the project gutenberg ebook of the jewel of seven stars, by bram stoker 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the jewel of seven star 

author: bram stoker 

post date: may 19, 2009 [ebook #3781] 
releas date: february, 2003 
first posted: septemb 4, 2001 
[last updated: septemb 26, 2011] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the jewel OF seven star *** 




produc by sue asscher. html version by Al haines. 









the jewel of seven star 


by 

bram stoker 




To eleanor and constanc hoyt 




content 

I A summon in the night 
II strang instruct 
iii the watcher 
IV the second attempt 
V more strang instruct 
VI suspicion 
vii the traveller' loss 
viii the find of the lamp 
IX the need of knowledg 
X the valley of the sorcer 
XI A queen' tomb 
xii the magic coffer 
xiii awak from the tranc 
xiv the birth-mark 
XV the purpos of queen tera 
xvi the cavern 
xvii doubt and fear 
xviii the lesson of the "ka" 
xix the great experi 




chapter I 

A summon in the night 


It all seem so real that I could hardli imagin that it had ever 
occur before; and yet each episod came, not as a fresh step in the 
logic of things, but as someth expected. It is in such a wise that 
memori play it prank for good or ill; for pleasur or pain; for weal 
or woe. It is thu that life is bittersweet, and that which ha been 
done becom eternal. 

again, the light skiff, ceas to shoot through the lazi water as when 
the oar flash and dripped, glide out of the fierc juli sunlight 
into the cool shade of the great droop willow branches--i stand 
up in the sway boat, she sit still and with deft finger 
guard herself from stray twig or the freedom of the resili of 
move boughs. again, the water look golden-brown under the canopi 
of transluc green; and the grassi bank wa of emerald hue. again, 
we sat in the cool shade, with the myriad nois of natur both without 
and within our bower merg into that drowsi hum in whose suffic 
environ the great world with it disturb trouble, and it more 
disturb joys, can be effectu forgotten. again, in that bliss 
solitud the young girl lost the convent of her prim, narrow 
upbringing, and told me in a natural, dreami way of the loneli of 
her new life. with an underton of sad she made me feel how in that 
spaciou home each one of the household wa isol by the person 
magnific of her father and herself; that there confid had no 
altar, and sympathi no shrine; and that there even her father' face 
wa as distant as the old countri life seem now. onc more, the 
wisdom of my manhood and the experi of my year laid themselv at 
the girl' feet. It wa seemingli their own doing; for the individu 
"i" had no say in the matter, but onli just obey imper orders. 
and onc again the fli second multipli themselv endlessly. for 
it is in the arcana of dream that exist merg and renew 
themselves, chang and yet keep the same--lik the soul of a musician 
in a fugue. and so memori swooned, again and again, in sleep. 

It seem that there is never to be ani perfect rest. even in eden the 
snake rear it head among the laden bough of the tree of knowledge. 
the silenc of the dreamless night is broken by the roar of the 
avalanche; the hiss of sudden floods; the clang of the engin 
bell mark it sweep through a sleep american town; the clank 
of distant paddl over the sea.... whatev it is, it is break the 
charm of my eden. the canopi of greeneri abov us, star with 
diamond-point of light, seem to quiver in the ceaseless beat of 
paddles; and the restless bell seem as though it would never cease.... 

all at onc the gate of sleep were thrown wide open, and my wake 
ear took in the caus of the disturb sounds. wake exist is 
prosaic enough--ther wa somebodi knock and ring at someone' 
street door. 

I wa pretti well accustom in my jermyn street chamber to pass 
sounds; usual I did not concern myself, sleep or waking, with the 
doings, howev noisy, of my neighbours. but thi nois wa too 
continuous, too insistent, too imper to be ignored. there wa 
some activ intellig behind that ceaseless sound; and some stress 
or need behind the intelligence. I wa not altogeth selfish, and at 
the thought of someone' need I was, without premeditation, out of bed. 
instinct I look at my watch. It wa just three o'clock; there 
wa a faint edg of grey round the green blind which darken my 
room. It wa evid that the knock and ring were at the door of 
our own house; and it wa evident, too, that there wa no one awak to 
answer the call. I slip on my dressing-gown and slippers, and went 
down to the hall door. when I open it there stood a dapper groom, 
with one hand press unflinchingli on the electr bell whilst with 
the other he rais a ceaseless clangour with the knocker. the instant 
he saw me the nois ceased; one hand went up instinct to the brim 
of hi hat, and the other produc a letter from hi pocket. A neat 
brougham wa opposit the door, the hors were breath heavili as 
though they had come fast. A policeman, with hi night lantern still 
alight at hi belt, stood by, attract to the spot by the noise. 

"beg pardon, sir, i'm sorri for disturb you, but my order wa 
imperative; I wa not to lose a moment, but to knock and ring till 
someon came. may I ask you, sir, if mr. malcolm ross live here?" 

"I am mr. malcolm ross." 

"then thi letter is for you, sir, and the bro'am is for you too, sir!" 

I took, with a strang curiosity, the letter which he hand to me. As 
a barrist I had had, of course, odd experi now and then, 
includ sudden demand upon my time; but never anyth like this. I 
step back into the hall, close the door to, but leav it ajar; 
then I switch on the electr light. the letter wa direct in a 
strang hand, a woman's. It began at onc without "dear sir" or ani 
such address: 

"you said you would like to help me if I need it; and I believ you 
meant what you said. the time ha come sooner than I expected. I am 
in dread trouble, and do not know where to turn, or to whom to 
apply. An attempt has, I fear, been made to murder my father; though, 
thank god, he still lives. but he is quit unconscious. the doctor 
and polic have been sent for; but there is no one here whom I can 
depend on. come at onc if you are abl to; and forgiv me if you can. 
I suppos I shall realis later what I have done in ask such a 
favour; but at present I cannot think. come! come at once! margaret 
trelawny." 

pain and exult struggl in my mind as I read; but the master 
thought wa that she wa in troubl and had call on me--me! My 
dream of her, then, wa not altogeth without a cause. I call 
out to the groom: 

"wait! I shall be with you in a minute!" then I flew upstairs. 

A veri few minut suffic to wash and dress; and we were soon drive 
through the street as fast as the hors could go. It wa market 
morning, and when we got out on piccadilli there wa an endless stream 
of cart come from the west; but for the rest the roadway wa clear, 
and we went quickly. I had told the groom to come into the brougham 
with me so that he could tell me what had happen as we went along. 
He sat awkwardly, with hi hat on hi knee as he spoke. 

"miss trelawny, sir, sent a man to tell us to get out a carriag at 
once; and when we wa readi she come herself and gave me the letter and 
told morgan--th coachman, sir--to fly. she said as I wa to lose not 
a second, but to keep knock till someon come." 

"yes, I know, I know--you told me! what I want to know is, whi she 
sent for me. what happen in the house?" 

"I don't quit know myself, sir; except that master wa found in hi 
room senseless, with the sheet all bloody, and a wound on hi head. He 
couldn't be wake nohow. twa miss trelawni herself as found him." 

"how did she come to find him at such an hour? It wa late in the 
night, I suppose?" 

"I don't know, sir; I didn't hear noth at all of the details." 

As he could tell me no more, I stop the carriag for a moment to let 
him get out on the box; then I turn the matter over in my mind as I 
sat alone. there were mani thing which I could have ask the 
servant; and for a few moment after he had gone I wa angri with 
myself for not have use my opportunity. On second thought, however, 
I wa glad the temptat wa gone. I felt that it would be more 
delic to learn what I want to know of miss trelawny' surround 
from herself, rather than from her servants. 

We bowl swiftli along knightsbridge, the small nois of our 
well-appoint vehicl sound hollowli in the morn air. We turn 
up the kensington palac road and present stop opposit a great 
hous on the left-hand side, nearer, so far as I could judge, the 
not hill than the kensington end of the avenue. It wa a truli 
fine house, not onli with regard to size but to architecture. even in 
the dim grey light of the morning, which tend to diminish the size of 
things, it look big. 

miss trelawni met me in the hall. she wa not in ani way shy. she 
seem to rule all around her with a sort of high-br dominance, all 
the more remark as she wa greatli agit and as pale as snow. 
In the great hall were sever servants, the men stand togeth near 
the hall door, and the women cling togeth in the further corner 
and doorways. A polic superintend had been talk to miss 
trelawny; two men in uniform and one plain-cloth man stood near him. 
As she took my hand impuls there wa a look of relief in her eyes, 
and she gave a gentl sigh of relief. her salut wa simple. 

"I knew you would come!" 

the clasp of the hand can mean a great deal, even when it is not 
intend to mean anyth especially. miss trelawny' hand somehow 
becam lost in my own. It wa not that it wa a small hand; it wa 
fine and flexible, with long delic fingers--a rare and beauti 
hand; it wa the unconsci self-surrender. and though at the moment 
I could not dwell on the caus of the thrill which swept me, it came 
back to me later. 

she turn and said to the polic superintendent: 

"thi is mr. malcolm ross." the polic offic salut as he answered: 

"I know mr. malcolm ross, miss. perhap he will rememb I had the 
honour of work with him in the brixton coin case." I had not at 
first glanc notic who it was, my whole attent have been taken 
with miss trelawny. 

"of course, superintend dolan, I rememb veri well!" I said as we 
shook hands. I could not but note that the acquaintanceship seem a 
relief to miss trelawny. there wa a certain vagu uneasi in her 
manner which took my attention; instinct I felt that it would be 
less embarrass for her to speak with me alone. So I said to the 
superintendent: 

"perhap it will be better if miss trelawni will see me alon for a few 
minutes. you, of course, have alreadi heard all she knows; and I shall 
understand better how thing are if I may ask some questions. I will 
then talk the matter over with you if I may." 

"I shall be glad to be of what servic I can, sir," he answer 
heartily. 

follow miss trelawny, I move over to a dainti room which open 
from the hall and look out on the garden at the back of the house. 
when we had enter and I had close the door she said: 

"I will thank you later for your good in come to me in my 
trouble; but at present you can best help me when you know the facts." 

"go on," I said. "tell me all you know and spare no detail, howev 
trivial it may at the present time seem to be." she went on at once: 

"I wa awaken by some sound; I do not know what. I onli know that it 
came through my sleep; for all at onc I found myself awake, with my 
heart beat wildly, listen anxious for some sound from my 
father' room. My room is next father's, and I can often hear him 
move about befor I fall asleep. He work late at night, sometim 
veri late indeed; so that when I wake early, as I do occasionally, or 
in the grey of the dawn, I hear him still moving. I tri onc to 
remonstr with him about stay up so late, as it cannot be good for 
him; but I never ventur to repeat the experiment. you know how stern 
and cold he can be--at least you may rememb what I told you about 
him; and when he is polit in thi mood he is dreadful. when he is 
angri I can bear it much better; but when he is slow and deliberate, 
and the side of hi mouth lift up to show the sharp teeth, I think I 
feel--well, I don't know how! last night I got up softli and stole to 
the door, for I realli fear to disturb him. there wa not ani nois 
of moving, and no kind of cri at all; but there wa a queer kind of 
drag sound, and a slow, heavi breathing. oh! it wa dreadful, 
wait there in the dark and the silence, and fearing--fear I did 
not know what! 

"at last I took my courag a deux mains, and turn the handl as 
softli as I could, I open the door a tini bit. It wa quit dark 
within; I could just see the outlin of the windows. but in the 
dark the sound of breathing, becom more distinct, wa appalling. 
As I listened, thi continued; but there wa no other sound. I push 
the door open all at once. I wa afraid to open it slowly; I felt as 
if there might be some dread thing behind it readi to pounc out on 
me! then I switch on the electr light, and step into the room. 
I look first at the bed. the sheet were all crumpl up, so that I 
knew father had been in bed; but there wa a great dark red patch in 
the centr of the bed, and spread to the edg of it, that made my 
heart stand still. As I wa gaze at it the sound of the breath 
came across the room, and my eye follow to it. there wa father on 
hi right side with the other arm under him, just as if hi dead bodi 
had been thrown there all in a heap. the track of blood went across 
the room up to the bed, and there wa a pool all around him which 
look terribl red and glitter as I bent over to examin him. the 
place where he lay wa right in front of the big safe. He wa in hi 
pyjamas. the left sleev wa torn, show hi bare arm, and stretch 
out toward the safe. It looked--oh! so terrible, patch all with 
blood, and with the flesh torn or cut all around a gold chain bangl on 
hi wrist. I did not know he wore such a thing, and it seem to give 
me a new shock of surprise." 

she paus a moment; and as I wish to reliev her by a moment' 
diverg of thought, I said: 

"oh, that need not surpris you. you will see the most unlik men 
wear bangles. I have seen a judg condemn a man to death, and the 
wrist of the hand he held up had a gold bangle." she did not seem to 
heed much the word or the idea; the pause, however, reliev her 
somewhat, and she went on in a steadier voice: 

"I did not lose a moment in summon aid, for I fear he might bleed 
to death. I rang the bell, and then went out and call for help as 
loudli as I could. In what must have been a veri short time--though it 
seem an incred long one to me--som of the servant came run 
up; and then others, till the room seem full of stare eyes, and 
dishevel hair, and night cloth of all sorts. 

"we lift father on a sofa; and the housekeeper, mrs. grant, who 
seem to have her wit about her more than ani of us, began to look 
where the flow of blood came from. In a few second it becam appar 
that it came from the arm which wa bare. there wa a deep wound--not 
clean-cut as with a knife, but like a jag rent or tear--clos to the 
wrist, which seem to have cut into the vein. mrs. grant tie a 
handkerchief round the cut, and screw it up tight with a silver 
paper-cutter; and the flow of blood seem to be check at once. By 
thi time I had come to my senses--or such of them as remained; and I 
sent off one man for the doctor and anoth for the police. when they 
had gone, I felt that, except for the servants, I wa all alon in the 
house, and that I knew nothing--of my father or anyth else; and a 
great long came to me to have someon with me who could help me. 
then I thought of you and your kind offer in the boat under the 
willow-tree; and, without wait to think, I told the men to get a 
carriag readi at once, and I scribbl a note and sent it on to you." 

she paused. I did not like to say just then anyth of how I felt. I 
look at her; I think she understood, for her eye were rais to mine 
for a moment and then fell, leav her cheek as red as peoni roses. 
with a manifest effort she went on with her story: 

"the doctor wa with us in an incred short time. the groom had met 
him let himself into hi hous with hi latchkey, and he came here 
running. He made a proper tourniquet for poor father' arm, and then 
went home to get some appliances. I dare say he will be back almost 
immediately. then a policeman came, and sent a messag to the station; 
and veri soon the superintend wa here. then you came." 

there wa a long pause, and I ventur to take her hand for an instant. 
without a word more we open the door, and join the superintend 
in the hall. He hurri up to us, say as he came: 

"I have been examin everyth myself, and have sent off a messag 
to scotland yard. you see, mr. ross, there seem so much that wa odd 
about the case that I thought we had better have the best man of the 
crimin investig depart that we could get. So I sent a note 
ask to have sergeant daw sent at once. you rememb him, sir, in 
that american poison case at hoxton." 

"oh yes," I said, "I rememb him well; in that and other cases, for I 
have benefit sever time by hi skill and acumen. He ha a mind 
that work as truli as ani that I know. when I have been for the 
defence, and believ my man wa innocent, I wa glad to have him 
against us!" 

"that is high praise, sir!" said the superintend gratified: "I am 
glad you approv of my choice; that I did well in send for him." 

I answer heartily: 

"could not be better. I do not doubt that between you we shall get at 
the facts--and what lie behind them!" 

We ascend to mr. trelawny' room, where we found everyth exactli 
as hi daughter had described. 

there came a ring at the hous bell, and a minut later a man wa shown 
into the room. A young man with aquilin features, keen grey eyes, and 
a forehead that stood out squar and broad as that of a thinker. In 
hi hand he had a black bag which he at onc opened. miss trelawni 
introduc us: "doctor winchester, mr. ross, superintend dolan." 
We bow mutually, and he, without a moment' delay, began hi work. 
We all waited, and eagerli watch him as he proceed to dress the 
wound. As he went on he turn now and again to call the 
superintendent' attent to some point about the wound, the latter 
proceed to enter the fact at onc in hi notebook. 

"see! sever parallel cut or scratch begin on the left side of 
the wrist and in some place endang the radial artery. 

"these small wound here, deep and jagged, seem as if made with a blunt 
instrument. thi in particular would seem as if made with some kind of 
sharp wedge; the flesh round it seem torn as if with later pressure." 

turn to miss trelawni he said presently: 

"do you think we might remov thi bangle? It is not absolut 
necessary, as it will fall lower on the wrist where it can hang 
loosely; but it might add to the patient' comfort later on." the poor 
girl flush deepli as she answer in a low voice: 

"I do not know. i--i have onli recent come to live with my father; 
and I know so littl of hi life or hi idea that I fear I can hardli 
judg in such a matter. the doctor, after a keen glanc at her, said 
in a veri kindli way: 

"forgiv me! I did not know. but in ani case you need not be 
distressed. It is not requir at present to move it. were it so I 
should do so at onc on my own responsibility. If it be necessari 
later on, we can easili remov it with a file. your father doubtless 
ha some object in keep it as it is. see! there is a tini key 
attach to it...." As he wa speak he stop and bent lower, 
take from my hand the candl which I held and lower it till it 
light fell on the bangle. then motion me to hold the candl in the 
same position, he took from hi pocket a magnifying-glass which he 
adjusted. when he had made a care examin he stood up and 
hand the magnifying-glass to dolan, say as he did so: 

"you had better examin it yourself. that is no ordinari bangle. the 
gold is wrought over tripl steel links; see where it is worn away. It 
is manifestli not meant to be remov lightly; and it would need more 
than an ordinari file to do it." 

the superintend bent hi great body; but not get close enough 
that way knelt down by the sofa as the doctor had done. He examin 
the bangl minutely, turn it slowli round so that no particl of it 
escap observation. then he stood up and hand the magnifying-glass 
to me. "when you have examin it yourself," he said, "let the ladi 
look at it if she will," and he commenc to write at length in hi 
notebook. 

I made a simpl alter in hi suggestion. I held out the glass 
toward miss trelawny, saying: 

"had you not better examin it first?" she drew back, slightli rais 
her hand in disclaimer, as she said impulsively: 

"oh no! father would doubtless have shown it to me had he wish me to 
see it. I would not like to without hi consent." then she added, 
doubtless fear lest her delicaci of view should give offenc to the 
rest of us: 

"of cours it is right that you should see it. you have to examin and 
consid everything; and indeed--inde I am grate to you..." 

she turn away; I could see that she wa cri quietly. It wa 
evid to me that even in the midst of her troubl and anxieti there 
wa a chagrin that she knew so littl of her father; and that her 
ignor had to be shown at such a time and amongst so mani strangers. 
that they were all men did not make the shame more easi to bear, though 
there wa a certain relief in it. tri to interpret her feel I 
could not but think that she must have been glad that no woman' 
eyes--of understand greater than man's--wer upon her in that hour. 

when I stood up from my examination, which verifi to me that of the 
doctor, the latter resum hi place besid the couch and went on with 
hi ministrations. superintend dolan said to me in a whisper: 

"I think we are fortun in our doctor!" I nodded, and wa about to 
add someth in prais of hi acumen, when there came a low tap at 
the door. 




chapter II 

strang instruct 


superintend dolan went quietli to the door; by a sort of natur 
understand he had taken possess of affair in the room. the rest 
of us waited. He open the door a littl way; and then with a gestur 
of manifest relief threw it wide, and a young man step in. A young 
man clean-shaven, tall and slight; with an eagl face and bright, quick 
eye that seem to take in everyth around him at a glance. As he 
came in, the superintend held out hi hand; the two men shook hand 
warmly. 

"I came at once, sir, the moment I got your message. I am glad I still 
have your confidence." 

"that you'll alway have," said the superintend heartily. "I have 
not forgotten our old bow street days, and I never shall!" then, 
without a word of preliminary, he began to tell everyth he knew up 
to the moment of the newcomer' entry. sergeant daw ask a few 
questions--a veri few--when it wa necessari for hi understand of 
circumst or the rel posit of persons; but as a rule 
dolan, who knew hi work thoroughly, forestal everi query, and 
explain all necessari matter as he went on. sergeant daw threw 
occasion swift glanc round him; now at one of us; now at the room 
or some part of it; now at the wound man lie senseless on the sofa. 

when the superintend had finished, the sergeant turn to me and 
said: 

"perhap you rememb me, sir. I wa with you in that hoxton case." 

"I rememb you veri well," I said as I held out my hand. the 
superintend spoke again: 

"you understand, sergeant daw, that you are put in full charg of thi 
case." 

"under you I hope, sir," he interrupted. the other shook hi head and 
smile as he said: 

"it seem to me that thi is a case that will take all a man' time and 
hi brains. I have other work to do; but I shall be more than 
interested, and if I can help in ani possibl way I shall be glad to do 
so!" 

"all right, sir," said the other, accept hi respons with a 
sort of modifi salute; straightway he began hi investigation. 

first he came over to the doctor and, have learn hi name and 
address, ask him to write a full report which he could use, and which 
he could refer to headquart if necessary. doctor winchest bow 
grave as he promised. then the sergeant approach me and said sotto 
voce: 

"I like the look of your doctor. I think we can work together!" 
turn to miss trelawni he asked: 

"pleas let me know what you can of your father; hi way of life, hi 
history--in fact of anyth of whatsoev kind which interest him, or 
in which he may be concerned." I wa about to interrupt to tell him 
what she had alreadi said of her ignor in all matter of her father 
and hi ways, but her warn hand wa rais to me pointedli and she 
spoke herself. 

"alas! I know littl or nothing. superintend dolan and mr. ross 
know alreadi all I can say." 

"well, ma'am, we must be content to do what we can," said the offic 
genially. "i'll begin by make a minut examination. you say that you 
were outsid the door when you heard the noise?" 

"I wa in my room when I heard the queer sound--inde it must have 
been the earli part of whatev it wa which woke me. I came out of my 
room at once. father' door wa shut, and I could see the whole land 
and the upper slope of the staircase. No one could have left by the 
door unknown to me, if that is what you mean!" 

"that is just what I do mean, miss. If everi one who know anyth 
will tell me as well as that, we shall soon get to the bottom of this." 

He then went over to the bed, look at it carefully, and asked: 

"ha the bed been touched?" 

"not to my knowledge," said miss trelawny, "but I shall ask mrs. 
grant--th housekeeper," she ad as she rang the bell. mrs. grant 
answer it in person. "come in," said miss trelawny. "these gentlemen 
want to know, mrs. grant, if the bed ha been touched." 

"not by me, ma'am." 

"then," said miss trelawny, turn to sergeant daw, "it cannot have 
been touch by ani one. either mrs. grant or I myself wa here all 
the time, and I do not think ani of the servant who came when I gave 
the alarm were near the bed at all. you see, father lay here just 
under the great safe, and everi one crowd round him. We sent them 
all away in a veri short time." daw, with a motion of hi hand, ask 
us all to stay at the other side of the room whilst with a 
magnifying-glass he examin the bed, take care as he move each fold 
of the bed-cloth to replac it in exact position. then he examin 
with hi magnifying-glass the floor besid it, take especi pain 
where the blood had trickl over the side of the bed, which wa of 
heavi red wood handsom carved. inch by inch, down on hi knees, 
care avoid ani touch with the stain on the floor, he follow 
the blood-mark over to the spot, close under the great safe, where the 
bodi had lain. all around and about thi spot he went for a radiu of 
some yards; but seemingli did not meet with anyth to arrest special 
attention. then he examin the front of the safe; round the lock, and 
along the bottom and top of the doubl doors, more especi at the 
place of their touch in front. 

next he went to the windows, which were fasten down with the hasps. 

"were the shutter closed?" he ask miss trelawni in a casual way as 
though he expect the neg answer, which came. 

all thi time doctor winchest wa attend to hi patient; now 
dress the wound in the wrist or make minut examin all over 
the head and throat, and over the heart. more than onc he put hi 
nose to the mouth of the senseless man and sniffed. each time he did 
so he finish up by unconsci look round the room, as though in 
search of something. 

then we heard the deep strong voic of the detective: 

"so far as I can see, the object wa to bring that key to the lock of 
the safe. there seem to be some secret in the mechan that I am 
unabl to guess at, though I serv a year in chubb' befor I join 
the police. It is a combin lock of seven letters; but there seem 
to be a way of lock even the combination. It is one of chatwood's; 
I shall call at their place and find out someth about it." then 
turn to the doctor, as though hi own work were for the present 
done, he said: 

"have you anyth you can tell me at once, doctor, which will not 
interfer with your full report? If there is ani doubt I can wait, but 
the sooner I know someth definit the better." doctor winchest 
answer at once: 

"for my own part I see no reason in waiting. I shall make a full 
report of course. but in the meantim I shall tell you all I 
know--which is after all not veri much, and all I think--which is less 
definite. there is no wound on the head which could account for the 
state of stupor in which the patient continues. I must, therefore, 
take it that either he ha been drug or is under some hypnot 
influence. So far as I can judge, he ha not been drugged--at least by 
mean of ani drug of whose qualiti I am aware. Of course, there is 
ordinarili in thi room so much of a mummi smell that it is difficult 
to be certain about anyth have a delic aroma. I dare say that 
you have notic the peculiar egyptian scents, bitumen, nard, aromat 
gum and spices, and so forth. It is quit possibl that somewher in 
thi room, amongst the curio and hidden by stronger scents, is some 
substanc or liquid which may have the effect we see. It is possibl 
that the patient ha taken some drug, and that he may in some sleep 
phase have injur himself. I do not think thi is likely; and 
circumstances, other than those which I have myself been investigating, 
may prove that thi surmis is not correct. but in the meantim it is 
possible; and must, till it be disproved, be kept within our purview." 
here sergeant daw interrupted: 

"that may be, but if so, we should be abl to find the instrument with 
which the wrist wa injured. there would be mark of blood somewhere." 

"exactli so!" said the doctor, fix hi glass as though prepar 
for an argument. "but if it be that the patient ha use some strang 
drug, it may be one that doe not take effect at once. As we are as 
yet ignor of it potentialities--if, indeed, the whole surmis is 
correct at all--w must be prepar at all points." 

here miss trelawni join in the conversation: 

"that would be quit right, so far as the action of the drug wa 
concerned; but accord to the second part of your surmis the wound 
may have been self-inflicted, and thi after the drug had taken effect." 

"true!" said the detect and the doctor simultaneously. she went on: 

"a however, doctor, your guess doe not exhaust the possibilities, we 
must bear in mind that some other variant of the same root-idea may be 
correct. I take it, therefore, that our first search, to be made on 
thi assumption, must be for the weapon with which the injuri wa done 
to my father' wrist." 

"perhap he put the weapon in the safe befor he becam quit 
unconscious," said I, give voic foolishli to a half-form thought. 

"that could not be," said the doctor quickly. "at least I think it 
could hardli be," he ad cautiously, with a brief bow to me. "you 
see, the left hand is cover with blood; but there is no blood mark 
whatev on the safe." 

"quit right!" I said, and there wa a long pause. 

the first to break the silenc wa the doctor. 

"we shall want a nurs here as soon as possible; and I know the veri 
one to suit. I shall go at onc to get her if I can. I must ask that 
till I return some of you will remain constantli with the patient. It 
may be necessari to remov him to anoth room later on; but in the 
meantim he is best left here. miss trelawny, may I take it that 
either you or mrs. grant will remain here--not mere in the room, but 
close to the patient and watch of him--til I return?" 

she bow in reply, and took a seat besid the sofa. the doctor gave 
her some direct as to what she should do in case her father should 
becom consciou befor hi return. 

the next to move wa superintend dolan, who came close to sergeant 
daw as he said: 

"I had better return now to the station--unless, of course, you should 
wish me to remain for a while." 

He answered, "i johnni wright still in your division?" 

"yes! would you like him to be with you?" the other nod reply. 
"then I will send him on to you as soon as can be arranged. He shall 
then stay with you as long as you wish. I will tell him that he is to 
take hi instruct entir from you." 

the sergeant accompani him to the door, say as he went: 

"thank you, sir; you are alway thought for men who are work with 
you. It is a pleasur to me to be with you again. I shall go back to 
scotland yard and report to my chief. then I shall call at chatwood's; 
and I shall return here as soon as possible. I suppos I may take it, 
miss, that I may put up here for a day or two, if required. It may be 
some help, or possibl some comfort to you, if I am about, until we 
unravel thi mystery." 

"I shall be veri grate to you." He look keenli at her for a few 
second befor he spoke again. 

"befor I go have I permiss to look about your father' tabl and 
desk? there might be someth which would give us a clue--or a lead 
at all events." her answer wa so unequivoc as almost to surpris 
him. 

"you have the fullest possibl permiss to do anyth which may help 
us in thi dread trouble--to discov what it is that is wrong with 
my father, or which may shield him in the future!" 

He began at onc a systemat search of the dressing-table, and after 
that of the writing-t in the room. In one of the drawer he found 
a letter sealed; thi he brought at onc across the room and hand to 
miss trelawny. 

"A letter--direct to me--and in my father' hand!" she said as she 
eagerli open it. I watch her face as she began to read; but see 
at onc that sergeant daw kept hi keen eye on her face, unflinchingli 
watch everi flit expression, I kept my eye henceforth fix on 
his. when miss trelawni had read her letter through, I had in my mind 
a conviction, which, however, I kept lock in my own heart. amongst 
the suspicion in the mind of the detect wa one, rather perhap 
potenti than definite, of miss trelawni herself. 

for sever minut miss trelawni held the letter in her hand with her 
eye downcast, thinking. then she read it care again; thi time 
the vari express were intensified, and I thought I could easili 
follow them. when she had finish the second reading, she paus 
again. then, though with some reluctance, she hand the letter to the 
detective. He read it eagerli but with unchang face; read it a 
second time, and then hand it back with a bow. she paus a littl 
again, and then hand it to me. As she did so she rais her eye to 
mine for a singl moment appealingly; a swift blush spread over her 
pale cheek and forehead. 

with mingl feel I took it, but, all said, I wa glad. she did 
not show ani perturb in give the letter to the detective--sh 
might not have shown ani to anyon else. but to me... I fear to 
follow the thought further; but read on, consciou that the eye of 
both miss trelawni and the detect were fix on me. 


"mi dear daughter, I want you to take thi letter as an 
instruction--absolut and imperative, and admit of no deviat 
whatever--in case anyth untoward or unexpect by you or by other 
should happen to me. If I should be suddenli and mysteri stricken 
down--eith by sickness, accid or attack--y must follow these 
direct implicitly. If I am not alreadi in my bedroom when you are 
made cognis of my state, I am to be brought there as quickli as 
possible. even should I be dead, my bodi is to be brought there. 
thenceforth, until I am either consciou and abl to give instruct 
on my own account, or buried, I am never to be left alone--not for a 
singl instant. from nightfal to sunris at least two person must 
remain in the room. It will be well that a train nurs be in the 
room from time to time, and will note ani symptoms, either perman or 
changing, which may strike her. My solicitors, marvin & jewkes, of 27b 
lincoln' inn, have full instruct in case of my death; and mr. 
marvin ha himself undertaken to see person my wish carri out. 
I should advis you, my dear daughter, see that you have no rel 
to appli to, to get some friend whom you can trust to either remain 
within the hous where instant commun can be made, or to come 
nightli to aid in the watching, or to be within call. such friend may 
be either male or female; but, whichev it may be, there should be 
ad one other watcher or attend at hand of the opposit sex. 
understand, that it is of the veri essenc of my wish that there should 
be, awak and exercis themselv to my purposes, both masculin and 
feminin intelligences. onc more, my dear margaret, let me impress on 
you the need for observ and just reason to conclusions, 
howsoev strange. If I am taken ill or injured, thi will be no 
ordinari occasion; and I wish to warn you, so that your guard may be 
complete. 

"noth in my room--i speak of the curios--must be remov or 
displac in ani way, or for ani caus whatever. I have a special 
reason and a special purpos in the place of each; so that ani move 
of them would thwart my plans. 

"should you want money or counsel in anything, mr. marvin will carri 
out your wishes; to the which he ha my full instructions." 

"abel trelawny." 


I read the letter a second time befor speaking, for I fear to betray 
myself. the choic of a friend might be a moment occas for me. 
I had alreadi ground for hope, that she had ask me to help her in the 
first throe of her trouble; but love make it own doubtings, and I 
feared. My thought seem to whirl with lightn rapidity, and in a 
few second a whole process of reason becam formulated. I must not 
volunt to be the friend that the father advis hi daughter to have 
to aid her in her vigil; and yet that one glanc had a lesson which I 
must not ignore. also, did not she, when she want help, send to 
me--to me a stranger, except for one meet at a danc and one brief 
afternoon of companionship on the river? would it not humili her to 
make her ask me twice? humili her! no! that pain I could at all 
event save her; it is not humili to refuse. so, as I hand her 
back the letter, I said: 

"I know you will forgiv me, miss trelawny, if I presum too much; but 
if you will permit me to aid in the watch I shall be proud. though 
the occas is a sad one, I shall be so far happi to be allow the 
privilege." 

despit her manifest and pain effort at self-control, the red tide 
swept her face and neck. even her eye seem suffused, and in stern 
contrast with her pale cheek when the tide had roll back. she 
answer in a low voice: 

"I shall be veri grate for your help!" then in an afterthought she 
added: 

"but you must not let me be selfish in my need! I know you have mani 
duti to engag you; and though I shall valu your help highly--most 
highly--it would not be fair to monopolis your time." 

"a to that," I answer at once, "mi time is yours. I can for today 
easili arrang my work so that I can come here in the afternoon and 
stay till morning. after that, if the occas still demand it, I can 
so arrang my work that I shall have more time still at my disposal." 

she wa much moved. I could see the tear gather in her eyes, and she 
turn away her head. the detect spoke: 

"I am glad you will be here, mr. ross. I shall be in the hous myself, 
as miss trelawni will allow me, if my peopl in scotland yard will 
permit. that letter seem to put a differ complexion on everything; 
though the mysteri remain greater than ever. If you can wait here an 
hour or two I shall go to headquarters, and then to the safe-makers. 
after that I shall return; and you can go away easier in your mind, for 
I shall be here." 

when he had gone, we two, miss trelawni and I, remain in silence. At 
last she rais her eye and look at me for a moment; after that I 
would not have exchang place with a king. for a while she busi 
herself round the extemporis bedsid of her father. then, ask me 
to be sure not to take my eye off him till she returned, she hurri 
out. 

In a few minut she came back with mrs. grant and two maid and a 
coupl of men, who bore the entir frame and furnitur of a light iron 
bed. thi they proceed to put togeth and to make. when the work 
wa completed, and the servant had withdrawn, she said to me: 

"it will be well to be all readi when the doctor returns. He will 
sure want to have father put to bed; and a proper bed will be better 
for him than the sofa." she then got a chair close besid her father, 
and sat down watch him. 

I went about the room, take accur note of all I saw. and truli 
there were enough thing in the room to evok the curios of ani 
man--even though the attend circumst were less strange. the 
whole place, except those articl of furnitur necessari to a 
well-furnish bedroom, wa fill with magnific curios, chiefli 
egyptian. As the room wa of immens size there wa opportun for the 
place of a larg number of them, even if, as with these, they were of 
huge proportions. 

whilst I wa still investig the room there came the sound of 
wheel on the gravel outsid the house. there wa a ring at the hall 
door, and a few minut later, after a preliminari tap at the door and 
an answer "come in!" doctor winchest entered, follow by a young 
woman in the dark dress of a nurse. 

"I have been fortunate!" he said as he came in. "I found her at onc 
and free. miss trelawny, thi is nurs kennedy!" 




chapter iii 

the watcher 


I wa struck by the way the two young women look at each other. I 
suppos I have been so much in the habit of weigh up in my own mind 
the person of wit and of form judgment by their 
unconsci action and mode of bear themselves, that the habit 
extend to my life outsid as well as within the court-house. At thi 
moment of my life anyth that interest miss trelawni interest me; 
and as she had been struck by the newcom I instinct weigh her 
up also. By comparison of the two I seem somehow to gain a new 
knowledg of miss trelawny. certainly, the two women made a good 
contrast. miss trelawni wa of fine figure; dark, straight-featured. 
she had marvel eyes; great, wide-open, and as black and soft as 
velvet, with a mysteri depth. To look in them wa like gaze at a 
black mirror such as doctor dee use in hi wizard rites. I heard an 
old gentleman at the picnic, a great orient traveller, describ the 
effect of her eye "a look at night at the great distant lamp of a 
mosqu through the open door." the eyebrow were typical. fine 
arch and rich in long curl hair, they seem like the proper 
architectur environ of the deep, splendid eyes. her hair wa 
black also, but wa as fine as silk. gener black hair is a type of 
anim strength and seem as if some strong express of the forc of 
a strong nature; but in thi case there could be no such thought. 
there were refin and high breeding; and though there wa no 
suggest of weakness, ani sens of power there was, wa rather 
spiritu than animal. the whole harmoni of her be seem complete. 
carriage, figure, hair, eyes; the mobile, full mouth, whose scarlet 
lip and white teeth seem to light up the lower part of the face--a 
the eye did the upper; the wide sweep of the jaw from chin to ear; the 
long, fine fingers; the hand which seem to move from the wrist as 
though it had a sentienc of it own. all these perfect went to 
make up a person that domin either by it grace, it 
sweetness, it beauty, or it charm. 

nurs kennedy, on the other hand, wa rather under than over a woman' 
averag height. she wa firm and thickset, with full limb and broad, 
strong, capabl hands. her colour wa in the gener effect that of an 
autumn leaf. the yellow-brown hair wa thick and long, and the 
golden-brown eye sparkl from the freckled, sunburnt skin. her rosi 
cheek gave a gener idea of rich brown. the red lip and white teeth 
did not alter the colour scheme, but onli emphas it. she had a 
snub nose--ther wa no possibl doubt about it; but like such nose in 
gener it show a natur generous, untiring, and full of good-nature. 
her broad white forehead, which even the freckl had spared, wa full 
of forc thought and reason. 

doctor winchest had on their journey from the hospital, coach her 
in the necessari particulars, and without a word she took charg of the 
patient and set to work. have examin the new-mad bed and shaken 
the pillows, she spoke to the doctor, who gave instructions; present 
we all four, step together, lift the unconsci man from the 
sofa. 

earli in the afternoon, when sergeant daw had returned, I call at my 
room in jermyn street, and sent out such clothes, book and paper as 
I should be like to want within a few days. then I went on to keep 
my legal engagements. 

the court sat late that day as an import case wa ending; it wa 
strike six as I drove in at the gate of the kensington palac road. 
I found myself instal in a larg room close to the sick chamber. 

that night we were not yet regularli organis for watching, so that 
the earli part of the even show an unevenli balanc guard. nurs 
kennedy, who had been on duti all day, wa lie down, as she had 
arrang to come on again by twelv o'clock. doctor winchester, who 
wa dine in the house, remain in the room until dinner wa 
announced; and went back at onc when it wa over. dure dinner mrs. 
grant remain in the room, and with her sergeant daw, who wish to 
complet a minut examin which he had undertaken of everyth in 
the room and near it. At nine o'clock miss trelawni and I went in to 
reliev the doctor. she had lain down for a few hour in the afternoon 
so as to be refresh for her work at night. she told me that she had 
determin that for thi night at least she would sit up and watch. I 
did not tri to dissuad her, for I knew that her mind wa made up. 
then and there I made up my mind that I would watch with her--unless, 
of course, I should see that she realli did not wish it. I said 
noth of my intent for the present. We came in on tiptoe, so 
silent that the doctor, who wa bend over the bed, did not hear 
us, and seem a littl startl when suddenli look up he saw our 
eye upon him. I felt that the mysteri of the whole thing wa get 
on hi nerves, as it had alreadi got on the nerv of some other of 
us. He was, I fancied, a littl annoy with himself for have been 
so startled, and at onc began to talk in a hurri manner as though to 
get over our idea of hi embarrassment: 

"I am realli and absolut at my wits' end to find ani fit caus for 
thi stupor. I have made again as accur an examin as I know 
how, and I am satisfi that there is no injuri to the brain, that is, 
no extern injury. indeed, all hi vital organ seem unimpaired. I 
have given him, as you know, food sever time and it ha manifestli 
done him good. hi breath is strong and regular, and hi puls is 
slower and stronger than it wa thi morning. I cannot find evid 
of ani known drug, and hi unconsci doe not resembl ani of the 
mani case of hypnot sleep which I saw in the charcot hospit in 
paris. and as to these wounds"--h laid hi finger gentli on the 
bandag wrist which lay outsid the coverlet as he spoke, "I do not 
know what to make of them. they might have been made by a 
carding-machine; but that supposit is untenable. It is within the 
bound of possibl that they might have been made by a wild anim 
if it had taken care to sharpen it claws. that too is, I take it, 
impossible. By the way, have you ani strang pet here in the house; 
anyth of an except kind, such as a tiger-cat or anyth out of 
the common?" miss trelawni smile a sad smile which made my heart ache, 
as she made answer: 

"oh no! father doe not like anim about the house, unless they are 
dead and mummied." thi wa said with a touch of bitterness--or 
jealousy, I could hardli tell which. "even my poor kitten wa onli 
allow in the hous on sufferance; and though he is the dearest and 
best-conduct cat in the world, he is now on a sort of parole, and is 
not allow into thi room." 

As she wa speak a faint rattl of the door handl wa heard. 
instantli miss trelawny' face brightened. she sprang up and went over 
to the door, say as she went: 

"there he is! that is my silvio. He stand on hi hind leg and 
rattl the door handl when he want to come into a room." she open 
the door, speak to the cat as though he were a baby: "did him want 
hi movver? come then; but he must stay with her!" she lift the 
cat, and came back with him in her arms. He wa certainli a 
magnific animal. A chinchilla grey persian with long silki hair; a 
realli lordli anim with a haughti bear despit hi gentleness; and 
with great paw which spread out as he place them on the ground. 
whilst she wa fondl him, he suddenli gave a wriggl like an eel and 
slip out of her arms. He ran across the room and stood opposit a 
low tabl on which stood the mummi of an animal, and began to mew and 
snarl. miss trelawni wa after him in an instant and lift him in her 
arms, kick and struggl and wriggl to get away; but not bite 
or scratching, for evid he love hi beauti mistress. He 
ceas to make a nois the moment he wa in her arms; in a whisper she 
admonish him: 

"O you naughti silvio! you have broken your parol that mother gave 
for you. now, say goodnight to the gentlemen, and come away to 
mother' room!" As she wa speak she held out the cat' paw to me 
to shake. As I did so I could not but admir it size and beauty. 
"why," said I, "hi paw seem like a littl boxing-glov full of 
claws." she smiled: 

"so it ought to. don't you notic that my silvio ha seven toes, see!" 
she open the paw; and sure enough there were seven separ claws, 
each of them sheath in a delicate, fine, shell-lik case. As I 
gentli stroke the foot the claw emerg and one of them 
accidentally--ther wa no anger now and the cat wa purring--stuck 
into my hand. instinct I said as I drew back: 

"why, hi claw are like razors!" 

doctor winchest had come close to us and wa bend over look at 
the cat' claws; as I spoke he said in a quick, sharp way: 

"eh!" I could hear the quick intak of hi breath. whilst I wa 
stroke the now quiescent cat, the doctor went to the tabl and tore 
off a piec of blotting-pap from the writing-pad and came back. He 
laid the paper on hi palm and, with a simpl "pardon me!" to miss 
trelawny, place the cat' paw on it and press it down with hi other 
hand. the haughti cat seem to resent somewhat the familiarity, and 
tri to draw it foot away. thi wa plainli what the doctor wanted, 
for in the act the cat open the sheath of it claw and and made 
sever reef in the soft paper. then miss trelawni took her pet away. 
she return in a coupl of minutes; as she came in she said: 

"it is most odd about that mummy! when silvio came into the room 
first--inde I took him in as a kitten to show to father--h went on 
just the same way. He jump up on the table, and tri to scratch and 
bite the mummy. that wa what made father so angry, and brought the 
decre of banish on poor silvio. onli hi parole, given through 
me, kept him in the house." 

whilst she had been gone, doctor winchest had taken the bandag from 
her father' wrist. the wound wa now quit clear, as the separ 
cut show out in fierc red lines. the doctor fold the 
blotting-pap across the line of punctur made by the cat' claws, 
and held it down close to the wound. As he did so, he look up 
triumphantli and beckon us over to him. 

the cut in the paper correspond with the wound in the wrist! No 
explan wa needed, as he said: 

"it would have been better if master silvio had not broken hi parole!" 

We were all silent for a littl while. suddenli miss trelawni said: 

"but silvio wa not in here last night!" 

"are you sure? could you prove that if necessary?" she hesit 
befor replying: 

"I am certain of it; but I fear it would be difficult to prove. silvio 
sleep in a basket in my room. I certainli put him to bed last night; 
I rememb distinctli lay hi littl blanket over him, and tuck 
him in. thi morn I took him out of the basket myself. I certainli 
never notic him in here; though, of course, that would not mean much, 
for I wa too concern about poor father, and too much occupi with 
him, to notic even silvio." 

the doctor shook hi head as he said with a certain sadness: 

"well, at ani rate it is no use tri to prove anyth now. ani cat 
in the world would have clean blood-marks--did ani exist--from hi 
paw in a hundredth part of the time that ha elapsed." 

again we were all silent; and again the silenc wa broken by miss 
trelawny: 

"but now that I think of it, it could not have been poor silvio that 
injur father. My door wa shut when I first heard the sound; and 
father' wa shut when I listen at it. when I went in, the injuri 
had been done; so that it must have been befor silvio could possibl 
have got in." thi reason commend itself, especi to me as a 
barrister, for it wa proof to satisfi a jury. It gave me a distinct 
pleasur to have silvio acquit of the crime--poss becaus he wa 
miss trelawny' cat and wa love by her. happi cat! silvio' 
mistress wa manifestli pleas as I said: 

"verdict, 'not guilty!'" doctor winchest after a paus observed: 

"mi apolog to master silvio on thi occasion; but I am still puzzl 
to know whi he is so keen against that mummy. Is he the same toward 
the other mummi in the house? there are, I suppose, a lot of them. 
I saw three in the hall as I came in." 

"there are lot of them," she answered. "I sometim don't know 
whether I am in a privat hous or the british museum. but silvio 
never concern himself about ani of them except that particular one. I 
suppos it must be becaus it is of an animal, not a man or a woman." 

"perhap it is of a cat!" said the doctor as he start up and went 
across the room to look at the mummi more closely. "yes," he went on, 
"it is the mummi of a cat; and a veri fine one, too. If it hadn't been 
a special favourit of some veri special person it would never have 
receiv so much honour. see! A paint case and obsidian eyes--just 
like a human mummy. It is an extraordinari thing, that knowledg of 
kind to kind. here is a dead cat--that is all; it is perhap four or 
five thousand year old--and anoth cat of anoth breed, in what is 
practic anoth world, is readi to fli at it, just as it would if 
it were not dead. I should like to experi a bit about that cat if 
you don't mind, miss trelawny." she hesit befor replying: 

"of course, do anyth you may think necessari or wise; but I hope it 
will not be anyth to hurt or worri my poor silvio." the doctor 
smile as he answered: 

"oh, silvio would be all right: it is the other one that my sympathi 
would be reserv for." 

"how do you mean?" 

"master silvio will do the attacking; the other one will do the 
suffering." 

"suffering?" there wa a note of pain in her voice. the doctor smile 
more broadly: 

"oh, pleas make your mind easi as to that. the other won't suffer as 
we understand it; except perhap in hi structur and outfit." 

"what on earth do you mean?" 

"simpli this, my dear young lady, that the antagonist will be a mummi 
cat like thi one. there are, I take it, plenti of them to be had in 
museum street. I shall get one and place it here instead of that 
one--y won't think that a temporari exchang will violat your 
father' instructions, I hope. We shall then find out, to begin with, 
whether silvio object to all mummi cats, or onli to thi one in 
particular." 

"I don't know," she said doubtfully. "father' instruct seem veri 
uncompromising." then after a paus she went on: "but of cours under 
the circumst anyth that is to be ultim for hi good must 
be done. I suppos there can't be anyth veri particular about the 
mummi of a cat." 

doctor winchest said nothing. He sat rigid, with so grave a look on 
hi face that hi extra graviti pass on to me; and in it 
enlighten perturb I began to realis more than I had yet done 
the strang of the case in which I wa now so deepli concerned. 
when onc thi thought had begun there wa no end to it. inde it 
grew, and blossomed, and reproduc itself in a thousand differ 
ways. the room and all in it gave ground for strang thoughts. there 
were so mani ancient relic that unconsci one wa taken back to 
strang land and strang times. there were so mani mummi or mummi 
objects, round which there seem to cling for ever the penetr 
odour of bitumen, and spice and gums--"nard and circassia' balmi 
smells"--that one wa unabl to forget the past. Of course, there wa 
but littl light in the room, and that care shaded; so that there 
wa no glare anywhere. none of that direct light which can manifest 
itself as a power or an entity, and so make for companionship. the 
room wa a larg one, and lofti in proport to it size. In it 
vast wa place for a multitud of thing not often found in a 
bedchamber. In far corner of the room were shadow of uncanni shape. 
more than onc as I thought, the multitudin presenc of the dead and 
the past took such hold on me that I caught myself look round 
fear as though some strang person or influenc wa present. 
even the manifest presenc of doctor winchest and miss trelawni could 
not altogeth comfort or satisfi me at such moments. It wa with a 
distinct sens of relief that I saw a new person in the room in 
the shape of nurs kennedy. there wa no doubt that that business-like, 
self-reliant, capabl young woman ad an element of secur to such 
wild imagin as my own. she had a qualiti of common sens that 
seem to pervad everyth around her, as though it were some kind of 
emanation. Up to that moment I had been build fanci around the 
sick man; so that final all about him, includ myself, had becom 
involv in them, or enmeshed, or saturated, or... but now that she had 
come, he relaps into hi proper perspect as a patient; the room 
wa a sick-room, and the shadow lost their fearsom quality. the onli 
thing which it could not altogeth abrog wa the strang egyptian 
smell. you may put a mummi in a glass case and hermet seal it so 
that no corrod air can get within; but all the same it will exhal 
it odour. one might think that four or five thousand year would 
exhaust the olfactori qualiti of anything; but experi teach us 
that these smell remain, and that their secret are unknown to us. 
today they are as much mysteri as they were when the embalm put 
the bodi in the bath of natron... 


all at onc I sat up. I had becom lost in an absorb reverie. the 
egyptian smell had seem to get on my nerves--on my memory--on my veri 
will. 

At that moment I had a thought which wa like an inspiration. If I wa 
influenc in such a manner by the smell, might it not be that the sick 
man, who live half hi life or more in the atmosphere, had gradual 
and by slow but sure process taken into hi system someth which had 
permeat him to such degre that it had a new power deriv from 
quantity--or strength--or... 

I wa becom lost again in a reverie. thi would not do. I must 
take such precaut that I could remain awake, or free from such 
entranc thought. I had had but half a night' sleep last night; and 
thi night I must remain awake. without state my intention, for I 
fear that I might add to the troubl and uneasi of miss trelawny, 
I went downstair and out of the house. I soon found a chemist' shop, 
and came away with a respirator. when I got back, it wa ten o'clock; 
the doctor wa go for the night. the nurs came with him to the 
door of the sick-room, take her last instructions. miss trelawni sat 
still besid the bed. sergeant daw, who had enter as the doctor went 
out, wa some littl distanc off. 

when nurs kennedi join us, we arrang that she should sit up till 
two o'clock, when miss trelawni would reliev her. thus, in accord 
with mr. trelawny' instructions, there would alway be a man and a 
woman in the room; and each one of us would overlap, so that at no time 
would a new set of watcher come on duti without some one to tell of 
what--if anything--had occurred. I lay down on a sofa in my own room, 
have arrang that one of the servant should call me a littl befor 
twelve. In a few moment I wa asleep. 

when I wa waked, it took me sever second to get back my thought so 
as to recognis my own ident and surroundings. the short sleep had, 
however, done me good, and I could look on thing around me in a more 
practic light than I had been abl to do earlier in the evening. I 
bath my face, and thu refresh went into the sick-room. I move 
veri softly. the nurs wa sit by the bed, quiet and alert; the 
detect sat in an arm-chair across the room in deep shadow. He did 
not move when I crossed, until I got close to him, when he said in a 
dull whisper: 

"it is all right; I have not been asleep!" An unnecessari thing to 
say, I thought--it alway is, unless it be untru in spirit. when I 
told him that hi watch wa over; that he might go to bed till I should 
call him at six o'clock, he seem reliev and went with alacrity. At 
the door he turn and, come back to me, said in a whisper: 

"I sleep lightli and I shall have my pistol with me. I won't feel so 
heavy-head when I get out of thi mummi smell." 

He too, then, had share my experi of drowsiness! 

I ask the nurs if she want anything. I notic that she had a 
vinaigrett in her lap. doubtless she, too, had felt some of the 
influenc which had so affect me. she said that she had all she 
required, but that if she should want anyth she would at onc let me 
know. I wish to keep her from notic my respirator, so I went to 
the chair in the shadow where her back wa toward me. here I quietli 
put it on, and made myself comfortable. 

for what seem a long time, I sat and thought and thought. It wa a 
wild medley of thoughts, as might have been expect from the 
experi of the previou day and night. again I found myself 
think of the egyptian smell; and I rememb that I felt a delici 
satisfact that I did not experi it as I had done. the 
respir wa do it work. 

It must have been that the pass of thi disturb thought made for 
repos of mind, which is the corollari of bodili rest, for, though I 
realli cannot rememb be asleep or wake from it, I saw a 
vision--i dream a dream, I scarc know which. 

I wa still in the room, seat in the chair. I had on my respir 
and knew that I breath freely. the nurs sat in her chair with her 
back toward me. she sat quit still. the sick man lay as still as the 
dead. It wa rather like the pictur of a scene than the reality; all 
were still and silent; and the still and silenc were continuous. 
outside, in the distanc I could hear the sound of a city, the 
occasion roll of wheels, the shout of a reveller, the far-away echo 
of whistl and the rumbl of trains. the light wa very, veri low; 
the reflect of it under the green-shad lamp wa a dim relief to 
the darkness, rather than light. the green silk fring of the lamp had 
mere the colour of an emerald seen in the moonlight. the room, for 
all it darkness, wa full of shadows. It seem in my whirl 
thought as though all the real thing had becom shadows--shadow 
which moved, for they pass the dim outlin of the high windows. 
shadow which had sentience. I even thought there wa sound, a faint 
sound as of the mew of a cat--th rustl of draperi and a metal 
clink as of metal faintli touch metal. I sat as one entranced. At 
last I felt, as in nightmare, that thi wa sleep, and that in the 
pass of it portal all my will had gone. 

all at onc my sens were full awake. A shriek rang in my ears. the 
room wa fill suddenli with a blaze of light. there wa the sound of 
pistol shots--one, two; and a haze of white smoke in the room. when my 
wake eye regain their power, I could have shriek with horror 
myself at what I saw befor me. 




chapter IV 

the second attempt 


the sight which met my eye had the horror of a dream within a dream, 
with the certainti of realiti added. the room wa as I had seen it 
last; except that the shadowi look had gone in the glare of the mani 
lights, and everi articl in it stood stark and solidli real. 

By the empti bed sat nurs kennedy, as my eye had last seen her, 
sit bolt upright in the arm-chair besid the bed. she had place a 
pillow behind her, so that her back might be erect; but her neck wa 
fix as that of one in a catalept trance. she was, to all intent 
and purposes, turn into stone. there wa no special express on 
her face--no fear, no horror; noth such as might be expect of one 
in such a condition. her open eye show neither wonder nor interest. 
she wa simpli a neg existence, warm, breathing, placid; but 
absolut unconsci of the world around her. the bedcloth were 
disarranged, as though the patient had been drawn from under them 
without throw them back. the corner of the upper sheet hung upon 
the floor; close by it lay one of the bandag with which the doctor 
had dress the wound wrist. anoth and anoth lay further along 
the floor, as though form a clue to where the sick man now lay. 
thi wa almost exactli where he had been found on the previou night, 
under the great safe. again, the left arm lay toward the safe. but 
there had been a new outrage, an attempt had been made to sever the arm 
close to the bangl which held the tini key. A heavi "kukri" 
knife--on of the leaf-shap knive which the gurkha and other of 
the hill tribe of india use with such effect--had been taken from it 
place on the wall, and with it the attempt had been made. It wa 
manifest that just at the moment of striking, the blow had been 
arrested, for onli the point of the knife and not the edg of the blade 
had struck the flesh. As it was, the outer side of the arm had been 
cut to the bone and the blood wa pour out. In addition, the former 
wound in front of the arm had been cut or torn about terribly, one of 
the cut seem to jet out blood as if with each pulsat of the 
heart. By the side of her father knelt miss trelawny, her white 
nightdress stain with the blood in which she knelt. In the middl of 
the room sergeant daw, in hi shirt and trouser and stock feet, wa 
put fresh cartridg into hi revolv in a daze mechan kind 
of way. hi eye were red and heavy, and he seem onli half awake, 
and less than half consciou of what wa go on around him. sever 
servants, bear light of variou kinds, were cluster round the 
doorway. 

As I rose from my chair and came forward, miss trelawni rais her eye 
toward me. when she saw me she shriek and start to her feet, 
point toward me. never shall I forget the strang pictur she 
made, with her white draperi all smear with blood which, as she rose 
from the pool, ran in streak toward her bare feet. I believ that I 
had onli been asleep; that whatev influenc had work on mr. 
trelawni and nurs kennedy--and in less degre on sergeant daw--had not 
touch me. the respir had been of some service, though it had not 
kept off the tragedi whose dire evid were befor me. I can 
understand now--i could understand even then--th fright, ad to that 
which had gone before, which my appear must have evoked. I had 
still on the respirator, which cover mouth and nose; my hair had been 
toss in my sleep. come suddenli forward, thu enwrap and 
dishevelled, in that horrifi crowd, I must have had, in the strang 
mixtur of lights, an extraordinari and terrifi appearance. It wa 
well that I recognis all thi in time to avert anoth catastrophe; 
for the half-dazed, mechanically-act detect put in the cartridg 
and had rais hi revolv to shoot at me when I succeed in 
wrench off the respir and shout to him to hold hi hand. In 
thi also he act mechanically; the red, half-awak eye had not in 
them even then the intent of consciou action. the danger, however, 
wa averted. the relief of the situation, strang enough, came in a 
simpl fashion. mrs. grant, see that her young mistress had on onli 
her nightdress, had gone to fetch a dressing-gown, which she now threw 
over her. thi simpl act brought us all back to the region of fact. 
with a long breath, one and all seem to devot themselv to the most 
press matter befor us, that of staunch the flow of blood from 
the arm of the wound man. even as the thought of action came, I 
rejoiced; for the bleed wa veri proof that mr. trelawni still lived. 

last night' lesson wa not thrown away. more than one of those 
present knew now what to do in such an emergency, and within a few 
second will hand were at work on a tourniquet. A man wa at onc 
despatch for the doctor, and sever of the servant disappear to 
make themselv respectable. We lift mr. trelawni on to the sofa 
where he had lain yesterday; and, have done what we could for him, 
turn our attent to the nurse. In all the turmoil she had not 
stirred; she sat there as before, erect and rigid, breath softli and 
natur and with a placid smile. As it wa manifestli of no use to 
attempt anyth with her till the doctor had come, we began to think 
of the gener situation. 

mrs. grant had by thi time taken her mistress away and chang her 
clothes; for she wa back present in a dressing-gown and slippers, 
and with the trace of blood remov from her hands. she wa now much 
calmer, though she trembl sadly; and her face wa ghastli white. 
when she had look at her father' wrist, I hold the tourniquet, 
she turn her eye round the room, rest them now and again on each 
one of us present in turn, but seem to find no comfort. It wa so 
appar to me that she did not know where to begin or whom to trust 
that, to reassur her, I said: 

"I am all right now; I wa onli asleep." her voic had a gulp in it as 
she said in a low voice: 

"asleep! you! and my father in danger! I thought you were on the 
watch!" I felt the sting of justic in the reproach; but I realli 
want to help her, so I answered: 

"onli asleep. It is bad enough, I know; but there is someth more 
than an "only" round us here. had it not been that I took a definit 
precaut I might have been like the nurs there." she turn her 
eye swiftli on the weird figure, sit grimli upright like a paint 
statue; and then her face softened. with the action of habitu 
courtesi she said: 

"forgiv me! I did not mean to be rude. but I am in such distress and 
fear that I hardli know what I am saying. oh, it is dreadful! I fear 
for fresh troubl and horror and mysteri everi moment." thi cut me to 
the veri heart, and out of the heart' ful I spoke: 

"don't give me a thought! I don't deserv it. I wa on guard, and yet 
I slept. all that I can say is that I didn't mean to, and I tri to 
avoid it; but it wa over me befor I knew it. anyhow, it is done now; 
and can't be undone. probabl some day we may understand it all; but 
now let us tri to get at some idea of what ha happened. tell me what 
you remember!" the effort to recollect seem to stimul her; she 
becam calmer as she spoke: 

"I wa asleep, and woke suddenli with the same horribl feel on me 
that father wa in great and immedi danger. I jump up and ran, 
just as I was, into hi room. It wa nearli pitch dark, but as I 
open the door there wa light enough to see father' nightdress as he 
lay on the floor under the safe, just as on that first aw night. 
then I think I must have gone mad for a moment." she stop and 
shuddered. My eye lit on sergeant daw, still fiddl in an aimless 
way with the revolver. mind of my work with the tourniquet, I said 
calmly: 

"now tell us, sergeant daw, what did you fire at?" the policeman 
seem to pull himself togeth with the habit of obedience. look 
around at the servant remain in the room, he said with that air of 
import which, I take it, is the regul attitud of an offici 
of the law befor strangers: 

"don't you think, sir, that we can allow the servant to go away? We 
can then better go into the matter." I nod approval; the servant 
took the hint and withdrew, though unwillingly, the last one close 
the door behind him. then the detect went on: 

"I think I had better tell you my impressions, sir, rather than recount 
my actions. that is, so far as I rememb them." there wa a mortifi 
defer now in hi manner, which probabl aros from hi 
conscious of the awkward posit in which he found himself. "I 
went to sleep half-dressed--a I am now, with a revolv under my 
pillow. It wa the last thing I rememb think of. I do not know 
how long I slept. I had turn off the electr light, and it wa 
quit dark. I thought I heard a scream; but I can't be sure, for I 
felt thick-head as a man doe when he is call too soon after an 
extra long stretch of work. not that such wa the case thi time. 
anyhow my thought flew to the pistol. I took it out, and ran on to 
the landing. then I heard a sort of scream, or rather a call for help, 
and ran into thi room. the room wa dark, for the lamp besid the 
nurs wa out, and the onli light wa that from the landing, come 
through the open door. miss trelawni wa kneel on the floor besid 
her father, and wa screaming. I thought I saw someth move between 
me and the window; so, without thinking, and be half daze and onli 
half awake, I shot at it. It move a littl more to the right between 
the windows, and I shot again. then you came up out of the big chair 
with all that muffl on your face. It seem to me, be as I say 
half daze and half awake--i know, sir, you will take thi into 
account--a if it had been you, be in the same direct as the 
thing I had fire at. and so I wa about to fire again when you pull 
off the wrap." here I ask him--i wa cross-examin now and felt at 
home: 

"you say you thought I wa the thing you fire at. what thing?" the 
man scratch hi head, but made no reply. 

"come, sir," I said, "what thing; what wa it like?" the answer came 
in a low voice: 

"I don't know, sir. I thought there wa something; but what it was, or 
what it wa like, I haven't the faintest notion. I suppos it wa 
becaus I had been think of the pistol befor I went to sleep, and 
becaus when I came in here I wa half daze and onli half awake--which 
I hope you will in future, sir, alway remember." He clung to that 
formula of excus as though it were hi sheet-anchor. I did not want 
to antagonis the man; on the contrari I want to have him with us. 
besides, I had on me at that time myself the shadow of my own default; 
so I said as kindli as I knew how: 

"quit right! sergeant. your impuls wa correct; though of cours in 
the half-somnol condit in which you were, and perhap partli 
affect by the same influence--whatev it may be--which made me sleep 
and which ha put the nurs in that catalept trance, it could not be 
expect that you would paus to weigh matters. but now, whilst the 
matter is fresh, let me see exactli where you stood and where I sat. 
We shall be abl to trace the cours of your bullets." the prospect of 
action and the exercis of hi habitu skill seem to brace him at 
once; he seem a differ man as he set about hi work. I ask mrs. 
grant to hold the tourniquet, and went and stood where he had stood and 
look where, in the darkness, he had pointed. I could not but notic 
the mechan exact of hi mind, as when he show me where he had 
stood, or drew, as a matter of course, the revolv from hi pistol 
pocket, and point with it. the chair from which I had risen still 
stood in it place. then I ask him to point with hi hand only, as I 
wish to move in the track of hi shot. 

just behind my chair, and a littl back of it, stood a high buhl 
cabinet. the glass door wa shattered. I asked: 

"wa thi the direct of your first shot or your second?" the answer 
came promptly. 

"the second; the first wa over there!" 

He turn a littl to the left, more toward the wall where the great 
safe stood, and pointed. I follow the direct of hi hand and came 
to the low tabl whereon rested, amongst other curios, the mummi of the 
cat which had rais silvio' ire. I got a candl and easili found the 
mark of the bullet. It had broken a littl glass vase and a tazza of 
black basalt, exquisit engrav with hieroglyphics, the graven line 
be fill with some faint green cement and the whole thing be 
polish to an equal surface. the bullet, flatten against the wall, 
lay on the table. 

I then went to the broken cabinet. It wa evid a receptacl for 
valuabl curios; for in it were some great scarab of gold, agate, 
green jasper, amethyst, lapi lazuli, opal, granite, and blue-green 
china. none of these thing happili were touched. the bullet had gone 
through the back of the cabinet; but no other damage, save the 
shatter of the glass, had been done. I could not but notic the 
strang arrang of the curio on the shelf of the cabinet. all the 
scarabs, rings, amulets, &c. were arrang in an uneven oval round an 
exquisitely-carv golden miniatur figur of a hawk-head god crown 
with a disk and plumes. I did not wait to look further at present, for 
my attent wa demand by more press things; but I determin to 
make a more minut examin when I should have time. It wa evid 
that some of the strang egyptian smell clung to these old curios; 
through the broken glass came an ad whiff of spice and gum and 
bitumen, almost stronger than those I had alreadi notic as come 
from other in the room. 

all thi had realli taken but a few minutes. I wa surpris when my 
eye met, through the chink between the dark window blind and the 
window cases, the brighter light of the come dawn. when I went back 
to the sofa and took the tourniquet from mrs. grant, she went over and 
pull up the blinds. 

It would be hard to imagin anyth more ghastli than the appear 
of the room with the faint grey light of earli morn come in upon 
it. As the window face north, ani light that came wa a fix grey 
light without ani of the rosi possibl of dawn which come in the 
eastern quarter of heaven. the electr light seem dull and yet 
glaring; and everi shadow wa of a hard intensity. there wa noth 
of morn freshness; noth of the soft of night. all wa hard 
and cold and inexpress dreary. the face of the senseless man on 
the sofa seem of a ghastli yellow; and the nurse' face had taken a 
suggest of green from the shade of the lamp near her. onli miss 
trelawny' face look white; and it wa of a pallor which made my 
heart ache. It look as if noth on god' earth could ever again 
bring back to it the colour of life and happiness. 

It wa a relief to us all when doctor winchest came in, breathless 
with running. He onli ask one question: 

"can anyon tell me anyth of how thi wound wa gotten?" On see 
the headshak which went round us under hi glance, he said no more, 
but appli himself to hi surgic work. for an instant he look up 
at the nurs sit so still; but then bent himself to hi task, a 
grave frown contract hi brows. It wa not till the arteri were 
tie and the wound complet dress that he spoke again, except, of 
course, when he had ask for anyth to be hand to him or to be 
done for him. when mr. trelawny' wound had been thoroughli care 
for, he said to miss trelawny: 

"what about nurs kennedy?" she answer at once: 

"I realli do not know. I found her when I came into the room at 
half-past two o'clock, sit exactli as she doe now. We have not 
move her, or chang her position. she ha not waken since. even 
sergeant daw' pistol-shot did not disturb her." 

"pistol-shots? have you then discov ani caus for thi new 
outrage?" the rest were silent, so I answered: 

"we have discov nothing. I wa in the room watch with the 
nurse. earlier in the even I fanci that the mummi smell were 
make me drowsy, so I went out and got a respirator. I had it on when 
I came on duty; but it did not keep me from go to sleep. I awok to 
see the room full of people; that is, miss trelawni and sergeant daw, 
be onli half awak and still stupefi by the same scent or 
influenc which had affect us, fanci that he saw someth move 
through the shadowi dark of the room, and fire twice. when I rose 
out of my chair, with my face swath in the respirator, he took me for 
the caus of the trouble. natur enough, he wa about to fire 
again, when I wa fortun in time to manifest my identity. mr. 
trelawni wa lie besid the safe, just as he wa found last night; 
and wa bleed profus from the new wound in hi wrist. We lift 
him on the sofa, and made a tourniquet. that is, liter and 
absolutely, all that ani of us know as yet. We have not touch the 
knife, which you see lie close by the pool of blood. look!" I said, 
go over and lift it. "the point is red with the blood which ha 
dried." 

doctor winchest stood quit still a few minut befor speaking: 

"then the do of thi night are quit as mysteri as those of last 
night?" 

"quite!" I answered. He said noth in reply, but turn to miss 
trelawni said: 

"we had better take nurs kennedi into anoth room. I suppos there 
is noth to prevent it?" 

"nothing! please, mrs. grant, see that nurs kennedy' room is ready; 
and ask two of the men to come and carri her in." mrs. grant went out 
immediately; and in a few minut came back saying: 

"the room is quit ready; and the men are here." By her direct two 
footmen came into the room and, lift up the rigid bodi of nurs 
kennedi under the supervis of the doctor, carri her out of the 
room. miss trelawni remain with me in the sick chamber, and mrs. 
grant went with the doctor into the nurse' room. 

when we were alon miss trelawni came over to me, and take both my 
hand in hers, said: 

"I hope you won't rememb what I said. I did not mean it, and I wa 
distraught." I did not make reply; but I held her hand and kiss 
them. there are differ way of kiss a lady' hands. thi way 
wa intend as homag and respect; and it wa accept as such in the 
high-bred, dignifi way which mark miss trelawny' bear and everi 
movement. I went over to the sofa and look down at the senseless 
man. the dawn had come much nearer in the last few minutes, and there 
wa someth of the clear of day in the light. As I look at the 
stern, cold, set face, now as white as a marbl monument in the pale 
grey light, I could not but feel that there wa some deep mysteri 
beyond all that had happen within the last twenty-six hours. those 
beetl brow screen some massiv purpose; that high, broad forehead 
held some finish train of reasoning, which the broad chin and massiv 
jaw would help to carri into effect. As I look and wondered, there 
began to steal over me again that phase of wander thought which had 
last night herald the approach of sleep. I resist it, and held 
myself sternli to the present. thi wa easier to do when miss 
trelawni came close to me, and, lean her forehead against my 
shoulder, began to cri silently. then all the manhood in me woke, and 
to present purpose. It wa of littl use tri to speak; word were 
inadequ to thought. but we understood each other; she did not draw 
away when I put arm protectingli over her shoulder as I use to do with 
my littl sister long ago when in her childish troubl she would come 
to her big brother to be comforted. that veri act or attitud of 
protect made me more resolut in my purpose, and seem to clear my 
brain of idle, dreami wander in thought. with an instinct of 
greater protection, however, I took away my arm as I heard the doctor' 
footstep outsid the door. 

when doctor winchest came in he look intent at the patient befor 
speaking. hi brow were set, and hi mouth wa a thin, hard line. 
present he said: 

"there is much in common between the sleep of your father and nurs 
kennedy. whatev influenc ha brought it about ha probabl work 
the same way in both cases. In kennedy' case the coma is less marked. 
I cannot but feel, however, that with her we may be abl to do more and 
more quickli than with thi patient, as our hand are not tied. I have 
place her in a draught; and alreadi she show some signs, though veri 
faint ones, of ordinari unconsciousness. the rigid of her limb is 
less, and her skin seem more sensitive--or perhap I should say less 
insensitive--to pain." 

"how is it, then," I asked, "that mr. trelawni is still in thi state 
of insensibility; and yet, so far as we know, hi bodi ha not had such 
rigid at all?" 

"that I cannot answer. the problem is one which we may solv in a few 
hours; or it may need a few days. but it will be a use lesson in 
diagnosi to us all; and perhap to mani and mani other after us, who 
knows!" he added, with the genuin fire of an enthusiast. 

As the morn wore on, he flit perpetu between the two rooms, 
watch anxious over both patients. He made mrs. grant remain with 
the nurse, but either miss trelawni or I, gener both of us, 
remain with the wound man. We each managed, however, to get bath 
and dressed; the doctor and mrs. grant remain with mr. trelawni 
whilst we had breakfast. 

sergeant daw went off to report at scotland yard the progress of the 
night; and then to the local station to arrang for the come of hi 
comrade, wright, as fix with superintend dolan. when he return 
I could not but think that he had been haul over the coal for 
shoot in a sick-room; or perhap for shoot at all without certain 
and proper cause. hi remark to me enlighten me in the matter: 

"A good charact is worth something, sir, in spite of what some of 
them say. see! i'v still got leav to carri my revolver." 

that day wa a long and anxiou one. toward nightfal nurs kennedi so 
far improv that the rigid of her limb entir disappeared. she 
still breath quietli and regularly; but the fix express of her 
face, though it wa a calm enough expression, gave place to fallen 
eyelid and the neg look of sleep. doctor winchest had, toward 
evening, brought two more nurses, one of whom wa to remain with nurs 
kennedi and the other to share in the watch with miss trelawny, who 
had insist on remain up herself. she had, in order to prepar for 
the duty, slept for sever hour in the afternoon. We had all taken 
counsel together, and had arrang thu for the watch in mr. 
trelawny' room. mrs. grant wa to remain besid the patient till 
twelve, when miss trelawni would reliev her. the new nurs wa to sit 
in miss trelawny' room, and to visit the sick chamber each quarter of 
an hour. the doctor would remain till twelve; when I wa to reliev 
him. one or other of the detect wa to remain within hail of the 
room all night; and to pay period visit to see that all wa well. 
thus, the watcher would be watched; and the possibl of such event 
as last night, when the watcher were both overcome, would be avoided. 

when the sun set, a strang and grave anxieti fell on all of us; and in 
our separ way we prepar for the vigil. doctor winchest had 
evid been think of my respirator, for he told me he would go 
out and get one. indeed, he took to the idea so kindli that I 
persuad miss trelawni also to have one which she could put on when 
her time for watch came. 

and so the night drew on. 




chapter V 

more strang instruct 


when I came from my room at half-past eleven o'clock I found all well 
in the sick-room. the new nurse, prim, neat, and watchful, sat in the 
chair by the bedsid where nurs kennedi had sat last night. A littl 
way off, between the bed and the safe, sat dr. winchest alert and 
wakeful, but look strang and almost comic with the respir over 
mouth and nose. As I stood in the doorway look at them I heard a 
slight sound; turn round I saw the new detective, who nodded, held 
up the finger of silenc and withdrew quietly. hitherto no one of the 
watcher wa overcom by sleep. 

I took a chair outsid the door. As yet there wa no need for me to 
risk come again under the subtl influenc of last night. natur 
my thought went revolv round the main incid of the last day and 
night, and I found myself arriv at strang conclusions, doubts, 
conjectures; but I did not lose myself, as on last night, in train of 
thought. the sens of the present wa ever with me, and I realli felt 
as should a sentri on guard. think is not a slow process; and when 
it is earnest the time can pass quickly. It seem a veri short time 
inde till the door, usual left ajar, wa pull open and dr. 
winchest emerged, take off hi respir as he came. hi act, 
when he had it off, wa demonstr of hi keenness. He turn up 
the outsid of the wrap and smell it carefully. 

"I am go now," he said. "I shall come earli in the morning; unless, 
of course, I am sent for before. but all seem well tonight." 

the next to appear wa sergeant daw, who went quietli into the room and 
took the seat vacat by the doctor. I still remain outside; but 
everi few minut look into the room. thi wa rather a form than a 
matter of utility, for the room wa so dark that come even from the 
dimly-light corridor it wa hard to distinguish anything. 

A littl befor twelv o'clock miss trelawni came from her room. 
befor come to her father' she went into that occupi by nurs 
kennedy. after a coupl of minut she came out, looking, I thought, a 
trifl more cheerful. she had her respir in her hand, but befor 
put it on, ask me if anyth special had occur sinc she had 
gone to lie down. I answer in a whisper--ther wa no loud talk 
in the hous tonight--that all wa safe, wa well. she then put on her 
respirator, and I mine; and we enter the room. the detect and the 
nurs rose up, and we took their places. sergeant daw wa the last to 
go out; he close the door behind him as we had arranged. 

for a while I sat quiet, my heart beating. the place wa grimli dark. 
the onli light wa a faint one from the top of the lamp which threw a 
white circl on the high ceiling, except the emerald sheen of the shade 
as the light took it under edges. even the light onli seem to 
emphas the black of the shadows. these present began to seem, 
as on last night, to have a sentienc of their own. I did not myself 
feel in the least sleepy; and each time I went softli over to look at 
the patient, which I did about everi ten minutes, I could see that miss 
trelawni wa keenli alert. everi quarter of an hour one or other of 
the policemen look in through the partli open door. each time both 
miss trelawni and I said through our mufflers, "all right," and the 
door wa close again. 

As the time wore on, the silenc and the dark seem to increase. 
the circl of light on the ceil wa still there, but it seem less 
brilliant than at first. the green edg of the lamp-shad becam 
like maori greenston rather than emerald. the sound of the night 
without the house, and the starlight spread pale line along the 
edg of the window-cases, made the pall of black within more solemn 
and more mysterious. 

We heard the clock in the corridor chime the quarter with it silver 
bell till two o'clock; and then a strang feel came over me. I 
could see from miss trelawny' movement as she look round, that she 
also had some new sensation. the new detect had just look in; we 
two were alon with the unconsci patient for anoth quarter of an 
hour. 

My heart began to beat wildly. there wa a sens of fear over me. not 
for myself; my fear wa impersonal. It seem as though some new 
person had enter the room, and that a strong intellig wa awak 
close to me. someth brush against my leg. I put my hand down 
hastili and touch the furri coat of silvio. with a veri faint 
far-away sound of a snarl he turn and scratch at me. I felt blood 
on my hand. I rose gentli and came over to the bedside. miss 
trelawny, too, had stood up and wa look behind her, as though there 
wa someth close to her. her eye were wild, and her breast rose and 
fell as though she were fight for air. when I touch her she did 
not seem to feel me; she work her hand in front of her, as though 
she wa fend off something. 

there wa not an instant to lose. I seiz her in my arm and rush 
over to the door, threw it open, and strode into the passage, call 
loudly: 

"help! help!" 

In an instant the two detectives, mrs. grant, and the nurs appear on 
the scene. close on their heel came sever of the servants, both men 
and women. immedi mrs. grant came near enough, I place miss 
trelawni in her arms, and rush back into the room, turn up the 
electr light as soon as I could lay my hand on it. sergeant daw and 
the nurs follow me. 

We were just in time. close under the great safe, where on the two 
success night he had been found, lay mr. trelawni with hi left 
arm, bare save for the bandages, stretch out. close by hi side wa 
a leaf-shap egyptian knife which had lain amongst the curio on the 
shelf of the broken cabinet. it point wa stuck in the parquet floor, 
whenc had been remov the blood-stain rug. 

but there wa no sign of disturb anywhere; nor ani sign of ani one 
or anyth unusual. the policemen and I search the room accurately, 
whilst the nurs and two of the servant lift the wound man back to 
bed; but no sign or clue could we get. veri soon miss trelawni 
return to the room. she wa pale but collected. when she came close 
to me she said in a low voice: 

"I felt myself fainting. I did not know why; but I wa afraid!" 

the onli other shock I had wa when miss trelawni cri out to me, as I 
place my hand on the bed to lean over and look care at her father: 

"you are wounded. look! look! your hand is bloody. there is blood on 
the sheets!" I had, in the excitement, quit forgotten silvio' 
scratch. As I look at it, the recollect came back to me; but 
befor I could say a word miss trelawni had caught hold of my hand and 
lift it up. when she saw the parallel line of the cut she cri out 
again: 

"it is the same wound as father's!" then she laid my hand down gentli 
but quickly, and said to me and to sergeant daw: 

"come to my room! silvio is there in hi basket." We follow her, 
and found silvio sit in hi basket awake. He wa lick hi paws. 
the detect said: 

"he is there sure enough; but whi lick hi paws?" 

margaret--miss trelawny--gav a moan as she bent over and took one of 
the forepaw in her hand; but the cat seem to resent it and snarled. 
At that mrs. grant came into the room. when she saw that we were 
look at the cat she said: 

"the nurs tell me that silvio wa asleep on nurs kennedy' bed ever 
sinc you went to your father' room until a while ago. He came there 
just after you had gone to master' room. nurs say that nurs 
kennedi is moan and mutter in her sleep as though she had a 
nightmare. I think we should send for dr. winchester." 

"do so at once, please!" said miss trelawny; and we went back to the 
room. 

for a while miss trelawni stood look at her father, with her brow 
wrinkled. then, turn to me, as though her mind were made up, she 
said: 

"don't you think we should have a consult on father? Of cours I 
have everi confid in doctor winchester; he seem an immens 
clever young man. but he is a young man; and there must be men who 
have devot themselv to thi branch of science. such a man would 
have more knowledg and more experience; and hi knowledg and 
experi might help to throw light on poor father' case. As it is, 
doctor winchest seem to be quit in the dark. oh! I don't know what 
to do. It is all so terrible!" here she broke down a littl and cried; 
and I tri to comfort her. 

doctor winchest arriv quickly. hi first thought wa for hi 
patient; but when he found him without further harm, he visit nurs 
kennedy. when he saw her, a hope look came into hi eyes. take a 
towel, he dip a corner of it in cold water and flick on the face. 
the skin coloured, and she stir slightly. He said to the new 
nurse--sist dori he call her: 

"she is all right. she will wake in a few hour at latest. she may be 
dizzi and distraught at first, or perhap hysterical. If so, you know 
how to treat her." 

"yes, sir!" answer sister dori demurely; and we went back to mr. 
trelawny' room. As soon as we had entered, mrs. grant and the nurs 
went out so that onli doctor winchester, miss trelawny, and myself 
remain in the room. when the door had been close doctor winchest 
ask me as to what had occurred. I told him fully, give exactli 
everi detail so far as I could remember. throughout my narrative, 
which did not take long, however, he kept ask me question as to who 
had been present and the order in which each one had come into the 
room. He ask other things, but noth of ani importance; these were 
all that took my attention, or remain in my memory. when our 
convers wa finished, he said in a veri decid way indeed, to 
miss trelawny: 

"I think, miss trelawny, that we had better have a consult on thi 
case." she answer at once, seemingli a littl to hi surprise: 

"I am glad you have mention it. I quit agree. who would you 
suggest?" 

"have you ani choic yourself?" he asked. "ani one to whom your father 
is known? ha he ever consult ani one?" 

"not to my knowledge. but I hope you will choos whoever you think 
would be best. My dear father should have all the help that can be 
had; and I shall be deepli oblig by your choosing. who is the best 
man in london--anywher else--in such a case?" 

"there are sever good men; but they are scatter all over the world. 
somehow, the brain specialist is born, not made; though a lot of hard 
work goe to the complet of him and fit him for hi work. He 
come from no country. the most dare investig up to the present 
is chiuni, the japanese; but he is rather a surgic experimentalist 
than a practitioner. then there is zammerfest of uppsala, and fenelon 
of the univers of paris, and morfessi of naples. these, of course, 
are in addit to our own men, morrison of aberdeen and richardson of 
birmingham. but befor them all I would put frere of king' college. 
Of all that I have name he best unit theori and practice. He ha no 
hobbies--that have been discov at all events; and hi experi is 
immense. It is the regret of all of us who admir him that the nerv 
so firm and the hand so dexter must yield to time. for my own part 
I would rather have frere than ani one living." 

"then," said miss trelawni decisively, "let us have doctor frere--bi 
the way, is he 'doctor' or 'mister'?--a earli as we can get him in the 
morning!" 

A weight seem remov from him, and he spoke with greater eas and 
genial than he had yet shown: 

"he is sir jame frere. I shall go to him myself as earli as it is 
possibl to see him, and shall ask him to come here at once." then 
turn to me he said: 

"you had better let me dress your hand." 

"it is nothing," I said. 

"nevertheless it should be seen to. A scratch from ani anim might 
turn out dangerous; there is noth like be safe." I submitted; 
forthwith he began to dress my hand. He examin with a 
magnifying-glass the sever parallel wounds, and compar them with 
the slip of blotting-paper, mark with silvio' claws, which he took 
from hi pocket-book. He put back the paper, simpli remarking: 

"it' a piti that silvio slip in--and out--just when he shouldn't." 

the morn wore slowli on. By ten o'clock nurs kennedi had so far 
recov that she wa abl to sit up and talk intelligibly. but she 
wa still hazi in her thoughts; and could not rememb anyth that 
had happen on the previou night, after her take her place by the 
sick-bed. As yet she seem neither to know nor care what had happened. 

It wa nearli eleven o'clock when doctor winchest return with sir 
jame frere. somehow I felt my heart sink when from the land I saw 
them in the hall below; I knew that miss trelawni wa to have the pain 
of tell yet anoth stranger of her ignor of her father' life. 

sir jame frere wa a man who command attent follow by respect. 
He knew so thoroughli what he want himself, that he place at onc on 
one side all wish and idea of less definit persons. the mere flash 
of hi pierc eyes, or the set of hi resolut mouth, or the lower 
of hi great eyebrows, seem to compel immedi and will obedi 
to hi wishes. somehow, when we had all been introduc and he wa 
well amongst us, all sens of mysteri seem to melt away. It wa with 
a hope spirit that I saw him pass into the sick-room with doctor 
winchester. 

they remain in the room a long time; onc they sent for the nurse, 
the new one, sister doris, but she did not remain long. again they 
both went into nurs kennedy' room. He sent out the nurs attend 
on her. doctor winchest told me afterward that nurs kennedy, though 
she wa ignor of later matters, gave full and satisfactori answer 
to all doctor frere' question relat to her patient up to the time 
she becam unconscious. then they went to the study, where they 
remain so long, and their voic rais in heat discuss seem 
in such determin opposition, that I began to feel uneasy. As for 
miss trelawny, she wa almost in a state of collaps from nervous 
befor they join us. poor girl! she had had a sadli anxiou time of 
it, and her nervou strength had almost broken down. 

they came out at last, sir jame first, hi grave face look as 
unenlighten as that of the sphinx. doctor winchest follow him 
closely; hi face wa pale, but with that kind of pallor which look 
like a reaction. It gave me the idea that it had been red not long 
before. sir jame ask that miss trelawni would come into the study. 
He suggest that I should come also. when we had entered, sir jame 
turn to me and said: 

"I understand from doctor winchest that you are a friend of miss 
trelawny, and that you have alreadi consider knowledg of thi 
case. perhap it will be well that you should be with us. I know you 
alreadi as a keen lawyer, mr. ross, though I never had the pleasur of 
meet you. As doctor winchest tell me that there are some strang 
matter outsid thi case which seem to puzzl him--and others--and in 
which he think you may yet be special interested, it might be as 
well that you should know everi phase of the case. for myself I do not 
take much account of mysteries--except those of science; and as there 
seem to be some idea of an attempt at assassin or robbery, all I 
can say is that if assassin were at work they ought to take some 
elementari lesson in anatomi befor their next job, for they seem 
thoroughli ignorant. If robberi were their purpose, they seem to have 
work with marvel inefficiency. that, however, is not my 
business." here he took a big pinch of snuff, and turn to to miss 
trelawny, went on: "now as to the patient. leav out the caus of hi 
illness, all we can say at present is that he appear to be suffer 
from a mark attack of catalepsy. At present noth can be done, 
except to sustain hi strength. the treatment of my friend doctor 
winchest is mainli such as I approv of; and I am confid that 
should ani slight chang aris he will be abl to deal with it 
satisfactorily. It is an interest case--most interesting; and 
should ani new or abnorm develop aris I shall be happi to come 
at ani time. there is just one thing to which I wish to call your 
attention; and I put it to you, miss trelawny, directly, sinc it is 
your responsibility. doctor winchest inform me that you are not 
yourself free in the matter, but are bound by an instruct given by 
your father in case just such a condit of thing should arise. I 
would strongli advis that the patient be remov to anoth room; or, 
as an alternative, that those mummi and all such thing should be 
remov from hi chamber. why, it' enough to put ani man into an 
abnorm condition, to have such an assemblag of horror round him, 
and to breath the atmospher which they exhale. you have evid 
alreadi of how such mephit odour may act. that nurse--kennedy, I 
think you said, doctor--isn't yet out of her state of catalepsy; and 
you, mr. ross, have, I am told, experienc someth of the same 
effects. I know this"--her hi eyebrow came down more than ever, and 
hi mouth hardened--"if I were in charg here I should insist on the 
patient have a differ atmosphere; or I would throw up the case. 
doctor winchest alreadi know that I can onli be again consult on 
thi condit be fulfilled. but I trust that you will see your 
way, as a good daughter to my mind should, to look to your father' 
health and saniti rather than to ani whim of his--wheth support or 
not by a forego fear, or by ani number of "penni dreadful" 
mysteries. the day ha hardli come yet, I am glad to say, when the 
british museum and st. thomas' hospit have exchang their normal 
functions. good-day, miss trelawny. I earnestli hope that I may soon 
see your father restored. remember, that should you fulfil the 
elementari condit which I have laid down, I am at your servic day 
or night. good-morning, mr. ross. I hope you will be abl to report 
to me soon, doctor winchester." 

when he had gone we stood silent, till the rumbl of hi carriag 
wheel die away. the first to speak wa doctor winchester: 

"I think it well to say that to my mind, speak pure as a 
physician, he is quit right. I feel as if I could have assault him 
when he made it a condit of not give up the case; but all the same 
he is right as to treatment. He doe not understand that there is 
someth odd about thi special case; and he will not realis the knot 
that we are all tie up in by mr. trelawny' instructions. Of 
course--" He wa interrupt by miss trelawny: 

"doctor winchester, do you, too, wish to give up the case; or are you 
will to continu it under the condit you know?" 

"give it up! less now than ever. miss trelawny, I shall never give it 
up, so long as life is left to him or ani of us!" she said nothing, 
but held out her hand, which he took warmly. 

"now," said she, "if sir jame frere is a type of the cult of 
specialists, I want no more of them. To start with, he doe not seem 
to know ani more than you do about my father' condition; and if he 
were a hundredth part as much interest in it as you are, he would not 
stand on such punctilio. Of course, I am onli too anxiou about my 
poor father; and if I can see a way to meet either of sir jame frere' 
conditions, I shall do so. I shall ask mr. marvin to come here today, 
and advis me as to the limit of father' wishes. If he think I am 
free to act in ani way on my own responsibility, I shall not hesit 
to do so." then doctor winchest took hi leave. 

miss trelawni sat down and wrote a letter to mr. marvin, tell him of 
the state of affairs, and ask him to come and see her and to bring 
with him ani paper which might throw ani light on the subject. she 
sent the letter off with a carriag to bring back the solicitor; we 
wait with what patienc we could for hi coming. 

It is not a veri long journey for oneself from kensington palac 
garden to lincoln' inn fields; but it seem endlessli long when 
wait for someon els to take it. all things, however, are amen 
to time; it wa less than an hour all told when mr. marvin wa with us. 

He recognis miss trelawny' impatience, and when he had learn 
suffici of her father' illness, he said to her: 

"whenev you are readi I can go with you into particular regard 
your father' wishes." 

"whenev you like," she said, with an evid ignor of hi 
meaning. "whi not now?" He look at me, as to a fellow man of 
business, and stammer out: 

"we are not alone." 

"I have brought mr. ross here on purpose," she answered. "he know so 
much at present, that I want him to know more." the solicitor wa a 
littl disconcerted, a thing which those know him onli in court 
would hardli have believed. He answered, however, with some hesitation: 

"but, my dear young lady--your father' wishes!--confid between 
father and child--" 

here she interrupt him; there wa a ting of red in her pale cheek 
as she did so: 

"do you realli think that appli to the present circumstances, mr. 
marvin? My father never told me anyth of hi affairs; and I can 
now, in thi sad extremity, onli learn hi wish through a gentleman 
who is a stranger to me and of whom I never even heard till I got my 
father' letter, written to be shown to me onli in extremity. mr. ross 
is a new friend; but he ha all my confidence, and I should like him to 
be present. unless, of course," she added, "such a thing is forbidden 
by my father. oh! forgiv me, mr. marvin, if I seem rude; but I have 
been in such dread troubl and anxieti lately, that I have hardli 
command of myself." she cover her eye with her hand for a few 
seconds; we two men look at each other and waited, tri to appear 
unmoved. she went on more firmly; she had recov herself: 

"please! pleas do not think I am ungrat to you for your kind 
in come here and so quickly. I realli am grateful; and I have everi 
confid in your judgment. If you wish, or think it best, we can be 
alone." I stood up; but mr. marvin made a dissenti gesture. He wa 
evid pleas with her attitude; there wa genial in hi voic 
and manner as he spoke: 

"not at all! not at all! there is no restrict on your father' 
part; and on my own I am quit willing. indeed, all told, it may be 
better. from what you have said of mr. trelawny' illness, and the 
other--incidental--matters, it will be well in case of ani grave 
eventuality, that it wa understood from the first, that circumst 
were rule by your father' own imper instructions. for, pleas 
understand me, hi instruct are imperative--most imperative. they 
are so unyield that he ha given me a power of attorney, under which 
I have undertaken to act, authoris me to see hi written wish 
carri out. pleas believ me onc for all, that he intend fulli 
everyth mention in that letter to you! whilst he is aliv he is 
to remain in hi own room; and none of hi properti is to be remov 
from it under ani circumst whatever. He ha even given an 
inventori of the articl which are not to be displaced." 

miss trelawni wa silent. she look somewhat distressed; so, think 
that I understood the immedi cause, I asked: 

"may we see the list?" miss trelawny' face at onc brightened; but it 
fell again as the lawyer answer promptly--h wa evid prepar 
for the question: 

"not unless I am compel to take action on the power of attorney. I 
have brought that instrument with me. you will recognise, mr. 
ross"--h said thi with a sort of busi convict which I had 
notic in hi profession work, as he hand me the deed--"how 
strongli it is worded, and how the grantor made hi wish appar in 
such a way as to leav no loophole. It is hi own wording, except for 
certain legal formalities; and I assur you I have seldom seen a more 
iron-clad document. even I myself have no power to make the slightest 
relax of the instructions, without commit a distinct breach of 
faith. and that, I need not tell you, is impossible." He evid 
ad the last word in order to prevent an appeal to hi person 
consideration. He did not like the seem harsh of hi words, 
however, for he added: 

"I do hope, miss trelawny, that you understand that I am 
willing--frankli and unequivoc willing--to do anyth I can, 
within the limit of my power, to reliev your distress. but your 
father had, in all hi doings, some purpos of hi own which he did not 
disclos to me. So far as I can see, there is not a word of hi 
instruct that he had not thought over fully. whatev idea he had 
in hi mind wa the idea of a lifetime; he had studi it in everi 
possibl phase, and wa prepar to guard it at everi point. 

"now I fear I have distress you, and I am truli sorri for it; for I 
see you have much--too much--to bear already. but I have no 
alternative. If you want to consult me at ani time about anything, I 
promis you I will come without a moment' delay, at ani hour of the 
day or night. there is my privat address," he scribbl in hi 
pocket-book as he spoke, "and under it the address of my club, where I 
am gener to be found in the evening." He tore out the paper and 
hand it to her. she thank him. He shook hand with her and with 
me and withdrew. 

As soon as the hall door wa shut on him, mrs. grant tap at the door 
and came in. there wa such a look of distress in her face that miss 
trelawni stood up, deadli white, and ask her: 

"what is it, mrs. grant? what is it? ani new trouble?" 

"I griev to say, miss, that the servants, all but two, have given 
notic and want to leav the hous today. they have talk the matter 
over among themselves; the butler ha spoken for the rest. He say as 
how they are will to forego their wages, and even to pay their legal 
oblig instead of notice; but that go today they must." 

"what reason do they give?" 

"none, miss. they say as how they'r sorry, but that they'v noth 
to say. I ask jane, the upper housemaid, miss, who is not with the 
rest but stop on; and she tell me confidenti that they'v got some 
notion in their silli head that the hous is haunted!" 

We ought to have laughed, but we didn't. I could not look in miss 
trelawny' face and laugh. the pain and horror there show no sudden 
paroxysm of fear; there wa a fix idea of which thi wa a 
confirmation. for myself, it seem as if my brain had found a voice. 
but the voic wa not complete; there wa some other thought, darker 
and deeper, which lay behind it, whose voic had not sound as yet. 




chapter VI 

suspicion 


the first to get full self-command wa miss trelawny. there wa a 
haughti digniti in her bear as she said: 

"veri well, mrs. grant; let them go! pay them up to today, and a 
month' wages. they have hitherto been veri good servants; and the 
occas of their leav is not an ordinari one. We must not expect 
much faith from ani one who is beset with fears. those who 
remain are to have in futur doubl wages; and pleas send these to me 
present when I send word." mrs. grant bristl with smother 
indignation; all the housekeep in her wa outrag by such gener 
treatment of servant who had combin to give notice: 

"they don't deserv it, miss; them to go on so, after the way they have 
been treat here. never in my life have I seen servant so well 
treat or anyon so good to them and graciou to them as you have 
been. they might be in the household of a king for treatment. and now, 
just as there is trouble, to go and act like this. it' abominable, 
that' what it is!" 

miss trelawni wa veri gentl with her, and smother her ruffl 
dignity; so that present she went away with, in her manner, a lesser 
measur of hostil to the undeserving. In quit a differ frame of 
mind she return present to ask if her mistress would like her to 
engag a full staff of other servants, or at ani rate tri to do so. 
"for you know, ma'am," she went on, "when onc a scare ha been 
establish in the servants' hall, it' wellnigh imposs to get rid 
of it. servant may come; but they go away just as quick. there' no 
hold them. they simpli won't stay; or even if they work out their 
month' notice, they lead you that life that you wish everi hour of the 
day that you hadn't kept them. the women are bad enough, the huzzies; 
but the men are worse!" there wa neither anxieti nor indign in 
miss trelawny' voic or manner as she said: 

"I think, mrs. grant, we had better tri to do with those we have. 
whilst my dear father is ill we shall not be have ani company, so 
that there will be onli three now in the hous to attend to. If those 
servant who are will to stay are not enough, I should onli get 
suffici to help them to do the work. It will not, I should think, 
be difficult to get a few maids; perhap some that you know already. 
and pleas bear in mind, that those whom you get, and who are suitabl 
and will stay, are henceforth to have the same wage as those who are 
remaining. Of course, mrs. grant, you well enough understand that 
though I do not group you in ani way with the servants, the rule of 
doubl salari appli to you too." As she spoke she extend her long, 
fine-shap hand, which the other took and then, rais it to her 
lips, kiss it impress with the freedom of an elder woman to a 
younger. I could not but admir the generos of her treatment of her 
servants. In my mind I endors mrs. grant' sotto voce remark as she 
left the room: 

"no wonder the hous is like a king' house, when the mistress is a 
princess!" 

"A princess!" that wa it. the idea seem to satisfi my mind, and to 
bring back in a wave of light the first moment when she swept across my 
vision at the ball in belgrav square. A queenli figure! tall and 
slim, bending, swaying, undul as the lili or the lotos. clad in a 
flow gown of some filmi black materi shot with gold. for ornament 
in her hair she wore an old egyptian jewel, a tini crystal disk, set 
between rise plume carv in lapi lazuli. On her wrist wa a broad 
bangl or bracelet of antiqu work, in the shape of a pair of spread 
wing wrought in gold, with the feather made of colour gems. for 
all her graciou bear toward me, when our hostess introduc me, I 
wa then afraid of her. It wa onli when later, at the picnic on the 
river, I had come to realis her sweet and gentle, that my awe chang 
to someth else. 

for a while she sat, make some note or memoranda. then put them 
away, she sent for the faith servants. I thought that she had 
better have thi interview alone, and so left her. when I came back 
there were trace of tear in her eyes. 

the next phase in which I had a part wa even more disturbing, and 
infinit more painful. late in the afternoon sergeant daw came into 
the studi where I wa sitting. after close the door care and 
look all round the room to make certain that we were alone, he came 
close to me. 

"what is it?" I ask him. "I see you wish to speak to me privately." 

"quit so, sir! may I speak in absolut confidence?" 

"of cours you may. In anyth that is for the good of miss 
trelawny--and of cours mr. trelawny--y may be perfectli frank. I 
take it that we both want to serv them to the best of our powers." He 
hesit befor replying: 

"of cours you know that I have my duti to do; and I think you know me 
well enough to know that I will do it. I am a policeman--a detective; 
and it is my duti to find out the fact of ani case I am put on, 
without fear or favour to anyone. I would rather speak to you alone, 
in confid if I may, without refer to ani duti of anyon to 
anyone, except mine to scotland yard." 

"of course! of course!" I answer mechanically, my heart sinking, I 
did not know why. "be quit frank with me. I assur you of my 
confidence." 

"thank you, sir. I take it that what I say is not to pass beyond 
you--not to anyone. not to miss trelawni herself, or even to mr. 
trelawni when he becom well again." 

"certainly, if you make it a condition!" I said a littl more stiffly. 
the man recognis the chang in my voic or manner, and said 
apologetically: 

"excus me, sir, but I am go outsid my duti in speak to you at 
all on the subject. I know you, however, of old; and I feel that I can 
trust you. not your word, sir, that is all right; but your discretion!" 

I bowed. "go on!" I said. He began at once: 

"I have gone over thi case, sir, till my brain begin to reel; but I 
can't find ani ordinari solut of it. At the time of each attempt no 
one ha seemingli come into the house; and certainli no one ha got 
out. what doe it strike you is the inference?" 

"that the somebody--or the something--wa in the hous already," I 
answered, smile in spite of myself. 

"that' just what I think," he said, with a manifest sigh of relief. 
"veri well! who can be that someone?" 

"'someone, or something,' wa what I said," I answered. 

"let us make it 'someone,' mr. ross! that cat, though he might have 
scratch or bit, never pull the old gentleman out of bed, and tri 
to get the bangl with the key off hi arm. such thing are all veri 
well in book where your amateur detectives, who know everyth befor 
it' done, can fit them into theories; but in scotland yard, where the 
men aren't all idiot either, we gener find that when crime is 
done, or attempted, it' people, not things, that are at the bottom of 
it." 

"then make it 'people' by all means, sergeant." 

"we were speak of 'someone,' sir." 

"quit right. someone, be it!" 

"did it ever strike you, sir, that on each of the three separ 
occas where outrag wa effected, or attempted, there wa one 
person who wa the first to be present and to give the alarm?" 

"let me see! miss trelawny, I believe, gave the alarm on the first 
occasion. I wa present myself, if fast asleep, on the second; and so 
wa nurs kennedy. when I woke there were sever peopl in the room; 
you were one of them. I understand that on that occas also miss 
trelawni wa befor you. At the last attempt I wa miss trelawni 
fainted. I carri her out and went back. In returning, I wa first; 
and I think you were close behind me." 

sergeant daw thought for a moment befor replying: 

"she wa present, or first, in the room on all the occasions; there wa 
onli damag done in the first and second!" 

the infer wa one which I, as a lawyer, could not mistake. I 
thought the best thing to do wa to meet it half-way. I have alway 
found that the best way to encount an infer is to caus it to be 
turn into a statement. 

"you mean," I said, "that as on the onli occas when actual harm wa 
done, miss trelawny' be the first to discov it is a proof that 
she did it; or wa in some way connect with the attempt, as well as 
the discovery?" 

"I didn't ventur to put it as clear as that; but that is where the 
doubt which I had leads." sergeant daw wa a man of courage; he 
evid did not shrink from ani conclus of hi reason on facts. 

We were both silent for a while. fear began crowd in on my own 
mind. not doubt of miss trelawny, or of ani act of hers; but fear 
lest such act should be misunderstood. there wa evid a mysteri 
somewhere; and if no solut to it could be found, the doubt would be 
cast on someone. In such case the guess of the major are bound 
to follow the line of least resistance; and if it could be prove that 
ani person gain to anyon could follow mr. trelawny' death, should 
such ensue, it might prove a difficult task for anyon to prove 
innoc in the face of suspici facts. I found myself 
instinct take that deferenti cours which, until the plan of 
battl of the prosecut is unfolded, is so safe an attitud for the 
defence. It would never do for me, at thi stage, to combat ani 
theori which a detect might form. I could best help miss trelawni 
by listen and understanding. when the time should come for the 
dissip and obliter of the theories, I should be quit will 
to use all my milit ardour, and all the weapon at my command. 

"you will of cours do your duty, I know," I said, "and without fear. 
what cours do you intend to take?" 

"I don't know as yet, sir. you see, up to now it isn't with me even a 
suspicion. If ani one els told me that that sweet young ladi had a 
hand in such a matter, I would think him a fool; but I am bound to 
follow my own conclusions. I know well that just as unlik person 
have been prove guilty, when a whole court--al except the prosecut 
who knew the facts, and the judg who had taught hi mind to 
wait--would have sworn to innocence. I wouldn't, for all the world, 
wrong such a young lady; more especi when she ha such a cruel weight 
to bear. and you will be sure that I won't say a word that'll prompt 
anyon els to make such a charge. that' whi I speak to you in 
confidence, man to man. you are skill in proofs; that is your 
profession. mine onli get so far as suspicions, and what we call our 
own proofs--which are noth but ex part evid after all. you 
know miss trelawni better than I do; and though I watch round the 
sick-room, and go where I like about the hous and in and out of it, I 
haven't the same opportun as you have of know the ladi and what 
her life is, or her mean are; or of anyth els which might give me 
a clue to her actions. If I were to tri to find out from her, it would 
at onc arous her suspicions. then, if she were guilty, all 
possibl of ultim proof would go; for she would easili find a way 
to baffl discovery. but if she be innocent, as I hope she is, it 
would be do a cruel wrong to accus her. I have thought the matter 
over accord to my light befor I spoke to you; and if I have taken 
a liberty, sir, I am truli sorry." 

"no liberti in the world, daw," I said warmly, for the man' courag 
and honesti and consider compel respect. "I am glad you have 
spoken to me so frankly. We both want to find out the truth; and there 
is so much about thi case that is strange--so strang as to go beyond 
all experiences--that to aim at truth is our onli chanc of make 
anyth clear in the long-run--no matter what our view are, or what 
object we wish to achiev ultimately!" the sergeant look pleas as 
he went on: 

"I thought, therefore, that if you had it onc in your mind that 
somebodi els held to such a possibility, you would by degre get 
proof; or at ani rate such idea as would convinc yourself, either for 
or against it. then we would come to some conclusion; or at ani rate 
we should so exhaust all other possibl that the most like one 
would remain as the nearest thing to proof, or strong suspicion, that 
we could get. after that we should have to--" 

just at thi moment the door open and miss trelawni enter the room. 
the moment she saw us she drew back quickly, saying: 

"oh, I beg pardon! I did not know you were here, and engaged." By the 
time I had stood up, she wa about to go back. 

"do come in," I said; "sergeant daw and I were onli talk matter 
over." 

whilst she wa hesitating, mrs. grant appeared, say as she enter 
the room: "doctor winchest is come, miss, and is ask for you." 

I obey miss trelawny' look; togeth we left the room. 

when the doctor had made hi examination, he told us that there wa 
seemingli no change. He ad that nevertheless he would like to stay 
in the hous that night is he might. miss trelawni look glad, and 
sent word to mrs. grant to get a room readi for him. later in the day, 
when he and I happen to be alon together, he said suddenly: 

"I have arrang to stay here tonight becaus I want to have a talk 
with you. and as I wish it to be quit private, I thought the least 
suspici way would be to have a cigar togeth late in the even 
when miss trelawni is watch her father." We still kept to our 
arrang that either the sick man' daughter or I should be on watch 
all night. We were to share the duti at the earli hour of the 
morning. I wa anxiou about this, for I knew from our convers 
that the detect would watch in secret himself, and would be 
particularli alert about that time. 

the day pass uneventfully. miss trelawni slept in the afternoon; and 
after dinner went to reliev the nurse. mrs. grant remain with her, 
sergeant daw be on duti in the corridor. doctor winchest and I 
took our coffe in the library. when we had lit our cigar he said 
quietly: 

"now that we are alon I want to have a confidenti talk. We are 
'tiled,' of course; for the present at all events?" 

"quit so!" I said, my heart sink as I thought of my convers 
with sergeant daw in the morning, and of the disturb and harrow 
fear which it had left in my mind. He went on: 

"thi case is enough to tri the saniti of all of us concern in it. 
the more I think of it, the madder I seem to get; and the two lines, 
each continu strengthened, seem to pull harder in opposit 
directions." 

"what two lines?" He look at me keenli for a moment befor replying. 
doctor winchester' look at such moment wa apt to be disconcerting. 
It would have been so to me had I had a person part, other than my 
interest in miss trelawny, in the matter. As it was, however, I stood 
it unruffled. I wa now an attorney in the case; an amicu curia in 
one sense, in anoth retain for the defence. the mere thought that 
in thi clever man' mind were two lines, equal strong and opposite, 
wa in itself so consol as to neutralis my anxieti as to a new 
attack. As he began to speak, the doctor' face wore an inscrut 
smile; this, however, gave place to a stern graviti as he proceeded: 

"two lines: fact and--fancy! In the first there is thi whole thing; 
attacks, attempt at robberi and murder; stupefyings; organis 
catalepsi which point to either crimin hypnot and thought 
suggestion, or some simpl form of poison unclassifi yet in our 
toxicology. In the other there is some influenc at work which is not 
classifi in ani book that I know--outsid the page of romance. I 
never felt in my life so strongli the truth of hamlet' words: 

'there are more thing in heaven and earth... 
than are dreamt of in your philosophy.' 

"let us take the 'fact' side first. here we have a man in hi home; 
amidst hi own household; plenti of servant of differ class in 
the house, which forbid the possibl of an organis attempt made 
from the servants" hall. He is wealthy, learned, clever. from hi 
physiognomi there is no doubt that he is a man of iron will and 
determin purpose. hi daughter--hi onli child, I take it, a young 
girl bright and clever--i sleep in the veri next room to his. 
there is seemingli no possibl reason for expect ani attack or 
disturb of ani kind; and no reason opportun for ani outsid 
to effect it. and yet we have an attack made; a brutal and remorseless 
attack, made in the middl of the night. discoveri is made quickly; 
made with that rapid which in crimin case gener is found to 
be not accidental, but of premedit intent. the attacker, or 
attackers, are manifestli disturb befor the complet of their 
work, whatev their ultim intent may have been. and yet there is 
no possibl sign of their escape; no clue, no disturb of anything; 
no open door or window; no sound. noth whatev to show who had 
done the deed, or even that a deed ha been done; except the victim, 
and hi surround incident to the deed! 

"the next night a similar attempt is made, though the hous is full of 
wake people; and though there are on watch in the room and around it 
a detect officer, a train nurse, an earnest friend, and the man' 
own daughter. the nurs is thrown into a catalepsy, and the watch 
friend--though protect by a respirator--into a deep sleep. even the 
detect is so far overcom with some phase of stupor that he fire 
off hi pistol in the sick-room, and can't even tell what he thought he 
wa fire at. that respir of your is the onli thing that seem 
to have a bear on the 'fact' side of the affair. that you did not 
lose your head as the other did--th effect in such case be in 
proport to the amount of time each remain in the room--point to 
the probabl that the stupefi medium wa not hypnotic, whatev 
els it may have been. but again, there is a fact which is 
contradictory. miss trelawny, who wa in the room more than ani of 
you--for she wa in and out all the time and did her share of perman 
watch also--did not seem to be affect at all. thi would show 
that the influence, whatev it is, doe not affect generally--unless, 
of course, it wa that she wa in some way inur to it. If it should 
turn out that it be some strang exhal from some of those egyptian 
curios, that might account for it; only, we are then face to face with 
the fact that mr. trelawny, who wa most of all in the room--who, in 
fact, live more than half hi life in it--wa affect worst of all. 
what kind of influenc could it be which would account for all these 
differ and contradictori effects? no! the more I think of thi form 
of the dilemma, the more I am bewildered! why, even if it were that 
the attack, the physic attack, on mr. trelawni had been made by some 
one resid in the hous and not within the sphere of suspicion, the 
odd of the stupefi would still remain a mystery. It is not 
easi to put anyon into a catalepsy. indeed, so far as is known yet in 
science, there is no way to achiev such an object at will. the crux 
of the whole matter is miss trelawny, who seem to be subject to none 
of the influences, or possibl of the variant of the same influenc at 
work. through all she goe unscathed, except for that one slight 
semi-faint. It is most strange!" 

I listen with a sink heart; for, though hi manner wa not 
illumin of distrust, hi argument wa disturbing. although it wa 
not so direct as the suspicion of the detective, it seem to singl 
out miss trelawni as differ from all other concerned; and in a 
mysteri to be alon is to be suspected, ultim if not immediately. 
I thought it better not to say anything. In such a case silenc is 
inde golden; and if I said noth now I might have less to defend, 
or explain, or take back later. I was, therefore, secretli glad that 
hi form of put hi argument did not requir ani answer from 
me--for the present, at all events. doctor winchest did not seem to 
expect ani answer--a fact which, when I recognis it, gave my 
pleasure, I hardli knew why. He paus for a while, sit with hi 
chin in hi hand, hi eye stare at vacancy, whilst hi brow were 
fixed. hi cigar wa held limp between hi fingers; he had appar 
forgotten it. In an even voice, as though commenc exactli where he 
had left off, he resum hi argument: 

"the other horn of the dilemma is a differ affair altogether; and if 
we onc enter on it we must leav everyth in the shape of scienc 
and experi behind us. I confess that it ha it fascin for 
me; though at everi new thought I find myself romanc in a way that 
make me pull up suddenli and look fact resolut in the face. I 
sometim wonder whether the influenc or eman from the sick-room 
at time affect me as it did the others--th detective, for instance. 
Of cours it may be that if it is anyth chemical, ani drug, for 
example, in vapor form, it effect may be cumulative. but then, 
what could there be that could produc such an effect? the room is, I 
know, full of mummi smell; and no wonder, with so mani relic from the 
tomb, let alon the actual mummi of that anim which silvio attacked. 
By the way, I am go to test him tomorrow; I have been on the trace 
of a mummi cat, and am to get possess of it in the morning. when I 
bring it here we shall find out if it be a fact that racial instinct 
can surviv a few thousand year in the grave. however, to get back to 
the subject in hand. these veri mummi smell aris from the presenc 
of substances, and combin of substances, which the egyptian 
priests, who were the learn men and scientist of their time, found 
by the experi of centuri to be strong enough to arrest the 
natur forc of decay. there must be power agenc at work to 
effect such a purpose; and it is possibl that we may have here some 
rare substanc or combin whose qualiti and power are not 
understood in thi later and more prosaic age. I wonder if mr. 
trelawni ha ani knowledge, or even suspicion, of such a kind? I onli 
know thi for certain, that a wors atmospher for a sick chamber could 
not possibl be imagined; and I admir the courag of sir jame frere 
in refus to have anyth to do with a case under such conditions. 
these instruct of mr. trelawni to hi daughter, and from what you 
have told me, the care with which he ha protect hi wish through 
hi solicitor, show that he suspect something, at ani rate. indeed, 
it would almost seem as if he expect someth to happen.... I wonder 
if it would be possibl to learn anyth about that! sure hi 
paper would show or suggest something.... It is a difficult matter to 
tackle; but it might have to be done. hi present condit cannot go 
on for ever; and if anyth should happen there would have to be an 
inquest. In such case full examin would have to be made into 
everything.... As it stands, the polic evid would show a murder 
attack more than onc repeated. As no clue is apparent, it would be 
necessari to seek one in a motive." 

He wa silent. the last word seem to come in a lower and lower tone 
as he went on. It had the effect of hopelessness. It came to me as a 
convict that now wa my time to find out if he had ani definit 
suspicion; and as if in obedi to some command, I asked: 

"do you suspect anyone?" He seem in a way startl rather than 
surpris as he turn hi eye on me: 

"suspect anyone? ani thing, you mean. I certainli suspect that there 
is some influence; but at present my suspicion is held within such 
limit. later on, if there be ani suffici definit conclus to 
my reasoning, or my thinking--for there are not proper data for 
reasoning--i may suspect; at present however--" 

He stop suddenli and look at the door. there wa a faint sound as 
the handl turned. My own heart seem to stand still. there wa over 
me some grim, vagu apprehension. the interrupt in the morning, 
when I wa talk with the detective, came back upon me with a rush. 

the door opened, and miss trelawni enter the room. 

when she saw us, she start back; and a deep flush swept her face. 
for a few second she paused; at such a time a few succeed second 
seem to lengthen in geometr progression. the strain upon me, and, 
as I could easili see, on the doctor also, relax as she spoke: 

"oh, forgiv me, I did not know that you were engaged. I wa look 
for you, doctor winchester, to ask you if I might go to bed tonight 
with safety, as you will be here. I feel so tire and worn-out that I 
fear I may break down; and tonight I would certainli not be of ani 
use." doctor winchest answer heartily: 

"do! Do go to bed by all means, and get a good night' sleep. god 
knows! you want it. I am more than glad you have made the suggestion, 
for I fear when I saw you tonight that I might have you on my hand a 
patient next." 

she gave a sigh of relief, and the tire look seem to melt from her 
face. never shall I forget the deep, earnest look in her great, 
beauti black eye as she said to me: 

"you will guard father tonight, won't you, with doctor winchester? I 
am so anxiou about him that everi second bring new fears. but I am 
realli worn-out; and if I don't get a good sleep, I think I shall go 
mad. I will chang my room for tonight. i'm afraid that if I stay so 
close to father' room I shall multipli everi sound into a new terror. 
but, of course, you will have me wake if there be ani cause. I shall 
be in the bedroom of the littl suit next the boudoir off the hall. I 
had those room when first I came to live with father, and I had no 
care then.... It will be easier to rest there; and perhap for a few 
hour I may forget. I shall be all right in the morning. good-night!" 

when I had close the door behind her and come back to the littl tabl 
at which we had been sitting, doctor winchest said: 

"that poor girl is overwrought to a terribl degree. I am delight 
that she is to get a rest. It will be life to her; and in the morn 
she will be all right. her nervou system is on the verg of a 
breakdown. did you notic how fear disturb she was, and how red 
she got when she came in and found us talking? An ordinari thing like 
that, in her own hous with her own guests, wouldn't under normal 
circumst disturb her!" 

I wa about to tell him, as an explan in her defence, how her 
entranc wa a repetit of her find the detect and myself alon 
togeth earlier in the day, when I rememb that that convers 
wa so privat that even an allus to it might be awkward in evok 
curiosity. So I remain silent. 

We stood up to go to the sick-room; but as we took our way through the 
dimly-light corridor I could not help thinking, again and again, and 
again--ay, and for mani a day after--how strang it wa that she had 
interrupt me on two such occas when touch on such a theme. 

there wa certainli some strang web of accidents, in whose mesh we 
were all involved. 




chapter vii 

the traveller' loss 


that night everyth went well. know that miss trelawni herself 
wa not on guard, doctor winchest and I doubl our vigilance. the 
nurs and mrs. grant kept watch, and the detect made their visit 
each quarter of an hour. all night the patient remain in hi trance. 
He look healthy, and hi chest rose and fell with the easi breath 
of a child. but he never stirred; onli for hi breath he might have 
been of marble. doctor winchest and I wore our respirators, and 
irksom they were on that intoler hot night. between midnight and 
three o'clock I felt anxious, and had onc more that creepi feel to 
which these last few night had accustom me; but the grey of the 
dawn, steal round the edg of the blinds, came with inexpress 
relief, follow by restfulness, went through the household. dure 
the hot night my ears, strain to everi sound, had been almost 
pain troubled; as though my brain or sensoria were in anxiou 
touch with them. everi breath of the nurs or the rustl of her dress; 
everi soft pat of slipper feet, as the policeman went hi rounds; 
everi moment of watch life, seem to be a new impetu to 
guardianship. someth of the same feel must have been abroad in 
the house; now and again I could hear upstair the sound of restless 
feet, and more than onc downstair the open of a window. with the 
come of the dawn, however, all thi ceased, and the whole household 
seem to rest. doctor winchest went home when sister dori came to 
reliev mrs. grant. He was, I think, a littl disappoint or 
chagrin that noth of an except natur had happen dure hi 
long night vigil. 

At eight o'clock miss trelawni join us, and I wa amaz as well as 
delight to see how much good her night' sleep had done her. she wa 
fairli radiant; just as I had seen her at our first meet and at the 
picnic. there wa even a suggest of colour in her cheeks, which, 
however, look startlingli white in contrast with her black brow and 
scarlet lips. with her restor strength, there seem to have come a 
tender even exceed that which she had at first shown to her sick 
father. I could not but be move by the love touch as she fix 
hi pillow and brush the hair from hi forehead. 

I wa weari out myself with my long spell of watching; and now that 
she wa on guard I start off to bed, blink my tire eye in the 
full light and feel the weari of a sleepless night on me all at 
once. 

I had a good sleep, and after lunch I wa about to start out to walk to 
jermyn street, when I notic an importun man at the hall door. the 
servant in charg wa the one call morris, formerli the "odd man," 
but sinc the exodu of the servant promot to be butler pro tem. 
the stranger wa speak rather loudly, so that there wa no 
difficulti in understand hi grievance. the servant man wa 
respect in both word and demeanour; but he stood squar in front 
of the great doubl door, so that the other could not enter. the first 
word which I heard from the visitor suffici explain the 
situation: 

"that' all veri well, but I tell you I must see mr. trelawny! what is 
the use of your say I can't, when I tell you I must. you put me 
off, and off, and off! I came here at nine; you said then that he wa 
not up, and that as he wa not well he could not be disturbed. I came 
at twelve; and you told me again he wa not up. I ask then to see 
ani of hi household; you told me that miss trelawni wa not up. now I 
come again at three, and you tell me he is still in bed, and is not 
awak yet. where is miss trelawny? 'she is occupi and must not be 
disturbed!' well, she must be disturbed! Or some one must. I am here 
about mr. trelawny' special business; and I have come from a place 
where servant alway begin by say no. 'no' isn't good enough for 
me thi time! i'v had three year of it, wait outsid door and 
tent when it took longer to get in than it did into the tombs; and 
then you would think, too, the men insid were as dead as the mummies. 
i'v had about enough of it, I tell you. and when I come home, and 
find the door of the man i'v been work for barred, in just the same 
way and with the same old answers, it stir me up the wrong way. did 
mr. trelawni leav order that he would not see me when I should come?" 

He paus and excitedli mop hi forehead. the servant answer veri 
respectfully: 

"I am veri sorry, sir, if in do my duti I have given ani offence. 
but I have my orders, and must obey them. If you would like to leav 
ani message, I will give it to miss trelawny; and if you will leav 
your address, she can commun with you if she wishes." the answer 
came in such a way that it wa easi to see that the speaker wa a 
kind-heart man, and a just one. 

"mi good fellow, I have no fault to find with you personally; and I am 
sorri if I have hurt your feelings. I must be just, even if I am 
angry. but it is enough to anger ani man to find himself in the 
posit I am. time is pressing. there is not an hour--not a 
minute--to lose! and yet here I am, kick my heel for six hours; 
know all the time that your master will be a hundr time angrier 
than I am, when he hear how the time ha been fool away. He would 
rather be wake out of a thousand sleep than not see me just at 
present--and befor it is too late. My god! it' simpli dreadful, 
after all i'v gone through, to have my work spoil at the last and be 
foil in the veri doorway by a stupid flunkey! Is there no one with 
sens in the house; or with authority, even if he hasn't got sense? I 
could mighti soon convinc him that your master must be awakened; even 
if he sleep like the seven sleepers--" 

there wa no mistak the man' sincerity, or the urgenc and 
import of hi business; from hi point of view at ani rate. I 
step forward. 

"morris," I said, "you had better tell miss trelawni that thi 
gentleman want to see her particularly. If she is busy, ask mrs. 
grant to tell her." 

"veri good, sir!" he answer in a tone of relief, and hurri away. 

I took the stranger into the littl boudoir across the hall. As we 
went he ask me: 

"are you the secretary?" 

"no! I am a friend of miss trelawny's. My name is ross." 

"thank you veri much, mr. ross, for your kindness!" he said. "mi name 
is corbeck. I would give you my card, but they don't use card where 
i'v come from. and if I had had any, I suppos they, too, would have 
gone last night--" 

He stop suddenly, as though consciou that he had said too much. We 
both remain silent; as we wait I took stock of him. A short, 
sturdi man, brown as a coffee-berry; possibl inclin to be fat, but 
now lean exceedingly. the deep wrinkl in hi face and neck were not 
mere from time and exposure; there were those unmistak sign 
where flesh or fat ha fallen away, and the skin ha becom loose. the 
neck wa simpli an intric surfac of seam and wrinkles, and 
sun-scar with the burn of the desert. the far east, the tropic 
seasons, and the desert--each can have it colour mark. but all three 
are quit different; and an eye which ha onc known, can thenceforth 
easili distinguish them. the duski pallor of one; the fierc red-brown 
of the other; and of the third, the dark, ingrain burning, as though 
it had becom a perman colour. mr. corbeck had a big head, massiv 
and full; with shaggy, dark red-brown hair, but bald on the temples. 
hi forehead wa a fine one, high and broad; with, to use the term of 
physiognomy, the frontal sinu boldli marked. the squar of it 
show "ratiocination"; and the ful under the eye "language". He 
had the short, broad nose that mark energy; the squar chin--mark 
despit a thick, unkempt beard--and massiv jaw that show great 
resolution. 

"no bad man for the desert!" I thought as I looked. 

miss trelawni came veri quickly. when mr. corbeck saw her, he seem 
somewhat surprised. but hi annoy and excit had not 
disappeared; quit enough remain to cover up ani such secondari and 
pure exoter feel as surprise. but as she spoke he never took hi 
eye off her; and I made a mental note that I would find some earli 
opportun of investig the caus of hi surprise. she began with 
an apolog which quit smooth down hi ruffl feelings: 

"of course, had my father been well you would not have been kept 
waiting. indeed, had not I been on duti in the sick-room when you 
call the first time, I should have seen you at once. now will you 
kindli tell me what is the matter which so presses?" He look at me 
and hesitated. she spoke at once: 

"you may say befor mr. ross anyth which you can tell me. He ha my 
fullest confidence, and is help me in my trouble. I do not think 
you quit understand how seriou my father' condit is. for three 
day he ha not waked, or given ani sign of consciousness; and I am in 
terribl troubl about him. unhappili I am in great ignor of my 
father and hi life. I onli came to live with him a year ago; and I 
know noth whatev of hi affairs. I do not even know who you are, 
or in what way your busi is associ with him." she said thi 
with a littl deprec smile, all convent and altogeth 
graceful; as though to express in the most genuin way her absurd 
ignorance. 

He look steadili at her for perhap a quarter of a minute; then he 
spoke, begin at onc as though hi mind were made up and hi 
confid established: 

"mi name is eugen corbeck. I am a master of art and doctor of law 
and master of surgeri of cambridge; doctor of letter of oxford; doctor 
of scienc and doctor of languag of london university; doctor of 
philosophi of berlin; doctor of orient languag of paris. I have 
some other degrees, honorari and otherwise, but I need not troubl you 
with them. those I have name will show you that I am suffici 
feather with diploma to fli into even a sick-room. earli in 
life--fortun for my interest and pleasures, but unfortun for 
my pocket--i fell in with egyptology. I must have been bitten by some 
power scarab, for I took it bad. I went out tomb-hunting; and 
manag to get a live of a sort, and to learn some thing that you 
can't get out of books. I wa in pretti low water when I met your 
father, who wa do some explor on hi own account; and sinc 
then I haven't found that I have mani unsatisfi wants. He is a real 
patron of the arts; no mad egyptologist can ever hope for a better 
chief!" 

He spoke with feeling; and I wa glad to see that miss trelawni 
colour up with pleasur at the prais of her father. I could not 
help noticing, however, that mr. corbeck was, in a measure, speak as 
if against time. I took it that he wished, while speaking, to studi 
hi ground; to see how far he would be justifi in take into 
confid the two stranger befor him. As he went on, I could see 
that hi confid kept increasing. when I thought of it afterward, 
and rememb what he had said, I realis that the measur of the 
inform which he gave us mark hi grow trust. 

"I have been sever time out on expedit in egypt for your father; 
and I have alway found it a delight to work for him. mani of hi 
treasures--and he ha some rare ones, I tell you-h ha procur 
through me, either by my explor or by purchase--or--or--otherwise. 
your father, miss trelawny, ha a rare knowledge. He sometim make 
up hi mind that he want to find a particular thing, of whose 
existence--if it still exists--h ha becom aware; and he will follow 
it all over the world till he get it. i'v been on just such a chase 
now." 

He stop suddenly, as suddenli as thought hi mouth had been shut by 
the jerk of a string. We waited; when he went on he spoke with a 
caution that wa new to him, as though he wish to forestal our 
ask ani questions: 

"I am not at liberti to mention anyth of my mission; where it wa 
to, what it wa for, or anyth at all about it. such matter are in 
confid between mr. trelawni and myself; I am pledg to absolut 
secrecy." 

He paused, and an embarrass look crept over hi face. suddenli he 
said: 

"you are sure, miss trelawny, your father is not well enough to see me 
today?" 

A look of wonder wa on her face in turn. but it clear at 
once;--sh stood up, say in a tone in which digniti and gracious 
were blended: 

"come and see for yourself!" she move toward her father' room; he 
followed, and I brought up the rear. 

mr. corbeck enter the sick-room as though he knew it. there is an 
unconsci attitud or bear to person in new surround which 
there is no mistaking. even in hi anxieti to see hi power friend, 
he glanc for a moment round the room, as at a familiar place. then 
all hi attent becam fix on the bed. I watch him narrowly, for 
somehow I felt that on thi man depend much of our enlighten 
regard the strang matter in which we were involved. 

It wa not that I doubt him. the man wa of transpar honesty; it 
wa thi veri qualiti which we had to dread. He wa of that 
courageous, fix trueness to hi undertaking, that if he should deem 
it hi duti to guard a secret he would do it to the last. the case 
befor us was, at least, an unusu one; and it would, consequently, 
requir more liber recognit of bound of the duti of secreci than 
would hold under ordinari conditions. To us, ignor wa 
helplessness. If we could learn anyth of the past we might at least 
form some idea of the condit anteced to the attack; and might, 
so, achiev some mean of help the patient to recovery. there were 
curio which might be removed.... My thought were begin to whirl 
onc again; I pull myself up sharpli and watched. there wa a look 
of infinit piti on the sun-stained, rug face as he gaze at hi 
friend, lie so helpless. the stern of mr. trelawny' face had not 
relax in sleep; but somehow it made the helpless more marked. It 
would not have troubl one to see a weak or an ordinari face under 
such conditions; but thi purposeful, master man, lie befor us 
wrap in impenetr sleep, had all the patho of a great ruin. the 
sight wa not a new one to us; but I could see that miss trelawny, like 
myself, wa move afresh by it in the presenc of the stranger. mr. 
corbeck' face grew stern. all the piti die away; and in it stead 
came a grim, hard look which bode ill for whoever had been the caus 
of thi mighti downfall. thi look in turn gave place to one of 
decision; the volcan energi of the man wa work to some definit 
purpose. He glanc around at us; and as hi eye light on nurs 
kennedi hi eyebrow went up a trifle. she note the look, and glanc 
interrog at miss trelawny, who flash back a repli with a 
glance. she went quietli from the room, close the door behind her. 
mr. corbeck look first at me, with a strong man' natur impuls to 
learn from a man rather than a woman; then at miss trelawny, with a 
remembr of the duti of courtesy, and said: 

"tell me all about it. how it began and when!" miss trelawni look 
at me appeallingly; and forthwith I told him all that I knew. He 
seem to make no motion dure the whole time; but insens the 
bronz face becam steel. when, at the end, I told him of mr. marvin' 
visit and of the power of attorney, hi look began to brighten. and 
when, see hi interest in the matter, I went more into detail as to 
it terms, he spoke: 

"good! now I know where my duti lies!" 

with a sink heart I heard him. such a phrase, come at such a 
time, seem to close the door to my hope of enlightenment. 

"what do you mean?" I asked, feel that my question wa a feebl one. 

hi answer emphas my fears: 

"trelawni know what he is doing. He had some definit purpos in all 
that he did; and we must not thwart him. He evid expect 
someth to happen, and guard himself at all points." 

"not at all points!" I said impulsively. "there must have been a weak 
spot somewhere, or he wouldn't be lie here like that!" somehow hi 
impass surpris me. I had expect that he would find a valid 
argument in my phrase; but it did not move him, at least not in the way 
I thought. someth like a smile flicker over hi swarthi face as 
he answer me: 

"thi is not the end! trelawni did not guard himself to no purpose. 
doubtless, he expect thi too; or at ani rate the possibl of it." 

"do you know what he expected, or from what source?" the question 
wa miss trelawny. 

the answer came at once: "no! I know noth of either. I can 
guess..." He stop suddenly. 

"guess what?" the suppress excit in the girl' voic wa akin 
to anguish. the steeli look came over the swarthi face again; but there 
wa tender and courtesi in both voic and manner as he replied: 

"believ me, I would do anyth I honestli could to reliev you 
anxiety. but in thi I have a higher duty." 

"what duty?" 

"silence!" As he spoke the word, the strong mouth close like a steel 
trap. 

We all remain silent for a few minutes. In the intens of our 
thinking, the silenc becam a posit thing; the small sound of life 
within and without the hous seem intrusive. the first to break it 
wa miss trelawny. I had seen an idea--a hope--flash in her eyes; but 
she steadi herself befor speaking: 

"what wa the urgent subject on which you want to see me, know 
that my father was--not available?" the paus show her masteri of 
her thoughts. 

the instantan chang in mr. corbeck wa almost ludicrous. hi 
start of surprise, come close upon hi iron-clad impassiveness, wa 
like a pantomim change. but all idea of comedi wa swept away by the 
tragic earnest with which he rememb hi origin purpose. 

"mi god!" he said, as he rais hi hand from the chair back on which 
it rested, and beat it down with a violenc which would in itself have 
arrest attention. hi brow corrug as he went on: "I quit 
forgot! what a loss! now of all times! just at the moment of 
success! He lie there helpless, and my tongu tied! not abl to 
rais hand or foot in my ignor of hi wishes!" 

"what is it? oh, do tell us! I am so anxiou about my dear father! 
Is it ani new trouble? I hope not! oh, I hope not! I have had such 
anxieti and troubl already! It alarm me afresh to hear you speak so! 
won't you tell me someth to allay thi terribl anxieti and 
uncertainty?" 

He drew hi sturdi form up to hi full height as he said: 

"alas! I cannot, may not, tell you anything. It is hi secret." He 
point to the bed. "and yet--and yet I came here for hi advice, hi 
counsel, hi assistance. and he lie there helpless.... and time is 
fli by us! It may soon be too late!" 

"what is it? what is it?" broke in miss trelawni in a sort of passion 
of anxiety, her face drawn with pain. "oh, speak! say something! 
thi anxiety, and horror, and mysteri are kill me!" mr. corbeck 
calm himself by a great effort. 

"I may not tell you details; but I have had a great loss. My mission, 
in which I have spent three years, wa successful. I discov all 
that I sought--and more; and brought them home with me safely. 
treasures, priceless in themselves, but doubli preciou to him by whose 
wish and instruct I sought them. I arriv in london onli last 
night, and when I woke thi morn my preciou charg wa stolen. 
stolen in some mysteri way. not a soul in london knew that I wa 
arriving. No one but myself knew what wa in the shabbi portmanteau 
that I carried. My room had but one door, and that I lock and 
bolted. the room wa high in the house, five stori up, so that no 
entranc could have been obtain by the window. indeed, I had close 
the window myself and shut the hasp, for I wish to be secur in everi 
way. thi morn the hasp wa untouched.... and yet my portmanteau 
wa empty. the lamp were gone! ... there! it is out. I went to egypt 
to search for a set of antiqu lamp which mr. trelawni wish to 
trace. with incred labour, and through mani dangers, I follow 
them. I brought them safe home.... and now!" He turn away much 
moved. even hi iron natur wa break down under the sens of loss. 

miss trelawni step over and laid her hand on hi arm. I look at 
her in amazement. all the passion and pain which had so move her 
seem to have taken the form of resolution. her form wa erect, her 
eye blazed; energi wa manifest in everi nerv and fibr of her being. 
even her voic wa full of nervou power as she spoke. It wa appar 
that she wa a marvel strong woman, and that her strength could 
answer when call upon. 

"we must act at once! My father' wish must be carri out if it is 
possibl to us. mr. ross, you are a lawyer. We have actual in the 
hous a man whom you consid one of the best detect in london. 
sure we can do something. We can begin at once!" mr. corbeck took 
new life from her enthusiasm. 

"good! you are your father' daughter!" wa all he said. but hi 
admir for her energi wa manifest by the impuls way in which 
he took her hand. I move over to the door. I wa go to bring 
sergeant daw; and from her look of approval, I knew that margaret--miss 
trelawny--understood. I wa at the door when mr. corbeck call me 
back. 

"one moment," he said, "befor we bring a stranger on the scene. It 
must be born in mind that he is not to know what you know now, that 
the lamp were the object of a prolong and difficult and danger 
search. all I can tell him, all that he must know from ani source, is 
that some of my properti ha been stolen. I must describ some of the 
lamps, especi one, for it is of gold; and my fear is lest the 
thief, ignor of it histor worth, may, in order to cover up hi 
crime, have it melted. I would willingli pay ten, twenty, a hundred, a 
thousand time it intrins valu rather than have it destroyed. I 
shall tell him onli what is necessary. so, please, let me answer ani 
question he may ask; unless, of course, I ask you or refer to either 
of you for the answer." We both nod acquiescence. then a thought 
struck me and I said: 

"bi the way, if it be necessari to keep thi matter quiet it will be 
better to have it if possibl a privat job for the detective. If onc 
a thing get to scotland yard it is out of our power to keep it quiet, 
and further secreci may be impossible. I shall sound sergeant daw 
befor he come up. If I say nothing, it will mean that he accept the 
task and will deal with it privately." mr. corbeck answer at once: 

"secreci is everything. the one thing I dread is that the lamps, or 
some of them, may be destroy at once." To my intens astonish 
miss trelawni spoke out at once, but quietly, in a decid voice: 

"they will not be destroyed; nor ani of them!" mr. corbeck actual 
smile in amazement. 

"how on earth do you know?" he asked. her answer wa still more 
incomprehensible: 

"I don't know how I know it; but know it I do. I feel it all through 
me; as though it were a convict which ha been with me all my life!" 




chapter viii 

the find of the lamp 


sergeant daw at first made some demur; but final agre to advis 
privat on a matter which might be suggest to him. He ad that I 
wa to rememb that he onli undertook to advise; for if action were 
requir he might have to refer the matter to headquarters. with thi 
understand I left him in the study, and brought miss trelawni and 
mr. corbeck to him. nurs kennedi resum her place at the bedsid 
befor we left the room. 

I could not but admir the cautious, cool-head precis with which 
the travel state hi case. He did not seem to conceal anything, 
and yet he gave the least possibl descript of the object missing. 
He did not enlarg on the mysteri of the case; he seem to look on it 
as an ordinari hotel theft. knowing, as I did, that hi one object wa 
to recov the articl befor their ident could be obliterated, I 
could see the rare intellectu skill with which he gave the necessari 
matter and held back all else, though without seem to do so. 
"truly," thought I, "thi man ha learn the lesson of the eastern 
bazaars; and with western intellect ha improv upon hi masters!" He 
quit convey hi idea to the detective, who, after think the 
matter over for a few moments, said: 

"pot or scale? that is the question." 

"what doe that mean?" ask the other, keenli alert. 

"an old thiev phrase from birmingham. I thought that in these day 
of slang everyon knew that. In old time at brum, which had a lot of 
small metal industries, the gold- and silver-smith use to buy metal 
from almost anyon who came along. and as metal in small quantiti 
could gener be had cheap when they didn't ask where it came from, 
it got to be a custom to ask onli one thing--wheth the custom 
want the good melted, in which case the buyer made the price, and 
the melting-pot wa alway on the fire. If it wa to be preserv in 
it present state at the buyer' option, it went into the scale and 
fetch standard price for old metal. 

"there is a good deal of such work done still, and in other place than 
brum. when we'r look for stolen watch we often come across the 
works, and it' not possibl to identifi wheel and spring out of a 
heap; but it' not often that we come across case that are wanted. 
now, in the present instanc much will depend on whether the thief is a 
good man--that' what they call a man who know hi work. A 
first-class crook will know whether a thing is of more valu than 
mere the metal in it; and in such case he would put it with someon 
who could place it later on--in america or france, perhaps. By the 
way, do you think anyon but yourself could identifi your lamps?" 

"no one but myself!" 

"are there other like them?" 

"not that I know of," answer mr. corbeck; "though there may be other 
that resembl them in mani particulars." the detect paus befor 
ask again: "would ani other skill person--at the british museum, 
for instance, or a dealer, or a collector like mr. trelawny, know the 
value--th artist value--of the lamps?" 

"certainly! anyon with a head on hi shoulder would see at a glanc 
that the thing were valuable." 

the detective' face brightened. "then there is a chance. If your 
door wa lock and the window shut, the good were not stolen by the 
chanc of a chambermaid or a boot come along. whoever did the job 
went after it special; and he ain't go to part with hi swag without 
hi price. thi must be a case of notic to the pawnbrokers. there' 
one good thing about it, anyhow, that the hue and cri needn't be given. 
We needn't tell scotland yard unless you like; we can work the thing 
privately. If you wish to keep the thing dark, as you told me at the 
first, that is our chance." mr. corbeck, after a pause, said quietly: 

"I suppos you couldn't hazard a suggest as to how the robberi wa 
effected?" the policeman smile the smile of knowledg and experience. 

"in a veri simpl way, I have no doubt, sir. that is how all these 
mysteri crime turn out in the long-run. the crimin know hi 
work and all the trick of it; and he is alway on the watch for 
chances. moreover, he know by experi what these chanc are like 
to be, and how they usual come. the other person is onli careful; he 
doesn't know all the trick and pit that may be made for him, and by 
some littl oversight or other he fall into the trap. when we know 
all about thi case, you will wonder that you did not see the method of 
it all along!" thi seem to annoy mr. corbeck a little; there wa 
decid heat in hi manner as he answered: 

"look here, my good friend, there is not anyth simpl about thi 
case--except that the thing were taken. the window wa closed; the 
fireplac wa brick up. there is onli one door to the room, and that 
I lock and bolted. there is no transom; I have heard all about hotel 
robberi through the transom. I never left my room in the night. I 
look at the thing befor go to bed; and I went to look at them 
again when I woke up. If you can rig up ani kind of simpl robberi out 
of these fact you are a clever man. that' all I say; clever enough 
to go right away and get my thing back." miss trelawni laid her hand 
upon hi arm in a sooth way, and said quietly: 

"do not distress yourself unnecessarily. I am sure they will turn up." 
sergeant daw turn to her so quickli that I could not help rememb 
vividli hi suspicion of her, alreadi formed, as he said: 

"may I ask, miss, on what you base that opinion?" 

I dread to hear her answer, given to ear alreadi awak to suspicion; 
but it came to me as a new pain or shock all the same: 

"I cannot tell you how I know. but I am sure of it!" the detect 
look at her for some second in silence, and then threw a quick 
glanc at me. 

present he had a littl more convers with mr. corbeck as to hi 
own movements, the detail of the hotel and the room, and the mean of 
identifi the goods. then he went away to commenc hi inquiries, 
mr. corbeck impress on him the necess for secreci lest the thief 
should get wind of hi danger and destroy the lamps. mr. corbeck 
promised, when go away to attend to variou matter of hi own 
business, to return earli in the evening, and to stay in the house. 

all that day miss trelawni wa in better spirit and look in better 
strength than she had yet been, despit the new shock and annoy of 
the theft which must ultim bring so much disappoint to her 
father. 

We spent most of the day look over the curio treasur of mr. 
trelawny. from what I had heard from mr. corbeck I began to have some 
idea of the vast of hi enterpris in the world of egyptian 
research; and with thi light everyth around me began to have a new 
interest. As I went on, the interest grew; ani linger doubt which 
I might have had chang to wonder and admiration. the hous seem to 
be a verit storehous of marvel of antiqu art. In addit to 
the curios, big and little, in mr. trelawny' own room--from the great 
sarcophagi down to the scarab of all kind in the cabinets--th great 
hall, the staircas landings, the study, and even the boudoir were full 
of antiqu piec which would have made a collector' mouth water. 

miss trelawni from the first came with me, and look with grow 
interest at everything. after have examin some cabinet of 
exquisit amulet she said to me in quit a naiv way: 

"you will hardli believ that I have of late seldom even look at ani 
of these things. It is onli sinc father ha been ill that I seem to 
have even ani curios about them. but now, they grow and grow on me 
to quit an absorb degree. I wonder if it is that the collector' 
blood which I have in my vein is begin to manifest itself. If so, 
the strang thing is that I have not felt the call of it before. Of 
cours I know most of the big things, and have examin them more or 
less; but really, in a sort of way I have alway taken them for 
granted, as though they had alway been there. I have notic the same 
thing now and again with famili pictures, and the way they are taken 
for grant by the family. If you will let me examin them with you it 
will be delightful!" 

It wa a joy to me to hear her talk in such a way; and her last 
suggest quit thrill me. togeth we went round the variou room 
and passages, examin and admir the magnific curios. there wa 
such a bewild amount and varieti of object that we could onli 
glanc at most of them; but as we went along we arrang that we should 
take them seriatim, day by day, and examin them more closely. In the 
hall wa a sort of big frame of floriat steel work which margaret 
said her father use for lift the heavi stone lid of the 
sarcophagi. It wa not heavi and could be move about easili enough. 
By aid of thi we rais the cover in turn and look at the endless 
seri of hieroglyph pictur cut in most of them. In spite of her 
profess of ignor margaret knew a good deal about them; her year 
of life with her father had had unconsci it daili and hourli 
lesson. she wa a remark clever and acute-mind girl, and with a 
prodigi memory; so that her store of knowledge, gather 
unthinkingli bit by bit, had grown to proport that mani a scholar 
might have envied. 

and yet it wa all so naiv and unconscious; so girlish and simple. 
she wa so fresh in her view and ideas, and had so littl thought of 
self, that in her companionship I forgot for the time all the troubl 
and mysteri which enmesh the house; and I felt like a boy again.... 

the most interest of the sarcophagi were undoubtedli the three in 
mr. trelawny' room. Of these, two were of dark stone, one of porphyri 
and the other of a sort of ironstone. these were wrought with some 
hieroglyphs. but the third wa strikingli different. It wa of some 
yellow-brown substanc of the domin colour effect of mexican onyx, 
which it resembl in mani ways, except that the natur pattern of 
it convolut wa less marked. here and there were patch almost 
transparent--certainli translucent. the whole chest, cover and all, 
wa wrought with hundreds, perhap thousands, of minut hieroglyphics, 
seemingli in an endless series. back, front, sides, edges, bottom, all 
had their quota of the dainti pictures, the deep blue of their 
colour show up fresh and sharpli edg in the yellow stone. It 
wa veri long, nearli nine feet; and perhap a yard wide. the side 
undulated, so that there wa no hard line. even the corner took such 
excel curv that they pleas the eye. "truly," I said, "thi 
must have been made for a giant!" 

"or for a giantess!" said margaret. 

thi sarcophagu stood near to one of the windows. It wa in one 
respect differ from all the other sarcophagi in the place. all the 
other in the house, of whatev material--granite, porphyry, 
ironstone, basalt, slate, or wood--wer quit simpl in form within. 
some of them were plain of interior surface; other were engraved, in 
whole or part, with hieroglyphics. but each and all of them had no 
protuber or uneven surfac anywhere. they might have been use 
for baths; indeed, they resembl in mani way roman bath of stone or 
marbl which I had seen. insid this, however, wa a rais space, 
outlin like a human figure. I ask margaret if she could explain it 
in ani way. for answer she said: 

"father never wish to speak about this. It attract my attent 
from the first; but when I ask him about it he said: 'I shall tell 
you all about it some day, littl girl--if I live! but not yet! the 
stori is not yet told, as I hope to tell it to you! some day, perhap 
soon, I shall know all; and then we shall go over it together. and a 
mighti interest stori you will find it--from first to last!' onc 
afterward I said, rather lightli I am afraid: 'i that stori of the 
sarcophagu told yet, father?' He shook hi head, and look at me 
grave as he said: 'not yet, littl girl; but it will be--if I 
live--if I live!' hi repeat that phrase about hi live rather 
frighten me; I never ventur to ask him again." 

somehow thi thrill me. I could not exactli say how or why; but it 
seem like a gleam of light at last. there are, I think, moment when 
the mind accept someth as true; though it can account for neither 
the cours of the thought, nor, if there be more than one thought, the 
connect between them. hitherto we had been in such outer dark 
regard mr. trelawny, and the strang visit which had fallen on 
him, that anyth which afford a clue, even of the faintest and most 
shadowi kind, had at the outset the enlighten satisfact of a 
certainty. here were two light of our puzzle. the first that mr. 
trelawni associ with thi particular curio a doubt of hi own 
living. the second that he had some purpos or expect with regard 
to it, which he would not disclose, even to hi daughter, till 
complete. again it wa to be born in mind that thi sarcophagu 
differ intern from all the others. what meant that odd rais 
place? I said noth to miss trelawny, for I fear lest I should 
either frighten her or buoy her up with futur hopes; but I made up my 
mind that I would take an earli opportun for further investigation. 

close besid the sarcophagu wa a low tabl of green stone with red 
vein in it, like bloodstone. the feet were fashion like the paw of 
a jackal, and round each leg wa twine a full-throat snake wrought 
exquisit in pure gold. On it rest a strang and veri beauti 
coffer or casket of stone of a peculiar shape. It wa someth like a 
small coffin, except that the longer sides, instead of be cut off 
squar like the upper or level part were continu to a point. thu it 
wa an irregular septahedron, there be two plane on each of the two 
sides, one end and a top and bottom. the stone, of one piec of which 
it wa wrought, wa such as I had never seen before. At the base it 
wa of a full green, the colour of emerald without, of course, it 
gleam. It wa not by ani mean dull, however, either in colour or 
substance, and wa of infinit hard and fine of texture. the 
surfac wa almost that of a jewel. the colour grew lighter as it 
rose, with gradat so fine as to be imperceptible, chang to a fine 
yellow almost of the colour of "mandarin" china. It wa quit unlik 
anyth I had ever seen, and did not resembl ani stone or gem that I 
knew. I took it to be some uniqu mother-stone, or matrix of some gem. 
It wa wrought all over, except in a few spots, with fine 
hieroglyphics, exquisit done and colour with the same blue-green 
cement or pigment that appear on the sarcophagus. In length it wa 
about two feet and a half; in breadth about half this, and wa nearli a 
foot high. the vacant space were irregularli distribut about the 
top run to the point end. these place seem less opaqu than 
the rest of the stone. I tri to lift up the lid so that I might see 
if they were translucent; but it wa secur fixed. It fit so 
exactli that the whole coffer seem like a singl piec of stone 
mysteri hollow from within. On the side and edg were some 
odd-look protuber wrought just as fine as ani other portion 
of the coffer which had been sculptur by manifest design in the 
cut of the stone. they had queer-shap hole or hollows, 
differ in each; and, like the rest, were cover with the 
hieroglyph figures, cut fine and fill in with the same blue-green 
cement. 

On the other side of the great sarcophagu stood anoth small tabl of 
alabaster, exquisit chase with symbol figur of god and the 
sign of the zodiac. On thi tabl stood a case of about a foot squar 
compos of slab of rock crystal set in a skeleton of band of red 
gold, beauti engrav with hieroglyphics, and colour with a blue 
green, veri much the tint of the figur on the sarcophagu and the 
coffer. the whole work wa quit modern. 

but if the case wa modern what it held wa not. within, on a cushion 
of cloth of gold as fine as silk, and with the peculiar soft of old 
gold, rest a mummi hand, so perfect that it startl one to see it. 
A woman' hand, fine and long, with slim taper finger and nearli as 
perfect as when it wa given to the embalm thousand of year before. 
In the embalm it had lost noth of it beauti shape; even the 
wrist seem to maintain it pliabil as the gentl curv lay on the 
cushion. the skin wa of a rich creami or old ivori colour; a duski 
fair skin which suggest heat, but heat in shadow. the great 
peculiar of it, as a hand, wa that it had in all seven fingers, 
there be two middl and two index fingers. the upper end of the 
wrist wa jagged, as though it had been broken off, and wa stain 
with a red-brown stain. On the cushion near the hand wa a small 
scarab, exquisit wrought of emerald. 

"that is anoth of father' mysteries. when I ask him about it he 
said that it wa perhap the most valuabl thing he had, except one. 
when I ask him what that one was, he refus to tell me, and forbad 
me to ask him anyth concern it. 'I will tell you,' he said, 'all 
about it, too, in good time--if I live!'" 

"if I live!" the phrase again. these three thing group together, 
the sarcophagus, the coffer, and the hand, seem to make a trilog of 
mysteri indeed! 

At thi time miss trelawni wa sent for on some domest matter. I 
look at the other curio in the room; but they did not seem to have 
anyth like the same charm for me, now that she wa away. later on 
in the day I wa sent for to the boudoir where she wa consult with 
mrs. grant as to the lodgment of mr. corbeck. they were in doubt as to 
whether he should have a room close to mr. trelawny' or quit away 
from it, and had thought it well to ask my advic on the subject. I 
came to the conclus that he had better not be too near; for the 
first at all events, he could easili be move closer if necessary. 
when mrs. grant had gone, I ask miss trelawni how it came that the 
furnitur of thi room, the boudoir in which we were, wa so differ 
from the other room of the house. 

"father' forethought!" she answered. "when I first came, he thought, 
and rightli enough, that I might get frighten with so mani record of 
death and the tomb everywhere. So he had thi room and the littl 
suit off it--that door open into the sitting-room--wher I slept last 
night, furnish with pretti things. you see, they are all beautiful. 
that cabinet belong to the great napoleon." 

"there is noth egyptian in these room at all then?" I asked, rather 
to show interest in what she had said than anyth else, for the 
furnish of the room wa apparent. "what a love cabinet! may I 
look at it?" 

"of course! with the greatest pleasure!" she answered, with a smile. 
"it finishing, within and without, father says, is absolut 
complete." I step over and look at it closely. It wa made of 
tulip wood, inlaid in patterns; and wa mount in ormolu. I pull 
open one of the drawers, a deep one where I could see the work to great 
advantage. As I pull it, someth rattl insid as though rolling; 
there wa a tinkl as of metal on metal. 

"hullo!" I said. "there is someth in here. perhap I had better 
not open it." 

"there is noth that I know of," she answered. "some of the 
housemaid may have use it to put someth by for the time and 
forgotten it. open it by all means!" 

I pull open the drawer; as I did so, both miss trelawni and I start 
back in amazement. 

there befor our eye lay a number of ancient egyptian lamps, of 
variou size and of strang vari shapes. 

We lean over them and look closely. My own heart wa beat like 
a trip-hammer; and I could see by the heav of margaret' bosom that 
she wa strang excited. 

whilst we looked, afraid to touch and almost afraid to think, there wa 
a ring at the front door; immedi afterward mr. corbeck, follow 
by sergeant daw, came into the hall. the door of the boudoir wa open, 
and when they saw us mr. corbeck came run in, follow more slowli 
by the detective. there wa a sort of chasten joy in hi face and 
manner as he said impulsively: 

"rejoic with me, my dear miss trelawny, my luggag ha come and all my 
thing are intact!" then hi face fell as he added, "except the lamps. 
the lamp that were worth all the rest a thousand times...." He 
stopped, struck by the strang pallor of her face. then hi eyes, 
follow her look and mine, lit on the cluster of lamp in the drawer. 
He gave a sort of cri of surpris and joy as he bent over and touch 
them: 

"mi lamps! My lamps! then they are safe--safe--safe! ... but how, in 
the name of god--of all the gods--did they come here?" 

We all stood silent. the detect made a deep sound of in-tak 
breath. I look at him, and as he caught my glanc he turn hi eye 
on miss trelawni whose back wa toward him. 

there wa in them the same look of suspicion which had been there when 
he had spoken to me of her be the first to find her father on the 
occas of the attacks. 




chapter IX 

the need of knowledg 


mr. corbeck seem to go almost off hi head at the recoveri of the 
lamps. He took them up one by one and look them all over tenderly, 
as though they were thing that he loved. In hi delight and 
excit he breath so hard that it seem almost like a cat 
purring. sergeant daw said quietly, hi voic break the silenc 
like a discord in a melody: 

"are you quit sure those lamp are the one you had, and that were 
stolen?" 

hi answer wa in an indign tone: "sure! Of cours i'm sure. 
there isn't anoth set of lamp like these in the world!" 

"so far as you know!" the detective' word were smooth enough, but 
hi manner wa so exasper that I wa sure he had some motiv in 
it; so I wait in silence. He went on: 

"of cours there may be some in the british museum; or mr. trelawni may 
have had these already. there' noth new under the sun, you know, 
mr. corbeck; not even in egypt. these may be the originals, and your 
may have been the copies. are there ani point by which you can 
identifi these as yours?" 

mr. corbeck wa realli angri by thi time. He forgot hi reserve; and 
in hi indign pour forth a torrent of almost incoherent, but 
enlightening, broken sentences: 

"identify! copi of them! british museum! rot! perhap they keep a 
set in scotland yard for teach idiot policemen egyptology! Do I 
know them? when I have carri them about my body, in the desert, for 
three months; and lay awak night after night to watch them! when I 
have look them over with a magnifying-glass, hour after hour, till my 
eye ached; till everi tini blotch, and chip, and ding becam as 
familiar to me as hi chart to a captain; as familiar as they doubtless 
have been all the time to everi thick-head area-prowl within the 
bound of mortality. see here, young man, look at these!" He rang 
the lamp in a row on the top of the cabinet. "did you ever see a set 
of lamp of these shapes--of ani one of these shapes? look at these 
domin figur on them! did you ever see so complet a set--even in 
scotland yard; even in bow street? look! one on each, the seven form 
of hathor. look at that figur of the Ka of a princess of the two 
egypts, stand between Ra and osiri in the boat of the dead, with 
the eye of sleep, support on legs, bend befor her; and harmochi 
rise in the north. will you find that in the british museum--or bow 
street? Or perhap your studi in the gizeh museum, or the 
fitzwilliam, or paris, or leyden, or berlin, have shown you that the 
episod is common in hieroglyphics; and that thi is onli a copy. 
perhap you can tell me what that figur of ptah-seker-ausar hold 
the tet wrap in the sceptr of papyru means? did you ever see it 
before; even in the british museum, or gizeh, or scotland yard?" 

He broke off suddenly; and then went on in quit a differ way: 

"look here! it seem to me that the thick-head idiot is myself! I 
beg your pardon, old fellow, for my rudeness. I quit lost my temper 
at the suggest that I do not know these lamps. you don't mind, do 
you?" the detect answer heartily: 

"lord, sir, not I. I like to see folk angri when I am deal with 
them, whether they are on my side or the other. It is when peopl are 
angri that you learn the truth from them. I keep cool; that is my 
trade! Do you know, you have told me more about those lamp in the 
past two minut than when you fill me up with detail of how to 
identifi them." 

mr. corbeck grunted; he wa not pleas at have given himself away. 
all at onc he turn to me and said in hi natur way: 

"now tell me how you got them back?" I wa so surpris that I said 
without thinking: 

"we didn't get them back!" the travel laugh openly. 

"what on earth do you mean?" he asked. "you didn't get them back! 
why, there they are befor your eyes! We found you look at them 
when we came in." By thi time I had recov my surpris and had my 
wit about me. 

"why, that' just it," I said. "we had onli come across them, by 
accident, that veri moment!" 

mr. corbeck drew back and look hard at miss trelawni and myself; 
turn hi eye from one to the other as he asked: 

"do you mean to tell me that no one brought them here; that you found 
them in that drawer? that, so to speak, no one at all brought them 
back?" 

"I suppos someon must have brought them here; they couldn't have come 
of their own accord. but who it was, or when, or how, neither of us 
knows. We shall have to make inquiry, and see if ani of the servant 
know anyth of it." 

We all stood silent for sever seconds. It seem a long time. the 
first to speak wa the detective, who said in an unconsci way: 

"well, i'm damned! I beg your pardon, miss!" then hi mouth shut like 
a steel trap. 

We call up the servants, one by one, and ask them if they knew 
anyth of some articl place in a drawer in the boudoir; but none 
of them could throw ani light on the circumstance. We did not tell 
them what the articl were; or let them see them. 

mr. corbeck pack the lamp in cotton wool, and place them in a tin 
box. this, I may mention incidentally, wa then brought up to the 
detectives' room, where one of the men stood guard over them with a 
revolv the whole night. next day we got a small safe into the house, 
and place them in it. there were two differ keys. one of them I 
kept myself; the other I place in my drawer in the safe deposit vault. 
We were all determin that the lamp should not be lost again. 

about an hour after we had found the lamps, doctor winchest arrived. 
He had a larg parcel with him, which, when unwrapped, prove to be the 
mummi of a cat. with miss trelawny' permiss he place thi in the 
boudoir; and silvio wa brought close to it. To the surpris of us 
all, however, except perhap doctor winchester, he did not manifest the 
least annoyance; he took no notic of it whatever. He stood on the 
tabl close besid it, pur loudly. then, follow out hi plan, 
the doctor brought him into mr. trelawny' room, we all following. 
doctor winchest wa excited; miss trelawni anxious. I wa more than 
interest myself, for I began to have a glimmer of the doctor' 
idea. the detect wa calmli and coldli superior; but mr. corbeck, 
who wa an enthusiast, wa full of eager curiosity. 

the moment doctor winchest got into the room, silvio began to mew and 
wriggle; and jump out of hi arms, ran over to the cat mummi and 
began to scratch angrili at it. miss trelawni had some difficulti in 
take him away; but so soon as he wa out of the room he becam quiet. 
when she came back there wa a clamour of comments: 

"I thought so!" from the doctor. 

"what can it mean?" from miss trelawny. 

"that' a veri strang thing!" from mr. corbeck. 

"odd! but it doesn't prove anything!" from the detective. 

"I suspend my judgment!" from myself, think it advis to say 
something. 

then by common consent we drop the theme--for the present. 

In my room that even I wa make some note of what had happened, 
when there came a low tap on the door. In obedi to my summon 
sergeant daw came in, care close the door behind him. 

"well, sergeant," said I, "sit down. what is it?" 

"I want to speak to you, sir, about those lamps." I nod and 
waited: he went on: "you know that that room where they were found 
open directli into the room where miss trelawni slept last night?" 

"yes." 

"dure the night a window somewher in that part of the hous wa 
opened, and shut again. I heard it, and took a look round; but I could 
see no sign of anything." 

"yes, I know that!" I said; "I heard a window move myself." 

"doe noth strike you as strang about it, sir?" 

"strange!" I said; "strange! whi it' all the most bewildering, 
madden thing I have ever encountered. It is all so strang that one 
seem to wonder, and simpli wait for what will happen next. but what 
do you mean by strange?" 

the detect paused, as if choos hi word to begin; and then said 
deliberately: 

"you see, I am not one who believ in magic and such things. I am for 
fact all the time; and I alway find in the long-run that there is a 
reason and a caus for everything. thi new gentleman say these 
thing were stolen out of hi room in the hotel. the lamps, I take it 
from some thing he ha said, realli belong to mr. trelawny. hi 
daughter, the ladi of the house, have left the room she usual 
occupies, sleep that night on the ground floor. A window is heard to 
open and shut dure the night. when we, who have been dure the day 
tri to find a clue to the robbery, come to the house, we find the 
stolen good in a room close to where she slept, and open out of it!" 

He stopped. I felt that same sens of pain and apprehension, which I 
had experienc when he had spoken to me before, creeping, or rather 
rushing, over me again. I had to face the matter out, however. My 
relat with her, and the feel toward her which I now knew full 
well meant a veri deep love and devotion, demand so much. I said as 
calmli as I could, for I knew the keen eye of the skil investig 
were on me: 

"and the inference?" 

He answer with the cool audac of conviction: 

"the infer to me is that there wa no robberi at all. the good 
were taken by someon to thi house, where they were receiv through a 
window on the ground floor. they were place in the cabinet, readi to 
be discov when the proper time should come!" 

somehow I felt relieved; the assumpt wa too monstrous. I did not 
want, however, my relief to be apparent, so I answer as grave as I 
could: 

"and who do you suppos brought them to the house?" 

"I keep my mind open as to that. possibl mr. corbeck himself; the 
matter might be too riski to trust to a third party." 

"then the natur extens of your infer is that mr. corbeck is a 
liar and a fraud; and that he is in conspiraci with miss trelawni to 
deceiv someon or other about those lamps." 

"those are harsh words, mr. ross. they'r so plain-spoken that they 
bring a man up standing, and make new doubt for him. but I have to go 
where my reason points. It may be that there is anoth parti than 
miss trelawni in it. indeed, if it hadn't been for the other matter 
that set me think and bred doubt of it own about her, I wouldn't 
dream of mix her up in this. but i'm safe on corbeck. whoever els 
is in it, he is! the thing couldn't have been taken without hi 
connivance--if what he say is true. If it isn't--well! he is a liar 
anyhow. I would think it a bad job to have him stay in the hous with 
so mani valuables, onli that it will give me and my mate a chanc of 
watch him. we'll keep a pretti good look-out, too, I tell you. 
he' up in my room now, guard those lamps; but johnni wright is 
there too. I go on befor he come off; so there won't be much chanc 
of anoth house-breaking. Of course, mr. ross, all this, too, is 
between you and me." 

"quit so! you may depend on my silence!" I said; and he went away to 
keep a close eye on the egyptologist. 

It seem as though all my pain experi were to go in pairs, and 
that the sequenc of the previou day wa to be repeated; for befor 
long I had anoth privat visit from doctor winchest who had now 
paid hi nightli visit to hi patient and wa on hi way home. He took 
the seat which I proffer and began at once: 

"thi is a strang affair altogether. miss trelawni ha just been 
tell me about the stolen lamps, and of the find of them in the 
napoleon cabinet. It would seem to be anoth complic of the 
mystery; and yet, do you know, it is a relief to me. I have exhaust 
all human and natur possibl of the case, and am begin to 
fall back on superhuman and supernatur possibilities. here are such 
strang thing that, if I am not go mad, I think we must have a 
solut befor long. I wonder if I might ask some question and some 
help from mr. corbeck, without make further complic and 
embarrass us. He seem to know an amaz amount regard egypt 
and all relat to it. perhap he wouldn't mind translat a littl 
bit of hieroglyphic. It is child' play to him. what do you think?" 

when I had thought the matter over a few second I spoke. We want 
all the help we could get. for myself, I had perfect confid in 
both men; and ani compar notes, or mutual assistance, might bring 
good results. such could hardli bring evil. 

"bi all mean I should ask him. He seem an extraordinarili learn 
man in egyptology; and he seem to me a good fellow as well as an 
enthusiast. By the way, it will be necessari to be a littl guard as 
to whom you speak regard ani inform which he may give you." 

"of course!" he answered. "inde I should not dream of say 
anyth to anybody, except yourself. We have to rememb that when 
mr. trelawni recov he may not like to think that we have been 
chatter unduli over hi affairs." 

"look here!" I said, "whi not stay for a while: and I shall ask him to 
come and have a pipe with us. We can then talk over things." 

He acquiesced: so I went to the room where mr. corbeck was, and 
brought him back with me. I thought the detect were pleas at hi 
going. On the way to my room he said: 

"I don't half like leav those thing there, with onli those men to 
guard them. they'r a deal sight too preciou to be left to the police!" 

from which it would appear that suspicion wa not confin to sergeant 
daw. 

mr. corbeck and doctor winchester, after a quick glanc at each other, 
becam at onc on most friendli terms. the travel profess hi 
willing to be of ani assist which he could, provided, he added, 
that it wa anyth about which he wa free to speak. thi wa not 
veri promising; but doctor winchest began at once: 

"I want you, if you will, to translat some hieroglyph for me." 

"certainly, with the greatest pleasure, so far as I can. for I may 
tell you that hieroglyph write is not quit master yet; though we 
are get at it! We are get at it! what is the inscription?" 

"there are two," he answered. "one of them I shall bring here." 

He went out, and return in a minut with the mummi cat which he had 
that even introduc to silvio. the scholar took it; and, after a 
short examination, said: 

"there is noth especi in this. It is an appeal to bast, the ladi 
of bubastis, to give her good bread and milk in the elysian fields. 
there may be more inside; and if you will care to unrol it, I will do 
my best. I do not think, however, that there is anyth special. 
from the method of wrap I should say it is from the delta; and of a 
late period, when such mummi work wa common and cheap. what is the 
other inscript you wish me to see?" 

"the inscript on the mummi cat in mr. trelawny' room." 

mr. corbeck' face fell. "no!" he said, "I cannot do that! I am, for 
the present at all events, practic bound to secreci regard ani 
of the thing in mr. trelawny' room." 

doctor winchester' comment and my own were made at the same moment. I 
said onli the one word "checkmate!" from which I think he may have 
gather that I guess more of hi idea and purpos than perhap I had 
intent convey to him. He murmured: 

"practic bound to secrecy?" 

mr. corbeck at onc took up the challeng conveyed: 

"do not misunderstand me! I am not bound by ani definit pledg of 
secrecy; but I am bound in honour to respect mr. trelawny' confidence, 
given to me, I may tell you, in a veri larg measure. regard mani 
of the object in hi room he ha a definit purpos in view; and it 
would not be either right or becom for me, hi trust friend and 
confidant, to forestal that purpose. mr. trelawny, you may know--or 
rather you do not know or you would not have so constru my remark--i 
a scholar, a veri great scholar. He ha work for year toward a 
certain end. for thi he ha spare no labour, no expense, no person 
danger or self-denial. He is on the line of a result which will place 
him amongst the foremost discover or investig of hi age. and 
now, just at the time when ani hour might bring him success, he is 
stricken down!" 

He stopped, seemingli overcom with emotion. after a time he recov 
himself and went on: 

"again, do not misunderstand me as to anoth point. I have said that 
mr. trelawni ha made much confid with me; but I do not mean to 
lead you to believ that I know all hi plans, or hi aim or objects. 
I know the period which he ha been studying; and the definit 
histor individu whose life he ha been investigating, and whose 
record he ha been follow up one by one with infinit patience. 
but beyond thi I know nothing. that he ha some aim or object in the 
complet of thi knowledg I am convinced. what it is I may guess; 
but I must say nothing. pleas to remember, gentlemen, that I have 
voluntarili accept the posit of recipi of a partial confidence. 
I have respect that; and I must ask ani of my friend to do the same." 

He spoke with great dignity; and he grew, moment by moment, in the 
respect and esteem of both doctor winchest and myself. We understood 
that he had not done speaking; so we wait in silenc till he 
continued: 

"I have spoken thi much, although I know well that even such a hint as 
either of you might gather from my word might jeopardis the success 
of hi work. but I am convinc that you both wish to help him--and 
hi daughter," he said thi look me fairli between the eyes, "to the 
best of your power, honestli and unselfishly. He is so stricken down, 
and the manner of it is so mysteri that I cannot but think that it 
is in some way a result of hi own work. that he calcul on some 
set-back is manifest to us all. god knows! I am will to do what I 
can, and to use ani knowledg I have in hi behalf. I arriv in 
england full of exult at the thought that I had fulfil the 
mission with which he had trust me. I had got what he said were the 
last object of hi search; and I felt assur that he would now be 
abl to begin the experi of which he had often hint to me. It is 
too dread that at just such a time such a calam should have 
fallen on him. doctor winchester, you are a physician; and, if your 
face doe not beli you, you are a clever and a bold one. Is there no 
way which you can devis to wake thi man from hi unnatur stupor?" 

there wa a pause; then the answer came slowli and deliberately: 

"there is no ordinari remedi that I know of. there might possibl be 
some extraordinari one. but there would be no use in tri to find 
it, except on one condition." 

"and that?" 

"knowledge! I am complet ignor of egyptian matters, language, 
writing, history, secrets, medicines, poisons, occult powers--al that 
go to make up the mysteri of that mysteri land. thi disease, or 
condition, or whatev it may be called, from which mr. trelawni is 
suffering, is in some way connect with egypt. I have had a suspicion 
of thi from the first; and later it grew into a certainty, though 
without proof. what you have said tonight confirm my conjecture, and 
make me believ that a proof is to be had. I do not think that you 
quit know all that ha gone on in thi hous sinc the night of the 
attack--of the find of mr. trelawny' body. now I propos that we 
confid in you. If mr. ross agrees, I shall ask him to tell you. He is 
more skill than I am in put fact befor other people. He can 
speak by hi brief; and in thi case he ha the best of all briefs, the 
experi of hi own eye and ears, and the evid that he ha 
himself taken on the spot from particip in, or spectat of, what 
ha happened. when you know all, you will, I hope, be in a posit to 
judg as to whether you can best help mr. trelawny, and further hi 
secret wishes, by your silenc or your speech." 

I nod approval. mr. corbeck jump up, and in hi impuls way 
held out a hand to each. 

"done!" he said. "I acknowledg the honour of your confidence; and on 
my part I pledg myself that if I find my duti to mr. trelawny' wish 
will, in hi own interest, allow my lip to open on hi affairs, I 
shall speak so freeli as I may." 

accordingli I began, and told him, as exactli as I could, everyth 
that had happen from the moment of my wake at the knock on the 
door in jermyn street. the onli reserv I made were as to my own 
feel toward miss trelawni and the matter of small import to the 
main subject which follow it; and my convers with sergeant daw, 
which were in themselv private, and which would have demand 
discretionari silenc in ani case. As I spoke, mr. corbeck follow 
with breathless interest. sometim he would stand up and pace about 
the room in uncontrol excitement; and then recov himself 
suddenly, and sit down again. sometim he would be about to speak, 
but would, with an effort, restrain himself. I think the narrat 
help me to make up my own mind; for even as I talked, thing seem 
to appear in a clearer light. thing big and little, in relat of 
their import to the case, fell into proper perspective. the stori 
up to date becam coherent, except as to it cause, which seem a 
greater mysteri than ever. thi is the merit of entire, or collected, 
narrative. isol facts, doubts, suspicions, conjectures, give way 
to a homogen which is convincing. 

that mr. corbeck wa convinc wa evident. He did not go through ani 
process of explan or limitation, but spoke right out at onc to 
the point, and fearlessli like a man: 

"that settl me! there is in activ some forc that need special 
care. If we all go on work in the dark we shall get in one 
another' way, and by hamper each other, undo the good that ani or 
each of us, work in differ directions, might do. It seem to me 
that the first thing we have to accomplish is to get mr. trelawni wake 
out of that unnatur sleep. that he can be wake is appar from the 
way the nurs ha recovered; though what addit harm may have been 
done to him in the time he ha been lie in that room I suppos no one 
can tell. We must chanc that, however. He ha lain there, and 
whatev the effect might be, it is there now; and we have, and shall 
have, to deal with it as a fact. A day more or less won't hurt in the 
long-run. It is late now; and we shall probabl have tomorrow a task 
befor us that will requir our energi afresh. you, doctor, will 
want to get to your sleep; for I suppos you have other work as well as 
thi to do tomorrow. As for you, mr. ross, I understand that you are 
to have a spell of watch in the sick-room tonight. I shall get you 
a book which will help to pass the time for you. I shall go and look 
for it in the library. I know where it wa when I wa here last; and I 
don't suppos mr. trelawni ha use it since. He knew long ago all 
that wa in it which wa or might be of interest to him. but it will 
be necessary, or at least helpful, to understand other thing which I 
shall tell you later. you will be abl to tell doctor winchest all 
that would aid him. for I take it that our work will branch out pretti 
soon. We shall each have our own end to hold up; and it will take each 
of us all our time and understand to get through hi own tasks. It 
will not be necessari for you to read the whole book. all that will 
interest you--with regard to our matter I mean of course, for the whole 
book is interest as a record of travel in a countri then quit 
unknown--i the preface, and two or three chapter which I shall mark 
for you." 

He shook hand warmli with doctor winchest who had stood up to go. 

whilst he wa away I sat lonely, thinking. As I thought, the world 
around me seem to be illimit great. the onli littl spot in 
which I wa interest seem like a tini speck in the midst of a 
wilderness. without and around it were dark and unknown danger, 
press in from everi side. and the central figur in our littl 
oasi wa one of sweet and beauty. A figur one could love; could 
work for; could die for...! 

mr. corbeck came back in a veri short time with the book; he had found 
it at onc in the spot where he had seen it three year before. have 
place in it sever slip of paper, mark the place where I wa to 
read, he put it into my hands, saying: 

"that is what start mr. trelawny; what start me when I read it; and 
which will, I have no doubt, be to you an interest begin to a 
special study--whatev the end may be. if, indeed, ani of us here may 
ever see the end." 

At the door he paus and said: 

"I want to take back one thing. that detect is a good fellow. what 
you have told me of him put him in a new light. the best proof of it 
is that I can go quietli to sleep tonight, and leav the lamp in hi 
care!" 

when he had gone I took the book with me, put on my respirator, and 
went to my spell of duti in the sick-room! 




chapter X 

the valley of the sorcer 


I place the book on the littl tabl on which the shade lamp rest 
and move the screen to one side. thu I could have the light on my 
book; and by look up, see the bed, and the nurse, and the door. I 
cannot say that the condit were enjoyable, or calcul to allow 
of that absorpt in the subject which is advis for effect 
study. however, I compos myself to the work as well as I could. the 
book wa one which, on the veri face of it, requir special attention. 
It wa a folio in dutch, print in amsterdam in 1650. some one had 
made a liter translation, write gener the english word under 
the dutch, so that the grammat differ between the two tongu 
made even the read of the translat a difficult matter. one had 
to dodg backward and forward among the words. thi wa in addit to 
the difficulti of deciph a strang handwrit of two hundr 
year ago. I found, however, that after a short time I got into the 
habit of follow in convent english the dutch construction; and, 
as I becam more familiar with the writing, my task becam easier. 

At first the circumst of the room, and the fear lest miss trelawni 
should return unexpectedli and find me read the book, disturb me 
somewhat. for we had arrang amongst us, befor doctor winchest had 
gone home, that she wa not to be brought into the rang of the come 
investigation. We consid that there might be some shock to a 
woman' mind in matter of appar mystery; and further, that she, 
be mr. trelawny' daughter, might be place in a difficult posit 
with him afterward if she took part in, or even had a person 
knowledg of, the disregard of hi express wishes. but when I 
rememb that she did not come on nurs duti till two o'clock, the 
fear of interrupt pass away. I had still nearli three hous 
befor me. nurs kennedi sat in her chair by the bedside, patient and 
alert. A clock tick on the landing; other clock in the hous 
ticked; the life of the citi without manifest itself in the distant 
hum, now and again swell into a roar as a breez float westward 
took the concours of sound with it. but still the domin idea wa 
of silence. the light on my book, and the sooth fring of green 
silk round the shade intensified, whenev I look up, the gloom of 
the sick-room. with everi line I read, thi seem to grow deeper and 
deeper; so that when my eye came back to the page the light seem to 
dazzl me. I stuck to my work, however, and present began to get 
suffici into the subject to becom interest in it. 

the book wa by one nichola van huyn of hoorn. In the prefac he told 
how, attract by the work of john greav of merton college, 
pyramidographia, he himself visit egypt, where he becam so 
interest in it wonder that he devot some year of hi life to 
visit strang places, and explor the ruin of mani templ and 
tombs. He had come across mani variant of the stori of the build 
of the pyramid as told by the arabian historian, ibn abd alhokin, some 
of which he set down. these I did not stop to read, but went on to the 
mark pages. 

As soon as I began to read these, however, there grew on me some sens 
of a disturb influence. onc or twice I look to see if the nurs 
had moved, for there wa a feel as though some one were near me. 
nurs kennedi sat in her place, as steadi and alert as ever; and I came 
back to my book again. 

the narr went on to tell how, after pass for sever day 
through the mountain to the east of aswan, the explor came to a 
certain place. here I give hi own words, simpli put the 
translat into modern english: 

"toward even we came to the entranc of a narrow, deep valley, 
run east and west. I wish to proceed through this; for the sun, 
now nearli down on the horizon, show a wide open beyond the 
narrow of the cliffs. but the fellaheen absolut refus to enter 
the valley at such a time, alleg that they might be caught by the 
night befor they could emerg from the other end. At first they would 
give no reason for their fear. they had hitherto gone anywher I 
wished, and at ani time, without demur. On be pressed, however, 
they said that the place wa the valley of the sorcerer, where none 
might come in the night. On be ask to tell of the sorcerer, they 
refused, say that there wa no name, and that they knew nothing. On 
the next morning, however, when the sun wa up and shine down the 
valley, their fear had somewhat pass away. then they told me that a 
great sorcer in ancient days--'million of million of years' wa the 
term they used--a king or a queen, they could not say which, wa buri 
there. they could not give the name, persist to the last that there 
wa no name; and that anyon who should name it would wast away in 
life so that at death noth of him would remain to be rais again in 
the other world. In pass through the valley they kept togeth in a 
cluster, hurri on in front of me. none dare to remain behind. they 
gave, as their reason for so proceeding, that the arm of the sorcer 
were long, and that it wa danger to be the last. the which wa of 
littl comfort to me who of thi necess took that honour post. 
In the narrowest part of the valley, on the south side, wa a great 
cliff of rock, rise sheer, of smooth and even surface. hereon were 
graven certain cabalist signs, and mani figur of men and animals, 
fishes, reptil and birds; sun and stars; and mani quaint symbols. 
some of these latter were disjoint limb and features, such as arm 
and legs, fingers, eyes, noses, ears, and lips. mysteri symbol 
which will puzzl the record angel to interpret at the judgment day. 
the cliff face exactli north. there wa someth about it so 
strange, and so differ from the other carv rock which I had 
visited, that I call a halt and spent the day in examin the rock 
front as well as I could with my telescope. the egyptian of my 
compani were terribl afraid, and use everi kind of persuas to 
induc me to pass on. I stay till late in the afternoon, by which 
time I had fail to make out aright the entri of ani tomb, for I 
suspect that such wa the purpos of the sculptur of the rock. By 
thi time the men were rebellious; and I had to leav the valley if I 
did not wish my whole retinu to desert. but I secretli made up my 
mind to discov the tomb, and explor it. To thi end I went further 
into the mountains, where I met with an arab sheik who wa will to 
take servic with me. the arab were not bound by the same 
superstiti fear as the egyptians; sheik abu some and hi follow 
were will to take a part in the explorations. 

"when I return to the valley with these bedouins, I made effort to 
climb the face of the rock, but failed, it be of one impenetr 
smoothness. the stone, gener flat and smooth by nature, had been 
chisel to completeness. that there had been project step wa 
manifest, for there remained, untouch by the wondrou climat of that 
strang land, the mark of saw and chisel and mallet where the step 
had been cut or broken away. 

"be thu baffl of win the tomb from below, and be 
unprovid with ladder to scale, I found a way by much circuit 
journey to the top of the cliff. thenc I caus myself to be 
lower by ropes, till I had investig that portion of the rock face 
wherein I expect to find the opening. I found that there wa an 
entrance, close howev by a great stone slab. thi wa cut in the 
rock more than a hundr feet up, be two-third the height of the 
cliff. the hieroglyph and cabalist symbol cut in the rock were so 
manag as to disguis it. the cut wa deep, and wa continu 
through the rock and the portal of the doorway, and through the great 
slab which form the door itself. thi wa fix in place with such 
incred exact that no stone chisel or cut implement which I 
had with me could find a lodgment in the interstices. I use much 
force, however; and by mani heavi stroke won a way into the tomb, for 
such I found it to be. the stone door have fallen into the entranc 
I pass over it into the tomb, note as I went a long iron chain 
which hung coil on a bracket close to the doorway. 

"the tomb I found to be complete, after the manner of the finest 
egyptian tombs, with chamber and shaft lead down to the corridor, 
end in the mummi pit. It had the tabl of pictures, which seem 
some kind of record--whos mean is now for ever lost--graven in a 
wondrou colour on a wondrou stone. 

"all the wall of the chamber and the passag were carv with strang 
write in the uncanni form mentioned. the huge stone coffin or 
sarcophagu in the deep pit wa marvel graven throughout with 
signs. the arab chief and two other who ventur into the tomb with 
me, and who were evid use to such grim explorations, manag to 
take the cover from the sarcophagu without break it. At which they 
wondered; for such good fortune, they said, did not usual attend such 
efforts. inde they seem not over careful; and did handl the 
variou furnitur of the tomb with such littl concern that, onli for 
it great strength and thickness, even the coffin itself might have 
been injured. which gave me much concern, for it wa veri beauti 
wrought of rare stone, such as I had no knowledg of. much I griev 
that it were not possibl to carri it away. but time and desert 
journey forbad such; I could onli take with me such small matter 
as could be carri on the person. 

"within the sarcophagu wa a body, manifestli of a woman, swath with 
mani wrap of linen, as is usual with all mummies. from certain 
embroid thereon, I gather that she wa of high rank. across 
the breast wa one hand, unwrapped. In the mummi which I had seen, 
the arm and hand are within the wrappings, and certain adorn of 
wood, shape and paint to resembl arm and hands, lie outsid the 
enwrap body. 

"but thi hand wa strang to see, for it wa the real hand of her who 
lay enwrap there; the arm project from the cerement be of 
flesh, seemingli made as like marbl in the process of embalming. arm 
and hand were of duski white, be of the hue of ivori that hath lain 
long in air. the skin and the nail were complet and whole, as though 
the bodi had been place for burial over night. I touch the hand and 
move it, the arm be someth flexibl as a live arm; though stiff 
with long disuse, as are the arm of those faqueer which I have seen 
in the indees. there was, too, an ad wonder that on thi ancient 
hand were no less than seven fingers, the same all be fine and long, 
and of great beauty. sooth to say, it made me shudder and my flesh 
creep to touch that hand that had lain there undisturb for so mani 
thousand of years, and yet wa like unto live flesh. underneath the 
hand, as though guard by it, lay a huge jewel of ruby; a great stone 
of wondrou bigness, for the rubi is in the main a small jewel. thi 
one wa of wondrou colour, be as of fine blood whereon the light 
shineth. but it wonder lay not in it size or colour, though these 
were, as I have said, of priceless rarity; but in that the light of it 
shone from seven stars, each of seven points, as clearli as though the 
star were in realiti there imprisoned. when that the hand wa lifted, 
the sight of that wondrou stone lie there struck me with a shock 
almost to momentari paralysis. I stood gaze on it, as did those with 
me, as though it were that fade head of the gorgon medusa with the 
snake in her hair, whose sight struck into stone those who beheld. So 
strong wa the feel that I want to hurri away from the place. so, 
too, those with me; therefore, take thi rare jewel, togeth with 
certain amulet of strang and rich be wrought of 
jewel-stones, I made hast to depart. I would have remain longer, 
and made further research in the wrap of the mummy, but that I 
fear so to do. for it came to me all at onc that I wa in a desert 
place, with strang men who were with me becaus they were not 
over-scrupulous. that we were in a lone cavern of the dead, an hundr 
feet abov the ground, where none could find me were ill done to me, 
nor would ani ever seek. but in secret I determin that I would come 
again, though with more secur following. moreover, wa I tempt to 
seek further, as in examin the wrap I saw mani thing of 
strang import in that wondrou tomb; includ a casket of eccentr 
shape made of some strang stone, which methought might have contain 
other jewels, inasmuch as it had secur lodgment in the great 
sarcophagu itself. there wa in the tomb also anoth coffer which, 
though of rare proport and adornment, wa more simpli shaped. It 
wa of ironston of great thickness; but the cover wa lightli cement 
down with what seem gum and pari plaster, as though to insur that 
no air could penetrate. the arab with me so insist in it opening, 
think that from it thick much treasur wa store therein, that 
I consent thereto. but their hope wa a fals one, as it proved. 
within, close packed, stood four jar fine wrought and carv with 
variou adornments. Of these one wa the head of a man, anoth of a 
dog, anoth of a jackal, and anoth of a hawk. I had befor known 
that such burial urn as these were use to contain the entrail and 
other organ of the mummi dead; but on open these, for the 
fasten of wax, though complete, wa thin, and yield easily, we 
found that they held but oil. the bedouins, spill most of the oil 
in the process, grope with their hand in the jar lest treasur 
should have been there concealed. but their search wa of no avail; 
no treasur wa there. I wa warn of my danger by see in the eye 
of the arab certain covet glances. whereon, in order to hasten 
their departure, I wrought upon those fear of superstit which even 
in these callou men were apparent. the chief of the bedouin ascend 
from the pit to give the signal to those abov to rais us; and I, not 
care to remain with the men whom I mistrusted, follow him 
immediately. the other did not come at once; from which I fear that 
they were rifl the tomb afresh on their own account. I refrain to 
speak of it, however, lest wors should befall. At last they came. 
one of them, who ascend first, in land at the top of the cliff 
lost hi foothold and fell below. He wa instantli killed. the other 
followed, but in safety. the chief came next, and I came last. befor 
come away I pull into it place again, as well as I could, the slab 
of stone that cover the entranc to the tomb. I wished, if possible, 
to preserv it for my own examin should I come again. 

"when we all stood on the hill abov the cliff, the burn sun that 
wa bright and full of glori wa good to see after the dark and 
strang mysteri of the tomb. even wa I glad that the poor arab who 
fell down the cliff and lay dead below, lay in the sunlight and not in 
that gloomi cavern. I would fain have gone with my companion to seek 
him and give him sepultur of some kind; but the sheik made light of 
it, and sent two of hi men to see to it whilst we went on our way. 

"that night as we camped, one of the men onli returned, say that a 
lion of the desert had kill hi companion after that they had buri 
the dead man in a deep sand without the valley, and had cover the 
spot where he lay with mani great rocks, so that jackal or other 
prey beast might not dig him up again as is their wont. 

"later, in the light of the fire round which the men sat or lay, I saw 
him exhibit to hi fellow someth white which they seem to regard 
with special awe and reverence. So I drew near silently, and saw that 
it wa none other than the white hand of the mummi which had lain 
protect the jewel in the great sarcophagus. I heard the bedouin tell 
how he had found it on the bodi of him who had fallen from the cliff. 
there wa no mistak it, for there were the seven finger which I had 
note before. thi man must have wrench it off the dead bodi whilst 
hi chief and I were otherwis engaged; and from the awe of the other 
I doubt not that he had hope to use it as an amulet, or charm. 
wherea if power it had, they were not for him who had taken it from 
the dead; sinc hi death follow hard upon hi theft. alreadi hi 
amulet had had an awesom baptism; for the wrist of the dead hand wa 
stain with red as though it had been dip in recent blood. 

"that night I wa in certain fear lest there should be some violenc 
done to me; for if the poor dead hand wa so valu as a charm, what 
must be the worth in such wise of the rare jewel which it had guarded. 
though onli the chief knew of it, my doubt wa perhap even greater; 
for he could so order matter as to have me at hi merci when he would. 
I guard myself, therefore, with wake so well as I could, 
determin that at my earliest opportun I should leav thi party, 
and complet my journey home, first to the nile bank, and then down 
it cours to alexandria; with other guid who knew not what strang 
matter I had with me. 

"at last there came over me a disposit of sleep, so potent that I 
felt it would be resistless. fear attack, or that be search in 
my sleep the bedouin might find the star jewel which he had seen me 
place with other in my dress, I took it out unobserv and held it in 
my hand. It seem to give back the light of the flicker fire and 
the light of the stars--for there wa no moon--with equal fidelity; and 
I could note that on it revers it wa graven deepli with certain 
sign such as I had seen in the tomb. As I sank into the 
unconsci of sleep, the graven star jewel wa hidden in the 
hollow of my clench hand. 

"I wake out of sleep with the light of the morn sun on my face. I 
sat up and look around me. the fire wa out, and the camp wa 
desolate; save for one figur which lay prone close to me. It wa that 
of the arab chief, who lay on hi back, dead. hi face wa almost 
black; and hi eye were open, and stare horribl up at the sky, as 
though he saw there some dread vision. He had evid been 
strangled; for on looking, I found on hi throat the red mark where 
finger had pressed. there seem so mani of these mark that I 
count them. there were seven; and all parallel, except the thumb 
mark, as though made with one hand. thi thrill me as I thought of 
the mummi hand with the seven fingers. 

"even there, in the open desert, it seem as if there could be 
enchantments! 

"in my surprise, as I bent over him, I open my right hand, which up 
to now I had held shut with the feeling, instinct even in sleep, of 
keep safe that which it held. As I did so, the star jewel held 
there fell out and struck the dead man on the mouth. mirabil dictu 
there came forth at onc from the dead mouth a great gush of blood, in 
which the red jewel wa for the moment lost. I turn the dead man 
over to look for it, and found that he lay with hi right hand bent 
under him as though he had fallen on it; and in it he held a great 
knife, keen of point and edge, such as arab carri at the belt. It may 
have been that he wa about to murder me when vengeanc came on him, 
whether from man or god, or the god of old, I know not. suffic it, 
that when I found my rubi jewel, which shone up as a live star from 
the mess of blood wherein it lay, I paus not, but fled from the 
place. I journey on alon through the hot desert, till, by god' 
grace, I came upon an arab tribe camp by a well, who gave me salt. 
with them I rest till they had set me on my way. 

"I know not what becam of the mummi hand, or of those who had it. 
what strife, or suspicion, or disaster, or greed went with it I know 
not; but some such caus there must have been, sinc those who had it 
fled with it. It doubtless is use as a charm of potenc by some 
desert tribe. 

"at the earliest opportun I made examin of the star ruby, as I 
wish to tri to understand what wa graven on it. the symbols--whos 
meaning, however, I could not understand--wer as follows..." 

twice, whilst I had been read thi engross narrative, I had 
thought that I had seen across the page streak of shade, which the 
weird of the subject had made to seem like the shadow of a hand. 
On the first of these occas I found that the illus came from the 
fring of green silk around the lamp; but on the second I had look 
up, and my eye had lit on the mummi hand across the room on which the 
starlight wa fall under the edg of the blind. It wa of littl 
wonder that I had connect it with such a narrative; for if my eye 
told me truly, here, in thi room with me, wa the veri hand of which 
the travel van huyn had written. I look over at the bed; and it 
comfort me to think that the nurs still sat there, calm and wakeful. 
At such a time, with such surrounds, dure such a narrative, it wa 
well to have assur of the presenc of some live person. 

I sat look at the book on the tabl befor me; and so mani strang 
thought crowd on me that my mind began to whirl. It wa almost as 
if the light on the white finger in front of me wa begin to have 
some hypnot effect. all at once, all thought seem to stop; and 
for an instant the world and time stood still. 

there lay a real hand across the book! what wa there to so overcom 
me, as wa the case? I knew the hand that I saw on the book--and love 
it. margaret trelawny' hand wa a joy to me to see--to touch; and yet 
at that moment, come after other marvel things, it had a 
strang move effect on me. It wa but momentary, however, and had 
pass even befor her voic had reach me. 

"what disturb you? what are you stare at the book for? I thought 
for an instant that you must have been overcom again!" I jump up. 

"I wa reading," I said, "an old book from the library." As I spoke I 
close it and put it under my arm. "I shall now put it back, as I 
understand that your father wish all things, especi books, kept 
in their proper places." My word were intent misleading; for I 
did not wish her to know what I wa reading, and thought it best not to 
wake her curios by leav the book about. I went away, but not to 
the library; I left the book in my room where I could get it when I had 
had my sleep in the day. when I return nurs kennedi wa readi to go 
to bed; so miss trelawni watch with me in the room. I did not want 
ani book whilst she wa present. We sat close togeth and talk in a 
whisper whilst the moment flew by. It wa with surpris that I note 
the edg of the curtain chang from grey to yellow light. what we 
talk of had noth to do with the sick man, except in so far that 
all which concern hi daughter must ultim concern him. but it 
had noth to say to egypt, or mummies, or the dead, or caves, or 
bedouin chiefs. I could well take note in the grow light that 
margaret' hand had not seven fingers, but five; for it lay in mine. 

when doctor winchest arriv in the morn and had made hi visit to 
hi patient, he came to see me as I sat in the dining-room have a 
littl meal--breakfast or supper, I hardli knew which it was--befor I 
went to lie down. mr. corbeck came in at the same time; and we resum 
out convers where we had left it the night before. I told mr. 
corbeck that I had read the chapter about the find of the tomb, and 
that I thought doctor winchest should read it, too. the latter said 
that, if he might, he would take it with him; he had that morn to 
make a railway journey to ipswich, and would read it on the train. He 
said he would bring it back with him when he came again in the evening. 
I went up to my room to bring it down; but I could not find it 
anywhere. I had a distinct recollect of have left it on the littl 
tabl besid my bed, when I had come up after miss trelawny' go on 
duti into the sick-room. It wa veri strange; for the book wa not of 
a kind that ani of the servant would be like to take. I had to come 
back and explain to the other that I could not find it. 

when doctor winchest had gone, mr. corbeck, who seem to know the 
dutchman' work by heart, talk the whole matter over with me. I told 
him that I wa interrupt by a chang of nurses, just as I had come to 
the descript of the ring. He smile as he said: 

"so far as that is concerned, you need not be disappointed. not in van 
huyn' time, nor for nearli two centuri later, could the mean of 
that engrav have been understood. It wa onli when the work wa 
taken up and follow by young and champollion, by birch and lepsiu 
and rosellini and salvolini, by mariett bey and by walli budg and 
flinder petri and the other scholar of their time that great 
result ensued, and that the true mean of hieroglyph wa known. 

"later, I shall explain to you, if mr. trelawni doe not explain it 
himself, or if he doe not forbid me to, what it mean in that 
particular place. I think it will be better for you to know what 
follow van huyn' narrative; for with the descript of the stone, 
and the account of hi bring it to holland at the termin of hi 
travels, the episod ends. end so far as hi book is concerned. the 
chief thing about the book is that it set other thinking--and acting. 
amongst them were mr. trelawni and myself. mr. trelawni is a good 
linguist of the orient, but he doe not know northern tongues. As for 
me I have a faculti for learn languages; and when I wa pursu my 
studi in leyden I learn dutch so that I might more easili make 
refer in the librari there. thu it was, that at the veri time 
when mr. trelawny, who, in make hi great collect of work on 
egypt, had, through a booksellers' catalogue, acquir thi volum with 
the manuscript translation, wa studi it, I wa read anoth 
copy, in origin dutch, in leyden. We were both struck by the 
descript of the lone tomb in the rock; cut so high up as to be 
inaccess to ordinari seekers: with all mean of reach it 
care obliterated; and yet with such an elabor ornament of 
the smooth surfac of the cliff as van huyn ha described. It also 
struck us both as an odd thing--for in the year between van huyn' 
time and our own the gener knowledg of egyptian curio and record 
ha increas marvellously--that in the case of such a tomb, made in 
such a place, and which must have cost an immens sum of money, there 
wa no seem record or effigi to point out who lay within. moreover, 
the veri name of the place, 'the valley of the sorcerer', had, in a 
prosaic age, attract of it own. when we met, which we did through 
hi seek the assist of other egyptologist in hi work, we 
talk over thi as we did over mani other things; and we determin to 
make search for the mysteri valley. whilst we were wait to start 
on the travel, for mani thing were requir which mr. trelawni 
undertook to see to himself, I went to holland to tri if I could by ani 
trace verifi van huyn' narrative. I went straight to hoorn, and set 
patient to work to find the hous of the travel and hi 
descendants, if any. I need not troubl you with detail of my 
seeking--and finding. hoorn is a place that ha not chang much sinc 
van huyn' time, except that it ha lost the place which it held 
amongst commerci cities. it extern are such as they had been 
then; in such a sleepi old place a centuri or two doe not count for 
much. I found the house, and discov that none of the descend 
were alive. I search records; but onli to one end--death and 
extinction. then I set me to work to find what had becom of hi 
treasures; for that such a travel must have had great treasur wa 
apparent. I trace a good mani to museum in leyden, utrecht, and 
amsterdam; and some few to the privat hous of rich collectors. At 
last, in the shop of an old watchmak and jewel at hoorn, I found 
what he consid hi chiefest treasure; a great ruby, carven like a 
scarab, with seven stars, and engraven with hieroglyphics. the old man 
did not know hieroglyph character, and in hi old-world, sleepi life, 
the philolog discoveri of recent year had not reach him. He 
did not know anyth of van huyn, except that such a person had been, 
and that hi name was, dure two centuries, vener in the town as a 
great traveller. He valu the jewel as onli a rare stone, spoil in 
part by the cutting; and though he wa at first loth to part with such 
an uniqu gem, he becam amen ultim to commerci reason. I 
had a full purse, sinc I bought for mr. trelawny, who is, as I suppos 
you know, immens wealthy. I wa shortli on my way back to london, 
with the star rubi safe in my pocket-book; and in my heart a joy and 
exult which knew no bounds. 

"for here we were with proof of van huyn' wonder story. the jewel 
wa put in secur in mr. trelawny' great safe; and we start out on 
our journey of explor in full hope. 

"mr. trelawni was, at the last, loth to leav hi young wife whom he 
dearli loved; but she, who love him equally, knew hi long to 
prosecut the search. So keep to herself, as all good women do, all 
her anxieties--which in her case were special--sh bade him follow out 
hi bent." 




chapter XI 

A queen' tomb 


"mr. trelawny' hope wa at least as great as my own. He is not so 
volatil a man as I am, prone to up and down of hope and despair; but 
he ha a fix purpos which crystallis hope into belief. At time I 
had fear that there might have been two such stones, or that the 
adventur of van huyn were traveller' fictions, base on some 
ordinari acquisit of the curio in alexandria or cairo, or london or 
amsterdam. but mr. trelawni never falter in hi belief. We had mani 
thing to distract our mind from belief or disbelief. thi wa soon 
after arabi pasha, and egypt wa so safe place for travellers, 
especi if they were english. but mr. trelawni is a fearless man; 
and I almost come to think at time that I am not a coward myself. We 
got togeth a band of arab whom one or other of us had known in 
former trip to the desert, and whom we could trust; that is, we did 
not distrust them as much as others. We were numer enough to 
protect ourselv from chanc maraud bands, and we took with us 
larg impedimenta. We had secur the consent and passiv co-oper 
of the offici still friendli to britain; in the acquir of which 
consent I need hardli say that mr. trelawny' rich were of chief 
importance. We found our way in dhahabiyeh to aswan; whence, have 
got some arab from the sheik and have given our usual backsheesh, we 
set out on our journey through the desert. 

"well, after much wander and tri everi wind in the 
intermin jumbl of hills, we came at last at nightfal on just such 
a valley as van huyn had described. A valley with high, steep cliffs; 
narrow in the centre, and widen out to the eastern and western 
ends. At daylight we were opposit the cliff and could easili note the 
open high up in the rock, and the hieroglyph figur which were 
evid intend origin to conceal it. 

"but the sign which had baffl van huyn and those of hi time--and 
later, were no secret to us. the host of scholar who have given 
their brain and their live to thi work, had wrest open the 
mysteri prison-hous of egyptian language. On the hewn face of the 
rocki cliff we, who had learn the secrets, could read what the theban 
priesthood had had there inscrib nearli fifti centuri before. 

"for that the extern inscript wa the work of the priesthood--and 
a hostil priesthood at that--ther could be no live doubt. the 
inscript on the rock, written in hieroglyphic, ran thus: 

"'hither the god come not at ani summons. the "nameless one" ha 
insult them and is for ever alone. Go not nigh, lest their vengeanc 
wither you away!' 

"the warn must have been a terribl potent one at the time it wa 
written and for thousand of year afterwards; even when the languag 
in which it wa given had becom a dead mysteri to the peopl of the 
land. the tradit of such a terror last longer than it cause. even 
in the symbol use there wa an ad signific of alliteration. 
'for ever' is given in the hieroglyph as 'million of years'. thi 
symbol wa repeat nine times, in three group of three; and after 
each group a symbol of the upper world, the under world, and the sky. 
So that for thi lone one there could be, through the vengeanc of 
all the gods, resurrect in neither the world of sunlight, in the 
world of the dead, or for the soul in the region of the gods. 

"neither mr. trelawni nor I dare to tell ani of our peopl what the 
write meant. for though they did not believ in the religion whenc 
the curs came, or in the god whose vengeanc wa threatened, yet they 
were so superstiti that they would probably, had they known of it, 
have thrown up the whole task and run away. 

"their ignorance, however, and our discret preserv us. We made an 
encamp close at hand, but behind a jut rock a littl further 
along the valley, so that they might not have the inscript alway 
befor them. for even that tradit name of the place: 'the valley 
of the sorcerer', had a fear for them; and for us through them. with 
the timber which we had brought, we made a ladder up the face of the 
rock. We hung a pulley on a beam fix to project from the top of the 
cliff. We found the great slab of rock, which form the door, place 
clumsili in it place and secur by a few stones. it own weight kept 
it in safe position. In order to enter, we had to push it in; and we 
pass over it. We found the great coil of chain which van huyn had 
describ fasten into the rock. there were, however, abund 
evid amid the wreckag of the great stone door, which had revolv 
on iron hing at top and bottom, that ampl provis had been 
origin made for close and fasten it from within. 

"mr. trelawni and I went alon into the tomb. We had brought plenti of 
light with us; and we fix them as we went along. We wish to get a 
complet survey at first, and then make examin of all in detail. 
As we went on, we were fill with ever-increas wonder and delight. 
the tomb wa one of the most magnific and beauti which either of 
us had ever seen. from the elabor natur of the sculptur and 
painting, and the perfect of the workmanship, it wa evid that 
the tomb wa prepar dure the lifetim of her for whose 
resting-plac it wa intended. the draw of the hieroglyph 
pictur wa fine, and the colour superb; and in that high cavern, 
far away from even the damp of the nile-flood, all wa as fresh as when 
the artist had laid down their palettes. there wa one thing which we 
could not avoid seeing. that although the cut on the outsid rock 
wa the work of the priesthood, the smooth of the cliff face wa 
probabl a part of the tomb-builder' origin design. the symbol 
of the paint and cut within all gave the same idea. the outer 
cavern, partli natur and partli hewn, wa regard architectur as 
onli an ante-chamber. At the end of it, so that it would face the east, 
wa a pillar portico, hewn out of the solid rock. the pillar were 
massiv and were seven-sided, a thing which we had not come across in 
ani other tomb. sculptur on the architrav wa the boat of the moon, 
contain hathor, cow-head and bear the disk and plumes, and the 
dog-head hapi, the god of the north. It wa steer by harpocr 
toward the north, repres by the pole star surround by draco and 
ursa major. In the latter the star that form what we call the 'plough' 
were cut larger than ani of the other stars; and were fill with gold 
so that, in the light of torches, they seem to flame with a special 
significance. pass within the portico, we found two of the 
architectur featur of a rock tomb, the chamber, or chapel, and the 
pit, all complet as van huyn had noticed, though in hi day the name 
given to these part by the egyptian of old were unknown. 

"the stele, or record, which had it place low down on the western 
wall, wa so remark that we examin it minutely, even befor go 
on our way to find the mummi which wa the object of our search. thi 
stele wa a great slab of lapi lazuli, cut all over with hieroglyph 
figur of small size and of much beauty. the cut wa fill in 
with some cement of exceed fineness, and of the colour of pure 
vermilion. the inscript began: 

"'tera, queen of the egypts, daughter of antef, monarch of the north 
and the south.' 'daughter of the sun,' 'queen of the diadems'. 

"it then set out, in full record, the histori of her life and reign. 

"the sign of sovereignti were given with a truli feminin profus of 
adornment. the unit crown of upper and lower egypt were, in 
especial, cut with exquisit precision. It wa new to us both to find 
the hejet and the desher--th white and the red crown of upper and 
lower egypt--on the stele of a queen; for it wa a rule, without 
except in the records, that in ancient egypt either crown wa worn 
onli by a king; though they are to be found on goddesses. later on we 
found an explanation, of which I shall say more presently. 

"such an inscript wa in itself a matter so startl as to arrest 
attent from anyon anywher at ani time; but you can have no 
concept of the effect which it had upon us. though our eye were 
not the first which had seen it, they were the first which could see it 
with understand sinc first the slab of rock wa fix in the cliff 
open nearli five thousand year before. To us wa given to read 
thi messag from the dead. thi messag of one who had war against 
the god of old, and claim to have control them at a time when the 
hierarchi profess to be the onli mean of excit their fear or 
gain their good will. 

"the wall of the upper chamber of the pit and the sarcophagu chamber 
were profus inscribed; all the inscriptions, except that on the 
stele, be colour with bluish-green pigment. the effect when seen 
sideway as the eye caught the green facets, wa that of an old, 
discolour indian turquoise. 

"we descend the pit by the aid of the tackl we had brought with us. 
trelawni went first. It wa a deep pit, more than seventi feet; but it 
had never been fill up. the passag at the bottom slope up to the 
sarcophagu chamber, and wa longer than is usual found. It had not 
been wall up. 

"within, we found a great sarcophagu of yellow stone. but that I need 
not describe; you have seen it in mr. trelawny' chamber. the cover of 
it lay on the ground; it had not been cemented, and wa just as van 
huyn had describ it. needless to say, we were excit as we look 
within. there must, however, be one sens of disappointment. I could 
not help feel how differ must have been the sight which met the 
dutch traveller' eye when he look within and found that white hand 
lie lifelik abov the shroud mummi cloths. It is true that a 
part of the arm wa there, white and ivori like. 

"but there wa a thrill to us which came not to van huyn! 

"the end of the wrist wa cover with dri blood! It wa as though 
the bodi had bled after death! the jag end of the broken wrist 
were rough with the clot blood; through thi the white bone, 
stick out, look like the matrix of opal. the blood had stream 
down and stain the brown wrap as with rust. here, then, wa 
full confirm of the narrative. with such evid of the 
narrator' truth befor us, we could not doubt the other matter which 
he had told, such as the blood on the mummi hand, or mark of the seven 
finger on the throat of the strangl sheik. 

"I shall not troubl you with detail of all we saw, or how we learn 
all we knew. part of it wa from knowledg common to scholars; part we 
read on the stele in the tomb, and in the sculptur and hieroglyph 
paint on the walls. 

"queen tera wa of the eleventh, or theban dynasti of egyptian king 
which held sway between the twenty-ninth and twenty-fifth centuri 
befor christ. she succeed as the onli child of her father, antef. 
she must have been a girl of extraordinari charact as well as 
ability, for she wa but a young girl when her father died. her youth 
and sex encourag the ambiti priesthood, which had then achiev 
immens power. By their wealth and number and learn they domin 
all egypt, more especi the upper portion. they were then secretli 
readi to make an effort for the achiev of their bold and 
long-consid design, that of transfer the govern power from a 
kingship to a hierarchy. but king antef had suspect some such 
movement, and had taken the precaut of secur to hi daughter the 
allegi of the army. He had also had her taught statecraft, and had 
even made her learn in the lore of the veri priest themselves. He 
had use those of one cult against the other; each be hope of 
some present gain on it own part by the influenc of the king, or of 
some ultim gain from it own influenc over hi daughter. thus, the 
princess had been brought up amongst scribes, and wa herself no mean 
artist. mani of these thing were told on the wall in pictur or in 
hieroglyph write of great beauty; and we came to the conclus 
that not a few of them had been done by the princess herself. It wa 
not without caus that she wa inscrib on the stele as 'protector of 
the arts'. 

"but the king had gone to further lengths, and had had hi daughter 
taught magic, by which she had power over sleep and will. thi wa 
real magic--"black" magic; not the magic of the temples, which, I may 
explain, wa of the harmless or "white" order, and wa intend to 
impress rather than to effect. she had been an apt pupil; and had gone 
further than her teachers. her power and her resourc had given her 
great opportunities, of which she had avail herself to the full. she 
had won secret from natur in strang ways; and had even gone to the 
length of go down into the tomb herself, have been swath and 
coffin and left as dead for a whole month. the priest had tri to 
make out that the real princess tera had die in the experiment, and 
that anoth girl had been substituted; but she had conclus prove 
their error. all thi wa told in pictur of great merit. It wa 
probabl in her time that the impuls wa given in the restor the 
artist great of the fourth dynasti which had found it perfect 
in the day of chufu. 

"in the chamber of the sarcophagu were pictur and write to show 
that she had achiev victori over sleep. indeed, there wa everywher 
a symbolism, wonder even in a land and an age of symbolism. 
promin wa given to the fact that she, though a queen, claim all 
the privileg of kingship and masculinity. In one place she wa 
pictur in man' dress, and wear the white and red crowns. In the 
follow pictur she wa in femal dress, but still wear the crown 
of upper and lower egypt, while the discard male raiment lay at her 
feet. In everi pictur where hope, or aim, of resurrect wa 
express there wa the ad symbol of the north; and in mani 
places--alway in represent of import events, past, present, 
or future--wa a group of the star of the plough. she evid 
regard thi constel as in some way peculiarli associ with 
herself. 

"perhap the most remark statement in the records, both on the 
stele and in the mural writings, wa that queen tera had power to 
compel the gods. this, by the way, wa not an isol belief in 
egyptian history; but wa differ in it cause. she had engrav on 
a ruby, carv like a scarab, and have seven star of seven points, 
master word to compel all the gods, both of the upper and the under 
worlds. 

"in the statement it wa plainli set forth that the hatr of the 
priest was, she knew, store up for her, and that they would after her 
death tri to suppress her name. thi wa a terribl revenge, I may 
tell you, in egyptian mythology; for without a name no one can after 
death be introduc to the gods, or have prayer said for him. 
therefore, she had intend her resurrect to be after a long time 
and in a more northern land, under the constel whose seven star 
had rule her birth. To thi end, her hand wa to be in the 
air--'unwrapped'--and in it the jewel of seven stars, so that wherev 
there wa air she might move even as her Ka could move! this, after 
think it over, mr. trelawni and I agre meant that her bodi could 
becom astral at command, and so move, particl by particle, and becom 
whole again when and where required. then there wa a piec of write 
in which allus wa made to a chest or casket in which were contain 
all the gods, and will, and sleep, the two latter be personifi by 
symbols. the box wa mention as with seven sides. It wa not much of 
a surpris to us when, underneath the feet of the mummy, we found the 
seven-sid casket, which you have also seen in mr. trelawny' room. 
On the underneath part of the wrapping--linen of the left foot wa 
painted, in the same vermilion colour as that use in the stele, the 
hieroglyph symbol for much water, and underneath the right foot the 
symbol of the earth. We made out the symbol to be that her body, 
immort and transfer at will, rule both the land and water, air 
and fire--th latter be exemplifi by the light of the jewel stone, 
and further by the flint and iron which lay outsid the mummi wrappings. 

"a we lift the casket from the sarcophagus, we notic on it side 
the strang protuber which you have alreadi seen; but we were 
unabl at the time to account for them. there were a few amulet in 
the sarcophagus, but none of ani special worth or significance. We 
took it that if there were such, they were within the wrappings; or 
more probabl in the strang casket underneath the mummy' feet. this, 
however, we could not open. there were sign of there be a cover; 
certainli the upper portion and the lower were each in one piece. the 
fine line, a littl way from the top, appear to be where the cover 
wa fixed; but it wa made with such exquisit fine and finish that 
the join could hardli be seen. certainli the top could not be moved. 
We took it, that it wa in some way fasten from within. I tell you 
all thi in order that you may understand thing with which you may be 
in contact later. you must suspend your judgment entirely. such 
strang thing have happen regard thi mummi and all around it, 
that there is a necess for new belief somewhere. It is absolut 
imposs to reconcil certain thing which have happen with the 
ordinari current of life or knowledge. 

"we stay around the valley of the sorcerer, till we had copi 
roughli all the draw and write on the walls, ceil and floor. 
We took with us the stele of lapi lazuli, whose graven record wa 
colour with vermilion pigment. We took the sarcophagu and the 
mummy; the stone chest with the alabast jars; the tabl of 
bloodston and alabast and onyx and carnelian; and the ivori pillow 
whose arch rest on 'buckles', round each of which wa twist an 
uraeu wrought in gold. We took all the articl which lay in the 
chapel, and the mummi pit; the wooden boat with crew and the ushaptiu 
figures, and the symbol amulets. 

"when come away we took down the ladders, and at a distanc buri 
them in the sand under a cliff, which we note so that if necessari we 
might find them again. then with our heavi baggage, we set out on our 
labori journey back to the nile. It wa no easi task, I tell you, to 
bring the case with that great sarcophagu over the desert. We had a 
rough cart and suffici men to draw it; but the progress seem 
terribl slow, for we were anxiou to get our treasur into a place of 
safety. the night wa an anxiou time with us, for we fear attack 
from some maraud band. but more still we fear some of those with 
us. they were, after all, but predatory, unscrupul men; and we had 
with us a consider bulk of preciou things. they, or at least the 
danger one amongst them, did not know whi it wa so precious; they 
took it for grant that it wa materi treasur of some kind that we 
carried. We had taken the mummi from the sarcophagus, and pack it 
for safeti of travel in a separ case. dure the first night two 
attempt were made to steal thing from the cart; and two men were 
found dead in the morning. 

"on the second night there came on a violent storm, one of those 
terribl simoom of the desert which make one feel hi helplessness. 
We were overwhelm with drift sand. some of our bedouin had fled 
befor the storm, hope to find shelter; the rest of us, wrap in 
our bournous, endur with what patienc we could. In the morning, 
when the storm had passed, we recov from under the pile of sand 
what we could of our impedimenta. We found the case in which the mummi 
had been pack all broken, but the mummi itself could nowher be 
found. We search everywher around, and dug up the sand which had 
pile around us; but in vain. We did not know what to do, for trelawni 
had hi heart set on take home that mummy. We wait a whole day in 
hope that the bedouins, who had fled, would return; we had a blind 
hope that they might have in some way remov the mummi from the cart, 
and would restor it. that night, just befor dawn, mr. trelawni woke 
me up and whisper in my ear: 

"'we must go back to the tomb in the valley of the sorcerer. show no 
hesit in the morn when I give the orders! If you ask ani 
question as to where we are go it will creat suspicion, and will 
defeat our purpose." 

"'all right!" I answered. "but whi shall we go there?' hi answer 
seem to thrill through me as though it had struck some chord readi 
tune within: 

"'we shall find the mummi there! I am sure of it!' then anticip 
doubt or argument he added: 

"'wait, and you shall see!' and he sank back into hi blanket again. 

"the arab were surpris when we retrac our steps; and some of them 
were not satisfied. there wa a good deal of friction, and there were 
sever desertions; so that it wa with a diminish follow that we 
took our way eastward again. At first the sheik did not manifest ani 
curios as to our definit destination; but when it becam appar 
that we were again make for the valley of the sorcerer, he too show 
concern. thi grew as we drew near; till final at the entranc of 
the valley he halt and refus to go further. He said he would await 
our return if we chose to go on alone. that he would wait three days; 
but if by that time we had not return he would leave. No offer of 
money would tempt him to depart from thi resolution. the onli 
concess he would make wa that he would find the ladder and bring 
them near the cliff. thi he did; and then, with the rest of the 
troop, he went back to wait at the entranc of the valley. 

"mr. trelawni and I took rope and torches, and again ascend to the 
tomb. It wa evid that someon had been there in our absence, for 
the stone slab which protect the entranc to the tomb wa lie flat 
inside, and a rope wa dangl from the cliff summit. within, there 
wa anoth rope hang into the shaft of the mummi pit. We look at 
each other; but neither said a word. We fix our own rope, and as 
arrang trelawni descend first, I follow at once. It wa not 
till we stood togeth at the foot of the shaft that the thought 
flash across me that we might be in some sort of a trap; that someon 
might descend the rope from the cliff, and by cut the rope by which 
we had lower ourselv into the pit, buri us there alive. the 
thought wa horrifying; but it wa too late to do anything. I remain 
silent. We both had torches, so that there wa ampl light as we 
pass through the passag and enter the chamber where the 
sarcophagu had stood. the first thing notic wa the empti of 
the place. despit all it magnific adornment, the tomb wa made a 
desol by the absenc of the great sarcophagus, to hold which it 
wa hewn in the rock; of the chest with the alabast jars; of the 
tabl which had held the implement and food for the use of the dead, 
and the ushaptiu figures. 

"it wa made more infinit desol still by the shroud figur of 
the mummi of queen tera which lay on the floor where the great 
sarcophagu had stood! besid it lay, in the strang contort 
attitud of violent death, three of the arab who had desert from 
our party. their face were black, and their hand and neck were 
smear with blood which had burst from mouth and nose and eyes. 

"on the throat of each were the marks, now blackening, of a hand of 
seven fingers. 

"trelawni and I drew close, and clutch each other in awe and fear as 
we looked. 

"for, most wonder of all, across the breast of the mummi queen lay 
a hand of seven fingers, ivori white, the wrist onli show a scar 
like a jag red line, from which seem to depend drop of blood." 




chapter xii 

the magic coffer 


"when we recov our amazement, which seem to last unduli long, we 
did not lose ani time carri the mummi through the passage, and 
hoist it up the pit shaft. I went first, to receiv it at the top. 
As I look down, I saw mr. trelawni lift the sever hand and put it 
in hi breast, manifestli to save it from be injur or lost. We 
left the dead arab where they lay. with our rope we lower our 
preciou burden to the ground; and then took it to the entranc of the 
valley where our escort wa to wait. To our astonish we found them 
on the move. when we remonstr with the sheik, he answer that he 
had fulfil hi contract to the letter; he had wait the three day 
as arranged. I thought that he wa lie to cover up hi base 
intent of desert us; and I found when we compar note that 
trelawni had the same suspicion. It wa not till we arriv at cairo 
that we found he wa correct. It wa the 3rd of novemb 1884 when we 
enter the mummi pit for the second time; we had reason to rememb 
the date. 

"we had lost three whole day of our reckoning--out of our 
lives--whilst we had stood wonder in that chamber of the dead. wa 
it strange, then, that we had a superstiti feel with regard to 
the dead queen tera and all belong to her? Is it ani wonder that it 
rest with us now, with a bewild sens of some power outsid 
ourselv or our comprehension? will it be ani wonder if it go down to 
the grave with us at the appoint time? if, indeed, there be ani 
grave for us who have rob the dead!" He wa silent for quit a 
minut befor he went on: 

"we got to cairo all right, and from there to alexandria, where we were 
to take ship by the messageri servic to marseilles, and go thenc by 
express to london. but 

'the best-laid scheme o' mice and men gang aft agley.' 

At alexandria, trelawni found wait a cabl state that mrs. 
trelawni had die in give birth to a daughter. 

"her stricken husband hurri off at onc by the orient express; and I 
had to bring the treasur alon to the desol house. I got to london 
all safe; there seem to be some special good fortun to our journey. 
when I got to thi house, the funer had long been over. the child 
had been put out to nurse, and mr. trelawni had so far recov from 
the shock of hi loss that he had set himself to take up again the 
broken thread of hi life and hi work. that he had had a shock, and 
a bad one, wa apparent. the sudden grey in hi black hair wa proof 
enough in itself; but in addition, the strong cast of hi featur had 
becom set and stern. sinc he receiv that cabl in the ship 
offic at alexandria I have never seen a happi smile on hi face. 

"work is the best thing in such a case; and to hi work he devot 
himself heart and soul. the strang tragedi of hi loss and gain--for 
the child wa born after the mother' death--took place dure the time 
that we stood in that tranc in the mummi pit of queen tera. It seem 
to have becom in some way associ with hi egyptian studies, and 
more especi with the mysteri connect with the queen. He told 
me veri littl about hi daughter; but that two forc struggl in hi 
mind regard her wa apparent. I could see that he loved, almost 
idolis her. yet he could never forget that her birth had cost her 
mother' life. also, there wa someth whose exist seem to 
wring hi father' heart, though he would never tell me what it was. 
again, he onc said in a moment of relax of hi purpos of silence: 

"'she is unlik her mother; but in both featur and colour she ha a 
marvel resembl to the pictur of queen tera.' 

"he said that he had sent her away to peopl who would care for her as 
he could not; and that till she becam a woman she should have all the 
simpl pleasur that a young girl might have, and that were best for 
her. I would often have talk with him about her; but he would never 
say much. onc he said to me: 'there are reason whi I should not 
speak more than is necessary. some day you will know--and understand!' 
I respect hi reticence; and beyond ask after her on my return 
after a journey, I have never spoken of her again. I had never seen 
her till I did so in your presence. 

"well, when the treasur which we had--ah!--taken from the tomb had 
been brought here, mr. trelawni arrang their disposit himself. 
the mummy, all except the sever hand, he place in the great 
ironston sarcophagu in the hall. thi wa wrought for the theban 
high priest uni, and is, as you may have remarked, all inscrib with 
wonder invoc to the old god of egypt. the rest of the thing 
from the tomb he dispos about hi own room, as you have seen. 
amongst them he placed, for special reason of hi own, the mummi hand. 
I think he regard thi as the most sacr of hi possessions, with 
perhap one exception. that is the carven rubi which he call the 
'jewel of seven stars', which he keep in that great safe which is 
lock and guard by variou devices, as you know. 

"I dare say you find thi tedious; but I have had to explain it, so 
that you should understand all up to the present. It wa a long time 
after my return with the mummi of queen tera when mr. trelawni 
re-open the subject with me. He had been sever time to egypt, 
sometim with me and sometim alone; and I had been sever trips, on 
my own account or for him. but in all that time, nearli sixteen years, 
he never mention the subject, unless when some press occas 
suggested, if it did not necessitate, a reference. 

"one morn earli he sent for me in a hurry; I wa then studi in 
the british museum, and had room in hart street. when I came, he wa 
all on fire with excitement. I had not seen him in such a glow sinc 
befor the news of hi wife' death. He took me at onc into hi room. 
the window blind were down and the shutter closed; not a ray of 
daylight came in. the ordinari light in the room were not lit, but 
there were a lot of power electr lamps, fifti candle-pow at 
least, arrang on one side of the room. the littl bloodston tabl 
on which the heptagon coffer stand wa drawn to the centr of the 
room. the coffer look exquisit in the glare of light which shone on 
it. It actual seem to glow as if lit in some way from within. 

"'what do you think of it?' he asked. 

"'it is like a jewel,' I answered. 'you may well call it the 
'sorcerer' magic coffer', if it often look like that. It almost 
seem to be alive.' 

"'do you know whi it seem so?' 

"'from the glare of the light, I suppose?' 

"'light of course,' he answered, 'but it is rather the disposit of 
light.' As he spoke he turn up the ordinari light of the room and 
switch off the special ones. the effect on the stone box wa 
surprising; in a second it lost all it glow effect. It wa still a 
veri beauti stone, as always; but it wa stone and no more. 

"'do you notic anyth about the arrang of the lamps?' he asked. 

"'no!' 

"'they were in the shape of the star in the plough, as the star are 
in the ruby!' the statement came to me with a certain sens of 
conviction. I do not know why, except that there had been so mani 
mysteri associ with the mummi and all belong to it that ani 
new one seem enlightening. I listen as trelawni went on to explain: 

"'for sixteen year I have never ceas to think of that adventure, or 
to tri to find a clue to the mysteri which came befor us; but never 
until last night did I seem to find a solution. I think I must have 
dream of it, for I woke all on fire about it. I jump out of bed 
with a determin of do something, befor I quit knew what it 
wa that I wish to do. then, all at once, the purpos wa clear 
befor me. there were allus in the write on the wall of the tomb 
to the seven star of the great bear that go to make up the plough; and 
the north wa again and again emphasized. the same symbol were 
repeat with regard to the "magic box", as we call it. We had 
alreadi notic those peculiar transluc space in the stone of the 
box. you rememb the hieroglyph write had told that the jewel 
came from the heart of an aerolite, and that the coffer wa cut from it 
also. It might be, I thought, that the light of the seven stars, 
shine in the right direction, might have some effect on the box, or 
someth within it. I rais the blind and look out. the plough wa 
high in the heavens, and both it star and the pole star were straight 
opposit the window. I pull the tabl with the coffer out into the 
light, and shift it until the transluc patch were in the 
direct of the stars. instantli the box began to glow, as you saw it 
under the lamps, though but slightly. I wait and waited; but the sky 
cloud over, and the light die away. So I got wire and lamps--you 
know how often I use them in experiments--and tri the effect of 
electr light. It took me some time to get the lamp properli placed, 
so that they would correspond to the part of the stone, but the moment 
I got them right the whole thing began to glow as you have seen it. 

"'i could get no further, however. there wa evid someth 
wanting. all at onc it came to me that if light could have some 
effect there should be in the tomb some mean of produc light, for 
there could not be starlight in the mummi pit in the cavern. then the 
whole thing seem to becom clear. On the bloodston table, which ha 
a hollow carv in it top, into which the bottom of the coffer fits, I 
laid the magic coffer; and I at onc saw that the odd protuber so 
care wrought in the substanc of the stone correspond in a way 
to the star in the constellation. these, then, were to hold lights. 

"'eureka!' I cried. 'all we want now is the lamps.'" I tri place 
the electr light on, or close to, the protuberances. but the glow 
never came to the stone. So the convict grew on me that there were 
special lamp made for the purpose. If we could find them, a step on 
the road to solv the mysteri should be gained. 

"'but what about the lamps?' I asked. 'where are they? when are we to 
discov them? how are we to know them if we do find them? what--" 

"he stop me at once: 

"'one thing at a time!' he said quietly. 'your first question contain 
all the rest. where are these lamps? I shall tell you: In the tomb!' 

"'in the tomb!' I repeat in surprise. 'whi you and I search the 
place ourselv from end to end; and there wa not a sign of a lamp. 
not a sign of anyth remain when we came away the first time; or 
on the second, except the bodi of the arabs.' 

"whilst I wa speaking, he had uncoil some larg sheet of paper 
which he had brought in hi hand from hi own room. these he spread 
out on the great table, keep their edg down with book and 
weights. I knew them at a glance; they were the care copi which 
he had made of our first transcript from the write in the tomb. 
when he had all ready, he turn to me and said slowly: 

"'do you rememb wondering, when we examin the tomb, at the lack of 
one thing which is usual found in such a tomb?' 

"'yes! there wa no serdab.' 

"the serdab, I may perhap explain," said mr. corbeck to me, "i a sort 
of nich built or hewn in the wall of a tomb. those which have as yet 
been examin bear no inscriptions, and contain onli effigi of the 
dead for whom the tomb wa made." then he went on with hi narrative: 

"trelawny, when he saw that I had caught hi meaning, went on speak 
with someth of hi old enthusiasm: 

"'i have come to the conclus that there must be a serdab--a secret 
one. We were dull not to have thought of it before. We might have 
known that the maker of such a tomb--a woman, who had shown in other 
way such a sens of beauti and completeness, and who had finish 
everi detail with a feminin rich of elaboration--would not have 
neglect such an architectur feature. even if it had not it own 
special signific in ritual, she would have had it as an adornment. 
other had had it, and she like her own work to be complete. depend 
upon it, there was--ther is--a serdab; and that in it, when it is 
discovered, we shall find the lamps. Of course, had we known then what 
we now know or at all event surmise, that there were lamps, we might 
have suspect some hidden spot, some cachet. I am go to ask you to 
go out to egypt again; to seek the tomb; to find the serdab; and to 
bring back the lamps!'" 

"'and if I find there is no serdab; or if discov it I find no 
lamp in it, what then?' He smile grimli with that saturnin smile of 
his, so rare seen for year past, as he spoke slowly: 

"'then you will have to hustl till you find them!' 

"'good!' I said. He point to one of the sheets. 

"'here are the transcript from the chapel at the south and the east. 
I have been look over the write again; and I find that in seven 
place round thi corner are the symbol of the constel which we 
call the plough, which queen tera held to rule her birth and her 
destiny. I have examin them carefully, and I notic that they are 
all represent of the group of the stars, as the constel 
appear in differ part of the heavens. they are all astronom 
correct; and as in the real sky the pointer indic the pole star, so 
these all point to one spot in the wall where usual the serdab is to 
be found!' 

"'bravo!' I shouted, for such a piec of reason demand applause. 
He seem pleas as he went on: 

"'when you are in the tomb, examin thi spot. there is probabl some 
spring or mechan contriv for open the receptacle. what it 
may be, there is no use guessing. you will know what best to do, when 
you are on the spot.' 

"I start the next week for egypt; and never rest till I stood again 
in the tomb. I had found some of our old following; and wa fairli 
well provid with help. the countri wa now in a condit veri 
differ to that in which it had been sixteen year before; there wa 
no need for troop or arm men. 

"I climb the rock face alone. there wa no difficulty, for in that 
fine climat the woodwork of the ladder wa still dependable. It wa 
easi to see that in the year that had elaps there had been other 
visitor to the tomb; and my heart sank within me when I thought that 
some of them might by chanc have come across the secret place. It 
would be a bitter discoveri inde to find that they had forestal 
me; and that my journey had been in vain. 

"the bitter wa realis when I lit my torches, and pass between 
the seven-sid column to the chapel of the tomb. 

"there, in the veri spot where I had expect to find it, wa the 
open of a serdab. and the serdab wa empty. 

"but the chapel wa not empty; for the dried-up bodi of a man in arab 
dress lay close under the opening, as though he had been stricken down. 
I examin all round the wall to see if trelawny' surmis wa 
correct; and I found that in all the posit of the star as given, 
the pointer of the plough indic a spot to the left hand, or south 
side, of the open of the serdab, where wa a singl star in gold. 

"I press this, and it gave way. the stone which had mark the front 
of the serdab, and which lay back against the wall within, move 
slightly. On further examin the other side of the opening, I found 
a similar spot, indic by other represent of the 
constellation; but thi wa itself a figur of the seven stars, and 
each wa wrought in burnish gold. I press each star in turn; but 
without result. then it struck me that if the open spring wa on 
the left, thi on the right might have been intend for the 
simultan pressur of all the star by one hand of seven fingers. 
By use both my hands, I manag to effect this. 

"with a loud click, a metal figur seem to dart from close to the 
open of the serdab; the stone slowli swung back to it place, and 
shut with a click. the glimps which I had of the descend figur 
appal me for the moment. It wa like that grim guardian which, 
accord to the arabian historian ibn abd alhokin, the builder of the 
pyramids, king saurid ibn salhouk place in the western pyramid to 
defend it treasure: 'A marbl figure, upright, with lanc in hand; 
with on hi head a serpent wreathed. when ani approached, the serpent 
would bite him on one side, and twine about hi throat and kill 
him, would return again to hi place.' 

"I knew well that such a figur wa not wrought to pleasantry; and that 
to brave it wa no child' play. the dead arab at my feet wa proof of 
what could be done! So I examin again along the wall; and found here 
and there chip as if someon had been tap with a heavi hammer. 
thi then had been what happened: the grave-robber, more expert at hi 
work than we had been, and suspect the presenc of a hidden serdab, 
had made essay to find it. He had struck the spring by chance; had 
releas the aveng 'treasurer', as the arabian writer design 
him. the issu spoke for itself. I got a piec of wood, and, stand 
at a safe distance, press with the end of it upon the star. 

"instantli the stone flew back. the hidden figur within dart 
forward and thrust out it lance. then it rose up and disappeared. I 
thought I might now safe press on the seven stars; and did so. again 
the stone roll back; and the 'treasurer' flash by to hi hidden 
lair. 

"I repeat both experi sever times; with alway the same 
result. I should have like to examin the mechan of that figur of 
such malign mobility; but it wa not possibl without such tool as 
could not easili be had. It might be necessari to cut into a whole 
section of the rock. some day I hope to go back, properli equipped, 
and attempt it. 

"perhap you do not know that the entranc to a serdab is almost alway 
veri narrow; sometim a hand can hardli be inserted. two thing I 
learn from thi serdab. the first wa that the lamps, if lamp at 
all there had been, could not have been of larg size; and secondly, 
that they would be in some way associ with hathor, whose symbol, 
the hawk in a squar with the right top corner form a smaller 
square, wa cut in relief on the wall within, and colour the bright 
vermilion which we had found on the stele. hathor is the goddess who 
in egyptian mytholog answer to venu of the greeks, in as far as she 
is the presid deiti of beauti and pleasure. In the egyptian 
mythology, however, each god ha mani forms; and in some aspect hathor 
ha to do with the idea of resurrection. there are seven form or 
variant of the goddess; whi should not these correspond in some way to 
the seven lamps! that there had been such lamps, I wa convinced. the 
first grave-robb had met hi death; the second had found the content 
of the serdab. the first attempt had been made year since; the state 
of the bodi prove this. I had no clue to the second attempt. It 
might have been long ago; or it might have been recently. if, however, 
other had been to the tomb, it wa probabl that the lamp had been 
taken long ago. well! all the more difficult would be my search; for 
undertaken it must be! 

"that wa nearli three year ago; and for all that time I have been 
like the man in the arabian nights, seek old lamps, not for new, but 
for cash. I dare not say what I wa look for, or attempt to give 
ani description; for such would have defeat my purpose. but I had in 
my own mind at the start a vagu idea of what I must find. In process 
of time thi grew more and more clear; till at last I almost overshot 
my mark by search for someth which might have been wrong. 

"the disappoint I suffered, and the wild-goos chase I made, 
would fill a volume; but I persevered. At last, not two month ago, I 
wa shown by an old dealer in mossul one lamp such as I had look for. 
I had been trace it for nearli a year, alway suffer 
disappointment, but alway buoy up to further endeavour by a grow 
hope that I wa on the track. 

"I do not know how I restrain myself when I realis that, at last, I 
wa at least close to success. I wa skilled, however, in the finess 
of eastern trade; and the jew-arab-portuge trader met hi match. I 
want to see all hi stock befor buying; and one by one he produced, 
amongst mass of rubbish, seven differ lamps. each of them had a 
distinguish mark; and each and all wa some form of the symbol of 
hathor. I think I shook the imperturb of my swarthi friend by 
the magnitud of my purchases; for in order to prevent him guess 
what form of good I sought, I nearli clear out hi shop. At the end 
he nearli wept, and said I had ruin him; for now he had noth to 
sell. He would have torn hi hair had he known what price I should 
ultim have given for some of hi stock, that perhap he valu 
least. 

"I part with most of my merchandis at normal price as I hurri 
home. I did not dare to give it away, or even lose it, lest I should 
incur suspicion. My burden wa far too preciou to be risk by ani 
foolish now. I got on as fast as it is possibl to travel in such 
countries; and arriv in london with onli the lamp and certain 
portabl curio and papyri which I had pick up on my travels. 

"now, mr. ross, you know all I know; and I leav it to your discret 
how much, if ani of it, you will tell miss trelawny." 

As he finish a clear young voic said behind us: 

"what about miss trelawny? she is here!" 

We turned, startled; and look at each other inquiringly. miss 
trelawni stood in the doorway. We did not know how long she had been 
present, or how much she had heard. 




chapter xiii 

awak from the tranc 


the first unexpect word may alway startl a hearer; but when the 
shock is over, the listener' reason ha assert itself, and he can 
judg of the manner, as well as of the matter, of speech. thu it wa 
on thi occasion. with intellig now alert, I could not doubt of 
the simpl sincer of margaret' next question. 

"what have you two men been talk about all thi time, mr. ross? I 
suppose, mr. corbeck ha been tell you all hi adventur in find 
the lamps. I hope you will tell me too, some day, mr. corbeck; but 
that must not be till my poor father is better. He would like, I am 
sure, to tell me all about these thing himself; or to be present when 
I heard them." she glanc sharpli from one to the other. "oh, that 
wa what you were say as I came in? all right! I shall wait; but I 
hope it won't be long. the continu of father' condit is, I 
feel, break me down. A littl while ago I felt that my nerv were 
give out; so I determin to go out for a walk in the park. I am 
sure it will do me good. I want you, if you will, mr. ross, to be with 
father whilst I am away. I shall feel secur then." 

I rose with alacrity, rejoic that the poor girl wa go out, even 
for half an hour. she wa look terribl weari and haggard; and the 
sight of her pale cheek made my heart ache. I went to the sick-room; 
and sat down in my usual place. mrs. grant wa then on duty; we had 
not found it necessari to have more than one person in the room dure 
the day. when I came in, she took occas to go about some household 
duty. the blind were up, but the north aspect of the room soften the 
hot glare of the sunlight without. 

I sat for a long time think over all that mr. corbeck had told me; 
and weav it wonder into the tissu of strang thing which had 
come to pass sinc I had enter the house. At time I wa inclin to 
doubt; to doubt everyth and everi one; to doubt even the evid 
of my own five senses. the warn of the skill detect kept 
come back to my mind. He had put down mr. corbeck as a clever liar, 
and a confeder of miss trelawny. Of margaret! that settl it! 
face to face with such a proposit as that, doubt vanished. each 
time when her image, her name, the merest thought of her, came befor 
my mind, each event stood out stark as a live fact. My life upon her 
faith! 

I wa recal from my reverie, which wa fast becom a dream of 
love, in a startl manner. A voic came from the bed; a deep, 
strong, master voice. the first note of it call up like a clarion 
my eye and my ears. the sick man wa awak and speaking! 

"who are you? what are you do here?" 

whatev idea ani of us had ever form of hi waking, I am quit sure 
that none of us expect to see him start up all awak and full master 
of himself. I wa so surpris that I answer almost mechanically: 

"ross is my name. I have been watch by you!" He look surpris 
for an instant, and then I could see that hi habit of judg for 
himself came into play. 

"watch by me! how do you mean? whi watch by me?" hi eye had 
now lit on hi heavili bandag wrist. He went on in a differ tone; 
less aggressive, more genial, as of one accept facts: 

"are you a doctor?" I felt myself almost smile as I answered; the 
relief from the long pressur of anxieti regard hi life wa 
begin to tell: 

"no, sir!" 

"then whi are you here? If you are not a doctor, what are you?" hi 
tone wa again more dictatorial. thought is quick; the whole train of 
reason on which my answer must be base flood through my brain 
befor the word could leav my lips. margaret! I must think of 
margaret! thi wa her father, who as yet knew noth of me; even of 
my veri existence. He would be natur curious, if not anxious, to 
know whi I amongst men had been chosen as hi daughter' friend on the 
occas of hi illness. father are natur a littl jealou in 
such matter as a daughter' choice, and in the undeclar state of my 
love for margaret I must do noth which could ultim embarrass 
her. 

"I am a barrister. It is not, however, in that capac I am here; but 
simpli as a friend of your daughter. It wa probabl her knowledg of 
my be a lawyer which first determin her to ask me to come when she 
thought you had been murdered. afterward she wa good enough to 
consid me to be a friend, and to allow me to remain in accord 
with your express wish that someon should remain to watch." 

mr. trelawni wa manifestli a man of quick thought, and of few words. 
He gaze at me keenli as I spoke, and hi pierc eye seem to read 
my thought. To my relief he said no more on the subject just then, 
seem to accept my word in simpl faith. there wa evid in hi 
own mind some caus for the accept deeper than my own knowledge. 
hi eye flashed, and there wa an unconsci movement of the 
mouth--it could hardli be call a twitch--which betoken 
satisfaction. He wa follow out some train of reason in hi own 
mind. suddenli he said: 

"she thought I had been murdered! wa that last night?" 

"no! four day ago." He seem surprised. whilst he had been speak 
the first time he had sat up in bed; now he made a movement as though 
he would jump out. with an effort, however, he restrain himself; 
lean back on hi pillow he said quietly: 

"tell me all about it! all you know! everi detail! omit nothing! 
but stay; first lock the door! I want to know, befor I see anyone, 
exactli how thing stand." 

somehow hi last word made my heart leap. "anyone!" He evid 
accept me, then, as an exception. In my present state of feel for 
hi daughter, thi wa a comfort thought. I felt exult as I went 
over to the door and softli turn the key. when I came back I found 
him sit up again. He said: 

"go on!" 

accordingly, I told him everi detail, even of the slightest which I 
could remember, of what had happen from the moment of my arriv at 
the house. Of cours I said noth of my feel toward margaret, 
and spoke onli concern those thing alreadi within hi own 
knowledge. with regard to corbeck, I simpli said that he had brought 
back some lamp of which he had been in quest. then I proceed to 
tell him fulli of their loss, and of their re-discoveri in the house. 

He listen with a self-control which, under the circumstances, wa to 
me littl less than marvellous. It wa impassiveness, for at time hi 
eye would flash or blaze, and the strong finger of hi uninjur hand 
would grip the sheet, pull it into far-extend wrinkles. thi wa 
most notic when I told him of the return of corbeck, and the 
find of the lamp in the boudoir. At time he spoke, but onli a few 
words, and as if unconsci in emot comment. the mysteri 
parts, those which had most puzzl us, seem to have no special 
interest for him; he seem to know them already. the utmost concern 
he show wa when I told him of daw' shooting. hi mutter comment: 
"stupid ass!" togeth with a quick glanc across the room at the 
injur cabinet, mark the measur of hi disgust. As I told him of 
hi daughter' harrow anxieti for him, of her unend care and 
devotion, of the tender love which she had shown, he seem much moved. 
there wa a sort of veil surpris in hi unconsci whisper: 

"margaret! margaret!" 

when I had finish my narration, bring matter up to the moment 
when miss trelawni had gone out for her walk--i thought of her as "miss 
trelawny', not as 'margaret' now, in the presenc of her father--h 
remain silent for quit a long time. It wa probabl two or three 
minutes; but it seem interminable. all at onc he turn and said to 
me briskly: 

"now tell me all about yourself!" thi wa someth of a floorer; I 
felt myself grow red-hot. mr. trelawny' eye were upon me; they were 
now calm and inquiring, but never ceas in their soul-search 
scrutiny. there wa just a suspicion of a smile on the mouth which, 
though it ad to my embarrassment, gave me a certain measur of 
relief. I was, however, face to face with difficulty; and the habit of 
my life stood me in good stead. I look him straight in the eye as I 
spoke: 

"mi name, as I told you, is ross, malcolm ross. I am by profess a 
barrister. I wa made a Q. C. in the last year of the queen' reign. 
I have been fairli success in my work." To my relief he said: 

"yes, I know. I have alway heard well of you! where and when did you 
meet margaret?" 

"first at the hay' in belgrav square, ten day ago. then at a picnic 
up the river with ladi strathconnell. We went from windsor to cookham. 
mar--miss trelawni wa in my boat. I scull a little, and I had my own 
boat at windsor. We had a good deal of conversation--naturally." 

"naturally!" there wa just a suspicion of someth sardon in the 
tone of acquiescence; but there wa no other intim of hi feeling. 
I began to think that as I wa in the presenc of a strong man, I 
should show someth of my own strength. My friends, and sometim my 
opponents, say that I am a strong man. In my present circumstances, 
not to be absolut truth would be to be weak. So I stood up to 
the difficulti befor me; alway bear in mind, however, that my 
word might affect margaret' happi through her love for her 
father. I went on: 

"in convers at a place and time and amid surround so pleasing, 
and in a solitud invit to confidence, I got a glimps of her inner 
life. such a glimps as a man of my year and experi may get from 
a young girl!" the father' face grew graver as I went on; but he said 
nothing. I wa commit now to a definit line of speech, and went on 
with such masteri of my mind as I could exercise. the occas might 
be fraught with seriou consequ to me too. 

"I could not but see that there wa over her spirit a sens of 
loneli which wa habitu to her. I thought I understood it; I am 
myself an onli child. I ventur to encourag her to speak to me 
freely; and wa happi enough to succeed. A sort of confid becam 
establish between us." there wa someth in the father' face 
which made me add hurriedly: 

"noth wa said by her, sir, as you can well imagine, which wa not 
right and proper. she onli told me in the impuls way of one long 
to give voic to thought long care concealed, of her yearn to 
be closer to the father whom she loved; more en rapport with him; more 
in hi confidence; closer within the circl of hi sympathies. oh, 
believ me, sir, that it wa all good! all that a father' heart could 
hope or wish for! It wa all loyal! that she spoke it to me wa 
perhap becaus I wa almost a stranger with whom there wa no previou 
barrier to confidence." 

here I paused. It wa hard to go on; and I fear lest I might, in my 
zeal, do margaret a disservice. the relief of the strain came from her 
father. 

"and you?" 

"sir, miss trelawni is veri sweet and beautiful! she is young; and her 
mind is like crystal! her sympathi is a joy! I am not an old man, and 
my affect were not engaged. they never had been till then. I hope 
I may say as much, even to a father!" My eye involuntarili dropped. 
when I rais them again mr. trelawni wa still gaze at me keenly. 
all the kindli of hi natur seem to wreath itself in a smile as 
he held out hi hand and said: 

"malcolm ross, I have alway heard of you as a fearless and honour 
gentleman. I am glad my girl ha such a friend! Go on!" 

My heart leaped. the first step to the win of margaret' father 
wa gained. I dare say I wa somewhat more effus in my word and my 
manner as I went on. I certainli felt that way. 

"one thing we gain as we grow older: to use our age judiciously! I 
have had much experience. I have fought for it and work for it all 
my life; and I felt that I wa justifi in use it. I ventur to 
ask miss trelawni to count on me as a friend; to let me serv her 
should occas arise. she promis me that she would. I had littl 
idea that my chanc of serv her should come so soon or in such a 
way; but that veri night you were stricken down. In her desol and 
anxieti she sent for me!" I paused. He continu to look at me as I 
went on: 

"when your letter of instruct wa found, I offer my services. 
they were accepted, as you know." 

"and these days, how did they pass for you?" the question startl me. 
there wa in it someth of margaret' own voic and manner; someth 
so greatli resembl her lighter moment that it brought out all the 
masculin in me. I felt more sure of my ground now as I said: 

"these days, sir, despit all their harrow anxiety, despit all the 
pain they held for the girl whom I grew to love more and more with each 
pass hour, have been the happiest of my life!" He kept silenc for 
a long time; so long that, as I wait for him to speak, with my heart 
beating, I began to wonder if my frank had been too effusive. At 
last he said: 

"I suppos it is hard to say so much vicariously. her poor mother 
should have heard you; it would have made her heart glad!" then a 
shadow swept across hi face; and he went on more hurriedly. 

"but are you quit sure of all this?" 

"I know my own heart, sir; or, at least, I think I do!" 

"no! no!" he answered, "I don't mean you. that is all right! but you 
spoke of my girl' affect for me ... and yet...! and yet she ha 
been live here, in my house, a whole year... still, she spoke to you 
of her loneliness--h desolation. I never--it griev me to say it, 
but it is true--i never saw sign of such affect toward myself in 
all the year!..." hi voic trembl away into sad, reminisc 
introspection. 

"then, sir," I said, "I have been privileg to see more in a few day 
than you in her whole lifetime!" My word seem to call him up from 
himself; and I thought that it wa with pleasur as well as surpris 
that he said: 

"I had no idea of it. I thought that she wa indiffer to me. that 
what seem like the neglect of her youth wa reveng itself on me. 
that she wa cold of heart.... It is a joy unspeak to me that her 
mother' daughter love me too!" unconsci he sank back upon hi 
pillow, lost in memori of the past. 

how he must have love her mother! It wa the love of her mother' 
child, rather than the love of hi own daughter, that appeal to him. 
My heart went out to him in a great wave of sympathi and kindliness. I 
began to understand. To understand the passion of these two great, 
silent, reserv natures, that success conceal the burn 
hunger for the other' love! It did not surpris me when present he 
murmur to himself: 

"margaret, my child! tender, and thoughtful, and strong, and true, and 
brave! like her dear mother! like her dear mother!" 

and then to the veri depth of my heart I rejoic that I had spoken so 
frankly. 

present mr. trelawni said: 

"four days! the sixteenth! then thi is the twentieth of july?" I 
nod affirmation; he went on: 

"so I have been lie in a tranc for four days. It is not the first 
time. I wa in a tranc onc under strang condit for three days; 
and never even suspect it till I wa told of the laps of time. I 
shall tell you all about it some day, if you care to hear." 

that made me thrill with pleasure. that he, margaret' father, would 
so take me into hi confid made it possible.... the business-like, 
every-day alert of hi voic as he spoke next quit recal me: 

"I had better get up now. when margaret come in, tell her yourself 
that I am all right. It will avoid ani shock! and will you tell 
corbeck that I would like to see him as soon as I can. I want to see 
those lamps, and hear all about them!" 

hi attitud toward me fill me with delight. there wa a possibl 
father-in-law aspect that would have rais me from a death-bed. I wa 
hurri away to carri out hi wishes; when, however, my hand wa on 
the key of the door, hi voic recal me: 

"mr. ross!" 

I did not like to hear him say "mr." after he knew of my friendship 
with hi daughter he had call me malcolm ross; and thi obviou 
return to formal not onli pained, but fill me with apprehension. 
It must be someth about margaret. I thought of her as "margaret" 
and not as "miss trelawny", now that there wa danger of lose her. I 
know now what I felt then: that I wa determin to fight for her 
rather than lose her. I came back, unconsci hold myself erect. 
mr. trelawny, the keen observ of men, seem to read my thought; hi 
face, which wa set in a new anxiety, relax as he said: 

"sit down a minute; it is better that we speak now than later. We are 
both men, and men of the world. all thi about my daughter is veri new 
to me, and veri sudden; and I want to know exactli how and where I 
stand. mind, I am make no objection; but as a father I have duti 
which are grave, and may prove to be painful. i--i"--h seem 
slightli at a loss how to begin, and thi gave me hope--"i suppos I am 
to take it, from what you have said to me of your feel toward my 
girl, that it is in your mind to be a suitor for her hand, later on?" 
I answer at once: 

"absolutely! firm and fixed; it wa my intent the even after I 
had been with her on the river, to seek you, of cours after a proper 
and respect interval, and to ask you if I might approach her on the 
subject. event forc me into closer relationship more quickli than I 
had to hope would be possible; but that first purpos ha remain 
fresh in my heart, and ha grown in intensity, and multipli itself 
with everi hour which ha pass sinc then." hi face seem to 
soften as he look at me; the memori of hi own youth wa come back 
to him instinctively. after a paus he said: 

"I suppos I may take it, too, malcolm ross"--th return to the 
familiar of address swept through me with a gloriou thrill--"that 
as yet you have not made ani protest to my daughter?" 

"not in words, sir." the arrier pense of my phrase struck me, not by 
it own humour, but through the grave, kindli smile on the father' 
face. there wa a pleasant sarcasm in hi comment: 

"not in words! that is dangerous! she might have doubt words, or 
even disbeliev them." 

I felt myself blush to the root of my hair as I went on: 

"the duti of delicaci in her defenceless position; my respect for her 
father--i did not know you then, sir, as yourself, but onli as her 
father--restrain me. but even had not these barrier existed, I 
should not have dare in the presenc of such grief and anxieti to have 
declar myself. mr. trelawny, I assur you on my word of honour that 
your daughter and I are as yet, on her part, but friend and noth 
more!" onc again he held out hi hands, and we clasp each other 
warmly. then he said heartily: 

"I am satisfied, malcolm ross. Of course, I take it that until I have 
seen her and have given you permission, you will not make ani 
declar to my daughter--in words," he added, with an indulg 
smile. but hi face becam stern again as he went on: 

"time presses; and I have to think of some matter so urgent and so 
strang that I dare not lose an hour. otherwis I should not have been 
prepar to enter, at so short a notic and to so new a friend, on the 
subject of my daughter' settlement in life, and of her futur 
happiness." there wa a digniti and a certain proud in hi manner 
which impress me much. 

"I shall respect your wishes, sir!" I said as I went back and open 
the door. I heard him lock it behind me. 

when I told mr. corbeck that mr. trelawni had quit recovered, he began 
to danc about like a wild man. but he suddenli stopped, and ask me 
to be care not to draw ani inferences, at all event at first, when 
in the futur speak of the find of the lamps, or of the first 
visit to the tomb. thi wa in case mr. trelawni should speak to me 
on the subject; "as, of course, he will," he added, with a sidelong 
look at me which meant knowledg of the affair of my heart. I agre 
to this, feel that it wa quit right. I did not quit understand 
why; but I knew that mr. trelawni wa a peculiar man. In no case could 
one make a mistak by be reticent. retic is a qualiti which a 
strong man alway respects. 

the manner in which the other of the hous took the news of the 
recoveri vari much. mrs. grant wept with emotion; then she hurri 
off to see if she could do anyth personally, and to set the hous in 
order for "master", as she alway call him. the nurse' face fell: 
she wa depriv of an interest case. but the disappoint wa 
onli momentary; and she rejoic that the troubl wa over. she wa 
readi to come to the patient the moment she should be wanted; but in 
the meantim she occupi herself in pack her portmanteau. 

I took sergeant daw into the study, so that we should be alon when I 
told him the news. It surpris even hi iron self-control when I told 
him the method of the waking. I wa myself surpris in turn by hi 
first words: 

"and how did he explain the first attack? He wa unconsci when the 
second wa made." 

Up to that moment the natur of the attack, which wa the caus of my 
come to the house, had never even cross my mind, except when I had 
simpli narrat the variou occurr in sequenc to mr. trelawny. 
the detect did not seem to think much of my answer: 

"do you know, it never occur to me to ask him!" the profession 
instinct wa strong in the man, and seem to supersed everyth else. 

"that is whi so few case are ever follow out," he said, "unless our 
peopl are in them. your amateur detect neer hunt down to the 
death. As for ordinari people, the moment thing begin to mend, and 
the strain of suspens is off them, they drop the matter in hand. It 
is like sea-sickness," he ad philosoph after a pause; "the 
moment you touch the shore you never give it a thought, but run off to 
the buffet to feed! well, mr. ross, i'm glad the case is over; for 
over it is, so far as I am concerned. I suppos that mr. trelawni 
know hi own business; and that now he is well again, he will take it 
up himself. perhaps, however, he will not do anything. As he seem to 
expect someth to happen, but did not ask for protect from the 
polic in ani way, I take it that he don't want them to interfer with 
an eye to punishment. we'll be told officially, I suppose, that it wa 
an accident, or sleep-walking, or someth of the kind, to satisfi the 
conscienc of our record department; and that will be the end. As for 
me, I tell you frankly, sir, that it will be the save of me. I 
verili believ I wa begin to get dotti over it all. there were 
too mani mysteries, that aren't in my line, for me to be realli 
satisfi as to either fact or the caus of them. now i'll be abl 
to wash my hand of it, and get back to clean, wholesome, crimin 
work. Of course, sir, i'll be glad to know if you ever do light on a 
caus of ani kind. and i'll be grate if you can ever tell me how 
the man wa drag out of bed when the cat bit him, and who use the 
knife the second time. for master silvio could never have done it by 
himself. but there! I keep think of it still. I must look out and 
keep a check on myself, or I shall think of it when I have to keep my 
mind on other things!" 

when margaret return from her walk, I met her in the hall. she wa 
still pale and sad; somehow, I had expect to see her radiant after 
her walk. the moment she saw me her eye brightened, and she look at 
me keenly. 

"you have some good news for me?" she said. "i father better?" 

"he is! whi did you think so?" 

"I saw it in your face. I must go to him at once." she wa hurri 
away when I stop her. 

"he said he would send for you the moment he wa dressed." 

"he said he would send for me!" she repeat in amazement. "then he is 
awak again, and conscious? I had no idea he wa so well as that! O 
malcolm!" 

she sat down on the nearest chair and began to cry. I felt overcom 
myself. the sight of her joy and emotion, the mention of my own name 
in such a way and at such a time, the rush of gloriou possibl 
all come together, quit unman me. she saw my emotion, and seem 
to understand. she put out her hand. I held it hard, and kiss it. 
such moment as these, the opportun of lovers, are gift of the 
gods! Up to thi instant, though I knew I love her, and though I 
believ she return my affection, I had had onli hope. now, however, 
the self-surrend manifest in her willing to let me squeez her 
hand, the ardour of her pressur in return, and the gloriou flush of 
love in her beautiful, deep, dark eye as she lift them to mine, were 
all the eloqu which the most impati or exact lover could 
expect or demand. 

No word wa spoken; none wa needed. even had I not been pledg to 
verbal silence, word would have been poor and dull to express what we 
felt. hand in hand, like two littl children, we went up the staircas 
and wait on the landing, till the summon from mr. trelawni should 
come. 

I whisper in her ear--it wa nicer than speak aloud and at a 
greater distance--how her father had awakened, and what he had said; 
and all that had pass between us, except when she herself had been 
the subject of conversation. 

present a bell rang from the room. margaret slip from me, and 
look back with warn finger on lip. she went over to her father' 
door and knock softly. 

"come in!" said the strong voice. 

"it is I, father!" the voic wa tremul with love and hope. 

there wa a quick step insid the room; the door wa hurriedli thrown 
open, and in an instant margaret, who had sprung forward, wa clasp 
in her father' arms. there wa littl speech; onli a few broken 
phrases. 

"father! dear, dear father!" 

"mi child! margaret! My dear, dear child!" 

"O father, father! At last! At last!" 

here the father and daughter went into the room together, and the door 
closed. 




chapter xiv 

the birth-mark 


dure my wait for the summon to mr. trelawny' room, which I knew 
would come, the time wa long and lonely. after the first few moment 
of emot happi at margaret' joy, I somehow felt apart and 
alone; and for a littl time the selfish of a lover possess me. 
but it wa not for long. margaret' happi wa all to me; and in 
the consciou sens of it I lost my baser self. margaret' last word 
as the door close on them gave the key to the whole situation, as it 
had been and as it was. these two proud, strong people, though father 
and daughter, had onli come to know each other when the girl wa grown 
up. margaret' natur wa of that kind which matur early. 

the pride and strength of each, and the retic which wa their 
corollary, made a barrier at the beginning. each had respect the 
other' retic too much thereafter; and the misunderstand grew to 
habit. and so these two love hearts, each of which yearn for 
sympathi from the other, were kept apart. but now all wa well, and in 
my heart of heart I rejoic that at last margaret wa happy. whilst 
I wa still muse on the subject, and dream dream of a person 
nature, the door wa opened, and mr. trelawni beckon to me. 

"come in, mr. ross!" he said cordially, but with a certain formal 
which I dreaded. I enter the room, and he close the door again. He 
held out hi hand, and I put mine in it. He did not let it go, but 
still held it as he drew me over toward hi daughter. margaret look 
from me to him, and back again; and her eye fell. when I wa close to 
her, mr. trelawni let go my hand, and, look hi daughter straight in 
the face, said: 

"if thing are as I fancy, we shall not have ani secret between us. 
malcolm ross know so much of my affair already, that I take it he 
must either let matter stop where they are and go away in silence, or 
els he must know more. margaret! are you will to let mr. ross see 
your wrist?" 

she threw one swift look of appeal in hi eyes; but even as she did so 
she seem to make up her mind. without a word she rais her right 
hand, so that the bracelet of spread wing which cover the wrist 
fell back, leav the flesh bare. then an ici chill shot through me. 

On her wrist wa a thin red jag line, from which seem to hang red 
stain like drop of blood! 

she stood there, a verit figur of patient pride. 

oh! but she look proud! through all her sweetness, all her dignity, 
all her high-soul negat of self which I had known, and which never 
seem more mark than now--through all the fire that seem to shine 
from the dark depth of her eye into my veri soul, pride shone 
conspicuously. the pride that ha faith; the pride that is born of 
consciou purity; the pride of a verit queen of old time, when to 
be royal wa to be the first and greatest and bravest in all high 
things. As we stood thu for some seconds, the deep, grave voic of her 
father seem to sound a challeng in my ears: 

"what do you say now?" 

My answer wa not in words. I caught margaret' right hand in mine as 
it fell, and, hold it tight, whilst with the other I push back the 
golden cincture, stoop and kiss the wrist. As I look up at her, 
but never let go her hand, there wa a look of joy on her face such 
as I dream of when I think of heaven. then I face her father. 

"you have my answer, sir!" hi strong face look grave sweet. He 
onli said one word as he laid hi hand on our clasp ones, whilst he 
bent over and kiss hi daughter: 

"good!" 

We were interrupt by a knock at the door. In answer to an impati 
"come in!" from mr. trelawny, mr. corbeck entered. when he saw us 
group he would have drawn back; but in an instant mr. trelawni had 
sprung forth and drag him forward. As he shook him by both hands, 
he seem a transform man. all the enthusiasm of hi youth, of which 
mr. corbeck had told us, seem to have come back to him in an instant. 

"so you have got the lamps!" he almost shouted. "mi reason wa 
right after all. come to the library, where we will be alone, and tell 
me all about it! and while he doe it, ross," said he, turn to me, 
"do you, like a good fellow, get the key from the safe deposit, so that 
I may have a look at the lamps!" 

then the three of them, the daughter lovingli hold her father' arm, 
went into the library, whilst I hurri off to chanceri lane. 

when I return with the key, I found them still engag in the 
narrative; but doctor winchester, who had arriv soon after I left, 
wa with them. mr. trelawny, on hear from margaret of hi great 
attent and kindness, and how he had, under much pressur to the 
contrary, steadfastli obey hi written wishes, had ask him to 
remain and listen. "it will interest you, perhaps," he said, "to learn 
the end of the story!" 

We all had an earli dinner together. We sat after it a good while, and 
then mr. trelawni said: 

"now, I think we had all better separ and go quietli to bed early. 
We may have much to talk about tomorrow; and tonight I want to think." 

doctor winchest went away, taking, with a courteou forethought, mr. 
corbeck with him, and leav me behind. when the other had gone mr. 
trelawni said: 

"I think it will be well if you, too, will go home for tonight. I want 
to be quit alon with my daughter; there are mani thing I wish to 
speak of to her, and to her alone. perhaps, even tomorrow, I will be 
abl to tell you also of them; but in the meantim there will be less 
distract to us both if we are alon in the house." I quit 
understood and sympathis with hi feelings; but the experi of 
the last few day were strong on me, and with some hesit I said: 

"but may it not be dangerous? If you knew as we do--" To my surpris 
margaret interrupt me: 

"there will be no danger, malcolm. I shall be with father!" As she 
spoke she clung to him in a protect way. I said no more, but stood 
up to go at once. mr. trelawni said heartily: 

"come as earli as you please, ross. come to breakfast. after it, you 
and I will want to have a word together." He went out of the room 
quietly, leav us together. I clasp and kiss margaret' hands, 
which she held out to me, and then drew her close to me, and our lip 
met for the first time. 

I did not sleep much that night. happi on the one side of my bed 
and anxieti on the other kept sleep away. but if I had anxiou care, I 
had also happi which had not equal in my life--or ever can have. 
the night went by so quickli that the dawn seem to rush on me, not 
steal as is it wont. 

befor nine o'clock I wa at kensington. all anxieti seem to float 
away like a cloud as I met margaret, and saw that alreadi the pallor of 
her face had given to the rich bloom which I knew. she told me that 
her father had slept well, and that he would be with us soon. 

"I do believe," she whispered, "that my dear and thought father ha 
kept back on purpose, so that I might meet you first, and alone!" 

after breakfast mr. trelawni took us into the study, say as he 
pass in: 

"I have ask margaret to come too." when we were seated, he said 
gravely: 

"I told you last night that we might have someth to say to each 
other. I dare say that you may have thought that it wa about margaret 
and yourself. isn't that so?" 

"I thought so." 

"well, my boy, that is all right. margaret and I have been talking, 
and I know her wishes." He held out hi hand. when I wrung it, and 
had kiss margaret, who drew her chair close to mine, so that we could 
hold hand as we listened, he went on, but with a certain 
hesitation--it could hardli be call nervousness--which wa new to me. 

"you know a good deal of my hunt after thi mummi and her belongings; 
and I dare say you have guess a good deal of my theories. but these 
at ani rate I shall explain later, concis and categorically, if it 
be necessary. what I want to consult you about now is this: margaret 
and I disagre on one point. I am about to make an experiment; the 
experi which is to crown all that I have devot twenti year of 
research, and danger, and labour to prepar for. through it we may 
learn thing that have been hidden from the eye and the knowledg of 
men for centuries; for score of centuries. I do not want my daughter 
to be present; for I cannot blind myself to the fact that there may be 
danger in it--great danger, and of an unknown kind. I have, however, 
alreadi face veri great dangers, and of an unknown kind; and so ha 
that brave scholar who ha help me in the work. As to myself, I am 
will to run ani risk. for science, and history, and philosophi may 
benefit; and we may turn one old page of a wisdom unknown in thi 
prosaic age. but for my daughter to run such a risk I am loth. her 
young bright life is too preciou to throw lightli away; now especi 
when she is on the veri threshold of new happiness. I do not wish to 
see her life given, as her dear mother' was--" 

He broke down for a moment, and cover hi eye with hi hands. In an 
instant margaret wa besid him, clasp him close, and kiss him, 
and comfort him with love words. then, stand erect, with one 
hand on hi head, she said: 

"father! mother did not bid you stay besid her, even when you want 
to go on that journey of unknown danger to egypt; though that countri 
wa then upset from end to end with war and the danger that follow 
war. you have told me how she left you free to go as you wished; though 
that she thought of danger for you and and fear it for you, is prove 
by this!" she held up her wrist with the scar that seem to run 
blood. "now, mother' daughter doe as mother would have done herself!" 
then she turn to me: 

"malcolm, you know I love you! but love is trust; and you must trust 
me in danger as well as in joy. you and I must stand besid father in 
thi unknown peril. togeth we shall come through it; or togeth we 
shall fail; togeth we shall die. that is my wish; my first wish to my 
husband that is to be! Do you not think that, as a daughter, I am 
right? tell my father what you think!" 

she look like a queen stoop to plead. My love for her grew and 
grew. I stood up besid her; and took her hand and said: 

"mr. trelawny! in thi margaret and I are one!" 

He took both our hand and held them hard. present he said with deep 
emotion: 

"it is as her mother would have done!" 

mr. corbeck and doctor winchest came exactli at the time appointed, 
and join us in the library. despit my great happi I felt our 
meet to be a veri solemn function. for I could never forget the 
strang thing that had been; and the idea of the strang thing which 
might be, wa with me like a cloud, press down on us all. from the 
graviti of my companion I gather that each of them also wa rule by 
some such domin thought. 

instinct we gather our chair into a circl round mr. trelawny, 
who had taken the great armchair near the window. margaret sat by him 
on hi right, and I wa next to her. mr. corbeck wa on hi left, with 
doctor winchest on the other side. after a few second of silenc mr. 
trelawni said to mr. corbeck: 

"you have told doctor winchest all up to the present, as we arranged?" 

"yes," he answered; so mr. trelawni said: 

"and I have told margaret, so we all know!" then, turn to the 
doctor, he asked: 

"and am I to take it that you, know all as we know it who have 
follow the matter for years, wish to share in the experi which we 
hope to make?" hi answer wa direct and uncompromising: 

"certainly! why, when thi matter wa fresh to me, I offer to go on 
with it to the end. now that it is of such strang interest, I would 
not miss it for anyth which you could name. Be quit easi in your 
mind, mr. trelawny. I am a scientist and an investig of phenomena. 
I have no one belong to me or depend on me. I am quit alone, 
and free to do what I like with my own--includ my life!" mr. 
trelawni bow gravely, and turn to mr. corbeck said: 

"I have known your idea for mani year past, old friend; so I need ask 
you nothing. As to margaret and malcolm ross, they have alreadi told me 
their wish in no uncertain way." He paus a few seconds, as though 
to put hi thought or hi word in order; then he began to explain hi 
view and intentions. He spoke veri carefully, seem alway to bear 
in mind that some of us who listen were ignor of the veri root and 
natur of some thing touch upon, and explain them to us as he 
went on: 

"the experi which is befor us is to tri whether or no there is ani 
force, ani reality, in the old magic. there could not possibl be more 
favour condit for the test; and it is my own desir to do all 
that is possibl to make the origin design effective. that there is 
some such exist power I firmli believe. It might not be possibl to 
create, or arrange, or organis such a power in our own time; but I 
take it that if in old time such a power existed, it may have some 
except survival. after all, the bibl is not a myth; and we read 
there that the sun stood still at a man' command, and that an ass--not 
a human one--spoke. and if the witch at endor could call up to saul 
the spirit of samuel, whi may not there have been other with equal 
powers; and whi may not one among them survive? indeed, we are told in 
the book of samuel that the witch of endor wa onli one of many, and 
her be consult by saul wa a matter of chance. He onli sought one 
among the mani whom he had driven out of israel; 'all those that had 
familiar spirits, and the wizards.' thi egyptian queen, tera, who 
reign nearli two thousand year befor saul, had a familiar, and wa 
a wizard too. see how the priest of her time, and those after it 
tri to wipe out her name from the face of the earth, and put a curs 
over the veri door of her tomb so that none might ever discov the 
lost name. ay, and they succeed so well that even manetho, the 
historian of the egyptian kings, write in the tenth centuri befor 
christ, with all the lore of the priesthood for forti centuri behind 
him, and with possibl of access to everi exist record, could not 
even find her name. did it strike ani of you, in think of the late 
events, who or what her familiar was?" there wa an interruption, for 
doctor winchest struck one hand loudli on the other as he ejaculated: 

"the cat! the mummi cat! I knew it!" mr. trelawni smile over at him. 

"you are right! there is everi indic that the familiar of the 
wizard queen wa that cat which wa mummi when she was, and wa not 
onli place in her tomb, but wa laid in the sarcophagu with her. 
that wa what bit into my wrist, what cut me with sharp claws." He 
paused. margaret' comment wa a pure girlish one: 

"then my poor silvio is acquitted! I am glad!" her father stroke her 
hair and went on: 

"thi woman seem to have had an extraordinari foresight. foresight 
far, far beyond her age and the philosophi of her time. she seem to 
have seen through the weak of her own religion, and even prepar 
for emerg into a differ world. all her aspir were for the 
north, the point of the compass whenc blew the cool invigor 
breez that make life a joy. from the first, her eye seem to have 
been attract to the seven star of the plough from the fact, as 
record in the hieroglyph in her tomb, that at her birth a great 
aerolit fell, from whose heart wa final extract that jewel of 
seven star which she regard as the talisman of her life. It seem 
to have so far rule her destini that all her thought and care circl 
round it. the magic coffer, so wondrous wrought with seven sides, we 
learn from the same source, came from the aerolite. seven wa to her a 
magic number; and no wonder. with seven finger on one hand, and seven 
toe on one foot. with a talisman of a rare rubi with seven star in 
the same posit as in that constel which rule her birth, each 
star of the seven have seven points--in itself a geolog 
wonder--it would have been odd if she had not been attract by it. 
again, she wa born, we learn in the stele of her tomb, in the seventh 
month of the year--th month begin with the inund of the nile. 
Of which month the presid goddess wa hathor, the goddess of her own 
house, of the antef of the theban line--th goddess who in variou 
form symbolis beauty, and pleasure, and resurrection. again, in 
thi seventh month--which, by later egyptian astronomi began on octob 
28th, and ran to the 27th of our november--on the seventh day the 
pointer of the plough just rise abov the horizon of the sky at thebes. 

"in a marvel strang way, therefore, are group into thi 
woman' life these variou things. the number seven; the pole star, 
with the constel of seven stars; the god of the month, hathor, 
who wa her own particular god, the god of her family, the antef of 
the theban dynasty, whose kings' symbol it was, and whose seven form 
rule love and the delight of life and resurrection. If ever there 
wa ground for magic; for the power of symbol carri into mystic 
use; for a belief in finit spirit in an age which knew not the 
live god, it is here. 

"remember, too, that thi woman wa skill in all the scienc of her 
time. her wise and cautiou father took care of that, know that by 
her own wisdom she must ultim combat the intrigu of the 
hierarchy. bear in mind that in old egypt the scienc of astronomi 
began and wa develop to an extraordinari height; and that astrolog 
follow astronomi in it progress. and it is possibl that in the 
later develop of scienc with regard to light rays, we may yet 
find that astrolog is on a scientif basis. our next wave of 
scientif thought may deal with this. I shall have someth special 
to call your mind to on thi point presently. bear in mind also that 
the egyptian knew sciences, of which today, despit all our 
advantages, we are profoundli ignorant. acoustics, for instance, an 
exact scienc with the builder of the templ of karnak, of luxor, of 
the pyramids, is today a mysteri to bell, and kelvin, and edison, and 
marconi. again, these old miracle-work probabl understood some 
practic way of use other forces, and amongst them the forc of 
light that at present we do not dream of. but of thi matter I shall 
speak later. that magic coffer of queen tera is probabl a magic box 
in more way than one. It may--poss it does--contain forc that 
we wot not of. We cannot open it; it must be close from within. how 
then wa it closed? It is a coffer of solid stone, of amaz 
hardness, more like a jewel than an ordinari marble, with a lid equal 
solid; and yet all is so fine wrought that the finest tool made today 
cannot be insert under the flange. how wa it wrought to such 
perfection? how wa the stone so chosen that those transluc patch 
match the relat of the seven star of the constellation? how is 
it, or from what cause, that when the starlight shine on it, it glow 
from within--that when I fix the lamp in similar form the glow grow 
greater still; and yet the box is irrespons to ordinari light 
howev great? I tell you that that box hide some great mysteri of 
science. We shall find that the light will open it in some way: 
either by strike on some substance, sensit in a peculiar way to 
it effect, or in releas some greater power. I onli trust that in 
our ignor we may not so bungl thing as to do harm to it 
mechanism; and so depriv the knowledg of our time of a lesson hand 
down, as by a miracle, through nearli five thousand years. 

"in anoth way, too, there may be hidden in that box secret which, 
for good or ill, may enlighten the world. We know from their records, 
and inferenti also, that the egyptian studi the properti of 
herb and miner for magic purposes--whit magic as well as black. 
We know that some of the wizard of old could induc from sleep dream 
of ani given kind. that thi purpos wa mainli effect by hypnotism, 
which wa anoth art or scienc of old nile, I have littl doubt. but 
still, they must have had a masteri of drug that is far beyond 
anyth we know. with our own pharmacopoeia we can, to a certain 
extent, induc dreams. We may even differenti between good and 
bad--dream of pleasure, or disturb and harrow dreams. but these 
old practition seem to have been abl to command at will ani form 
or colour of dreaming; could work round ani given subject or thought in 
almost ani wa required. In that coffer, which you have seen, may rest 
a veri armouri of dreams. indeed, some of the forc that lie within 
it may have been alreadi use in my household." again there wa an 
interrupt from doctor winchester. 

"but if in your case some of these imprison forc were used, what 
set them free at the opportun time, or how? besides, you and mr. 
corbeck were onc befor put into a tranc for three whole days, when 
you were in the queen' tomb for the second time. and then, as I 
gather from mr. corbeck' story, the coffer wa not back in the tomb, 
though the mummi was. sure in both these case there must have been 
some activ intellig awake, and with some other power to wield." 
mr. trelawny' answer wa equal to the point: 

"there wa some activ intellig awake. I am convinc of it. and 
it wield a power which it never lacks. I believ that on both those 
occas hypnot wa the power wielded." 

"and wherein is that power contained? what view do you hold on the 
subject?" doctor winchester' voic vibrat with the intens of hi 
excit as he lean forward, breath hard, and with eye staring. 
mr. trelawni said solemnly: 

"in the mummi of the queen tera! I wa come to that presently. 
perhap we had better wait till I clear the ground a little. what I 
hold is, that the prepar of that box wa made for a special 
occasion; as inde were all the prepar of the tomb and all 
belong to it. queen tera did not troubl herself to guard against 
snake and scorpions, in that rocki tomb cut in the sheer cliff face a 
hundr feet abov the level of the valley, and fifti down from the 
summit. her precaut were against the disturb of human hands; 
against the jealousi and hatr of the priests, who, had they known of 
her real aims, would have tri to baffl them. from her point of 
view, she made all readi for the time of resurrection, whenev that 
might be. I gather from the symbol pictur in the tomb that she so 
far differ from the belief of her time that she look for a 
resurrect in the flesh. It wa doubtless thi that intensifi the 
hatr of the priesthood, and gave them an accept caus for 
obliter the veri existence, present and future, of one who had 
outrag their theori and blasphem their gods. all that she might 
require, either in the accomplish of the resurrect or after it, 
were contain in that almost hermet seal suit of chamber in 
the rock. In the great sarcophagus, which as you know is of a size 
quit unusu even for kings, wa the mummi of her familiar, the cat, 
which from it great size I take to be a sort of tiger-cat. In the 
tomb, also in a strong receptacle, were the canop jar usual 
contain those intern organ which are separ embalmed, but 
which in thi case had no such contents. So that, I take it, there wa 
in her case a departur in embalming; and that the organ were restor 
to the body, each in it proper place--if, indeed, they had ever been 
removed. If thi surmis be true, we shall find that the brain of the 
queen either wa never extract in the usual way, or, if so taken out, 
that it wa duli replaced, instead of be enclos within the mummi 
wrappings. finally, in the sarcophagu there wa the magic coffer on 
which her feet rested. mark you also, the care taken in the 
preserv of her power to control the elements. accord to her 
belief, the open hand outsid the wrap control the air, and the 
strang jewel stone with the shine star control fire. the 
symbol inscrib on the sole of her feet gave sway over land and 
water. about the star stone I shall tell you later; but whilst we are 
speak of the sarcophagus, mark how she guard her secret in case of 
grave-wreck or intrusion. none could open her magic coffer without 
the lamps, for we know now that ordinari light will not be effective. 
the great lid of the sarcophagu wa not seal down as usual, becaus 
she wish to control the air. but she hid the lamps, which in 
structur belong to the magic coffer, in a place where none could find 
them, except by follow the secret guidanc which she had prepar 
for onli the eye of wisdom. and even here she had guard against 
chanc discovery, by prepar a bolt of death for the unwari 
discoverer. To do thi she had appli the lesson of the tradit of 
the aveng guard of the treasur of the pyramid, built by her great 
predecessor of the fourth dynasti of the throne of egypt. 

"you have noted, I suppose, how there were, in the case of her tomb, 
certain deviat from the usual rules. for instance, the shaft of 
the mummi pit, which is usual fill up solid with stone and 
rubbish, wa left open. whi wa this? I take it that she had made 
arrang for leav the tomb when, after her resurrection, she 
should be a new woman, with a differ personality, and less inur to 
the hardship that in her first exist she had suffered. So far as 
we can judg of her intent, all thing need for her exit into the 
world had been thought of, even to the iron chain, describ by van 
huyn, close to the door in the rock, by which she might be abl to 
lower herself to the ground. that she expect a long period to elaps 
wa shown in the choic of material. An ordinari rope would be 
render weaker or unsaf in process of time, but she imagined, and 
rightly, that the iron would endure. 

"what her intent were when onc she trod the open earth afresh we 
do not know, and we never shall, unless her own dead lip can soften 
and speak." 




chapter XV 

the purpos of queen tera 


"now, as to the star jewel! thi she manifestli regard as the 
greatest of her treasures. On it she had engraven word which none of 
her time dare to speak. 

"in the old egyptian belief it wa held that there were words, which, 
if use properly--for the method of speak them wa as import as 
the word themselves--could command the lord of the upper and the 
lower worlds. the 'hekau', or word of power, wa all-import in 
certain ritual. On the jewel of seven stars, which, as you know, is 
carv into the imag of a scarab, are graven in hieroglyph two such 
hekau, one above, the other underneath. but you will understand better 
when you see it! wait here! Do not stir!" 

As he spoke, he rose and left the room. A great fear for him came over 
me; but I wa in some strang way reliev when I look at margaret. 
whenev there had been ani possibl of danger to her father, she 
had shown great fear for him; now she wa calm and placid. I said 
nothing, but waited. 

In two or three minutes, mr. trelawni returned. He held in hi hand a 
littl golden box. this, as he resum hi seat, he place befor him 
on the table. We all lean forward as he open it. 

On a line of white satin lay a wondrou rubi of immens size, almost 
as big as the top joint of margaret' littl finger. It wa carven--it 
could not possibl have been it natur shape, but jewel do not show 
the work of the tool--into the shape of a scarab, with it wing 
folded, and it leg and feeler press back to it sides. shine 
through it wondrou "pigeon' blood" colour were seven differ 
stars, each of seven points, in such posit that they reproduc 
exactli the figur of the plough. there could be no possibl mistak 
as to thi in the mind of anyon who had ever note the constellation. 
On it were some hieroglyph figures, cut with the most exquisit 
precision, as I could see when it came to my turn to use the 
magnifying-glass, which mr. trelawni took from hi pocket and hand to 
us. 

when we all had seen it fully, mr. trelawni turn it over so that it 
rest on it back in a caviti made to hold it in the upper half of the 
box. the revers wa no less wonder than the upper, be carv to 
resembl the under side of the beetle. it, too, had some hieroglyph 
figur cut on it. mr. trelawni resum hi lectur as we all sat with 
our head close to thi wonder jewel: 

"a you see, there are two words, one on the top, the other underneath. 
the symbol on the top repres a singl word, compos of one 
syllabl prolonged, with it determinatives. you know, all of you, I 
suppose, that the egyptian languag wa phonetic, and that the 
hieroglyph symbol repres the sound. the first symbol here, the 
hoe, mean 'mer', and the two point ellips the prolong of the 
final r: mer-r-r. the sit figur with the hand to it face is what 
we call the 'determinative' of 'thought'; and the roll of papyru that 
of 'abstraction'. thu we get the word 'mer', love, in it abstract, 
general, and fullest sense. thi is the hekau which can command the 
upper world." 

margaret' face wa a glori as she said in a deep, low, ring tone: 

"oh, but it is true. how the old wonder-work guess at almighti 
truth!" then a hot blush swept her face, and her eye fell. her 
father smile at her lovingli as he resumed: 

"the symbolis of the word on the revers is simpler, though the 
mean is more abstruse. the first symbol mean 'men', 'abiding', and 
the second, 'ab', 'the heart'. So that we get 'abid of heart', or 
in our own languag 'patience'. and thi is the hekau to control the 
lower world!" 

He close the box, and motion us to remain as we were, he went back 
to hi room to replac the jewel in the safe. when he had return and 
resum hi seat, he went on: 

"that jewel, with it mystic words, and which queen tera held under her 
hand in the sarcophagus, wa to be an import factor--prob the 
most important--in the work out of the act of her resurrection. 
from the first I seem by a sort of instinct to realis this. I kept 
the jewel within my great safe, whenc none could extract it; not even 
queen tera herself with her astral body." 

"her 'astral body'? what is that, father? what doe that mean?" there 
wa a keen in margaret' voic as she ask the question which 
surpris me a little; but trelawni smile a sort of indulg parent 
smile, which came through hi grim solemn like sunshin through a 
rift cloud, as he spoke: 

"the astral body, which is a part of buddhist belief, long subsequ 
to the time I speak of, and which is an accept fact of modern 
mysticism, had it rise in ancient egypt; at least, so far as we know. 
It is that the gift individu can at will, quick as thought itself, 
transfer hi bodi whithersoev he chooses, by the dissolut and 
reincarn of particles. In the ancient belief there were sever 
part of a human being. you may as well know them; so that you will 
understand matter rel to them or depend on them as they occur. 

"first there is the 'ka', or 'double', which, as doctor budg explains, 
may be defin as 'an abstract individu of personality' which wa 
imbu with all the characterist attribut of the individu it 
represented, and possess an absolut independ existence. It wa 
free to move from place to place on earth at will; and it could enter 
into heaven and hold convers with the gods. then there wa the 'ba', 
or 'soul', which dwelt in the 'ka', and had the power of becom 
corpor or incorpor at will; 'it had both substanc and form.... 
It had power to leav the tomb.... It could revisit the bodi in the 
tomb ... and could reincarn it and hold convers with it.' again 
there wa the 'khu', the 'spiritu intelligence', or spirit. It took 
the form of 'a shining, luminous, intang shape of the body.'... 
then, again, there wa the 'sekhem', or 'power' of a man, hi strength 
or vital forc personified. these were the 'khaibit', or 'shadow', the 
'ren', or 'name', the 'khat', or 'physic body', and 'ab', the 
'heart', in which life wa seated, went to the full make up of a man. 

"thu you will see, that if thi divis of functions, spiritu and 
bodily, ether and corporeal, ideal and actual, be accept as exact, 
there are all the possibl and capabl of corpor 
transference, guid alway by an unimprison will or intelligence." 
As he paus I murmur the line from shelley' "prometheu unbound": 

"'the magnu zoroaster... 
met hi own imag walk in the garden.'" 

mr. trelawni wa not displeased. "quit so!" he said, in hi quiet 
way. "shelley had a better concept of ancient belief than ani of 
our poets." with a voic chang again he resum hi lecture, for so 
it wa to some of us: 

"there is anoth belief of the ancient egyptian which you must bear in 
mind; that regard the ushaptiu figur of osiris, which were place 
with the dead to it work in the under world. the enlarg of thi 
idea came to a belief that it wa possibl to transmit, by magic 
formulae, the soul and qualiti of ani live creatur to a figur 
made in it image. thi would give a terribl extens of power to 
one who held the gift of magic. 

"it is from a union of these variou beliefs, and their natur 
corollaries, that I have come to the conclus that queen tera 
expect to be abl to effect her own resurrection, when, and where, 
and how, she would. that she may have held befor her a definit time 
for make her effort is not onli possibl but likely. I shall not 
stop now to explain it, but shall enter upon the subject later on. 
with a soul with the gods, a spirit which could wander the earth at 
will, and a power of corpor transference, or an astral body, there 
need be no bound or limit to her ambition. the belief is forc upon 
us that for these forti or fifti centuri she lay dormant in her 
tomb--waiting. wait with that 'patience' which could rule the god 
of the under world, for that 'love' which could command those of the 
upper world. what she may have dreamt we know not; but her dream must 
have been broken when the dutch explor enter her sculptur cavern, 
and hi follow violat the sacr privaci of her tomb by hi rude 
outrag in the theft of her hand. 

"that theft, with all that followed, prove to us one thing, however: 
that each part of her body, though separ from the rest, can be a 
central point or ralli place for the item or particl of her 
astral body. that hand in my room could ensur her instantan 
presenc in the flesh, and it equal rapid dissolution. 

"now come the crown of my argument. the purpos of the attack on me 
wa to get the safe open, so that the sacr jewel of seven star could 
be extracted. that immens door of the safe could not keep out her 
astral body, which, or ani part of it, could gather itself as well 
within as without the safe. and I doubt not that in the dark of 
the night that mummi hand sought often the talisman jewel, and drew 
new inspir from it touch. but despit all it power, the astral 
bodi could not remov the jewel through the chink of the safe. the 
rubi is not astral; and it could onli be move in the ordinari way by 
the open of the doors. To thi end, the queen use her astral bodi 
and the fierc forc of her familiar, to bring to the keyhol of the 
safe the master key which debar her wish. for year I have 
suspected, nay, have believ as much; and I, too, guard myself 
against power of the nether world. I, too, wait in patienc till I 
should have gather togeth all the factor requir for the open 
of the magic coffer and the resurrect of the mummi queen!" He 
paused, and hi daughter' voic came out sweet and clear, and full of 
intens feeling: 

"father, in the egyptian belief, wa the power of resurrect of a 
mummi bodi a gener one, or wa it limited? that is: could it 
achiev resurrect mani time in the cours of ages; or onli once, 
and that one final?" 

"there wa but one resurrection," he answered. "there were some who 
believ that thi wa to be a definit resurrect of the bodi into 
the real world. but in the common belief, the spirit found joy in the 
elysian fields, where there wa plenti of food and no fear of famine. 
where there wa moistur and deep-root reeds, and all the joy that 
are to be expect by the peopl of an arid land and burn clime." 

then margaret spoke with an earnest which show the convict of 
her inmost soul: 

"to me, then, it is given to understand what wa the dream of thi 
great and far-think and high-soul ladi of old; the dream that held 
her soul in patient wait for it realis through the pass of 
all those ten of centuries. the dream of a love that might be; a love 
that she felt she might, even under new conditions, herself evoke. the 
love that is the dream of everi woman' life; of the old and of the 
new; pagan or christian; under whatev sun; in whatev rank or 
calling; howev may have been the joy or pain of her life in other 
ways. oh! I know it! I know it! I am a woman, and I know a woman' 
heart. what were the lack of food or the plenitud of it; what were 
feast or famin to thi woman, born in a palace, with the shadow of the 
crown of the two egypt on her brows! what were reedi morass or the 
tinkl of run water to her whose barg could sweep the great nile 
from the mountain to the sea. what were petti joy and absenc of 
petti fear to her, the rais of whose hand could hurl armies, or 
draw to the water-stair of her palac the commerc of the world! At 
whose word rose templ fill with all the artist beauti of the 
time of old which it wa her aim and pleasur to restore! under whose 
guidanc the solid rock yawn into the sepulchr that she designed! 

"surely, surely, such a one had nobler dreams! I can feel them in my 
heart; I can see them with my sleep eyes!" 

As she spoke she seem to be inspired; and her eye had a far-away 
look as though they saw someth beyond mortal sight. and then the 
deep eye fill up with unsh tear of great emotion. the veri soul 
of the woman seem to speak in her voice; whilst we who listen sat 
entranced. 

"I can see her in her loneli and in the silenc of her mighti 
pride, dream her own dream of thing far differ from those around 
her. Of some other land, far, far away under the canopi of the silent 
night, lit by the cool, beauti light of the stars. A land under 
that northern star, whenc blew the sweet wind that cool the 
feverish desert air. A land of wholesom greenery, far, far away. 
where were no scheme and malign priesthood; whose idea were to 
lead to power through gloomi templ and more gloomi cavern of the 
dead, through an endless ritual of death! A land where love wa not 
base, but a divin possess of the soul! where there might be some 
one kindr spirit which could speak to her through mortal lip like 
her own; whose be could merg with her in a sweet communion of soul 
to soul, even as their breath could mingl in the ambient air! I know 
the feeling, for I have share it myself. I may speak of it now, sinc 
the bless ha come into my own life. I may speak of it sinc it 
enabl me to interpret the feelings, the veri long soul, of that 
sweet and love queen, so differ from her surroundings, so high 
abov her time! whose nature, put into a word, could control the forc 
of the under world; and the name of whose aspiration, though but graven 
on a star-lit jewel, could command all the power in the pantheon of 
the high gods. 

"and in the realis of that dream she will sure be content to 
rest!" 

We men sat silent, as the young girl gave her power interpret 
of the design or purpos of the woman of old. her everi word and tone 
carri with it the convict of her own belief. the lofti of her 
thought seem to uplift us all as we listened. her nobl words, 
flow in music cadenc and vibrant with intern force, seem to 
issu from some great instrument of element power. even her tone wa 
new to us all; so that we listen as to some new and strang be 
from a new and strang world. her father' face wa full of delight. 
I knew now it cause. I understood the happi that had come into 
hi life, on hi return to the world that he knew, from that prolong 
sojourn in the world of dreams. To find in hi daughter, whose natur 
he had never till now known, such a wealth of affection, such a 
splendour of spiritu insight, such a scholarli imagination, such... 
the rest of hi feel wa of hope! 

the two other men were silent unconsciously. one man had had hi 
dreaming; for the other, hi dream were to come. 

for myself, I wa like one in a trance. who wa thi new, radiant 
be who had won to exist out of the mist and dark of our 
fears? love ha divin possibl for the lover' heart! the wing 
of the soul may expand at ani time from the shoulder of the love one, 
who then may sweep into angel form. I knew that in my margaret' 
natur were divin possibl of mani kinds. when under the shade 
of the overhang willow-tre on the river, I had gaze into the 
depth of her beauti eyes, I had thenceforth a strict belief in the 
manifold beauti and excel of her nature; but thi soar and 
understand spirit was, indeed, a revelation. My pride, like her 
father's, wa outsid myself; my joy and raptur were complet and 
supreme! 

when we had all got back to earth again in our variou ways, mr. 
trelawny, hold hi daughter' hand in his, went on with hi 
discourse: 

"now, as to the time at which queen tera intend her resurrect to 
take place! We are in contact with some of the higher astronom 
calcul in connect with true orientation. As you know, the 
star shift their rel posit in the heavens; but though the 
real distanc travers are beyond all ordinari comprehension, the 
effect as we see them are small. nevertheless, they are suscept 
of measurement, not by years, indeed, but by centuries. It wa by thi 
mean that sir john herschel arriv at the date of the build of the 
great pyramid--a date fix by the time necessari to chang the star of 
the true north from draconi to the pole star, and sinc then verifi 
by later discoveries. from the abov there can be no doubt whatev 
that astronomi wa an exact scienc with the egyptian at least a 
thousand year befor the time of queen tera. now, the star that go 
to make up a constel chang in process of time their rel 
positions, and the plough is a notabl example. the chang in the 
posit of star in even forti centuri is so small as to be hardli 
notic by an eye not train to minut observances, but they can be 
measur and verified. did you, or ani of you, notic how exactli the 
star in the rubi correspond to the posit of the star in the 
plough; or how the same hold with regard to the transluc place in 
the magic coffer?" 

We all assented. He went on: 

"you are quit correct. they correspond exactly. and yet when queen 
tera wa laid in her tomb, neither the star in the jewel nor the 
transluc place in the coffer correspond to the posit of the 
star in the constel as they then were!" 

We look at each other as he paused: a new light wa break upon 
us. with a ring of masteri in hi voic he went on: 

"do you not see the mean of this? doe it not throw a light on the 
intent of the queen? she, who wa guid by augury, and magic, and 
superstition, natur chose a time for her resurrect which seem 
to have been point out by the high god themselves, who had sent 
their messag on a thunderbolt from other worlds. when such a time wa 
fix by supern wisdom, would it not be the height of human wisdom to 
avail itself of it? thu it is"--her hi voic deepen and trembl 
with the intens of hi feeling--"that to us and our time is given 
the opportun of thi wondrou peep into the old world, such as ha 
been the privileg of none other of our time; which may never be again. 

"from first to last the cryptic write and symbol of that wondrou 
tomb of that wondrou woman is full of guid light; and the key of 
the mani mysteri lie in that most wondrou jewel which she held in 
her dead hand over the dead heart, which she hope and believ would 
beat again in a newer and nobler world! 

"there are onli loos end now to consider. margaret ha given us the 
true inward of the feel of the other queen!" He look at her 
fondly, and stroke her hand as he said it. "for my own part I 
sincer hope she is right; for in such case it will be a joy, I am 
sure, to all of us to assist at such a realis of hope. but we 
must not go too fast, or believ too much in our present state of 
knowledge. the voic that we hearken for come out of time strang 
other than our own; when human life count for little, and when the 
moral of the time made littl account of the remov of obstacl 
in the way to achiev of desire. We must keep our eye fix on 
the scientif side, and wait for the develop on the psychic side. 

"now, as to thi stone box, which we call the magic coffer. As I have 
said, I am convinc that it open onli in obedi to some principl 
of light, or the exercis of some of it forc at present unknown to 
us. there is here much ground for conjectur and for experiment; for 
as yet the scientist have not thoroughli differenti the kinds, and 
powers, and degre of light. without analys variou ray we may, I 
think, take it for grant that there are differ qualiti and 
power of light; and thi great field of scientif investig is 
almost virgin soil. We know as yet so littl of natur forces, that 
imagin need set no bound to it flight in consid the 
possibl of the future. within but a few year we have made such 
discoveri as two centuri ago would have sent the discoverer' to 
the flames. the liquefact of oxygen; the exist of radium, of 
helium, of polonium, of argon; the differ power of roentgen and 
cathod and bequerel rays. and as we may final prove that there are 
differ kind and qualiti of light, so we may find that combust 
may have it own power of differentiation; that there are qualiti in 
some flame non-exist in others. It may be that some of the 
essenti condit of substanc are continuous, even in the 
destruct of their bases. last night I wa think of this, and 
reason that as there are certain qualiti in some oil which are 
not in others, so there may be certain similar or correspond 
qualiti or power in the combin of each. I suppos we have all 
notic some time or other that the light of colza oil is not quit the 
same as that of paraffin, or that the flame of coal ga and whale oil 
are different. they find it so in the light-houses! all at onc it 
occur to me that there might be some special virtu in the oil which 
had been found in the jar when queen tera' tomb wa opened. these 
had not been use to preserv the intestin as usual, so they must 
have been place there for some other purpose. I rememb that in 
van huyn' narr he had comment on the way the jar were sealed. 
thi wa lightly, though effectually; they could be open without 
force. the jar were themselv preserv in a sarcophagu which, 
though of immens strength and hermet sealed, could be open 
easily. accordingly, I went at onc to examin the jars. A little--a 
veri littl of the oil still remained, but it had grown thick in the 
two and a half centuri in which the jar had been open. still, it 
wa not rancid; and on examin it I found it wa cedar oil, and that 
it still exhal someth of it origin aroma. thi gave me the idea 
that it wa to be use to fill the lamps. whoever had place the oil 
in the jars, and the jar in the sarcophagus, knew that there might be 
shrinkag in process of time, even in vase of alabaster, and fulli 
allow for it; for each of the jar would have fill the lamp half a 
dozen times. with part of the oil remain I made some experiments, 
therefore, which may give use results. you know, doctor, that cedar 
oil, which wa much use in the prepar and ceremoni of the 
egyptian dead, ha a certain refract power which we do not find in 
other oils. for instance, we use it on the lens of our microscop 
to give addit clear of vision. last night I put some in one 
of the lamps, and place it near a transluc part of the magic 
coffer. the effect wa veri great; the glow of light within wa fuller 
and more intens than I could have imagined, where an electr light 
similarli place had little, if any, effect. I should have tri 
other of the seven lamps, but that my suppli of oil ran out. this, 
however, is on the road to rectification. I have sent for more cedar 
oil, and expect to have befor long an ampl supply. whatev may 
happen from other causes, our experi shall not, at all events, fail 
from this. We shall see! We shall see!" 

doctor winchest had evid been follow the logic process of 
the other' mind, for hi comment was: 

"I do hope that when the light is effect in open the box, the 
mechan will not be impair or destroyed." 

hi doubt as to thi gave anxiou thought to some of us. 




chapter xvi 

the cavern 


In the even mr. trelawni took again the whole parti into the study. 
when we were all attent he began to unfold hi plans: 

"I have come to the conclus that for the proper carri out of what 
we will call our great experi we must have absolut and complet 
isolation. isol not mere for a day or two, but for as long as 
we may require. here such a thing would be impossible; the need and 
habit of a great citi with it ingrain possibl of 
interruption, would, or might, quit upset us. telegrams, regist 
letters, or express messeng would alon be sufficient; but the great 
armi of those who want to get someth would make disast certain. 
In addition, the occurr of the last week have drawn polic 
attent to thi house. even if special instruct to keep an eye 
on it have not been issu from scotland yard or the district station, 
you may be sure that the individu policeman on hi round will keep 
it well under observation. besides, the servant who have discharg 
themselv will befor long begin to talk. they must; for they have, 
for the sake of their own characters, to give some reason for the 
termin of a servic which ha I should say a posit in the 
neighbourhood. the servant of the neighbour will begin to talk, and, 
perhap the neighbour themselves. then the activ and intellig 
press will, with it usual zeal for the enlighten of the public and 
it eye to increas of circulation, get hold of the matter. when the 
report is after us we shall not have much chanc of privacy. even if 
we were to bar ourselv in, we should not be free from interruption, 
possibl from intrusion. either would ruin our plans, and so we must 
take measur to effect a retreat, carri all our impedimenta with 
us. for thi I am prepared. for a long time past I have foreseen such 
a possibility, and have made prepar for it. Of course, I had no 
foreknowledg of what ha happened; but I knew someth would, or 
might, happen. for more than two year past my hous in cornwal ha 
been made readi to receiv all the curio which are preserv here. 
when corbeck went off on hi search for the lamp I had the old hous 
at kyllion made ready; it is fit with electr light all over, and 
all the applianc for manufactur of the light are complete. I had 
perhap better tell you, for none of you, not even margaret, know 
anyth of it, that the hous is absolut shut out from public 
access or even from view. It stand on a littl rocki promontori 
behind a steep hill, and except from the sea cannot be seen. Of old it 
wa fenc in by a high stone wall, for the hous which it succeed 
wa built by an ancestor of mine in the day when a great hous far 
away from a centr had to be prepar to defend itself. here, then, is 
a place so well adapt to our need that it might have been prepar 
on purpose. I shall explain it to you when we are all there. thi 
will not be long, for alreadi our movement is in train. I have sent 
word to marvin to have all prepar for our transport ready. He is 
to have a special train, which is to run at night so as to avoid 
notice. also a number of cart and stone-wagons, with suffici men 
and applianc to take all our packing-cas to paddington. We shall 
be away befor the argus-ey pressman is on the watch. We shall today 
begin our pack up; and I dare say that by tomorrow night we shall be 
ready. In the outhous I have all the packing-cas which were use 
for bring the thing from egypt, and I am satisfi that as they 
were suffici for the journey across the desert and down the nile to 
alexandria and thenc on to london, they will serv without fail 
between here and kyllion. We four men, with margaret to hand us such 
thing as we may require, will be abl to get the thing pack safely; 
and the carrier' men will take them to the trucks. 

"today the servant go to kyllion, and mrs. grant will make such 
arrang as may be required. she will take a stock of necessari 
with her, so that we will not attract local attent by our daili 
needs; and will keep us suppli with perish food from london. 
thank to margaret' wise and gener treatment of the servant who 
decid to remain, we have got a staff on which we can depend. they 
have been alreadi caution to secrecy, so that we need not fear gossip 
from within. indeed, as the servant will be in london after their 
prepar at kyllion are complete, there will not be much subject 
for gossip, in detail at ani rate. 

"as, however, we should commenc the immedi work of pack at once, 
we will leav over the after proceed till later when we have 
leisure." 

accordingli we set about our work. under mr. trelawny' guidance, and 
aid by the servants, we took from the outhous great packing-cases. 
some of these were of enorm strength, fortifi by mani thick 
of wood, and by iron band and rod with screw-end and nuts. We 
place them throughout the house, each close to the object which it wa 
to contain. when thi preliminari work had been effected, and there 
had been place in each room and in the hall great mass of new hay, 
cotton-wast and paper, the servant were sent away. then we set about 
packing. 

No one, not accustom to packing, could have the slightest idea of the 
amount of the amount of work involv in such a task as that in which 
in we were engaged. for my own part I had had a vagu idea that there 
were a larg number of egyptian object in mr. trelawny' house; but 
until I came to deal with them seriatim I had littl idea of either 
their importance, the size of some of them, or of their endless number. 
far into the night we worked. At time we use all the strength which 
we could muster on a singl object; again we work separately, but 
alway under mr. trelawny' immedi direction. He himself, assist 
by margaret, kept an exact tall of each piece. 

It wa onli when we sat down, utterli wearied, to a long-delay supper 
that we began to realis that a larg part of the work wa done. onli 
a few of the packing-cases, however, were closed; for a vast amount of 
work still remained. We had finish some of the cases, each of which 
held onli one of the great sarcophagi. the case which held mani 
object could not be close till all had been differenti and packed. 

I slept that night without movement or without dreams; and on our 
compar note in the morning, I found that each of the other had had 
the same experience. 

By dinner-tim next even the whole work wa complete, and all wa 
readi for the carrier who were to come at midnight. A littl befor 
the appoint time we heard the rumbl of carts; then we were shortli 
invad by an armi of workmen, who seem by sheer forc of number to 
move without effort, in an endless procession, all our prepar 
packages. A littl over an hour suffic them, and when the cart had 
rumbl away, we all got readi to follow them to paddington. silvio 
wa of cours to be taken as one of our party. 

befor leav we went in a bodi over the house, which look desol 
indeed. As the servant had all gone to cornwal there had been no 
attempt at tidying-up; everi room and passag in which we had worked, 
and all the stairways, were strewn with paper and waste, and mark 
with dirti feet. 

the last thing which mr. trelawni did befor come away wa to take 
from the great safe the rubi with the seven stars. As he put it safe 
into hi pocket-book, margaret, who had all at onc seem to grow 
deadli tire and stood besid her father pale and rigid, suddenli 
becam all aglow, as though the sight of the jewel had inspir her. 
she smile at her father approvingli as she said: 

"you are right, father. there will not be ani more troubl tonight. 
she will not wreck your arrang for ani cause. I would stake my 
life upon it." 

"she--or something--wreck us in the desert when we had come from the 
tomb in the valley of the sorcerer!" wa the grim comment of corbeck, 
who wa stand by. margaret answer him like a flash: 

"ah! she wa then near her tomb from which for thousand of year her 
bodi had not been moved. she must know that thing are differ now." 

"how must she know?" ask corbeck keenly. 

"if she ha that astral bodi that father spoke of, sure she must 
know! how can she fail to, with an invis presenc and an intellect 
that can roam abroad even to the star and the world beyond us!" she 
paused, and her father said solemnly: 

"it is on that supposit that we are proceeding. We must have the 
courag of our convictions, and act on them--to the last!" 

margaret took hi hand and held it in a dreami kind of way as we file 
out of the house. she wa hold it still when he lock the hall 
door, and when we move up the road to the gateway, whenc we took a 
cab to paddington. 

when all the good were load at the station, the whole of the workmen 
went on to the train; thi took also some of the stone-wagon use for 
carri the case with the great sarcophagi. ordinari cart and 
plenti of hors were to be found at westerton, which wa our station 
for kyllion. mr. trelawni had order a sleeping-carriag for our 
party; as soon as the train had start we all turn into our cubicles. 

that night I slept sound. there wa over me a convict of secur 
which wa absolut and supreme. margaret' definit announcement: 
"there will not be ani troubl tonight!" seem to carri assur with 
it. I did not question it; nor did anyon else. It wa onli 
afterward that I began to think as to how she wa so sure. the train 
wa a slow one, stop mani time and for consider intervals. As 
mr. trelawni did not wish to arriv at westerton befor dark, there wa 
no need to hurry; and arrang had been made to feed the workmen at 
certain place on the journey. We had our own hamper with us in the 
privat car. 

all that afternoon we talk over the great experiment, which seem to 
have becom a definit entiti in our thoughts. mr. trelawni becam 
more and more enthusiast as the time wore on; hope wa with him 
becom certainty. doctor winchest seem to becom imbu with 
some of hi spirit, though at time he would throw out some scientif 
fact which would either make an impass to the other' line of 
argument, or would come as an arrest shock. mr. corbeck, on the 
other hand, seem slightli antagonist to the theory. It may have 
been that whilst the opinion of the other advanced, hi own stood 
still; but the effect wa an attitud which appear negative, if not 
wholli one of negation. 

As for margaret, she seem to be in some way overcome. either it wa 
some new phase of feel with her, or els she wa take the issu 
more serious than she had yet done. she wa gener more or less 
distraite, as though sunk in a brown study; from thi she would recov 
herself with a start. thi wa usual when there occur some mark 
episod in the journey, such as stop at a station, or when the 
thunder rumbl of cross a viaduct woke the echo of the hill or 
cliff around us. On each such occas she would plung into the 
conversation, take such a part in it as to show that, whatev had 
been her abstract thought, her sens had taken in fulli all that had 
gone on around her. toward myself her manner wa strange. sometim 
it wa mark by a distance, half shy, half haughty, which wa new to 
me. At other time there were moment of passion in look and gestur 
which almost made me dizzi with delight. little, however, of a mark 
natur transpir dure the journey. there wa but one episod which 
had in it ani element of alarm, but as we were all asleep at the time 
it did not disturb us. We onli learn it from a commun guard in 
the morning. whilst run between dawlish and teignmouth the train 
wa stop by a warn given by someon who move a torch to and fro 
right on the veri track. the driver had found on pull up that just 
ahead of the train a small landslip had taken place, some of the red 
earth from the high bank have fallen away. It did not howev reach 
to the metals; and the driver had resum hi way, none too well 
pleas at the delay. To use hi own words, the guard thought "there 
wa too much balli caution on thi 'ere line!'" 

We arriv at westerton about nine o'clock in the evening. cart and 
hors were in waiting, and the work of unload the train began at 
once. our own parti did not wait to see the work done, as it wa in 
the hand of compet people. We took the carriag which wa in 
waiting, and through the dark of the night sped on to kyllion. 

We were all impress by the hous as it appear in the bright 
moonlight. A great grey stone mansion of the jacobean period; vast and 
spacious, stand high over the sea on the veri verg of a high cliff. 
when we had swept round the curv of the avenu cut through the rock, 
and come out on the high plateau on which the hous stood, the crash 
and murmur of wave break against rock far below us came with an 
invigor breath of moist sea air. We understood then in an instant 
how well we were shut out from the world on that rocki shelf abov the 
sea. 

within the hous we found all ready. mrs. grant and her staff had 
work well, and all wa bright and fresh and clean. We took a brief 
survey of the chief room and then separ to have a wash and to 
chang our cloth after our long journey of more than four-and-twenti 
hours. 

We had supper in the great dining-room on the south side, the wall of 
which actual hung over the sea. the murmur came up muffled, but it 
never ceased. As the littl promontori stood well out into the sea, 
the northern side of the hous wa open; and the due north wa in no 
way shut out by the great mass of rock, which, rear high abov us, 
shut out the rest of the world. far off across the bay we could see 
the trembl light of the castle, and here and there along the shore 
the faint light of a fisher' window. for the rest the sea wa a dark 
blue plain with an occasion flicker of light as the gleam of 
starlight fell on the slope of a swell wave. 

when supper wa over we all adjourn to the room which mr. trelawni 
had set asid as hi study, hi bedroom be close to it. As we 
entered, the first thing I notic wa a great safe, somewhat similar 
to that which stood in hi room in london. when we were in the room 
mr. trelawni went over to the table, and, take out hi pocket-book, 
laid it on the table. As he did so he press down on it with the palm 
of hi hand. A strang pallor came over hi face. with finger that 
trembl he open the book, say as he did so: 

"it bulk doe not seem the same; I hope noth ha happened!" 

all three of us men crowd round close. margaret alon remain calm; 
she stood erect and silent, and still as a statue. she had a far-away 
look in her eyes, as though she did not either know or care what wa 
go on around her. 

with a despair gestur trelawni threw open the pouch of the 
pocket-book wherein he had place the jewel of seven stars. As he sank 
down on the chair which stood close to him, he said in a hoars voice: 

"mi god! it is gone. without it the great experi can come to 
nothing!" 

hi word seem to wake margaret from her introspect mood. An 
agonis spasm swept her face; but almost on the instant she wa calm. 
she almost smile as she said: 

"you may have left it in your room, father. perhap it ha fallen out 
of the pocket-book whilst you were changing." without a word we all 
hurri into the next room through the open door between the studi and 
the bedroom. and then a sudden calm fell on us like a cloud of fear. 

there! on the table, lay the jewel of seven stars, shine and 
sparkl with lurid light, as though each of the seven point of each 
the seven star gleam through blood! 

timidli we each look behind us, and then at each other. margaret wa 
now like the rest of us. she had lost her statuesqu calm. all the 
introspect rigid had gone from her; and she clasp her hand 
togeth till the knuckl were white. 

without a word mr. trelawni rais the jewel, and hurri with it into 
the next room. As quietli as he could he open the door of the safe 
with the key fasten to hi wrist and place the jewel within. when 
the heavi door were close and lock he seem to breath more freely. 

somehow thi episode, though a disturb one in mani ways, seem to 
bring us back to our old selves. sinc we had left london we had all 
been overstrained; and thi wa a sort of relief. anoth step in our 
strang enterpris had been effected. 

the chang back wa more mark in margaret than in ani of us. perhap 
it wa that she wa a woman, whilst we were men; perhap it wa that 
she wa younger than the rest; perhap both reason were effective, 
each in it own way. At ani rate the chang wa there, and I wa 
happier than I had been through the long journey. all her buoyancy, 
her tenderness, her deep feel seem to shine forth onc more; now 
and again as her father' eye rest on her, hi face seem to light 
up. 

whilst we wait for the cart to arrive, mr. trelawni took us through 
the house, point out and explain where the object which we had 
brought with us were to be placed. In one respect onli did he withhold 
confidence. the posit of all those thing which had connect 
with the great experi were not indicated. the case contain them 
were to be left in the outer hall, for the present. 

By the time we had made the survey, the cart began to arrive; and the 
stir and bustl of the previou night were renewed. mr. trelawni stood 
in the hall besid the massiv ironbound door, and gave direct as 
to the place of each of the great packing-cases. those contain 
mani item were place in the inner hall where they were to be unpacked. 

In an incred short time the whole consign wa delivered; and 
the men depart with a douceur for each, given through their foreman, 
which made them effus in their thanks. then we all went to our own 
rooms. there wa a strang confid over us all. I do not think 
that ani one of us had a doubt as the the quiet pass of the 
remaind of the night. 

the faith wa justified, for on our re-assembl in the morn we 
found that all had slept well and peaceably. 

dure that day all the curios, except those requir for the great 
experiment, were put into the place design for them. then it wa 
arrang that all the servant should go back with mrs. grant to london 
on the next morning. 

when they had all gone mr. trelawny, have seen the door locked, took 
us into the study. 

"now," said he when we were seated, "I have a secret to impart; but, 
accord to an old promis which doe not leav me free, I must ask 
you each to give me a solemn promis not to reveal it. for three 
hundr year at least such a promis ha been exact from everyon to 
whom it wa told, and more than onc life and safeti were secur 
through loyal observ of the promise. even as it is, I am break 
the letter, if not the spirit of the tradition; for I should onli tell 
it to the immedi member of my family." 

We all gave the promis required. then he went on: 

"there is a secret place in thi house, a cave, natur origin but 
finish by labour, underneath thi house. I will not undertak to say 
that it ha alway been use accord to the law. dure the bloodi 
assiz more than a few cornishmen found refug in it; and later, and 
earlier, it formed, I have no doubt whatever, a use place for 
store contraband goods. 'tre pol and pen', I suppos you know, have 
alway been smugglers; and their relat and friend and neighbour 
have not held back from the enterprise. for all such reason a safe 
hiding-plac wa alway consid a valuabl possession; and as the 
head of our hous have alway insist on preserv the secret, I am 
in honour bound to it. later on, if all be well, I shall of cours 
tell you, margaret, and you too, ross, under the condit that I am 
bound to make." 

He rose up, and we all follow him. leav us in the outer hall, he 
went away alon for a few minutes; and returning, beckon us to follow 
him. 

In the insid hall we found a whole section of an outstand angl 
move away, and from the caviti saw a great hole dimli dark, and the 
begin of a rough staircas cut in the rock. As it wa not pitch 
dark there wa manifestli some mean of light it naturally, so 
without paus we follow our host as he descended. after some forti 
or fifti step cut in a wind passage, we came to a great cave whose 
further end taper away into blackness. It wa a huge place, dimli 
lit by a few irregular slit of eccentr shape. manifestli these were 
fault in the rock which would readili allow the window be disguised. 
close to each of them wa a hang shutter which could be easili swung 
across by mean of a dangl rope. the sound of the ceaseless beat of 
the wave came up muffl from far below. mr. trelawni at onc began 
to speak: 

"thi is the spot which I have chosen, as the best I know, for the 
scene of our great experiment. In a hundr differ way it fulfil 
the condit which I am led to believ are primari with regard to 
success. here, we are, and shall be, as isol as queen tera herself 
would have been in her rocki tomb in the valley of the sorcerer, and 
still in a rocki cavern. for good or ill we must here stand by our 
chances, and abid by results. If we are success we shall be abl 
to let in on the world of modern scienc such a flood of light from the 
old world as will chang everi condit of thought and experi and 
practice. If we fail, then even the knowledg of our attempt will die 
with us. for this, and all els which may come, I believ we are 
prepared!" He paused. No one spoke, but we all bow our head 
grave in acquiescence. He resumed, but with a certain hesitancy: 

"it is not yet too late! If ani of you have a doubt or misgiving, for 
god' sake speak it now! whoever it may be, can go henc without let or 
hindrance. the rest of us can go on our way alone!" 

again he paused, and look keenli at us in turn. We look at each 
other; but no one quailed. for my own part, if I had had ani doubt as 
to go on, the look on margaret' face would have reassur me. It 
wa fearless; it wa intense; it wa full of a divin calm. 

mr. trelawni took a long breath, and in a more cheerful, as well as in 
a more decid tone, went on: 

"a we are all of one mind, the sooner we get the necessari matter in 
train the better. let me tell you that thi place, like all the rest 
of the house, can be lit with electricity. We could not join the wire 
to the main lest our secret should becom known, but I have a cabl 
here which we can attach in the hall and complet the circuit!" As he 
wa speaking, he began to ascend the steps. from close to the entranc 
he took the end of a cable; thi he drew forward and attach to a 
switch in the wall. then, turn on a tap, he flood the whole vault 
and staircas below with light. I could now see from the volum of 
light stream up into the hallway that the hole besid the staircas 
went direct into the cave. abov it wa a pulley and a mass of strong 
tackl with multipli block of the smeaton order. mr. trelawny, 
see me look at this, said, correctli interpret my thoughts: 

"yes! it is new. I hung it there myself on purpose. I knew we should 
have to lower great weights; and as I did not wish to take too mani 
into my confidence, I arrang a tackl which I could work alon if 
necessary." 

We set to work at once; and befor nightfal had lowered, unhooked, and 
place in the posit design for each by trelawny, all the great 
sarcophagi and all the curio and other matter which we had taken with 
us. 

It wa a strang and weird proceeding, the place of those wonder 
monument of a bygon age in that green cavern, which repres in 
it cut and purpos and up-to-d mechan and electr light 
both the old world and the new. but as time went on I grew more and 
more to recognis the wisdom and correct of mr. trelawny' choice. 
I wa much disturb when silvio, who had been brought into the cave in 
the arm of hi mistress, and who wa lie asleep on my coat which I 
had taken off, sprang up when the cat mummi had been unpacked, and flew 
at it with the same feroc which he had previous exhibited. the 
incid show margaret in a new phase, and one which gave my heart a 
pang. she had been stand quit still at one side of the cave 
lean on a sarcophagus, in one of those fit of abstract which had 
of late come upon her; but on hear the sound, and see silvio' 
violent onslaught, she seem to fall into a posit furi of passion. 
her eye blazed, and her mouth took a hard, cruel tension which wa new 
to me. instinct she step toward silvio as if to interfer in 
the attack. but I too had step forward; and as she caught my eye a 
strang spasm came upon her, and she stopped. it intens made me 
hold my breath; and I put up my hand to clear my eyes. when I had done 
this, she had on the instant recov her calm, and there wa a look 
of brief wonder on her face. with all her old grace and sweet she 
swept over and lift silvio, just as she had done on former occasions, 
and held him in her arms, pet him and treat him as though he 
were a littl child who had erred. 

As I look a strang fear came over me. the margaret that I knew 
seem to be changing; and in my inmost heart I pray that the 
disturb caus might soon come to an end. more than ever I long at 
that moment that our terribl experi should come to a prosper 
termination. 

when all had been arrang in the room as mr. trelawni wish he turn 
to us, one after another, till he had concentr the intellig of 
us all upon him. then he said: 

"all is now readi in thi place. We must onli await the proper time to 
begin." 

We were silent for a while. doctor winchest wa the first to speak: 

"what is the proper time? have you ani approximation, even if you are 
not satisfi as to the exact day?" He answer at once: 

"after the most anxiou thought I have fix on juli 31!" 

"may I ask whi that date?" He spoke hi answer slowly: 

"queen tera wa rule in great degre by mysticism, and there are so 
mani evid that she look for resurrect that natur she 
would choos a period rule over by a god specialis to such a 
purpose. now, the fourth month of the season of inund wa rule 
by harmachis, thi be the name for 'ra', the sun-god, at hi rise 
in the morning, and therefor typifi the awaken or arising. thi 
aris is manifestli to physic life, sinc it is of the mid-world of 
human daili life. now as thi month begin on our 25th july, the 
seventh day would be juli 31st, for you may be sure that the mystic 
queen would not have chosen ani day but the seventh or some power of 
seven. 

"I dare say that some of you have wonder whi our prepar have 
been so deliber undertaken. thi is why! We must be readi in 
everi possibl way when the time comes; but there wa no use in have 
to wait round for a needless number of days." 

and so we wait onli for the 31st of july, the next day but one, when 
the great experi would be made. 




chapter xvii 

doubt and fear 


We learn of great thing by littl experiences. the histori of age is 
but an indefinit repetit of the histori of hours. the record of a 
soul is but a multipl of the stori of a moment. the record angel 
write in the great book in no rainbow tints; hi pen is dip in no 
colour but light and darkness. for the eye of infinit wisdom there 
is no need of shading. all things, all thoughts, all emotions, all 
experiences, all doubt and hope and fears, all intentions, all wish 
seen down to the lower strata of their concret and multitudin 
elements, are final resolv into direct opposites. 

did ani human be wish for the epitom of a life wherein were 
gather and group all the experi that a child of adam could 
have, the history, fulli and frankli written, of my own mind dure the 
next forty-eight hour would afford him all that could be wanted. and 
the record could have wrought as usual in sunlight and shadow, which 
may be taken to repres the final express of heaven and hell. 
for in the highest heaven is faith; and doubt hang over the yawn 
black of hell. 

there were of cours time of sunshin in those two days; moment when, 
in the realis of margaret' sweet and her love for me, all 
doubt were dissip like morn mist befor the sun. but the 
balanc of the time--and an overwhelm balanc it was--gloom hung 
over me like a pall. the hour, in whose come I had acquiesced, wa 
approach so quickli and wa alreadi so near that the sens of 
final wa bear upon me! the issu wa perhap life or death to 
ani of us; but for thi we were all prepared. margaret and I were one 
as to the risk. the question of the moral aspect of the case, which 
involv the religi belief in which I had been reared, wa not one 
to troubl me; for the issues, and the caus that lay behind them, 
were not within my power even to comprehend. the doubt of the success 
of the great experi wa such a doubt as exist in all enterpris 
which have great possibilities. To me, whose life wa pass in a 
seri of intellectu struggles, thi form of doubt wa a stimulus, 
rather than deterrent. what then wa it that made for me a trouble, 
which becam an anguish when my thought dwelt long on it? 

I wa begin to doubt margaret! 

what it wa that I doubt I knew not. It wa not her love, or her 
honour, or her truth, or her kindness, or her zeal. what then wa it? 

It wa herself! 

margaret wa changing! At time dure the past few day I had hardli 
known her as the same girl whom I had met at the picnic, and whose 
vigil I had share in the sick-room of her father. then, even in her 
moment of greatest sorrow or fright or anxiety, she wa all life and 
thought and keenness. now she wa gener distraite, and at time in 
a sort of neg condit as though her mind--her veri being--wa 
not present. At such moment she would have full possess of 
observ and memory. she would know and rememb all that wa go 
on, and had gone on around her; but her come back to her old self had 
to me someth the sensat of a new person come into the room. Up 
to the time of leav london I had been content whenev she wa 
present. I had over me that delici sens of secur which come 
with the conscious that love is mutual. but now doubt had taken 
it place. I never knew whether the person present wa my 
margaret--th old margaret whom I had love at the first glance--or the 
other new margaret, whom I hardli understood, and whose intellectu 
aloof made an impalp barrier between us. sometim she would 
become, as it were, awak all at once. At such times, though she would 
say to me sweet and pleasant thing which she had often said before, 
she would seem most unlik herself. It wa almost as if she wa 
speak parrot-lik or at dictat of one who could read word or 
acts, but not thoughts. after one or two experi of thi kind, my 
own doubt began to make a barrier; for I could not speak with the 
eas and freedom which were usual to me. and so hour by hour we 
drift apart. were it not for the few odd moment when the old 
margaret wa back with me full of her charm I do not know what would 
have happened. As it was, each such moment gave me a fresh start and 
kept my love from changing. 

I would have given the world for a confidant; but thi wa impossible. 
how could I speak a doubt of margaret to anyone, even her father! how 
could I speak a doubt to margaret, when margaret herself wa the theme! 
I could onli endure--and hope. and of the two the endur wa the 
lesser pain. 

I think that margaret must have at time felt that there wa some cloud 
between us, for toward the end of the first day she began to shun me a 
little; or perhap it wa that she had becom more diffid that usual 
about me. hitherto she had sought everi opportun of be with me, 
just as I had tri to be with her; so that now ani avoidance, one of 
the other, made a new pain to us both. 

On thi day the household seem veri still. each one of us wa about 
hi own work, or occupi with hi own thoughts. We onli met at meal 
times; and then, though we talked, all seem more or less preoccupied. 
there wa not in the hous even the stir of the routin of service. 
the precaut of mr. trelawni in have three room prepar for each 
of us had render servant unnecessary. the dining-room wa solidli 
prepar with cook provis for sever days. toward even I 
went out by myself for a stroll. I had look for margaret to ask her 
to come with me; but when I found her, she wa in one of her apathet 
moods, and the charm of her presenc seem lost to me. angri with 
myself, but unabl to quell my own spirit of discontent, I went out 
alon over the rocki headland. 

On the cliff, with the wide expans of wonder sea befor me, and no 
sound but the dash of wave below and the harsh scream of the seagul 
above, my thought ran free. Do what I would, they return 
continu to one subject, the solv of the doubt that wa upon me. 
here in the solitude, amid the wide circl of nature' forc and 
strife, my mind began to work truly. unconsci I found myself 
ask a question which I would not allow myself to answer. At last 
the persist of a mind work truli prevailed; I found myself face 
to face with my doubt. the habit of my life began to assert itself, 
and I analys the evid befor me. 

It wa so startl that I had to forc myself into obedi to 
logic effort. My starting-plac wa this: margaret wa changed--in 
what way, and by what means? wa it her character, or her mind, or her 
nature? for her physic appear remain the same. I began to 
group all that I had ever heard of her, begin at her birth. 

It wa strang at the veri first. she had been, accord to corbeck' 
statement, born of a dead mother dure the time that her father and 
hi friend were in a tranc in the tomb at aswan. that tranc wa 
presum effect by a woman; a woman mummied, yet preserv as we 
had everi reason to believ from after experience, an astral bodi 
subject to a free will and an activ intelligence. with that astral 
body, space ceas to exist. the vast distanc between london and 
aswan becam as naught; and whatev power of necrom the sorceress 
had might have been exercis over the dead mother, and possibl the 
dead child. 

the dead child! wa it possibl that the child wa dead and wa made 
aliv again? whenc then came the anim spirit--th soul? logic 
wa point the way to me now with a vengeance! 

If the egyptian belief wa true for egyptians, then the "ka" of the 
dead queen and her "khu" could anim what she might choose. In such 
case margaret would not be an individu at all, but simpli a phase of 
queen tera herself; an astral bodi obedi to her will! 

here I revolt against logic. everi fibr of my be resent such a 
conclusion. how could I believ that there wa no margaret at all; but 
just an anim image, use by the doubl of a woman of forti 
centuri ago to it own ends...! somehow, the outlook wa brighter to 
me now, despit the new doubts. 

At least I had margaret! 

back swung the logic pendulum again. the child then wa not dead. 
If so, had the sorceress had anyth to do with her birth at all? It 
wa evident--so I took it again from corbeck--that there wa a strang 
like between margaret and the pictur of queen tera. how could 
thi be? It could not be ani birth-mark reproduc what had been in 
the mother' mind; for mrs. trelawni had never seen the pictures. nay, 
even her father had not seen them till he had found hi way into the 
tomb onli a few day befor her birth. thi phase I could not get rid 
of so easili as the last; the fibr of my be remain quiet. there 
remain to me the horror of doubt. and even then, so strang is the 
mind of man, doubt itself took a concret image; a vast and 
impenetr gloom, through which flicker irregularli and 
spasmod tini point of evanesc light, which seem to quicken 
the dark into a posit existence. 

the remain possibl of relat between margaret and the mummi 
queen was, that in some occult way the sorceress had power to chang 
place with the other. thi view of thing could not be so lightli 
thrown aside. there were too mani suspici circumst to warrant 
this, now that my attent wa fix on it and my intellig 
recognis the possibility. hereupon there began to come into my mind 
all the strang incomprehens matter which had whirl through our 
live in the last few days. At first they all crowd in upon me in a 
jumbl mass; but again the habit of mind of my work life prevailed, 
and they took order. I found it now easier to control myself; for 
there wa someth to grasp, some work to be done; though it wa of a 
sorri kind, for it wa or might be antagonist to margaret. but 
margaret wa herself at stake! I wa think of her and fight for 
her; and yet if I were to work in the dark, I might be even harm to 
her. My first weapon in her defenc wa truth. I must know and 
understand; I might then be abl to act. certainly, I could not act 
benefic without a just concept and recognit of the facts. 
arrang in order these were as follows: 

firstly: the strang like of queen tera to margaret who had been 
born in anoth countri a thousand mile away, where her mother could 
not possibl have had even a pass knowledg of her appearance. 

secondly: the disappear of van huyn' book when I had read up to 
the descript of the star ruby. 

thirdly: the find of the lamp in the boudoir. tera with her 
astral bodi could have unlock the door of corbeck' room in the 
hotel, and have lock it again after her exit with the lamps. she 
could in the same way have open the window, and put the lamp in the 
boudoir. It need not have been that margaret in her own person should 
have had ani hand in this; but--but it wa at least strange. 

fourthly: here the suspicion of the detect and the doctor came 
back to me with renew force, and with a larger understanding. 

fifthly: there were the occas on which margaret foretold with 
accuraci the come occas of quietude, as though she had some 
convict or knowledg of the intent of the astral-bodi queen. 

sixthly: there wa her suggest of the find of the rubi which her 
father had lost. As I thought now afresh over thi episod in the 
light of suspicion in which her own power were involved, the onli 
conclus I could come to was--alway suppos that the theori of the 
queen' astral power wa correct--that queen tera be anxiou that 
all should go well in the movement from london to kyllion had in her 
own way taken the jewel from mr. trelawny' pocket-book, find it of 
some use in her supernatur guardianship of the journey. then in some 
mysteri way she had, through margaret, made the suggest of it 
loss and finding. 

seventhly, and lastly, wa the strang dual exist which margaret 
seem of late to be leading; and which in some way seem a 
consequ or corollari of all that had gone before. 

the dual existence! thi wa inde the conclus which overcam all 
difficulti and reconcil opposites. If inde margaret were not in 
all way a free agent, but could be compel to speak or act as she 
might be instructed; or if her whole be could be chang for anoth 
without the possibl of ani one notic the do of it, then all 
thing were possible. all would depend on the spirit of the 
individu by which she could be so compelled. If thi 
individu were just and kind and clean, all might be well. but if 
not! ... the thought wa too aw for words. I ground my teeth with 
futil rage, as the idea of horribl possibl swept through me. 

Up to thi morn margaret' laps into her new self had been few and 
hardli noticeable, save when onc or twice her attitud toward myself 
had been mark by a bear strang to me. but today the contrari wa 
the case; and the chang presag badly. It might be that that other 
individu wa of the lower, not of the better sort! now that I 
thought of it I had reason to fear. In the histori of the mummy, from 
the time of van huyn' break into the tomb, the record of death 
that we knew of, presum effect by her will and agency, wa a 
startl one. the arab who had stolen the hand from the mummy; and the 
one who had taken it from hi body. the arab chief who had tri to 
steal the jewel from van huyn, and whose throat bore the mark of seven 
fingers. the two men found dead on the first night of trelawny' take 
away the sarcophagus; and the three on the return to the tomb. the 
arab who had open the secret serdab. nine dead men, one of them 
slain manifestli by the queen' own hand! and beyond thi again the 
sever savag attack on mr. trelawni in hi own room, in which, aid 
by her familiar, she had tri to open the safe and to extract the 
talisman jewel. hi devic of fasten the key to hi wrist by a 
steel bangle, though success in the end, had wellnigh cost him hi 
life. 

If then the queen, intent on her resurrect under her own condit 
had, so to speak, wade to it through blood, what might she not do were 
her purpos thwarted? what terribl step might she not take to effect 
her wishes? nay, what were her wishes; what wa her ultim purpose? 
As yet we had had onli margaret' statement of them, given in all the 
gloriou enthusiasm of her lofti soul. In her record there wa no 
express of love to be sought or found. all we knew for certain wa 
that she had set befor her the object of resurrection, and that in it 
the north which she had manifestli love wa to have a special part. 
but that the resurrect wa to be accomplish in the lone tomb in 
the valley of the sorcer wa apparent. all prepar had been 
care made for accomplish from within, and for her ultim 
exit in her new and live form. the sarcophagu wa unlidded. the oil 
jars, though hermet sealed, were to be easili open by hand; and 
in them provis wa made for shrinkag through a vast period of time. 
even flint and steel were provid for the product of flame. the 
mummi pit wa left open in violat of usage; and besid the stone 
door on the cliff side wa fix an imperish chain by which she 
might in safeti descend to earth. but as to what her after intent 
were we had no clue. If it wa that she meant to begin life again as a 
humbl individual, there wa someth so nobl in the thought that it 
even warm my heart to her and turn my wish to her success. 

the veri idea seem to endors margaret' magnific tribut to her 
purpose, and help to calm my troubl spirit. 

then and there, with thi feel strong upon me, I determin to warn 
margaret and her father of dire possibilities; and to await, as well 
content as I could in my ignorance, the develop of thing over 
which I had no power. 

I return to the hous in a differ frame of mind to that in which I 
had left it; and wa enchant to find margaret--th old 
margaret--wait for me. 

after dinner, when I wa alon for a time with the father and daughter, 
I open the subject, though with consider hesitation: 

"would it not be well to take everi possibl precaution, in case the 
queen may not wish what we are doing, with regard to what may occur 
befor the experiment; and at or after her waking, if it come off?" 
margaret' answer came back quickly; so quickli that I wa convinc 
she must have had it readi for some one: 

"but she doe approve! sure it cannot be otherwise. father is 
doing, with all hi brain and all hi energi and all hi great 
courage, just exactli what the great queen had arranged!" 

"but," I answered, "that can hardli be. all that she arrang wa in a 
tomb high up in a rock, in a desert solitude, shut away from the world 
by everi conceiv means. she seem to have depend on thi 
isol to insur against accident. surely, here in anoth countri 
and age, with quit differ conditions, she may in her anxieti make 
mistak and treat ani of you--of us--a she did those other in time 
gone past. nine men that we know of have been slain by her own hand or 
by her instigation. she can be remorseless if she will." It did not 
strike me till afterward when I wa think over thi conversation, 
how thoroughli I had accept the live and consciou condit of 
queen tera as a fact. befor I spoke, I had fear I might offend mr. 
trelawny; but to my pleasant surpris he smile quit genial as he 
answer me: 

"mi dear fellow, in a way you are quit right. the queen did 
undoubtedli intend isolation; and, all told, it would be best that her 
experi should be made as she arrang it. but just think, that 
becam imposs when onc the dutch explor had broken into her 
tomb. that wa not my doing. I am innoc of it, though it wa the 
caus of my set out to rediscov the sepulchre. mind, I do not 
say for a moment that I would not have done just the same as van huyn. 
I went into the tomb from curiosity; and I took away what I did, be 
fire with the zeal of acquisit which anim the collector. 
but, rememb also, that at thi time I did not know of the queen' 
intent of resurrection; I had no idea of the complet of her 
preparations. all that came long afterwards. but when it did come, I 
have done all that I could to carri out her wish to the full. My 
onli fear is that I may have misinterpret some of her cryptic 
instructions, or have omit or overlook something. but of thi I 
am certain; I have left undon noth that I can imagin right to be 
done; and I have done noth that I know of to clash with queen tera' 
arrangement. I want her great experi to succeed. To thi end I 
have not spare labour or time or money--or myself. I have endur 
hardship, and brave danger. all my brains; all my knowledg and 
learning, such as they are; all my endeavour such as they can be, have 
been, are, and shall be devot to thi end, till we either win or lose 
the great stake that we play for." 

"the great stake?" I repeated; "the resurrect of the woman, and the 
woman' life? the proof that resurrect can be accomplished; by 
magic powers; by scientif knowledge; or by use of some forc which 
at present the world doe not know?" 

then mr. trelawni spoke out the hope of hi heart which up to now he 
had indic rather than expressed. onc or twice I had heard corbeck 
speak of the fieri energi of hi youth; but, save for the nobl word 
of margaret when she had spoken of queen tera' hope--which come from 
hi daughter made possibl a belief that her power wa in some sens 
due to heredity--i had seen no mark sign of it. but now hi words, 
sweep befor them like a torrent all antagonist thought, gave me a 
new idea of the man. 

"'a woman' life!' what is a woman' life in the scale with what we 
hope for! why, we are risk alreadi a woman' life; the dearest life 
to me in all the world, and that grow more dear with everi hour that 
passes. We are risk as well the live of four men; your and my 
own, as well as those two other who have been won to our confidence. 
'the proof that resurrect can be accomplished!' that is much. A 
marvel thing in thi age of science, and the sceptic that 
knowledg makes. but life and resurrect are themselv but item in 
what may be won by the accomplish of thi great experiment. 
imagin what it will be for the world of thought--th true world of 
human progress--th verit road to the stars, the itur ad astra of 
the ancients--if there can come back to us out of the unknown past one 
who can yield to us the lore store in the great librari of alexandria, 
and lost in it consum flames. not onli histori can be set right, 
and the teach of scienc made verit from their beginnings; but 
we can be place on the road to the knowledg of lost arts, lost 
learning, lost sciences, so that our feet may tread on the indic 
path to their ultim and complet restoration. why, thi woman can 
tell us what the world wa like befor what is call 'the flood'; can 
give us the origin of that vast astound myth; can set the mind back 
to the consider of thing which to us now seem primeval, but which 
were old stori befor the day of the patriarchs. but thi is not 
the end! no, not even the beginning! If the stori of thi woman be 
all that we think--which some of us most firmli believe; if her power 
and the restor of them prove to be what we expect, why, then we 
may yet achiev a knowledg beyond what our age ha ever known--beyond 
what is believ today possibl for the children of men. If inde 
thi resurrect can be accomplished, how can we doubt the old 
knowledge, the old magic, the old belief! and if thi be so, we must 
take it that the 'ka' of thi great and learn queen ha won secret 
of more than mortal worth from her surround amongst the stars. thi 
woman in her life voluntarili went down live to the grave, and came 
back again, as we learn from the record in her tomb; she chose to die 
her mortal death whilst young, so that at her resurrect in anoth 
age, beyond a tranc of countless magnitude, she might emerg from her 
tomb in all the ful and splendour of her youth and power. alreadi 
we have evid that though her bodi slept in patienc through those 
mani centuries, her intellig never pass away, that her resolut 
never flagged, that her will remain supreme; and, most import of 
all, that her memori wa unimpaired. oh, what possibl are there 
in the come of such a be into our midst! one whose histori began 
befor the concret teach of our bible; whose experi were 
anteced to the formul of the god of greece; who can link 
togeth the old and the new, earth and heaven, and yield to the known 
world of thought and physic exist the mysteri of the unknown--of 
the old world in it youth, and of world beyond our ken!" 

He paused, almost overcome. margaret had taken hi hand when he spoke 
of her be so dear to him, and held it hard. As he spoke she 
continu to hold it. but there came over her face that chang which I 
had so often seen of late; that mysteri veil of her own 
person which gave me the subtl sens of separ from her. In 
hi impass vehem her father did not notice; but when he 
stop she seem all at onc to be herself again. In her gloriou 
eye came the ad bright of unsh tears; and with a gestur of 
passion love and admiration, she stoop and kiss her father' 
hand. then, turn to me, she too spoke: 

"malcolm, you have spoken of the death that came from the poor queen; 
or rather that justli came from meddl with her arrang and 
thwart her purpose. Do you not think that, in put it as you have 
done, you have been unjust? who would not have done just as she did? 
rememb she wa fight for her life! ay, and for more than her 
life! for life, and love, and all the gloriou possibl of that 
dim futur in the unknown world of the north which had such enchant 
hope for her! Do you not think that she, with all the learn of her 
time, and with all the great and resistless forc of her mighti nature, 
had hope of spread in a wider way the lofti aspir of her 
soul! that she hope to bring to the conquer of unknown worlds, and 
use to the advantag of her people, all that she had won from sleep 
and death and time; all of which might and could have been frustrat 
by the ruthless hand of an assassin or a thief. were it you, in such 
case would you not struggl by all mean to achiev the object of your 
life and hope; whose possibl grew and grew in the pass of 
those endless years? can you think that that activ brain wa at rest 
dure all those weari centuries, whilst her free soul wa flit 
from world to world amongst the boundless region of the stars? had 
these star in their myriad and vari life no lesson for her; as they 
have had for us sinc we follow the gloriou path which she and her 
peopl mark for us, when they sent their wing imagin circl 
amongst the lamp of the night!" 

here she paused. she too wa overcome, and the well tear ran down 
her cheeks. I wa myself more move than I can say. thi wa inde my 
margaret; and in the conscious of her presenc my heart leapt. out 
of my happi came boldness, and I dare to say now what I had fear 
would be impossible: someth which would call the attent of mr. 
trelawni to what I imagin wa the dual exist of hi daughter. As 
I took margaret' hand in mine and kiss it, I said to her father: 

"why, sir! she couldn't speak more eloqu if the veri spirit of 
queen tera wa with her to anim her and suggest thoughts!" 

mr. trelawny' answer simpli overwhelm me with surprise. It 
manifest to me that he too had gone through just such a process of 
thought as my own. 

"and what if it was; if it is! I know well that the spirit of her 
mother is within her. If in addit there be the spirit of that great 
and wondrou queen, then she would be no less dear to me, but doubli 
dear! Do not have fear for her, malcolm ross; at least have no more 
fear than you may have for the rest of us!" margaret took up the 
theme, speak so quickli that her word seem a continu of her 
father's, rather than an interrupt of them. 

"have no special fear for me, malcolm. queen tera knows, and will 
offer us no harm. I know it! I know it, as sure as I am lost in the 
depth of my own love for you!" 

there wa someth in her voic so strang to me that I look quickli 
into her eyes. they were bright as ever, but veil to my see the 
inward thought behind them as are the eye of a cage lion. 

then the two other men came in, and the subject changed. 




chapter xviii 

the lesson of the "ka" 


that night we all went to bed early. the next night would be an 
anxiou one, and mr. trelawni thought that we should all be fortifi 
with what sleep we could get. the day, too, would be full of work. 
everyth in connect with the great experi would have to be 
gone over, so that at the last we might not fail from ani unthought-of 
flaw in our working. We made, of course, arrang for summon aid 
in case such should be needed; but I do not think that ani of us had 
ani real apprehens of danger. certainli we had no fear of such 
danger from violenc as we had had to guard against in london dure 
mr. trelawny' long trance. 

for my own part I felt a strang sens of relief in the matter. I had 
accept mr. trelawny' reason that if the queen were inde such as 
we surmised--such as inde we now took for granted--ther would not be 
ani opposit on her part; for we were carri out her own wish to 
the veri last. So far I wa at ease--far more at eas than earlier in 
the day I should have thought possible; but there were other sourc of 
troubl which I could not blot out from my mind. chief amongst them 
wa margaret' strang condition. If it wa inde that she had in her 
own person a dual existence, what might happen when the two exist 
becam one? again, and again, and again I turn thi matter over in my 
mind, till I could have shriek out in nervou anxiety. It wa no 
consol to me to rememb that margaret wa herself satisfied, and 
her father acquiescent. love is, after all, a selfish thing; and it 
throw a black shadow on anyth between which and the light it 
stands. I seem to hear the hand go round the dial of the clock; I 
saw dark turn to gloom, and gloom to grey, and grey to light 
without paus or hindranc to the success of my miser feelings. 
At last, when it wa decent possibl without the fear of disturb 
others, I got up. I crept along the passag to find if all wa well 
with the others; for we had arrang that the door of each of our room 
should be left slightli open so that ani sound of disturb would be 
easili and distinctli heard. 

one and all slept; I could hear the regular breath of each, and my 
heart rejoic that thi miser night of anxieti wa safe passed. 
As I knelt in my own room in a burst of thank prayer, I knew in the 
depth of my own heart the measur of my fear. I found my way out of 
the house, and went down to the water by the long stairway cut in the 
rock. A swim in the cool bright sea brace my nerv and made me my 
old self again. 

As I came back to the top of the step I could see the bright sunlight, 
rise from behind me, turn the rock across the bay to glitter 
gold. and yet I felt somehow disturbed. It wa all too bright; as it 
sometim is befor the come of a storm. As I paus to watch it, I 
felt a soft hand on my shoulder; and, turning, found margaret close to 
me; margaret as bright and radiant as the morn glori of the sun! It 
wa my own margaret thi time! My old margaret, without alloy of ani 
other; and I felt that, at least, thi last and fatal day wa well 
begun. 

but alas! the joy did not last. when we got back to the hous from a 
stroll around the cliffs, the same old routin of yesterday wa 
resumed: gloom and anxiety, hope, high spirits, deep depression, and 
apathet aloofness. 

but it wa to be a day of work; and we all brace ourselv to it with 
an energi which wrought it own salvation. 

after breakfast we all adjourn to the cave, where mr. trelawni went 
over, point by point, the posit of each item of our paraphernalia. 
He explain as he went on whi each piec wa so placed. He had with 
him the great roll of paper with the measur plan and the sign and 
draw which he had had made from hi own and corbeck' rough notes. 
As he had told us, these contain the whole of the hieroglyph on 
wall and ceil and floor of the tomb in the valley of the sorcerer. 
even had not the measurements, made to scale, record the posit of 
each piec of furniture, we could have eventu place them by a 
studi of the cryptic write and symbols. 

mr. trelawni explain to us certain other things, not laid down on the 
chart. such as, for instance, that the hollow part of the tabl wa 
exactli fit to the bottom of the magic coffer, which wa therefor 
intend to be place on it. the respect leg of thi tabl were 
indic by differ shape uraei outlin on the floor, the head 
of each be extend in the direct of the similar uraeu twine 
round the leg. also that the mummy, when laid on the rais portion in 
the bottom of the sarcophagus, seemingli made to fit the form, would 
lie head to the west and feet to the east, thu receiv the natur 
earth currents. "if thi be intended," he said, "a I presum it is, I 
gather that the forc to be use ha someth to do with magnet or 
electricity, or both. It may be, of course, that some other force, 
such, for instance, as that eman from radium, is to be employed. 
I have experi with the latter, but onli in such small quantiti as 
I could obtain; but so far as I can ascertain the stone of the coffer 
is absolut impervi to it influence. there must be some such 
unsuscept substanc in nature. radium doe not seemingli manifest 
itself when distribut through pitchblende; and there are doubtless 
other such substanc in which it can be imprisoned. possibl these 
may belong to that class of "inert" element discov or isol by 
sir william ramsay. It is therefor possibl that in thi coffer, made 
from an aerolit and therefor perhap contain some element unknown 
in our world, may be imprison some mighti power which is to be 
releas on it opening." 

thi appear to be an end of thi branch of the subject; but as he 
still kept the fix look of one who is engag in a theme we all 
wait in silence. after a paus he went on: 

"there is one thing which ha up to now, I confess, puzzl me. It may 
not be of prime importance; but in a matter like this, where all is 
unknown, we must take it that everyth is important. I cannot think 
that in a matter work out with such extraordinari scrupulos such a 
thing should be overlooked. As you may see by the ground-plan of the 
tomb the sarcophagu stand near the north wall, with the magic coffer 
to the south of it. the space cover by the former is left quit bare 
of symbol or ornament of ani kind. At the first glanc thi would 
seem to impli that the draw had been made after the sarcophagu had 
been put into it place. but a more minut examin will show that 
the symbolis on the floor is so arrang that a definit effect is 
produced. see, here the write run in correct order as though they 
had jump across the gap. It is onli from certain effect that it 
becom clear that there is a mean of some kind. what that mean 
may be is what we want to know. look at the top and bottom of the 
vacant space, which lie west and east correspond to the head and 
foot of the sarcophagus. In both are duplic of the same 
symbolisation, but so arrang that the part of each one of them are 
integr portion of some other write run crosswise. It is onli 
when we get a coup d'oeil from either the head or the foot that you 
recognis that there are symbolisations. see! they are in triplic 
at the corner and the centr of both top and bottom. In everi case 
there is a sun cut in half by the line of the sarcophagus, as by the 
horizon. close behind each of these and face away from it, as though 
in some way depend on it, is the vase which in hieroglyph write 
symbolis the heart--'ab' the egyptian call it. beyond each of 
these again is the figur of a pair of widespread arm turn upward 
from the elbow; thi is the determin of the 'ka' or 'double'. but 
it rel posit is differ at top and bottom. At the head of 
the sarcophagu the top of the 'ka' is turn toward the mouth of the 
vase, but at the foot the extend arm point away from it. 

"the symbolis seem to mean that dure the pass of the sun 
from west to east--from sunset to sunrise, or through the under world, 
otherwis night--th heart, which is materi even in the tomb and 
cannot leav it, simpli revolves, so that it can alway rest on 'ra' 
the sun-god, the origin of all good; but that the double, which 
repres the activ principle, goe whither it will, the same by 
night as by day. If thi be correct it is a warning--a caution--a 
remind that the conscious of the mummi doe not rest but is to be 
reckon with. 

"or it may be intend to convey that after the particular night of the 
resurrection, the 'ka' would leav the heart altogether, thu typifi 
that in her resurrect the queen would be restor to a lower and 
pure physic existence. In such case what would becom of her 
memori and the experi of her wide-wand soul? the chiefest 
valu of her resurrect would be lost to the world! this, however, 
doe not alarm me. It is onli guess-work after all, and is 
contradictori to the intellectu belief of the egyptian theology, that 
the 'ka' is an essenti portion of humanity." He paus and we all 
waited. the silenc wa broken by doctor winchester: 

"but would not all thi impli that the queen fear intrus of her 
tomb?" mr. trelawni smile as he answered: 

"mi dear sir, she wa prepar for it. the grave robber is no modern 
applic of endeavour; he wa probabl known in the queen' own 
dynasty. not onli wa she prepar for intrusion, but, as shown in 
sever ways, she expect it. the hide of the lamp in the serdab, 
and the institut of the aveng 'treasurer' show that there wa 
defence, posit as well as negative. indeed, from the mani 
indic afford in the clue laid out with the most consumm 
thought, we may almost gather that she entertain it as a possibl 
that others--lik ourselves, for instance--might in all serious 
undertak the work which she had made readi for her own hand when the 
time should have come. thi veri matter that I have been speak of 
is an instance. the clue is intend for see eyes!" 

again we were silent. It wa margaret who spoke: 

"father, may I have that chart? I should like to studi it dure the 
day!" 

"certainly, my dear!" answer mr. trelawni heartily, as he hand it 
to her. He resum hi instruct in a differ tone, a more 
matter-of-fact one suitabl to a practic theme which had no mysteri 
about it: 

"I think you had better all understand the work of the electr 
light in case ani sudden conting should arise. I dare say you have 
notic that we have a complet suppli in everi part of the house, so 
that there need not be a dark corner anywhere. thi I had special 
arranged. It is work by a set of turbin move by the flow and 
eb tide, after the manner of the turbin at niagara. I hope by 
thi mean to nullifi accid and to have without fail a full suppli 
readi at ani time. come with me and I will explain the system of 
circuits, and point out to you the tap and the fuses." I could not 
but notice, as we went with him all over the house, how absolut 
complet the system was, and how he had guard himself against ani 
disast that human thought could foresee. 

but out of the veri complet came a fear! In such an enterpris as 
our the bound of human thought were but narrow. beyond it lay the 
vast of divin wisdom, and divin power! 

when we came back to the cave, mr. trelawni took up anoth theme: 

"we have now to settl definit the exact hour at which the great 
experi is to be made. So far as scienc and mechan go, if the 
prepar are complete, all hour are the same. but as we have to 
deal with prepar made by a woman of extraordinarili subtl mind, 
and who had full belief in magic and had a cryptic mean in 
everything, we should place ourselv in her posit befor deciding. 
It is now manifest that the sunset ha an import place in the 
arrangements. As those suns, cut so mathemat by the edg of the 
sarcophagus, were arrang of full design, we must take our cue from 
this. again, we find all along that the number seven ha had an 
import bear on everi phase of the queen' thought and reason 
and action. the logic result is that the seventh hour after sunset 
wa the time fix on. thi is born out by the fact that on each of 
the occas when action wa taken in my house, thi wa the time 
chosen. As the sun set tonight in cornwal at eight, our hour is to 
be three in the morning!" He spoke in a matter-of-fact way, though 
with great gravity; but there wa noth of mysteri in hi word or 
manner. still, we were all impress to a remark degree. I could 
see thi in the other men by the pallor that came on some of their 
faces, and by the still and unquest silenc with which the 
decis wa received. the onli one who remain in ani way at eas 
wa margaret, who had laps into one of her mood of abstraction, but 
who seem to wake up to a note of gladness. her father, who wa 
watch her intently, smiled; her mood wa to him a direct 
confirm of hi theory. 

for myself I wa almost overcome. the definit fix of the hour 
seem like the voic of doom. when I think of it now, I can realis 
how a condemn man feel at hi sentence, or at the sound of the 
last hour he is to hear. 

there could be no go back now! We were in the hand of god! 

the hand of god...! and yet...! what other forc were arrayed? ... 
what would becom of us all, poor atom of earthli dust whirl in the 
wind which cometh whenc and goeth whither no man may know. It wa not 
for myself... margaret...! 

I wa recal by mr. trelawny' firm voice: 

"now we shall see to the lamp and finish our preparations." 
accordingli we set to work, and under hi supervis made readi the 
egyptian lamps, see that they were well fill with the cedar oil, 
and that the wick were adjust and in good order. We light and 
test them one by one, and left them readi so that they would light at 
onc and evenly. when thi wa done we had a gener look round; and 
fix all in readi for our work at night. 

all thi had taken time, and we were I think all surpris when as we 
emerg from the cave we heard the great clock in the hall chime four. 

We had a late lunch, a thing possibl without troubl in the present 
state of our commissariat arrangements. after it, by mr. trelawny' 
advice, we separated; each to prepar in our own way for the strain of 
the come night. margaret look pale and somewhat overwrought, so I 
advis her to lie down and tri to sleep. she promis that she would. 
the abstract which had been upon her fit all day lift for the 
time; with all her old sweet and love delicaci she kiss me 
good-by for the present! with the sens of happi which thi gave 
me I went out for a walk on the cliffs. I did not want to think; and I 
had an instinct feel that fresh air and god' sunlight, and the 
myriad beauti of the work of hi hand would be the best prepar 
of fortitud for what wa to come. 

when I got back, all the parti were assembl for a late tea. come 
fresh from the exhilar of nature, it struck me as almost comic 
that we, who were near the end of so strange--almost monstrous--an 
undertaking, should be yet bound by the need and habit of our lives. 

all the men of the parti were grave; the time of seclusion, even if it 
had given them rest, had also given opportun for thought. margaret 
wa bright, almost buoyant; but I miss about her someth of her 
usual spontaneity. toward myself there wa a shadowi air of reserve, 
which brought back someth of my suspicion. when tea wa over, she 
went out of the room; but return in a minut with the roll of draw 
which she had taken with her earlier in the day. come close to mr. 
trelawny, she said: 

"father, I have been care consid what you said today about 
the hidden mean of those sun and heart and 'ka's', and I have been 
examin the draw again." 

"and with what result, my child?" ask mr. trelawni eagerly. 

"there is anoth read possible!" 

"and that?" hi voic wa now tremul with anxiety. margaret spoke 
with a strang ring in her voice; a ring that cannot be, unless there 
is the conscious of truth behind it: 

"it mean that at the sunset the 'ka' is to enter the 'ab'; and it is 
onli at the sunris that it will leav it!" 

"go on!" said her father hoarsely. 

"it mean that for thi night the queen' double, which is otherwis 
free, will remain in her heart, which is mortal and cannot leav it 
prison-plac in the mummy-shrouding. It mean that when the sun ha 
drop into the sea, queen tera will ceas to exist as a consciou 
power, till sunrise; unless the great experi can recal her to 
wake life. It mean that there will be noth whatev for you or 
other to fear from her in such way as we have all caus to remember. 
whatev chang may come from the work of the great experiment, 
there can come none from the poor, helpless, dead woman who ha wait 
all those centuri for thi night; who ha given up to the come hour 
all the freedom of eternity, won in the old way, in hope of a new life 
in a new world such as she long for...!" she stop suddenly. As 
she had gone on speak there had come with her word a strang 
pathetic, almost pleading, tone which touch me to the quick. As she 
stopped, I could see, befor she turn away her head, that her eye 
were full of tears. 

for onc the heart of her father did not respond to her feeling. He 
look exultant, but with a grim master which remind me of the 
set look of hi stern face as he had lain in the trance. He did not 
offer ani consol to hi daughter in her sympathet pain. He onli 
said: 

"we may test the accuraci of your surmise, and of her feeling, when the 
time comes!" have said so, he went up the stone stairway and into hi 
own room. margaret' face had a troubl look as she gaze after him. 

strang enough her troubl did not as usual touch me to the quick. 

when mr. trelawni had gone, silenc reigned. I do not think that ani 
of us want to talk. present margaret went to her room, and I went 
out on the terrac over the sea. the fresh air and the beauti of all 
befor help to restor the good spirit which I had known earlier in 
the day. present I felt myself actual rejoic in the belief that 
the danger which I had fear from the queen' violenc on the come 
night wa obviated. I believ in margaret' belief so thoroughli that 
it did not occur to me to disput her reasoning. In a lofti frame of 
mind, and with less anxieti than I had felt for days, I went to my room 
and lay down on the sofa. 

I wa awak by corbeck call to me, hurriedly: 

"come down to the cave as quickli as you can. mr. trelawni want to 
see us all there at once. hurry!" 

I jump up and ran down to the cave. all were there except margaret, 
who came immedi after me carri silvio in her arms. when the 
cat saw hi old enemi he struggl to get down; but margaret held him 
fast and sooth him. I look at my watch. It wa close to eight. 

when margaret wa with us her father said directly, with a quiet 
insist which wa new to me: 

"you believe, margaret, that queen tera ha voluntarili undertaken to 
give up her freedom for thi night? To becom a mummi and noth 
more, till the experi ha been completed? To be content that she 
shall be powerless under all and ani circumst until after all is 
over and the act of resurrect ha been accomplished, or the effort 
ha failed?" after a paus margaret answer in a low voice: 

"yes!" 

In the paus her whole being, appearance, expression, voice, manner had 
changed. even silvio notic it, and with a violent effort wriggl 
away from her arms; she did not seem to notic the act. I expect 
that the cat, when he had achiev hi freedom, would have attack the 
mummy; but on thi occas he did not. He seem too cow to 
approach it. He shrunk away, and with a piteou "miaou" came over and 
rub himself against my ankles. I took him up in my arms, and he 
nestl there content. mr. trelawni spoke again: 

"you are sure of what you say! you believ it with all your soul?" 
margaret' face had lost the abstract look; it now seem illumin 
with the devot of one to whom is given to speak of great things. 
she answer in a voic which, though quiet, vibrat with conviction: 

"I know it! My knowledg is beyond belief!" mr. trelawni spoke again: 

"then you are so sure, that were you queen tera herself, you would be 
will to prove it in ani way that I might suggest?" 

"yes, ani way!" the answer rang out fearlessly. He spoke again, in a 
voic in which wa no note of doubt: 

"even in the abandon of your familiar to death--to annihilation." 

she paused, and I could see that she suffered--suff horribly. 
there wa in her eye a hunt look, which no man can, unmoved, see in 
the eye of hi beloved. I wa about to interrupt, when her father' 
eyes, glanc round with a fierc determination, met mine. I stood 
silent, almost spellbound; so also the other men. someth wa go 
on befor us which we did not understand! 

with a few long stride mr. trelawni went to the west side of the cave 
and tore back the shutter which obscur the window. the cool air blew 
in, and the sunlight stream over them both, for margaret wa now by 
hi side. He point to where the sun wa sink into the sea in a 
halo of golden fire, and hi face wa as set as flint. In a voic 
whose absolut uncompromis hard I shall hear in my ear at time 
till my die day, he said: 

"choose! speak! when the sun ha dip below the sea, it will be too 
late!" the glori of the die sun seem to light up margaret' face, 
till it shone as if lit from within by a nobl light, as she answered: 

"even that!" 

then step over to where the mummi cat stood on the littl table, 
she place her hand on it. she had now left the sunlight, and the 
shadow look dark and deep over her. In a clear voic she said: 

"were I tera, I would say 'take all I have! thi night is for the god 
alone!'" 

As she spoke the sun dipped, and the cold shadow suddenli fell on us. 
We all stood still for a while. silvio jump from my arm and ran 
over to hi mistress, rear himself up against her dress as if ask 
to be lifted. He took no notic whatev of the mummi now. 

margaret wa gloriou with all her wont sweet as she said sadly: 

"the sun is down, father! shall ani of us see it again? the night of 
night is come!" 




chapter xix 

the great experi 


If ani evid had been want of how absolut one and all of us had 
come to believ in the spiritu exist of the egyptian queen, it 
would have been found in the chang which in a few minut had been 
effect in us by the statement of voluntari negat made, we all 
believed, through margaret. despit the come of the fear ordeal, 
the sens of which it wa imposs to forget, we look and act as 
though a great relief had come to us. We had inde live in such a 
state of terror dure the day when mr. trelawni wa lie in a 
tranc that the feel had bitten deepli into us. No one know till 
he ha experienc it, what it is to be in constant dread of some 
unknown danger which may come at ani time and in ani form. 

the chang wa manifest in differ ways, accord to each nature. 
margaret wa sad. doctor winchest wa in high spirits, and keenli 
observant; the process of thought which had serv as an antidot to 
fear, be now reliev from thi duty, ad to hi intellectu 
enthusiasm. mr. corbeck seem to be in a retrospect rather than a 
specul mood. I wa myself rather inclin to be gay; the relief 
from certain anxieti regard margaret wa suffici for me for the 
time. 

As to mr. trelawni he seem less chang than any. perhap thi wa 
onli natural, as he had had in hi mind the intent for so mani year 
of do that in which we were tonight engaged, that ani event 
connect with it could onli seem to him as an episode, a step to the 
end. hi wa that command natur which look so to the end of an 
undertak that all els is of secondari importance. even now, though 
hi terribl stern relax under the relief from the strain, he 
never flag nor falter for a moment in hi purpose. He ask us 
men to come with him; and go to the hall we present manag to 
lower into the cave an oak table, fairli long and not too wide, which 
stood against the wall in the hall. thi we place under the strong 
cluster of electr light in the middl of the cave. margaret look 
on for a while; then all at onc her face blanched, and in an agit 
voic she said: 

"what are you go to do, father?" 

"to unrol the mummi of the cat! queen tera will not need her familiar 
tonight. If she should want him, it might be danger to us; so we 
shall make him safe. you are not alarmed, dear?" 

"oh no!" she answer quickly. "but I wa think of my silvio, and 
how I should feel if he had been the mummi that wa to be unswathed!" 

mr. trelawni got knive and scissor ready, and place the cat on the 
table. It wa a grim begin to our work; and it made my heart sink 
when I thought of what might happen in that lone hous in the 
mid-gloom of the night. the sens of loneli and isol from the 
world wa increas by the moan of the wind which had now risen 
ominously, and by the beat of wave on the rock below. but we had 
too grave a task befor us to be sway by extern manifestations: 
the unrol of the mummi began. 

there wa an incred number of bandages; and the tear sound--they 
be stuck fast to each other by bitumen and gum and spices--and the 
littl cloud of red pungent dust that arose, press on the sens of 
all of us. As the last wrap came away, we saw the anim seat 
befor us. He wa all hunker up; hi hair and teeth and claw were 
complete. the eye were closed, but the eyelid had not the fierc 
look which I expected. the whisker had been press down on the side 
of the face by the bandaging; but when the pressur wa taken away they 
stood out, just as they would have done in life. He wa a magnific 
creature, a tiger-cat of great size. but as we look at him, our 
first glanc of admir chang to one of fear, and a shudder ran 
through each one of us; for here wa a confirm of the fear which 
we had endured. 

hi mouth and hi claw were smear with the dry, red stain of recent 
blood! 

doctor winchest wa the first to recover; blood in itself had small 
disturb qualiti for him. He had taken out hi magnifying-glass and 
wa examin the stain on the cat' mouth. mr. trelawni breath 
loudly, as though a strain had been taken from him. 

"it is as I expected," he said. "thi promis well for what is to 
follow." 

By thi time doctor winchest wa look at the red stain paws. 
"a I expected!" he said. "he ha seven claws, too!" open hi 
pocket-book, he took out the piec of blotting-pap mark by silvio' 
claws, on which wa also mark in pencil a diagram of the cut made on 
mr. trelawny' wrist. He place the paper under the mummi cat' paw. 
the mark fit exactly. 

when we had care examin the cat, finding, however, noth 
strang about it but it wonder preservation, mr. trelawni lift it 
from the table. margaret start forward, cri out: 

"take care, father! take care! He may injur you!" 

"not now, my dear!" he answer as he move toward the stairway. her 
face fell. "where are you going?" she ask in a faint voice. 

"to the kitchen," he answered. "fire will take away all danger for the 
future; even an astral bodi cannot materialis from ashes!" He sign 
to us to follow him. margaret turn away with a sob. I went to her; 
but she motion me back and whispered: 

"no, no! Go with the others. father may want you. oh! it seem like 
murder! the poor queen' pet...!" the tear were drop from under 
the finger that cover her eyes. 

In the kitchen wa a fire of wood readi laid. To thi mr. trelawni 
appli a match; in a few second the kindl had caught and the 
flame leaped. when the fire wa solidli ablaze, he threw the bodi of 
the cat into it. for a few second it lay a dark mass amidst the 
flames, and the room wa rank with the smell of burn hair. then the 
dri bodi caught fire too. the inflamm substanc use in embalm 
becam new fuel, and the flame roared. A few minut of fierc 
conflagration; and then we breath freely. queen tera' familiar wa 
no more! 

when we went back to the cave we found margaret sit in the dark. 
she had switch off the electr light, and onli a faint glow of the 
even light came through the narrow openings. her father went 
quickli over to her and put hi arm round her in a love protect 
way. she laid her head on hi shoulder for a minut and seem 
comforted. present she call to me: 

"malcolm, turn up the light!" I carri out her orders, and could see 
that, though she had been crying, her eye were now dry. her father 
saw it too and look glad. He said to us in a grave tone: 

"now we had better prepar for our great work. It will not do to leav 
anyth to the last!" margaret must have had a suspicion of what wa 
coming, for it wa with a sink voic that she asked: 

"what are you go to do now?" mr. trelawni too must have had a 
suspicion of her feelings, for he answer in a low tone: 

"to unrol the mummi of queen tera!" she came close to him and said 
pleadingli in a whisper: 

"father, you are not go to unswath her! all you men...! and in 
the glare of light!" 

"but whi not, my dear?" 

"just think, father, a woman! all alone! In such a way! In such a 
place! oh! it' cruel, cruel!" she wa manifestli much overcome. her 
cheek were flame red, and her eye were full of indign tears. 
her father saw her distress; and, sympathis with it, began to 
comfort her. I wa move off; but he sign to me to stay. I took it 
that after the usual manner of men he want help on such an occasion, 
and man-lik wish to throw on someon els the task of deal with a 
woman in indign distress. however, he began to appeal first to her 
reason: 

"not a woman, dear; a mummy! she ha been dead nearli five thousand 
years!" 

"what doe that matter? sex is not a matter of years! A woman is a 
woman, if she had been dead five thousand centuries! and you expect 
her to aris out of that long sleep! It could not be real death, if 
she is to rise out of it! you have led me to believ that she will 
come aliv when the coffer is opened!" 

"I did, my dear; and I believ it! but if it isn't death that ha been 
the matter with her all these years, it is someth uncommonli like 
it. then again, just think; it wa men who embalm her. they didn't 
have women' right or ladi doctor in ancient egypt, my dear! and 
besides," he went on more freely, see that she wa accept hi 
argument, if not yield to it, "we men are accustom to such things. 
corbeck and I have unrol a hundr mummies; and there were as mani 
women as men amongst them. doctor winchest in hi work ha had to 
deal with women as well of men, till custom ha made him think noth 
of sex. even ross ha in hi work as a barrister..." He stop 
suddenly. 

"you were go to help too!" she said to me, with an indign look. 

I said nothing; I thought silenc wa best. mr. trelawni went on 
hurriedly; I could see that he wa glad of interruption, for the part 
of hi argument concern a barrister' work wa becom decidedli 
weak: 

"mi child, you will be with us yourself. would we do anyth which 
would hurt or offend you? come now! be reasonable! We are not at a 
pleasur party. We are all grave men, enter grave on an 
experi which may unfold the wisdom of old times, and enlarg human 
knowledg indefinitely; which may put the mind of men on new track of 
thought and research. An experiment," as he went on hi voic 
deepened, "which may be fraught with death to ani one of us--to us all! 
We know from what ha been, that there are, or may be, vast and unknown 
danger ahead of us, of which none in the hous today may ever see the 
end. take it, my child, that we are not act lightly; but with all 
the graviti of deepli earnest men! besides, my dear, whatev feel 
you or ani of us may have on the subject, it is necessari for the 
success of the experi to unswath her. I think that under ani 
circumst it would be necessari to remov the wrap befor she 
becam again a live human be instead of a spiritualis corps with 
an astral body. were her origin intent carri out, and did she 
come to new life within her mummi wrappings, it might be to exchang a 
coffin for a grave! she would die the death of the buri alive! but 
now, when she ha voluntarili abandon for the time her astral power, 
there can be no doubt on the subject." 

margaret' face cleared. "all right, father!" she said as she kiss 
him. "but oh! it seem a horribl indign to a queen, and a woman." 

I wa move away to the staircas when she call me: 

"where are you going?" I came back and took her hand and stroke it as 
I answered: 

"I shall come back when the unrol is over!" she look at me long, 
and a faint suggest of a smile came over her face as she said: 

"perhap you had better stay, too! It may be use to you in your 
work as a barrister!" she smile out as she met my eyes: but in an 
instant she changed. her face grew grave, and deadli white. In a far 
away voic she said: 

"father is right! It is a terribl occasion; we need all to be seriou 
over it. but all the same--nay, for that veri reason you had better 
stay, malcolm! you may be glad, later on, that you were present 
tonight!" 

My heart sank down, down, at her words; but I thought it better to say 
nothing. fear wa stalk openli enough amongst us already! 

By thi time mr. trelawny, assist by mr. corbeck and doctor 
winchester, had rais the lid of the ironston sarcophagu which 
contain the mummi of the queen. It wa a larg one; but it wa none 
too big. the mummi wa both long and broad and high; and wa of such 
weight that it wa no easi task, even for the four of us, to lift it 
out. under mr. trelawny' direct we laid it out on the tabl 
prepar for it. 

then, and then only, did the full horror of the whole thing burst upon 
me! there, in the full glare of the light, the whole materi and 
sordid side of death seem staringli real. the outer wrappings, torn 
and loosen by rude touch, and with the colour either darken by dust 
or worn light by friction, seem creas as by rough treatment; the 
jag edg of the wrapping-cloth look fringed; the paint wa 
patchy, and the varnish chipped. the cover were evid many, 
for the bulk wa great. but through all, show that unhid human 
figure, which seem to look more horribl when partial conceal than 
at ani other time. what wa befor us wa death, and noth else. 
all the romanc and sentiment of fanci had disappeared. the two elder 
men, enthusiast who had often done such work, were not disconcerted; 
and doctor winchest seem to hold himself in a business-lik 
attitude, as if befor the operating-table. but I felt low-spirited, 
and miserable, and ashamed; and besid I wa pain and alarm by 
margaret' ghastli pallor. 

then the work began. the unrol of the mummi cat had prepar me 
somewhat for it; but thi wa so much larger, and so infinit more 
elaborate, that it seem a differ thing. moreover, in addit to 
the ever present sens of death and humanity, there wa a feel of 
someth finer in all this. the cat had been embalm with coarser 
materials; here, all, when onc the outer cover were removed, wa 
more delic done. It seem as if onli the finest gum and spice 
had been use in thi embalming. but there were the same surroundings, 
the same attend red dust and pungent presenc of bitumen; there wa 
the same sound of rend which mark the tear away of the 
bandages. there were an enorm number of these, and their bulk when 
open wa great. As the men unrol them, I grew more and more 
excited. I did not take a part in it myself; margaret had look at me 
grate as I drew back. We clasp hands, and held each other hard. 
As the unrol went on, the wrap becam finer, and the smell 
less laden with bitumen, but more pungent. We all, I think, began to 
feel it as though it caught or touch us in some special way. this, 
however, did not interfer with the work; it went on uninterruptedly. 
some of the inner wrap bore symbol or pictures. these were done 
sometim wholli in pale green colour, sometim in mani colours; but 
alway with a preval of green. now and again mr. trelawni or mr. 
corbeck would point out some special draw befor lay the bandag 
on the pile behind them, which kept grow to a monstrou height. 

At last we knew that the wrap were come to an end. alreadi the 
proport were reduc to those of a normal figur of the manifest 
height of the queen, who wa more than averag height. and as the end 
drew nearer, so margaret' pallor grew; and her heart beat more and 
more wildly, till her breast heav in a way that frighten me. 

just as her father wa take away the last of the bandages, he 
happen to look up and caught the pain and anxiou look of her pale 
face. He paused, and take her concern to be as to the outrag on 
modesty, said in a comfort way: 

"do not be uneasy, dear! see! there is noth to harm you. the queen 
ha on a robe.--ay, and a royal robe, too!" 

the wrap wa a wide piec the whole length of the body. It be 
removed, a profus full robe of white linen had appeared, cover 
the bodi from the throat to the feet. 

and such linen! We all bent over to look at it. 

margaret lost her concern, in her woman' interest in fine stuff. then 
the rest of us look with admiration; for sure such linen wa never 
seen by the eye of our age. It wa as fine as the finest silk. but 
never wa spun or woven silk which lay in such graciou folds, 
constrict though they were by the close wrap of the mummi cloth, 
and fix into hard by the pass of thousand of years. 

round the neck it wa delic embroid in pure gold with tini 
spray of sycamore; and round the feet, similarli worked, wa an 
endless line of lotu plant of unequ height, and with all the 
grace abandon of natur growth. 

across the body, but manifestli not surround it, wa a girdl of 
jewels. A wondrou girdle, which shone and glow with all the form 
and phase and colour of the sky! 

the buckl wa a great yellow stone, round of outline, deep and curved, 
as if a yield globe had been press down. It shone and glowed, as 
though a verit sun lay within; the ray of it light seem to 
strike out and illumin all round. flank it were two great 
moonston of lesser size, whose glowing, besid the glori of the 
sunstone, wa like the silveri sheen of moonlight. 

and then on either side, link by golden clasp of exquisit shape, 
wa a line of flame jewels, of which the colour seem to glow. 
each of these stone seem to hold a live star, which twinkl in 
everi phase of chang light. 

margaret rais her hand in ecstasy. she bent over to examin more 
closely; but suddenli drew back and stood fulli erect at her grand 
height. she seem to speak with the convict of absolut knowledg 
as she said: 

"that is no cerement! It wa not meant for the cloth of death! It 
is a marriag robe!" 

mr. trelawni lean over and touch the linen robe. He lift a fold 
at the neck, and I knew from the quick intak of hi breath that 
someth had surpris him. He lift yet a littl more; and then he, 
too, stood back and pointed, saying: 

"margaret is right! that dress is not intend to be worn by the dead! 
see! her figur is not robe in it. It is but laid upon her." He 
lift the zone of jewel and hand it to margaret. then with both 
hand he rais the ampl robe, and laid it across the arm which she 
extend in a natur impulse. thing of such beauti were too preciou 
to be handl with ani but the greatest care. 

We all stood awe at the beauti of the figur which, save for the face 
cloth, now lay complet nude befor us. mr. trelawni bent over, and 
with hand that trembl slightly, rais thi linen cloth which wa of 
the same fine as the robe. As he stood back and the whole gloriou 
beauti of the queen wa revealed, I felt a rush of shame sweep over me. 
It wa not right that we should be there, gaze with irrever eye 
on such unclad beauty: it wa indecent; it wa almost sacrilegious! 
and yet the white wonder of that beauti form wa someth to dream 
of. It wa not like death at all; it wa like a statu carven in ivori 
by the hand of a praxiteles. there wa noth of that horribl 
shrinkag which death seem to effect in a moment. there wa none of 
the wrinkl tough which seem to be a lead characterist of 
most mummies. there wa not the shrunken attenu of a bodi dri in 
the sand, as I had seen befor in museums. all the pore of the bodi 
seem to have been preserv in some wonder way. the flesh wa 
full and round, as in a live person; and the skin wa as smooth as 
satin. the colour seem extraordinary. It wa like ivory, new ivory; 
except where the right arm, with shattered, bloodstain wrist and 
miss hand had lain bare to exposur in the sarcophagu for so mani 
ten of centuries. 

with a womanli impulse; with a mouth that droop with pity, with eye 
that flash with anger, and cheek that flamed, margaret threw over 
the bodi the beauti robe which lay across her arm. onli the face 
wa then to be seen. thi wa more startl even than the body, for 
it seem not dead, but alive. the eyelid were closed; but the long, 
black, curl lash lay over on the cheeks. the nostrils, set in 
grave pride, seem to have the repos which, when it is seen in life, 
is greater than the repos of death. the full, red lips, though the 
mouth wa not open, show the tiniest white line of pearli teeth 
within. her hair, gloriou in quantiti and glossi black as the raven' 
wing, wa pile in great mass over the white forehead, on which a few 
curl tress stray like tendrils. I wa amaz at the like to 
margaret, though I had had my mind prepar for thi by mr. corbeck' 
quotat of her father' statement. thi woman--i could not think of 
her as a mummi or a corpse--wa the imag of margaret as my eye had 
first lit on her. the like wa increas by the jewel ornament 
which she wore in her hair, the "disk and plumes", such as margaret, 
too, had worn. it, too, wa a gloriou jewel; one nobl pearl of 
moonlight lustre, flank by carven piec of moonstone. 

mr. trelawni wa overcom as he looked. He quit broke down; and when 
margaret flew to him and held him close in her arm and comfort him, 
I heard him murmur brokenly: 

"it look as if you were dead, my child!" 

there wa a long silence. I could hear without the roar of the wind, 
which wa now risen to a tempest, and the furiou dash of the wave 
far below. mr. trelawny' voic broke the spell: 

"later on we must tri and find out the process of embalming. It is not 
like ani that I know. there doe not seem to have been ani open cut 
for the withdraw of the viscera and organs, which appar remain 
intact within the body. then, again, there is no moistur in the 
flesh; but it place is suppli with someth else, as though wax or 
stearin had been convey into the vein by some subtl process. I 
wonder could it be possibl that at that time they could have use 
paraffin. It might have been, by some process that we know not, pump 
into the veins, where it hardened!" 

margaret, have thrown a white sheet over the queen' body, ask us 
to bring it to her own room, where we laid it on her bed. then she 
sent us away, saying: 

"leav her alon with me. there are still mani hour to pass, and I do 
not like to leav her lie there, all stark in the glare of light. 
thi may be the bridal she prepar for--th bridal of death; and at 
least she shall wear her pretti robes." 

when present she brought me back to her room, the dead queen wa 
dress in the robe of fine linen with the embroideri of gold; and all 
her beauti jewel were in place. candl were lit around her, and 
white flower lay upon her breast. 

hand in hand we stood look at her for a while. then with a sigh, 
margaret cover her with one of her own snowi sheets. she turn 
away; and after softli close the door of the room, went back with me 
to the other who had now come into the dine room. here we all began 
to talk over the thing that had been, and that were to be. 

now and again I could feel that one or other of us wa forc 
conversation, as if we were not sure of ourselves. the long wait wa 
begin to tell on our nerves. It wa appar to me that mr. 
trelawni had suffer in that strang tranc more than we suspected, or 
than he care to show. true, hi will and hi determin were as 
strong as ever; but the pure physic side of him had been weaken 
somewhat. It wa inde onli natur that it should be. No man can go 
through a period of four day of absolut negat of life without 
be weaken by it somehow. 

As the hour crept by, the time pass more and more slowly. the other 
men seem to get unconsci a littl drowsy. I wonder if in the 
case of mr. trelawni and mr. corbeck, who had alreadi been under the 
hypnot influenc of the queen, the same dormanc wa manifest 
itself. doctor winchest had period of distract which grew longer 
and more frequent as the time wore on. 

As to margaret, the suspens told on her exceedingly, as might have 
been expect in the case of a woman. she grew paler and paler still; 
till at last about midnight, I began to be serious alarm about her. 
I got her to come into the librari with me, and tri to make her lie 
down on a sofa for a littl while. As mr. trelawni had decid that 
the experi wa to be made exactli at the seventh hour after sunset, 
it would be as nearli as possibl three o'clock in the morn when the 
great trial should be made. even allow a whole hour for the final 
preparations, we had still two hour of wait to go through, and I 
promis faith to watch her and to awak her at ani time she might 
name. she would not hear of it, however. she thank me sweetli and 
smile at me as she did so; but she assur me that she wa not sleepy, 
and that she wa quit abl to bear up. that it wa onli the suspens 
and excit of wait that made her pale. I agre perforce; but I 
kept her talk of mani thing in the librari for more than an hour; 
so that at last, when she insist on go back to her father' room I 
felt that I had at least done someth to help her pass the time. 

We found the three men sit patient in silence. with manlik 
fortitud they were content to be still when they felt they had done 
all in their power. and so we waited. 

the strike of two o'clock seem to freshen us all up. whatev 
shadow had been settl over us dure the long hour preced 
seem to lift at once; and we went about our separ duti alert and 
with alacrity. We look first to the window to see that they were 
closed, and we got readi our respir to put them on when the time 
should be close at hand. We had from the first arrang to use them 
for we did not know whether some noxiou fume might not come from the 
magic coffer when it should be opened. somehow, it never seem to 
occur to ani of us that there wa ani doubt as to it opening. 

then, under margaret' guidance, we carri the mummi bodi of queen 
tera from her room into her father's, and laid it on a couch. We put 
the sheet lightli over it, so that if she should wake she could at onc 
slip from under it. the sever hand wa place in it true posit 
on her breast, and under it the jewel of seven star which mr. trelawni 
had taken from the great safe. It seem to flash and blaze as he put 
it in it place. 

It wa a strang sight, and a strang experience. the group of grave 
silent men carri the white still figure, which look like an ivori 
statu when through our move the sheet fell back, away from the 
light candl and the white flowers. We place it on the couch in 
that other room, where the blaze of the electr light shone on the 
great sarcophagu fix in the middl of the room readi for the final 
experiment, the great experi consequ on the research dure a 
lifetim of these two travel scholars. again, the startl 
like between margaret and the mummy, intensifi by her own 
extraordinari pallor, heighten the strang of it all. when all 
wa final fix three-quart of an hour had gone, for we were 
deliber in all our doings. margaret beckon me, and I went out 
with her to bring in silvio. He came to her purring. she took him up 
and hand him to me; and then did a thing which move me strang and 
brought home to me keenli the desper natur of the enterpris on 
which we were embarked. one by one, she blew out the candl care 
and place them back in their usual places. when she had finish she 
said to me: 

"they are done with now. whatev comes--lif or death--ther will be 
no purpos in their use now." then take silvio into her arms, and 
press him close to her bosom where he pur loudly, we went back to 
the room. I close the door care behind me, feel as I did so a 
strang thrill as of finality. there wa to be no go back now. 
then we put on our respirators, and took our place as had been 
arranged. I wa to stand by the tap of the electr light besid the 
door, readi to turn them off or on as mr. trelawni should direct. 
doctor winchest wa to stand behind the couch so that he should not 
be between the mummi and the sarcophagus; he wa to watch care 
what should take place with regard to the queen. margaret wa to be 
besid him; she held silvio readi to place him upon the couch or besid 
it when she might think right. mr. trelawni and mr. corbeck were to 
attend to the light of the lamps. when the hand of the clock were 
close to the hour, they stood readi with their linstocks. 

the strike of the silver bell of the clock seem to smite on our 
heart like a knell of doom. one! two! three! 

befor the third stroke the wick of the lamp had caught, and I had 
turn out the electr light. In the dim of the struggl lamps, 
and after the bright glow of the electr light, the room and all 
within it took weird shapes, and all seem in an instant to change. 
We wait with our heart beating. I know mine did, and I fanci I 
could hear the pulsat of the others. 

the second seem to pass with leaden wings. It were as though all 
the world were stand still. the figur of the other stood out 
dimly, margaret' white dress alon show clearli in the gloom. the 
thick respir which we all wore ad to the strang appearance. 
the thin light of the lamp show mr. trelawny' squar jaw and strong 
mouth and the brown shaven face of mr. corbeck. their eye seem to 
glare in the light. across the room doctor winchester' eye twinkl 
like stars, and margaret' blaze like black suns. silvio' eye were 
like emeralds. 

would the lamp never burn up! 

It wa onli a few second in all till they did blaze up. A slow, 
steadi light, grow more and more bright, and chang in colour from 
blue to crystal white. So they stay for a coupl of minut without 
chang in the coffer; till at last there began to appear all over it a 
delic glow. thi grew and grew, till it becam like a blaze 
jewel, and then like a live thing whose essenc of life wa light. 
We wait and waited, our heart seem to stand still. 

all at onc there wa a sound like a tini muffl explos and the 
cover lift right up on a level plane a few inches; there wa no 
mistak anyth now, for the whole room wa full of a blaze of 
light. then the cover, stay fast at one side rose slowli up on the 
other, as though yield to some pressur of balance. the coffer 
still continu to glow; from it began to steal a faint greenish smoke. 
I could not smell it fulli on account of the respirator; but, even 
through that, I wa consciou of a strang pungent odour. then thi 
smoke began to grow thicker, and to roll out in volum of ever 
increas densiti till the whole room began to get obscure. I had a 
terribl desir to rush over to margaret, whom I saw through the smoke 
still stand erect behind the couch. then, as I looked, I saw doctor 
winchest sink down. He wa not unconscious; for he wave hi hand 
back and forward, as though to forbid ani one to come to him. At thi 
time the figur of mr. trelawni and mr. corbeck were becom 
indistinct in the smoke which roll round them in thick billowi 
clouds. final I lost sight of them altogether. the coffer still 
continu to glow; but the lamp began to grow dim. At first I thought 
that their light wa be overpow by the thick black smoke; but 
present I saw that they were, one by one, burn out. they must 
have burn quickli to produc such fierc and vivid flames. 

I wait and waited, expect everi instant to hear the command to 
turn up the light; but none came. I wait still, and look with 
harrow intens at the roll billow of smoke still pour out 
of the glow casket, whilst the lamp sank down and went out one by 
one. 

final there wa but one lamp alight, and that wa dimli blue and 
flickering. the onli effect light in the room wa from the glow 
casket. I kept my eye fix toward margaret; it wa for her now that 
all my anxieti wa claimed. I could just see her white frock beyond 
the still white shroud figur on the couch. silvio wa troubled; hi 
piteou mew wa the onli sound in the room. deeper and denser grew 
the black mist and it pungenc began to assail my nostril as well as 
my eyes. now the volum of smoke come from the coffer seem to 
lessen, and the smoke itself to be less dense. across the room I saw 
someth white move where the couch was. there were sever 
movements. I could just catch the quick glint of white through the 
dens smoke in the fade light; for now the glow of the coffer began 
quickli to subside. I could still hear silvio, but hi mew came 
from close under; a moment later I could feel him piteous crouch 
on my foot. 

then the last spark of light disappeared, and through the egyptian 
dark I could see the faint line of white around the window blinds. 
I felt that the time had come to speak; so I pull off my respir 
and call out: 

"shall I turn up the light?" there wa no answer; so befor the thick 
smoke choke me, I call again but more loudly: 

"mr. trelawny, shall I turn up the light?" He did not answer; but from 
across the room I heard margaret' voice, sound as sweet and clear 
as a bell: 

"yes, malcolm!" I turn the tap and the lamp flash out. but they 
were onli dim point of light in the midst of that murki ball of smoke. 
In that thick atmospher there wa littl possibl of illumination. 
I ran across to margaret, guid by her white dress, and caught hold of 
her and held her hand. she recognis my anxieti and said at once: 

"I am all right." 

"thank god!" I said. "how are the others? quick, let us open all the 
window and get rid of thi smoke!" To my surprise, she answer in a 
sleepi way: 

"they will be all right. they won't get ani harm." I did not stop to 
inquir how or on what ground she form such an opinion, but threw up 
the lower sash of all the windows, and pull down the upper. then I 
threw open the door. 

A few second made a percept chang as the thick, black smoke began 
to roll out of the windows. then the light began to grow into 
strength and I could see the room. all the men were overcome. besid 
the couch doctor winchest lay on hi back as though he had sunk down 
and roll over; and on the farther side of the sarcophagus, where they 
had stood, lay mr. trelawni and mr. corbeck. It wa a relief to me to 
see that, though they were unconscious, all three were breath 
heavili as though in a stupor. margaret still stood behind the couch. 
she seem at first to be in a partial daze condition; but everi 
instant appear to get more command of herself. she step forward 
and help me to rais her father and drag him close to a window. 
togeth we place the other similarly, and she flew down to the 
dining-room and return with a decant of brandy. thi we proceed 
to administ to them all in turn. It wa not mani minut after we 
had open the window when all three were struggl back to 
consciousness. dure thi time my entir thought and effort had 
been concentr on their restoration; but now that thi strain wa 
off, I look round the room to see what had been the effect of the 
experiment. the thick smoke had nearli clear away; but the room wa 
still misti and wa full of a strang pungent acrid odour. 

the great sarcophagu wa just as it had been. the coffer wa open, 
and in it, scatter through certain divis or partit wrought in 
it own substance, wa a scatter of black ashes. over all, 
sarcophagus, coffer and, indeed, all in the room, wa a sort of black 
film of greasi soot. I went over to the couch. the white sheet still 
lay over part of it; but it had been thrown back, as might be when one 
is step out of bed. 

but there wa no sign of queen tera! I took margaret by the hand and 
led her over. she reluctantli left her father to whom she wa 
administering, but she came docil enough. I whisper to her as I 
held her hand: 

"what ha becom of the queen? tell me! you were close at hand, and 
must have seen if anyth happened!" she answer me veri softly: 

"there wa noth that I could see. until the smoke grew too dens I 
kept my eye on the couch, but there wa no change. then, when all 
grew so dark that I could not see, I thought I heard a movement close 
to me. It might have been doctor winchest who had sunk down overcome; 
but I could not be sure. I thought that it might be the queen waking, 
so I put down poor silvio. I did not see what becam of him; but I 
felt as if he had desert me when I heard him mew over by the door. 
I hope he is not offend with me!" As if in answer, silvio came 
run into the room and rear himself against her dress, pull it 
as though clamour to be taken up. she stoop down and took him up 
and began to pet and comfort him. 

I went over and examin the couch and all around it most carefully. 
when mr. trelawni and mr. corbeck recov sufficiently, which they 
did quickly, though doctor winchest took longer to come round, we 
went over it afresh. but all we could find wa a sort of ridg of 
impalp dust, which gave out a strang dead odour. On the couch lay 
the jewel of the disk and plume which the queen had worn in her hair, 
and the star jewel which had word to command the gods. 

other than thi we never got clue to what had happened. there wa just 
one thing which confirm our idea of the physic annihil of the 
mummy. In the sarcophagu in the hall, where we had place the mummi 
of the cat, wa a small patch of similar dust. 

* * * * * 

In the autumn margaret and I were married. On the occas she wore 
the mummi robe and zone and the jewel which queen tera had worn in her 
hair. On her breast, set in a ring of gold make like a twist lotu 
stalk, she wore the strang jewel of seven star which held word to 
command the god of all the worlds. At the marriag the sunlight 
stream through the chancel window fell on it, and it seem to glow 
like a live thing. 

the graven word may have been of efficacy; for margaret hold to them, 
and there is no other life in all the world so happi as my own. 

We often think of the great queen, and we talk of her freely. once, 
when I said with a sigh that I wa sorri she could not have wake into 
a new life in a new world, my wife, put both her hand in mine and 
look into my eye with that far-away eloqu dreami look which 
sometim come into her own, said lovingly: 

"do not griev for her! who knows, but she may have found the joy she 
sought? love and patienc are all that make for happi in thi 
world; or in the world of the past or of the future; of the live or 
the dead. she dream her dream; and that is all that ani of us can 
ask!" 



the end 








end of the project gutenberg ebook of the jewel of seven stars, by bram stoker 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the jewel OF seven star *** 

***** thi file should be name 3781.txt or 3781.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/8/3781/ 

produc by sue asscher. html version by Al haines. 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
