the project gutenberg ebook of four weird tales, by algernon blackwood 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: four weird tale 

author: algernon blackwood 

releas date: septemb 20, 2005 [ebook #16726] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook four weird tale *** 




produc by suzann shell, geetu melwani and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 








four weird tale 

BY 

algernon blackwood 


including: 

"the insan of jones" 
"the man who found out" 
"the glamour of the snow" and 
"sand" 




A note ON the text 

these stori first appear in blackwood' stori collections: 
"the insan of jones" in _the listen and other stories_ (1907); 
"the man who found out" in _the wolv of god and other fey stories_ 
(1921); 
"the glamour of the snow," and "sand" in _pan' garden_ (1912). 

* * * * * 




_the insan of jones_ 

(A studi in reincarnation) 


adventur come to the adventurous, and mysteri thing fall in the 
way of those who, with wonder and imagination, are on the watch for 
them; but the major of peopl go past the door that are half ajar, 
think them closed, and fail to notic the faint stir of the 
great curtain that hang ever in the form of appear between them 
and the world of caus behind. 

for onli to the few whose inner sens have been quickened, perchanc 
by some strang suffer in the depths, or by a natur tempera 
bequeath from a remot past, come the knowledge, not too welcome, 
that thi greater world lie ever at their elbow, and that ani moment a 
chanc combin of mood and forc may invit them to cross the 
shift frontier. 

some, however, are born with thi aw certainti in their hearts, and 
are call to no apprenticeship, and to thi select compani jone 
undoubtedli belonged. 

all hi life he had realis that hi sens brought to him mere a 
more or less interest set of sham appearances; that space, as men 
measur it, wa utterli misleading; that time, as the clock tick it 
in a success of minutes, wa arbitrari nonsense; and, in fact, that 
all hi sensori percept were but a clumsi represent of _real_ 
thing behind the curtain--th he wa for ever tri to get at, and 
that sometim he actual did get at. 

He had alway been tremblingli awar that he stood on the borderland 
of anoth region, a region where time and space were mere form of 
thought, where ancient memori lay open to the sight, and where the 
forc behind each human life stood plainli reveal and he could see 
the hidden spring at the veri heart of the world. moreover, the fact 
that he wa a clerk in a fire insur office, and did hi work with 
strict attention, never allow him to forget for one moment that, just 
beyond the dingi brick wall where the hundr men scribbl with 
point pen beneath the electr lamps, there exist thi gloriou 
region where the import part of himself dwelt and move and had it 
being. for in thi region he pictur himself play the part of a 
spectat to hi ordinari workaday life, watching, like a king, the 
stream of events, but untouch in hi own soul by the dirt, the noise, 
and the vulgar commot of the outer world. 

and thi wa no poetic dream merely. jone wa not play prettili with 
ideal to amus himself. It wa a living, work belief. So convinc 
wa he that the extern world wa the result of a vast decept 
practis upon him by the gross senses, that when he stare at a great 
build like st. paul' he felt it would not veri much surpris him to 
see it suddenli quiver like a shape of jelli and then melt utterli away, 
while in it place stood all at onc reveal the mass of colour, or the 
great intric vibrations, or the splendid sound--th spiritu 
idea--which it repres in stone. 

for someth in thi way it wa that hi mind worked. 

yet, to all appearances, and in the satisfact of all busi claims, 
jone wa normal and unenterprising. He felt noth but contempt for 
the wave of modern psychism. He hardli knew the mean of such word as 
"clairvoyance" and "clairaudience." He had never felt the least desir 
to join the theosoph societi and to specul in theori of 
astral-plan life, or elementals. He attend no meet of the 
psychic research society, and knew no anxieti as to whether hi "aura" 
wa black or blue; nor wa he consciou of the slightest wish to mix in 
with the reviv of cheap occult which prove so attract to weak 
mind of mystic tendenc and unleash imaginations. 

there were certain thing he _knew_, but none he care to argu about; 
and he shrank instinct from attempt to put name to the content 
of thi other region, know well that such name could onli limit and 
defin thing that, accord to ani standard in use in the ordinari 
world, were simpli undefin and illusive. 

So that, although thi wa the way hi mind worked, there wa clearli a 
veri strong leaven of common sens in jones. In a word, the man the 
world and the offic knew as jone _was_ jones. the name sum him up 
and label him correctly--john enderbi jones. 

among the thing that he _knew_, and therefor never care to speak or 
specul about, one wa that he plainli saw himself as the inheritor 
of a long seri of past lives, the net result of pain evolution, 
alway as himself, of course, but in numer differ bodi each 
determin by the behaviour of the preced one. the present john jone 
wa the last result to date of all the previou thinking, feeling, 
and do of john jone in earlier bodi and in other centuries. He 
pretend to no details, nor claim distinguish ancestry, for he 
realis hi past must have been utterli commonplac and insignific 
to have produc hi present; but he wa just as sure he had been at 
thi weari game for age as that he breathed, and it never occur to 
him to argue, to doubt, or to ask questions. and one result of thi 
belief wa that hi thought dwelt upon the past rather than upon the 
future; that he read much history, and felt special drawn to certain 
period whose spirit he understood instinct as though he had live 
in them; and that he found all religion uninterest because, almost 
without exception, they start from the present and specul ahead as to 
what men shall become, instead of look back and specul whi men 
have got here as they are. 

In the insur offic he did hi work exceedingli well, but without 
much person ambition. men and women he regard as the imperson 
instrument for inflict upon him the pain or pleasur he had earn 
by hi past workings, for chanc had no place in hi scheme of thing at 
all; and while he recognis that the practic world could not get 
along unless everi man did hi work thoroughli and conscientiously, he 
took no interest in the accumul of fame or money for himself, and 
simply, therefore, did hi plain duty, with indiffer as to results. 

In common with other who lead a strictli imperson life, he possess 
the qualiti of utter bravery, and wa alway readi to face ani 
combin of circumstances, no matter how terrible, becaus he saw in 
them the just working-out of past caus he had himself set in motion 
which could not be dodg or modified. and wherea the major of 
peopl had littl mean for him, either by way of attract or 
repulsion, the moment he met some one with whom he felt hi past had 
been _vitally_ interwoven hi whole inner be leapt up instantli and 
shout the fact in hi face, and he regul hi life with the utmost 
skill and caution, like a sentri on watch for an enemi whose feet could 
alreadi be heard approaching. 

thus, while the great major of men and women left him 
uninfluenced--sinc he regard them as so mani soul mere pass 
with him along the great stream of evolution--ther were, here and 
there, individu with whom he recognis that hi smallest intercours 
wa of the gravest importance. these were person with whom he knew 
in everi fibr of hi be he had account to settle, pleasant or 
otherwise, aris out of deal in past lives; and into hi relat 
with these few, therefore, he concentr as it were the effort that 
most peopl spread over their intercours with a far greater number. By 
what mean he pick out these few individu onli those convers 
with the startl process of the subconsci memori may say, but the 
point wa that jone believ the main purpose, if not quit the entir 
purpose, of hi present incarn lay in hi faith and thorough 
settl of these accounts, and that if he sought to evad the least 
detail of such settling, no matter how unpleasant, he would have live 
in vain, and would return to hi next incarn with thi ad duti 
to perform. for accord to hi belief there wa no chance, and could 
be no ultim shirking, and to avoid a problem wa mere to wast time 
and lose opportun for development. 

and there wa one individu with whom jone had long understood clearli 
he had a veri larg account to settle, and toward the accomplish 
of which all the main current of hi be seem to bear him with 
unswerv purpose. for, when he first enter the insur offic as a 
junior clerk ten year before, and through a glass door had caught sight 
of thi man seat in an inner room, one of hi sudden overwhelm 
flash of intuit memori had burst up into him from the depths, and 
he had seen, as in a flame of blind light, a symbol pictur of 
the futur rise out of a dread past, and he had, without ani act of 
definit volition, mark down thi man for a real account to be 
settled. 

"with _that_ man I shall have much to do," he said to himself, as he 
note the big face look up and meet hi eye through the glass. "there is 
someth I cannot shirk--a vital relat out of the past of both of 
us." 

and he went to hi desk trembl a little, and with shake knees, as 
though the memori of some terribl pain had suddenli laid it ici hand 
upon hi heart and touch the scar of a great horror. It wa a moment 
of genuin terror when their eye had met through the glass door, and 
he wa consciou of an inward shrink and loath that seiz upon 
him with great violenc and convinc him in a singl second that the 
settl of thi account would be almost, perhaps, more than he could 
manage. 

the vision pass as swiftli as it came, drop back again into the 
submerg region of hi consciousness; but he never forgot it, and 
the whole of hi life thereaft becam a sort of natur though 
undeliber prepar for the fulfil of the great duti when the 
time should be ripe. 

In those days--ten year ago--thi man wa the assist manager, 
but had sinc been promot as manag to one of the company' local 
branches; and soon afterward jone had likewis found himself 
transfer to thi same branch. A littl later, again, the branch 
at liverpool, one of the most important, had been in peril owe to 
mismanag and defalcation, and the man had gone to take charg of 
it, and again, by mere chanc apparently, jone had been promot to the 
same place. and thi pursuit of the assist manag had continu for 
sever years, often, too, in the most curiou fashion; and though jone 
had never exchang a singl word with him, or been so much as notic 
inde by the great man, the clerk understood perfectli well that these 
move in the game were all part of a definit purpose. never for one 
moment did he doubt that the invis behind the veil were slowli and 
sure arrang the detail of it all so as to lead up suitabl to the 
climax demand by justice, a climax in which himself and the manag 
would play the lead _roles_. 

"it is inevitable," he said to himself, "and I feel it may be terrible; 
but when the moment come I shall be ready, and I pray god that I may 
face it properli and act like a man." 

moreover, as the year passed, and noth happened, he felt the horror 
close in upon him with steadi increase, for the fact wa jone hate 
and loath the manag with an intens of feel he had never befor 
experienc toward ani human being. He shrank from hi presence, and 
from the glanc of hi eyes, as though he rememb to have suffer 
nameless cruelti at hi hands; and he slowli began to realise, 
moreover, that the matter to be settl between them wa one of veri 
ancient standing, and that the natur of the settlement wa a discharg 
of accumul punish which would probabl be veri dread in the 
manner of it fulfilment. 

when, therefore, the chief cashier one day inform him that the man 
wa to be in london again--thi time as gener manag of the head 
office--and said that he wa charg to find a privat secretari for him 
from among the best clerks, and further intim that the select 
had fallen upon himself, jone accept the promot quietly, 
fatalistically, yet with a degre of inward loath hardli to be 
described. for he saw in thi mere anoth move in the evolut of 
the inevit nemesi which he simpli dare not seek to frustrat by 
ani person consideration; and at the same time he wa consciou of a 
certain feel of relief that the suspens of wait might soon be 
mitigated. A secret sens of satisfaction, therefore, accompani the 
unpleas change, and jone wa abl to hold himself perfectli well in 
hand when it wa carri into effect and he wa formal introduc as 
privat secretari to the gener manager. 

now the manag wa a large, fat man, with a veri red face and bag 
beneath hi eyes. be short-sighted, he wore glass that seem to 
magnifi hi eyes, which were alway a littl bloodshot. In hot weather a 
sort of thin slime cover hi cheeks, for he perspir easily. hi head 
wa almost entir bald, and over hi turn-down collar hi great neck 
fold in two distinct reddish collop of flesh. hi hand were big and 
hi finger almost massiv in thickness. 

He wa an excel busi man, of sane judgment and firm will, 
without enough imagin to confus hi cours of action by show 
him possibl alternatives; and hi integr and abil caus him to 
be held in univers respect by the world of busi and finance. In 
the import region of a man' character, however, and at heart, he 
wa coarse, brutal almost to savagery, without consider for others, 
and as a result often cruelli unjust to hi helpless subordinates. 

In moment of temper, which were not infrequent, hi face turn a dull 
purple, while the top of hi bald head shone by contrast like white 
marble, and the bag under hi eye swell till it seem they would 
present explod with a pop. and at these time he present a 
distinctli repuls appearance. 

but to a privat secretari like jones, who did hi duti regardless of 
whether hi employ wa beast or angel, and whose mainspr wa 
principl and not emotion, thi made littl difference. within the 
narrow limit in which ani one _could_ satisfi such a man, he pleas 
the gener manager; and more than onc hi pierc intuit faculty, 
amount almost to clairvoyance, assist the chief in a fashion that 
serv to bring the two closer togeth than might otherwis have 
been the case, and caus the man to respect in hi assist a power 
of which he possess not even the germ himself. It wa a curiou 
relationship that grew up between the two, and the cashier, who enjoy 
the credit of have made the selection, profit by it indirectli as 
much as ani one else. 

So for some time the work of the offic continu normal and veri 
prosperously. john enderbi jone receiv a good salary, and in the 
outward appear of the two chief charact in thi histori there 
wa littl chang noticeable, except that the manag grew fatter and 
redder, and the secretari observ that hi own hair wa begin to 
show rather greyish at the temples. 

there were, however, two chang in progress, and they both had to do 
with jones, and are import to mention. 

one wa that he began to dream evilly. In the region of deep sleep, 
where the possibl of signific dream first develop itself, he 
wa torment more and more with vivid scene and pictur in which a 
tall thin man, dark and sinist of countenance, and with bad eyes, wa 
close associ with himself. onli the set wa that of a past 
age, with costum of centuri gone by, and the scene had to do with 
dread cruelti that could not belong to modern life as he knew it. 

the other chang wa also significant, but is not so easi to describe, 
for he had in fact becom awar that some new portion of himself, 
hitherto unawakened, had stir slowli into life out of the veri depth 
of hi consciousness. thi new part of himself amount almost to 
anoth personality, and he never observ it least manifest 
without a strang thrill at hi heart. 

for he understood that it had begun to _watch_ the manager! 




II 


It wa the habit of jones, sinc he wa compel to work among 
condit that were utterli distasteful, to withdraw hi mind wholli 
from busi onc the day wa over. dure offic hour he kept the 
strictest possibl watch upon himself, and turn the key on all inner 
dreams, lest ani sudden uprush from the deep should interfer with hi 
duty. but, onc the work day wa over, the gate flew open, and he 
began to enjoy himself. 

He read no modern book on the subject that interest him, and, as 
alreadi said, he follow no cours of training, nor belong to ani 
societi that dabbl with half-told mysteries; but, onc releas from 
the offic desk in the manager' room, he simpli and natur enter 
the other region, becaus he wa an old inhabitant, a right denizen, 
and becaus he belong there. It was, in fact, realli a case of 
dual personality; and a care drawn agreement exist between 
jones-of-the-fire-insurance-offic and jones-of-the-mysteries, by the 
term of which, under heavi penalties, neither region claim him out of 
hours. 

for the moment he reach hi room under the roof in bloomsbury, and 
had chang hi citi coat to another, the iron door of the offic 
clang far behind him, and in front, befor hi veri eyes, roll up 
the beauti gate of ivory, and he enter into the place of flower 
and sing and wonder veil forms. sometim he quit lost touch 
with the outer world, forget to eat hi dinner or go to bed, and lay 
in a state of trance, hi conscious work far out of the body. and 
on other occas he walk the street on air, half-way between the 
two regions, unabl to distinguish between incarn and discarn 
forms, and not veri far, probably, beyond the strata where poets, 
saints, and the greatest artist have move and thought and found their 
inspiration. but thi wa onli when some insist bodili claim 
prevent hi full release, and more often than not he wa entir 
independ of hi physic portion and free of the real region, without 
let or hindrance. 

one even he reach home utterli exhaust after the burden of the 
day' work. the manag had been more than usual brutal, unjust, 
ill-tempered, and jone had been almost persuad out of hi settl 
polici of contempt into answer back. everyth seem to have gone 
amiss, and the man' coarse, underbr natur had been in the ascend 
all day long: he had thump the desk with hi great fists, abused, 
found fault unreasonably, utter outrag things, and behav 
gener as he actual was--beneath the thin veneer of acquir 
busi varnish. He had done and said everyth to wound all that wa 
woundabl in an ordinari secretary, and though jone fortun dwelt 
in a region from which he look down upon such a man as he might look 
down on the blunder of a savag animal, the strain had nevertheless 
told sever upon him, and he reach home wonder for the first time 
in hi life whether there wa perhap a point beyond which he would be 
unabl to restrain himself ani longer. 

for someth out of the usual had happened. At the close of a passag 
of great stress between the two, everi nerv in the secretary' bodi 
tingl from undeserv abuse, the manag had suddenli turn full 
upon him, in the corner of the privat room where the safe stood, in 
such a way that the glare of hi red eyes, magnifi by the glasses, 
look straight into hi own. and at thi veri second that other 
person in jones--th one that wa ever _watching_--ros up swiftli 
from the deep within and held a mirror to hi face. 

A moment of flame and vision rush over him, and for one singl 
second--on merciless second of clear sight--h saw the manag as the 
tall dark man of hi evil dreams, and the knowledg that he had suffer 
at hi hand some aw injuri in the past crash through hi mind like 
the report of a cannon. 

It all flash upon him and wa gone, chang him from fire to ice, 
and then back again to fire; and he left the offic with the certain 
convict in hi heart that the time for hi final settlement with the 
man, the time for the inevit retribution, wa at last draw veri 
near. 

accord to hi invari custom, however, he succeed in put 
the memori of all thi unpleas out of hi mind with the chang 
of hi offic coat, and after doze a littl in hi leather chair 
befor the fire, he start out as usual for dinner in the soho french 
restaurant, and began to dream himself away into the region of flower 
and singing, and to commun with the invis that were the veri 
sourc of hi real life and being. 

for it wa in thi way that hi mind worked, and the habit of year had 
crystallis into rigid line along which it wa now necessari and 
inevit for him to act. 

At the door of the littl restaur he stop short, a half-rememb 
appoint in hi mind. He had made an engag with some one, but 
where, or with whom, had entir slip hi memory. He thought it wa 
for dinner, or els to meet just after dinner, and for a second it came 
back to him that it had someth to do with the office, but, whatev 
it was, he wa quit unabl to recal it, and a refer to hi pocket 
engag book show onli a blank page. evid he had even omit 
to enter it; and after stand a moment vainli tri to recal either 
the time, place, or person, he went in and sat down. 

but though the detail had escap him, hi subconsci memori seem 
to know all about it, for he experienc a sudden sink of the heart, 
accompani by a sens of forebod anticipation, and felt that 
beneath hi exhaust there lay a centr of tremend excitement. the 
emot caus by the engag wa at work, and would present caus 
the actual detail of the appoint to reappear. 

insid the restaur the feel increased, instead of passing: some 
one wa wait for him somewhere--som one whom he had definit 
arrang to meet. He wa expect by a person that veri night and just 
about that veri time. but by whom? where? A curiou inner trembl came 
over him, and he made a strong effort to hold himself in hand and to be 
readi for anyth that might come. 

and then suddenli came the knowledg that the place of appoint wa 
thi veri restaurant, and, further, that the person he had promis to 
meet wa alreadi here, wait somewher quit close besid him. 

He look up nervous and began to examin the face round him. the 
major of the diner were frenchmen, chatter loudli with much 
gesticul and laughter; and there wa a fair sprinkl of clerk 
like himself who came becaus the price were low and the food good, but 
there wa no singl face that he recognis until hi glanc fell upon 
the occup of the corner seat opposite, gener fill by himself. 

"there' the man who' wait for me!" thought jone instantly. 

He knew it at once. the man, he saw, wa sit well back into the 
corner, with a thick overcoat button tightli up to the chin. hi skin 
wa veri white, and a heavi black beard grew far up over hi cheeks. At 
first the secretari took him for a stranger, but when he look up and 
their eye met, a sens of familiar flash across him, and for a 
second or two jone imagin he wa stare at a man he had known year 
before. for, bar the beard, it wa the face of an elderli clerk who 
had occupi the next desk to hi own when he first enter the servic 
of the insur company, and had shown him the most painstak 
kind and sympathi in the earli difficulti of hi work. but a 
moment later the illus passed, for he rememb that thorp had been 
dead at least five years. the similar of the eye wa obvious a 
mere suggest trick of memory. 

the two men stare at one anoth for sever seconds, and then jone 
began to act _instinctively_, and becaus he had to. He cross over and 
took the vacant seat at the other' table, face him; for he felt it 
wa somehow imper to explain whi he wa late, and how it wa he had 
almost forgotten the engag altogether. 

No honest excuse, however, came to hi assistance, though hi mind had 
begun to work furiously. 

"yes, you _are_ late," said the man quietly, befor he could find a 
singl word to utter. "but it doesn't matter. also, you had forgotten 
the appointment, but that make no differ either." 

"I knew--that there wa an engagement," jone stammered, pass hi 
hand over hi forehead; "but somehow--" 

"you will recal it presently," continu the other in a gentl voice, 
and smile a little. "it wa in deep sleep last night we arrang this, 
and the unpleas occurr of to-day have for the moment obliter 
it." 

A faint memori stir within him as the man spoke, and a grove of tree 
with move form hover befor hi eye and then vanish again, while 
for an instant the stranger seem to be capabl of self-distort and 
to have assum vast proportions, with wonder flame eyes. 

"oh!" he gasped. "it wa there--in the other region?" 

"of course," said the other, with a smile that illumin hi whole face. 
"you will rememb presently, all in good time, and meanwhil you have 
no caus to feel afraid." 

there wa a wonder sooth qualiti in the man' voice, like the 
whisper of a great wind, and the clerk felt calmer at once. they sat 
a littl while longer, but he could not rememb that they talk much 
or ate anything. He onli recal afterward that the head waiter came 
up and whisper someth in hi ear, and that he glanc round and saw 
the other peopl were look at him curiously, some of them laughing, 
and that hi companion then got up and led the way out of the 
restaurant. 

they walk hurriedli through the streets, neither of them speaking; and 
jone wa so intent upon get back the whole histori of the affair 
from the region of deep sleep, that he bare notic the way they took. 
yet it wa clear he knew where they were bound for just as well as hi 
companion, for he cross the street often ahead of him, dive down 
alley without hesitation, and the other follow alway without 
correction. 

the pavement were veri full, and the usual night crowd of london were 
surg to and fro in the glare of the shop lights, but somehow no one 
imped their rapid movements, and they seem to pass through the 
peopl as if they were smoke. and, as they went, the pedestrian and 
traffic grew less and less, and they soon pass the mansion hous and 
the desert space in front of the royal exchange, and so on down 
fenchurch street and within sight of the tower of london, rise dim and 
shadowi in the smoki air. 

jone rememb all thi perfectli well, and thought it wa hi intens 
preoccup that made the distanc seem so short. but it wa when the 
tower wa left behind and they turn northward that he began to notic 
how alter everyth was, and saw that they were in a neighbourhood 
where hous were suddenli scarce, and lane and field beginning, 
and that their onli light wa the star overhead. and, as the deeper 
conscious more and more assert itself to the exclus of the 
surfac happen of hi mere bodi dure the day, the sens of 
exhaust vanished, and he realis that he wa move somewher in the 
region of caus behind the veil, beyond the gross decept of the 
senses, and releas from the clumsi spell of space and time. 

without great surprise, therefore, he turn and saw that hi companion 
had altered, had shed hi overcoat and black hat, and wa move besid 
him absolut _without sound_. for a brief second he saw him, tall as a 
tree, extend through space like a great shadow, misti and waver of 
outline, follow by a sound like wing in the darkness; but, when he 
stopped, fear clutch at hi heart, the other resum hi former 
proportions, and jone could plainli see hi normal outlin against the 
green field behind. 

then the secretari saw him fumbl at hi neck, and at the same moment 
the black beard came away from the face in hi hand. 

"then you _are_ thorpe!" he gasped, yet somehow without overwhelm 
surprise. 

they stood face one anoth in the lone lane, tree meet overhead 
and hide the stars, and a sound of mourn sigh among the 
branches. 

"I am thorpe," wa the answer in a voic that almost seem part of the 
wind. "and I have come out of our far past to help you, for my debt to 
you is large, and in thi life I had but small opportun to repay." 

jone thought quickli of the man' kind to him in the office, and a 
great wave of feel surg through him as he began to rememb dimli 
the friend by whose side he had alreadi climbed, perhap through vast 
age of hi soul' evolution. 

"to help me _now_?" he whispered. 

"you will understand me when you enter into your real memori and recal 
how great a debt I have to pay for old faith kind of long ago," 
sigh the other in a voic like fall wind. 

"between us, though, there can be no question of _debt_," jone heard 
himself saying, and rememb the repli that float to him on the air 
and the smile that lighten for a moment the stern eye face him. 

"not of debt, indeed, but of privilege." 

jone felt hi heart leap out toward thi man, thi old friend, tri 
by centuri and still faithful. He made a movement to seiz hi hand. 
but the other shift like a thing of mist, and for a moment the clerk' 
head swam and hi eye seem to fail. 

"then you are _dead_?" he said under hi breath with a slight shiver. 

"five year ago I left the bodi you knew," repli thorpe. "I tri to 
help you then instinctively, not fulli recognis you. but now I can 
accomplish far more." 

with an aw sens of forebod and dread in hi heart, the secretari 
wa begin to understand. 

"it ha to do with--with--?" 

"your past deal with the manager," came the answer, as the wind rose 
louder among the branch overhead and carri off the remaind of the 
sentenc into the air. 

jones' memory, which wa just begin to stir among the deepest 
layer of all, shut down suddenli with a snap, and he follow hi 
companion over field and down sweet-smel lane where the air wa 
fragrant and cool, till they came to a larg house, stand gaunt and 
lone in the shadow at the edg of a wood. It wa wrap in utter 
stillness, with window heavili drape in black, and the clerk, as he 
looked, felt such an overpow wave of sad invad him that hi 
eye began to burn and smart, and he wa consciou of a desir to shed 
tears. 

the key made a harsh nois as it turn in the lock, and when the door 
swung open into a lofti hall they heard a confus sound of rustl and 
whispering, as of a great throng of peopl press forward to meet 
them. the air seem full of sway movement, and jone wa certain he 
saw hand held aloft and dim face claim recognition, while in hi 
heart, alreadi oppress by the approach burden of vast accumul 
memories, he wa awar of the _uncoil of something_ that had been 
asleep for ages. 

As they advanc he heard the door close with a muffl thunder behind 
them, and saw that the shadow seem to retreat and shrink away toward 
the interior of the house, carri the hand and face with them. He 
heard the wind sing round the wall and over the roof, and it 
wail voic mingl with the sound of deep, collect breath that 
fill the hous like the murmur of a sea; and as they walk up the 
broad staircas and through the vault rooms, where pillar rose like 
the stem of trees, he knew that the build wa crowded, row upon row, 
with the throng memori of hi own long past. 

"thi is the _hous of the past_," whisper thorp besid him, as they 
move silent from room to room; "the hous of _your_ past. It is full 
from cellar to roof with the memori of what you have done, thought, 
and felt from the earliest stage of your evolut until now. 

"the hous climb up almost to the clouds, and stretch back into the 
heart of the wood you saw outside, but the remot hall are fill with 
the ghost of age ago too mani to count, and even if we were abl to 
waken them you could not rememb them now. some day, though, they will 
come and claim you, and you must know them, and answer their questions, 
for they can never rest till they have exhaust themselv again 
through you, and justic ha been perfectli work out. 

"but now follow me closely, and you shall see the particular memori 
for which I am permit to be your guide, so that you may know and 
understand a great forc in your present life, and may use the sword of 
justice, or rise to the level of a great forgiveness, accord to your 
degre of power." 

ici thrill ran through the trembl clerk, and as he walk slowli 
besid hi companion he heard from the vault below, as well as from 
more distant region of the vast building, the stir and sigh of 
the serri rank of sleepers, sound in the still air like a chord 
swept from unseen string stretch somewher among the veri foundat 
of the house. 

stealthily, pick their way among the great pillars, they move up the 
sweep staircas and through sever dark corridor and halls, and 
present stop outsid a small door in an archway where the shadow 
were veri deep. 

"remain close by my side, and rememb to utter no cry," whisper the 
voic of hi guide, and as the clerk turn to repli he saw hi face wa 
stern to white and even shone a littl in the darkness. 

the room they enter seem at first to be pitchi black, but gradual 
the secretari perceiv a faint reddish glow against the farther end, 
and thought he saw figur move silent to and fro. 

"now watch!" whisper thorpe, as they press close to the wall near 
the door and waited. "but rememb to keep absolut silence. It is a 
tortur scene." 

jone felt utterli afraid, and would have turn to fli if he dared, for 
an indescrib terror seiz him and hi knee shook; but some power 
that made escap imposs held him remorselessli there, and with eye 
glu on the spot of light he crouch against the wall and waited. 

the figur began to move more swiftly, each in it own dim light that 
shed no radianc beyond itself, and he heard a soft clank of chain 
and the voic of a man groan in pain. then came the sound of a door 
closing, and thereaft jone saw but one figure, the figur of an old 
man, nake entirely, and fasten with chain to an iron framework on 
the floor. hi memori gave a sudden leap of fear as he looked, for the 
featur and white beard were familiar, and he recal them as though 
of yesterday. 

the other figur had disappeared, and the old man becam the centr of 
the terribl picture. slowly, with ghastli groans; as the heat below him 
increas into a steadi glow, the age bodi rose in a curv of agony, 
rest on the iron frame onli where the chain held wrist and ankl 
fast. cri and gasp fill the air, and jone felt exactli as though 
they came from hi own throat, and as if the chain were burn into 
hi own wrist and ankles, and the heat scorch the skin and flesh 
upon hi own back. He began to writh and twist himself. 

"spain!" whisper the voic at hi side, "and four hundr year ago." 

"and the purpose?" gasp the perspir clerk, though he knew quit 
well what the answer must be. 

"to extort the name of a friend, to hi death and betrayal," came the 
repli through the darkness. 

A slide panel open with a littl rattl in the wall immedi 
abov the rack, and a face, frame in the same red glow, appear and 
look down upon the die victim. jone wa onli just abl to choke 
a scream, for he recognis the tall dark man of hi dreams. with 
horrible, gloat eye he gaze down upon the writh form of the old 
man, and hi lip move as in speaking, though no word were actual 
audible. 

"he ask again for the name," explain the other, as the clerk 
struggl with the intens hatr and loath that threaten everi 
moment to result in scream and action. hi ankl and wrist pain him 
so that he could scarc keep still, but a merciless power held him to 
the scene. 

He saw the old man, with a fierc cry, rais hi tortur head and spit 
up into the face at the panel, and then the shutter slid back again, and 
a moment later the increas glow beneath the body, accompani by aw 
writhing, told of the applic of further heat. there came the odour 
of burn flesh; the white beard curl and burn to a crisp; the bodi 
fell back limp upon the red-hot iron, and then shot up again in fresh 
agony; cri after cry, the most aw in the world, rang out with 
deaden sound between the four walls; and again the panel slid back 
creaking, and reveal the dread face of the torturer. 

again the name wa ask for, and again it wa refused; and thi time, 
after the close of the panel, a door opened, and the tall thin man 
with the evil face came slowli into the chamber. hi featur were 
savag with rage and disappointment, and in the dull red glow that fell 
upon them he look like a veri princ of devils. In hi hand he held a 
point iron at white heat. 

"now the murder!" came from thorp in a whisper that sound as if it 
wa outsid the build and far away. 

jone knew quit well what wa coming, but wa unabl even to close hi 
eyes. He felt all the fear pain himself just as though he were 
actual the sufferer; but now, as he stared, he felt someth more 
besides; and when the tall man deliber approach the rack and 
plung the heat iron first into one eye and then into the other, he 
heard the faint fizz of it, and felt hi own eye burst in fright 
pain from hi head. At the same moment, unabl longer to control 
himself, he utter a wild shriek and dash forward to seiz the 
tortur and tear him to a thousand pieces. instantly, in a flash, the 
entir scene vanished; dark rush in to fill the room, and he felt 
himself lift off hi feet by some forc like a great wind and born 
swiftli away into space. 

when he recov hi sens he wa stand just outsid the hous and 
the figur of thorp wa besid him in the gloom. the great door were 
in the act of close behind him, but befor they shut he fanci he 
caught a glimps of an immens veil figur stand upon the 
threshold, with flame eyes, and in hi hand a bright weapon like a 
shine sword of fire. 

"come quickli now--al is over!" thorp whispered. 

"and the dark man--?" gasp the clerk, as he move swiftli by the 
other' side. 

"in thi present life is the manag of the company." 

"and the victim?" 

"wa yourself!" 

"and the friend he--_i_ refus to betray?" 

"I wa that friend," answer thorpe, hi voic with everi moment 
sound more and more like the cri of the wind. "you gave your life in 
agoni to save mine." 

"and again, in thi life, we have all three been together?" 

"yes. such forc are not soon or easili exhausted, and justic is not 
satisfi till all have reap what they sowed." 

jone had an odd feel that he wa slip away into some other state 
of consciousness. thorp began to seem unreal. present he would be 
unabl to ask more questions. He felt utterli sick and faint with it 
all, and hi strength wa ebbing. 

"oh, quick!" he cried, "now tell me more. whi did I see this? what must 
I do?" 

the wind swept across the field on their right and enter the wood 
beyond with a great roar, and the air round him seem fill with 
voic and the rush of hurri movement. 

"to the end of justice," answer the other, as though speak out 
of the centr of the wind and from a distance, "which sometim is 
entrust to the hand of those who suffer and were strong. one wrong 
cannot be put right by anoth wrong, but your life ha been so worthi 
that the opportun is given to--" 

the voic grew fainter and fainter, alreadi it wa far overhead with the 
rush wind. 

"you may punish or--" here jone lost sight of thorpe' figur 
altogether, for he seem to have vanish and melt away into the 
wood behind him. hi voic sound far across the trees, veri weak, and 
ever rising. 

"or if you can rise to the level of a great forgiveness--" 

the voic becam inaudible.... the wind came cri out of the wood 
again. 

* * * * * 

jone shiver and stare about him. He shook himself violent and 
rub hi eyes. the room wa dark, the fire wa out; he felt cold and 
stiff. He got up out of hi armchair, still trembling, and lit the gas. 
outsid the wind wa howling, and when he look at hi watch he saw 
that it wa veri late and he must go to bed. 

He had not even chang hi offic coat; he must have fallen asleep in 
the chair as soon as he came in, and he had slept for sever hours. 
certainli he had eaten no dinner, for he felt ravenous. 




iii 


next day, and for sever week thereafter, the busi of the offic 
went on as usual, and jone did hi work well and behav outwardli with 
perfect propriety. No more vision troubl him, and hi relat with 
the manag became, if anything, somewhat smoother and easier. 

true, the man _looked_ a littl different, becaus the clerk kept see 
him with hi inner and outer eye promiscuously, so that one moment he 
wa broad and red-faced, and the next he wa tall, thin, and dark, 
enveloped, as it were, in a sort of black atmospher ting with red. 
while at time a confus of the two sight took place, and jone saw 
the two face mingl in a composit counten that wa veri horribl 
inde to contemplate. but, beyond thi occasion chang in the outward 
appear of the manager, there wa noth that the secretari notic 
as the result of hi vision, and busi went on more or less as 
before, and perhap even with a littl less friction. 

but in the room under the roof in bloomsburi it wa different, for 
there it wa perfectli clear to jone that thorp had come to take up 
hi abod with him. He never saw him, but he knew all the time he wa 
there. everi night on return from hi work he wa greet by the 
well-known whisper, "be readi when I give the sign!" and often in the 
night he woke up suddenli out of deep sleep and wa awar that thorp 
had that minut move away from hi bed and wa stand wait and 
watch somewher in the dark of the room. often he follow him 
down the stairs, though the dim ga jet on the land never reveal 
hi outline; and sometim he did not come into the room at all, but 
hover outsid the window, peer through the dirti panes, or send 
hi whisper into the chamber in the whistl of the wind. 

for thorp had come to stay, and jone knew that he would not get rid of 
him until he had fulfil the end of justic and accomplish the 
purpos for which he wa waiting. 

meanwhile, as the day passed, he went through a tremend struggl 
with himself, and came to the perfectli honest decis that the "level 
of a great forgiveness" wa imposs for him, and that he must 
therefor accept the altern and use the secret knowledg place 
in hi hands--and execut justice. and onc thi decis wa arriv 
at, he notic that thorp no longer left him alon dure the day as 
before, but now accompani him to the offic and stay more or less at 
hi side all through busi hour as well. hi whisper made itself 
heard in the street and in the train, and even in the manager' room 
where he worked; sometim warning, sometim urging, but never for a 
moment suggest the abandon of the main purpose, and more than 
onc so plainli audibl that the clerk felt certain other must have 
heard it as well as himself. 

the obsess wa complete. He felt he wa alway under thorpe' eye day 
and night, and he knew he must acquit himself like a man when the moment 
came, or prove a failur in hi own sight as well in the sight of the 
other. 

and now that hi mind wa made up, noth could prevent the carri 
out of the sentence. He bought a pistol, and spent hi saturday 
afternoon practis at a target in lone place along the essex 
shore, mark out in the sand the exact measur of the manager' 
room. sunday he occupi in like fashion, put up at an inn 
overnight for the purpose, spend the money that usual went into the 
save bank on travel expens and cartridges. everyth wa done 
veri thoroughly, for there must be no possibl of failure; and at the 
end of sever week he had becom so expert with hi six-shoot that 
at a distanc of 25 feet, which wa the greatest length of the manager' 
room, he could pick the insid out of a halfpenni nine time out of a 
dozen, and leav a clean, unbroken rim. 

there wa not the slightest desir to delay. He had thought the matter 
over from everi point of view hi mind could reach, and hi purpos wa 
inflexible. indeed, he felt proud to think that he had been chosen as 
the instrument of justic in the inflict of so well-deserv and so 
terribl a punishment. vengeanc may have had some part in hi decision, 
but he could not help that, for he still felt at time the hot chain 
burn hi wrist and ankl with fierc agoni through to the bone. 
He rememb the hideou pain of hi slowli roast back, and the 
point when he thought death _must_ interven to end hi suffering, but 
instead new power of endur had surg up in him, and aw further 
stretch of pain had open up, and unconsci seem farther off 
than ever. then at last the hot iron in hi eyes.... It all came back 
to him, and caus him to break out in ici perspir at the mere 
thought of it ... the vile face at the panel ... the express of the 
dark face.... hi finger worked. hi blood boiled. It wa utterli 
imposs to keep the idea of vengeanc altogeth out of hi mind. 

sever time he wa temporarili baulk of hi prey. odd thing 
happen to stop him when he wa on the point of action. the first day, 
for instance, the manag faint from the heat. anoth time when he 
had decid to do the deed, the manag did not come down to the offic 
at all. and a third time, when hi hand wa actual in hi hip pocket, 
he suddenli heard thorpe' horrid whisper tell him to wait, and 
turning, he saw that the head cashier had enter the room noiselessli 
without hi notic it. thorp evid knew what he wa about, and 
did not intend to let the clerk bungl the matter. 

He fancied, moreover, that the head cashier wa watch him. He wa 
alway meet him in unexpect corner and places, and the cashier 
never seem to have an adequ excus for be there. hi movement 
seem suddenli of particular interest to other in the offic as well, 
for clerk were alway be sent to ask him unnecessari questions, 
and there wa appar a gener design to keep him under a sort of 
surveillance, so that he wa never much alon with the manag in the 
privat room where they worked. and onc the cashier had even gone so 
far as to suggest that he could take hi holiday earlier than usual if 
he liked, as the work had been veri arduou of late and the heat 
exceedingli trying. 

He noticed, too, that he wa sometim follow by a certain individu 
in the streets, a careless-look sort of man, who never came face to 
face with him, or actual ran into him, but who wa alway in hi train 
or omnibus, and whose eye he often caught observ him over the top of 
hi newspaper, and who on one occas wa even wait at the door of 
hi lodg when he came out to dine. 

there were other indic too, of variou sorts, that led him to 
think someth wa at work to defeat hi purpose, and that he must act 
at onc befor these hostil forc could prevent. 

and so the end came veri swiftly, and wa thoroughli approv by thorpe. 

It wa toward the close of july, and one of the hottest day london had 
ever known, for the citi wa like an oven, and the particl of dust 
seem to burn the throat of the unfortun toiler in street and 
office. the portli manager, who suffer cruelli owe to hi size, came 
down perspir and gasp with the heat. He carri a light-colour 
umbrella to protect hi head. 

"he'll want someth more than that, though!" jone laugh quietli to 
himself when he saw him enter. 

the pistol wa safe in hi hip pocket, everi one of it six chamber 
loaded. 

the manag saw the smile on hi face, and gave him a long steadi look 
as he sat down to hi desk in the corner. A few minut later he touch 
the bell for the head cashier--a singl ring--and then ask jone to 
fetch some paper from anoth safe in the room upstairs. 

A deep inner trembl seiz the secretari as he notic these 
precautions, for he saw that the hostil forc were at work against 
him, and yet he felt he could delay no longer and must act that veri 
morning, interfer or no interference. however, he went obedi up 
in the lift to the next floor, and while fumbl with the combin 
of the safe, known onli to himself, the cashier, and the manager, he 
again heard thorpe' horrid whisper just behind him: 

"you must do it to-day! you must do it to-day!" 

He came down again with the papers, and found the manag alone. the 
room wa like a furnace, and a wave of dead heat air met him in the 
face as he went in. the moment he pass the doorway he realis that he 
had been the subject of convers between the head cashier and hi 
enemy. they had been discuss him. perhap an inkl of hi secret 
had somehow got into their minds. they had been watch him for day 
past. they had becom suspicious. 

clearly, he must act now, or let the opportun slip by perhap for 
ever. He heard thorpe' voic in hi ear, but thi time it wa no mere 
whisper, but a plain human voice, speak out loud. 

"now!" it said. "do it now!" 

the room wa empty. onli the manag and himself were in it. 

jone turn from hi desk where he had been standing, and lock the 
door lead into the main office. He saw the armi of clerk scribbl 
in their shirt-sleeves, for the upper half of the door wa of glass. He 
had perfect control of himself, and hi heart wa beat steadily. 

the manager, hear the key turn in the lock, look up sharply. 

"what' that you'r doing?" he ask quickly. 

"onli lock the door, sir," repli the secretari in a quit even 
voice. 

"why? who told you to--?" 

"the voic of justice, sir," repli jones, look steadili into the 
hate face. 

the manag look black for a moment, and stare angrili across the 
room at him. then suddenli hi express chang as he stared, and he 
tri to smile. It wa meant to be a kind smile evidently, but it onli 
succeed in be frightened. 

"that _is_ a good idea in thi weather," he said lightly, "but it would 
be much better to lock it on the _outside_, wouldn't it, mr. jones?" 

"I think not, sir. you might escap me then. now you can't." 

jone took hi pistol out and point it at the other' face. down the 
barrel he saw the featur of the tall dark man, evil and sinister. then 
the outlin trembl a littl and the face of the manag slip back 
into it place. It wa white as death, and shine with perspiration. 

"you tortur me to death four hundr year ago," said the clerk in the 
same steadi voice, "and now the dispens of justic have chosen me to 
punish you." 

the manager' face turn to flame, and then back to chalk again. He 
made a quick movement toward the telephon bell, stretch out a hand 
to reach it, but at the same moment jone pull the trigger and the 
wrist wa shattered, splash the wall behind with blood. 

"that' _one_ place where the chain burnt," he said quietli to himself. 
hi hand wa absolut steady, and he felt that he wa a hero. 

the manag wa on hi feet, with a scream of pain, support himself 
with hi right hand on the desk in front of him, but jone press the 
trigger again, and a bullet flew into the other wrist, so that the big 
man, depriv of support, fell forward with a crash on to the desk. 

"you damn madman!" shriek the manager. "drop that pistol!" 

"that' _another_ place," wa all jone said, still take care aim 
for anoth shot. 

the big man, scream and blundering, scrambl beneath the desk, 
make frantic effort to hide, but the secretari took a step forward 
and fire two shot in quick success into hi project legs, 
hit first one ankl and then the other, and smash them horribly. 

"two more place where the chain burnt," he said, go a littl 
nearer. 

the manager, still shrieking, tri desper to squeez hi bulk 
behind the shelter of the open beneath the desk, but he wa far too 
large, and hi bald head protrud through on the other side. jone 
caught him by the scruff of hi great neck and drag him yelp out 
on to the carpet. He wa cover with blood, and flop helplessli upon 
hi broken wrists. 

"be quick now!" cri the voic of thorpe. 

there wa a tremend commot and bang at the door, and jone 
grip hi pistol tightly. someth seem to crash through hi brain, 
clear it for a second, so that he thought he saw besid him a great 
veil figure, with drawn sword and flame eyes, and sternli approv 
attitude. 

"rememb the eyes! rememb the eyes!" hiss thorp in the air abov 
him. 

jone felt like a god, with a god' power. vengeanc disappear from 
hi mind. He wa act imperson as an instrument in the hand of 
the invis who dispens justic and balanc accounts. He bent down 
and put the barrel close into the other' face, smile a littl as he 
saw the childish effort of the arm to cover hi head. then he pull 
the trigger, and a bullet went straight into the right eye, blacken 
the skin. move the pistol two inch the other way, he sent anoth 
bullet crash into the left eye. then he stood upright over hi victim 
with a deep sigh of satisfaction. 

the manag wriggl convuls for the space of a singl second, and 
then lay still in death. 

there wa not a moment to lose, for the door wa alreadi broken in and 
violent hand were at hi neck. jone put the pistol to hi templ and 
onc more press the trigger with hi finger. 

but thi time there wa no report. onli a littl dead click answer the 
pressure, for the secretari had forgotten that the pistol had onli six 
chambers, and that he had use them all. He threw the useless weapon 
on to the floor, laugh a littl out loud, and turned, without a 
struggle, to give himself up. 

"I _had_ to do it," he said quietly, while they tie him. "it wa simpli 
my duty! and now I am readi to face the consequences, and thorp will be 
proud of me. for justic ha been done and the god are satisfied." 

He made not the slightest resistance, and when the two policemen march 
him off through the crowd of shudder littl clerk in the office, he 
again saw the veil figur move majest in front of him, make 
slow sweep circl with the flame sword, to keep back the host of 
face that were throng in upon him from the other region. 


* * * * * 




_the man who found out_ 

(A nightmare) 

1 


professor mark ebor, the scientist, led a doubl life, and the onli 
person who knew it were hi assistant, dr. laidlaw, and hi publishers. 
but a doubl life need not alway be a bad one, and, as dr. laidlaw and 
the gratifi publish well knew, the parallel live of thi 
particular man were equal good, and indefinit produc would 
certainli have end in a heaven somewher that can suitabl contain 
such strang opposit characterist as hi remark person 
combined. 

for mark ebor, f.r.s., etc., etc., wa that uniqu combin hardli 
ever met with in actual life, a man of scienc and a mystic. 

As the first, hi name stood in the galleri of the great, and as the 
second--but there came the mystery! for under the pseudonym of "pilgrim" 
(the author of that brilliant seri of book that appeal to so many), 
hi ident wa as well conceal as that of the anonym writer of 
the weather report in a daili newspaper. thousand read the sanguine, 
optimistic, stimul littl book that issu annual from the pen 
of "pilgrim," and thousand bore their daili burden better for have 
read; while the press gener agre that the author, besid be an 
incorrig enthusiast and optimist, wa also--a woman; but no one ever 
succeed in penetr the veil of anonym and discov that 
"pilgrim" and the biologist were one and the same person. 

mark ebor, as dr. laidlaw knew him in hi laboratory, wa one man; but 
mark ebor, as he sometim saw him after work wa over, with rapt eye 
and ecstat face, discuss the possibl of "union with god" and 
the futur of the human race, wa quit another. 

"I have alway held, as you know," he wa say one even as he 
sat in the littl studi beyond the laboratori with hi assist and 
intimate, "that vision should play a larg part in the life of the 
awaken man--not to be regard as infallible, of course, but to be 
observ and made use of as a guide-post to possibilities--" 

"I am awar of your peculiar views, sir," the young doctor put in 
deferentially, yet with a certain impatience. 

"for vision come from a region of the conscious where observ 
and experi are out of the question," pursu the other with 
enthusiasm, not notic the interruption, "and, while they should be 
check by reason afterwards, they should not be laugh at or ignored. 
all inspiration, I hold, is of the natur of interior vision, and all 
our best knowledg ha come--such is my confirm belief--a a sudden 
revel to the brain prepar to receiv it--" 

"prepar by hard work first, by concentration, by the closest possibl 
studi of ordinari phenomena," dr. laidlaw allow himself to observe. 

"perhaps," sigh the other; "but by a process, none the less, of 
spiritu illumination. the best match in the world will not light a 
candl unless the wick be first suitabl prepared." 

It wa laidlaw' turn to sigh. He knew so well the imposs of 
argu with hi chief when he wa in the region of the mystic, but at 
the same time the respect he felt for hi tremend attain wa so 
sincer that he alway listen with attent and deference, wonder 
how far the great man would go and to what end thi curiou combin 
of logic and "illumination" would eventu lead him. 

"onli last night," continu the elder man, a sort of light come into 
hi rug features, "the vision came to me again--th one that ha 
haunt me at interv ever sinc my youth, and that will not be 
denied." 

dr. laidlaw fidget in hi chair. 

"about the tablet of the gods, you mean--and that they lie somewher 
hidden in the sands," he said patiently. A sudden gleam of interest came 
into hi face as he turn to catch the professor' reply. 

"and that I am to be the one to find them, to deciph them, and to give 
the great knowledg to the world--" 

"who will not believe," laugh laidlaw shortly, yet interest in spite 
of hi thinly-veil contempt. 

"becaus even the keenest minds, in the right sens of the word, are 
hopelessly--unscientific," repli the other gently, hi face posit 
aglow with the memori of hi vision. "yet what is more likely," he 
continu after a moment' pause, peer into space with rapt eye that 
saw thing too wonder for exact languag to describe, "than that 
there should have been given to man in the first age of the world some 
record of the purpos and problem that had been set him to solve? In a 
word," he cried, fix hi shine eye upon the face of hi perplex 
assistant, "that god' messeng in the far-off age should have given 
to hi creatur some full statement of the secret of the world, of the 
secret of the soul, of the mean of life and death--th explan of 
our be here, and to what great end we are destin in the ultim 
full of things?" 

dr. laidlaw sat speechless. these outburst of mystic enthusiasm he 
had wit before. with ani other man he would not have listen to 
a singl sentence, but to professor ebor, man of knowledg and profound 
investigator, he listen with respect, becaus he regard thi 
condit as temporari and pathological, and in some sens a reaction 
from the intens strain of the prolong mental concentr of mani 
days. 

He smiled, with someth between sympathi and resign as he met the 
other' rapt gaze. 

"but you have said, sir, at other times, that you consid the ultim 
secret to be screen from all possible--" 

"the _ultimate_ secrets, yes," came the unperturb reply; "but that 
there lie buri somewher an indestruct record of the secret 
mean of life, origin known to men in the day of their pristin 
innocence, I am convinced. and, by thi strang vision so often 
vouchsaf to me, I am equal sure that one day it shall be given to me 
to announc to a weari world thi gloriou and terrif message." 

and he continu at great length and in glow languag to describ the 
speci of vivid dream that had come to him at interv sinc earliest 
childhood, show in detail how he discov these veri tablet of the 
gods, and proclaim their splendid contents--whos precis natur wa 
always, however, withheld from him in the vision--to a patient and 
suffer humanity. 

"the _scrutator_, sir, well describ 'pilgrim' as the apostl of 
hope," said the young doctor gently, when he had finished; "and now, if 
that review could hear you speak and realiz from what strang depth 
come your simpl faith--" 

the professor held up hi hand, and the smile of a littl child broke 
over hi face like sunshin in the morning. 

"half the good my book do would be instantli destroyed," he said sadly; 
"they would say that I wrote with my tongu in my cheek. but wait," he 
ad significantly; "wait till I find these tablet of the gods! wait 
till I hold the solut of the old world-problem in my hands! wait 
till the light of thi new revel break upon confus humanity, and 
it wake to find it bravest hope justified! ah, then, my dear 
laidlaw--" 

He broke off suddenly; but the doctor, cleverli guess the thought in 
hi mind, caught him up immediately. 

"perhap thi veri summer," he said, tri hard to make the suggest 
keep pace with honesty; "in your explor in assyria--your dig 
in the remot civil of what wa onc chaldea, you may find--what 
you dream of--" 

the professor held up hi hand, and the smile of a fine old face. 

"perhaps," he murmur softly, "perhaps!" 

and the young doctor, thank the god of scienc that hi leader' 
aberr were of so harmless a character, went home strong in the 
certitud of hi knowledg of externals, proud that he wa abl to refer 
hi vision to self-suggestion, and wonder complaisantli whether in 
hi old age he might not after all suffer himself from visit of 
the veri kind that afflict hi respect chief. 

and as he got into bed and thought again of hi master' rug face, 
and fine shape head, and the deep line trace by year of work and 
self-discipline, he turn over on hi pillow and fell asleep with a 
sigh that wa half of wonder, half of regret. 




2 


It wa in february, nine month later, when dr. laidlaw made hi way to 
chare cross to meet hi chief after hi long absenc of travel and 
exploration. the vision about the so-cal tablet of the god had 
meanwhil pass almost entir from hi memory. 

there were few peopl in the train, for the stream of traffic wa now 
run the other way, and he had no difficulti in find the man he 
had come to meet. the shock of white hair beneath the low-crown felt 
hat wa alon enough to distinguish him by easily. 

"here I am at last!" exclaim the professor, somewhat wearily, clasp 
hi friend' hand as he listen to the young doctor' warm greet 
and questions. "here I am--a littl older, and _much_ dirtier than when 
you last saw me!" He glanc down laughingli at hi travel-stain 
garments. 

"and _much_ wiser," said laidlaw, with a smile, as he bustl about the 
platform for porter and gave hi chief the latest scientif news. 

At last they came down to practic considerations. 

"and your luggage--wher is that? you must have ton of it, I suppose?" 
said laidlaw. 

"hardli anything," professor ebor answered. "nothing, in fact, but what 
you see." 

"noth but thi hand-bag?" laugh the other, think he wa joking. 

"and a small portmanteau in the van," wa the quiet reply. "I have no 
other luggage." 

"you have no other luggage?" repeat laidlaw, turn sharpli to see if 
he were in earnest. 

"whi should I need more?" the professor ad simply. 

someth in the man' face, or voice, or manner--th doctor hardli knew 
which--suddenli struck him as strange. there wa a chang in him, a 
chang so profound--so littl on the surface, that is--that at first he 
had not becom awar of it. for a moment it wa as though an utterli 
alien person stood befor him in that noisy, bustl throng. here, 
in all the homely, friendli turmoil of a chare cross crowd, a curiou 
feel of cold pass over hi heart, touch hi life with ici 
finger, so that he actual trembl and felt afraid. 

He look up quickli at hi friend, hi mind work with startl and 
unwelcom thoughts. 

"onli this?" he repeated, indic the bag. "but where' all the stuff 
you went away with? and--hav you brought noth home--no treasures?" 

"thi is all I have," the other said briefly. the pale smile that went 
with the word caus the doctor a second indescrib sensat of 
uneasiness. someth wa veri wrong, someth wa veri queer; he 
wonder now that he had not notic it sooner. 

"the rest follows, of course, by slow freight," he ad tactfully, and 
as natur as possible. "but come, sir, you must be tire and in want 
of food after your long journey. i'll get a taxi at once, and we can see 
about the other luggag afterwards." 

It seem to him he hardli knew quit what he wa saying; the chang in 
hi friend had come upon him so suddenli and now grew upon him more and 
more distressingly. yet he could not make out exactli in what it 
consisted. A terribl suspicion began to take shape in hi mind, 
troubl him dreadfully. 

"I am neither veri tired, nor in need of food, thank you," the professor 
said quietly. "and thi is all I have. there is no luggag to follow. I 
have brought home nothing--noth but what you see." 

hi word convey finality. they got into a taxi, tip the porter, 
who had been stare in amaz at the vener figur of the 
scientist, and were convey slowli and noisili to the hous in the 
north of london where the laboratori was, the scene of their labour of 
years. 

and the whole way professor ebor utter no word, nor did dr. laidlaw 
find the courag to ask a singl question. 

It wa onli late that night, befor he took hi departure, as the two 
men were stand befor the fire in the study--that studi where they 
had discuss so mani problem of vital and absorb interest--that 
dr. laidlaw at last found strength to come to the point with direct 
questions. the professor had been give him a superfici and desultori 
account of hi travels, of hi journey by camel, of hi encamp 
among the mountain and in the desert, and of hi explor among the 
buri temples, and, deeper, into the wast of the pre-histor sands, 
when suddenli the doctor came to the desir point with a kind of 
nervou rush, almost like a frighten boy. 

"and you found--" he began stammering, look hard at the other' 
dread alter face, from which everi line of hope and cheer 
seem to have been obliter as a spong wipe mark from a 
slate--"y found--" 

"I found," repli the other, in a solemn voice, and it wa the voic of 
the mystic rather than the man of science--"i found what I went to seek. 
the vision never onc fail me. It led me straight to the place like a 
star in the heavens. I found--th tablet of the gods." 

dr. laidlaw caught hi breath, and steadi himself on the back of a 
chair. the word fell like particl of ice upon hi heart. for the 
first time the professor had utter the well-known phrase without the 
glow of light and wonder in hi face that alway accompani it. 

"you have--brought them?" he faltered. 

"I have brought them home," said the other, in a voic with a ring like 
iron; "and I have--deciph them." 

profound despair, the bloom of outer darkness, the dead sound of a 
hopeless soul freez in the utter cold of space seem to fill in the 
paus between the brief sentences. A silenc followed, dure which dr. 
laidlaw saw noth but the white face befor him altern fade and 
return. and it wa like the face of a dead man. 

"they are, alas, indestructible," he heard the voic continue, with it 
even, metal ring. 

"indestructible," laidlaw repeat mechanically, hardli know what he 
wa saying. 

again a silenc of sever minut passed, dure which, with a creep 
cold about hi heart, he stood and stare into the eye of the man he 
had known and love so long--aye, and worshipped, too; the man who had 
first open hi own eye when they were blind, and had led him to the 
gate of knowledge, and no littl distanc along the difficult path 
beyond; the man who, in anoth direction, had pass on the strength of 
hi faith into the heart of thousand by hi books. 

"I may see them?" he ask at last, in a low voic he hardli recogn 
as hi own. "you will let me know--their message?" 

professor ebor kept hi eye fixedli upon hi assistant' face as he 
answered, with a smile that wa more like the grin of death than a 
live human smile. 

"when I am gone," he whispered; "when I have pass away. then you 
shall find them and read the translat I have made. and then, too, in 
your turn, you must try, with the latest resourc of scienc at your 
dispos to aid you, to compass their utter destruction." He paus 
a moment, and hi face grew pale as the face of a corpse. "until 
that time," he ad presently, without look up, "I must ask 
you not to refer to the subject again--and to keep my confid 
meanwhile--_ab--so--lute--ly_." 




3 


A year pass slowli by, and at the end of it dr. laidlaw had found it 
necessari to sever hi work connexion with hi friend and one-tim 
leader. professor ebor wa no longer the same man. the light had gone 
out of hi life; the laboratori wa closed; he no longer put pen to 
paper or appli hi mind to a singl problem. In the short space of 
a few month he had pass from a hale and hearti man of late middl 
life to the condit of old age--a man collaps and on the edg of 
dissolution. death, it wa plain, lay wait for him in the shadow of 
ani day--and he knew it. 

To describ faith the natur of thi profound alter in hi 
charact and tempera is not easy, but dr. laidlaw sum it up to 
himself in three words: _loss of hope_. the splendid mental power 
remain inde undimmed, but the incent to use them--to use them for 
the help of others--had gone. the charact still held to it fine and 
unselfish habit of years, but the far goal to which they had been the 
lead string had fade away. the desir for knowledge--knowledg for 
it own sake--had died, and the passion hope which hitherto had 
anim with tireless energi the heart and brain of thi splendidli 
equip intellect had suffer total eclipse. the central fire had 
gone out. noth wa worth doing, thinking, work for. there _was_ 
noth to work for ani longer! 

the professor' first step wa to recal as mani of hi book as 
possible; hi second to close hi laboratori and stop all research. He 
gave no explanation, he invit no questions. hi whole person 
crumbl away, so to speak, till hi daili life becam a mere mechan 
process of cloth the body, feed the body, keep it in good 
health so as to avoid physic discomfort, and, abov all, do noth 
that could interfer with sleep. the professor did everyth he could 
to lengthen the hour of sleep, and therefor of forgetfulness. 

It wa all clear enough to dr. laidlaw. A weaker man, he knew, would 
have sought to lose himself in one form or anoth of sensual 
indulgence--sleeping-draughts, drink, the first pleasur that came to 
hand. self-destruct would have been the method of a littl bolder 
type; and deliber evil-doing, poison with hi aw knowledg all 
he could, the mean of still anoth kind of man. mark ebor wa none of 
these. He held himself under fine control, face silent and without 
complaint the terribl fact he honestli believ himself to have been 
unfortun enough to discover. even to hi intim friend and 
assistant, dr. laidlaw, he vouchsaf no word of true explan or 
lament. He went straight forward to the end, know well that the end 
wa not veri far away. 

and death came veri quietli one day to him, as he wa sit in the 
arm-chair of the study, directli face the door of the laboratory--th 
door that no longer opened. dr. laidlaw, by happi chance, wa with him 
at the time, and just abl to reach hi side in respons to the sudden 
pain effort for breath; just in time, too, to catch the murmur 
word that fell from the pallid lip like a messag from the other side 
of the grave. 

"read them, if you must; and, if you can--destroy. but"--hi 
voic sank so low that dr. laidlaw onli just caught the die 
syllables--"but--never, never--g them to the world." 

and like a grey bundl of dust loos gather up in an old garment the 
professor sank back into hi chair and expired. 

but thi wa onli the death of the body. hi spirit had die two year 
before. 




4 


the estat of the dead man wa small and uncomplicated, and dr. laidlaw, 
as sole executor and residuari legatee, had no difficulti in settl 
it up. A month after the funer he wa sit alon in hi upstair 
library, the last sad duti completed, and hi mind full of poignant 
memori and regret for the loss of a friend he had rever and loved, 
and to whom hi debt wa so incalcul great. the last two years, 
indeed, had been for him terrible. To watch the swift decay of the 
greatest combin of heart and brain he had ever known, and to 
realiz he wa powerless to help, wa a sourc of profound grief to him 
that would remain to the end of hi days. 

At the same time an insati curios possess him. the studi of 
dementia was, of course, outsid hi special provinc as a specialist, 
but he knew enough of it to understand how small a matter might be the 
actual caus of how great an illusion, and he had been devour from the 
veri begin by a ceaseless and increas anxieti to know what the 
professor had found in the sand of "chaldea," what these preciou 
tablet of the god might be, and particularly--for thi wa the real 
caus that had sap the man' saniti and hope--what the inscript 
wa that he had believ to have deciph thereon. 

the curiou featur of it all to hi own mind was, that wherea hi 
friend had dream of find a messag of gloriou hope and comfort, he 
had appar found (so far as he had found anyth intellig at 
all, and not invent the whole thing in hi dementia) that the secret 
of the world, and the mean of life and death, wa of so terribl a 
natur that it rob the heart of courag and the soul of hope. what, 
then, could be the content of the littl brown parcel the professor had 
bequeath to him with hi pregnant die sentences? 

actual hi hand wa trembl as he turn to the writing-t and 
began slowli to unfasten a small old-fashion desk on which the small 
gilt initi "m.e." stood forth as a melancholi memento. He put the key 
into the lock and half turn it. then, suddenly, he stop and look 
about him. wa that a sound at the back of the room? It wa just as 
though someon had laugh and then tri to smother the laugh with a 
cough. A slight shiver ran over him as he stood listening. 

"thi is absurd," he said aloud; "too absurd for belief--that I should 
be so nervous! it' the effect of curios unduli prolonged." He smile 
a littl sadli and hi eye wander to the blue summer sky and the 
plane tree sway in the wind below hi window. "it' the reaction," 
he continued. "the curios of two year to be quench in a singl 
moment! the nervou tension, of course, must be considerable." 

He turn back to the brown desk and open it without further delay. 
hi hand wa firm now, and he took out the paper parcel that lay insid 
without a tremor. It wa heavy. A moment later there lay on the tabl 
befor him a coupl of weather-worn plaqu of grey stone--they look 
like stone, although they felt like metal--on which he saw mark of 
a curiou charact that might have been the mere trace of natur 
forc through the ages, or, equal well, the half-obliter 
hieroglyph cut upon their surfac in past centuri by the more or 
less untutor hand of a common scribe. 

He lift each stone in turn and examin it carefully. It seem to him 
that a faint glow of heat pass from the substanc into hi skin, and 
he put them down again suddenly, as with a gestur of uneasiness. 

"A veri clever, or a veri imagin man," he said to himself, "who 
could squeez the secret of life and death from such broken line as 
those!" 

then he turn to a yellow envelop lie besid them in the desk, with 
the singl word on the outsid in the write of the professor--th word 
_translation_. 

"now," he thought, take it up with a sudden violenc to conceal hi 
nervousness, "now for the great solution. now to learn the mean of 
the worlds, and whi mankind wa made, and whi disciplin is worth while, 
and sacrific and pain the true law of advancement." 

there wa the shadow of a sneer in hi voice, and yet someth in him 
shiver at the same time. He held the envelop as though weigh it in 
hi hand, hi mind ponder mani things. then curios won the day, 
and he suddenli tore it open with the gestur of an actor who tear open 
a letter on the stage, know there is no real write insid at all. 

A page of fine written script in the late scientist' handwrit lay 
befor him. He read it through from begin to end, miss no word, 
utter each syllabl distinctli under hi breath as he read. 

the pallor of hi face grew ghastli as he near the end. He began to 
shake all over as with ague. hi breath came heavili in gasps. He still 
grip the sheet of paper, however, and deliberately, as by an intens 
effort of will, read it through a second time from begin to end. and 
thi time, as the last syllabl drop from hi lips, the whole face of 
the man flame with a sudden and terribl anger. hi skin becam deep, 
deep red, and he clench hi teeth. with all the strength of hi 
vigor soul he wa struggl to keep control of himself. 

for perhap five minut he stood there besid the tabl without 
stir a muscle. He might have been carv out of stone. hi eye were 
shut, and onli the heav of the chest betray the fact that he wa a 
live being. then, with a strang quietness, he lit a match and appli 
it to the sheet of paper he held in hi hand. the ash fell slowli 
about him, piec by piece, and he blew them from the window-sil into 
the air, hi eye follow them as they float away on the summer wind 
that breath so warmli over the world. 

He turn back slowli into the room. although hi action and movement 
were absolut steadi and controlled, it wa clear that he wa on the 
edg of violent action. A hurrican might burst upon the still room ani 
moment. hi muscl were tens and rigid. then, suddenly, he whitened, 
collapsed, and sank backward into a chair, like a tumbl bundl of 
inert matter. He had fainted. 

In less than half an hour he recov conscious and sat up. As 
before, he made no sound. not a syllabl pass hi lips. He rose 
quietli and look about the room. 

then he did a curiou thing. 

take a heavi stick from the rack in the corner he approach the 
mantlepiece, and with a heavi shatter blow he smash the clock to 
pieces. the glass fell in shiver atoms. 

"ceas your lie voic for ever," he said, in a curious still, even 
tone. "there is no such thing as _time_!" 

He took the watch from hi pocket, swung it round sever time by the 
long gold chain, smash it into smithereen against the wall with a 
singl blow, and then walk into hi laboratori next door, and hung it 
broken bodi on the bone of the skeleton in the corner of the room. 

"let one damn mockeri hang upon another," he said smile oddly. 
"delusions, both of you, and cruel as false!" 

He slowli move back to the front room. He stop opposit the bookcas 
where stood in a row the "scriptur of the world," choic bound and 
exquisit printed, the late professor' most treasur possession, and 
next to them sever book sign "pilgrim." 

one by one he took them from the shelf and hurl them through the open 
window. 

"A devil' dreams! A devil' foolish dreams!" he cried, with a viciou 
laugh. 

present he stop from sheer exhaustion. He turn hi eye slowli to 
the wall opposite, where hung a weird array of eastern sword and 
daggers, scimitar and spears, the collect of mani journeys. He 
cross the room and ran hi finger along the edge. hi mind seem to 
waver. 

"no," he mutter presently; "not that way. there are easier and better 
way than that." 

He took hi hat and pass downstair into the street. 




5 


It wa five o'clock, and the june sun lay hot upon the pavement. He felt 
the metal door-knob burn the palm of hi hand. 

"ah, laidlaw, thi is well met," cri a voic at hi elbow; "I wa in 
the act of come to see you. i'v a case that will interest you, and 
besides, I rememb that you flavour your tea with orang 
leaves!--and I admit--" 

It wa alexi stephen, the great hypnot doctor. 

"i'v had no tea to-day," laidlaw said, in a daze manner, after stare 
for a moment as though the other had struck him in the face. A new idea 
had enter hi mind. 

"what' the matter?" ask dr. stephen quickly. "something' wrong with 
you. it' thi sudden heat, or overwork. come, man, let' go inside." 

A sudden light broke upon the face of the younger man, the light of a 
heaven-s inspiration. He look into hi friend' face, and told a 
direct lie. 

"odd," he said, "I myself wa just come to see you. I have someth 
of great import to test your confid with. but in _your_ house, 
please," as stephen urg him toward hi own door--"in your house. it' 
onli round the corner, and i--i cannot go back there--to my rooms--til 
I have told you. 

"i'm your patient--for the moment," he ad stammeringli as soon as 
they were seat in the privaci of the hypnotist' sanctum, "and I 
want--er--" 

"mi dear laidlaw," interrupt the other, in that sooth voic of 
command which had suggest to mani a suffer soul that the cure for 
it pain lay in the power of it own reawaken will, "I am alway at 
your service, as you know. you have onli to tell me what I can do for 
you, and I will do it." He show everi desir to help him out. hi 
manner wa indescrib tact and direct. 

dr. laidlaw look up into hi face. 

"I surrend my will to you," he said, alreadi calm by the other' 
heal presence, "and I want you to treat me hypnotically--and at once. 
I want you to suggest to me"--hi voic becam veri tense--"that I shall 
forget--forget till I die--everyth that ha occur to me dure the 
last two hours; till I die, mind," he added, with solemn emphasis, "till 
I die." 

He flounder and stammer like a frighten boy. alexi stephen 
look at him fixedli without speaking. 

"and further," laidlaw continued, "I want you to ask me no questions. I 
wish to forget for ever someth I have recent discovered--someth 
so terribl and yet so obviou that I can hardli understand whi it 
is not patent to everi mind in the world--for I have had a moment of 
absolut _clear vision_--of merciless clairvoyance. but I want no one 
els in the whole world to know what it is--least of all, old friend, 
yourself." 

He talk in utter confusion, and hardli knew what he wa saying. but 
the pain on hi face and the anguish in hi voic were an instant 
passport to the other' heart. 

"noth is easier," repli dr. stephen, after a hesit so slight 
that the other probabl did not even notic it. "come into my other room 
where we shall not be disturbed. I can heal you. your memori of the last 
two hour shall be wipe out as though it had never been. you can trust 
me absolutely." 

"I know I can," laidlaw said simply, as he follow him in. 




6 


An hour later they pass back into the front room again. the sun wa 
alreadi behind the hous opposite, and the shadow began to gather. 

"I went off easily?" laidlaw asked. 

"you were a littl obstin at first. but though you came in like a 
lion, you went out like a lamb. I let you sleep a bit afterwards." 

dr. stephen kept hi eye rather steadili upon hi friend' face. 

"what were you do by the fire befor you came here?" he asked, 
pausing, in a casual tone, as he lit a cigarett and hand the case to 
hi patient. 

"i? let me see. oh, I know; I wa worri my way through poor old 
ebor' paper and things. i'm hi executor, you know. then I got weari 
and came out for a whiff of air." He spoke lightli and with perfect 
naturalness. obvious he wa tell the truth. "I prefer specimen to 
papers," he laugh cheerily. 

"I know, I know," said dr. stephen, hold a light match for the 
cigarette. hi face wore an express of content. the experi had 
been a complet success. the memori of the last two hour wa wipe out 
utterly. laidlaw wa alreadi chat gaili and easili about a dozen 
other thing that interest him. togeth they went out into the 
street, and at hi door dr. stephen left him with a joke and a wri face 
that made hi friend laugh heartily. 

"don't dine on the professor' old paper by mistake," he cried, as he 
vanish down the street. 

dr. laidlaw went up to hi studi at the top of the house. half way down 
he met hi housekeeper, mrs. fewings. she wa fluster and excited, and 
her face wa veri red and perspiring. 

"there'v been burglar here," she cri excitedly, "or someth funny! 
all your thing is just any'ow, sir. I found everyth all about 
everywhere!" she wa veri confused. In thi orderli and veri precis 
establish it wa unusu to find a thing out of place. 

"oh, my specimens!" cri the doctor, dash up the rest of the stair 
at top speed. "have they been touch or--" 

He flew to the door of the laboratory. mrs. few pant up heavili 
behind him. 

"the labatri ain't been touched," she explained, breathlessly, "but they 
smash the libri clock and they'v 'ung your gold watch, sir, on the 
skelinton' hands. and the book that weren't no valu they flung out er 
the window just like so much rubbish. they must have been wild drunk, 
dr. laidlaw, sir!" 

the young scientist made a hurri examin of the rooms. noth of 
valu wa missing. He began to wonder what kind of burglar they were. 
He look up sharpli at mrs. few stand in the doorway. for a 
moment he seem to cast about in hi mind for something. 

"odd," he said at length. "I onli left here an hour ago and everyth 
wa all right then." 

"wa it, sir? yes, sir." she glanc sharpli at him. her room look out 
upon the courtyard, and she must have seen the book come crash down, 
and also have heard her master leav the hous a few minut later. 

"and what' thi rubbish the brute have left?" he cried, take up 
two slab of worn gray stone, on the writing-table. "bath brick, or 
something, I do declare." 

He look veri sharpli again at the confus and troubl housekeeper. 

"throw them on the dust heap, mrs. fewings, and--and let me know if 
anyth is miss in the house, and I will notifi the polic thi 
evening." 

when she left the room he went into the laboratori and took hi watch 
off the skeleton' fingers. hi face wore a troubl expression, but 
after a moment' thought it clear again. hi memori wa a complet 
blank. 

"I suppos I left it on the writing-t when I went out to take the 
air," he said. and there wa no one present to contradict him. 

He cross to the window and blew carelessli some ash of burn paper 
from the sill, and stood watch them as they float away lazili over 
the top of the trees. 


* * * * * 




_the glamour of the snow_ 

I 


hibbert, alway consciou of two worlds, wa in thi mountain villag 
consciou of three. It lay on the slope of the valai alps, and he had 
taken a room in the littl post office, where he could be at peac to 
write hi book, yet at the same time enjoy the winter sport and find 
companionship in the hotel when he want it. 

the three world that met and mingl here seem to hi imagin 
tempera veri obvious, though it is doubt if anoth mind less 
intuit equip would have seen them so well-defined. there wa 
the world of tourist english, civilised, quasi-educated, to which he 
belong by birth, at ani rate; there wa the world of peasant to which 
he felt himself drawn by sympathy--for he love and admir their 
toiling, simpl life; and there wa thi other--which he could onli call 
the world of nature. To thi last, however, in virtu of a vehement 
poetic imagination, and a tumultu pagan instinct fed by hi veri 
blood, he felt that most of him belonged. the other borrow from it, 
as it were, for visits. here, with the soul of nature, hid hi central 
life. 

between all three wa conflict--potenti conflict. On the skating-rink 
each sunday the tourist regard the nativ as intruders; in the 
church the peasant plainli questioned: "whi do you come? We are here 
to worship; you to stare and whisper!" for neither of these two world 
accept the other. and neither did natur accept the tourists, for it 
took advantag of their least mistakes, and indeed, even of the 
peasant-world "accepted" onli those who were strong and bold enough to 
invad her savag domain with suffici skill to protect themselv 
from sever form of--death. 

now hibbert wa keenli awar of thi potenti conflict and want of 
harmony; he felt outside, yet caught by it--torn in the three direct 
becaus he wa partli of each world, but wholli in onli one. there 
grew in him a constant, subtl effort--or, at least, desire--to unifi 
them and decid posit to which he should belong and live in. 
the attempt, of course, wa larg subconscious. It wa the natur 
instinct of a richli imagin natur seek the point of 
equilibrium, so that the mind could feel at peac and hi brain be free 
to do good work. 

among the guest no one especi claim hi interest. the men were 
nice but undistinguished--athlet schoolmasters, doctor snatch a 
holiday, good fellow all; the women, equal various--th clever, the 
would-be-fast, the dare-to-be-dull, the women "who understood," and the 
usual pack of jolli danc girl and "flappers." and hibbert, with hi 
forti odd year of thick experi behind him, got on well with the 
lot; he understood them all; they belong to definite, predigest 
type that are the same the world over, and that he had met the world 
over long ago. 

but to none of them did he belong. hi natur wa too "multiple" to 
subscrib to the set of shibboleth of ani one class. and, sinc all 
like him, and felt that somehow he seem outsid of them--spectator, 
looker-on--al sought to claim him. 

In a sense, therefore, the three world fought for him: natives, 
tourists, nature.... 

It wa thu began the singular conflict for the soul of hibbert. _in_ 
hi own soul, however, it took place. neither the peasant nor the 
tourist were consciou that they fought for anything. and nature, they 
say, is mere blind and automatic. 

the assault upon him of the peasant may be left out of account, for it 
is obviou that they stood no chanc of success. the tourist world, 
however, made a gallant effort to subdu him to themselves. but the 
even in the hotel, when danc wa not in order, were--english. the 
provinci imagin wa set upon a throne and worship heavili 
through incens of the stupidest convent possible. hibbert use to 
go back earli to hi room in the post offic to work. 

"it is a mistak on my part to have _realised_ that there is ani 
conflict at all," he thought, as he crunch home over the snow at 
midnight after one of the dances. "it would have been better to have 
kept outsid it all and done my work. better," he added, look back 
down the silent villag street to the church tower, "and--safer." 

the adject slip from hi mind befor he wa awar of it. He 
turn with an involuntari start and look about him. He knew perfectli 
well what it meant--thi thought that had thrust it head up from the 
instinct region. He understood, without be abl to express it 
fully, the mean that betray itself in the choic of the adjective. 
for if he had ignor the exist of thi conflict he would at the 
same time, have remain outsid the arena. wherea now he had enter 
the lists. now thi battl for hi soul must have issue. and he knew 
that the spell of natur wa greater for him than all other spell in 
the world combined--great than love, revelry, pleasure, greater even 
than study. He had alway been afraid to let himself go. hi pagan soul 
dread her terrif power of witcheri even while he worshipped. 

the littl villag alreadi slept. the world lay smother in snow. the 
chalet roof shone white beneath the moon, and pitch-black shadow 
gather against the wall of the church. hi eye rest a moment on the 
squar stone tower with it frost cross that point to the sky: then 
travel with a leap of mani thousand feet to the enorm mountain 
that brush the brilliant stars. like a forest rose the huge peak 
abov the slumber village, measur the night and heavens. they 
beckon him. and someth born of the snowi desolation, born of the 
midnight and the silent grandeur, born of the great listen hollow of 
the night, someth that lay 'twixt terror and wonder, drop from the 
vast wintri space down into hi heart--and call him. veri softly, 
unrecord in ani word or thought hi brain could compass, it laid it 
spell upon him. finger of snow brush the surfac of hi heart. the 
power and quiet majesti of the winter' night appal him.... 

fumbl a moment with the big unwieldi key, he let himself in and went 
upstair to bed. two thought went with him--appar quit ordinari 
and sensibl ones: 

"what fool these peasant are to sleep through such a night!" and the 
other: 

"those danc tire me. i'll never go again. My work onli suffer in the 
morning." the claim of peasant and tourist upon him seem thu in a 
singl instant weakened. 

the clash of battl troubl half hi dreams. natur had sent her beauti 
of the night and won the first assault. the others, rout and dismayed, 
fled far away. 




II 


"don't go back to your dreari old post office. we'r go to have 
supper in my room--someth hot. come and join us. hurri up!" 

there had been an ice carnival, and the last party, tail up the 
snow-slop to the hotel, call him. the chines lantern smoke and 
sputter on the wires; the band had long sinc gone. the cold wa 
bitter and the moon came onli momentarili between high, drive clouds. 
from the shed where the peopl chang from skate to snow-boot he 
shout someth to the effect that he wa "following"; but no answer 
came; the move shadow of those who had call were alreadi merg 
high up against the villag darkness. the voic die away. door 
slammed. hibbert found himself alon on the desert rink. 

and it wa then, quit suddenly, the impuls came to--stay and skate 
alone. the thought of the stuffi hotel room, and of those noisi peopl 
with their obviou joke and laughter, oppress him. He felt a long 
to be alon with the night; to tast her wonder all by himself there 
beneath the stars, glide over the ice. It wa not yet midnight, and he 
could skate for half an hour. that supper party, if they notic hi 
absenc at all, would mere think he had chang hi mind and gone to 
bed. 

It wa an impulse, yes, and not an unnatur one; yet even at the time 
it struck him that someth more than impuls lay conceal behind it. 
more than invitation, yet certainli less than command, there wa a vagu 
queer feel that he stay becaus he had to, almost as though there 
wa someth he had forgotten, overlooked, left undone. imagin 
tempera are often thus; and impuls is ever weakness. for with such 
ill-consid open of the door to hasti action may come an invas 
of other forc at the same time--forc mere wait their 
opportun perhaps! 

He caught the fugit warn even while he dismiss it as absurd, and 
the next minut he wa whirl over the smooth ice in delight curv 
and loop beneath the moon. there wa no fear of collision. He could 
take hi own speed and space as he willed. the shadow of the tower 
mountain fell across the rink, and a wind of ice came from the forests, 
where the snow lay ten feet deep. the hotel light wink and went out. 
the villag slept. the high wire net could not keep out the wonder 
of the winter night that grew about him like a presence. He skate on 
and on, keen exhilar pleasur in hi tingl blood, and weari 
all forgotten. 

and then, midway in the delight of rush movement, he saw a figur 
glide behind the wire netting, watch him. with a start that almost 
made him lose hi balance--for the abrupt of the new arriv wa so 
unlook for--h paus and stared. although the light wa dim he made 
out that it wa the figur of a woman and that she wa feel her way 
along the netting, tri to get in. against the white background of the 
snow-field he watch her rather stealthi effort as she pass with a 
silent step over the banked-up snow. she wa tall and slim and graceful; 
he could see that even in the dark. and then, of course, he understood. 
It wa anoth adventur skater like himself, stolen down unawar 
from hotel or chalet, and search for the opening. At once, make a 
sign and point with one hand, he turn swiftli and skate over to 
the littl entranc on the other side. 

but, even befor he got there, there wa a sound on the ice behind him 
and, with an exclam of amaz he could not suppress, he turn 
to see her swerv up to hi side across the width of the rink. she had 
somehow found anoth way in. 

hibbert, as a rule, wa punctilious, and in these free-and-easi places, 
perhaps, especi so. If onli for hi own protect he did not seek 
to make advanc unless some kind of introduct pave the way. but for 
these two to skate togeth in the semi-dark without speech, often 
of necess brush shoulder almost, wa too absurd to think of. 
accordingli he rais hi cap and spoke. hi actual word he seem 
unabl to recall, nor what the girl said in reply, except that she 
answer him in accent english with some commonplac about do 
figur at midnight on an empti rink. quit natur it was, and right. 
she wore grey cloth of some kind, though not the customari long glove 
or sweater, for inde her hand were bare, and present when he skate 
with her, he wonder with someth like astonish at their dri and 
ici coldness. 

and she wa delici to skate with--supple, sure, and light, fast as a 
man yet with the freedom of a child, sinuou and steadi at the same 
time. her flexibl made him wonder, and when he ask where she had 
learn she murmured--h caught the breath against hi ear and recal 
later that it wa singularli cold--that she could hardli tell, for she 
had been accustom to the ice ever sinc she could remember. 

but her face he never properli saw. A muffler of white fur buri her 
neck to the ears, and her cap came over the eyes. He onli saw that she 
wa young. nor could he gather her hotel or chalet, for she point 
vaguely, when he ask her, up the slopes. "just over there--" she said, 
quickli take hi hand again. He did not press her; no doubt she wish 
to hide her escapade. and the touch of her hand thrill him more than 
anyth he could remember; even through hi thick glove he felt the 
soft of that cold and delic softness. 

the cloud thicken over the mountains. It grew darker. they talk 
veri little, and did not alway skate together. often they separated, 
curv about in corner by themselves, but alway come togeth again 
in the centr of the rink; and when she left him thu hibbert wa 
consciou of--yes, of miss her. He found a peculiar satisfaction, 
almost a fascination, in skate by her side. It wa quit an 
adventure--thes two stranger with the ice and snow and night! 

midnight had long sinc sound from the old church tower befor they 
parted. she gave the sign, and he skate quickli to the shed, mean to 
find a seat and help her take her skate off. yet when he turned--sh 
had alreadi gone. He saw her slim figur glide away across the snow 
... and hurri for the last time round the rink alon he search in 
vain for the open she had twice use in thi curiou way. 

"how veri queer!" he thought, refer to the wire netting. "she must 
have lift it and wriggl under ...!" 

wonder how in the world she manag it, what in the world had 
possess him to be so free with her, and who in the world she was, he 
went up the steep slope to the post offic and so to bed, her promis to 
come again anoth night still ring delight in hi ears. and 
curiou were the thought and sensat that accompani him. most of 
all, perhaps, wa the half suggest of some dim memori that he had 
known thi girl before, had met her somewhere, more--that she knew him. 
for in her voice--a low, soft, windi littl voic it was, tender and 
sooth for all it quiet coldness--ther lay some faint remind of 
two other he had known, both long sinc gone: the voic of the woman he 
had loved, and--th voic of hi mother. 

but thi time through hi dream there ran no clash of battle. He wa 
conscious, rather, of someth cold and cling that made him think of 
sift snowflak climb slowli with entangl touch and thick 
round hi feet. the snow, come without noise, each flake so light 
and tini none can mark the spot whereon it settles, yet the mass of it 
abl to smother whole villages, wove through the veri textur of hi 
mind--cold, bewildering, deaden effort with it cling network of 
ten million featheri touches. 




iii 


In the morn hibbert realis he had done, perhaps, a foolish thing. 
the brilliant sunshin that drench the valley made him see this, and 
the sight of hi work-tabl with it typewriter, books, papers, and the 
rest, brought addit conviction. To have skate with a girl alon 
at midnight, no matter how innoc the thing had come about, wa 
unwise--unfair, especi to her. gossip in these littl winter resort 
wa wors than in a provinci town. He hope no one had seen them. 
luckili the night had been dark. most like none had heard the ring of 
skates. 

decid that in futur he would be more careful, he plung into work, 
and sought to dismiss the matter from hi mind. 

but in hi time of leisur the memori return persist to haunt 
him. when he "ski-d," "luged," or danc in the evenings, and especi 
when he skate on the littl rink, he wa awar that the eye of hi 
mind forev sought thi strang companion of the night. A hundr time 
he fanci that he saw her, but alway sight deceiv him. her face he 
might not know, but he could hardli fail to recognis her figure. yet 
nowher among the other did he catch a glimps of that slim young 
creatur he had skate with alon beneath the cloud stars. He search 
in vain. even hi inquiri as to the occup of the privat chalet 
brought no results. He had lost her. but the queer thing wa that he 
felt as though she were somewher close; he _knew_ she had not realli 
gone. while peopl came and left with everi day, it never onc occur 
to him that she had left. On the contrary, he felt assur that they 
would meet again. 

thi thought he never quit acknowledged. perhap it wa the wish that 
father it only. and, even when he did meet her, it wa a question how 
he would speak and claim acquaintance, or whether _she_ would recognis 
himself. It might be awkward. He almost came to dread a meeting, though 
"dread," of course, wa far too strong a word to describ an emot 
that wa half delight, half wonder anticipation. 

meanwhil the season wa in full swing. hibbert felt in perfect health, 
work hard, ski-d, skated, luged, and at night danc fairli often--in 
spite of hi decision. thi danc was, however, an act of subconsci 
surrender; it realli meant he hope to find her among the whirl 
couples. He wa search for her without quit acknowledg it to 
himself; and the hotel-world, meanwhile, think it had won him over, 
teas and chaf him. He made excus in a similar vein; but all the 
time he watch and search and--waited. 

for sever day the sky held clear and bright and frosty, bitterli 
cold, everyth crisp and sparkl in the sun; but there wa no sign 
of fresh snow, and the ski-er began to grumble. On the mountain wa an 
ici crust that made "running" dangerous; they want the frozen, dry, 
and powderi snow that make for speed, render steer easier and 
fall less severe. but the keen east wind show no sign of chang 
for a whole ten days. then, suddenly, there came a touch of softer air 
and the weather-wis began to prophesy. 

hibbert, who wa delic sensit to the least chang in earth or 
sky, wa perhap the first to feel it. onli he did not prophesy. He knew 
through everi nerv in hi bodi that moistur had crept into the air, 
wa accumulating, and that present a fall would come. for he respond 
to the mood of natur like a fine barometer. 

and the knowledge, thi time, brought into hi heart a strang littl 
wayward emot that wa hard to account for--a feel of unexplain 
uneasi and disquiet joy. for behind it, woven through it rather, 
ran a faint exhilar that connect remot somewher with that 
touch of delici alarm, that tini anticip "dread," that so 
puzzl him when he thought of hi next meet with hi skate 
companion of the night. It lay beyond all words, all telling, thi queer 
relationship between the two; but somehow the girl and snow ran in a 
pair across hi mind. 

perhap for imagin writing-men, more than for other workers, the 
smallest chang of mood betray itself at once. hi work at ani rate 
reveal thi slight shift of emot valu in hi soul. not that 
hi write suffered, but that it altered, subtli as those chang of 
sky or sea or landscap that come with the pass of afternoon into 
evening--imperceptibly. A subconsci excit sought to push 
outward and express itself ... and, know the uneven effect such 
mood produc in hi work, he laid hi pen asid and took instead to 
read that he had to do. 

meanwhil the brillianc pass from the sunshine, the sky grew slowli 
overcast; by dusk the mountain top came singularli close and sharp; the 
distant valley rose into absurdli near perspective. the moistur 
increased, rapidli approach satur point, when it must fall in 
snow. hibbert watch and waited. 

and in the morn the world lay smother beneath it fresh white 
carpet. It snow heavili till noon, thickly, incessantly, chokingly, a 
foot or more; then the sky cleared, the sun came out in splendour, the 
wind shift back to the east, and frost came down upon the mountain 
with it keenest and most bite tooth. the drop in the temperatur wa 
tremendous, but the ski-er were jubilant. next day the "running" would 
be fast and perfect. alreadi the mass wa settling, and the surfac 
freez into those moss-like, powderi crystal that make the ski run 
almost of their own accord with the faint "sishing" as of a bird' wing 
through the air. 




IV 


that night there wa excit in the littl hotel-world, first becaus 
there wa a _bal costume_, but chiefli becaus the new snow had come. 
and hibbert went--felt drawn to go; he did not go in costume, but he 
want to talk about the slope and ski-e with the other men, and at 
the same time.... 

ah, there wa the truth, the deeper necess that called. for the 
singular connect between the stranger and the snow again betray 
itself, utterli beyond explan as before, but vital and insistent. 
some hidden instinct in hi pagan soul--heaven know how he phrase it 
even to himself, if he phrase it at all--whisp that with the snow 
the girl would be somewher about, would emerg from her hide place, 
would even look for him. 

absolut unwarr it was. He laugh while he stood befor the 
littl glass and trim hi moustache, tri to make hi black tie sit 
straight, and shook down hi dinner jacket so that it should lie upon 
the shoulder without a crease. hi brown eye were veri bright. "I 
look younger than I usual do," he thought. It wa unusual, even 
significant, in a man who had no vaniti about hi appear and 
certainli never question hi age or tri to look younger than he was. 
affair of the heart, with one tumultu except that left no fuel 
for lesser subsequ fires, had never troubl him. the forc of hi 
soul and mind not call upon for "work" and obviou duties, all went to 
nature. the desolate, wild place of the earth were what he loved; 
night, and the beauti of the star and snow. and thi even he felt 
their claim upon him mightili stirring. A rise wild caught hi 
blood, quicken hi pulse, woke long and passion too. but chiefli 
snow. the snow whir softli through hi thought like white, seduct 
dreams.... for the snow had come; and she, it seemed, had somehow come 
with it--into hi mind. 

and yet he stood befor that twist mirror and pull hi tie and coat 
askew a dozen times, as though it mattered. "what in the world is up 
with me?" he thought. then, laugh a little, he turn befor leav 
the room to put hi privat paper in order. the green morocco desk that 
held them he took down from the shelf and laid upon the table. tie to 
the lid wa the visit card with hi brother' london address "in case 
of accident." On the way down to the hotel he wonder whi he had done 
this, for though imaginative, he wa not the kind of man who dealt in 
presentiments. mood with him were strong, but ever held in leash. 

"it' almost like a warning," he thought, smiling. He drew hi thick 
coat tightli round the throat as the freez air bit at him. "those 
warn one read of in stori sometim ...!" 

A delici happi wa in hi blood. over the edg of the hill 
across the valley rose the moon. He saw her silver sheet the world of 
snow. snow cover all. It smother sound and distance. It smother 
houses, streets, and human beings. It smothered--life. 




V 


In the hall there wa light and bustle; peopl were alreadi arriv 
from the other hotel and chalets, their costum hidden beneath mani 
wraps. group of men in even dress stood about smoking, talk 
"snow" and "ski-ing." the band wa tune up. the claim of the 
hotel-world clash about him faintli as of old. At the big glass 
window of the verandah, peasant stop a moment on their way home 
from the _cafe_ to peer. hibbert thought laughingli of that conflict he 
use to imagine. He laugh becaus it suddenli seem so unreal. He 
belong so utterli to natur and the mountains, and especi to those 
desol slope where now the snow lay thick and fresh and sweet, that 
there wa no question of a conflict at all. the power of the newli 
fallen snow had caught him, prove it without effort. out there, upon 
those lone reach of the moonlit ridges, the snow lay ready--mass 
and mass of it--cool, soft, inviting. He long for it. It await 
him. He thought of the intox delight of ski-e in the 
moonlight.... 

thus, somehow, in vivid flash vision, he thought of it while he stood 
there smoke with the other men and talk all the "shop" of ski-ing. 

and, ever mysteri blend with thi power of the snow, pour also 
through hi inner be the power of the girl. He could not disabus hi 
mind of the insinu presenc of the two together. He rememb that 
queer skating-impuls of ten day ago, the impuls that had let her in. 
that ani mind, even an imagin one, could pass beneath the sway of 
such a fanci wa strang enough; and hibbert, while fulli awar of the 
disorder, yet found a curiou joy in yield to it. thi insubordin 
centr that drew him toward old pagan belief had assum command. with 
a kind of sensuou pleasur he let himself be conquered. 

and snow that night seem in everybody' thoughts. the danc coupl 
talk of it; the hotel proprietor congratul one another; it meant 
good sport and satisfi their guests; everi one wa plan trip and 
expeditions, talk of slope and telemarks, of fli speed and 
distance, of drift and crust and frost. vital and enthusiasm puls 
in the veri air; all were alert and active, positive, radiat current 
of creativ life even into the stuffi atmospher of that crowd 
ball-room. and the snow had caus it, the snow had brought it; all thi 
discharg of eager sparkl energi wa due primarili to the--snow. 

but in the mind of hibbert, by some swift alchemi of hi pagan 
yearnings, thi energi becam transmuted. It rarefi itself, gleam 
in white and crystal current of passion anticipation, which he 
transferred, as by a speci of electr imagination, into the 
person of the girl--th girl of the snow. she somewher wa wait 
for him, expect him, call to him softli from those leagu of 
moonlit mountain. He rememb the touch of that cool, dri hand; the 
soft and ici breath against hi cheek; the hush and soft of her 
presenc in the way she came and the way she had gone again--lik a 
flurri of snow the wind sent glide up the slopes. she, like himself, 
belong out there. He fanci that he heard her littl windi voic come 
sift to him through the snowi branch of the trees, call hi name 
... that haunt littl voic that dive straight to the centr of hi 
life as once, long year ago, two other voic use to do.... 

but nowher among the costum dancer did he see her slender figure. He 
danc with one and all, distrait and absent, a stupid partner as each 
girl discovered, hi eye ever turn toward the door and windows, 
hope to catch the lure face, the vision that did not come ... and at 
length, hope even against hope. for the ball-room thinned; group left 
one by one, go home to their hotel and chalets; the band tire 
obviously; peopl sat drink lemon-squash at the littl tables, the 
men mop their foreheads, everybodi readi for bed. 

It wa close on midnight. As hibbert pass through the hall to get hi 
overcoat and snow-boots, he saw men in the passag by the "sport-room," 
greas their ski against an earli start. knapsack luncheon were be 
order by the kitchen swing doors. He sighed. light a cigarett a 
friend offer him, he return a confus repli to some question as to 
whether he could join their parti in the morning. It seem he did not 
hear it properly. He pass through the outer vestibul between the 
doubl glass doors, and went into the night. 

the man who ask the question watch him go, an express of anxieti 
momentarili in hi eyes. 

"don't think he heard you," said another, laughing. "you'v got to shout 
to hibbert, hi mind' so full of hi work." 

"he work too hard," suggest the first, "full of queer idea and 
dreams." 

but hibbert' silenc wa not rudeness. He had not caught the 
invitation, that wa all. the call of the hotel-world had faded. He no 
longer heard it. anoth wilder call wa sound in hi ears. 

for up the street he had seen a littl figur moving. close against the 
shadow of the baker' shop it glided--white, slim, enticing. 




VI 


and at onc into hi mind pass the hush and soft of the snow--yet 
with it a searching, cri wild for the heights. He knew by some 
incalculable, swift instinct she would not meet him in the villag 
street. It wa not there, amid crowd houses, she would speak to him. 
indeed, alreadi she had disappeared, melt from view up the white vista 
of the moonlit road. yonder, he divined, she wait where the highway 
narrow abruptli into the mountain path beyond the chalets. 

It did not even occur to him to hesitate; mad though it seemed, and 
was--thi sudden crave for the height with her, at least for open 
space where the snow lay thick and fresh--it wa too imperi to be 
denied. He doe not rememb go up to hi room, put the sweater 
over hi even clothes, and get into the fur gauntlet glove and 
the helmet cap of wool. most certainli he ha no recollect of 
fasten on hi ski; he must have done it automatically. some faculti 
of normal observ wa in abeyance, as it were. hi mind wa out 
beyond the village--out with the snowi mountain and the moon. 

henri defago, put up the shutter over hi _cafe_ windows, saw him 
pass, and wonder mildly: "un monsieur qui fait du ski a cett heure! 
Il est anglais, done ...!" He shrug hi shoulders, as though a man had 
the right to choos hi own way of death. and marth perotti, the 
hunchback wife of the shoemaker, look by chanc from her window, 
caught hi figur move swiftli up the road. she had other thoughts, 
for she knew and believ the old tradit of the witch and 
snow-b that steal the soul of men. she had even heard, 'twa said, 
the dread "synagogue" pass roar down the street at night, and now, 
as then, she hid her eyes. "they'v call to him ... and he must go," 
she murmured, make the sign of the cross. 

but no one sought to stop him. hibbert recal onli a singl incid 
until he found himself beyond the houses, search for her along the 
fring of forest where the moonlight met the snow in a bewild 
friez of fantast shadows. and the incid wa simpli this--that he 
rememb pass the church. catch the outlin of it tower against 
the stars, he wa awar of a faint sens of hesitation. A vagu 
uneasi came and went--jar unpleasantli across the flow of hi 
excit feelings, chill exhilaration. He caught the instant' 
discord, dismiss it, and--pass on. the seduct of the snow 
smother the hint befor he realis that it had brush the skirt of 
warning. 

and then he saw her. she stood there wait in a littl clear space of 
shine snow, dress all in white, part of the moonlight and the 
glisten background, her slender figur just discernible. 

"I waited, for I knew you would come," the silveri littl voic of windi 
beauti float down to him. "you _had_ to come." 

"i'm ready," he answered, "I knew it too." 

the world of natur caught him to it heart in those few words--th 
wonder and the glori of the night and snow. life leap within him. the 
passion of hi pagan soul exulted, rose in joy, flow out to her. He 
neither reflect nor considered, but let himself go like the veriest 
schoolboy in the wild of first love. 

"give me your hand," he cried, "i'm come ...!" 

"A littl farther on, a littl higher," came her delici answer. "here 
it is too near the village--and the church." 

and the word seem wholli right and natural; he did not dream of 
question them; he understood that, with thi littl touch of 
civilis in sight, the familiar he suggest wa impossible. onc 
out upon the open mountains, 'mid the freedom of huge slope and 
tower peaks, the star and moon to wit and the wilder of snow 
to watch, they could tast an innoc of happi intercours free from 
the dead convent that imprison liter minds. 

He urg hi pace, yet did not quit overtak her. the girl kept alway 
just a littl bit ahead of hi best efforts.... and soon they left the 
tree behind and pass on to the enorm slope of the sea of snow 
that roll in mountain terror and beauti to the stars. the wonder of 
the white world caught him away. under the steadi moonlight it wa more 
than haunting. It wa a living, white, bewild power that 
delici confus the sens and laid a spell of wild perplex upon 
the heart. It wa a person that cloaked, and yet revealed, itself 
through all thi sheet white of snow. It rose, went with him, fled 
before, and follow after. slowli it drop lithe, gleam arm about 
hi neck, gather him in.... 

certainli some soft persuas coax hi veri soul, urg him ever 
forwards, upwards, on toward the higher ici slopes. judgment and 
reason left their throne, it seemed, completely, as in the mad of 
intoxication. the girl, slim and seductive, kept alway just ahead, so 
that he never quit came up with her. He saw the white enchant of 
her face and figure, someth that stream about her neck fli like 
a wreath of snow in the wind, and heard the allur accent of her 
whisper voic that call from time to time: "A littl farther on, a 
littl higher.... then we'll run home together!" 

sometim he saw her hand stretch out to find hi own, but each time, 
just as he came up with her, he saw her still in front, the hand and arm 
withdrawn. they took a gentl angl of ascent. the toil seem nothing. 
In thi crystal, wine-lik air fatigu vanished. the sish of the ski 
through the powderi surfac of the snow wa the onli sound that broke 
the stillness; this, with hi breath and the rustl of her skirts, 
wa all he heard. cold moonshine, snow, and silenc held the world. the 
sky wa black, and the peak beyond cut into it like frost wedg of 
iron and steel. far below the valley slept, the villag long sinc 
hidden out of sight. He felt that he could never tire.... the sound of 
the church clock rose from time to time faintli through the air--mor 
and more distant. 

"give me your hand. it' time now to turn back." 

"just one more slope," she laughed. "that ridg abov us. then we'll 
make for home." and her low voic mingl pleasantli with the pur of 
their ski. hi own seem harsh and ugli by comparison. 

"but I have never come so high before. it' glorious! thi world of 
silent snow and moonlight--and _you_. you'r a child of the snow, I 
swear. let me come up--closer--to see your face--and touch your littl 
hand." 

her laughter answer him. 

"come on! A littl higher. here we'r quit alon together." 

"it' magnificent," he cried. "but whi did you hide away so long? i'v 
look and search for you in vain ever sinc we skated--" he wa go 
to say "ten day ago," but the accur memori of time had gone from 
him; he wa not sure whether it wa day or year or minutes. hi 
thought of earth were scatter and confused. 

"you look for me in the wrong places," he heard her murmur just abov 
him. "you look in place where I never go. hotel and hous kill me. 
I avoid them." she laughed--a fine, shrill, windi littl laugh. 

"I loath them too--" 

He stopped. the girl had suddenli come quit close. A breath of ice 
pass through hi veri soul. she had touch him. 

"but thi aw cold!" he cri out, sharply, "thi freez cold that 
take me. the wind is rising; it' a wind of ice. come, let us turn ...!" 

but when he plung forward to hold her, or at least to look, the girl 
wa gone again. and someth in the way she stood there a few feet 
beyond, and stare down into hi eye so steadfastli in silence, made 
him shiver. the moonlight wa behind her, but in some odd way he could 
not focu sight upon her face, although so close. the gleam of eye he 
caught, but all the rest seem white and snowi as though he look 
beyond her--out into space.... 

the sound of the church bell came up faintli from the valley far below, 
and he count the strokes--five. A sudden, curiou weak seiz him 
as he listened. deep within it was, deadli yet somehow sweet, and hard 
to resist. He felt like sink down upon the snow and lie there.... 
they had been climb for five hours.... It was, of course, the warn 
of complet exhaustion. 

with a great effort he fought and overcam it. It pass away as 
suddenli as it came. 

"we'll turn," he said with a decis he hardli felt. "it will be dawn 
befor we reach the villag again. come at once. it' time for home." 

the sens of exhilar had utterli left him. An emot that wa akin 
to fear swept coldli through him. but her whisper answer turn it 
instantli to terror--a terror that grip him horribl and turn him 
weak and unresisting. 

"our home is--_here_!" A burst of wild, high laughter, loud and shrill, 
accompani the words. It wa like a whistl wind. the wind _had_ 
risen, and cloud obscur the moon. "A littl higher--wher we cannot 
hear the wick bells," she cried, and for the first time seiz him 
deliber by the hand. she moved, wa suddenli close against hi 
face. again she touch him. 

and hibbert tri to turn away in escape, and so trying, found for the 
first time that the power of the snow--that other power which doe not 
exhilar but deaden effort--wa upon him. the suffoc weak 
that it bring to exhaust men, lure them to the sleep of death in 
her cling soft embrace, lull the will and conquer all desir 
for life--thi wa aw upon him. hi feet were heavi and entangled. 
He could not turn or move. 

the girl stood in front of him, veri near; he felt her chilli breath 
upon hi cheeks; her hair pass blindingli across hi eyes; and that 
ici wind came with her. He saw her white close; again, it seemed, 
hi sight pass through her into space as though she had no face. her 
arm were round hi neck. she drew him softli downward to hi knees. He 
sank; he yield utterly; he obeyed. her weight wa upon him, 
smothering, delicious. the snow wa to hi waist.... she kiss him 
softli on the lips, the eyes, all over hi face. and then she spoke hi 
name in that voic of love and wonder, the voic that held the accent of 
two others--both taken over long ago by death--th voic of hi mother, 
and of the woman he had loved. 

He made one more feebl effort to resist. then, realis even while he 
struggl that thi soft weight about hi heart wa sweeter than 
anyth life could ever bring, he let hi muscl relax, and sank back 
into the soft oblivion of the cover snow. her wintri kiss bore him 
into sleep. 




vii 


they say that men who know the sleep of exhaust in the snow find no 
awaken on the hither side of death.... the hour pass and the moon 
sank down below the white world' rim. then, suddenly, there came a 
littl crash upon hi breast and neck, and hibbert--woke. 

He slowli turn bewildered, heavi eye upon the desol mountains, 
stare dizzili about him, tri to rise. At first hi muscl would not 
act; a numbing, ach pain possess him. He utter a long, thin cri 
for help, and heard it faint swallow by the wind. and then he 
understood vagu whi he wa onli warm--not dead. for thi veri wind 
that took hi cri had built up a shelter mound of driven snow against 
hi bodi while he slept. like a curv wave it ran besid him. It wa 
the break of it over-toppl edg that caus the crash, and the 
cold of the mass against hi neck that woke him. 

dawn kiss the eastern sky; pale gleam of gold shot everi peak with 
splendour; but ice wa in the air, and the dri and frozen snow blew like 
powder from the surfac of the slopes. He saw the point of hi ski 
project just below him. then he--remembered. It seem he had just 
strength enough to realis that, could he but rise and stand, he might 
fli with terrif impetu toward the wood and villag far beneath. the 
ski would carri him. but if he fail and fell ...! 

how he contriv it hibbert never knew; thi fear of death somehow 
call out hi whole avail reserv force. He rose slowly, balanc a 
moment, then, take the angl of an immens zigzag, start down the 
aw slope like an arrow from a bow. and automat the splendid 
muscl of the practis ski-er and athlet save and guid him, for he 
wa hardli consciou of control either speed or direction. the snow 
stung face and eye like fine steel shot; ridg after ridg flew past; 
the summit race across the sky; the valley leap up with bound to 
meet him. He scarc felt the ground beneath hi feet as the huge 
slope and distanc melt befor the lightn speed of that descent 
from death to life. 

He took it in four mile-long zigzags, and it wa the turn at each 
corner that nearli finish him, for then the strain of balanc tax 
to the verg of collaps the remnant of hi strength. 

slope that have taken hour to climb can be descend in a short 
half-hour on ski, but hibbert had lost all count of time. quit other 
thought and feel master him in that wild, swift drop through 
the air that wa like the flight of a bird. for ever close upon hi 
heel came follow form and voic with the whirl snow-dust. He 
heard that littl silveri voic of death and laughter at hi back. 
shrill and wild, with the whistl of the wind past hi ears, he caught 
it pursu tones; but in anger now, no longer soft and coaxing. and it 
wa accompanied; she did not follow alone. It seem a host of these 
fli figur of the snow chase madli just behind him. He felt them 
furious smite hi neck and cheeks, snatch at hi hand and tri to 
entangl hi feet and ski in drifts. hi eye they blinded, and they 
caught hi breath away. 

the terror of the height and snow and winter desol urg him 
forward in the maddest race with death a human be ever knew; and so 
terrif wa the speed that befor the gold and crimson had left the 
summit to touch the ice-lip of the lower glaciers, he saw the friendli 
forest far beneath swing up and welcom him. 

and it wa then, move slowli along the edg of the woods, he saw a 
light. A man wa carri it. A process of human figur wa pass 
in a dark line labori through the snow. and--h heard the sound of 
chanting. 

instinctively, without a second' hesitation, he chang hi course. No 
longer fli at an angl as before, he point hi ski straight down 
the mountain-side. the dread steep did not frighten him. He knew 
full well it meant a crash tumbl at the bottom, but he also knew it 
meant a doubl of hi speed--with safeti at the end. for, though no 
definit thought pass through hi mind, he understood that it wa the 
villag _cure_ who carri that littl gleam lantern in the dawn, and 
that he wa take the host to a chalet on the lower slopes--to some 
peasant _in extremis_. He rememb her terror of the church and bells. 
she fear the holi symbols. 

there wa one last wild cri in hi ear as he started, a shriek of the 
wind befor hi face, and a rush of sting snow against close 
eyelids--and then he drop through empti space. speed took sight from 
him. It seem he flew off the surfac of the world. 

* * * * * 

indistinctli he recal the murmur of men' voices, the touch of strong 
arm that lift him, and the shoot pain as the ski were unfasten 
from the twist ankl ... for when he open hi eye again to normal 
life he found himself lie in hi bed at the post offic with the 
doctor at hi side. but for year to come the stori of "mad hibbert's" 
ski-e at night is recount in that mountain village. He went, it 
seems, up slopes, and to a height that no man in hi sens ever tri 
before. the tourist were agog about it for the rest of the season, and 
the veri same day two of the bolder men went over the actual ground and 
photograph the slopes. later hibbert saw these photographs. He notic 
one curiou thing about them--though he did not mention it to ani one: 

there wa onli a singl track. 



* * * * * 




_sand_ 

I 


As felix henriot came through the street that januari night the fog wa 
stifling, but when he reach hi littl flat upon the top floor there 
came a sound of wind. wind wa stir about the world. It blew against 
hi windows, but at first so faintli that he hardli notic it. then, 
with an abrupt rise and fall like a wail voic that sought to claim 
attention, it call him. He peer through the window into the blur 
darkness, listening. 

there is no cri in the world like that of the homeless wind. A vagu 
excitement, scarc to be analysed, ran through hi blood. the curtain 
of fog wave momentarili aside. henriot fanci a star peep down at 
him. 

"it will chang thing a bit--at last," he sighed, settl back into 
hi chair. "it will bring movement!" 

alreadi someth in himself had changed. A restlessness, as of that 
wander wind, woke in hi heart--th desir to be off and away. other 
thing could rous thi wild too: fall water, the sing of a 
bird, an odour of wood-fire, a glimps of wind road. but the cri of 
wind, alway searching, questioning, travel the world' great 
routes, remain ever the master-touch. high long took hi mood in 
hand. mid seven million he felt suddenly--lonely. 


"I will aris and go now, for alway night and day 
I hear lake water lap with low sound by the shore; 
while I stand on the roadway, or on the pavement gray, 
I hear it in the deep heart' core." 


He murmur the word over softli to himself. the emot that produc 
innisfre pass strongli through him. He too would be over the hill 
and far away. He crave movement, change, adventure--somewher far from 
shop and crowd and motor-'busses. for a week the fog had stifl 
london. thi wind brought life. 

where should he go? desir wa long; hi purs wa short. 

He glanc at hi books, letters, newspapers. they had no interest now. 
instead he listened. the panorama of other journey roll in colour 
through the littl room, fli on one another' heels. henriot enjoy 
thi rememb essenc of hi travel more than the travel themselves. 
the cri wind brought so mani voices, all of them seductive: 

there wa a soft crash of wave upon the black sea shores, where the 
huge caucasu beckon in the sky beyond; a rustl in the umbrella 
pine and cactu at marseilles, whenc magic steamer start about the 
world like fli dreams. He heard the plash of fountain upon mount 
ida' slopes, and the whisper of the tamarisk on marathon. It wa dawn 
onc more upon the ionian sea, and he smelt the perfum of the cyclades. 
blue-veil island melt in the sunshine, and across the dewi lawn of 
tempe, moisten by the spray of mani waterfalls, he saw--great heaven 
above!--th danc of white form ... or wa it onli mist the sunshin 
paint against pelion?... "methought, among the lawn together, we 
wander underneath the young grey dawn. and multitud of dens white 
fleeci cloud shepherd by the slow, unwil wind...." 

and then, into hi stuffi room, slip the sing perfum of a 
wall-flow on a ruin tower, and with it the sweet of hot ivy. He 
heard the "yellow bee in the ivi bloom." wind whip over the open 
hills--thi veri wind that labour drearili through the london fog. 

and--h wa caught. the dark melt from the city. the fog whisk 
off into an azur sky. the roar of traffic turn into boom of the 
sea. there wa a whistl among cordage, and the floor sway to and 
fro. He saw a sailor touch hi cap and pocket the two-franc piece. the 
syren hooted--omin sound that had start him on mani a journey of 
adventure--and the roar of london becam mere insignific clatter of a 
child' toy carriages. 

He love that syren' call; there wa someth deep and pitiless in it. 
It drew the wander forth from citi everywhere: "leav your known 
world behind you, and come with me for better or for worse! the anchor 
is up; it is too late to change. only--beware! you shall know curiou 
things--and alone!" 

henriot stir uneasili in hi chair. He turn with sudden energi to 
the shelf of guide-books, map and time-tables--possess he most 
valu in the whole room. He wa a happy-go-lucky, adventure-lov 
soul, careless of common standards, athirst ever for the new and 
strange. 

"that' the best of have a cheap flat," he laughed, "and no tie in 
the world. I can turn the key and disappear. No one care or knows--no 
one but the thiev caretaker. and he' long ago found out that there' 
noth here worth taking!" 

there follow then no lengthi indecision. prepar wa even shorter 
still. He wa alway readi for a move, and hi sojourn in citi wa but 
breathing-spac while he gather penni for further wanderings. An 
enorm kit-bag--sack-shaped, veri worn and dirty--emerg speedili 
from the bottom of a cupboard in the wall. It wa of limitless capacity. 
the key and padlock rattl in it depths. cigarett ash cover 
everyth while he stuf it full of ancient, indescrib garments. 
and hi voice, sing of those "yellow bee in the ivi bloom," mingl 
with the cri of the rise wind about hi windows. hi restless 
had disappear by magic. 

thi time, however, there could be no haunt pelion, nor shadi grove 
of tempe, for he live in sophist time when money market 
regul movement sternly. travel wa onli for the rich; mere 
wander must pig it. He rememb instead an opportun invit to 
the desert. "objective" invitation, hi genial host had call it, 
know hi hatr of convention. and helouan danc into letter of 
brillianc upon the inner map of hi mind. for egypt had ever held hi 
spirit in thrall, though as yet he had tri in vain to touch the great 
buri soul of her. the excavators, the egyptologists, the 
archaeologist most of all, plaster her grey ancient face with label 
like hotel advertis on travellers' portmanteaux. they told where 
she had come from last, but noth of what she dream and thought and 
loved. the heart of egypt lay beneath the sand, and the trifl robberi 
of littl detail that poke forth from tomb and templ brought no 
true revel of her stupend spiritu splendour. henriot, in hi 
youth, had search and dive among what materi he could find, 
believ once--or half believing--that the ceremoni of that ancient 
system veil a weight of symbol that wa reflect from genuin 
supersensu knowledge. the rituals, now taken literally, and so 
pityingli explain away, had onc been genuin pathway of approach. 
but never yet, and least of all in hi previou visit to egypt itself, 
had he discov one singl person, worthi of speech, who caught at hi 
idea. "curious," they said, then turn away--to go on dig in the 
sand. sand smother her world to-day. excav discov skeletons. 
museum everywher store them--grinning, liter relic that told 
nothing. 

but now, while he pack and sang, these hope of enthusiast younger 
day stir again--becaus the emot that gave them birth wa real 
and true in him. through the morn mist upon the nile an old pyramid 
bow huge at him across london roofs: "come," he heard it aw 
whisper beneath the ceiling, "I have thing to show you, and to tell." 
He saw the flock of them sail the desert like weird grey solemn ship 
that make no earthli port. and he imagin them as one: multipl 
express of some singl unearthli portent they adumbr in mighti 
form--dead symbol of some spiritu concept long vanish from the 
world. 

"I mustn't dream like this," he laughed, "or I shall get absent-mind 
and pack fire-tong instead of boots. It look like a jumbl sale 
already!" and he stood on a heap of thing to wedg them down still 
tighter. 

but the pictur would not cease. He saw the kite circl high in the 
blue air. A coupl of white vultur flap lazili away over shine 
miles. felucca sails, like giant wing emerg from the ground, curv 
toward him from the nile. the palm-tre drop long shadow over 
memphis. He felt the delicious, drench heat, and the khamasin, that 
over-wind from nubia, brush hi veri cheeks. In the littl garden the 
mish-mish wa in bloom.... He smelt the desert ... grey sepulchr of 
cancel cycles.... the still of her intermin reach drop 
down upon old london.... 

the magic of the sand stole round him in it silent-foot tempest. 

and while he struggl with that strange, capaci sack, the pile of 
cloth ran into shape of gleam bedouin faces; london garment 
settl down with the mourn sound of camels' feet, half drop 
wind, half water flow underground--sound that old time ha brought 
over into modern life and left a moment for our wonder and perhap our 
tears. 

He rose at length with the excit of some deep enchant in hi 
eyes. the thought of egypt plung ever so deepli into him, carri 
him into depth where he found it difficult to breathe, so strang far 
away it seemed, yet indefin familiar. He lost hi way. A touch of 
fear came with it. 

"A sack like that is the wonder of the world," he laugh again, kick 
the unwieldy, sausage-shap monster into a corner of the room, and 
sit down to write the thrill labels: "felix henriot, alexandria 
_via_ marseilles." but hi pen blot the letters; there wa sand in 
it. He rewrot the words. then he rememb a dozen thing he had left 
out. impatiently, yet with confus somewhere, he stuf them in. they 
ran away into shift heaps; they disappeared; they emerg suddenli 
again. It wa like pack hot, dry, flow sand. from the pocket of a 
coat--h had worn it last summer down dorset way--out trickl sand. 
there wa sand in hi mind and thoughts. 

and hi dream that night were full of winds, the old sad wind of 
egypt, and of moving, sift sand. arab and afreet danc amazingli 
togeth across dune he could never reach. for he could not follow fast 
enough. someth infinit older than these ever caught hi feet and 
held him back. A million tini finger stung and prick him. someth 
flung a veil befor hi eyes. onc it touch him--hi face and hand 
and neck. "stay here with us," he heard a host of muffl voic crying, 
but their sound wa smothered, buried, rise through the ground. A 
myriad throat were choked. till, at last, with a violent effort he 
turn and seiz it. and then the thing he grasp at slip between 
hi finger and ran easili away. It had a grey and yellow face, and it 
move through all it parts. It flow as water flows, and yet wa 
solid. It wa centuri old. 

He cri out to it. "who are you? what is your name? I sure know you 
... but I have forgotten ...?" 

and it stopped, turn from far away it great uncov counten of 
nameless colouring. He caught a voice. It roll and boom and 
whisper like the wind. and then he woke, with a curiou shake in hi 
heart, and a littl touch of chilli perspir on the skin. 

but the voic seem in the room still--clos besid him: 

"I am the sand," he heard, befor it die away. 

* * * * * 

and next he realis that the glitter of pari lay behind him, and a 
steamer wa take him with much unnecessari motion across a sparkl 
sea toward alexandria. gladli he saw the riviera fade below the 
horizon, with it hard bright sunshine, treacher winds, and it smear 
of rich, convent english. all restless now had left him. true 
vagabond still at forty, he onli felt the unrest and discomfort of life 
when caught in the network of routin and rigid streets, no chanc of 
break loose. He wa off again at last, money scarc enough indeed, 
but the joy of wander express itself in happi emot of release. 
everi warn of calcul wa stifled. He thought of the american 
woman who walk out of her long island hous one summer' day to look 
at a pass sail--and wa gone eight year befor she walk in again. 
eight year of rove travel! He had alway felt respect and admir 
for that woman. 

for felix henriot, with hi admixtur of foreign blood, wa philosoph 
as well as vagabond, a strong poetic and religi strain sometim 
break out through fissur in hi complex nature. He had seen much 
life; had read mani books. the passion desir of youth to solv the 
world' big riddl had given place to a resign fill to the brim 
with wonder. anyth _might_ be true. noth surpris him. the most 
outlandish beliefs, for all he knew, might fring truth somewhere. He 
had escap that cheap cynic with which disappoint men sooth their 
vaniti when they realis that an intellig explan of the 
univers lie beyond their powers. He no longer expect final answers. 

for him, even the smallest journey held the spice of some adventure; 
all minut were load with entic potentialities. and they shape 
for themselv somehow a dramat form. "it' like a story," hi friend 
said when he told hi travels. It alway wa a story. 

but the adventur that lay wait for him where the silent street of 
littl helouan kiss the great desert' lips, wa of a differ kind to 
ani henriot had yet encountered. look back, he ha often ask 
himself, "how in the world can I accept it?" 

and, perhaps, he never yet ha accept it. It wa sand that brought it. 
for the desert, the stupend thing that mother littl helouan, 
produc it. 




II 


He slip through cairo with the same relief that he left the riviera, 
resent it social vulgar so close to the imperi aristocraci of 
the desert; he settl down into the peac of soft and silent littl 
helouan. the hotel in which he had a room on the top floor had been 
formerli a khedivi palace. It had the air of a palac still. He felt 
himself in a country-house, with lofti ceilings, cool and airi 
corridors, spaciou halls. soft-foot arab attend to hi wants; 
white wall let in light and air without a sign of heat; there wa a 
feel of a large, spread tent pitch on the veri sand; and the wind 
that stir the oleand in the shadi garden also crept in to rustl 
the palm leav of hi favourit corner seat. through the larg window 
where onc the khediv held high court, the sunshin blaze upon vista 
leagu of desert. 

and from hi bedroom window he watch the sun dip into gold and 
crimson behind the swell libyan sands. thi side of the pyramid he 
saw the nile meander among palm grove and till fields. across hi 
balconi rail the egyptian star troop down besid hi veri bed, 
shape old constel for hi dreams; while, to the south, he 
look out upon the vast untam bodi of the sand that carpet the 
world for thousand of mile toward upper egypt, nubia, and the dread 
sahara itself. He wonder again whi peopl thought it necessari to go 
so far afield to know the desert. here, within half an hour of cairo, it 
lay breath solemnli at hi veri doors. 

for littl helouan, caught thu between the shoulder of the libyan and 
arabian deserts, is utterli sand-haunted. the desert lie all round it 
like a sea. henriot felt he never could escap from it, as he move 
about the island whose coast are wash with sand. down each broad and 
shine street the two end hous frame a vista of it dim 
immensity--glimps of shimmer blue, or flame-touch purple. there 
were stretch of deep sea-green as well, far off upon it bosom. the 
street were open channel of approach, and the eye ran down them as 
along the tube of a telescop laid to catch incred distanc out of 
space. through them the desert reach in with long, thin feeler 
toward the village. it be flood into helouan, and over it. past 
wall and houses, church and hotels, the sea of desert press in 
silent with it myriad soft feet of sand. It pour in everywhere, 
through crack and slit and crannie. these were remind of possess 
and ownership. and everi pass wind that lift eddi of dust at the 
street corner were messag from the quiet, power thing that 
permit helouan to lie and dream so peac in the sunshine. mere 
artifici oasis, it exist wa temporary, held on lease, just for 
ninety-nin centuri or so. 

thi sea idea becam insistent. for, in certain lights, and especi 
in the brief, bewild dusk, the desert rose--sway toward the 
small white houses. the wave of it ran for fifti mile without a break. 
It wa too deep for foam or surfac agitation, yet it knew the swell of 
tides. and underneath flow resolut currents, link distanc to the 
centre. these mani desert were realli one. A storm, just retreated, had 
toss helouan upon the shore and left it there to dry; but ani morn 
he would wake to find it had been carri off again into the depths. 
some fragment, at least, would disappear. the grim mokattam hill were 
roller that ever threaten to toppl down and submerg the sandi bar 
that men call helouan. 

be soundless, and devoid of perfume, the desert' messag reach him 
through two sens only--sight and touch; chiefly, of course, the 
former. it invas wa concentr through the eyes. and vision, thu 
uncorrected, went what pace it pleased. the desert play with him. sand 
stole into hi being--through the eyes. 

and so obsess wa thi majesti of it close presence, that henriot 
sometim wonder how peopl dare their littl social activ 
within it veri sight and hearing; how they play golf and tenni upon 
reclaim edg of it face, picnick so blith hard upon it 
frontiers, and danc at night while thi stern, unfathom thing lay 
breath just beyond the trumperi wall that kept it out. the challeng 
of their shallow admir seem presumptuous, almost provocative. 
their pursuit of pleasur suggest insol indifference. they ran 
fool-hardi hazards, he felt; for there wa no worship in their vulgar 
hearts. with a mental shudder, sometim he watch the cheap tourist 
hord go laughing, chatter past within view of it ancient, 
half-clos eyes. It wa like defi deity. 

for, to hi stir imagin the sublim of the desert dwarf 
humanity. these peopl had been wiser to choos anoth place for the 
flaunt of their tawdri insignificance. ani minut thi wilderness, 
"huddl in grey annihilation," might awak and notic them ...! 

In hi own hotel were sever "smart," so-cal "society" peopl who 
emphasis the protest in him to the point of definit contempt. 
overdressed, the latest worldli novel under their arms, they strut 
the narrow pavement of their tini world, immens pleas with 
themselves. their vacuou mind express themselv in the slang of 
their exclus circle--valu be the element excluded. the petti 
of their outlook hardli distress him--h wa too familiar with it at 
home--but their essenti vulgarity, their innat ugliness, seem more 
than usual offens in the grandeur of it present setting. into the 
mighti sand they took the latest london scandal, gabbl it over even 
among the tomb and temples. and "it wa to laugh," the pain they spent 
wonder whom they might condescend to know, never dream that they 
themselv were not worth knowing. against the background of the nobl 
desert their titl seem the cap and bell of clowns. 

and henriot, know some of them personally, could not alway escap 
their insipid company. yet he wa the gainer. they littl guess how 
their common heighten contrast, set mercilessli thu besid the 
strange, etern beauti of the sand. 

occasion the protest in hi soul betray itself in words, which 
of cours they did not understand. "he is so clever, isn't he?" 
and then, have reliev hi feelings, he would comfort himself 
characteristically: 

"the desert ha not notic them. the sand is not awar of their 
existence. how should the sea take note of rubbish that lie abov it 
tide-line?" 

for henriot drew near to it great shift altar in an attitud of 
worship. the wilder made him kneel in heart. it shine reach led 
to the oldest templ in the world, and everi journey that he made wa 
like a sacrament. for him the desert wa a consecr place. It wa 
sacred. 

and hi tact hosts, know hi peculiarities, left their hous open 
to him when he care to come--they live upon the northern edg of the 
oasis--and he wa as free as though he were absolut alone. He bless 
them; he rejoic that he had come. littl helouan accept him. the 
desert knew that he wa there. 

* * * * * 

from hi corner of the big dining-room he could see the other guests, 
but hi rove eye alway return to the figur of a solitari man who 
sat at an adjoin table, and whose person stir hi interest. 
while affect to look elsewhere, he studi him as close as might 
be. there wa someth about the stranger that touch hi 
curiosity--a certain air of expect that he wore. but it wa more 
than that: it wa anticipation, apprehens in it somewhere. the man 
wa nervous, uneasy. hi restless way of suddenli look about him 
prove it. henriot tri everi one els in the room as well; but, though 
hi thought settl on other too, he alway came back to the figur of 
thi solitari be opposite, who ate hi dinner as if afraid of be 
seen, and glanc up sometim as if fear of be watched. henriot' 
curiosity, befor he knew it, becam suspicion. there wa mysteri here. 
the table, he noticed, wa laid for two. 

"i he an actor, a priest of some strang religion, an enquiri agent, or 
just--a crank?" wa the thought that first occur to him. and the 
question suggest itself without amusement. the impress of 
subterfug and caution he convey left hi observ unsatisfied. 

the face wa clean shaven, dark, and strong; thick hair, straight yet 
bushy, wa slightli unkempt; it wa streak with grey; and an 
unexpect mobil when he smile ran over the featur that he seem 
to hold rigid by deliber effort. the man wa cut to no quit common 
measure. henriot jump to an intuit conclusion: "he' not here for 
pleasur or mere sight-seeing. someth seriou ha brought him out 
to egypt." for the face combin too ill-assort qualities: an 
obstin tenac that might even mean brutality, and wa certainli 
repulsive, yet, with it, an undecipher dreami betray by line 
of the mouth, but abov all in the veri light blue eyes, so rare 
raised. those eyes, he felt, had look upon unusu things; 
"dreaminess" wa not an adequ description; "searching" convey it 
better. the true sourc of the queer impress remain elusive. and 
hence, perhaps, the incongru marriag in the face--mobl laid upon 
a matter-of-fact foundat underneath. the face show conflict. 

and henriot, watch him, felt decidedli intrigued. "i'd like to know 
that man, and all about him." hi name, he learn later, wa richard 
vance; from birmingham; a busi man. but it wa not the birmingham he 
wish to know; it wa the--other: caus of the elusive, dreami 
searching. though face one anoth at so short a distance, their eyes, 
however, did not meet. and this, henriot well knew, wa a sure sign that 
he himself wa also under observation. richard vance, from birmingham, 
wa equal take care note of felix henriot, from london. 

thus, he could wait hi time. they would come togeth later. An 
opportun would certainli present itself. the first link in a curiou 
chain had alreadi caught; soon the chain would tighten, pull as though 
by chance, and bring their live into one and the same circle. wonder 
in particular for what kind of a companion the second cover wa laid, 
henriot felt certain that their eventu come togeth wa inevitable. 
He possess thi kind of divin from first impressions, and not 
uncommonli it prove correct. 

follow instinct, therefore, he took no step toward acquaintance, 
and for sever days, owe to the fact that he dine frequent with 
hi hosts, he saw noth more of richard vance, the busi man from 
birmingham. then, one night, come home late from hi friend' house, 
he had pass along the great corridor, and wa actual a step or so 
into hi bedroom, when a drawl voic sound close behind him. It wa 
an unpleas sound. It wa veri near him too-- 

"I beg your pardon, but have you, by ani chance, such a thing as a 
compass you could lend me?" 

the voic wa so close that he started. vanc stood within touch 
distanc of hi body. He had stolen up like a ghostli arab, must have 
follow him, too, some littl distance, for further down the passag 
the light of an open door--h had pass it on hi way--show where he 
came from. 

"eh? I beg your pardon? a--compass, did you say?" He felt disconcert 
for a moment. how short the man was, now that he saw him standing. broad 
and power too. henriot look down upon hi thick head of hair. the 
person and voic repel him. possibl hi face, caught unawares, 
betray this. 

"forgiv my startl you," said the other apologetically, while the 
softer express danc in for a moment and disorganis the rigid set 
of the face. "the soft carpet, you know. i'm afraid you didn't hear my 
tread. I wondered"--h smile again slightli at the natur of the 
request--"if--bi ani chance--y had a pocket compass you could lend 
me?" 

"ah, a compass, yes! pleas don't apologise. I believ I have one--if 
you'll wait a moment. come in, won't you? i'll have a look." 

the other thank him but wait in the passage. henriot, it so 
happened, had a compass, and produc it after a moment' search. 

"I am greatli indebt to you--if I may return it in the morning. you 
will forgiv my disturb you at such an hour. My own is broken, and I 
wanted--er--to find the true north." 

henriot stammer some reply, and the man wa gone. It wa all over in a 
minute. He lock hi door and sat down in hi chair to think. the 
littl incid had upset him, though for the life of him he could not 
imagin why. It ought by right to have been almost ludicrous, yet 
instead it wa the exact reverse--half threatening. whi should not a man 
want a compass? but, again, whi should he? and at midnight? the voice, 
the eyes, the near presence--what did they bring that set hi nerv 
thu ask unusu questions? thi strang impress that someth 
grave wa happening, someth unearthly--how wa it born exactly? the 
man' proxim came like a shock. It had made him start. He 
brought--thu the idea came unbidden to hi mind--someth with him 
that galvanis him quit absurdly, as fear does, or delight, or great 
wonder. there wa a music in hi voic too--a certain--well, he could 
onli call it lilt, that remind him of plainsong, intoning, chanting. 
drawl wa _not_ the word at all. 

He tri to dismiss it as imagination, but it would not be dismissed. 
the disturb in himself wa caus by someth not imaginary, but 
real. and then, for the first time, he discov that the man had 
brought a faint, elus suggest of perfum with him, an aromat 
odour, that made him think of priest and churches. the ghost of it 
still linger in the air. ah, here then wa the origin of the notion 
that hi voic had chanted: it wa sure the suggest of incense. but 
incense, intoning, a compass to find the true north--at midnight in a 
desert hotel! 

A touch of uneasi ran through the curios and excit that he 
felt. 

and he undress for bed. "confound my old imagination," he thought, 
"what trick it play me! it'll keep me awake!" 

but the questions, onc start in hi mind, continued. He must find 
explan of one kind or anoth befor he could lie down and sleep, 
and he found it at length in--th stars. the man wa an astronom of 
sorts; possibl an astrolog into the bargain! whi not? the star were 
wonder abov helouan. wa there not an observatori on the mokattam 
hills, too, where tourist could use the telescop on privileg days? 
He had it at last. He even stole out on to hi balconi to see if the 
stranger perhap wa look through some wonder apparatu at the 
heavens. their room were on the same side. but the shutter window 
reveal no stoop figur with eye glu to a telescope. the star 
blink in their mani thousand down upon the silent desert. the night 
held neither sound nor movement. there wa a cool breez blow across 
the nile from the lybian sands. It nipped; and he step back quickli 
into the room again. draw the mosquito curtain care about the 
bed, he put the light out and turn over to sleep. 

and sleep came quickly, contrari to hi expectations, though it wa a 
light and surfac sleep. that last glimps of the darken desert lie 
beneath the egyptian star had touch him with some hand of aw power 
that oust the first, lesser excitement. It calm and sooth him in 
one sense, yet in another, a sens he could not understand, it caught 
him in a net of deep, deep feel whose mesh, while infinit 
delicate, wa utterli stupendous. hi nerv thi deeper emot left 
alone: it reach instead to someth infinit in him that mere nerv 
could neither deal with nor interpret. the soul awok and whisper in 
him while hi bodi slept. 

and the little, foolish dream that ran to and fro across thi veil of 
surfac sleep brought oddli tangl pictur of thing quit tini and at 
the same time of other that were mighti beyond words. with these two 
counter nightmar played. they interwove. there wa the figur of thi 
dark-fac man with the compass, measur the sky to find the true 
north, and there were hint of giant presenc that hover just outsid 
some curiou outlin that he trace upon the ground, copi in some 
nightmar fashion from the heavens. the excit caus by hi 
visitor' singular request mingl with the profound sensat hi 
final look at the star and desert stirred. the two were somehow 
inter-related. 

some hour later, befor thi surfac sleep pass into genuin slumber, 
henriot woke--with an appal feel that the desert had come 
creep into hi room and now stare down upon him where he lay in bed. 
the wind wa cri audibl about the wall outside. A faint, sharp 
tap came against the window panes. 

He sprang instantli out of bed, not yet awak enough to feel actual 
alarm, yet with the nightmar touch still close enough to caus a sort 
of feverish, loos bewilderment. He switch the light on. A moment 
later he knew the mean of that curiou tapping, for the rise wind 
wa fling tini speck of sand against the glass. the idea that they 
had summon him belonged, of course, to dream. 

He open the window, and step out on to the balcony. the stone wa 
veri cold under hi bare feet. there wa a wash of wind all over him. He 
saw the sheet of glimmering, pale desert near and far; and someth 
stung hi skin below the eyes. 

"the sand," he whispered, "again the sand; alway the sand. wake or 
sleeping, the sand is everywhere--noth but sand, sand, sand...." 

He rub hi eyes. It wa like talk in hi sleep, talk to someon 
who had question him just befor he woke. but wa he realli properli 
awake? It seem next day that he had dream it. someth enormous, 
with rustl skirt of sand, had just retreat far into the desert. 
sand went with it--flowing, trailing, smother the world. the wind 
die down. 

and henriot went back to sleep, caught instantli away into 
unconsciousness; covered, blinded, swept over by thi spread thing of 
reddish brown with the great, grey face, whose be wa coloss yet 
quit tiny, and whose fingers, wing and eye were countless as the 
stars. 

but all night long it watch and waited, rise to peer abov the 
littl balcony, and sometim enter the room and pile up besid hi 
veri pillow. He dream of sand. 




iii 


for some day henriot saw littl of the man who came from birmingham and 
push curios to a climax by ask for a compass in the middl of 
the night. for one thing, he wa a good deal with hi friend upon the 
other side of helouan, and for another, he slept sever night in the 
desert. 

He love the gigant peac the desert gave him. the world wa forgotten 
there; and not the world merely, but all memori of it. everyth fade 
out. the soul turn inward upon itself. 

An arab boy and donkey took out sleeping-bag, food and water to the wadi 
hof, a desol gorg about an hour eastwards. It wind between cliff 
whose summit rise some thousand feet abov the sea. It open suddenly, 
cut deep into the sway world of level plateaux and undul hills. 
It move about too; he never found it in the same place twice--lik an 
arm of the desert that shift with the chang lights. here he watch 
dawn and sunsets, slept through the mid-day heat, and enjoy the 
unearthli colour that swept day and night across the huge horizons. 
In solitud the desert soak down into him. At night the jackal cri 
in the dark round hi cautiously-f camp fire--small, becaus wood 
had to be carried--and in the day-tim kite circl overhead to inspect 
him, and an occasion white vultur flap across the blue. the weird 
desol of thi rocki valley, he thought, wa like the sceneri of the 
moon. He took no watch with him, and the arriv of the donkey boy an 
hour after sunris came almost from anoth planet, bring thing of 
time and common life out of some distant gulf where they had lain 
forgotten among lost ages. 

the short hour of twilight brought, too, a bewitch into the silenc 
that wa a littl less than comfortable. full light or dark he could 
manage, but thi time of half thing made him want to shut hi eye and 
hide. it effect step over imagination. the mind got lost. He could 
not understand it. for the cliff and boulder of discolour limeston 
shone then with an inward glow that signal to the desert with veil 
lanterns. the misshappen hills, carv by wind and rain into omin 
outlines, stir and nodded. In the morn light they retir into 
themselves, asleep. but at dusk the tide retreated. they rose from the 
sea, emerg naked, threatening. they ran togeth and join 
shoulders, the entir armi of them. and the glow of their sandi bodies, 
self-luminous, continu even beneath the stars. onli the moonlight 
drown it. for the moonris over the mokattam hill brought a white, 
grand loveli that drench the entir desert. It drew a marvel 
sweet from the sand. It shone across a world as yet unfinished, 
whereon no life might show itself for age yet to come. He wa alon 
then upon an empti star, befor the creation of thing that breath and 
moved. 

what impress him, however, more than everyth els wa the enorm 
vital that rose out of all thi appar death. there wa no hint of 
the melancholi that belong commonli to flatness; the sad of wide, 
monoton landscap wa not here. the endless repetit of sweep 
vale and plateau brought infin within measur comprehension. He 
grasp a definit mean in the phrase "world without end": the 
desert had no end and no beginning. It gave him a sens of etern 
peace, the silent peac that star-field know. instead of subdu the 
soul with bewilderment, it inspir with courage, confidence, hope. 
through thi sand which wa the wreck of countless geolog ages, 
rush life that wa terrif and uplifting, too huge to includ 
melancholy, too deep to betray itself in movement. here wa the 
still of eternity. behind the spread grey masqu of appar death 
lay store of accumul life, readi to break forth at ani point. In 
the desert he felt himself absolut royal. 

and thi contrast of life, veil itself in death, wa a contradict 
that somehow intoxicated. the desert exhilar never left him. He wa 
never alone. A companionship of million went with him, and he _felt_ 
the desert close, as star are close to one another, or grain of sand. 

It wa the khamasin, the hot wind bring sand, that drove him in--with 
the feel that these few day and night had been immeasurable, and 
that he had been away a thousand years. He came back with the magic of 
the desert in hi blood, hotel-lif tasteless and insipid by comparison. 
To human impress thu he wa fresh and vividli sensitive. hi being, 
clean and sensit by pure grandeur, "felt" people--for a time at 
ani rate--with an uncommon sharp of recept judgment. He return 
to a life somehow mean and meagre, resum insignific with hi 
dinner jacket. out with the sand he had been regal; now, like a slave, 
he strut self-consci and reduced. 

but thi imperi standard of the desert stay a littl time besid 
him, it puriti focuss judgment like a lens. the speck of smaller 
emot left it clear at first, and as hi eye wander vagu over 
the peopl assembl in the dining-room, it wa arrest with a vivid 
shock upon two figur at the littl tabl face him. 

He had forgotten vance, the birmingham man who sought the north at 
midnight with a pocket compass. He now saw him again, with an intuit 
discern entir fresh. befor memori brought up her cloud 
associations, some brillianc flash a light upon him. "that man," 
henriot thought, "might have come with me. He would have understood and 
love it!" but the thought wa realli this--a moment' reflect spread 
it, rather: "he belong somewher to the desert; the desert brought him 
out here." and, again, hidden swiftli behind it like a movement run 
below water--"what doe he want with it? what is the deeper motiv he 
conceals? for there is a deeper motive; and it _is_ concealed." 

but it wa the woman seat next him who absorb hi attent really, 
even while thi thought flash and went it way. the empti chair wa 
occupi at last. unlik hi first encount with the man, she look 
straight at him. their eye met fully. for sever second there wa 
steadi mutual inspection, while her penetr stare, intent without 
be rude, pass searchingli all over hi face. It wa disconcerting. 
crumbl hi bread, he look equal hard at her, unabl to turn away, 
determin not to be the first to shift hi gaze. and when at length she 
lower her eye he felt that mani thing had happened, as in a long 
period of intim conversation. her mind had judg him through and 
through. question and answer flashed. they were no longer strangers. 
for the rest of dinner, though he wa care to avoid direct 
inspection, he wa awar that she felt hi presenc and wa secretli 
speak with him. she ask question beneath her breath. the answer 
rose with the quicken puls in hi blood. moreover, she explain 
richard vance. It wa thi woman' power that shone reflect in the 
man. she wa the one who knew the big, unusu things. vanc mere 
echo the rush of her vital personality. 

thi wa the first impress that he got--from the most striking, 
curiou face he had ever seen in a woman. It remain veri near him all 
through the meal: she had move to hi table, it seem she sat besid 
him. their mind certainli knew contact from that moment. 

It is never difficult to credit stranger with the qualiti and 
knowledg that oneself crave for, and no doubt henriot' activ fanci 
went busili to work. but, none the less, thi thing remain and grew: 
that thi woman wa awar of the hidden thing of egypt he had alway 
long to know. there wa knowledg and guidanc she could impart. her 
soul wa search among ancient things. her face brought the desert 
back into hi thoughts. and with it came--th sand. 

here wa the flash. the sight of her restor the peac and splendour he 
had left behind him in hi desert camps. the rest, of course, wa what 
hi imagin construct upon thi slender basis. only,--not all of 
it wa imagination. 

now, henriot knew littl enough of women, and had no pose of 
"understanding" them. hi experi wa of the slightest; the love and 
vener felt for hi own mother had set the entir sex upon the 
heights. hi affair with women, if so they may be called, had been 
transient--al but those of earli youth, which have never known the 
devast test of fulfilment, still remain ideal and superb. there 
wa unconsci humour in hi attitude--from a distance; for he regard 
women with wonder and respect, as puzzl that sweeten but complic 
life, might even endang it. He certainli wa not a marri man! but 
now, as he felt the presenc of thi woman so deliber possess him, 
there came over him two clear, strong messages, each vivid with 
certainty. one wa that banal suggest of familiar claim by 
lover and the like--h had often heard of it--"i have known that woman 
before; I have met her age ago somewhere; she is strang familiar to 
me"; and the other, grow out of it almost: "have noth to do with 
her; she will bring you troubl and confusion; avoid her, and be 
warned";--in fact, a distinct presentiment. 

yet, although henriot dismiss both impress as have no shred of 
evid to justifi them, the origin clear judgment, as he studi her 
extraordinari countenance, persist through all denial the 
familiarity, and the presentiment, remained. there also remain thi 
other--an enorm imagin leap!--that she could teach him "egypt." 

He watch her carefully, in a sens fascinated. He could onli describ 
the face as black, so dark it wa with the dark of great age. 
elderli wa the obvious, natur word; but elderli describ the 
featur only. the express of the face wore centuries. nor wa it 
mere the coal-black eye that betray an ancient, age-travel soul 
behind them. the entir present mysteri convey it. thi 
woman' heart knew long-forgotten things--th thought kept beat up 
against him. there were cheek-bones, oddli high, that made him think 
involuntarili of the well-advertis pharaoh, ramases; a square, deep 
jaw; and an aquilin nose that gave the final touch of power. for the 
power undeni wa there, and while the gener effect had grim in 
it, there wa neither harsh nor ani forbid touch about it. there 
wa an implac stern in the set of lip and jaw, and, most 
curiou of all, the eyelid over the steadi eye of black were level as 
a ruler. thi level frame made the woman' stare remark beyond 
description. henriot thought of an idol carv in stone, stone hard and 
black, with eye that stare across the sand into a world of thing 
non-human, veri far away, forgotten of men. the face wa fine ugly. 
thi strang dark beauti flash flame about it. 

and, as the way ever wa with him, henriot next fell to construct the 
possibl live of herself and her companion, though without much 
success. imagin soon stop dead. she wa not old enough to be 
vance' mother, and assuredli she wa not hi wife. hi interest wa 
more than mere piqued--it wa puzzl uncommonly. what wa the 
contrast that made the man seem besid her--vile? whenc came, too, the 
impress that she exercis some strong authority, though never 
directli exercised, that held him at her mercy? how did he guess that 
the man resent it, yet did not dare oppose, and that, appar 
acquiesc good-humouredly, hi will wa deliber held in abeyance, 
and that he wait sulkily, bide hi time? there wa furtiv in 
everi gestur and expression. A hidden motiv lurk in him; 
unworthi somewhere; he wa determin yet ashamed. He watch her 
ceaselessli and with such uncanni closeness. 

henriot imagin he divin all this. He leap to the guess that hi 
expens were be paid. A good deal more wa be paid besides. she 
wa a rich relation, from whom he had expectations; he wa serv hi 
seven years, asham of hi servitude, ever calcul escape--but, 
perhaps, no ordinari escape. A faint shudder ran over him. He drew in 
the rein of imagination. 

Of course, the probabl were that he wa hopelessli astray--on 
usual is on such occasions--but thi time, it so happened, he wa 
singularli right. befor one thing onli hi readi invent stop 
everi time. thi vileness, thi notion of unworthi in vance, could 
not be neg merely. A man with that face wa no inact weakling. 
the motiv he wa at such pain to conceal, betray it exist by 
that veri fact, moved, surely, toward aggress action. disguised, it 
never slept. vanc wa sharpli on the alert. He had a plan deep out of 
sight. and henriot rememb how the man' soft approach along the 
carpet corridor had made him start. He recal the quasi shock it 
gave him. He thought again of the feel of discomfort he had 
experienced. 

next, hi eager fanci sought to plumb the busi these two had 
togeth in egypt--in the desert. for the desert, he felt convinced, had 
brought them out. but here, though he construct numer explanations, 
anoth barrier stop him. becaus he _knew_. thi woman wa in touch 
with that aspect of ancient egypt he himself had ever sought in vain; 
and not mere with stone the sand had buri so deep, but with the 
mean they onc represented, buri so utterli by the sand of later 
thought. 

and here, be ignorant, he found no clue that could lead to ani 
satisfactori result, for he possess no knowledg that might guid him. 
He floundered--until fate help him. and the instant fate help him, 
the warn and presenti he had dismiss as fanciful, becam real 
again. He hesitated. caution acted. He would think twice befor take 
step to form acquaintance. "better not," thought whispered. "better 
leav them alone, thi queer couple. they'r after thing that won't do 
you ani good." thi idea of mischief, almost of danger, in their 
purpos wa oddli insistent; for what could possibl convey it? but, 
while he hesitated, fate, who sent the warning, push him at the same 
time into the circl of their lives: at first tentatively--h might 
still have escaped; but soon urgently--curios led him inexor 
toward the end. 




IV 


It wa so simpl a manoeuvr by which fate began the innoc game. the 
woman left a coupl of book behind her on the tabl one night, and 
henriot, after a moment' hesitation, took them out after her. He knew 
the titles--_th hous of the master_, and _the hous of the hidden 
places_, both singular interpret of the pyramid that onc had 
held hi own mind spellbound. their idea had been sinc disproved, if 
he rememb rightly, yet the titl were a clue--a clue to that 
imagin part of hi mind that wa so busi construct theori and 
had found it stride. loos sheet of paper, cover with note in a 
minut handwriting, lay between the pages; but these, of course, he did 
not read, notic onli that they were written round design of variou 
kinds--intr designs. 

He discov vanc in a corner of the smoking-lounge. the woman had 
disappeared. 

vanc thank him politely. "mi aunt is so forget sometimes," he 
said, and took them with a covert eager that did not escap the 
other' observation. He fold up the sheet and put them care in 
hi pocket. On one there wa an ink-sketch map, cram with detail, 
that might well have refer to some portion of the desert. the point 
of the compass stood out boldli at the bottom. there were involv 
geometr design again. henriot saw them. they exchanged, then, the 
commonplac of conversation, but these led to noth further. vanc 
wa nervou and betray impatience. He present excus himself and 
left the lounge. ten minut later he pass through the outer hall, the 
woman besid him, and the pair of them, wrap up in cloak and ulster, 
went out into the night. At the door, vanc turn and threw a quick, 
investig glanc in hi direction. there seem a hint of 
question in that glance; it might almost have been a tent 
invitation. but, also, he want to see if their exit had been 
particularli noticed--and by whom. 

this, briefli told, wa the first manoeuvr by which fate introduc 
them. there wa noth in it. the detail were so insignificant, so 
slight the conversation, so meagr the piec thu ad to henriot' 
imagin structure. yet they somehow built it up and made it solid; 
the outlin in hi mind began to stand foursquare. that writing, those 
designs, the manner of the man, their go out together, the final 
curiou look--each and all betray point of a hidden thing. 
subconsci he wa excav their buri purposes. the sand wa 
shifting. the concentr of hi mind incessantli upon them remov it 
grain by grain and speck by speck. tip of the smother thing emerged. 
present a subsid would follow with a rush and light would blaze 
upon it skeleton. He felt it stir underneath hi feet--thi flow 
movement of light, dry, heaped-up sand. It wa always--sand. 

then other incid of a similar kind came about, clear the way to a 
natur acquaintanceship. henriot watch the process with amusement, 
yet with anoth feel too that wa onli a littl less than anxiety. A 
keen observer, no detail escap him; he saw the forc of their live 
draw closer. It made him think of the devic of young peopl who desir 
to know one another, yet cannot get a proper introduction. fate 
condescend to such littl tricks. they want a third person, he began 
to feel. A third wa necessari to some plan they had on hand, and--they 
wait to see if he could fill the place. thi woman, with whom he had 
yet exchang no singl word, seem so familiar to him, well known for 
years. they weigh and watch him, wonder if he would do. 

none of the devic were too obvious used, but at length henriot 
pick up so mani forgotten articles, and heard so mani signific 
phrases, casual let fall, that he began to feel like the villain in a 
machine-mad play, where the hero for ever drop clue hi enemi is 
intend to discover. 

introduct follow inevitably. "mi aunt can tell you; she know 
arab perfectly." He had been discuss the mean of some local name 
or other with a neighbour after dinner, and vanc had join them. the 
neighbour move away; these two were left stand alone, and he 
accept a cigarett from the other' case. there wa a rustl of skirt 
behind them. "here she comes," said vance; "you will let me introduc 
you." He did not ask for henriot' name; he had alreadi taken the 
troubl to find it out--anoth littl betrayal, and anoth clue. 

It wa in a seclud corner of the great hall, and henriot turn to see 
the woman' state figur come toward them across the thick carpet 
that deaden her footsteps. she came sail up, her black eye fix 
upon hi face. veri erect, head upright, shoulder almost squared, she 
move wonder well; there wa digniti and power in her walk. she wa 
dress in black, and her face wa like the night. He found it 
imposs to say what lent her thi air of impress and solemn 
that wa almost majestic. but there _was_ thi touch of dark and of 
power in the way she came that made him think of some sphinx-lik figur 
of stone, some idol motionless in all it part but move as a whole, 
and glide across--sand. beneath those level lid her eye stare hard 
at him. and a faint sensat of distress stir in him deep, deep 
down. where had he seen those eye before? 

He bowed, as she join them, and vanc led the way to the armchair in 
a corner of the lounge. the meeting, as the talk that followed, he felt, 
were all part of a preconceiv plan. It had happen before. the woman, 
that is, wa familiar to him--to some part of hi be that had drop 
stitch of old, old memory. 

ladi statham! At first the name had disappoint him. So mani folk wear 
titles, as syllabl in certain tongu wear accents--without them be 
mute, unnoticed, unpronounced. nonentities, born to names, so often 
claim attent for their insignific in thi way. but thi woman, 
had she been jemima jones, would have made the name distinguish and 
select. she wa a big and sombr personality. whi wa it, he wonder 
afterwards, that for a moment someth in him shrank, and that hi 
mind, metaphor speaking, flung up an arm in self-protection? the 
instinct flash and passed. but it seem to him born of an automat 
feel that he must protect--not himself, but the woman from the man. 
there wa confus in it all; link were missing. He studi her 
intently. she wa a woman who had none of the extern feminin signal 
in either dress or manner, no graces, no littl womanli hesit and 
alarms, no daintiness, yet neither anyth distinctli masculine. her 
charm wa strong, possessing; onli he kept forget that he wa 
talk to a--woman; and the thing she inspir in him included, with 
respect and wonder, somewher also thi curiou hint of dread. thi 
instinct to protect her fled as soon as it wa born, for the interest of 
the convers in which she so quickli plung him obliter all 
minor emot whatsoever. here, for the first time, he drew close to 
egypt, the egypt he had sought so long. It wa not to be explained. He 
_felt_ it. 

begin with commonplaces, such as "you like egypt? you find here what 
you expected?" she led him into better region with "one find here what 
one brings." He knew the delight experi of talk fluentli on 
subject he wa at home in, and to some one who understood. the feel 
at first that to thi woman he could not say mere anythings, slip 
into it opposite--that he could say everything. stranger ten minut 
ago, they were at onc in deep and intim talk together. He found hi 
idea readili followed, agre with up to a point--th point which 
permit discuss to start from a basi of gener accord toward 
speculation. In the excit of idea he neglect the uncomfort 
note that had stir hi caution, forgot the warn too. her mind, 
moreover, seem known to him; he wa often awar of what she wa go 
to say befor he actual heard it; the current of her thought struck a 
familiar gait, and more than onc he experienc vividli again the odd 
sensat that it all had happen before. the veri sentenc and 
phrase with which she point the turn of her unusu idea were never 
wholli unexpected. 

for her idea were decidedli unusual, in the sens that she accept 
without question specul not commonli deem worth consider at 
all, inde not ordinarili even known. henriot knew them, becaus he had 
read in mani fields. It wa the strength of her belief that fascin 
him. she offer no apologies. she knew. and while he talked, she 
listen with fold arm and her black eye fix upon hi own, 
richard vanc watch with vigil eye and listen too, ceaselessli 
alert. vanc join in littl enough, however, gave no opinions, hi 
attitud one of gener acquiescence. twice, when paus of slacken 
interest made it possible, henriot fanci he surpris anoth qualiti 
in thi neg attitude. interpret it each time differently, he yet 
dismiss both interpret with a smile. hi imagin leap so 
absurdli to violent conclusions. they were not tenable: vanc wa 
neither her keeper, nor wa he in some fashion a detective. yet in hi 
manner wa sometim thi suggest of the detect order. He watch 
with such deep attention, and he conceal it so clumsili with an 
affect of careless indifference. 

there is noth more danger than that impuls intimaci stranger 
sometim adopt when an atmospher of mutual sympathi take them by 
surprise, for it is akin to the fals frank friend affect when 
tell "candidly" one another' faults. the mood is invari 
regret later. henriot, however, yield to it now with someth like 
abandon. the pleasur of talk with thi woman wa so unexpected, and 
so keen. 

for ladi statham believ appar in some egypt of her dreams. her 
interest wa neither historical, archaeological, nor political. It wa 
religious--yet hardli of thi earth at all. the convers turn upon 
the knowledg of the ancient egyptian from an unearthli point of view, 
and even while he talk he wa vagu awar that it wa _her_ mind 
talk through hi own. she drew out hi idea and made him say them. 
but thi he wa properli awar of onli afterwards--that she had 
cleverly, mercilessli pump him of all he had ever known or read upon 
the subject. moreover, what vanc watch so intent wa himself, and 
the reaction in himself thi remark woman produced. that also he 
realis later. 

hi first impress that these two belong to what may be call the 
"crank" order wa justifi by the conversation. but, at least, it wa 
interest crankiness, and the belief behind it made it even 
fascinating. long befor the end he surpris in her a more vital form 
of hi own attitud that anyth _may_ be true, sinc knowledg ha 
never yet found final answer to ani of the biggest questions. 

He understood, from sentenc drop earli in the talk, that she wa 
among those few "superstitious" folk who think that the old egyptian 
came closer to read the etern riddl of the world than ani 
others, and that their knowledg wa a remnant of that ancient wisdom 
religion which exist in the superb, dark civil of the sunken 
atlantis, lost contin that onc join africa to mexico. eighti 
thousand year ago the dim sand of poseidonis, great island adjoin 
the main contin which itself had vanish a vast period before, sank 
down beneath the waves, and the entir known world to-day wa descend 
from it survivors. 

henc the signific fact that all religion and "mythological" system 
begin with a stori of a flood--som cataclysm upheav that destroy 
the world. egypt itself wa colonis by a group of atlantean priest 
who brought their curious, deep knowledg with them. they had foreseen 
the cataclysm. 

ladi statham talk well, bring into her great dream thi strong, 
insist qualiti of belief and fact. she knew, from plato to donelly, 
all that the mind of men have ever specul upon the gorgeou legend. 
the evid for such a sunken continent--henriot had skim it too in 
year gone by--sh made bewilderingli complete. He had heard baconian 
demolish shakespear with an array of evid equal overwhelming. It 
catch the imagin though not the mind. yet out of her facts, as 
she present them, grew a strang likelihood. the forc of thi woman' 
personality, and her calm and quiet way of believ all she talk 
about, took her listen to some extent--furth than ever before, 
certainly--into the great dream after her. and the dream, to say the 
least, wa a picturesqu one, laden with wonder possibilities. for as 
she talk the spirit of old egypt move up, stare down upon him out 
of eye lid so curious level. hitherto all had prate to him of the 
arabs, their ancient faith and customs, and the splendour of the 
bedouins, those princ of the desert. but what he sought, bare 
confess in word even to himself, wa someth older far than this. 
and thi strange, dark woman brought it close. deep in hi soul, long 
slumbering, awoke. He heard forgotten questions. 

onli in thi brief way could he attempt to sum up the storm she rous 
in him. 

she carri him far beyond mere outline, however, though afterward he 
recal the detail with difficulty. So much more wa suggest than 
actual expressed. she contriv to make the gener modern sceptic 
an evid of cheap mentality. It wa so easy; the depth it affect to 
conceal, mere emptiness. "we have tri all things, and found all 
wanting"--th mind, as measur instrument, mere confess 
inadequate. variou shrewd judgment of thi kind increas hi respect, 
although her accept went so far beyond hi own. and, while the label 
of credul refus to stick to her, her sens of imagin wonder 
enabl her to escap that dread compromise, a man' mind in a 
woman' temperament. she fascin him. 

the spiritu worship of the ancient egyptians, she held, wa a 
symbol explan of thing gener allud to as the secret of 
life and death; their knowledg wa a remnant of the wisdom of atlantis. 
materi relics, equal misunderstood, still stood to-day at karnac, 
stonehenge, and in the mysteri write on buri mexican templ and 
cities, so significantli akin to the hieroglyph upon the egyptian 
tombs. 

"the one misinterpret as liter as the other," she suggested, "yet 
both fragment of an advanc knowledg that found it grave in the sea. 
the wisdom of that old spiritu system ha vanish from the world, 
onli a degrad liter left of it undecipher language. the 
jewel ha been lost, and the casket is fill with sand, sand, sand." 

how keenli her black eye search hi own as she said it, and how oddli 
she made the littl word resound. the syllabl drew out almost into 
chanting. echo answer from the depth within him, carri it on and 
on across some desert of forgotten belief. veil of sand flew everywher 
about hi mind. curtain lifted. whole hill of sand went shift into 
level surfac whenc garden of dim outlin emerg to meet the 
sunlight. 

"but the sand may be removed." It wa her nephew, speak almost for 
the first time, and the interrupt had an odd effect, introduc a 
sharpli practic element. for the tone expressed, so far as he dare 
express it, disapproval. It wa a bait observation, an invit to 
opinion. 

"we are not sand-diggers, mr. henriot," put in ladi statham, befor he 
decid to respond. "our object is quit anoth one; and I believe--i 
have a feeling," she ad almost questioningly, "that you might be 
interest enough to help us perhaps." 

He onli wonder the direct attack had not come sooner. it blunt 
hardli surpris him. He felt himself leap forward to accept it. A 
sudden subsid had freed hi feet. 

then the warn oper suddenly--for an instant. henriot _was_ 
interested; more, he wa half seduced; but, as yet, he did not mean to 
be includ in their purposes, whatev these might be. that shrink 
dread came back a moment, and wa gone again befor he could question 
it. hi eye look full at ladi statham. "what is it that you know?" 
they ask her. "tell me the thing we onc knew together, you and I. 
these word are mere trifling. and whi doe anoth man now stand in 
my place? for the sand heap upon my memori are shifting, and it is 
_you_ who are move them away." 

hi soul whisper it; hi voic said quit anoth thing, although the 
word he use seem oddli chosen: 

"there is much in the idea of ancient egypt that ha attract me ever 
sinc I can remember, though I have never caught up with anyth 
definit enough to follow. there wa majesti somewher in their 
conceptions--a large, calm majesti of spiritu dominion, one might call 
it perhaps. I _am_ interested." 

her face remain expressionless as she listened, but there wa grave 
convict in the eye that held him like a spell. He saw through them 
into dim, faint pictur whose background wa alway sand. He forgot 
that he wa speak with a woman, a woman who half an hour ago had been 
a stranger to him. He follow these fade mental pictures, though he 
never caught them up.... It wa like hi dream in london. 

ladi statham wa talking--h had not notic the mean by which she 
effect the abrupt transition--of familiar belief of old egypt; of the 
ka, or double, by whose exist the surviv of the soul wa possible, 
even it return into manifested, physic life; of the astrology, or 
influenc of the heavenli bodi upon all sublunar activities; of 
terrif form of other life, known to the ancient worship of atlantis, 
great potenc that might be invok by ritual and ceremonial, and of 
their lesser influenc as recognis in certain lower forms, henc 
treat with vener as the "sacr animal" branch of thi dim 
religion. and she spoke lightli of the modern learn which so glibli 
imagin it wa the anim themselv that were look upon as 
"gods"--th bull, the bird, the crocodile, the cat. "it' there they all 
go so absurdli wrong," she said, "take the symbol for the power 
symbolised. yet natur enough. the mind to-day wear blinkers, studi 
onli the detail seen directli befor it. had none of us experienc 
love, we should think the first lover mad. few to-day know the power 
_they_ knew, henc deni them. If the world were deaf it would stand with 
mockeri befor a hear group sway by an orchestra, piti both 
listen and performers. It would deem our admir of a great 
swing bell mere foolish worship of form and movement. similarly, with 
high power that onc express themselv in common forms--wher best 
they could--b themselv bodiless. the learn men classifi the 
form with painstak detail. but deiti ha gone out of life. the 
power symbolis are no longer experienced." 

"these powers, you suggest, then--their kas, as it were--may still--" 

but she wave asid the interruption. "they are satisfied, as the common 
peopl were, with a degrad literalism," she went on. "nut wa the 
heavens, who spread herself across the earth in the form of a woman; 
shu, the vast of space; the ibi typifi thoth, and hathor wa the 
patron of the western hills; khonsu, the moon, wa personified, as wa 
the deiti of the nile. but the high priest of ra, the sun, you notice, 
remain ever the great one of visions." 

the high priest, the great one of visions!--how wonder again she 
made the sentenc sing. she put splendour into it. the pictur shift 
suddenli closer in hi mind. He saw the grandeur of memphi and 
heliopoli rise against the star and shake the sand of age from their 
stern old temples. 

"you think it possible, then, to get into touch with these high power 
you speak of, power onc manifest in common forms?" 

henriot ask the question with a degre of convict and solemn 
that surpris himself. the sceneri chang about him as he listened. 
the spaciou hall of thi former khedivi palac melt into desert 
spaces. He smelt the open wilderness, the sand that haunt helouan. the 
soft-foot arab servant move across the hall in their white sheet 
like eddi of dust the wind stir from the libyan dunes. and over 
these two stranger close besid him stole a queer, indefinit 
alteration. mood and emotions, nameless as unknown stars, rose through 
hi soul, trail dark mist of memori from unfathom distances. 

ladi statham answer him indirectly. He found himself wish that 
those steadi eye would sometim close. 

"love is known onli by feel it," she said, her voic deepen a 
little. "behind the form you feel the person loved. the process is an 
evocation, pure and simple. An arduou ceremonial, involv worship and 
devot preparation, is the means. It is a difficult ritual--th 
onli one acknowledg by the world as still effectual. ritual is the 
passag way of the soul into the infinite." 

He might have said the word himself. the thought lay in him while she 
utter it. evoc everywher in life wa as true as assimilation. 
nevertheless, he stare hi companion full in the eye with a touch of 
almost rude amazement. but no further question prompt themselves; or, 
rather, he declin to ask them. He recalled, somehow uneasily, that in 
ceremoni the point of the compass have significance, stand for 
forc and activ that sleep there until invoked, and a pass 
light fell upon that curiou midnight request in the corridor upstairs. 
these two were on the track of undesir experiments, he thought.... 
they wish to includ him too. 

"you go at night sometim into the desert?" he heard himself saying. It 
wa impuls and miscalculated. hi feel that it would be wise to 
chang the convers result in give it fresh impetu instead. 

"we saw you there--in the wadi hof," put in vance, suddenli break hi 
long silence; "you too sleep out, then? It means, you know, the valley 
of fear." 

"we wondered--" It wa ladi statham' voice, and she lean forward 
eagerli as she said it, then abruptli left the sentenc incomplete. 
henriot started; a sens of momentari acut discomfort again ran over 
him. the same second she continued, though obvious chang the 
phrase--"w wonder how you spent your day there, dure the heat. but 
you paint, don't you? you draw, I mean?" 

the commonplac question, he realis in everi fibr of hi being, meant 
someth _they_ deem significant. wa it hi talent for draw that 
they sought to use him for? even as he answer with a simpl 
affirmative, he had a flash of intuit that might be fanciful, yet 
that might be true: that thi extraordinari pair were intent upon some 
ceremoni of evoc that should summon into actual physic express 
some power--som type of life--known long ago to ancient worship, and 
that they even sought to fix it bodili outlin with the pencil--hi 
pencil. 

A gateway of incred adventur open at hi feet. He balanc on the 
edg of know unutter things. here wa a clue that might lead him 
toward the hidden egypt he had ever crave to know. An aw hand wa 
beckoning. the sand were shifting. He saw the million eye of the 
desert watch him from beneath the level lid of centuries. speck by 
speck, and grain by grain, the sand that smother memori lift the 
countless wrap that embalm it. 

and he wa willing, yet afraid. whi in the world did he hesit and 
shrink? whi wa it that the presenc of thi silent, watch 
person in the chair besid him kept caution still alive, with 
warn close behind? the pictur in hi mind were gorgeous coloured. 
It wa richard vanc who somehow streak them through with black. A 
thing of darkness, born of thi man' unassert presence, flit ever 
across the scenery, mar it grandeur with someth evil, petty, 
dreadful. He held a horribl thought alive. hi mind wa think venal 
purposes. 

In henriot himself imagin had grown curious heated, fed by what 
had been suggest rather than actual said. idea of immens crowd 
hi brain, yet never assum definit shape. they were familiar, even as 
thi strang woman wa familiar. once, long ago, he had known them well; 
had even practis them beneath these bright egyptian stars. whenc came 
thi prodigi glad excit in hi heart, thi sens of mighti 
power coax down to influenc the veri detail of daili life? behind 
them, for all their vagueness, lay an archetyp splendour, fraught with 
forgotten meanings. He had alway been awar of it in thi mysteri 
land, but it had ever hitherto elud him. It hover everywhere. He had 
felt it brood behind the tower colossi at thebes, in the skeleton 
of wast temples, in the uncouth comeli of the sphinx, and in the 
crude terror of the pyramid even. over the whole of egypt hung it 
invis wings. these were but isol fragment of the bodi that 
might express it. and the desert remain it cleanest, truest symbol. 
sand knew it closest. sand might even give it bodili form and outline. 

but, while it escap descript in hi mind, as equal it elud 
visualis in hi soul, he felt that it combin with it vast 
someth infinit small as well. Of such wee particl is the giant 
desert born.... 

henriot start nervous in hi chair, convict onc more of 
unconscion staring; and at the same moment a group of hotel people, 
return from a dance, pass through the hall and nod him 
good-night. the scent of the women reach him; and with it the sound of 
their voic discuss person just left behind. A london 
atmospher came with them. He caught trivial phrases, utter in a 
drawl tone, and follow by the shrill laughter of a girl. they 
pass upstairs, discuss their littl things, like marionett upon a 
tini stage. 

but their passag brought him back to thing of modern life, and to some 
standard of familiar measurement. the pictur that hi soul had gaze 
at so deep within, he realised, were a pictori transfer caught 
incomplet from thi woman' vivid mind. He had seen the desert as the 
grey, enorm tomb where hover still the Ka of ancient egypt. sand 
screen her visag with the veil of centuries. but she wa there, and 
she wa living. egypt herself had pitch a temporari camp in him, and 
then move on. 

there wa a momentari break, a sens of abrupt and dislocation. and 
then he becam awar that ladi statham had been speak for some time 
befor he caught her actual words, and that a certain chang had come 
into her voic as also into her manner. 




V 


she wa lean closer to him, her face suddenli glow and alive. 
through the stone figur cours the fire of a passion that deepen 
the coal-black eye and commun a hint of light--of exaltation--to 
her whole person. It wa incred moving. To thi deep passion wa due 
the power he had felt. It wa her entir life; she live for it, she 
would die for it. her calm of manner enhanc it effect. henc the 
strength of those first impress that had storm him. the woman had 
belief; howev wild and strange, it wa sacr to her. the secret of 
her influenc was--conviction. 

hi attitud shift sever point then. the wonder in him pass over 
into awe. the thing she knew were real. they were not mere 
imagin speculations. 

"I knew I wa not wrong in think you in sympathi with thi line of 
thought," she wa say in lower voice, steadi with earnestness, and as 
though she had read hi mind. "you, too, know, though perhap you hardli 
realis that you know. It lie so deep in you that you onli get vagu 
feel of it--intim of memory. isn't that the case?" 

henriot gave assent with hi eyes; it wa the truth. 

"what we know instinctively," she continued, "i simpli what we are 
tri to remember. knowledg is memory." she paus a moment watch 
hi face closely. "at least, you are free from that cheap sceptic 
which label these old belief as superstition." It wa not even a 
question. 

"i--worship real belief--of ani kind," he stammered, for her word and 
the close proxim of her atmospher caus a strang upheav in hi 
heart that he could not account for. He falter in hi speech. "it is 
the most vital qualiti in life--rar than deity." He wa use her own 
phrase even. "it is creative. It construct the world anew--" 

"and may reconstruct the old." 

she said it, lift her face abov him a little, so that her eye 
look down into hi own. It grew big and somehow masculine. It wa the 
face of a priest, spiritu power in it. where, oh where in the echo 
past had he known thi woman' soul? He saw her in anoth setting, a 
forest of column dim about her, tower abov giant aisles. again he 
felt the desert had come close. into thi tent-lik hall of the hotel 
came the sift of tini sand. It heap softli about the veri furnitur 
against hi feet, block the exit of door and window. It shroud the 
littl present. the wind that brought it stir a veil that had hung 
for age motionless.... 

she had been say mani thing that he had miss while hi mind went 
searching. "there were type of life the atlantean system knew it might 
revive--lif unmanifest to-day in ani bodili form," wa the sentenc 
he caught with hi return to the actual present. 

"A type of life?" he whispered, look about him, as though to see who 
it wa had join them; "you mean a--soul? some kind of soul, alien to 
humanity, or to--to ani form of live thing in the world to-day?" what 
she had been say reach him somehow, it seemed, though he had not 
heard the word themselves. still hesitating, he wa yet so eager to 
hear. alreadi he felt she meant to includ him in her purposes, and that 
in the end he must go willingly. So strong wa her persuas on hi 
mind. 

and he felt as if he knew vagu what wa coming. befor she answer 
hi curiou question--prompt it indeed--ros in hi mind that strang 
idea of the group-soul: the theori that big soul cannot express 
themselv in a singl individual, but need an entir group for their 
full manifestation. 

He listen intently. the reflect that thi sudden intimaci wa 
unnatural, he rejected, for mani convers were realli gather 
into one. long watch and prepar on both side had clear the 
way for the ripen of acquaint into confidence--how long he dimli 
wondered? but if thi concept of the group-soul wa not new, the 
suggest ladi statham develop out of it wa both new and 
startling--and yet alway so curious familiar. it valu for him lay, 
not in far-fetch evid that support it, but in the deep belief 
which made it a vital asset in an honest inner life. 

"an individual," she said quietly, "one soul express complet in a 
singl person, I mean, is exceedingli rare. not often is a physic 
instrument found perfect enough to provid it with adequ expression. 
In the lower rang of humanity--certainli in anim and insect 
life--on soul is share by many. behind a tribe of savag stand one 
savage. A flock of bird is a singl bird, scatter through the 
conscious of all. they wheel in mid-air, they migrate, they obey the 
deep intellig call instinct--al as one. the life of ani one lion 
is the life of all--th lion group-soul that manifest itself in the 
entir genus. An ant-heap is a singl ant; through the bee spread the 
conscious of a singl bee." 

henriot knew what she wa work up to. In hi eager to hasten 
disclosur he interrupted-- 

"and there may be type of life that have no correspond bodili 
express at all, then?" he ask as though the question were forc 
out of him. "they exist as powers--unmanifest on the earth to-day?" 

"powers," she answered, watch him close with unswerv stare, 
"that need a group to provid their body--their physic expression--if 
they came back." 

"came back!" he repeat below hi breath. 

but she heard him. "they onc had expression. egypt, atlanti knew 
them--spiritu power that never visit the world to-day." 

"bodies," he whisper softly, "actual bodies?" 

"their sphere of action, you see, would be their body. and it might be 
physic outline. So potent a descent of spiritu life would select 
materi for it bodi where it could find them. our convent notion 
of a body--what is it? A singl outlin move altogeth in one 
direction. for littl human souls, or fragments, thi is sufficient. but 
for vaster type of soul an entir host would be required." 

"A church?" he ventured. "some bodi of belief, you sure mean?" 

she bow her head a moment in assent. she wa determin he should 
seiz her mean fully. 

"A wave of spiritu awakening--a descent of spiritu life upon a 
nation," she answer slowly, "form itself a church, and the bodi of 
true believ are it sphere of action. they are liter it bodili 
expression. each individu believ is a corpuscl in that body. the 
power ha provid itself with a vehicl of manifestation. otherwis we 
could not know it. and the more real the belief of each individual, the 
more perfect the express of the spiritu life behind them all. A 
group-soul walk the earth. moreover, a nation natur devout could 
attract a type of soul unknown to a nation that deni all faith. faith 
bring back the gods.... but to-day belief is dead, and deiti ha left 
the world." 

she talk on and on, develop thi main idea that in day of older 
faith there were deific type of life upon the earth, evok by worship 
and benefici to humanity. they had long ago withdrawn becaus the 
worship which brought them down had die the death. the world had grown 
pettier. these vast centr of spiritu power found no "body" in which 
they now could express themselv or manifest.... her thought and 
phrase pour over him like sand. It wa alway sand he felt--buri 
the present and uncov the past.... 

He tri to steadi hi mind upon familiar objects, but wherev he 
look sand stare him in the face. outsid these trivial wall the 
desert lay listening. It lay wait too. vanc himself had drop out 
of recognition. He belong to the world of thing to-day. but thi 
woman and himself stood thousand of year away, beneath the column of 
a templ in the sands. and the sand were moving. hi feet went shift 
with them ... run down vista of ageless memori that woke terror by 
their sheer immens of distance.... 

like a muffl voic that call to him through mani veil and 
wrappings, he heard her describ the stupend power that evoc 
might coax down again among the world of men. 

"to what use end?" he ask at length, amaz at hi own temerity, 
and becaus he knew instinct the answer in advance. It rose through 
these layer of coil memori in hi soul. 

"the extens of spiritu knowledg and the widen of life," she 
answered. "the link with the 'unearthli kingdom' wherein thi ancient 
system went forev searching, would be re-established. complet 
rehabilit might follow. portions--littl portion of these 
powers--express themselv natur onc in certain anim types, 
instinct life that did not deni or reject them. the worship of sacr 
anim wa the relic of a onc gigant system of evocation--not of 
monsters," and she smile sadly, "but of power that were will and 
readi to descend when worship summon them." 

again, beneath hi breath, henriot heard himself murmur--hi own voic 
startl him as he whisper it: "actual bodili shape and outline?" 

"materi for bodi is everywhere," she answered, equal low; "dust to 
which we all return; sand, if you prefer it, fine, fine sand. life 
mould it easili enough, when that life is potent." 

A certain confus spread slowli through hi mind as he heard her. He 
lit a cigarett and smoke some minut in silence. ladi statham and her 
nephew wait for him to speak. At length, after some inner battl and 
hesitation, he put the question that he knew they wait for. It wa 
imposs to resist ani longer. 

"it would be interest to know the method," he said, "and to revive, 
perhaps, by experiment--" 

befor he could complet hi thought, she took him up: 

"there are some who claim to know it," she said gravely--h eye a 
moment masterful. "A clue, thu followed, might lead to the entir 
reconstruct I spoke of." 

"and the method?" he repeat faintly. 

"evok the power by ceremoni evocation--th ritual is obtainable--and 
note the form it assumes. then establish it. thi shape or outlin onc 
secured, could then be made permanent--a mould for it return at 
will--it natur physic express here on earth." 

"idol!" he exclaimed. 

"image," she repli at once. "life, befor we can know it, must have a 
body. our souls, in order to manifest here, need a materi vehicle." 

"and--to obtain thi form or outline?" he began; "to fix it, rather?" 

"would be requir the clever pencil of a fearless looker-on--som one 
not engag in the actual evocation. thi form, accur made 
perman in solid matter, say in stone, would provid a channel alway 
open. experiment, properli speaking, might then begin. the cistern of 
power behind would be accessible." 

"an amaz proposition!" henriot exclaimed. what surpris him wa that 
he felt no desir to laugh, and littl even to doubt. 

"yet known to everi religion that ever deserv the name," put in vanc 
like a voic from a distance. black came somehow with hi 
interruption--a touch of darkness. He spoke eagerly. 

To all the talk that followed, and there wa much of it, henriot 
listen with but half an ear. thi one idea storm through him with an 
uproar that kill attention. judgment wa held utterli in abeyance. He 
carri away from it some vagu suggest that thi woman had hint at 
previou live she half remembered, and that everi year she came to 
egypt, haunt the sand and templ in the effort to recov lost 
clues. and he recal afterward that she said, "thi all came to me as 
a child, just as though it wa someth half remembered." there wa the 
further suggest that he himself wa not unknown to her; that they, 
too, had met before. but this, compar to the grave certainti of the 
rest, wa merest fantasi that did not hold hi attention. He answered, 
hardli know what he said. hi preoccup with other thought deep 
down wa so intense, that he wa probabl bare polite, utter empti 
phrases, with hi mind elsewhere. hi one desir wa to escap and be 
alone, and it wa with genuin relief that he present excus himself 
and went upstair to bed. the halls, he noticed, were empty; an arab 
servant wait to put the light out. He walk up, for the lift had 
long ceas running. 

and the magic of old egypt stalk besid him. the studi that had 
fascin hi mind in earlier youth return with the power that had 
subdu hi mind in boyhood. the cult of osiri woke in hi blood again; 
horu and nephthi stir in their long-forgotten centres. there 
reviv in him, too long buried, the aw glamour of those liturg 
rite and vast bodi of observances, those spell and formula of 
incant of the oldest known recens that year ago had captur 
hi imagin and belief--th book of the dead. trumpet voic call 
to hi heart again across the desert of some dim past. there were form 
of life--impuls from the creativ power which is the universe--oth 
than the soul of man. they could be known. A spiritu exaltation, 
rous by the word and presenc of thi singular woman, shout to him 
as he went. 

then, as he close hi bedroom door, care lock it, there stood 
besid him--vance. the forgotten figur of vanc came up close--th 
watch eyes, the simul interest, the feign belief, the detect 
mental attitude, these broke through the grandios panorama, bring 
darkness. vance, strong person that hid behind assum nonent 
for some purpos of hi own, intrud with sudden violence, demand an 
explan of hi presence. 

and, with an equal suddenness, explan offer itself then and 
there. It came unsought, it horror of certainti utterli unjustified; 
and it came in thi unexpect fashion: 

behind the interest and acquiesc of the man ran--fear: but behind 
the vivid fear ran anoth thing that henriot now perceiv wa vile. 
for the first time in hi life, henriot knew it at close quarters, 
actual, readi to operate. though familiar enough in daili life to be of 
common occurrence, henriot had never realis it as he did now, so close 
and terrible. In the same way he had never _realised_ that he would 
die--vanish from the busi world of men and women, forgotten as though he 
had never existed, an eddi of wind-blown dust. and in the man name 
richard vanc thi thing wa close upon blossom. henriot could not name 
it to himself. even in thought it appal him. 

* * * * * 

He undress hurriedly, almost with the child' idea of find safeti 
between the sheets. hi mind undress itself as well. the busi of 
the day laid itself automat aside; the will sank down; desir grew 
inactive. henriot wa exhausted. but, in that stage toward slumber when 
think stops, and onli fugit pictur pass across the mind in 
shadowi dance, hi brain ceas shout it mechan explanations, 
and hi soul unveil a peer eye. great limb of memory, smother by 
the activ of the present, stir their stiffen length through 
the sand of long ago--sand thi woman had begun to excav from some 
far-off pre-exist they had sure known together. vagu and 
certainti ran hand in hand. detail were unrecoverable, but the emot 
in which they were embed moved. 

He turn restlessli in hi bed, strive to seiz the amaz clue and 
follow them. but deliber effort hid them instantli again; they 
retir instantli into the subconsciousness. with the brain of thi bodi 
he now occupi they had noth to do. the brain store memori of 
each life only. thi ancient script wa graven in hi soul. 
subconsci alon could interpret and reveal. and it wa hi 
subconsci memori that ladi statham had been so busili excavating. 

dimli it stir and move about the depth within him, never clearli 
seen, indefinite, felt as a yearn after unrecover knowledge. 
against the darker background of vance' fear and sinist purpose--both 
of thi present life, and recent--h saw the grandeur of thi woman' 
imposs dream, and _knew_, beyond argument or reason, that it wa 
true. judgment and will asleep, he left the imposs aside, and 
took the grandeur. the belief of ladi statham wa not credul and 
superstition; it wa memory. still to thi day, over the sand of egypt, 
hover immens spiritu potencies, so vast that they could onli know 
physic express in a group--in many. their sphere of bodili 
manifest must be a host, each individu unit in that host a 
corpuscl in the whole. 

the wind, rise from the lybian wast across the nile, swept up 
against the expos side of the hotel, and made hi window rattle--th 
old, sad wind of egypt. henriot got out of bed to fasten the outsid 
shutters. He stood a moment and watch the moon float down behind 
the sakkara pyramids. the pleiad and orion' belt hung brilliantly; 
the great bear wa close to the horizon. In the sky abov the desert 
swung ten thousand stars. No sound rose from the street of helouan. 
the tide of sand wa come slowli in. 

and a flock of enorm thought swoop past him from field of thi 
unbelievable, lost memory. the desert, pale in the moon, wa coextens 
with the night, too huge for comfort or understanding, yet charg to 
the brim with infinit peace. behind it majesti of silenc lay whisper 
of a vanish languag that onc could call with power upon mighti 
spiritu agencies. it skirt were fold now, but, slowli across the 
leagu of sand, they began to stir and rearrang themselves. He grew 
suddenli awar of thi envelop shroud of sand--a the raw materi of 
bodili expression: form. 

the sand wa in hi imagin and hi mind. shake loos the fold 
of it gigant skirts, it rose; it move a littl toward him. He saw 
the etern counten of the desert watch him--immobil and 
unchang behind these shift veil the wind laid so care over 
it. egypt, the ancient egypt, turn in her vast sarcophagu of desert, 
waken from her sleep of age at the belief of approach 
worshippers. 

onli in thi insignific manner could he express a letter of the 
terrif languag that crowd to seek express through hi soul.... 
He close the shutter and care fasten them. He turn to go back 
to bed, curious trembling. then, as he did so, the whole singular 
delus caught him with a shock that held him motionless. Up rose the 
stupend apparit of the entir desert and stood behind him on that 
balcony. swift as thought, in silence, the desert stood on end against 
hi veri face. It tower across the sky, hide orion and the moon; it 
dip below the horizons. the whole grey sheet of it rose up befor hi 
eye and stood. through it unfold skirt ran ten thousand eddi of 
swirl sand as the creas of it grave-cloth smooth themselv 
out in moonlight. and a bleak, scar countenance, huge as a planet, 
gaze down into hi own.... 

through hi dreamless sleep that night two thing lay activ and awak 
... in the subconsci part that know no slumber. they were 
incongruous. one wa evil, small and human; the other unearthli and 
sublime. for the memori of the fear that haunt vance, and the sinist 
caus of it, prick at him all night long. but behind, beyond thi 
common, intellig emotion, lay the crowd wonder that caught hi 
soul with glory: 

the sand wa stirring, the desert wa awake. readi to mate with them in 
materi form, brood close the Ka of that coloss entiti that onc 
express itself through the myriad life of ancient egypt. 




VI 


next day, and for sever day following, henriot kept out of the path 
of ladi statham and her nephew. the acquaintanceship had grown too 
rapidli to be quit comfortable. It wa easi to pretend that he took 
peopl at their face value, but it wa a pose; one like to know 
someth of antecedents. It wa otherwis difficult to "place" them. 
and henriot, for the life of him, could not "place" these two. hi 
subconsci brought explan when it came--but the 
subconsci is onli temporarili active. when it retir he 
flounder without a rudder, in confusion. 

with the flood of morn sunshin the valu of much she had said 
evaporated. her presenc alon had suppli the key to the cipher. but 
while the indigest portion he rejected, there remain a good deal 
he had alreadi assimilated. the discomfort remained; and with it the 
grave, unholi realiti of it all. It wa someth more than theory. 
result would follow--if he join them. He would wit curiou 
things. 

the forc with which it drew him brought hesitation. It oper in him 
like a shock that numb at first by it abrupt arrival, and need time 
to realis in the right proport to the rest of life. these right 
proportions, however, did not come readily, and hi emot rang 
between sceptic laughter and complet acceptance. the one detail he 
felt certain of wa thi dread thing he had divin in vance. tri 
hard to disbeliev it, he found he could not. It wa true. though 
without a shred of real evid to support it, the horror of it 
remained. He knew it in hi veri bones. 

and this, perhaps, wa what drove him to seek the comfort 
companionship of folk he understood and felt at home with. He told hi 
host and hostess about the strangers, though omit the actual 
convers becaus they would mere smile in blank miscomprehension. 
but the moment he describ the strong black eye beneath the level 
eyelids, hi hostess turn with a start, her interest deepli roused: 
"why, it' that aw statham woman," she exclaimed, "that must be ladi 
statham, and the man she call her nephew." 

"sound like it, certainly," her husband added. "felix, you'd better 
clear out. they'll bewitch you too." 

and henriot bridled, yet wonder whi he did so. He drew into hi shell 
a little, give the merest sketch of what had happened. but he listen 
close while these two practic old friend suppli him with 
inform in the gossip way that human natur loves. No doubt there 
wa much embroidery, and more perversion, exagger too, but the 
account evid rest upon some basi of solid foundat for all 
that. smoke and fire go togeth always. 

"he _is_ her nephew right enough," mansfield correct hi wife, befor 
proceed to hi own man' form of elaboration; "no question about 
that, I believe. he' her favourit nephew, and she' as rich as a pig. 
He follow her out here everi year, wait for her empti shoes. but 
they _are_ an unsavouri couple. i'v met 'em in variou parts, all over 
egypt, but they alway come back to helouan in the end. and the stori 
about them are simpli legion. you remember--" he turn hesitatingli to 
hi wife--"som people, I heard," he chang hi sentence, "were made 
quit ill by her." 

"i'm sure felix ought to know, yes," hi wife boldli took him up, "mi 
niece, fanny, had the most extraordinari experience." she turn to 
henriot. "her room wa next to ladi statham in some hotel or other at 
assouan or edfu, and one night she woke and heard a kind of mysteri 
chant or inton next her. hotel door are so dread thin. there 
wa a funni smell too, like incens of someth sickly, and a man' 
voic kept chime in. It went on for hours, while she lay terrifi in 
bed--" 

"frightened, you say?" ask henriot. 

"out of her skin, yes; she said it wa so uncanny--mad her feel icy. 
she want to ring the bell, but wa afraid to leav her bed. the room 
wa full of--of things, yet she could see nothing. she _felt_ them, you 
see. and after a bit the sound of thi sing-song voic so got on her 
nerves, it half daze her--a kind of enchantment--sh felt choke and 
suffocated. and then--" It wa her turn to hesitate. 

"tell it all," her husband said, quit grave too. 

"well--someth came in. At least, she describ it oddly, rather; she 
said it made the door bulg inward from the next room, but not the door 
alone; the wall bulg or sway as if a huge thing press against 
them from the other side. and at the same moment her windows--sh had 
two big balconies, and the venetian shutter were fastened--both her 
window _darkened_--though it wa two in the morn and pitch dark 
outside. she said it wa all _one_ thing--tri to get in; just as 
water, you see, would rush in through everi hole and open it could 
find, and all at once. and in spite of her terror--that' the odd part 
of it--sh say she felt a kind of splendour in her--a sort of elation." 

"she saw nothing?" 

"she say she doesn't remember. her sens left her, I believe--though 
she won't admit it." 

"faint for a minute, probably," said mansfield. 

"so there it is," hi wife concluded, after a silence. "and that' true. 
It happen to my niece, didn't it, john?" 

stori and legendari account of strang thing that the presenc of 
these two brought pour out then. they were obvious somewhat mixed, 
one account borrow picturesqu detail from another, and all in 
disproportion, as when peopl tell stori in a languag they are 
littl familiar with. but, listen with avidity, yet also with 
uneasiness, somehow, henriot put two and two together. truth stood 
behind them somewhere. these two held traffic with the power that 
ancient egypt knew. 

"tell felix, dear, about the time you met the nephew--horrid 
creature--in the valley of the kings," he heard hi wife say presently. 
and mansfield told it plainli enough, evid glad to get it done, 
though. 

"it wa some year ago now, and I didn't know who he wa then, or 
anyth about him. I don't know much more now--except that he' a 
danger sort of charlatan-devil, _i_ think. but I came across him one 
night up there by thebe in the valley of the kings--you know, where 
they buri all their johnni with so much magnific and process 
and masses, and all the rest. it' the most astounding, the most haunt 
place you ever saw, gloomy, silent, full of gorgeou light and shadow 
that seem alive--terr impressive; it make you creep and shudder. 
you feel old egypt watch you." 

"get on, dear," said hi wife. 

"well, I wa come home late on a blast lazi donkey, dog-tir into 
the bargain, when my donkey boy suddenli ran for hi life and left me 
alone. It wa after sunset. the sand wa red and shining, and the big 
cliff sort of fiery. and my donkey stuck it four feet in the ground 
and wouldn't budge. then, about fifti yard away, I saw a 
fellow--european apparently--do something--heaven know what, for I 
can't describ it--among the boulder that lie all over the ground 
there. ceremony, I suppos you'd call it. I wa so interest that at 
first I watched. then I saw he wasn't alone. there were a lot of move 
thing round him, tower big things, that came and went like shadows. 
that twilight is fear bewildering; perspect changes, and 
distanc get all confused. it' fear hard to see properly. I onli 
rememb that I got off my donkey and went up closer, and when I wa 
within a dozen yard of him--well, it sound such rot, you know, but I 
swear the thing suddenli rush off and left him there alone. they went 
with a roar nois like wind; shadowi but tremend big, they were, 
and they vanish up against the fieri precipic as though they slip 
bang into the stone itself. the onli thing I can think of to describ 
'em is--well, those sand-storm the khamasin raises--th hot winds, you 
know." 

"they probabl _were_ sand," hi wife suggested, burn to tell 
anoth stori of her own. 

"possibly, onli there wasn't a breath of wind, and it wa hot as 
blazes--and--i had such extraordinari sensations--nev felt anyth 
like it before--wild and exhilarated--drunk, I tell you, drunk." 

"you saw them?" ask henriot. "you made out their shape at all, or 
outline?" 

"sphinx," he repli at once, "for all the world like sphinxes. you know 
the kind of face and head these limeston strata in the desert 
take--great visag with squar egyptian head-dress where the driven 
sand ha eaten away the softer stuff beneath? you see it 
everywhere--enorm idol they seem, with face and eye and lip 
aw like the sphinx--well, that' the nearest I can get to it." He 
puf hi pipe hard. but there wa no sign of leviti in him. He told 
the actual truth as far as in him lay, yet half asham of what he told. 
and a good deal he left out, too. 

"she' got a face of the same sort, that statham horror," hi wife said 
with a shiver. "reduc the size, and paint in aw black eyes, and 
you'v got her exactly--a live idol." and all three laughed, yet a 
laughter without merriment in it. 

"and you spoke to the man?" 

"I did," the englishman answered, "though I confess i'm a bit asham of 
the way I spoke. fact is, I wa excited, thunderingli excited, and felt 
a kind of anger. I want to kick the beggar for practis such balli 
rubbish, and in such a place too. yet all the time--well, well, I 
believ it wa sheer funk now," he laughed; "for I felt uncommonli queer 
out there in the dusk, alon with--with that kind of business; and I wa 
angri with myself for feel it. anyhow, I went up--i'd lost my donkey 
boy as well, remember--and slate him like a dog. I can't rememb what 
I said exactly--onli that he stood and stare at me in silence. that 
made it worse--seem twice as real then. the beggar said no singl word 
the whole time. He sign to me with one hand to clear out. and then, 
suddenli out of nothing--she--that woman--appear and stood besid him. 
I never saw her come. she must have been behind some boulder or other, 
for she simpli rose out of the ground. she stood there and stare at me 
too--bang in the face. she wa turn toward the sunset--what wa left 
of it in the west--and her black eye shone like--ugh! I can't describ 
it--it wa shocking." 

"she spoke?" 

"she said five words--and her voice--it'l make you laugh--it wa 
metal like a gong: 'you are in danger here.' that' all she said. I 
simpli turn and clear out as fast as ever I could. but I had to go 
on foot. My donkey had follow it boy long before. I tell you--smil 
as you may--mi blood wa all curdl for an hour afterwards." 

then he explain that he felt some kind of explan or apolog wa 
due, sinc the coupl lodg in hi own hotel, and how he approach the 
man in the smoking-room after dinner. A convers resulted--th man 
wa quit intellig after all--of which onli one sentenc had remain 
in hi mind. 

"perhap you can explain it, felix. I wrote it down, as well as I could 
remember. the rest confus me beyond word or memory; though I must 
confess it did not seem--well, not utter rot exactly. It wa about 
astrolog and ritual and the worship of the old egyptians, and I don't 
know what els besides. only, he made it intellig and almost 
sensible, if onli I could have got the hang of the thing enough to 
rememb it. you know," he added, as though believ in spite of 
himself, "there _is_ a lot of that wonder old egyptian religi 
busi still hang about in the atmospher of thi place, say what 
you like." 

"but thi sentence?" henriot asked. and the other went off to get a 
note-book where he had written it down. 

"he wa jawing, you see," he continu when he came back, henriot and 
hi wife have kept silenc meanwhile, "about direct be of 
import in religi ceremonies, west and north symbolis certain 
powers, or someth of the kind, whi peopl turn to the east and all 
that sort of thing, and speak of the whole univers as if it had 
live forc tuck away in it that express themselv somehow when 
rous up. that' how I rememb it anyhow. and then he said thi 
thing--in answer to some fool question probabl that I put." and he read 
out of the note-book: 

"'you were in danger becaus you came through the gateway of the west, 
and the power from the gateway of the east were at that moment rising, 
and therefor in direct opposit to you.'" 

then came the following, appar a simil offer by way of 
explanation. mansfield read it in a shamefac tone, evid prepar 
for laughter: 

"'whether I strike you on the back or in the face determin what kind 
of answer forc I rous in you. direct is significant.' and he 
said it wa the period call the night of power--tim when the desert 
encroach and spirit are close." 

and toss the book aside, he lit hi pipe again and wait a moment to 
hear what might be said. "can you explain such gibberish?" he ask at 
length, as neither of hi listen spoke. but henriot said he couldn't. 
and the wife then took up her own tale of stori that had grown about 
thi singular couple. 

these were less detailed, and therefor less impressive, but all 
contribut someth toward the atmospher of realiti that frame the 
entir picture. they belong to the type one hear at everi dinner 
parti in egypt--stori of the vengeanc mummi seem to take on those 
who rob them, desecr their peac of centuries; of a woman 
wear a necklac of scarab taken from a princess' tomb, who felt 
hand about her throat to strangl her; of littl Ka figures, pasht 
goddesses, amulet and the rest, that brought curiou disast to those 
who kept them. they are mani and various, astonishingli circumstanti 
often, and vouch for by person the revers of credulous. the modern 
superstit that haunt the desert gulli with afreet ha noth in 
common with them. they rest upon a basi of indubit experience; and 
they remain--inexplicable. and about the person of ladi statham 
and her nephew they crowd like fli attract by a dish of fruit. the 
arabs, too, were afraid of her. she had difficulti in get guid and 
dragomen. 

"mi dear chap," conclud mansfield, "take my advic and have noth to 
do with 'em. there _is_ a lot of queer busi knock about in thi 
old country, and peopl like that know way of reviv it somehow. it' 
upset you already; you look scared, I thought, the moment you came 
in." they laughed, but the englishman wa in earnest. "I tell you what," 
he added, "we'll go off for a bit of shoot together. the field along 
the delta are pack with bird now: they'r home earli thi year on 
their way to the north. what d'ye say, eh?" 

but henriot did not care about the quail shooting. He felt more inclin 
to be alon and think thing out by himself. He had come to hi friend 
for comfort, and instead they had made him uneasi and excited. hi 
interest had suddenli doubled. though half afraid, he long to know 
what these two were up to--to follow the adventur to the bitter end. He 
disregard the warn of hi host as well as the premonit in hi 
own heart. the sand had caught hi feet. 

there were moment when he laugh in utter disbelief, but these were 
optimist mood that did not last. He alway return to the feel 
that truth lurk somewher in the whole strang business, and that if 
he join forc with them, as they seem to wish, he would 
witness--well, he hardli knew what--but it entic him as danger doe 
the reckless man, or death the suicide. the sand had caught hi mind. 

He decid to offer himself to all they wanted--hi pencil too. He would 
see--a shiver ran through him at the thought--what they saw, and know 
some eddi of that vanish tide of power and splendour the ancient 
egyptian priesthood knew, and that perhap wa even common experi in 
the far-off day of dim atlantis. the sand had caught hi imagin 
too. He wa utterli sand-haunted. 




vii 


and so he took pains, though without make definit suggestion, to 
place himself in the way of thi woman and her nephew--onli to find that 
hi hint were disregarded. they left him alone, if they did not 
actual avoid him. moreover, he rare came across them now. onli at 
night, or in the queer dusk hours, he caught glimps of them move 
hurriedli off from the hotel, and alway desertwards. and their 
disregard, well calculated, enflam hi desir to the point when he 
almost decid to propos himself. quit suddenly, then, the idea 
flash through him--how do they come, these odd revelations, when the 
mind lie recept like a plate sensitis by anticipation?--that they 
were wait for a certain date, and, with the notion, came mansfield' 
remark about "the night of power," believ in by the old egyptian 
calendar as a time when the supersensu world move close against the 
mind of men with all it troop of possibilities. and the thought, onc 
lodg in it corner of imagination, grew strong. He look it up. ten 
day from now, he found, leyel-el-sud would be upon him, with a moon, 
too, at the full. and thi strang hint of guidanc he accepted. In hi 
present mood, as he admitted, smile to himself, he could accept 
anything. It wa part of it, it belong to the adventure. but, even 
while he persuad himself that it wa play, the solemn reality, of 
what lay ahead increas amazingly, sketch darkli in hi veri soul. 

these interven day he spent as best he could--impatiently, a prey to 
quit opposit emotions. In the blaze sunshin he thought of it and 
laughed; but at night he lay often sleepless, calcul chanc of 
escape. He never did escape, however. the desert that watch littl 
helouan with great, unwink eye watch also everi turn and twist he 
made. like thi oasis, he bask in the sun of older time, and dream 
beneath forgotten moons. the sand at last had crept into hi inmost 
heart. It sift over him. 

seek a reaction from normal, everyday things, he made tourist trips; 
yet, while recognis the comedi in hi attitude, he never could lose 
sight of the grandeur that bank it up so hauntingly. these two 
contrari emot graft themselv on all he did and saw. He cross 
the nile at bedrashein, and went again to the tomb-world of sakkara; but 
through all the chatter of veil and helmet tourists, the 
_bandar-log_ of our modern jungle, ran thi dark under-stream of awe 
their monkey method could not turn aside. one world lay upon another, 
but thi modern layer wa a shallow crust that, like the phenomenon of 
the "desert-film," a mere angl of fall light could instantli 
obliterate. beneath the sand, deep down, he pass along the street of 
tombs, as he had often pass before, move then mere by histor 
curios and admiration, but now by emot for which he found no 
name. He saw the enorm sarcophagi of granit in their gloomi chamber 
where the sacr bull onc lay, swath and embalm like human beings, 
and, in the flicker candl light, the mood of ancient rite surg 
round him, menac hi doubt and laughter. the least human whisper in 
these subterraneans, dug out first four thousand year ago, reviv 
omin power that stalk besid him, forbid and premonitive. He 
gaze at the spot where mariette, unearth them forti year ago, 
found fresh as of yesterday the mark of finger and nake feet--of 
those who set the sixty-f ton slab in position. and when he came up 
again into the sunshin he met the etern question of the pyramids, 
overtop all hi mental horizons. sand block all the avenu of 
younger emotion, leav the channel of someth in him incalcul 
older, open and clean swept. 

He slip homewards, uncomfort and followed, glad to be with a 
crowd--becaus he wa otherwis alon with more than he could dare to 
think about. keep just ahead of hi companions, he cross the desert 
edg where the ghost of memphi walk under rustl palm tree that 
screen no stone left upon anoth of all it mile-long popul 
splendours. for here wa a vista hi imagin could realise; here he 
could know the comfort of solid ground hi feet could touch. gigant 
ramases, lie on hi back beneath their shade and stare at the sky, 
similarli help to steadi hi sway thoughts. imagin could deal 
with these. 

and daili thu he watch the busi world go to and fro to it scale of 
tip and bargaining, and gladli mingl with it, tri to laugh and 
studi guidebooks, and listen to half-fledg explanations, but alway 
see the comedi of hi poor attempts. not all those littl donkeys, 
bell tinkling, bead shining, trot beneath their comic burden to 
the tune of shout and belabouring, could stem thi tide of deeper 
thing the woman had let loos in the subconsci part of him. 
everywher he saw the mysteri camel go slouch through the sand, 
gurgl the water in their skinny, extend throats. centuri pass 
between the enorm knee-strok of their stride. and, everi night, the 
sunset restor the forbidding, graver mood, with their crimson, golden 
splendour, their strang green shaft of light, then--sudden twilight 
that brought the past upon him with an aw leap. upon the stage then 
step the figur of thi pair of human beings, chant their ancient 
plainsong of incant in the moonlit desert, and work their rite 
of unholi evoc as the priest had work them centuri befor in 
the sand that now buri sakkara fathom deep. 

then one morn he woke with a question in hi mind, as though it had 
been ask of him in sleep and he had wake just befor the answer came. 
"whi do I spend my time sight-seeing, instead of go alon into the 
desert as before? what ha made me change?" 

thi latest mood now ask for explanation. and the answer, come up 
automatically, startl him. It wa so clear and sure--had been lie in 
the background all along. one word contain it: 

vance. 

the sinist intent of thi man, forgotten in the rush of other 
emotions, assert themselv again convincingly. the human horror, so 
easili comprehensible, had been smother for the time by the hint of 
unearthli revelations. but it had oper all the time. now it took 
the lead. He dread to be alon in the desert with thi dark pictur in 
hi mind of what vanc meant to bring there to completion. thi 
abomin of a selfish human will return to fix it terror in him. 
To be alon in the desert meant to be alon with the imagin pictur 
of what vance--h knew it with such strang certainty--hop to bring 
about there. 

there wa absolut no evid to justifi the grim suspicion. It 
seem inde far-fetch enough, thi connect between the sand and 
the purpos of an evil-minded, violent man. but henriot saw it true. He 
could argu it away in a few minutes--easily. yet the instant thought 
ceased, it returned, led up by intuition. It possess him, fill hi 
mind with horribl possibilities. He fear the desert as he might have 
fear the scene of some atroci crime. and, for the time, thi dread 
of a mere human thing correct the big seduct of the other--th 
suggest "super-natural." 

side by side with it, hi desir to join himself to the purpos of the 
woman increas steadily. they kept out of hi way apparently; the offer 
seem withdrawn; he grew restless, unabl to settl to anyth for 
long, and onc he ask the porter casual if they were leav the 
hotel. ladi statham had been invis for days, and vanc wa somehow 
never within speak distance. He heard with relief that they had not 
gone--but with dread as well. keen excit work in him underground. 
He slept badly. like a schoolboy, he wait for the summon to an 
import examin that involv portent issues, and contradictori 
emot disturb hi peac of mind abominably. 




viii 


but it wa not until the end of the week, when vanc approach him with 
purpos in hi eye and manner, that henriot knew hi fear unfounded, 
and caught himself trembl with sudden anticipation--becaus the 
invitation, so desir yet so dreaded, wa actual at hand. firmli 
determin to keep caution uppermost, yet he went unresistingli to a 
seclud corner by the palm where they could talk in privacy. for 
prudenc is of the mind, but desir is of the soul, and while hi brain 
of to-day whisper wariness, voic in hi heart of long ago shout 
command that he knew he must obey with joy. 

It wa even and the star were out. helouan, with her fairi 
twinkl lights, lay silent against the desert edge. the sand wa at 
the flood. the period of the encroach of the desert wa at hand, and 
the deep were all astir with movement. but in the windless air wa a 
great peace. A calm of infinit still breath everywhere. the flow 
of time, befor it rush away backwards, stop somewher between the 
dust of star and desert. the mysteri of sand touch everi street with 
it unutter softness. 

and vanc began without the smallest circumlocution. hi voic wa low, 
in keep with the scene, but the word drop with a sharp 
distinct into the other' heart like grain of sand that prick the 
skin befor they smother him. caution they smother instantly; 
resist too. 

"I have a messag for you from my aunt," he said, as though he brought 
an invit to a picnic. henriot sat in shadow, but hi companion' 
face wa in a patch of light that follow them from the window of the 
central hall. there wa a shine in the light blue eye that betray 
the excit hi quiet manner concealed. "we are going--th day after 
to-morrow--to spend the night in the desert; she wonder if, perhaps, 
you would care to join us?" 

"for your experiment?" ask henriot bluntly. 

vanc smile with hi lips, hold hi eye steady, though unabl to 
suppress the gleam that flash in them and wa gone so swiftly. there 
wa a hint of shrug hi shoulders. 

"it is the night of power--in the old egyptian calendar, you know," he 
answer with assum light almost, "the final moment of 
leyel-el-sud, the period of black night when the desert wa held to 
encroach with--with variou possibl of a supernatur order. she 
wish to reviv a certain practic of the old egyptians. there _may_ be 
curiou results. At ani rate, the occas is a picturesqu one--bett 
than thi cheap imit of london life." and he indic the lights, 
the sign of peopl in the hall dress for gaieti and dances, the 
hotel orchestra that play after dinner. 

henriot at the moment answer nothing, so great wa the rush of 
conflict emot that came he knew not whence. vanc went calmli on. 
He spoke with a simpl frank that wa meant to be disarming. henriot 
never took hi eye off him. the two men stare steadili at one another. 

"she want to know if you will come and help too--in a certain way 
only: not in the experi itself precisely, but by watch mere 
and--" He hesit an instant, half lower hi eyes. 

"draw the picture," henriot help him deliberately. 

"draw what you see, yes," vanc replied, the voic turn graver in 
spite of himself. "she wants--sh hope to catch the outlin of 
anyth that happens--" 

"comes." 

"exactly. determin the shape of anyth that comes. you may rememb 
your convers of the other night with her. she is veri certain of 
success." 

thi wa direct enough at ani rate. It wa as formal as an invit to 
a dinner, and as guileless. the thing he thought he want lay within 
hi reach. He had mere to say yes. He did say yes; but first he look 
about him instinctively, as for guidance. He look at the star 
twinkl high abov the distant libyan plateau; at the long arm of the 
desert, gleam weirdli white in the moonlight, and reach toward 
him down everi open between the houses; at the heavi mass of the 
mokattam hills, guard the arabian wilder with strange, peak 
barriers, their sand-carv ridg dark and still abov the wadi hof. 

these question attract no response. the desert watch him, but it 
did not answer. there wa onli the shrill whistl cri of the lizards, 
and the sing-song of a white-rob arab glide down the sandi street. 
and through these sound he heard hi own voic answer: "I will 
come--yes. but how can I help? tell me what you propose--your plan?" 

and the face of vance, seen plainli in the electr glare, betray hi 
satisfaction. the oppos thing in the fellow' mind of dark 
fought visibl in hi eye and skin. the sordid motive, plan a 
dread act, leap to hi face, and with it a flash of thi other 
yearn that sought unearthli knowledge, perhap believ it too. No 
wonder there wa conflict written on hi features. 

then all express vanish again; he lean forward, lower hi 
voice. 

"you rememb our convers about there be type of life too vast 
to manifest in a singl body, and my aunt' belief that these were known 
to certain of the older religi system of the world?" 

"perfectly." 

"her experiment, then, is to bring one of these great power back--w 
possess the sympathet ritual that can rous some among them to 
activity--and win it down into the sphere of our minds, our mind 
heightened, you see, by ceremoni to that stage of clairvoy vision 
which can perceiv them." 

"and then?" they might have been discuss the build of a house, so 
natur follow answer upon question. but the whole bodi of mean 
in the old egyptian symbol rush over him with a forc that shook 
hi heart. memori came so marvel with it. 

"if the power flood down into our mind with suffici strength for 
actual form, to note the outlin of such form, and from your draw 
model it later in perman substance. then we should have mean of 
evok it at will, for we should have it natur body--th form it 
built itself, it signature, image, pattern. A starting-point, you see, 
for more--leading, she hopes, to a complet reconstruction." 

"it might take actual shape--assum a bodili form visibl to the eye?" 
repeat henriot, amaz as befor that doubt and laughter did not break 
through hi mind. 

"we are on the earth," wa the reply, spoken unnecessarili low sinc no 
live thing wa within earshot, "we are in physic conditions, are we 
not? even a human soul we do not recognis unless we see it in a 
body--par provid the outline, the signature, the sigil of the 
return soul. this," and he tap himself upon the breast, "i the 
physic signatur of that type of life we call a soul. unless there is 
life of a certain strength behind it, no bodi forms. and, without a 
body, we are helpless to control or manag it--deal with it in ani way. 
We could not know it, though be possibl _aware_ of it." 

"to be aware, you mean, is not sufficient?" for he notic the ital 
vanc made use of. 

"too vague, of no valu for futur use," wa the reply. "but onc obtain 
the form, and we have the natur symbol of that particular power. and a 
symbol is more than image, it is a direct and concentr express of 
the life it typifies--poss terrific." 

"it may be a body, then, thi symbol you speak of." 

"accur vehicl of manifestation; but 'body' seem the simplest word." 

vanc answer veri slowli and deliberately, as though weigh how much 
he would tell. hi languag wa admir evasive. few perhap would 
have detect the profound signific the curiou word he next use 
unquestion concealed. henriot' mind reject them, but hi heart 
accepted. for the ancient soul in him wa listen and aware. 

"life, use matter to express itself in bodili shape, first trace a 
geometr pattern. from the lowest form in crystals, upward to more 
complic pattern in the higher organisations--ther is alway first 
thi geometr pattern as skeleton. for geometri lie at the root of 
all possibl phenomena; and is the mind' interpret of a live 
movement toward shape that shall express it." He brought hi eye 
closer to the other, lower hi voic again. "hence," he said softly, 
"the sign in all the old magic systems--skeleton form into which the 
power evok descended; outlin those power automat built up 
when use matter to express themselves. such sign are materi symbol 
of their bodiless existence. they attract the life they repres and 
interpret. obtain the correct, true symbol, and the power correspond 
to it can approach--onc rous and made aware. It has, you see, a 
ready-mad mould into which it can come down." 

"onc rous and made aware?" repeat henriot questioningly, while thi 
man went stammer the letter of a languag that he himself had use 
too long ago to recaptur fully. 

"becaus they have left the world. they sleep, unmanifested. their form 
are no longer known to men. No form exist on earth to-day that could 
contain them. but they may be awakened," he ad darkly. "they are 
bound to answer to the summons, if such summon be accur made." 

"evocation?" whisper henriot, more distress than he care to admit. 

vanc nodded. lean still closer, to hi companion' face, he thrust 
hi lip forward, speak eagerly, earnestly, yet somehow at the same 
time, horribly: "and we want--mi aunt would ask--your draughtsman' 
skill, or at ani rate your memori afterwards, to establish the outlin 
of anyth that comes." 

He wait for the answer, still keep hi face uncomfort close. 

henriot drew back a little. but hi mind wa fulli made up now. He had 
known from the begin that he would consent, for the desir in him 
wa stronger than all the caution in the world. the past inexor drew 
him into the circl of these other lives, and the littl human dread 
vanc woke in him seem just then insignific by comparison. It wa 
mere of to-day. 

"you two," he said, tri to bring judgment into it, "engag in 
evocation, will be in a state of clairvoy vision. granted. but shall 
I, as an outsider, observ with unexcit mind, see anything, know 
anything, be awar of anyth at all, let alon the draw of it?" 

"unless," the repli came instantli with decision, "the descent of power 
is strong enough to take actual materi shape, the experi is a 
failure. anybodi can induc subject vision. such fantasi have no 
valu though. they are born of an overwrought imagination." and then he 
ad quickly, as though to clinch the matter befor caution and 
hesit could take effect: "you must watch from the height above. We 
shall be in the valley--th wadi hof is the place. you must not be too 
close--" 

"whi not too close?" ask henriot, spring forward like a flash 
befor he could prevent the sudden impulse. 

with a quick equal to hi own, vanc answered. there wa no faintest 
sign that he wa surprised. hi self-control wa perfect. onli the glare 
pass darkli through hi eye and went back again into the sombr soul 
that bore it. 

"for your own safety," he answer low. "the power, the type of life, 
she would waken is stupendous. and if rous enough to be attract by 
the pattern symbol into which she would decoy it down, it will take 
actual, physic expression. but how? where is the bodi of worshipp 
through whom it can manifest? there is none. It will, therefore, press 
inanim matter into the service. the terrif impuls to form itself a 
mean of express will forc all loos matter at hand toward 
it--sand, stones, all it can compel to yield--everyth must rush into 
the sphere of action in which it operates. alone, we at the centre, and 
you, upon the outer fringe, will be safe. only--y must not come too 
close." 

but henriot wa no longer listening. hi soul had turn to ice. for 
here, in thi unguard moment, the cloven hoof had plainli shown 
itself. In that suggest of a particular kind of danger vanc had 
lift a corner of the curtain behind which crouch hi horribl 
intention. vanc desir a wit of the extraordinari experiment, but 
he desir thi witness, not mere for the purpos of sketch 
possibl shape that might present themselv to excit vision. He 
desir a wit for anoth reason too. whi had vanc put that idea 
into hi mind, thi idea of so peculiar danger? It might well have lost 
him the veri assist he seem so anxiou to obtain. 

henriot could not fathom it quite. onli one thing wa clear to him. he, 
henriot, wa not the onli one in danger. 

they talk for long after that--far into the night. the light went 
out, and the arm patrol, pace to and fro outsid the iron rail 
that kept the desert back, eye them curiously. but the onli other thing 
he gather of import wa the ledg upon the cliff-top where he wa 
to stand and watch; that he wa expect to reach there befor sunset 
and wait till the moon conceal all glimmer in the western sky, 
and--that the woman, who had been engag for day in secret prepar 
of soul and bodi for the aw rite, would not be visibl again until he 
saw her in the depth of the black valley far below, busi with thi man 
upon audacious, ancient purposes. 




IX 


An hour befor sunset henriot put hi rug and food upon a donkey, and 
gave the boy direct where to meet him--a consider distanc from 
the appoint spot. He went himself on foot. He slip in the heat 
along the sandi street, where string of camel still go slouching, 
shuffl with their load from the quarri that built the pyramids, 
and he felt that littl friendli helouan tri to keep him back. but 
desir now wa far too strong for caution. the desert tide wa rising. 
It easili swept him down the long white street toward the enorm 
deep beyond. He felt the pull of a thousand mile befor him; and twice 
a thousand year drove at hi back. 

everyth still bask in the sunshine. He pass Al hayat, the state 
hotel that domin the villag like a palac built against the sky; 
and in it pillar colonnad and terrac he saw the throng of peopl 
have late afternoon tea and listen to the music of a regiment 
band. men in flannel were play tennis, parti were climb off 
donkey after long excursions; there wa laughter, talking, a babel of 
mani voices. the gaieti call to him; the everyday spirit whisper to 
stay and join the crowd of live human beings. soon there would be 
merri dinner-parties, dancing, voic of pretti women, sweet white 
dresses, singing, and the rest. soft eye would question and turn dark. 
He pick out sever girl he knew among the palms. but it wa all 
many, oh so mani leagu away; centuri lay between him and thi modern 
world. An indescri loneli wa in hi heart. He went search 
through the sand of forgotten ages, and wander among the ruin of a 
vanish time. He hurried. alreadi the deeper water caught hi breath. 

He climb the steep rise toward the plateau where the observatori 
stands, and saw two of the offici whom he knew take a siesta after 
their long day' work. He felt that hi mind, too, had dive and 
search among the heavenli bodi that live in silent, changeless peac 
remot from the world of men. they recognis him, these two whose eye 
also knew tremend distanc close. they beckoned, wave the straw 
through which they sip their drink from tall glasses. their voic 
float down to him as from the star-fields. He saw the sun gleam upon 
the glasses, and heard the clink of the ice against the sides. the 
still wa amazing. He wave an answer, and pass quickli on. He 
could not stop thi slide current of the years. 

the tide move faster, the draw of piled-up cycl urg it. He emerg 
upon the plateau, and met the cooler desert air. hi feet went crunch 
on the "desert-film" that spread it curiou dark shini carpet as far as 
the eye could reach; it lay everywhere, unswept and smooth as when the 
feet of vanish civil trod it burn surface, then dip 
behind the curtain time pin against the stars. and here the bodi of 
the tide set all one way. there wa a greater strength of current, 
draught and suction. He felt the power undertow. deeper mass drew 
hi feet sideways, and he felt the rush of the central bodi of the 
sand. the sand were moving, from their foundat upwards. He went 
unresistingli with them. 

turn a moment, he look back at shine littl helouan in the blaze 
of even light. the voic reach him veri faintly, merg now in a 
gener murmur. beyond lay the strip of delta vivid green, the palms, 
the roof of bedrashein, the blue laughter of the nile with it flock 
of curv felucca sails. further still, rise abov the yellow libyan 
horizon, gloom the vast triangl of a dozen pyramids, cut their 
wedge-shap cleft out of a sky fast crimson through a sea of gold. 
seen thus, their digniti impos upon the entir landscape. they tower 
darkly, symbol signatur of the ancient power that now watch him 
take these littl step across their damag territory. 

He gaze a minute, then went on. He saw the big pale face of the moon in 
the east. abov the ever-sil thing these giant symbol onc 
interpreted, she rose, grand, effortless, half-terr as themselves. 
and, with her, she lift up thi tide of the desert that drew hi feet 
across the sand to wadi hof. A moment later he dip below the ridg 
that buri helouan and nile and pyramid from sight. He enter the 
ancient waters. time then, in an instant, flow back behind hi 
footsteps, obliter everi trace. and with it hi mind went too. He 
step across the gulf of centuries, move into the past. the desert 
lay befor him--an open tomb wherein hi soul should read present of 
thing long vanished. 

the strang half-light of sunset began to play their witcheri then upon 
the landscape. A purpl glow came down upon the mokattam hills. 
perspect danc it trick of false, incred deception. the 
soar kite that were a mile away seem suddenli close, pass in a 
moment from the size of gnat to bird with a fabul stretch of wing. 
ridg and cliff rush close without a hint of warning, and level 
place sank into decliv and basin that made him trip and stumble. 
that indescrib qualiti of the desert, which make timid soul avoid 
the hour of dusk, emerged; it spread everywhere, undisguised. and the 
bewilder it bring is no vain, imagin thing, for it distort 
vision utterly, and the effect upon the mind when familiar sight goe 
flounder is the simplest way in the world of drag the anchor that 
grip reality. At the hour of sunset thi bewilder come upon a man 
with a disconcert swiftness. It rose now with all thi weird 
rapidity. henriot found himself envelop at a moment' notice. 

but, know well it effect, he tri to judg it and pass on. the 
other matters, the object of hi journey chief of all, he refus to 
dwell upon with ani imagination. wisely, hi mind, while never lose 
sight of it, declin to admit the exagger that over-elabor 
think brings. "i'm go to wit an incred experi in which 
two enthusiast religi dreamer believ firmly," he repeat to 
himself. "I have agre to draw--anyth I see. there may be truth in 
it, or they may be mere self-suggest vision due to an artifici 
exalt of their minds. i'm interested--perhap against my better 
judgment. yet i'll see the adventur out--becaus I _must_." 

thi wa the attitud he told himself to take. whether it wa the real 
one, or mere adopt to warm a cool courage, he could not tell. the 
emot were so complex and warring. hi mind, automatically, kept 
repeat thi comfort formula. deeper than that he could not see to 
judge. for a man who knew the full content of hi thought at such a time 
would solv some of the oldest psycholog problem in the world. sand 
had alreadi buri judgment, and with it all attempt to explain the 
adventur by the standard accept to hi brain of to-day. He steer 
subconsci through a world of dim, huge, half-rememb wonders. 

the sun, with that abrupt egyptian suddenness, wa below the horizon 
now. the pyramid field had swallow it. ra, in hi golden boat, sail 
distant sea beyond the libyan wilderness. henriot walk on and on, 
awar of utter loneliness. He wa walk field of dream, too remot 
from modern life to recal companionship he onc had sure known. how 
dim it was, how deep and distant, how lost in thi sea of an 
incalcul past! He walk into the place that are soundless. the 
soundless of ocean, mile below the surface, wa about him. He wa 
with one only--thi unfathomable, silent thing where noth breath or 
stirs--noth but sunshine, shadow and the wind-born sand. slowly, in 
front, the moon climb up the eastern sky, hang abov the 
silence--sil that ran unbroken across the horizon to where suez 
gleam upon the water of a sister sea in motion. that moon wa 
glint now upon the arabian mountain by it desol shores. 
southward stretch the wast of upper egypt a thousand mile to meet 
the nubian wilderness. but over all these separ desert stir the 
soft whisper of the move sand--deep murmur messag that life wa on 
the way to unwind death. the Ka of egypt, swath in centuri of sand, 
hover beneath the moon toward her ancient tenement. 

for the transform of the desert now began in earnest. It grew 
apace. befor he had gone the first two mile of hi hour' journey, the 
twilight caught the rocki hill and twist them into those monstrou 
revel of physiognomi they bare take the troubl to conceal 
even in the daytime. and, while he well understood the erod agenc 
that have produc them, there yet rose in hi mind a deeper 
interpret lurk just behind their liter meanings. here, through 
the motionless surfaces, that nameless thing the desert ill conceal 
urg outward into embryon form and shape, akin, he almost felt, to 
those immens deific symbol of other life the egyptian knew and 
worshipped. hence, from the desert, had first come, he felt, the 
unearthli life they typifi in their monstrou figur of granite, 
evok in their state temples, and commun with in the ritual of 
their mysteri ceremonials. 

thi "watching" aspect of the libyan desert is realli natur enough; 
but it is just the natural, henriot knew, that bring the deepest 
revelations. the surfac limestones, resist the erosion, block 
themselv omin against the sky, while the softer sand beneath set 
them on altar pedest that defin their isol splendidly. blunt 
and unconquerable, these mass now watch him pass between them. the 
desert surfac form them, gave them birth. they rose, they saw, they 
sank down again--wav upon a sea that carri forgotten life up from 
the depth below. Of forbidding, even menac type, they somewher 
mate with genuin grandeur. unformed, accord to ani standard of 
human or of anim faces, they achiev an air of giant physiognomi 
which made them terrible. the unwink stare of eyes--lidless eye that 
yet ever succeed in hiding--look out under well-marked, level 
eyebrows, suggest a vision that includ the motiv and purpos of 
hi veri heart. they look up grandly, understood whi he wa there, and 
then--slowli withdrew their mysterious, penetr gaze. 

the strata built them so marvel up; the heavy, threaten brows; 
thick lips, curv by the age into a semblanc of cold smiles; jowl 
droop into sandi heap that climb against the cheeks; protrud 
jaws, and the suggest of shoulder just about to lift the entir 
bodi out of the sandi beds--thi host of counten convey a 
solemn of express that seem everlasting, implac as death. Of 
human signatur they bore no trace, nor wa comparison possibl between 
their kind and ani anim life. they peopl the desert here. and their 
smiles, conceal yet just discernible, went broaden with the 
dark into a desert laughter. the silenc bore it underground. but 
henriot wa awar of it. the troop of face slip into that single, 
enorm counten which is the visag of the sand. and he saw it 
everywhere, yet nowhere. 

thu with the dark grew hi imagin interpret of the 
desert. yet there wa construct in it, a construction, moreover, that 
wa _not_ entir hi own. powers, he felt, were rising, stirring, 
waken from sleep. behind the natur face that he saw, these other 
thing peer grave at him as he passed. they used, as it were, 
materi that lay readi to their hand. imagin furnish these 
hint of outline, yet the power themselv were real. there _was_ thi 
amaz movement of the sand. By no other manner could hi mind have 
conceiv of such a thing, nor dream of thi simple, yet dread 
method of approach. 

approach! that wa the word that first stood out and startl him. there 
wa approach; someth wa draw nearer. the desert rose and walk 
besid him. for not alon these rib of gleam limeston contribut 
toward the element visages, but the entir hills, of which they were 
an outcrop, ran to assist in the formation, and were a necessari part of 
them. He wa watch and stare at from behind, in front, on either 
side, and even from below. the sand that swept him on, kept even pace 
with him. It turn lumin too, with a patchwork of glimmer effect 
that wa indescrib weird; lantern glow within it substance, and 
by their light he stumbl on, glad of the arab boy he would present 
meet at the appoint place. 

the last torch of the sunset had flicker out, melt into the 
wilderness, when, suddenli open at hi feet, gape the deep, wide 
gulli known as wadi hof. it curv swept past him. 

thi first impress came upon him with a certain violence: that the 
desol valley rushed. He saw but a section of it curv and sweep, but 
through it entir length of sever mile the wadi fled away. the moon 
whiten it like snow, pile black shadow veri close against the 
cliffs. In the flood of moonlight it went rush past. It wa empti 
itself. 

for a moment the stream of movement seem to paus and look up into hi 
face, then instantli went on again upon it swift career. It wa like 
the process of a river to the sea. the valley empti itself to make 
way for what wa coming. the approach, moreover, had alreadi begun. 

consciou that he wa trembling, he stood and gaze into the depths, 
seek to steadi hi mind by the repetit of the littl formula he 
had use before. He said it half aloud. but, while he did so, hi heart 
whisper quit other things. thought the woman and the man had sown 
rose up in a flock and fell upon him like a storm of sand. their impetu 
drove off all support of ordinari ideas. they shook him where he stood, 
stare down into thi river of strang invis movement that wa 
hundr of feet in depth and a quarter of a mile across. 

He sought to realis himself as he actual wa to-day--mer visitor to 
helouan, tempt into thi wild adventur with two strangers. but in 
vain. that seem a dream, unreal, a transient detail pick out from 
the enorm past that now engulf him, heart and mind and soul. _this_ 
wa the reality. 

the shape and face that the hill of sand built round him were the 
play of excit fanci only. By sheer forc he pin hi thought against 
thi fact: but further he could not get. there _were_ power at work; 
they were be stirred, waken somewher into activity. evoc had 
alreadi begun. that sens of their approach as he had walk along from 
helouan wa not imaginary. A descent of some type of life, vanish from 
the world too long for recollection, wa on the way,--so vast that it 
would manifest itself in a group of forms, a troop, a host, an army. 
these two were near him somewher at thi veri moment, alreadi long at 
work, their mind drive beyond thi littl world. the valley wa 
empti itself--for the descent of life their ritual invited. 

and the movement in the sand wa likewis true. He recal the 
sentenc the woman had used. "mi body," he reflected, "like the bodi 
life make use of everywhere, is mere upright heap of earth and dust 
and--sand. here in the desert is the raw material, the greatest store of 
it in the world." 

and on the heel of it came sharpli that other thing: that thi 
descend life would press into it servic all loos matter within it 
reach--to form that sphere of action which would be in a liter sens 
it body. 

In the first few seconds, as he stood there, he realis all this, and 
realis it with an overwhelm convict it wa futil to deny. the 
fast-empti valley would later brim with an unaccustom and terrif 
life. yet death hid there too--a little, ugly, insignific death. with 
the name of vanc it flash upon hi mind and vanished, too tini to be 
thought about in thi torrent of grander messag that shook the depth 
within hi soul. He bow hi head a moment, hardli know what he did. 
He could have wait thu a thousand year it seemed. He wa consciou 
of a wild desir to run away, to hide, to effac himself utterly, hi 
terror, hi curiosity, hi littl wonder, and not be seen of anything. 
but it wa all vain and foolish. the desert saw him. the gigant knew 
that he wa there. No escap wa possibl ani longer. caught by the 
sand, he stood amid etern things. the river of movement swept him too. 

these hills, now motionless as statues, would present glide forward 
into the cavalcade, sway like vessels, and go past with the procession. 
At present onli the contents, not the frame, of the wadi moved. An 
immens soft brush of moonlight swept it empti for what wa on the 
way.... but present the entir desert would stand up and also go. 

then, make a sideway movement, hi feet kick against someth soft 
and yield that lay heap upon the desert floor, and henriot 
discov the rug the arab boy had care set down befor he made 
full speed for the friendli light of helouan. the sound of hi 
depart footstep had long sinc die away. He wa alone. 

the detail restor to him hi conscious of the immedi present, 
and, stooping, he gather up the rug and overcoat and began to make 
prepar for the night. but the appoint spot, whenc he wa to 
watch, lay upon the summit of the opposit cliffs. He must cross the 
wadi bed and climb. slowli and with labour he made hi way down a steep 
cleft into the depth of the wadi hof, slide and stumbl often, till 
at length he stood upon the floor of shine moonlight. It wa veri 
smooth; windless utterly; still as space; each particl of sand lay in 
it ancient place asleep. the movement, it seemed, had ceased. 

He clamber next up the eastern side, through pitch-black shadows, and 
within the hour reach the ledg upon the top whenc he could see below 
him, like a silver map, the sweep of the valley bed. the wind nip 
keenli here again, come over the leagu of cool sand. loos 
boulder of splinter rock, start by hi climbing, crash and boom 
into the depths. He bank the rug behind him, wrap himself in hi 
overcoat, and lay down to wait. behind him wa a two-foot crumbl wall 
against which he leaned; in front a drop of sever hundr feet through 
space. He lay upon a platform, therefore, invis from the desert at 
hi back. below, the curv wadi form a natur amphitheatr in which 
each separ boulder fallen from the cliffs, and even the littl 
_silla_ shrub the camel eat, were plainli visible. He note all the 
bigger one among them. He count them over half aloud. 

and the move stream he had been unawar of when cross the bed 
itself, now began again. the wadi went rush past befor the broom of 
moonlight. again, the enorm and the tini combin in one singl 
strang impression. for, through thi concept of great movement, 
stir also a roving, delic touch that hi imagin felt as 
bird-like. behind the solid mass of the desert' immobl flash 
someth swift and light and airy. bizarr pictur interpret it to 
him, like rapid snap-shot of a huge fli panorama: he thought of 
dart dragon-fli seen at helouan, of children' littl danc feet, 
of twinkl butterflies--of birds. chiefly, yes, of a flock of bird in 
flight, whose separ unit form a singl entity. the idea of the 
group-soul possess hi mind onc more. but it came with a sens of 
more than curios or wonder. vener lay behind it, a vener 
touch with awe. It rose in hi deepest thought that here wa the first 
hint of a symbol representation. A symbol, sacr and inviolable, 
belong to some ancient worship that he half rememb in hi soul, 
stir toward interpret through all hi being. 

He lay there waiting, wonder vagu where hi two companion were, 
yet fear all vanish becaus he felt attun to a scale of thing too 
big to mate with definit dread. there wa high anticip in him, but 
not anxiety. Of himself, as felix henriot, indeed, he hardli seem 
aware. He wa some one else. or, rather, he wa himself at a stage he 
had known onc far, far away in a remot pre-existence. He watch 
himself from dim summit of a past, of which no further detail were as 
yet recoverable. 

pencil and sketching-block lay readi to hi hand. the moon rose higher, 
tuck the shadow ever more close against the precipices. the silver 
pass into a sheet of snowi whiteness, that made everi boulder clearli 
visible. solemn deepen everywher into awe. the wadi fled silent 
down the stream of hours. It wa almost empti now. and then, abruptly, 
he wa awar of change. the motion alter somewhere. It move more 
quietly; pace slackened; the end of the process that evacu the 
depth and length of it went trail past and turn the distant bend. 

"it' slow up," he whispered, as sure of it as though he had watch 
a regiment of soldier file by. the wind took off hi voic like a 
fli feather of sound. 

and there _was_ a change. It had begun. night and the moon stood still 
to watch and listen. the wind drop utterli away. the sand ceas it 
shift movement. the desert everywher stop still, and turned. 

some curtain, then, that for centuri had veil the world, drew 
softli up, leav a shade vista down which the eye of hi soul peer 
toward long-forgotten pictures. still buri by the sand too deep for 
full recovery, he yet perceiv dim portion of them--th onc 
honour and love passionately. for onc they had sure been to him 
the whole of life, not mere a fragment for cheap wonder to inspect. 
and they were curious familiar, even as the person of thi woman who 
now evok them wa familiar. henriot made no pretenc to more definit 
remembrance; but the haunt certainti rush over him, deeper than 
doubt or denial, and with such forc that he felt no effort to destroy 
it. some lost sweet of spiritu ambitions, live for with thi 
passion devotion, and passion worship as men to-day worship 
fame and money, reviv in him with a tempest of high glory. centr of 
memori stir from an age-long sleep, so that he could have wept at 
their so complet obliter hitherto. that such majesti had depart 
from the world as though it never had existed, wa a thought for 
desol and for tears. and though the littl fragment he wa about to 
wit might be crude in itself and incomplete, yet it wa part of a 
vast system that onc explor the richest realm of deity. the 
rever in him contain a holi of the night and of the stars; 
great, gentl awe lay in it too; for he stood, aflam with anticip 
and humility, at the gateway of sacr things. 

and thi wa the mood, no thrill of cheap excit or alarm to weaken 
in, in which he first becam awar that two spot of dark he had 
taken all along for boulder on the snowi valley bed, were actual 
someth veri different. they were live figures. they moved. It wa 
not the shadow slowli follow the moonlight, but the stir of human 
be who all these hour had been motionless as stone. He must have 
pass them unnot within a dozen yard when he cross the wadi bed, 
and a hundr time from thi veri ledg hi eye had sure rest on 
them without recognition. their minds, he knew full well, had not been 
inact as their bodies. the import part of the ancient ritual lay, 
he remembered, in the power of the evok mind. 

here, indeed, wa no effect nor theatric approach of the princip 
figures. It had noth in common with the cheap extern ceremoni of 
modern days. In forgotten power of the soul it grandeur lay, potent, 
splendid, true. long befor he came, perhap all through the day, these 
two had labour with their arduou preparations. they were there, part 
of the desert, when hour ago he had cross the plateau in the 
twilight. To them--to thi woman' potent work of old ceremonial--had 
been due that singular rush of imagin he had felt. He had 
interpret the desert as alive. here wa the explanation. It _was_ 
alive. life wa on the way. long latent, her intens desir summon it 
back to physic expression; and the effect upon him had steadili 
increas as he drew nearer to the centr where she would focu it 
reviv and return. those singular impress of be watch and 
accompani were explained. A priest of thi old-world worship perform 
a genuin evocation; a great one of vision reviv the cosmic powers. 

henriot watch the small figur far below him with a sens of dramat 
splendour that onli thi associ of far-off memori could account 
for. It wa their rise now, and the lift of their arm to form a 
slow revolv outline, that mark the abrupt cessat of the larger 
river of movement; for the sweep of the wadi sank into sudden 
stillness, and these two, with motion not unlik some danc of 
deliber solemnity, pass slowli through the moonlight to and fro. 
hi attent fix upon them both. all other movement ceased. they 
fasten the flow of time against the desert' body. 

what happen then? how could hi mind interpret an experi so long 
deni that the power of expression, as of comprehension, ha ceas to 
exist? how translat thi symbol representation, small detail though 
it was, of a transcend worship entomb for most so utterli beyond 
recovery? it splendour could never lodg in mind that conceiv deiti 
perch upon a cloud within telephon distanc of fashion 
churches. how should he phrase it even to himself, whose memori drew up 
pictur from so dim a past that the languag fit to frame them lay 
unreach and lost? 

henriot did not know. perhap he never yet ha known. certainly, at the 
time, he did not even tri to think. hi sensat remain hi 
own--untranslatable; and even that instinct descript the mind 
grope for automatically, floundered, halted, and stop dead. yet 
there rose within him somewhere, from depth long drown in slumber, a 
reviv power by which he saw, divin and recollected--rememb 
seem too liter a word--thes element of a worship he onc had 
person known. he, too, had worship thus. hi soul had move amid 
similar evoc in some aeonian past, whenc now the sand wa be 
clear away. symbol of stupend mean flash and went their way 
across the lift mists. He hardli caught their meaning, so long it wa 
since, he had known them; yet they were familiar as the face seen in 
dreams, and some hint of their spiritu signific left faint trace 
in hi heart by mean of which their grandeur reach toward 
interpretation. and all were symbol of a cosmic, deific nature; of 
power that onli symbol can express--prayer-book and sacrament use 
in the wisdom religion of an older time, but to-day known onli in the 
decrepit, liter shell which is their degradation. 

grandli the figur move across the valley bed. the power of the 
heavenli bodi onc more join them. they move to the measur of a 
cosmic dance, whose rhythm wa creative. the univers partner them. 

there wa thi transfigur of all common, extern things. He 
realis that appear were visibl letter of a soundless language, 
a languag he onc had known. the power of night and moon and desert 
sand marri with point in the fluid stream of hi inmost spiritu 
be that knew and welcom them. He understood. 

old egypt herself stoop down from her uncov throne. the star sent 
messengers. there wa commot in the secret, sandi place of the 
desert. for the desert had grown temple. column rear against the sky. 
there rose, from leagu away, the chant of the sand. 

the temples, where onc thi came to pass, were gone, their ruin 
question by alien heart that knew not their spiritu meaning. but 
here the entir desert swept in to form a shrine, and the majesti that 
onc wa egypt step grandli back across age of denial and neglect. 
the sand wa altar, and the star were altar lights. the moon lit up the 
vast recess of the ceiling, and the wind from a thousand mile brought 
in the perfum of her incense. for with that faith which shift 
mountain from their sandi bed, two passionate, believ soul invok 
the Ka of egypt. 

and the motion that they made, he saw, were definit harmoni 
pattern their dark figur trace upon the shine valley floor. like 
the point of compasses, with stem invisible, and direct from the 
sky, their movement mark the outlin of great signatur of 
power--th sigil of the type of life they would evoke. It would come as 
a procession. No individu outlin could contain it. It need for it 
visibl expression--many. the descent of a group-soul, known to the 
worship of thi mighti system, rose from it lair of centuri and move 
huge down upon them. the ka, answer to the summons, would mate with 
sand. the desert wa it body. 

yet it wa not thi that he had come to fix with block and pencil. not 
yet wa the moment when hi skill might be of use. He waited, watched, 
and listened, while thi river of half-rememb thing went past him. 
the pattern grew beneath hi eye like music. too intric and 
prolong to rememb with accuraci later, he understood that they were 
form of that root-geometri which lie behind all manifest life. the 
mould wa be trace in outline. life would present inform it. and a 
sing rose from the maze of line whose beauti wa like the beauti of 
the constellations. 

thi sound wa veri faint at first, but grew steadili in volume. 
although no echoes, properli speaking, were possible, these precipic 
caught stray note that troop in from the further sandi reaches. the 
figur certainli were chanting, but their chant wa not all he 
heard. other sound came to hi ear from far away, run past him 
through the air from everi side, and from incred distances, all 
flock down into the wadi bed to join the parent note that summon 
them. the desert wa give voice. and memory, lift her hood yet 
higher, show more of her grey, mysteri face that search hi soul 
with questions. had he so soon forgotten that strang union of form and 
sound which onc wa known to the evoc ritual of olden days? 

henriot tri patient to disentangl thi desert-mus that their 
inton voic woke, from the hum of the blood in hi own veins. 
but he succeed onli in part. sand wa alreadi in the air. there wa 
reverberation, rhythm, measure; there wa almost the break of the 
stream into great syllables. but wa it due, thi strang reverberation, 
to the countless particl of sand meet in mid-air about him, or--to 
larger bodies, whose surfac caught thi friction of the sand and threw 
it back against hi ears? the wind, now rising, brought particl that 
stung hi face and hands, and fill hi eye with a minut fine dust 
that partial veil the moonlight. but wa not someth larger, 
vaster these particl compos now also on the way? 

movement and sound and fli sand thu merg themselv more and more 
in a single, whirl torrent. but henriot sought no commonplac 
explan of what he witnessed; and here wa the proof that all 
happen in some vestibul of inner experi where the strain of 
question and answer had no business. one sit besid him need not 
have seen anyth at all. hi host, for instance, from helouan, need 
not have been aware. night screen it; helouan, as the whole of modern 
experience, stood in front of the screen. thi thing took place behind 
it. He crouch motionless, watch in some reconstruct ante-chamb 
of the soul' pre-existence, while the torrent grew into a verit 
tempest. 

yet night remain unshaken; the veil of moonlight did not quiver; the 
star drop their slender golden pillar unobstructed. calm 
reign everywher as before. the stupend represent pass on 
behind it all. 

but the digniti of the littl human movement that he watch had becom 
now indescribable. the gestur of the arm and bodi invest 
themselv with consumm grandeur, as these two strode into the 
cavern behind manifest life and drew forth symbol that repres 
vanish powers. the sound of their chant voic broke in cadenc 
fragment against the shore of language. the word henriot never 
actual caught, if word they were; yet he understood their 
purport--thes name of power to which the type of return life gave 
answer as they approached. He rememb fumbl for hi draw 
materials, with such violence, however, that the pencil snap in two 
between hi finger as he touch it. for now, even here, upon the outer 
fring of the ceremoni ground, there wa a stir of forc that set the 
veri muscl work in him befor he had becom awar of it.... 

then came the moment when hi heart leap against hi rib with a 
sudden violenc that wa almost pain, stand a second later still as 
death. the line upon the valley floor ceas their maze-lik dance. all 
movement stopped. sound die away. In the midst of thi profound and 
dread silenc the sigil lay empti there below him. they wait to be 
in-formed. for the moment of entranc had come at last. life wa close. 

and he understood whi thi return of life had all along suggest a 
process and could be no mere momentari flash of vision. from such 
appal distanc did it sweep down toward the present. 

upon thi network, then, of splendid lines, at length held rigid, the 
entir desert rear itself with wall of curtain sand, that dwarf 
the cliffs, the shoulder hills, the veri sky. the desert stood on 
end. As onc befor he had dream it from hi balconi windows, it rose 
upright, towering, and close against hi face. It built sudden rampart 
to the star that chamber the thing he wit behind wall no 
centuri could ever bring down crumbl into dust. 

He himself, in some curiou fashion, lay just outside, view it apart. 
As from a pinnacle, he peer within--p down with strain eye 
into the vast picture-galleri memori threw abruptli open. and the 
pictur space it nobl outlin thu against the veri stars. He gaze 
between columns, that support the sky itself, like pillar of sand 
that swept across the field of vanish years. sand pour and stream 
aside, lay bare the past. 

for down the enorm vista into which he gazed, as into an avenu 
run a million mile toward a tini point, he saw thi move thing 
that came toward him, shake loos the countless veil of sand the 
age had swath about it. the Ka of buri egypt waken out of sleep. 
she had heard the potent summon of her old, time-honour ritual. she 
came. she stretch forth an arm toward the worshipp who evok her. 
out of the desert, out of the leagu of sand, out of the immeasur 
wilder which wa her mummi form and body, she rose and came. and 
thi fragment of her he would actual see--thi littl portion that wa 
obedi to the stammer and broken ceremonial. the partial revel 
he would witness--yet so vast, even thi littl bit of it, that it came 
as a process and a host. 

for a moment there wa nothing. and then the voic of the woman rose in 
a resound cri that fill the wadi to it furthest precipices, befor 
it die away again to silence. that a human voic could produc such 
volume, accent, depth, seem half incredible. the wall of tower 
sand swallow it instantly. but the process of life, need a 
group, a host, an armi for it physic expression, reach at that 
moment the nearer end of the huge avenue. It touch the present; it 
enter the world of men. 




X 


the entir rang of henriot' experience, read, imagined, dreamed, then 
faint into unreal befor the sheer wonder of what he saw. In the 
brief interv it take to snap the finger the climax wa thu so 
hurriedli upon him. and, through it all, he wa clearli awar of the 
pair of littl human figures, man and woman, stand erect and 
command at the centre--knew, too, that she direct and controlled, 
while he in some secondari fashion support her--and ever watched. but 
both were dim, drop somewher into a lesser scale. It wa the 
knowledg of their presence, however, that alon enabl him to keep hi 
power in hand at all. but for these two _human_ be there within 
possibl reach, he must have close hi eye and swooned. 

for a tempest that seem to toss loos star about the sky swept round 
about him, pour up the pillar avenu in front of the procession. A 
blast of giant energy, of liberty, came through. forward and backwards, 
circl spiral about him like a whirlwind, came thi reviv of life 
that sought to dip itself onc more in matter and in form. It came to 
the accur out-lin of it form they had trace for it. He held hi 
mind steadi enough to realis that it wa akin to what men call a 
"descent" of some "spiritu movement" that waken a bodi of believ 
into faith--a race, an entir nation; onli that he experienc it in 
thi brief, concentr form befor it ha scatter down into ten 
thousand hearts. here he knew it sourc and essence, behind the veil. 
crudely, unmanag as yet, he felt it, rush loos behind 
appearances. there wa thi amaz impact of a twisting, swing forc 
that storm down as though it would bend and coil the veri rib of the 
old stubborn hills. It sought to warm them with the stress of it own 
irresist life-stream, to beat them into shape, and make pliabl 
their obstin resistance. through all thing the impuls pour and 
spread, like fire at white heat. 

yet noth visibl came as yet, no alter in the actual landscape, 
no sign of chang in thing familiar to hi eyes, while impetu thu 
fought against inertia. He perceiv noth form-al. calm and untouch 
himself, he lay outsid the circl of evocation, watching, waiting, 
scarc dare to breathe, yet well awar that ani minut the scene 
would transfer itself from memori that wa subject to matter that wa 
objective. 

and then, in a flash, the bridg wa built, and the transfer wa 
accomplished. how or where he did not see, he could not tell. It wa 
there befor he knew it--ther befor hi normal, earthli sight. He saw 
it, as he saw the hand he wa hold stupidli up to shield hi face. 
for thi terrif releas of forc long held back, long store up, 
latent for centuries, came pour down the empti wadi bed prepar for 
it reception. through stone and sand and boulder it came in an 
impetu hurrican of power. the liber of it life appal him. 
all that wa free, untied, respond instantli like chaff; loos object 
fled toward it; there wa a yield in the hill and precipices; and 
even in the mass of desert which provid their foundation. the hing 
of the sand went creak in the night. It shape for itself a bodili 
outline. 

yet, most strangely, noth definit moved. how could he express the 
violent contradiction? for the immobl wa appar only--a sham, a 
counterfeit; while behind it the essenti _being_ of these thing did 
rush and shift and alter. He saw the two thing side by side: the outer 
immobl the sens commonli agre upon, _and_ thi amaz flying-out 
of their inner, invis substanc toward the vortex of attract 
life that suck them in. for stubborn matter turn docil befor the 
stress of thi return life, taught somewher to be plastic. It wa 
be mould into an approach to bodili outline. A mobil elast 
invad rigid substance. the two offici human beings, safe at the 
stationari centre, and himself, just outsid the circl of operation, 
alon remain untouch and unaffected. but a few feet in ani 
direction, for ani one of them, meant--instantan death. they would 
be absorb into the vortex, mere corpuscl press into the servic of 
thi sphere of action of a mighti body.... 

how these percept reach him with such conviction, henriot could 
never say. He knew it, becaus he _felt_ it. someth fell about him 
from the sky that alreadi pale toward the dawn. the star themselves, 
it seemed, contribut some part of the terrific, flow impuls that 
conquer matter and shape itself thi physic expression. 

then, befor he wa abl to fashion ani preconceiv idea of what 
visibl form thi potent life might assume, he wa awar of further 
change. It came at the briefest possibl interv after the 
beginning--thi certainti that, to and fro about him, as yet howev 
indeterminate, pass magnitud that were stupend as the desert. 
there wa beauti in them too, though a terribl beauti hardli of thi 
earth at all. A fragment of old egypt had returned--a littl portion of 
that vast bodi of belief that onc wa egypt. evok by the worship of 
one human heart, passion sincere, the Ka of egypt step back to 
visit the materi it onc informed--th sand. 

yet onli a portion came. henriot clearli realis that. It stretch 
forth an arm. find no mass of worshipp through whom it might 
express itself completely, it press inanim matter thu into it 
service. 

here wa the begin the woman had spoken of--littl open clue. 
entir reconstruct lay perhap beyond. 

and henriot next realis that these magnitud in which thi 
group-energi sought to cloth itself as visibl form, were curious 
familiar. It wa not a new thing that he would see. boom softli as 
they drop downward through the sky, with a motion the size of them 
render delusive, they troop up the avenu toward the central point 
that summon them. He realis the giant flock of them--desc of 
fear beauty--outlin a type of life deni to the world for ages, 
countless as thi sand that blew against hi skin. career over the 
wast of desert move the armi of dark splendours, that dwarf ani 
organ structur call a bodi men have ever known. He recognis them, 
cold in him of death, though the outlin rear higher than the 
pyramids, and tower up to hide whole group of stars. yes, he 
recognis them in their partial revelation, though he never saw the 
monstrou host complete. but, one of them, he realised, pose it 
etern riddl to the sands, had of old been glimps suffici to 
seiz it form in stone,--yet poorli seized, as a doll may stand for the 
digniti of a human be or a child' toy repres an engin that draw 
trains.... 

and he knelt there on hi narrow ledge, the world of men forgotten. the 
power that caught him wa too great a thing for wonder or for fear; he 
even felt no awe. sensat of ani kind that can be name or realis 
left him utterly. He forgot himself. He mere watched. the glori numb 
him. block and pencil, as the reason of hi presenc there at all, no 
longer existed.... 

yet one small link remain that held him to some kind of conscious 
of earthli things: he never lost sight of this--that, be just outsid 
the circl of evocation, he wa safe, and that the man and woman, be 
stationari in it untouch centre, were also safe. but--that a movement 
of six inch in ani direct meant for ani one of them instant death. 

what wa it, then, that suddenli strengthen thi solitari link so that 
the chain tauten and he felt the pull of it? henriot could not say. He 
came back with the rush of a descend drop to the realisation--dimly, 
vaguely, as from great distance--that he wa with these two, now at thi 
moment, in the wadi hof, and that the cold of dawn wa in the air about 
him. the chill breath of the desert made him shiver. 

but at first, so deepli had hi soul been dip in thi fragment of 
ancient worship, he could rememb noth more. somewher lay a littl 
spot of street and houses; it name escap him. He had onc been 
there; there were mani people, but insignific people. who were they? 
and what had he to do with them? all recent memori had been drown in 
the tide that flood him from an immeasur past. 

and who were they--thes two beings, stand on the white floor of sand 
below him? for a long time he could not recov their names. yet he 
rememb them; and, thu rob of associ that name bring, he 
saw them for an instant naked, and knew that one of them wa evil. one 
of them wa vile. black touch the pictur there. the man, hi name 
still out of reach, wa sinister, impur and dark at the heart. and for 
thi reason the evoc had been partial only. the admixtur of an 
evil motiv wa the flaw that mar complet success. 

the name then flash upon him--ladi statham--richard 
vance. 

vance! with a horrid drop from splendour into someth mean 
and sordid, henriot felt the pain of it. the motiv of the man wa 
so insignificant, hi purpos so atrocious. more and more, with the 
name, came back--hi first repugnance, fear, suspicion. and human 
terror caught him. He shrieked. but, as in nightmare, no sound escap 
hi lips. He tri to move; a wild desir to interfere, to protect, 
to prevent, flung him forward--clos to the dizzi edg of the 
gulf below. but hi muscl refus obedi to the will. the 
paralysi of common fear root him to the rocks. 

but the sudden chang of focu instantli destroy the picture; 
and so vehement wa the fall from glori into meanness, that it disloc 
the machineri of clairvoy vision. the inner percept 
cloud and grew dark. outer and inner mingl in violent, inextric 
confusion. the wrench seem almost physical. It happen 
all at once, retreat and continu for a moment somehow combined. 
and, if he did not definit see the aw thing, at least he 
wa awar that it had come to pass. He knew it as posit as 
though hi eye were glu against a magnifi len in the still 
of some laboratory. He wit it. 

the suprem moment of evoc wa close. life, through that 
aw sandi vortex, whirl and raged. loos particl shower 
and pelted, caught by the draught of vehement life that mould the 
substanc of the desert into imperi outline--when, suddenly, shot 
the littl evil thing across that mar and blast it. 

into the whirlpool flew forward a particl of materi that wa a 
human being. and the group-soul caught and use it. 

the actual accomplish henriot did not claim to see. He wa 
a witness, but a wit who could give no evidence. whether the 
woman wa push of set intention, or whether some detail of 
sound and pattern wa fals use to effect the terribl result, he 
wa helpless to determine. He pretend no itemis account. she 
went. In one second, with appal swiftness, she disappeared, 
swallow out of space and time within that aw maw--on littl 
corpuscl among a million through which the life, now stalk the 
desert wastes, mould itself a troop-lik body. sand took her. 

there follow emptiness--a hush of unutter silence, stillness, 
peace. movement and sound instantli retir whenc they 
came. the avenu of memori closed; the splendour all went 
down into their sandi tombs.... 

* * * * * 

the moon had sunk into the libyan wilderness; the eastern sky wa 
red. the dawn drew out that wondrou sweet of the desert, 
which is as sister to the sweet that the moonlight brings. the 
desert settl back to sleep, huge, unfathomable, charg to the 
brim with life that watches, waits, and yet conceal itself behind 
the ruin of appar desolation. and the wadi, empti at hi feet, 
fill slowli with the gentl littl wind that bring the sunrise. 

then, across the pale glimmer of sand, henriot saw a figur 
moving. It came quickli toward him, yet unsteadily, and with a 
hurri that wa ugly. vanc wa on the way to fetch him. and the 
horror of the man' approach struck him like a hammer in the face. 
He close hi eyes, sink back to hide. 

but, befor he swooned, there reach him the clatter of the 
murderer' tread as he began to climb over the splinter rocks, and 
the faint echo of hi voice, call him by name--fals and in 
pretence--for help. 


the end 


[transcriber' note: In chapter IX of the stori sand, the 
word "indescriable" wa correct to "indescribable."] 







end of project gutenberg' four weird tales, by algernon blackwood 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook four weird tale *** 

***** thi file should be name 16726.txt or 16726.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/7/2/16726/ 

produc by suzann shell, geetu melwani and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
