the project gutenberg ebook of the book of were-wolves, by sabin baring-gould 

copyright law are chang all over the world. Be sure to check the 
copyright law for your countri befor download or redistribut 
thi or ani other project gutenberg ebook. 

thi header should be the first thing seen when view thi project 
gutenberg file. pleas do not remov it. Do not chang or edit the 
header without written permission. 

pleas read the "legal small print," and other inform about the 
ebook and project gutenberg at the bottom of thi file. includ is 
import inform about your specif right and restrict in 
how the file may be used. you can also find out about how to make a 
donat to project gutenberg, and how to get involved. 


**welcom To the world of free plain vanilla electron texts** 

**ebook readabl By both human and By computers, sinc 1971** 

*****these ebook were prepar By thousand of volunteers!***** 


title: the book of were-wolv 

author: sabin baring-gould 

releas date: march, 2004 [ebook #5324] 
[yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule] 
[thi file wa first post on juli 1, 2002] 

edition: 10 

language: english 


*** start OF the project gutenberg ebook, the book OF were-wolv *** 




scan and proofread by john B. hare for sacred-texts.com 
januari 2002 

orign html version at 
http://www.sacred-texts.com/goth/bow/index.htm 


prepar for project gutenberg by curti weyant 
june 2002 


[note: greek text is in curli braces, i.e., {}.] 

[note: ital have been indic by an underscor charact befor and 
after the italic text. for example, _thi is italic text_.] 






the book OF were-wolv 

by sabin baring-gould 


content 



chapter I 

introductori 

chapter II 

lycanthropi among the ancient 

definit of lycanthropy--marcellu 
sidetes--virgil--herodotus--ovid--pliny--agriopas--stori from 
petronius--arcadian legends--explan offer 

chapter iii 

the were-wolf IN the north 

nors traditions--mann in which the chang wa effected--vlundar 
kvda--inst from the völsung saga--hrolf' saga--kraka--faroës 
poem--helga kvida--vatnsdæla saga--eyrbyggja saga 

chapter IV 

the origin OF the scandinavian were-wolf 

advantag of the studi of nors literature--bear and wolf-skin 
dresses--th berserkir--their rage--th stori of thorir--passag from 
the aigla--th even wolf--skallagrim and hi son-deriv of the 
word "hamr:" of "vargr"--law affect outlaws--"to becom a 
boar"--recapitul 

chapter V 

the were-wolf IN the middl age 

stori from olau magnu of livonian were-wolves--stori from bishop 
majolus--stori of albertu pericofcius--similar occurr at 
prague--saint patrick--strang incid relat by john of 
nüremberg--bisclaveret--courland were-wolves--pierr vidal--pavian 
lycanthropist--bodin' stories--forestus' account of a 
lycanthropist--neapolitan were-wolf 

chapter VI 

A chapter OF horror 

pierr bourgot and michel verdung--'m hermit of S. bonnot--th 
gandillon family--thievenn paget--th tailor of châlons--roulet 69 

chapter vii 

jean grenier 

On the sand-dunes--a wolf attack marguerit poirier--jean grenier 
brought to trial--hi confessions--charg of cannib proved--hi 
sentence--behaviour in the monastery--visit of del'ancr 85 

chapter viii 

folk-lor relat TO were-wolv 

barren of english folk-lore--devonshir traditions--deriv of 
were-wolf--cannib in scotland--th angu robber--th carl of 
perth--french superstitions--norwegian traditions--danish tale of 
were-wolves--holstein stories--th werewolf in the netherlands--among 
the greeks; the serbs; the white russians; the poles; the russians--a 
russian receipt for becom a were-wolf--th bohemian 
vlkodlak--armenian story--indian tales--abyssinian budas--american 
transform tales--a slovakian household tale--similar greek, 
béarnais, and iceland tale 

chapter IX 

natur caus OF lycanthropi 

innat cruelty--it three forms--dumollard--andrea bichel--a dutch 
priest--oth instanc of inher cruelty--cruelti unit to 
refinement--a hungarian bather in blood--sudden with which the 
passion is developed--cannibalism; in pregnant women; in 
maniacs--hallucination; how produced--salves--th stori of 
lucius--self-decept 130 

chapter X 

mytholog origin OF the were-wolf myth 

metempsychosis--sympathi between men and beasts--finnbog and the 
bear--osag and the beaver--th connexion of soul and 
body--buddism--cas of mr. holloway--popular idea concern the 
body--th deriv of the german leichnam--feath 
dresses--transmigr of souls--a basqu story--stori from the 
pantschatantra--savag idea regard natur phenomena--thunder, 
lightning, and cloud--th origin of the dragon--john of bromton' 
dragon a waterspout--th legend of typhoeus--allegor of the 
effect of a hurricane--anthropomorphosis--th cirru cloud, a 
heavenli swan--urvaci--th storm-cloud a daemon--vritra and 
rakschasas--stori of a brahmin and a rakschasa 

chapter XI 

the maréchal DE rezt I: the investig OF charg 

introduction--histori of gill de laval--th castl of 
machecoul--surrend of the marshal--examin of witnesses--lett 
of De retz--th duke of brittani reluct to move--th bishop of 
nant 

chapter xii 

the maréchal DE rezt ii: the trial 

the appear of the marshal--pierr de l'hospital--th 
requisition--th trial adjourned--meet of the marshal and hi 
servants--th confess of henriet--pont persuad to confess 
all--th adjourn trial not hurri on--th hesit of the duke of 
brittani 

chapter xiii 

maréchal DE retz iii: the sentenc and execut 

the adjourn trial--th marshal confesses--th case hand over to 
the ecclesiast tribunal--prompt step taken by the bishop--th 
sentence--ratifi by the secular court--th execut 

chapter xiv 

A galician were-wolf 

the inhabit of austrian galicia--th hamlet of polomyja--summ 
even in the forest--th beggar swiatek--a girl disappears--a 
school-boy vanishes--a servant-girl lost--anoth boy carri of--th 
discoveri made by the publican of polomyja--swiatek lock up--brought 
to dabkow--commit suicid 

chapter XV 

anomal case--th human hyena 

ghouls--stori from fornari--quot from apuleius--incid 
mention by marcassus--cemeteri of pari violated--discoveri of 
violator--confess of M. bertrand 

chapter xvi 

A sermon ON were-wolv 

the discours of dr. johann--th sermon--remark 




the book OF were-wolves. 





chapter I. 

introductory. 


I shall never forget the walk I took one night in vienne, after have 
accomplish the examin of an unknown druidic relic, the pierr 
labie, at La rondelle, near champigni. I had learn of the exist 
of thi cromlech onli on my arriv at champigni in the afternoon, and 
I had start to visit the curios without calcul the time it 
would take me to reach it and to return. suffic it to say that I 
discov the vener pile of grey stone as the sun set, and that 
I expend the last light of even in plan and sketching. I 
then turn my face homeward. My walk of about ten mile had weari 
me, come at the end of a long day' posting, and I had lame myself 
in scrambl over some stone to the gaulish relic. 

A small hamlet wa at no great distance, and I betook myself thither, 
in the hope of hire a trap to convey me to the posthouse, but I wa 
disappointed. few in the place could speak french, and the priest, 
when I appli to him, assur me that he believ there wa no better 
convey in the place than a common charru with it solid wooden 
wheels; nor wa a ride hors to be procured. the good man offer to 
hous me for the night; but I wa oblig to decline, as my famili 
intend start earli on the follow morning. 

out spake then the mayor--"monsieur can never go back to-night across 
the flats, becaus of the--the--" and hi voic dropped; "the 
loups-garoux." 

"he say that he must return!" repli the priest in patois. "but who 
will go with him?" 

"ah, ha,! M. le curé. It is all veri well for one of us to accompani 
him, but think of the come back alone!" 

"then two must go with him," said the priest, and you can take care of 
each other as you return." 

"picou tell me that he saw the were-wolf onli thi day se'nnight," 
said a peasant; "he wa down by the hedg of hi buckwheat field, and 
the sun had set, and he wa think of come home, when he heard a 
rustl on the far side of the hedge. He look over, and there stood 
the wolf as big as a calf against the horizon, it tongu out, and it 
eye glare like marsh-fires. mon dieu! catch me go over the 
marai to-night. why, what could two men do if they were attack by 
that wolf-fiend?" 

"it is tempt providence," said one of the elder of the village;" 
no man must expect the help of god if he throw himself wil in 
the way of danger. Is it not so, M. le curé? I heard you say as much 
from the pulpit on the first sunday in lent, preach from the 
gospel." 

"that is true," observ several, shake their heads. 

"hi tongu hang out, and hi eye glare like marsh-fires!" said 
the confid of picou. 

"mon dieu! if I met the monster, I should run," quoth another. 

"I quit believ you, cortrez; I can answer for it that you would," 
said the mayor. 

"a big as a calf," threw in picou' friend. 

"if the loup-gar were _only_ a natur wolf, whi then, you see"--th 
mayor clear hi throat--"you see we should think noth of it; but, 
M. le curé, it is a fiend, a wors than fiend, a man-fiend,--a wors 
than man-fiend, a man-wolf-fiend." 

"but what is the young monsieur to do?" ask the priest, look from 
one to another. 

"never mind," said I, who had been quietli listen to their patois, 
which I understood. "never mind; I will walk back by myself, and if I 
meet the loup-gar I will crop hi ear and tail, and send them to M. 
le mair with my compliments." 

A sigh of relief from the assembly, as they found themselv clear of 
the difficulty. 

"il est anglais," said the mayor, shake hi head, as though he meant 
that an englishman might face the devil with impunity. 

A melancholi flat wa the marais, look desol enough by day, but 
now, in the gloaming, tenfold as desolate. the sky wa perfectli 
clear, and of a soft, blue-grey tinge; illumin by the new moon, a 
curv of light approach it western bed. To the horizon reach a 
fen, black with pool of stagnant water, from which the frog kept 
up an incess trill through the summer night. heath and fern cover 
the ground, but near the water grew dens mass of flag and bulrush, 
amongst which the light wind sigh wearily. here and there stood a 
sandi knoll, cap with firs, look like black splash against the 
grey sky; not a sign of habit anywhere; the onli trace of men 
be the white, straight road extend for mile across the fen. 

that thi district harbour wolv is not improbable, and I confess 
that I arm myself with a strong stick at the first clump of tree 
through which the road dived. 

thi wa my first introduct to were-wolves, and the circumst of 
find the superstit still so prevalent, first gave me the idea of 
investig the histori and the habit of these mythic creatures. 

I must acknowledg that I have been quit unsuccess in obtain a 
specimen of the animal, but I have found it trace in all directions. 
and just as the palæontologist ha construct the labyrinthodon out 
of it foot-print in marl, and one splinter of bone, so may thi 
monograph be complet and accurate, although I have no chain 
were-wolf befor me which I may sketch and describ from the life. 

the trace left are inde numer enough, and though perhap like 
the dodo or the dinormis, the werewolf may have becom extinct in our 
age, yet he ha left hi stamp on classic antiquity, he ha trodden 
deep in northern snows. ha ridden rough-shod over the mediævals, and 
ha howl amongst orient sepulchres. He belong to a bad breed, 
and we are quit content to be freed from him and hi kindred, the 
vampir and the ghoul. yet who knows! We may be a littl too hasti in 
conclud that he is extinct. He may still prowl in abyssinian 
forests, rang still over asiat steppes, and be found howl 
dismal in some pad room of a hanwel or a bedlam. 

In the follow page I design to investig the notic of 
were-wolv to be found in the ancient writer of classic antiquity, 
those contain in the northern sagas, and, lastly, the numer 
detail afford by the mediæv authors. In connect with thi I 
shall give a sketch of modern folklor relat to lycanthropy. 

It will then be seen that under the veil of mytholog lie a solid 
reality, that a float superstit hold in solut a posit 
truth. 

thi I shall show to be an innat crave for blood implant in 
certain natures, restrain under ordinari circumstances, but break 
forth occasionally, accompani with hallucination, lead in most 
case to cannibalism. I shall then give instanc of person thu 
afflicted, who were believ by others, and who believ themselves, 
to be transform into beasts, and who, in the paroxysm of their 
madness, commit numer murders, and devour their victims. 

I shall next give instanc of person suffer from the same passion 
for blood, who murder for the mere gratif of their natur 
cruelty, but who were not subject to hallucinations, nor were addict 
to cannibalism. 

I shall also give instanc of person fill with the same 
propens who murder and ate their victims, but who were 
perfectli free from hallucination. 



chapter ii. 

lycanthropi among the ancients. 


what is lycanthropy? the chang of manor woman into the form of a 
wolf, either through magic means, so as to enabl him or her to 
gratifi the tast for human flesh, or through judgment of the god in 
punish for some great offence. 

thi is the popular definition. truli it consist in a form of 
madness, such as may be found in most asylums. 

among the ancient thi kind of insan went by the name of 
lycanthropy, kuanthropy, or boanthropy, becaus those afflict with 
it believ themselv to be turn into wolves, dogs, or cows. but in 
the north of europe, as we shall see, the shape of a bear, and in 

africa that of a hyæna, were often select in preference. A mere 
matter of taste! accord to marcellu sidetes, of whose poem {greek 
_perì lukanðrw'pou_} a fragment exists, men are attack with thi 
mad chiefli in the begin of the year, and becom most furiou 
in february; retir for the night to lone cemeteries, and live 
precis in the manner of dog and wolves. 

virgil write in hi eighth eclogue:-- 

ha herbas, atqu hæc ponto mihi lecta venena 
ips dedit mris; nascuntur plurima ponto. 
hi ego sæpe lupum fieri et se conducer sylvi 
mrim, sæpe anima imi excir sepulchris, 
atqu sata alio, vidi traducer messes. 

and herodotus:--"it seem that the neuri are sorcerers, if one is to 
believ the scythian and the greek establish in scythia; for each 
neurian chang himself, onc in the year, into the form of a wolf, 
and he continu in that form for sever days, after which he resum 
hi former shape."--(lib. iv. c. 105.) 

see also pomponiu mela (lib. ii. c. 1) "there is a fix time for 
each neurian, at which they change, if they like, into wolves, and 
back again into their former condition." 

but the most remark stori among the ancient is that relat by 
ovid in hi "metamorphoses," of lycaon, king of arcadia, who, 
entertain jupit one day, set befor him a hash of human flesh, to 
prove hi omniscience, whereupon the god transfer him into a 
wolf:-- [1] 

[1. ovid. met. i. 237; pausanias, viii. 2, § 1; tzetz _ad lycoph._ 
481; eratosth. _catas._ i. 8.] 

In vain he attempt to speak; from that veri instant 
hi jaw were besplutt with foam, and onli he thirst 
for blood, as he rage amongst flock and pant for slaughter. 
hi vestur wa chang into hair, hi limb becam crooked; 
A wolf,--h retain yet larg trace of hi ancient expression, 
hoari he is as afore, hi counten rabid, 
hi eye glitter savag still, the pictur of fury. 

plini relat from evanthes, that on the festiv of jupit lycæus, 
one of the famili of antæu wa select by lot, and conduct to the 
brink of the arcadian lake. He then hung hi cloth on a tree and 
plung into the water, whereupon he wa transform into a wolf. nine 
year after, if he had not tast human flesh, he wa at liberti to 
swim back and resum hi former shape, which had in the meantim 
becom aged, as though he had worn it for nine years. 

agriopa relates, that demænetus, have assist at an arcadian human 
sacrific to jupit lycæus, ate of the flesh, and wa at onc 
transform into a wolf, in which shape he prowl about for ten 
years, after which he recov hi human form, and took part in the 
olymp games. 

the follow stori is from petronius:-- 

"mi master had gone to capua to sell some old clothes. I seiz the 
opportunity, and persuad our guest to bear me compani about five 
mile out of town; for he wa a soldier, and as bold as death. We set 
out about cockcrow, and the moon shone bright as day, when, come 
among some monuments. my man began to convers with the stars, whilst 
I jog along sing and count them. present I look back 
after him, and saw him strip and lay hi cloth by the side of the 
road. My heart wa in my mouth in an instant, I stood like a corpse; 
when, in a crack, he wa turn into a wolf. don't think i'm joking: I 
would not tell you a lie for the finest fortun in the world. 

"but to continue: after he wa turn into a wolf, he set up a howl 
and made straight for the woods. At first I did not know whether I wa 
on my head or my heels; but at last go to take up hi clothes, I 
found them turn into stone. the sweat stream from me, and I never 
expect to get over it. melissa began to wonder whi I walk so late. 
'had you come a littl sooner,' she said, 'you might at least have 
lent us a hand; for a wolf broke into the farm and ha butcher all 
our cattle; but though be got off, it wa no laugh matter for him, 
for a servant of our ran him through with a pike. hear thi I 
could not close an eye; but as soon as it wa daylight, I ran home 
like a pedlar that ha been eas of hi pack. come to the place 
where the cloth had been turn into stone, I saw noth but a pool 
of blood; and when I got home, I found my soldier lie in bed, like 
an ox in a stall, and a surgeon dress hi neck. I saw at onc that 
he wa a fellow who could chang hi skin (_versipellis_), and never 
after could I eat bread with him, no, not if you would have kill me. 
those who would have taken a differ view of the case are welcom to 
their opinion; if I tell you a lie, may your genii confound me!" 

As everi one knows, jupit chang himself into a bull; hecuba becam 
a bitch; actæon a stag; the comrad of ulyss were transform into 
swine; and the daughter of prtu fled through the field believ 
themselv to be cows, and would not allow ani one to come near them, 
lest they should be caught and yoked. 

S. augustin declared, in hi _de civit dei_, that he knew an old 
woman who wa said to turn men into ass by her enchantments. 

apuleiu ha left us hi charm romanc of the _golden ass_, in 
which the hero, through injudici use of a magic salve, is 
transform into that long-ear animal. 

It is to be observ that the chief seat of lycanthropi wa arcadia, 
and it ha been veri plausibl suggest that the caus might he 
trace to the follow circumstance:--th nativ were a pastor 
people, and would consequ suffer veri sever from the attack 
and depred of wolves. they would natur institut a sacrific 
to obtain deliver from thi pest, and secur for their flocks. 
thi sacrific consist in the offer of a child, and it wa 
institut by lycaon. from the circumst of the sacrific be 
human, and from the peculiar of the name of it originator, rose 
the myth. 

but, on the other hand, the stori is far too wide spread for us to 
attribut it to an accident origin, or to trace it to a local 
source. 

half the world believes, or believ in, were-wolves, and they were 
suppos to haunt the norwegian forest by those who had never 
remot been connect with arcadia: and the superstit had 
probabl struck deep it root into the scandinavian and teuton 
minds, age befor lycaon existed; and we have onli to glanc at 
orient literature, to see it as firmli engraft in the imagin 
of the easterns. 



chapter iii. 

the were-wolf IN the north. 


In norway and iceland certain men were said to be _eigi einhamir_, not 
of one skin, an idea which had it root in paganism. the full form of 
thi strang superstit was, that men could take upon them other 
bodies, and the natur of those be whose bodi they assumed. the 
second adopt shape wa call by the same name as the origin 
shape, _hamr_, and the express made use of to design the 
transit from one bodi to another, wa at _skipta hömum_, or _at 
hamaz_; whilst the expedit made in the second form, wa the hamför. 
By thi transfigur extraordinari power were acquired; the 
natur strength of the individu wa doubled, or quadrupled; he 
acquir the strength of the beast in whose bodi he travelled, in 
addit to hi own, and a man thu invigor wa call _hamrammr_. 

the manner in which the chang wa effected, varied. At times, a dress 
of skin wa cast over the body, and at onc the transform wa 
complete; at others, the human bodi wa deserted, and the soul enter 
the second form, leav the first bodi in a catalept state, to all 
appear dead. the second hamr wa either borrow or creat for 
the purpose. there wa yet a third manner of produc thi effect-it 
wa by incantation; but then the form of the individu remain 
unaltered, though the eye of all behold were charm so that they 
could onli perceiv him under the select form. 

have assum some bestial shape, the man who is _eigi einhammr_ is 
onli to be recogn by hi eyes, which by no power can be changed. 
He then pursu hi course, follow the instinct of the beast whose 
bodi he ha taken, yet without quench hi own intelligence. He is 
abl to do what the bodi of the anim can do, and do what he, as man, 
can do as well. He may fli or swim, if be is in the shape of bird or 
fish; if he ha taken the form of a wolf, or if he goe on a 
_gandreið_, or wolf's-ride, he is fall of the rage and malign of 
the creatur whose power and passion he ha assumed. 

I will give a few instanc of each of the three method of chang 
bodi mention above. freyja and frigg had their falcon dress in 
which they visit differ region of the earth, and loki is said to 
have borrow these, and to have then appear so precis like a 
falcon, that he would have escap detection, but for the malici 
twinkl of hi eyes. In the vælundar kviða is the follow passage:-- 

I. I. 

meyjar flugu sunnan from the south flew the maiden 
myrkvið igögnum athwart the gloom, 
alvitr unga alvit the young, 
orlög drýgja; To fix destinies; 
þær á savarströnd they on the sea-strand 
settusk at hvilask, sat them to rest, 
dró sir suðrnar these damsel of the south 
dýrt lín spunnu. fair linen spun. 

ii. ii. 

ein nam þeirra one of them took 
egil at verja egil to press, 
fögr mær fíra fair maid, in her 
faðmi ljósum; dazzl arms. 
önnur var svanhvít, anoth wa svanhwit, 
svanfjaðrar dró; who wore swan feathers; 
En in þriðja and the third, 
þeirra systir their sister, 
var i hvítan press the white 
hál völundar. neck of vlund. 

the introduct of smund tell us that these charm young ladi 
were caught when they had laid their swan-skin besid them on the 
shore, and were consequ not in a condit to fly. 

In like manner were wolves' dress used. the follow curiou 
passag is from the wild saga of the völsungs:-- 

"it is now to be told that sigmund thought sinfjötli too young to help 
him in hi revenge, and he wish first to test hi powers; so dure 
the summer they plung deep into the wood and slew men for their 
goods, and sigmund saw that he wa quit of the völsung stock. . . . 
now it fell out that as they went through the forest, collect 
monies, that they light on a hous in which were two men sleeping, 
with great gold ring an them; they had deal with witchcraft, for 
wolf-skin hung up in the hous abov them; it wa the tenth day on 
which they might come out of their second state. they were kings' 
sons. sigmund and sinfjötli got into the habits, and could not get out 
of them again, and the natur of the origin beast came over them, 
and they howl as wolves--they learn "both of them to howl. now 
they went into the forest, and each took hi own course; they made the 
agreement togeth that they should tri their strength against as mani 
as seven men, but not more, and. that he who wa ware of strife should 
utter hi wolf' howl. 

"'do not fail in this,' said sigmund, 'for you are young and daring, 
and men would be glad to chase you.' now each went hi own course; and 
after that they had part sigmund found men, so he howled; and when 
sinfjötli heard that, he ran up and slew them all-then they separated. 
and sinfjötli had not been long in the wood befor he met with. eleven 
men; he fell upon them and slew them everi one. then he wa tired, so 
he flung himself under an oak to rest. Up came sigmund and said, 'whi 
did you not call out?' sinfjötli replied, 'what wa the need of ask 
your help to kill eleven men?' 

"sigmund flew at him and rent him so that he fell, for he had bitten 
through hi throat. that day they could not leav their wolf-forms. 
sigmund laid him on hi back and bare him home to the hall, and sat 
besid him, and said, 'deuc take the wolf-forms!"'--völsung saga, c. 
8. 

there is anoth curiou stori of a were-wolf in the same saga, which 
I must relate. 

"now he did as she requested, and hew down a great piec of timber, 
and cast it across the feet of those ten brother seat in a row, in 
the forest; and there they sat all that day and on till night. and at 
midnight there came an old she-wolf out of the forest to them, as they 
sat in the stocks, and she wa both huge and grimly. now she fell upon 
one of them, and bit him to death, and after she had eaten him all up, 
she went away. and next morn signi sent a trusti man to her 
brothers, to know how it had fare with them. when he return he told 
her of the death of one, and that griev her much, for she fear it 
might fare thu with them all, and she would be unabl to assist them. 

"in short, nine night follow came the same she-wolf at midnight, 
and devour them one after anoth till all were dead, except 
sigmund, and he wa left alone. So when the tenth night came, signi 
sent her trusti man to sigmund, her brother, with honey in hi hand, 
and said that he wa to smear it over the face of sigmund, and to fill 
hi mouth with it. now he went to sigmund, and did as he wa bid, 
after which he return home. and dure the night came the same 
she-wolf, as wa her wont, and reckon to devour him, like hi 
brothers. 

"now she snuf at him, where the honey wa smeared, and began to 
lick hi face with her tongue, and present thrust her tongu into 
hi mouth. He bore it ill, and bit into the tongu of the she-wolf; 
she sprang up and tri to break loose, set her feet against the 
stock, so as to snap it asunder: but he held firm, and rip the 
tongu out by the roots, so that it wa the death of the wolf. It is 
the opinion of some men that thi beast wa the mother of king 
siggeir, and that she had taken thi form upon her through devilri and 
witchcraft."--(c. 5.) 

there is anoth stori bear on the subject in the hrolf saga 
kraka, which is pretty; it is as follows:-- 

"in the north of norway, in upland-dales, reign a king call hring; 
and he had a son name björn. now it fell out that the queen died, 
much lament by the king, and by all. the peopl advis him to marri 
again, and so be sent men south to get him a wife. A gale and fierc 
storm fell upon them, so that they had to turn the helm, and run 
befor the wind, and so they came north to finnmark, where they spent 
the winter. one day they went inland, and came to a hous in which sat 
two beauti women, who greet them well, and inquir whenc they 
had come. they repli by give an account of their journey and their 
errand, and then ask the women who they were, and whi they were 
alone, and far from the haunt of men, although they were so come 
and engaging. the elder replied--that her name wa ingibjorg, and that 
her daughter wa call hvit, and that she wa the finn king' 
sweetheart. the messeng decid that they would return home, if 
hvit would come with them and marri king hring. she agreed, and they 
took her with them and met the king who wa pleas with her, and had 
hi wed feast made, and said that he care not though she wa not 
rich. but the king wa veri old, and that the queen soon found out. 

"there wa a carl who had a farm not far from the king' dwelling; he 
had a wife, and a daughter, who wa but a child, and her name wa 
bera; she wa veri young and lovely. björn the king' son, and bera 
the carle' daughter, were wont, as children, to play together, and 
they love each other well. the carl wa well to do, he had been out 
harri in hi young days, and he wa a doughti champion. björn and 
bera love each other more and more, and they were often together. 

time passed, and noth worth relat occurred; but björn, the 
king' son, wax strong and tall; and he wa well skill in all 
manli exercises. 

"king hring wa often absent for long, harri foreign shores, and 
hvit remain at home and govern the land. she wa not like of the 
people. she wa alway veri pleasant with björn, but he care littl 
for her. It fell out onc that the king hring went abroad, and he 
spake with hi queen that björn should remain at home with her, to 
assist in the government, for he thought it advisable, the queen be 
haughti and inflat with pride. 

"the king told hi son björn that he wa to remain at home, and rule 
the land with the queen; björn repli that he dislik the plan, and 
that he had no love for the queen; but the king wa inflexible, and 
left the land with a great following. björn walk home after hi 
convers with the king, and went up to hi place, ill-pleas and 
red as blood. the queen came to speak with him, and to cheer him; and 
spake friendli with him, but he bade her be of. she obey him that 
time. she often came to talk with him, and said how much pleasant it 
wa for them to be together, than to have an old fellow like hring in 
the house. 

"björn resent thi speech, and struck her a box in the ear, and bade 
her depart, and he spurn her from him. she repli that thi wa 
ill-don to drive and thrust her away: and 'you think it better, 
björn, to sweetheart a carle' daughter, than to have my love and 
favour, a fine piec of condescens and a disgrac it is to you! 
but, befor long, someth will stand in the way of your fancy, and 
your folly.' then she struck at him with a wolf-skin glove, and said, 
that he should becom a rabid and grim wild bear; and 'you shall eat 
noth but your father' sheep, which you shall slay for your food, 
and never shall you leav thi state.' 

after that, björn disappeared, and none knew what had becom of him; 
and men sought but found him not, as wa to be expected. We must now 
relat how that the king' sheep were slaughtered, half a score at a 
time, and it wa all the work of a grey bear, both huge and grimly. 

"one even it chanc that the carle' daughter saw thi savag bear 
come toward her, look tenderli at her, and she fanci that she 
recogn the eye of björn, the king' son, so she made a slight 
attempt to escape; then the beast retreated, but she follow it, till 
she came to a cave. now when she enter the cave there stood befor 
her a man, who greet bera, the carle' daughter; and she recogn 
him, for he wa björn, hring' son. overjoy were they to meet. So 
they were togeth in the cave awhile, for she would not part from him 
when she had the chanc of be with him; but he said that thi wa 
not proper that she should be there by him, for by day he wa a beast, 
and by night a man. 

"hring return from hi harrying, and he wa told the news, of what 
had taken place dure hi absence; how that björn, hi son, had 
vanished, and also, how that a monstrou beast wa up the country, and 
wa destroy hi flocks. the queen urg the king to have the beast 
slain, but he delay awhile. 

"one night, as bera and björn were together, he said to 
her:--'methink to-morrow will be the day of my death, for they will 
come out to hunt me down. but for myself I care not, for it is littl 
pleasur to live with thi charm upon me, and my onli comfort is that 
we are together; but now our union must be broken. I will give you the 
ring which is under my left hand. you will see the troop of hunter 
to-morrow come to seek me; and when I am dead go to the king, and 
ask him to give you what is under the beast' left front leg. He will 
consent.' 

"he spoke to her of mani other things, till the bear' form stole over 
him, and he went forth a bear. she follow him, and saw that a great 
bodi of hunter had come over the mountain ridges, and had a number of 
dog with them. the bear rush away from the cavern, but the dog and 
the king' men came upon him, and there wa a desper struggle. He 
weari mani men befor he wa brought to bay, and had slain all the 
dogs. but now they made a ring about him, and he rang around it., 
but could see no mean of escape, so he turn to where the king 
stood, and he seiz a man who stood next him, and rent him asunder; 
then wa the bear so exhaust that he cast himself down flat, and, at 
once, the men rush in upon him and slew him. the carle' daughter 
saw this, and she went up to the king, and said,--'sire! wilt thou 
grant me that which is under the bear' left fore-shoulder?' the king 
consented. By thi time hi men had nearli flay the bear; bera went 
up and pluck away the ring, and kept it, but none saw what she took, 
nor had they look for anything. the king ask her who she was, and 
she gave a name, but not her true name. 

"the king now went home, and bera wa in hi company. the queen wa 
veri joyous, and treat her well, and ask who she was; but bera 
answer as before. 

"the queen now made a great feast, and had the bear' flesh cook for 
the banquet. the carle' daughter wa in the bower of the queen, and 
could not escape, for the queen had a suspicion who she was. then she 
came to bera with a dish, quit unexpectedly, and on it wa bear' 
flesh, and she bade bera eat it. she would not do so. 'here is a 
marvel!' said the queen; 'you reject the offer which a queen herself 
deign to make to you. take it at once, or someth wors will befal 
you.' she bit befor her, and she ate of that bite; the queen cut 
anoth piece, and look into her mouth; she saw that one littl 
grain of the bite had gone down, but bera spat out all the rest from 
her mouth, and said she would take no more, though she were tortur 
or killed. 

"'mayb you have had sufficient,' said the queen, and she 
laughed."--(hrolf saga kraka, c. 24-27, condensed.) 

In the faroës song of finnur hin friði, we have the follow 
verse:-- 
hegar íð finnur hetta sær. when thi peril finn saw, 
mannspel var at meini, that witchcraft did him harm, 
skapti hann seg í varglíki: then he chang himself into a were-wolf: 

hann feldi allvæl fleiri. He slew mani thus. 

the follow is from the second kviða of helga hundingsbana (stroph. 
31):-- 

may the blade bite, 
which thou brandishest 
onli on thyself, 
when it chime on thi head. 
then aveng will be 
the death of helgi, 
when thou, as a wolf, 
wanderest in the woods, 
know nor fortun 
nor ani pleasure, 
hay no meat, 
save rive of corpses. 

In all these case the chang is of the form: we shall now come to 
instanc in which the person who is chang ha a doubl shape, and 
the soul anim one after the other. 

the ynglinga saga (c. 7) say of odin, that "he chang form; the 
bodi lay as though sleep or dead, but he wa a bird or a beast, a 
fish, or a woman, and went in a twinkl to far distant lands, do 
hi own or other people' business." In like manner the danish king 
harold sent a warlock to iceland in the form of a whale, whilst hi 
bodi lay stiff and stark at home. the alreadi quot saga of hrolf 
krake give us anoth example, where bödvar bjarki, in the shape of a 
huge bear, fight desper with the enemy, which ha surround the 
hall of hi king, whilst hi human bodi lie drunkenli besid the 
ember within. 

In the vatnsdæla saga, there is a curiou account of three finns, who 
were shut up in a hut for three nights, and order by ingimund, a 
norwegian chief, to visit iceland and inform him of the lie of the 
country, where he wa to settle. their bodi becam rigid, and they 
sent their soul the errand, and, on their awak at the end of three 
days, gave an accur descript of the vatnsdal, in which ingimund 
wa eventu to establish himself. but the saga doe not relat 
whether these finn project their soul into the bodi of bird or 
beasts. 

the third manner of transform mentioned, wa that in which the 
individu wa not chang himself, but the eye of other were 
bewitched, so that they could not detect him, but saw him onli under a 
certain form. Of thi there are sever exampl in the sagas; as, for 
instance, in the hromundar saga greypsonar, and in the fostbræðra 
saga. but I will translat the most curious, which is that of odd, 
katla' son, in the eyrbyggja saga.--(c. 20.) 

"geirrid, housewif in mafvahlið, sent word into bolstad, that she wa 
ware of the fact that odd, katla' son, had hewn off aud' hand. 

"now when thorarinn and arnkel heard that, they rode from home with 
twelv men. they spent the night in mafvahlið, and rode on next 
morn to holt: and odd wa the onli man in the house. 

"katla sat on the high seat spin yarn, and she bade odd sit besid 
her; also, she bade her women sit each in her place, and hold their 
tongues. 'for,' said she, 'I shall do all the talking.' now when 
arnkel and hi compani arrived, they walk straight in, and when 
they came into the chamber, katla greet arnkell, and ask the news. 
He repli that there wa none, and he inquir after odd. katla said 
that he had gone to breidavik. 'we shall ransack the hous though,' 
quoth arnkell. 'be it so,' repli katla, and she order a girl to 
carri a light befor them, and unlock the differ part of the 
house. all they saw wa katla spin yarn off her distaff. now they 
search the house, but find no odd, so they depart. but when they had 
gone a littl way from the garth, arnkel stood still and said: 'how 
know we but that katla ha hoodwink us, and that the distaff in her 
hand wa noth more than odd.' 'not impossible!' said thorarinn; 
'let us turn back.' they did so; and when those at holt raw that they 
were returning, katla said to her maids, 'sit still in your places, 
odd and I shall go out.' 

"now as they approach the door, she went into the porch, and began 
to comb and clip the hair of her son odd. arnkel came to the door and 
saw where katla was, and she seem to be stroke her goat, and 
disentangl it mane and beard and smooth it wool. So he and hi 
men went into the house, but found not odd. katla' distaff lay 
against the bench, so they thought that it could not have been odd, 
and they went away. however, when they had come near the spot where 
they had turn before, arnkel said, 'think you not that odd may have 
been in the goat' form?' 'there is no saying,' repli thorarinn; 
'but if we turn back we will lay hand on katla.' 'we can tri our luck 
again,' quoth arnkell; 'and see what come of it.' So they returned. 

"now when they were seen on their way back, katla bade odd follow her; 
and she lea him to the ash-heap, and told him to lie there and not to 
stir on ani account. but when arnkell, and hi men came to the farm, 
they rush into the chamber, and saw katla seat in her place, 
spinning. she greet them and said that their visit follow with 
rapidity. arnkel repli that what she said wa true. hi comrad 
took the distaff and cut it in twain. 'come now!' said katla, 'you 
cannot say, when you get home, that you have done nothing, for you 
have chop up my distaff.' then arnkel and the rest hunt high and 
low for odd, but could not find him; inde they saw noth live 
about the place, besid a boar-pig which lay under the ash-heap, so 
they went away onc more. 

"well, when they got half-way to mafvahlið, came geirrid to meet them, 
with her workmen. 'they had not gone the right way to work in seek 
odd,' she said, 'but she would help them.' So they turn back again. 
geirrid had a blue cloak on her. now when the parti wa seen and 
report to katla, and it wa said that they were thirteen in number, 
and one had on a colour dress, katla exclaimed, 'that troll geirrid 
is come! I shall not be abl to throw a glamour over their eye ani 
more.' she start up from her place and lift the cushion of the 
seat, and there wa a hole and a caviti beneath: into thi she thrust 
odd, clap the cushion over him, and sat down, say she felt sick 
at heart. 

"now when they came into the room, there were small greetings. geirrid 
cast of her the cloak and went up to katla, and took the seal-skin bag 
which she had in her hand, and drew it over the head of katla. [1] 
then geirrid bade them break up the seat. they did so, and found odd. 
him they took and carri to buland' head, where they hang him. . . 
. but katla they stone to death under the headland." 

[1. A precaut against the "evil eye." compar _gisla saga 
surssonnar_, p. 34. _laxdæla saga_, cc. 37, 38.] 



chapter iv. 

the origin OF the scandinavian were-wolf. 


one of the great advantag of the studi of old nors or iceland 
literatur is the insight given by it into the origin of world-wid 
superstitions. nors tradit is transpar as glacier ice, and it 
origin is as unmistakable. 

mediæv mythology, rich and gorgeous, is a compound like corinthian 
brass, into which mani pure ore have been fused, or it is a full 
turbid river drawn from numer feeders, which had their sourc in 
remot climes. It is a blend of primæval keltic, teutonic, 
scandinavian, italic, and arab traditions, each ad a beauty, each 
yield a charm, bat each accret render the analysi more 
difficult. 

pacciuchelli says:--"th anio flow into the tiber; pure as crystal it 
meet the tawni stream, and is lost in it, so that there is no more 
anio, but the unit stream is all tiber." So is it with each 
tributari to the tide of mediæv mythology. the moment it ha blend 
it water with the great and onward roll flood, it is imposs 
to detect it with certainty; it ha swollen the stream, but ha lost 
it own identity. If we would analys a particular myth, we must not 
go at onc to the bodi of mediæv superstition, but strike at one of 
the tributari befor it absorption. thi we shall proceed to do, 
and in select nors mythology, we come upon abund material, 
point natur to the spot whenc it ha been derived, as glacial 
morain indic the direct which they have taken, and point to 
the mountain whenc they have fallen. It will not be difficult for us 
to arriv at the origin of the northern belief in were-wolves, and the 
data thu obtain will be use in assist us to elucid much 
that would otherwis prove obscur in mediæv tradition. 

among the old norse, it wa the custom for certain warrior to dress 
in the skin of the beast they had slain, and thu to give themselv 
an air of ferocity, calcul to strike terror into the heart of 
their foes. 

such dress are mention in some sagas, without there be ani 
supernatur qualiti attach to them. for instance, in the njála 
there is mention of a man _i geitheðni_, in goatskin dress. much in 
the same way do we hear of harold harfagr have in hi compani a band 
of berserkir, who were all dress in wolf-skins, _ulfheðnir_, and 
thi expression, wolf-skin coated, is met with as a man' name. thu 
in the holmverja saga, there is mention of a björn, "son of 
_ulfheðin_, wolfskin coat, son of _ulfhamr_, wolf-shaped, son of 
_ulf_, wolf, son of _ulfhamr_, wolf-shaped, who could chang forms." 

but the most conclus passag is in the vatnsdæla saga, and is as 
follows:--"thos berserkir who were call _ulfheðnir_, had got 
wolf-skin over their mail coats" (c. xvi.) In like manner the word 
_berserkr_, use of a man possess of superhuman powers, and subject. 
to access of diabol fury, wa origin appli to one of those 
doughti champion who went about in bear-sarks, or habit made of 
bear-skin over their armour. I am well awar that björn halldorson' 
deriv of berserkr, bare of sark, or destitut of clothing, ha 
been hitherto gener received, but sveibjörn egilsson, an 
indisput authority, reject thi deriv as untenable, and 
substitut for it that which I have adopted. 

It may be well imagin that a wolf or a bear-skin would make a warm 
and comfort great-coat to a man, whose manner of live requir 
him to defi all weathers, and that the dress would not onli give him 
an appear of grim and ferocity, like to produc an 
unpleas emot in the breast of a foe, but also that the thick fur 
might prove effectu in deaden the blow rain on him in 
conflict. 

the berserkr wa an object of avers and terror to the peac 
inhabit of the land, hi avoc be to challeng quiet 
countri farmer to singl combat. As the law of the land stood in 
norway, a man who declin to accept a challenge, forfeit all hi 
possessions, even to the wife of hi bosom, as a poltroon unworthi of 
the protect of the law, and everi item of hi properti pass into 
the hand of hi challenger. the berserkr accordingli had the unhappi 
man at hi mercy. If he slew him, the farmer' possess becam his, 
and if the poor fellow declin to fight, he lost all legal right to 
hi inheritance. A berserkr would invit himself to ani feast, and 
contribut hi quota to the hilar of the entertainment, by snap 
the backbone, or cleav the skull, of some merrymak who incur 
hi displeasure, or whom he might singl out to murder, for no other 
reason than a desir to keep hi hand in practice. 

It may well be imagin that popular superstit went along with the 
popular dread of these wolf-and-bear-skin rovers, and that they 
were believ to be endu with the force, as they certainli were with 
the ferocity, of the beast whose skin they wore. 

nor would superstit stop there, but the imagin of the 
trembl peasant would speedili invest these unscrupul disturb 
of the public peac with the attribut hitherto appropri to 
troll and jötuns. 

the incid mention in the völsung saga, of the sleep men be 
found with their wolf-skin hang to the wall abov their heads, is 
divest of it improbability, if we regard these skin as worn over 
their armour, and the marvel in the whole stori is reduc to a 
minimum, when we suppos that sigmund and sinfjötli stole these for 
the purpos of disguis themselves, whilst they live a life of 
violenc and robbery. 

In a similar manner the stori of the northern "beauti and beast," in 
hrolf' saga kraka, is render less improbable, on the supposit 
that björn wa live as an outlaw among the mountain fast in a 
bearskin dress, which would effectu disguis him--_al but hi 
eyes_--which would gleam out of the socket in hi hideou visor, 
unmistak human. hi veri name, björn, signifi a bear; and these 
two circumst may well have invest a kernel of histor fact 
with all the romanc of fable; and if divest of these supernatur 
embellishments, the stori would resolv itself into the veri simpl 
fact of there have been a king hring of the updales, who wa at 
varianc with hi son, and whose son took to the woods, and live a 
berserkr life, in compani with hi mistress, till he wa captur and 
slain by hi father. 

I think that the circumst insist on by the saga-writers, of the 
eye of the person remain unchanged, is veri significant, and 
point to the fact that the skin wa mere drawn over the bodi as a 
disguise. 

but there wa other ground for superstit to fasten on the 
berserkir, and invest them with supernatur attributes. 

No fact in connect with the histori of the northmen is more firmli 
established, on reliabl evidence, than that of the berserkr rage 
be a speci of diabol possession. the berserkir were said to 
work themselv up into a state of frenzy, in which a demoniac power 
came over them, impel them to act from which in their sober 
sens they would have recoiled. they acquir superhuman force, and 
were as invulner and as insens to pain as the jansenist 
convulsionist of S. medard. No sword would wound them, no fire would 
barn them, a club alon could destroy them, by break their bones, 
or crush in their skulls. their eye glare as though a flame 
burn in the sockets, they ground their teeth, and froth at the 
mouth; they gnaw at their shield rims, and are said to have 
sometim bitten them through, and as they rush into conflict they 
yelp as dog or howl as wolves. [1] 

[1. hic (syraldus) septem filio habebat, tanto veneficiorum usu 
callentes, ut sæpe subiti furori viribu instincti soler ore 
torvum infremere, scuta morsibu attrectare, torrida fauc pruna 
absumere, extructa quævi incendia penetrare, nec posset concepti 
dementiæ motu alio remedii gener quam aut vinculorum injurii aut 
cædi humanæ piaculo temperari. tantam illi rabiem site sævitia 
ingenii sive furiaram ferocita inspirabat.--_saxo gramm_. vii.] 

accord to the unanim testimoni of the old nors historians, the 
berserkr rage wa extinguish by baptism, and as christian 
advanced, the number of these berserkir decreased. 

but it must not be suppos that thi mad or possess came onli 
on those person who predispos themselv to be attack by it; 
other were afflict with it, who vainli struggl against it 
influence, and who deepli lament their own liabil to be seiz 
with these terribl access of frenzy. such wa thorir ingimund' 
son, of whom it is said, in the _vatnsdæla saga_, that "at time there 
came over thorir berserkr fits, and it wa consid a sad misfortun 
to such a man, as they were quit beyond control." 

the manner in which he wa cure is remarkable; point as it doe to 
the crave in the heathen mind for a better and more merci 
creed:-- 

"thorgrim of kornsá had a child by hi concubin vereydr, and, by 
order of hi wife, the child wa carri out to perish. 

"the brother (thorsteinn and thorir) often met, and it wa now the 
turn of thorsteinn to visit thorir, and thorir accompani him 
homeward. On their way thorsteinn ask thorir which he thought wa 
the first among the brethren; thorir answer that the repli wa easy, 
for 'you are abov us all in discret and talent; jökull is the best 
in all peril adventures, but i,' he added, 'I am the least worth of 
us brothers, becaus the berserkr fit come over me, quit against my 
will, and I wish that you, my brother, with your shrewdness, would 
devis some help for me.' 

"thorsteinn said,--'i have heard that our kinsman, thorgrim, ha just 
suffer hi littl babe to be carri out, at the instig of hi 
wife. that is ill done. I think also that it is a grievou matter for 
you to be differ in natur from other men.' 

"thorir ask how he could obtain releas from hi afflict . . . . 
then said thorsteinn, 'now will I make a vow to him who creat the 
sun, for I ween that he is most abl to take the ban of you, and I 
will undertak for hi sake, in return, to rescu the babe and to 
bring it up for him, till He who creat man shall take it to 
himself-for thi I reckon He will do!' after thi they left their 
hors and sought the child, and a thrall of thorir had found it near 
the marram river. they saw that a kerchief had been spread over it 
face, but it had rumpl it up over it nose; the littl thing wa all 
but dead, but they took it up and flit it home to thorir' house, 
and he brought the lad up, and call him thorkel rumple; as for the 
berserkr fits, they came on him no more." (c. 37) 

but the most remark passag bear on our subject will be found 
in the _aigla_. 

there wa a man, ulf (the wolf) by name, son of bjálfi and hallbera. 
ulf wa a man so tall and strong that the like of him wa not to be 
seen in the land at that time. and when he wa young he wa out vike 
expedit and harri . . . He wa a great land proprietor. It 
wa hi wont to rise early, and to go about the men' work, or to the 
smithies, and inspect all hi good and hi acres; and sometim he 
talk with those men who want hi advice; for he wa a good 
adviser, he wa so clear-headed; however, everi day, when it drew 
toward dusk, he becam so savag that few dare exchang a word with 
him, for he wa given to doze in the afternoon. 

"peopl said that he wa much given to chang form (_hamrammr_), so 
he wa call the evening-wolf, _kveldúlfr_."--(c. 1.) In thi and the 
follow passages, I do not consid _hamrammr_ to have it primari 
signif of actual transformation, but simpli to mean subject to 
fit of diabol possession, under the influenc of which the bodili 
power were greatli exaggerated. I shall translat pretti freeli from 
thi most interest saga, as I consid that the descript given 
in it of kveldulf in hi fit greatli elucid our subject. 

"kveldulf and skallagrim got news dure summer of an expedition. 
skallagrim. wa the keenest-sight of men, and he caught sight of the 
vessel of hallvard and hi brother, and recogn it at once. He 
follow their cours and mark the haven into which they enter at 
even. then he return to hi company, and told kveldulf of what he 
had seen . . . . then they busk them and got readi both their boats; 
in each they put twenti men, kveldulf steer one and skallagrim the 
other, and they row in quest of the ship. now when they came to the 
place where it was, they lay to. hallvard and hi men had spread an 
awn over the deck, and were asleep. now when kveldulf and hi parti 
came upon them, the watcher who were seat at the end of the bridg 
sprang up and call to the peopl on board to wake up, for there wa 
danger in the wind. So hallvard and hi men sprang to arms. then came 
kveldulf over the bridg and skallagrim with him into the ship. 
kveldulf had in hi hand a cleaver, and he bade hi men go through the 
vessel and hack away the awning. but he press on to the 
quarter-deck. It is said the were-wolf fit came over him and mani of 
hi companions. they slow all the men who were befor them. skallagrim 
did the same as he went round the vessel. He and hi father paus not 
till they had clear it. now when kveldulf came upon the quarter-deck 
he rais hi cleaver, and smote hallvard through helm and head, so 
that the haft wa buri in the flesh; but he drag it to him so 
violent that he whisk hallvard into the air., and flung him 
overboard. skallagrim clear the forecastl and slew sigtrygg. mani 
men flung themselv overboard, but skallagrim' men took to the boat 
and row about, kill all they found. thu perish hallvard with 
fifti men. skallagrim and hi parti took the ship and all the good 
which had belong to hallvard . . . and flit it and the ware to 
their own vessel, and then exchang ships, lade their capture, but 
quit their own. after which they fill their old ship with 
stones, brake it up and sank it. A good breez sprang up, and they 
stood out to sea. 

It is said of these men in the engag who were were-wolves, or 
those on whom came the berserkr rage, that as long as the fit wa on 
them no one could oppos them, they were so strong; but when it had 
pass off they were feebler than usual. It wa the same with kveldulf 
when the were-wolf fit went off him--h then felt the exhaust 
consequ on the fight, and he wa so complet 'done up,' that he 
wa oblig to take to hi bed." 

In like manner skallagrim had hi fit of frenzy, take after hi 
amiabl father. 

"thord and hi companion were oppos to skallagrim in the game, and 
they were too much for him, he wearied, and the game went better with 
them. but at dusk, after sunset, it went wors with egil and thord, 
for skallagrim becam so strong that he caught up thord and cast him 
down, so that he broke hi bones, and that wa the death of him. then 
he caught at egill. thorgerd brák wa the name of a servant of 
skallagrim, who had been foster-moth to egill. she wa a woman of 
great stature, strong as a man and a bit of a witch. brák 
exclaimed,--'skallagrim! are you now fall upon your son?' (hamaz þú 
at syni þínum). then skallagrim let go hi hold of egil and clutch 
at her. she start asid and fled. skallagrim. followed. they ran out 
upon digraness, and she sprang off the headland into the water. 
skallagrim cast after her a huge stone which struck her between the 
shoulders, and she never rose after it. the place is now call brak' 
sound."--(c. 40.) 

let it be observ that in these passag from the _aigla_, the word 
að hamaz, hamrammr, &c. are use without ani intent of convey 
the idea of a chang of bodili shape, though the word taken liter 
assert it. for they are deriv from _hamr_, a skin or habit; a word 
which ha it repres in other aryan languages, and is 
therefor a primit word express of the skin of a beast. 

the sanskrit ### _carmma_; the hindustane ### _cam_, hide or skin; 
and ### _camra_, leather; the persian ### _game_, clothing, disguise; 
the gothic _ham_ or _hams_, skin; and even the italian _camicia_, and 
the french _chemise_, are cognat words. [1] 

[1. I shall have more to say on thi subject in the chapter on the 
mytholog of lycanthropy.] 

It seem probabl accordingli that the verb _að hamaz_ wa first 
appli to those who wore the skin of savag animals, and went about 
the countri as freebooters; but that popular superstit soon 
invest them with supernatur powers, and they were suppos to 
assum the form of the beast in whose skin they were disguised. the 
verb then acquir the signific "to becom a were-wolf, to chang 
shape." It did not stop there, but went through anoth chang of 
meaning, and wa final appli to those who were afflict with 
paroxysm of mad or demoniac possession. 

thi wa not the onli word connect with were-wolv which help on 
the superstition. the word _vargr_, a wolf, had a doubl significance, 
which would be the mean of origin mani a were-wolf story. 
_vargr_ is the same as _u-argr_, restless; _argr_ be the same as 
the anglo-saxon _earg_. _vargr_ had it doubl signif in norse. 
It signifi a wolf, and also a godless man. thi _vargr_ is the 
english _were_, in the word were-wolf, and the _garou_ or _varou_ in 
french. the danish word for were-wolf is _var-ulf_, the gothic 
_vaira-ulf_. In the _roman de garin_, it is "leu warou, sanglant 
beste." In the _vie de S. hildefons_ by gauthier de coinsi,-- 

cil lon desve, cil lou garol, 
Ce sunt deable, que saul 
Ne puent estr de no mordre. 

here the loup-gar is a devil. the anglo-saxon regard him as an 
evil man: _wearg_, a scoundrel; gothic _varys_, a fiend. but veri 
often the word meant no more than an outlaw. pluquet in hi _cont 
populaires_ tell us that the ancient norman law said of the 
crimin condemn to outlawri for certain offences, _wargu esto_: 
be an outlaw! 

In like manner the lex ripuaria, tit. 87, "wargu sit, hoe est 
expulsus." In the law of canute, he is call verevulf. (_lege 
canuti_, schmid, i. 148.) and the salic law (tit. 57) orders: "si qui 
corpu jam sepultum effoderit, aut expoliaverit, _wargus_ sit." "if 
ani one shall have dug up or despoil an alreadi buri corpse, let 
him be a varg." 

sidoniu apollinaris. says, "unam feminam quam fort _vargorum_, hoc 
enim nomin indigena latrunculo nuncupant," as though the common 
name by which those who live a freeboot life were designated, wa 
varg. 

In like manner palgrav assur us in hi _rise and progress of the 
english commonwealth_, that among the anglo, saxon an _utlagh_, or 
out-law, wa said to have the head of a wolf. If then the term _vargr_ 
wa appli at one time to a wolf, at anoth to an outlaw who live 
the life of a wild beast, away from the haunt of men "he shall be 
driven away as a wolf, and chase so far as men chase wolv 
farthest," wa the legal form of sentence--it is certainli no matter 
of wonder that stori of out-law should have becom surround with 
mythic account of their transform into wolves. 

but the veri idiom of the nors wa calcul to foster thi 
superstition. the iceland had curiou express which are 
suffici like to have produc misconceptions. 

[1. sidoniu apollinaris: opera, lib. vi. ep. 4.] 

snorri not onli relat that odin chang himself into anoth form, 
but he add that by hi spell he turn hi enemi into boars. In 
precis the same manner doe a hag, ljot, in the vatnsdæla saga, say 
that she could have turn thorsteinn and jökull into boar to run 
about with the wild beast (c. xxvi.); and the express _verða at 
gjalti_, or at _gjöltum_, to becom a boar, is frequent met with in 
the sagas. 

"thereupon came thorarinn and hi men upon them, and nagli led the 
way; but when he saw weapon drawn he wa frightened, and ran away up 
the mountain, and becam a boar. . . . and thorarinn and hi men took 
to run, so as to help nagli, lest he should tumbl off the cliff into 
the sea" (eyrbyggja saga, c. xviii.) A similar express occur in 
the gisla saga surssonar, p. 50. In the hrolf saga kraka, we meet 
with a troll in boar' shape, to whom divin honour are paid; and in 
the kjalnessinga saga, c. xv., men are liken to boars--"then it 
began to fare with them as it fare with boar when they fight each 
other, for in the same manner drop their foam." the true 
signif of _verða at gjalti_ is to be in such a state of fear as 
to lose the senses; but it is suffici peculiar to have given rise 
to superstiti stories. 

I have dwelt at some length on the northern myth rel to 
were-wolv and anim transformations, becaus I have consid the 
investig of these all-import toward the elucid of the 
truth which lie at the bottom of mediæv superstition, and which is 
nowher so obtain as through the nors literature. As may be seen 
from the passag quot abov at length, and from an examin of 
those mere refer to, the result arriv at is pretti conclusive, 
and may be sum up in veri few words. 

the whole superstructur of fabl and romanc rel to 
transform into wild beasts, repos simpli on thi basi of 
truth--that among the scandinavian nation there exist a form of 
mad or possession, under the influenc of which men act as 
though they were chang into wild and savag brutes, howling, foam 
at the mouth, raven for blood and slaughter, readi to commit ani 
act of atrocity, and as irrespons for their action as the wolv 
and bears, in whose skin they often equip themselves. 

the manner in which thi fact becam invest with supernatur 
adjunct I have also point out, to wit, the chang in the 
signific of the word design the madness, the doubl mean 
of the word _vargr_, and abov all, the habit and appear of the 
maniacs. We shall see instanc of berserkr rage reappear in the 
middl ages, and late down into our own times, not exclus in the 
north, but throughout france, germany, and england, and instead of 
reject the account given by chronicl as fabulous, becaus there 
is much connect with them which seem to be fabulous, we shall be 
abl to refer them to their true origin. 

It may be accept as an axiom, that no superstit of gener 
accept is destitut of a foundat of truth; and if we discov 
the myth of the were-wolf to be wide spread, not onli throughout 
europe, but through the whole world, we may rest assur that there is 
a solid core of fact, round which popular superstit ha 
crystallized; and that fact is the exist of a speci of madness, 
dure the access of which the person afflict believ himself to 
be a wild beast, and act like a wild beast. 

In some case thi mad amount appar to posit possession, 
and the diabol act into which the possess is impel are so 
horrible, that the blood curdl in read them, and it is imposs 
to recal them without a shudder. 



chapter V. 

the were-wolf IN the middle-ages. 


olau magnu relat that--"in prussia, livonia, and lithuania, 
although the inhabit suffer consider from the rapac of 
wolv throughout the year, in that these anim rend their cattle, 
which are scatter in great number through the woods, whenev they 
stray in the veri least, yet thi is not regard by them as such a 
seriou matter as what they endur from men turn into wolves. 

"on the feast of the nativ of christ, at night, such a multitud of 
wolv transform from men gather togeth in a certain spot, 
arrang among themselves, and then spread to rage with wondrou 
feroc against human beings, and those anim which are not wild, 
that the nativ of these region suffer more detriment from these, 
than they do from true and natur wolves; for when a human habit 
ha been detect by them isol in the woods, they besieg it with 
atrocity, strive to break in the doors, and in the event of their 
do so, they devour all the human beings, and everi anim which is 
found within. they burst into the beer-cellars, and there they empti 
the tun of beer or mead, and pile up the empti cask one abov 
anoth in the middl of the cellar, thu show their differ 
from natur and genuin wolves. . . . between lithuania, livonia, and 
courland are the wall of a certain old ruin castle. At thi spot 
congreg thousands, on a fix occasion, and tri their agil in 
jumping. those who are unabl to bound over the wall, as; is often the 
case with the fattest, are fallen upon with scourg by the captain 
and slain." [1] olau relat also in c. xlvii. the stori of a 
certain nobleman who wa travel through a larg forest with some 
peasant in hi retinu who dabbl in the black art. they found no 
hous where they could lodg for the night, and were well-nigh 
famished. then one of the peasant offered, if all the rest would hold 
their tongu as to what he should do, that he would bring them a lamb 
from a distant flock. 

[1. olau magnus: _historia de vent. septent_. basil. 15, lib. xviii. 
cap. 45.] 

He thereupon retir into the depth of the forest and chang hi 
form into that of a wolf, fell upon the flock, and brought a lamb to 
hi companion in hi mouth. they receiv it with gratitude. then he 
retir onc more into the thicket, and transform himself back again 
into hi human shape. 

the wife of a nobleman in livonia express her doubt to one of her 
slave whether it were possibl for man or woman thu to chang shape. 
the servant at onc volunt to give her evid of the 
possibility. He left the room, and in anoth moment a wolf wa 
observ run over the country. the dog follow him, and 
notwithstand hi resistance, tore out one of hi eyes. next day the 
slave appear befor hi mistress blind of an eye. 

bp. majolu [1] and caspar peucer [2] relat the follow 
circumst of the livonians:-- 

[1. majoli _episc. vulturoniensi dier. canicul._ helenopolis, 1612, 
tom. ii. colloq. 3.] 

[2. caspar peucer: _comment. de præcipui divin. generibus_, 1591, p. 
169.] 

At christma a boy lame of a leg goe round the countri summon the 
devil' followers, who are countless, to a gener conclave. whoever 
remain behind, or goe reluctantly, is scourg by anoth with an 
iron whip till the blood flows, and hi trace are left in blood. the 
human form vanishes, and the whole multitud becom wolves. mani 
thousand assemble. foremost goe the leader arm with an iron whip, 
and the troop follow, "firmli convinc in their imagin that 
they are transform into wolves." they fall upon herd of cattl and 
flock of sheep, but they have no power to slay men. when they come to 
a river, the leader smite the water with hi scourge, and it divides, 
leav a dri path through the midst, by which the pack may go. the 
transform last dure twelv days, at the expir of which 
period the wolf-skin vanishes, and the human form reappears. thi 
superstit wa expressli forbidden by the church. "credidisti, quod 
quidam creder solent, ut illæ quæ a vulgo parcæ vocantur, ipsæ, vel 
sint vel possint hoc facer quod creduntur, id est, dum aliqui homo 
nascitur, et tunc valeant illum designar ad hoc quod velint, ut 
quandocunqu homo ill voluerit, in lupum transformari possit, quod 
vulgari stultitia, _werwolf_ vocat, aut in aliam aliquam 
figuram?"--ap. burchard. (d. 1024). In like manner did S. bonifac 
preach against those who believ superstiti in it striga et 
ficto lupos." (_serm_. apud mart. et durand. ix. 217.) 

In a dissert by müller [1] we learn, on the author of 
cluveriu and dannhaveru (_acad. homilet._ p. ii.), that a certain 
albertu pericofciu in muscovi wa wont to tyrann over and harass 
hi subject in the most unscrupul manner. one night when he wa 
absent from home, hi whole herd of cattle, acquir by extortion, 
perished. On hi return he wa inform of hi loss, and the wick 
man broke out into the most horribl blasphemies, exclaiming, "let him 
who ha slain, eat; if god chooses, let him devour me as well." 

[1. De {greek _lukanðrwpía_}. lipsiæ, 1736.] 

As he spoke, drop of blood fell to earth, and the nobleman, 
transform into a wild dog, rush upon hi dead cattle, tore and 
mangl the carcass and began to devour them; possibl he may be 
devour them still (_ac forsan hodi que pascitur_). hi wife, then 
near her confinement, die of fear. Of these circumst there were 
not onli ear but also eye witnesses. (_non ab auriti tantum, sed et 
ocidati accepi, quod narro_). similarli it is relat of a nobleman 
in the neighbourhood of prague, that he rob hi subject of their 
good and reduc them to penuri through hi exactions. He took the 
last cow from a poor widow with five children, but as a judgment, all 
hi own cattl died. He then broke into fear oaths, and god 
transform him into a dog: hi human head, however, remained. 

S. patrick is said to have chang vereticus, king of wales, into a 
wolf, and S. natalis, the abbot, to have pronounc anathema upon an 
illustri famili in ireland; in consequ of which, everi male and 
femal take the form of wolv for seven year and live in the forest 
and career over the bogs, howl mournfully, and appeas their 
hunger upon the sheep of the peasants. [1] A duke of prussia, 
accord to majolus, had a countryman brought for sentenc befor 
him, becaus he had devour hi neighbour' cattle. the fellow wa an 
ill-favoured, deform man, with great wound in hi face, which he 
had receiv from dogs' bite whilst he had been in hi wolf' form. 
It wa believ that he chang shape twice in the year, at christma 
and at midsummer. He wa said to exhibit much uneasi and 
discomfort when the wolf-hair began to break out and hi bodili shape 
to change. 

[1. phil. hartung: _concion tergeminæ_, par ii. p. 367.] 

He wa kept long in prison and close watched, lest he should becom 
a were-wolf dure hi confin and attempt to escape, but noth 
remark took place. If thi is the same individu as that 
mention by olau magnus, as there seem to be a probability, the 
poor fellow wa burn alive. 

john of nüremberg relat the follow curiou story. [1] A 
priest wa onc travel in a strang country, and lost hi way in a 
forest. see a fire, he made toward it, and beheld a wolf seat 
over it. the wolf address him in human-voice, and bade him not fear, 
as "he wa of the ossyrian race, of which a man and a woman were 
doom to spend a certain number of year in wolf' form. onli after 
seven year might they return home and resum their former shapes, if 
they were still alive." He beg the priest to visit and consol hi 
sick wife, and to give her the last sacraments. thi the priest 
consent to do, after some hesitation, and onli when convinc of the 
beast be human beings, by observ that the wolf use hi front 
paw as hands, and when he saw the she-wolf peel off her wolf-skin 
from her head to her navel, exhibit the featur of an age woman. 

[1. john eus. nierenberg _de miracul. in europa_, lib. ii. cap. 42.] 

mari de franc say in the lai du bisclaveret:-- [1] 

bisclaveret ad nun en bretan 
garwal papel li norman. 
* * * * 
jadi le poet-hum oir 
Et souvent suleit avenir, 
hume pluseir garwal deviendr 
E es boscag meisun tindrent 

[1. An epitom of thi curiou were-wolf tale will be found in ellis' 
_earli english metric romances_.] 

there is an interest paper by rhanæus, on the courland were-wolves, 
in the breslauer sammlung. [2] the author says,--"ther are too 
mani exampl deriv not mere from hearsay, but receiv on 
indisput evidence, for us to disput the fact, that satan--if we 
do not deni that such a be exists, and that he ha hi work in the 
children of darkness--hold the lycanthropist in hi net in three 
ways:-- 

[2. supplement iii. _curieuser_ und nutzbar anmerkungen von natur 
und kunstgeschichten, gesammelt von kanold. 1728.] 

"1. they execut as wolv certain acts, such as seiz a sheep, or 
destroy cattle, &c., not chang into wolves, which no scientif 
man in courland believes, but in their human frames, and with their 
human limbs, yet in such a state of phantasi and hallucination, that 
they believ themselv transform into wolves, and are regard as 
such by other suffer under similar hallucination, and in thi 
manner run these peopl in pack as wolves, though not true wolves. 

"2. they imagine, in deep sleep or dream, that they injur the cattle, 
and thi without leav their conch; but it is their master who does, 
in their stead, what their fanci point out, or suggest to him. 

"3. the evil one drive natur wolv to do some act, and then 
pictur it so well to the sleeper, immov in hi place, both in 
dream and at awaking, that he believ the act to have been commit 
by himself." 

rhanæus, under these heads, relat three stories, which he believ 
be ha on good authority. the first is of a gentleman start on a 
journey, who came upon a wolf engag in the act of seiz a sheep in 
hi own flock; he fire at it, and wound it, so that it fled howl 
to the thicket. when the gentleman return from hi expedit he 
found the whole neighbourhood impress with the belief that he had, 
on a given day and hour, shot at one of hi tenants, a publican, 
mickel. On inquiry, the man' wife, call lebba, relat the 
follow circumstances, which were fulli corrobor by numer 
witnesses:--when her husband had sown hi rye he had consult with 
hi wife how he wa to get some meat, so as to have a good feast. the 
woman urg him on no account to steal from hi landlord' flock, 
becaus it wa guard by fierc dogs. he, however, reject her 
advice, and mickel fell upon hi landlord' sheep, but he had suffer 
and had come limp home, and in hi rage at the ill success of hi 
attempt, had fallen upon hi own hors and had bitten it throat 
complet through. thi took place in the year 1684. 

In 1684, a man wa about to fire upon a pack of wolves, when he heard 
from among the troop a voic exclaiming--"gossip! gossip! don't fire. 
No good will come of it." 

the third stori is as follows:--a lycanthropist wa brought befor a 
judg and accus of witchcraft, but as noth could be prove 
against him, the judg order one of hi peasant to visit the man in 
hi prison, and to worm the truth out of him, and to persuad the 
prison to assist him in reveng himself upon anoth peasant who 
had injur him; and thi wa to be effect by destroy one of the 
man' cows; but the peasant wa to urg the prison to do it 
secretly, and, if possible, in the disguis of a wolf. the fellow 
undertook the task, but he had great difficulti in persuad the 
prison to fall in with hi wishes: eventually, however, he 
succeeded. next morn the cow wa found in it stall fright 
mangled, but the prison had not left hi cell: for the watch, who 
had been place to observ him, declar that he had spent the night 
in profound sleep, and that he had onli at one time made a slight 
motion with hi head and hand and feet. 

wieriu and forestu quot gulielmu brabantinu as an author for 
the fact, that a man of high posit had been so possess by the 
evil one, that often dure the year he fell into a condit in which 
he believ himself to be turn into a wolf, and at that time he 
rove in the wood and tri to seiz and devour littl children, but 
that at last, by god' mercy, he recov hi senses. 

certainli the famou pierr vidal, the don quixot of provenç 
troubadours, must have had a touch of thi madness, when, after have 
fallen in love with a ladi of carcassone, name loba, or the wolfess, 
the excess of hi passion drove him over the country, howl like a 
wolf, and demean himself more like an irrat beast than a 
ration man. 

He commemor hi lupin mad in the poem _A tal donna_:-- 
[1] 

[1. bruce whyte: _histoir de langu romaines_, tom. ii. p. 248.] 

crown with immort joy I mount 
the proudest emperor above, 
for I am honour with the love 
Of the fair daughter of a count. 
A lace from Na raymbauda' hand 
I valu more than all the land 
Of richard, with hi poïctou, 
hi rich tourain and fame anjou. 
when _loup-garou_ the rabbl call me, 
when vagrant shepherd hoot, 
pursue, and buffet me to boot, 
It doth not for a moment gall me; 
I seek not palac or halls, 
Or refug when the winter falls; 
expos to wind and frost at night, 
My soul is ravish with delight. 
Me claim my she-wolf (_loba_) so divine: 
and justli she that claim prefers, 
for, by my troth, my life is her 
more than another's, more than mine. 

job finceliu [1] relat the sad stori of a farmer of pavia, who, 
as a wolf, fell upon mani men in the open countri and tore them to 
pieces. after much troubl the maniac wa caught, and he then assur 
hi captor that the onli differ which exist between himself and 
a natur wolf, wa that in a true wolf the hair grew outward, whilst 
in him it struck inward. In order to put thi assert to the proof, 
the magistrates, themselv most certainli cruel and bloodthirsti 
wolves, cut off hi arm and legs; the poor wretch die of the 
mutilation. thi took place in 1541. the idea of the skin be 
revers is a veri ancient one: _versipellis_ occur as a name of 
reproach in petronius, lucilius, and plautus, and resembl the nors 
_hamrammr_. 

[1. finceliu _de mirabilibus_, lib. xi.] 

finceliu relat also that, in 1542, there wa such a multitud of 
were-wolv about constantinopl that the emperor, accompani by hi 
guard, left the citi to give them a sever correction, and slew one 
hundr and fifti of them. 

spranger speak of three young ladi who attack a labourer, under 
the form of cats, and were wound by him. they were found bleed in 
their bed next morning. 

majolu relat that a man afflict with lycanthropi wa brought to 
pomponatius. the poor fellow had been found buri in hay, and when 
peopl approached, he call to them to flee, as he wa a were wolf, 
and would rend them. the country-folk want to flay him, to discov 
whether the hair grew inwards, but pomponatiu rescu the man and 
cure him. 

bodin tell some were-wolf stori on good authority; it is a piti 
that the good author of bodin were such liars, but that, by the 
way. He say that the royal procurator-gener bourdin had assur him 
that he had shot a wolf, and that the arrow had stuck in the beast' 
thigh. A few hour after, the arrow wa found in the thigh of a man in 
bed. In vernon, about the year 1566, the witch and warlock gather 
in great multitudes, under the shape of cats. four or five men were 
attack in a lone place by a number of these beasts. the men stood 
their ground with the utmost heroism, succeed in slay one puss, 
and in wound mani others. next day a number of wound women were 
found in the town, and they gave the judg an accur account of all 
the circumst connect with their wounding. 

bodin quot pierr marner, the author of a treatis on sorcerers, as 
have wit in savoy the transform of men into wolves. 
nynauld [1] relat that in a villag of switzerland, near 
lucerne, a peasant wa attack by a wolf, whilst he wa hew 
timber; he defend himself, and smote off a fore-leg of the beast. 
the moment that the blood began to flow the wolf' form changed, and 
he recogn a woman without her arm. she wa burnt alive. 

[1. nynauld, _de la lycanthropie_. paris, 1615, p. 52.] 

An evid that beast are transform witch is to be found in 
their have no tails. when the devil take human form, however, he 
keep hi club-foot of the satyr, as a token by which he may be 
recognized. So anim defici in caudal appendag are to be 
avoided, as they are witch in disguise. the thingwald should 
consid the case of the manx cat in it next session. 

forestus, in hi chapter on maladi of the brain, relat a 
circumst which came under hi own observation, in the middl of 
the sixteenth century, at alcmaar in the netherlands. A peasant there 
wa attack everi spring with a fit of insanity; under the influenc 
of thi he rush about the churchyard, ran into the church, jump 
over the benches, danced, wa fill with fury, climb up, descended, 
and never remain quiet. He carri a long staff in hi hand, with 
which he drove away the dogs, which flew at him and wound him, so 
that hi thigh were cover with scars. hi face wa pale, hi eye 
deep sunk in their sockets. forestu pronounc the man to be a 
lycanthropist, but he doe not say that the poor fellow believ 
himself to be transform into a wolf. In refer to thi case, 
however, he mention that of a spanish nobleman who believ himself 
to be chang into a bear, and who wander fill with furi among the 
woods. 

donatu of altomar [1] affirm that he saw a man in the street 
of naples, surround by a ring of people, who in hi were-wolf frenzi 
had dug up a corps and wa carri off the leg upon hi shoulders. 
thi wa in the middl of the sixteenth century. 

[1. _de medend. human. corp_. lib. i. cap. 9.] 



chapter vi. 

A chamber OF horrors. 


pierr bourgot and michel verdung--'m hermit of S. bonnot--th 
gandillon family--thievenn paget--th tailor of châlons--roulet. 

IN december, 1521, the inquisitor-gener for the dioces of besançon, 
boin by name, heard a case of a suffici terribl natur to 
produc a profound sensat of alarm in the neighbourhood. two men 
were under accus of witchcraft and cannibalism. their name were 
pierr bourgot, or peter the great, as the peopl had nicknam him 
from hi stature, and michel verdung. peter had not been long under 
trial, befor he volunt a full confess of hi crimes. It 
amount to this:-- 

about nineteen year before, on the occas of a new year' market at 
poligny, a terribl storm had broken over the country, and among other 
mischief done by it, wa the scatter of pierre' flock. "in vain," 
said the prisoner, "did I labour, in compani with other peasants, to 
find the sheep and bring them together. I went everywher in search of 
them. 

"then there rode up three black horsemen, and the last said to me: 
'whither away? you seem to be in trouble?' 

"I relat to him my misfortun with my flock. He bade me pluck up my 
spirits, and promis that hi master would henceforth take charg of 
and protect my flock., if I would onli reli upon him. He told me, as 
well, that I should find my stray sheep veri shortly, and he 
promis to provid me with money. We agre to meet again in four or 
five days. My flock I soon found collect together. At my second 
meet I learn of the stranger that he wa a servant of the devil. 
I forswor god and our ladi and all saint and dweller in paradise. I 
renounc christianity, kiss hi left hand, which wa black and 
ice-cold as that of a corpse. then I fell on my knee and gave in my 
allegi to satan. I remain in the servic of the devil for two 
years, and never enter a church befor the end of mass, or at all 
event till the holi water had been sprinkled, accord to the desir 
of my master, whose name I afterward learn wa moyset. 

"all anxieti about my flock wa removed, for the devil had undertaken 
to protect it and to keep off the wolves. 

"thi freedom from care, however, made me begin to tire of the devil' 
service, and I recommenc my attend at church, till I wa brought 
back into obedi to the evil one by michel verdung, when I renew 
my compact on the understand that I should be suppli with money. 

"in a wood near chastel charnon we met with mani other whom I did not 
recognize; we danced, and each had in hi or her hand a green taper 
with a blue flame. still under the delus that I should obtain 
money, michel persuad me to move with the greatest celerity, and in 
order to do this, after I had strip myself, he smear me with a 
salve, and I believ myself then to be transform into a wolf. I wa 
at first somewhat horrifi at my four wolf' feet, and the fur with 
which I wa cover all at once, but I found that I could now travel 
with the speed of the wind. thi could not have taken place without 
the help of our power master, who wa present dure our excursion, 
though I did not perceiv him till I had recov my human form. 
michel did the same as myself. 

"when we had been one or two hour in thi condit of metamorphosis, 
michel smear us again, and quick as thought we resum our human 
forms. the salv wa given us by our masters; to me it wa given by 
moyset, to michel by hi own master, guillemin." 

pierr declar that he felt no exhaust after hi excursions, 
though the judg inquir particularli whether he felt that 
prostrat after hi unusu exertion, of which witch usual 
complained. inde the exhaust consequ on a were-wolf raid wa 
so great that the lycanthropist wa often confin to hi bed for 
days, and could hardli move hand or foot, much in the same way as the 
berserkir and _ham rammir_ in the north were utterli prostrat after 
their fit had left them. 

In one of hi were-wolf runs, pierr fell upon a boy of six or seven 
year old, with hi teeth, intend to rend and devour him, but the 
lad scream so loud that he wa oblig to beat a retreat to hi 
clothes, and smear himself again, in order to recov hi form and 
escap detection. He and michel, however, one day tore to piec a 
woman as she wa gather peas; and a M. de chusnée, who came to her 
rescue, wa attack by them and killed. 

On anoth occas they fell upon a littl girl of four year old, 
and ate her up, with the except of one arm. michel thought the 
flesh most delicious. 

anoth girl wa strangl by them, and her blood lap up. Of a 
third they ate mere a portion of the stomach. one even at dusk, 
pierr leap over a garden wall, and came upon a littl maiden of 
nine year old, engag upon the weed of the garden beds. she fell 
on her knee and entreat pierr to spare her; but he snap the 
neck, and left her a corpse, lie among her flowers. On thi occas 
he doe not seem to have been in hi wolf' shape. He fell upon a goat 
which he found in the field of pierr lerugen, and bit it in the 
throat, but he kill it with a knife. 

michel wa transform in hi cloth into a wolf, but pierr wa 
oblig to strip, and the metamorphosi could not take place with him 
unless he were stark naked. 

He wa unabl to account for the manner in which the hair vanish 
when he recov hi natur condition. 

the statement of pierr bourgot were fulli corrobor by michel 
verdung. 

toward the close of the autumn of 1573, the peasant of the 
neighbourhood of dôle, in franch comté, were author by the court 
of parliament at dôle, to hunt down the were-wolv which infest the 
country. the author wa as follows:-- "accord to the 
advertis made to the sovereign court of parliament at dole, that, 
in the territori of espagny, salvange, courchapon, and the 
neighbour villages, ha often been seen and met, for some time 
past, a were-wolf, who, it is said, ha alreadi seiz and carri off 
sever littl children, so that they have not been seen since, and 
sinc he ha attack and done injuri in the countri to some horsemen, 
who kept him of onli with great difficulti and danger to their 
persons: the said court, desir to prevent ani greater danger, ha 
permitted, and doe permit, those who are abid or dwell in the 
said place and others, notwithstand all edict concern the 
chase, to assembl with pikes, halberts, arquebuses, and sticks, to 
chase and to pursu the said were-wolf in everi place where they may 
find or seiz him; to tie and to kill, without incur ani pain or 
penalties. . . . given at the meet of the said court, on the 
thirteenth day of the month september, 1573." It wa some time, 
however, befor the loup-gar wa caught. 

In a retir spot near amanges, half shroud in trees, stood a small 
hovel of the rudest construction; it roof wa of turf, and it wall 
were blotch with lichen. the garden to thi cot wa run to waste, 
and the fenc round it broken through. As the hovel wa far from ani 
road, and wa onli reach by a path over moorland and through forest, 
it wa seldom visited, and the coupl who live in it were not such as 
would make mani friends. the man, gill garnier, wa a sombre, 
ill-look fellow, who walk in a stoop attitude, and whose pale 
face, livid complexion, and deep-set eye under a pair of coars and 
bushi brows, which met across the forehead, were suffici to repel 
ani one from seek hi acquaintance. gill seldom spoke, and when 
he did it wa in the broadest patoi of hi country. hi long grey 
beard and retir habit procur for him the name of the hermit of 
st. bonnot, though no one for a moment attribut to him ani 
extraordinari amount of sanctity. 

the hermit doe not seem to have been suspect for some time, but one 
day, as some of the peasant of chastenoy were return home from 
their work, through the forest, the scream of a child and the deep 
bay of a wolf, attract their notice, and on run in the 
direct whenc the cri sounded, they found a littl girl defend 
herself against a monstrou creature, which wa attack her tooth 
and nail, and had alreadi wound her sever in five places. As the 
peasant came up, the creatur fled on all four into the gloom of the 
thicket; it wa so dark that it could not be identifi with 
certainty, and whilst some affirm that it wa a wolf, other thought 
they had recogn the featur of the hermit. thi took place on the 
8th november. 

On the 14th a littl boy of ten year old wa missing, who had been 
last seen at a short distanc from the gate of dole. 

the hermit of S. bonnot wa now seiz and brought to trial at dole, 
when the follow evid wa extract from him and hi wife, and 
substanti in mani particular by witnesses. 

On the last day of michaelmas, under the form of a wolf, at a mile 
from dole, in the farm of gorge, a vineyard belong to chastenoy, 
near the wood of La serre, gill gamier had attack a littl maiden 
of ten or twelv year old, and had slain her with hi teeth and 
claws; he had then drawn her into the wood, strip her, gnaw the 
flesh from her leg and arms, and had enjoy hi meal so much, that, 
inspir with conjug affection, he had brought some of the flesh 
home for hi wife apolline. 

eight day after the feast of all saints, again in the form of a 
were-wolf, he had seiz anoth girl, near the meadow land of La 
pouppe, on the territori of athum and chastenoy, and wa on the point 
of slay and devour her, when three person came up, and he wa 
compel to escape. On the fourteenth day after all saints, also as a 
wolf, he had attack a boy of ten year old, a mile from dôle, 
between gredisan and menoté, and had strangl him. On that occas 
he had eaten all the flesh off hi leg and arms, and had also 
devour a great part of the belly; one of the leg he had rent 
complet from the trunk with hi fangs. 

On the friday befor the last feast of S. bartholomew, he had seiz a 
boy of twelv or thirteen, under a larg pear-tre near the wood of 
the villag perrouze, and had drawn him into the thicket and kill 
him, intend to eat him as he had eaten the other children, but the 
approach of men hinder him from fulfil hi intention. the boy 
was, however, quit dead, and the men who came up declar that gill 
appear as a man and not as a wolf. the hermit of S. bonnot wa 
sentenc to be drag to the place of public execution, and there to 
be burn alive, a sentenc which wa rigor carri out. 

In thi instanc the poor maniac fulli believ that actual 
transform into a wolf took place; he wa appar perfectli 
reason on other points, and quit consciou of the act he had 
committed. 

We come now to a more remark circumstance, the afflict of a 
whole famili with the same form of insanity. our inform is 
deriv from boguet' _discour de sorciers_, 1603-1610. 

pernett gandillon wa a poor girl in the jura, who in 1598 ran about 
the countri on all fours, in the belief that she wa a wolf. one day 
as she wa rang the countri in a fit of lycanthrop madness, she 
came upon two children who were pluck wild strawberries. fill 
with a sudden passion for blood, she flew at the littl girl and would 
have brought her down, had not her brother, a lad of four year old, 
defend her lustili with a knife. pernette, however, wrench the 
weapon from hi tini hand, flung him down and gash hi throat, so 
that he die of the wound. pernett wa tom to piec by the peopl in 
their rage and horror. 

directli after, pierre, the brother of pernett gandillon, wa accus 
of witchcraft. He wa charg with have led children to the sabbath, 
have made hail, and have run about the countri in the form of a 
wolf. the transform wa effect by mean of a salv which he had 
receiv from the devil. He had on one occas assum the form of a 
hare, but usual he appear as a wolf, and hi skin becam cover 
with shaggi grey hair. He readili acknowledg that the charg 
brought against him were well founded, and he allow that he had, 
dure the period of hi transformation, fallen on, and devoured, both 
beast and human beings. when he desir to recov hi true form, he 
roll himself in the dewi grass. hi son georg assert that he had 
also been anoint with the salve, and had gone to the sabbath in the 
shape of a wolf. accord to hi own testimony, he had fallen upon 
two goat in one of hi expeditions. 

one maundy-thursday night he had lain for three hour in hi bed in a 
catalept state, and at the end of that time had sprung out of bed. 
dure thi period he had been in the form of a wolf to the witches' 
sabbath. 

hi sister antoinnett confess that she had made hail, and that she 
had sold herself to the devil, who had appear to her in the shape of 
a black he-goat. she had been to the sabbath on sever occasions. 

pierr and georg in prison behav as maniacs, run on all four 
about their cell and howl dismally. their faces, arms, and leg 
were fright scar with the wound they had receiv from dog 
when they had been on their raids. boguet account for the 
transform not take place, by the fact of their not have the 
necessari salv by them. 

all three, pierre, georges, and antoinnette, were hung and burned. 

thievenn paget, who wa a witch of the most unmistak character, 
wa also frequent chang into a she-wolf, accord to her own 
confession, in which state she had often accompani the devil over 
hill and dale, slay cattle, and fall on and devour children. 
the same thing may be said of clauda isan prost, a lame woman, clauda 
isan guillaume, and isan roquet, who own to the murder of five 
children. 

On the 14th of december, in the same year as the execut of the 
gandillon famili (1598), a tailor of châlon wa sentenc to the 
flame by the parliament of pari for lycanthropy. thi wretch man 
had decoy children into hi shop, or attack them in the gloam 
when they stray in the woods, had torn them with hi teeth, and 
kill them, after which he seem calmli to have dress their flesh 
as ordinari meat, and to have eaten it with great relish. the number 
of littl innoc whom he destroy is unknown. A whole cask full of 
bone wa discov in hi house. the man wa perfectli hardened, and 
the detail of hi trial were so full of horror and abomin of 
all kinds, that the judg order the document to be burned. 

again in 1598, a year memor in the annal of lycanthropy, a trial 
took place in angers, the detail of which are veri terrible. 

In a wild and unfrequ spot near caude, some countrymen came one 
day upon the corps of a boy of fifteen, horribl mutil and 
bespatt with blood. As the men approached, two wolves, which had 
been rend the body, bound away into the thicket. the men gave 
chase immediately, follow their bloodi track till they lost them; 
when suddenli crouch among the bushes, hi teeth chatter with 
fear, they found a man half naked, with long hair and beard, and with 
hi hand dy in blood. hi nail were long as claws, and were 
clot with fresh gore, and shred of human flesh. 

thi is one of the most puzzl and peculiar case which come under 
our notice. 

the wretch man, whose name wa roulet, of hi own accord state that 
he had fallen upon the lad and had kill him by smother him, and 
that he had been prevent from devour the bodi complet by the 
arriv of men on the spot. 

roulet prove on investig to be a beggar from hous to house, in 
the most abject state of poverty. hi companion in mendic were hi 
brother john and hi cousin julien. He had been given lodg out of 
chariti in a neighbour village, but befor hi apprehens he had 
been absent for eight days. 

befor the judges, roulet acknowledg that he wa abl to transform 
himself into a wolf by mean of a salv which hi parent had given 
him. when question about the two wolv which had been seen leav 
the corpse, he said that he knew perfectli well who they were, for 
they were hi companions, jean and julian, who possess the same 
secret as himself. He wa shown the cloth he had worn on the day of 
hi seizure, and he recogn them immediately; he describ the boy 
whom he had murdered, gave the date correctly, indic the precis 
spot where the deed had been done, and recogn the father of the 
boy as the man who had first run up when the scream of the lad had 
been heard. In prison, roulet behav like an idiot. when seized, hi 
belli wa distend and hard; in prison he drank one even a whole 
pail of water, and from that moment refus to eat or drink. 

hi parents, on inquiry, prove to be respect and piou people, 
and they prove that hi brother john and hi cousin julien had been 
engag at a distanc on the day of roulet' apprehension. 

"what is your name, and what your estate?" ask the judge, pierr 
hérault. 

"mi name is jacqu roulet, my age thirty-five; I am poor, and a 
mendicant." 

"what are you accus of have done?" 

"of be a thief--of have offend god. My parent gave me an 
ointment; I do not know it composition." 

"when rub with thi ointment do you becom a wolf?" 

"no; but for all that, I kill and ate the child cornier: I wa a 
wolf." 

"were you dress as a wolf?" 

"I wa dress as I am now. I had my hand and my face bloody, becaus 
I had been eat the flesh of the said child." 

"do your hand and feet becom paw of a wolf?" 

"yes, they do." 

"doe your head becom like that of a wolf-your mouth becom larger?" 

"I do not know how my head wa at the time; I use my teeth; my head 
wa as it is to-day. I have wound and eaten mani other littl 
children; I have also been to the sabbath." 

the _lieuten criminel_ sentenc roulet to death. he, however, 
appeal to the parliament at paris; and thi decid that as there 
wa more folli in the poor idiot than malic and witchcraft, hi 
sentenc of death should be commut to two years' imprison in a 
madhouse, that he might be instruct in the knowledg of god, whom he 
had forgotten in hi utter poverty. [1] 

[1. "la cour du parliament, par arrêt, mist l'appel et la 
sentenc dont il avoit esté appel au néant, et, néanmoins, ordonna que 
le dit roulet serait mi à l'hospit saint germain de prés, où on a 
accoustumé de mettr le folz, pour y demeur l'espac de deux ans, 
afin d'i estr instruit et redressé tant de son esprit, que ramené à 
la cognoiss de dieu, que l'extrêm pauvreté lui avoit fait 
mescognoistre."] 



chapter vii. 

jean grenier 


On the sand-dunes--a wolf attack marguerit poirier--jean grenier 
brought to trial--hi confessions--charg of cannib proved--hi 
sentence--behaviour in the monastery--visit of del'ancre. 

one fine afternoon in the spring, some villag girl were tend 
their sheep on the sand-dun which interven between the vast forest 
of pine cover the greater portion of the present depart of 
_landes_ in the south of france, and the sea. 

the bright of the sky, the fresh of the air puf up off the 
blue twinkl bay of biscay, the hum or song of the wind as it made 
rich music among the pine which stood like a green uplift wave on 
the east, the beauti of the sand-hil speckl with golden cistus, or 
patch with gentian-blue, by the low grow _gremil couchée_, the 
charm of the forest-skirts, tint various with the foliag of 
cork-trees, pines, and acacia, the latter in full bloom, a pile of 
rose-colour or snowi flowers,--al conspir to fill the peasant 
maiden with joy, and to make their voic rise in song and laughter, 
which rung merrili over the hills, and through the dark avenu of 
evergreen trees. 

now a gorgeou butterfli attract their attention, then a flight of 
quail skim the surface. 

"ah!" exclaim jacquilin auzun," ah, if I had my stilt and bats, I 
would strike the littl bird down, and we should have a fine supper." 

"now, if they would fli readi cook into one' mouth, as they do in 
foreign parts!" said anoth girl. 

"have you got ani new cloth for the S. jean?" ask a third; "mi 
mother ha laid by to purchas me a smart cap with gold lace." 

"you will turn the head of etienn altogether, annette!" said jeann 
gaboriant. "but what is the matter with the sheep?" 

she ask becaus the sheep which had been quietli brows befor 
her, on reach a small depress in the dune, had start away as 
though frighten at something. At the same time one of the dog began 
to growl and show hi fangs. 

the girl ran to the spot, and saw a littl fall in the ground, in 
which, seat on a log of fir, wa a boy of thirteen. the appear 
of the lad wa peculiar. hi hair wa of a tawni red and thickli 
matted, fall over hi shoulder and complet cover hi narrow 
brow. hi small pale-grey eye twinkl with an express of horribl 
feroc and cunning, from deep sunken hollows. the complexion wa of 
a dark oliv colour; the teeth were strong and white, and the canin 
teeth protrud over the lower lip when the mouth wa closed. the 
boy' hand were larg and powerful, the nail black and point like 
bird' talons. He wa ill clothed, and seem to be in the most abject 
poverty. the few garment he had on him were in tatters, and through 
the rent the emaci of hi limb wa plainli visible. 

the girl stood round him, half frighten and much surprised, but the 
boy show no symptom of astonishment. hi face relax into a 
ghastli leer, which show the whole rang of hi glitter white 
fangs. 

"well, my maidens," said he in a harsh voice, "which of you is the 
prettiest, I should like to know; can you decid among you?" 

"what do you want to know for?" ask jeann gaboriant, the eldest of 
the girls, age eighteen, who took upon herself to be spokesman for 
the rest. 

"becaus I shall marri the prettiest," wa the answer. 

"ah!" said jeann jokingly; "that is if she will have you, which is 
not veri likely, as we none of us know you, or anyth about you." 

"I am the son of a priest," repli the boy curtly. 

"i that whi you look so dingi and black?" 

"no, I am dark-coloured, becaus I wear a wolf-skin sometimes." 

"A wolf-skin!" echo the girl; "and pray who gave it you?" 

"one call pierr labourant." 

"there is no man of that name hereabouts. where doe he live?" 

A scream of laughter mingl with howls, and break into strang 
gulp burst of fiendlik merriment from the strang boy. 

the littl girl recoiled, and the youngest took refug behind jeanne. 

"do you want to know pierr labourant, lass? hey, he is a man with an 
iron chain about hi neck, which he is ever engag in gnawing. Do you 
want to know where he lives, lass? ha., in a place of gloom and fire, 
where there are mani companions, some seat on iron chairs, burning, 
burning; other stretch on glow beds, burn too. some cast men 
upon blaze coals, other roast men befor fierc flames, other 
again plung them into caldron of liquid fire." 

the girl trembl and look at each other with scare faces, and 
then again at the hideou be which crouch befor them. 

"you want to know about the wolf-skin cape?" continu he. "pierr 
labour gave me that; he wrap it round me, and everi monday, 
friday, and sunday, and for about an hour at dusk everi other day, I 
am a wolf, a were-wolf. I have kill dog and drunk their blood; but 
littl girl tast better, their flesh is tender and sweet, their 
blood rich and warm. I have eaten mani a maiden, as I have been on my 
raid togeth with my nine companions. I am a were-wolf! ah, ha! if 
the sun were to set I would soon fall on one of you and make a meal of 
you!" again he burst into one of hi fright paroxysm of laughter, 
and the girl unabl to endur it ani longer, fled with precipitation. 

near the villag of S. antoin de pizon, a littl girl of the name of 
marguerit poirier, thirteen year old, wa in the habit of tend 
her sheep, in compani with a lad of the same age, whose name wa jean 
grenier. the same lad whom jeann gabori had questioned. 

the littl girl often complain to her parent of the conduct of the 
boy: she said that he frighten her with hi horribl stories; but 
her father and mother thought littl of her complaints, till one day 
she return home befor her usual time so thoroughli alarm that she 
had desert her flock. her parent now took the matter up and 
investig it. her stori wa as follows:-- 

jean had often told her that he had sold himself to the devil, and 
that he had acquir the power of rang the countri after dusk, and 
sometim in broad day, in the form of a wolf. He had assur her that 
he had kill and devour mani dogs, but that he found their flesh 
less palat than the flesh of littl girls, which he regard as a 
suprem delicacy. He had told her that thi had been tast by him not 
unfrequently, but he had specifi onli two instances: in one he had 
eaten as much as he could, and had thrown the rest to a wolf, which 
had come up dure the repast. In the other instanc he had bitten to 
death anoth littl girl, had lap her blood, and, be in a 
famish condit at the time, had devour everi portion of her, 
with the except of the arm and shoulders. 

the child told her parents, on the occas of her return home in a 
fit of terror, that she had been guid her sheep as usual, but 
grenier had not been present. hear a rustl in the bush she had 
look round, and a wild beast bad leap upon her, and torn her 
cloth on her left side with it sharp fangs. she ad that she had 
defend herself lustili with her shepherd' staff, and had beaten the 
creatur off. It had then retreat a few paces, had seat itself on 
it hind leg like a dog when it is begging, and had regard her with 
such a look of rage, that she had fled in terror. she describ the 
anim as resembl a wolf, but as be shorter and stouter; it 
hair wa red, it tail stumpy, and the head smaller than that of a 
genuin wolf. 

the statement of the child produc gener constern in the 
parish. It wa well known that sever littl girl had vanish in a 
most mysteri way of late, and the parent of these littl one were 
thrown into an agoni of terror lest their children had becom the prey 
of the wretch boy accus by marguerit poirier. the case wa now 
taken up by the author and brought befor the parliament of 
bordeaux. 

the investig which follow wa as complet as could be desired. 

jean grenier wa the son of a poor labour in the villag of S. 
antoin do pizon, and not the son of a priest, as he had asserted. 
three month befor hi seizur he had left home, and had been with 
sever master do odd work, or wander about the countri 
begging. He had been engag sever time to take charg of the 
flock belong to farmers, and had as often been discharg for 
neglect of hi duties. the lad exhibit no reluct to commun 
all he knew about himself, and hi statement were test one by one, 
and were often prove to be correct. 

the stori he relat of himself befor the court wa as follows:-- 

"when I wa ten or eleven year old, my neighbour, duthillaire, 
introduc me, in the depth of the forest, to a M. de la forest, a 
black man, who sign me with hi nail, and then gave to me and 
duthillair a salv and a wolf-skin. from that time have I run about 
the countri as a wolf. 

"the charg of marguerit poirier is correct. My intent wa to have 
kill and devour her, but she kept me off with a stick. I have onli 
kill one dog, a white one, and I did not drink it blood." 

when question touch the children, whom he said he had kill and 
eaten as a wolf, he allow that he had onc enter an empti hous on 
the way between S. coutra and S. anlaye, in a small village, the name 
of which he did not remember, and had found a child asleep in it 
cradle; and as no one wa within to hinder him, he drag the babi 
out of it cradle, carri it into the garden, leap the hedge, and 
devour as much of it as satisfi hi hunger. what remain he had 
given to a wolf. In the parish of S. antoin do pizon he had attack 
a littl girl, as she wa keep sheep. she wa dress in a black 
frock; he did not know her name. He tore her with hi nail and teeth, 
and ate her. six week befor hi captur he had fallen upon anoth 
child, near the stone-bridge, in the same parish. In eparon he had 
assault the hound of a certain M. millon, and would have kill the 
beast, had not the owner come out with hi rapier in hi hand. 

jean said that he had the wolf-skin in hi possession, and that he 
went out hunt for children, at the command of hi master, the lord 
of the forest. befor transform he smear himself with the 
salve, which be preserv in a small pot, and hid hi cloth in the 
thicket. 

He usual ran hi cours from one to two hour in the day, when the 
moon wa at the wane, but veri often he made hi expedit at night. 
On one occas he had accompani duthillaire, but they had kill no 
one. 

He accus hi father of have assist him, and of possess a 
wolf-skin; he charg him also with have accompani him on one 
occasion, when he attack and ate a girl in the villag of grilland, 
whom he had found tend a flock of geese. He said that hi 
stepmoth wa separ from hi father. He believ the reason to 
be, becaus she had seen him onc vomit the paw of a dog and the 
finger of a child. He ad that the lord of the forest had strictli 
forbidden him to bite the thumb-nail of hi left hand, which nail wa 
thicker and longer than the others, and had warn him never to lose 
sight of it, as long as he wa in hi were-wolf disguise. 

duthillair wa apprehended, and the father of jean grenier himself 
claim to be heard by examination. 

the account given by the father and stepmoth of jean coincid in 
mani particular with the statement made by their son. 

the local where grenier declar he had fallen on children were 
identified, the time when he said the deed had been done accord 
with the date given by the parent of the miss littl ones, when 
their loss had occurred. 

the wound which jean affirm that he had made, and the manner in 
which he had dealt them, coincid with the descript given by the 
children he had assaulted. 

He wa confront with marguerit poirier, and he singl her out from 
among five other girls, point to the still open gash in her body, 
and state that he had made them with hi teeth, when he attack her 
in wolf-form, and she had beaten him off with a stick. He describ an 
attack he had made on a littl boy whom he would have slain, had not a 
man come to the rescue, and exclaimed, "i'll have you presently." 

the man who save the child wa found, and prove to be the uncl of 
the rescu lad, and he corrobor the statement of grenier, that he 
had use the word mention above. 

jean wa then confront with hi father. He now began to falter in 
hi story, and to chang hi statements. the examin had last 
long, and it wa seen that the feebl intellect of the boy wa weari 
out, so the case wa adjourned. when next confront with the elder 
grenier, jean told hi stori as at first, without chang it in ani 
import particular. 

the fact of jean grenier have kill and eaten sever children, and 
of hi have attack and wound others, with intent to take their 
life, were fulli established; but there wa no proof whatev of the 
father have had the least hand in ani of the murders, so that he wa 
dismiss the court without a shadow of guilt upon him. 

the onli wit who corrobor the assert of jean that he 
chang hi shape into that of a wolf wa marguerit poirier. 

befor the court gave judgment, the first presid of assize, in an 
eloqu speech, put on one side all question of witchcraft and 
diabol compact, and bestial transformation, and boldli state that 
the court had onli to consid the age and the imbecil of the 
child, who wa so dull and idiotic--that children of seven or eight 
year old have usual a larger amount of reason than he. the 
presid went on to say that lycanthropi and kuanthropi were mere 
hallucinations, and that the chang of shape exist onli in the 
disorgan brain of the insane, consequ it wa not a crime 
which could be punished. the tender age of the boy must be taken into 
consideration, and the utter neglect of hi educ and moral 
development. the court sentenc grenier to perpetu imprison 
within the wall of a monasteri at bordeaux, where he might be 
instruct in hi christian and moral obligations; but ani attempt to 
escap would be punish with death. 

A pleasant companion for the monks! a promis pupil for them to 
instruct! No sooner wa he admit into the precinct of the 
religi house, than he ran frantic about the cloister and 
garden upon all fours, and find a heap of bloodi and raw offal, 
fell upon it and devour it in an incred short space of time. 

delancr visit him seven year after, and found him diminut in 
stature, veri shy, and unwil to look ani one in the face. hi eye 
were deep set and restless; hi teeth long and protruding; hi nail 
black, and in place worn away; hi mind wa complet barren; he 
seem unabl to comprehend the smallest things. He relat hi stori 
to delancre, and told him how he had run about formerli in the wood 
as a wolf, and he said that he still felt a crave for raw flesh, 
especi for that of littl girls, which he said wa delicious, and 
he ad that but for hi confin it would not be long befor he 
tast it again. He said that the lord of the forest had visit him 
twice in the prison, but that he had driven him off with the sign of 
the cross. the account be then gave of hi murder coincid exactli 
with what had come out in hi trial; and besid this, hi stori of the 
compact he had made with the black one, and the manner in which hi 
transform wa effected, also coincid with hi former 
statements. 

He die at the age of twenty, after an imprison of seven years, 
shortli after delancre' visit. [1] 

[1. delancre: _tableau de l'iinconstance_, p 305.] 

In the two case of roulet and grenier the court refer the whole 
matter of lycanthropy, or anim transformation, to it true and 
legitim cause, an aberr of the brain. from thi time medic 
men seem to have regard it as a form of mental maladi to be brought 
under their treatment, rather than as a crime to be punish by law. 
but it is veri fear to contempl that there may still exist 
person in the world fill with a morbid crave for human blood, 
which is readi to impel them to commit the most horribl atrocities, 
should they escap the vigilant of their guards, or break the bar of 
the madhous which restrain them. 



chapter viii. 

folk-lor relat TO were-wolves. 


barren of english folk-lore--devonshir traditions--deriv of 
were-wolf--cannib in scotland--th angu robber--th carl of 
perth--french superstitions--norwegian traditions--danish tale of 
were-wolves--holstein stories--th werewolf in the netherlands--among 
the greeks; the serbs; the white russians; the poles; the russians--a 
russian receipt for becom a were-wolf--th bohemian 
vlkodlak--armenian story--indian tales--abyssinian budas--american 
transform tales--a slovakian household tale--similar greek, 
béarnais, and iceland tales. 

english folk-lor is singularli barren of were-wolf stories, the 
reason be that wolv had been extirp from england under the 
anglo-saxon kings, and therefor ceas to be object of dread to the 
people. the tradit belief in were-wolf must, however, have 
remain long in the popular mind, though at present it ha 
disappeared, for the word occur in old ballad and romances. thu in 
kempion-- 

O wa it war-wolf in the wood? 
Or wa it mermaid in the sea? 
Or wa it man, or vile woman, 
My ain true love, that mis-shap thee? 

there is also the romanc of _william and the were-wolf_ in hartshorn; 
[1] but thi profess to be a translat from the french:-- 

[1. hartshorn: _ancient metric tales_, p. 256. see also "the witch 
cake," in crumek' _remain of nithsdal song_.] 

for he of french thi fayr tale ferst dede translate, 
In ese of englysch men in englysch speche. 

In the popular mind the cat or the hare have taken the place of the 
wolf for witches' transformation, and we hear often of the hag 
attend the devil' sabbath in these forms. 

In devonshir they rang the moor in the shape of black dogs, and I 
know a stori of two such creatur appear in an inn and nightli 
drink the cider, till the publican shot a silver button over their 
heads, when they were instantli transform into two ill-favour old 
ladi of hi acquaintance. On heathfield, near tavistock, the wild 
huntsman ride by full moon with hi "wush hounds;" and a white hare 
which they pursu wa onc rescu by a goodi return from market, 
and discov to be a transform young lady. 

gervais of tilburi say in hi _otia imperalia_-- 

"vidimu frequent in anglia, per lunationes, homin in lupo 
mutari, quod hominum genu _gerulfos_ galli vocant, angli vero 
_wer-wlf,_ dicunt: _wer_ enim anglic virum sonat, _wlf_, lupum." 
gervais may be right in hi deriv of the name, and were-wolf may 
mean man-wolf, though I have elsewher given a differ derivation, 
and one which I suspect is truer. but gervais ha ground for hi 
assert that _wér_ signifi man; it is so in anglo-saxon, _vair_ in 
gothic, _vir_ in latin, _verr_, in icelandic, _vîra_, zend, _wirs_, 
old prussian, _wirs_, lettish, _vîra_, sanskrit, _bîr_, bengalee. 

there have been case of cannib in scotland, but no bestial 
transform is hint at in connect with them. 

thu bthius, in hi histori of scotland, tell us of a robber and hi 
daughter who devour children, and lindsay of pitscotti give a full 
account. 

"about thi time (1460) there wa ane brigand ta'en with hi haill 
family, who haunt a place in angus. thi mischiev man had ane 
execr fashion to take all young men and children he could steal 
away quietly, or tak' away without knowledge, and eat them, and the 
younger they were, esteem them the mair tender and delicious. for 
the whilk caus and damnabl abuse, he with hi wife and bairn were 
all burnt, except ane young wench of a year old who wa save and 
brought to dandee, where she wa brought up and fostered; and when she 
came to a woman' years, she wa condemn and burnt quick for that 
crime. It is said that when she wa come to the place of execution, 
there gather ane huge multitud of people, and special of women, 
curs her that she wa so unhappi to commit so damnabl deeds. To 
whom she turn about with an ire countenance, saying:--'wherefor 
chide ye with me, as if I had commit ane unworthi act? give me 
credenc and trow me, if ye had experi of eat men and women' 
flesh, ye wold think it so delici that ye wold never forbear it 
again.' so, but ani sign of repentance, thi unhappi traitor die in 
the sight of the people." [1] 

[1. lindsay' _chronicl of scotland_, 1814, p. 163.] 

wyntoun also ha a passag in hi metric chronicl regard a 
cannib who live shortli befor hi own time, and he may easili have 
heard about him from surviv contemporaries. It wa about the year 
1340, when a larg portion of scotland had been devast by the arm 
of edward iii. 

about perth thare wa the countri 
sae waste, that wonder we to see; 

for intil well-great space thereby, 
we nother hous left nor herb'ry. 
Of deer thare we then sic foison (profusion), 
that they wold near come to the town, 
sae great default wa near that stead, 
that moni were in hunger dead. 
A carl they said wa near thereby, 
that wold act setti (traps) commonly, 
children and women for to slay, 
and swain that he might over-ta; 
and ate them all that he get might; 
chwsten cleek till name behight. 
that sa'ri life continu he, 
while wast but folk wa the countrie. [1] 

[1. wyntoun' _chronicle_, ii. 236.] 

We have onli to compar these two case with those record in the 
last two chapters, and we see at onc how the popular mind in great 
britain had lost the idea of connect chang of form with 
cannibalism. A man guilti of the crime commit by the angu 
brigand, or the carl of perth, would have been regard as a 
were-wolf in franc or germany, and would have been tri for 
lycanthropy. 

S. jerome, by the way, brought a sweep charg against the scots. He 
visit gaul in hi youth, about 880, and he writes:--"when I wa a 
young man in gaul, I may have seen the attacotti, a british peopl who 
live upon human flesh; and when they find herd of pigs, drove of 
cattle, or flock of sheep in the woods, they cut off the haunch of 
the men and the breast of the women, and these they regard as great 
dainties;" in other word they prefer the shepherd to hi flock. 
gibbon who quot thi passag say on it: "if in the neighbourhood of 
the commerci and literari town of glasgow, a race of cannib ha 
realli existed, we may contemplate, in the period of the scottish 
history, the opposit extrem of savag and civil life. such 
reflect tend to enlarg the circl of our ideas, and to encourag 
the pleas hope that new zealand may produc in a futur age, the 
hume of the southern hemisphere." 

If tradit of were-wolv are scanti in england, it is quit the 
revers if we cross the water. 

In the south of france, it is still believ that fate ha destin 
certain men to be lycanthropists--that they are transform into 
wolv at full moon. the desir to run come upon them at night. they 
leav their beds, jump out of a window, and plung into a fountain. 
after the bath, they come out cover with dens fur, walk on all 
fours, and commenc a raid over field and meadows, through wood and 
villages, bite all beast and human be that come in their way. 
At the approach of dawn, they return to the spring, plung into it, 
lose their furri skins, and regain their desert beds. sometim the 
loup-gar is said to appear under the form of a white dog, or to be 
load with chains; but there is probabl a confus of idea between 
the were-wolf and the church-dog, bar-ghest, pad-foit, wush-hound, or 
by whatev name the anim suppos to haunt a churchyard is 
designated. 

In the périgord, the were-wolf is call louléerou. certain men, 
especi bastards, are oblig at each full moon to transform 
themselv into these diabol beasts. 

It is alway at night that the fit come on. the lycanthropist dash 
out of a window, spring into a well, and, after have struggl in 
the water for a few moments, rise from it, dripping, and invest 
with a goatskin which the devil ha given him. In thi condition, the 
louléer run upon four legs, pass the night in rang over the 
country, and in bite and devour all the dog they meet. At break 
of day they lay asid their goatskin and return home. often they are 
ill in consequ of have eaten tough old hounds, and they vomit up 
their undigest paws. one great nuisanc to them is the fact that 
they may be wound or kill in their louléer state. with the first 
effus of blood their diabol cover vanishes, and they are 
recognized, to the disgrac of their families. 

A were-wolf may easili be detected, even when devoid of hi skin; for 
hi hand are broad, and hi finger short, and there are alway some 
hair in the hollow of hi hand. 

In normandy, those who are doom to be loups-garoux, cloth 
themselv everi even with a skin call their _hère_ or _hure_, 
which is a loan from the devil. when they run in their transform 
state, the evil one accompani them and scourg them at the foot of 
everi cross they pass. the onli way in which a werewolf can be 
liber from thi cruel bondage, is by stab him three time in 
the forehead with a knife. however, some peopl less addict to 
allopath treatment, consid that three drop of blood drawn by a 
needle, will be suffici to procur release. 

accord to an opinion of the vulgar in the same province, the 
loup-gar is sometim a metamorphosi forc upon the bodi of a 
damn person, who, after have been torment in hi grave, ha torn 
hi way out of it. the first stage in the process consist in hi 
devour the cerecloth which envelop hi face; then hi moan and 
muffl howl ring from the tomb, through the gloom of night, the 
earth of the grave begin to heave, and at last, with a scream, 
surround by a phosphoresc glare, and exhal a ftid odour, he 
burst away as a wolf. 

In Le bessin, they attribut to sorcer the power of metamorphos 
certain men into beasts, but the form of a dog is that princip 
affect by them. 

In norway it is believ that there are person who can assum the 
form of a wolf or a bear (huse-björn), and again resum their own; 
thi properti is either impart to them by the trollmen, or those 
possess it are themselv trolls. 

In a hamlet in the midst of a forest, there dwelt a cottag name 
lasse, and hi wife. one day he went out in the forest to fell a tree, 
but had forgot to cross himself and say hi paternoster, so that some 
troll or wolf-witch (varga mor) obtain power over him and 
transform him into a wolf. hi wife mourn him for mani years, but, 
one christmas-eve, there came a beggar-woman, veri poor and ragged, to 
the door, and the good woman of the hous took her in, fed her well, 
and entreat her kindly. At her departur the beggar-woman said that 
the wife would probabl see her husband again, as he wa not dead, but 
wa wander in the forest as a wolf. toward night-fal the wife 
went to her pantri to place in it a piec of meat for the morrow, 
when, on turn to go out, she perceiv a wolf stand befor her, 
rais itself with it paw on the pantri steps, regard her with 
sorrow and hungri looks. see thi she exclaimed, "if I were sure 
that thou wert my own lasse, I would give thee a bit of meat." At that 
instant the wolf-skin fell off, and her husband stood befor her in 
the cloth he wore on the unlucki morn when she had last beheld 
him. 

finns, lapps, and russian are held in particular aversion, becaus 
the swede believ that they have power to chang peopl into wild 
beasts. dure the last year of the war with russia, when calmar wa 
overrun with an unusu number of wolves, it wa gener said that 
the russian had transform their swedish prison into wolves, and 
sent them home to invest the country. 

In denmark the follow stori are told:-- 

A man, who from hi childhood had been a were-wolf, when return one 
night with hi wife from a merrymaking, observ that the hour wa at 
hand when the evil usual came upon him; give therefor the rein 
to hi wife, he descend from the vehicle, say to her, "if 
anyth come to thee, onli strike at it with thine apron." He then 
withdrew, but immedi after, the woman, as she wa sit in the 
vehicle, wa attach by a were-wolf. she did as the man had enjoin 
her, and struck it with her apron, from which it rive a portion, and 
then ran away. after some time the man returned, hold in hi mouth 
the rent portion of hi wife' apron, on see which, she cri out 
in terror,--"good lord, man, why, thou art a were-wolf!" "thank thee, 
wife," said he, "now I am free." and from that time he wa no more 
afflicted. 

If a femal at midnight stretch between four stick the membran 
which envelop the foal when it is brought forth, and creep through 
it, naked, she will bear children without pain; but all the boy will 
be were-wolves, and all the girl maras. By day the were-wolf ha the 
human form, though he may be known by the meet of hi eyebrow 
abov the nose. At a certain time of the night he ha the form of a 
dog on three legs. It is onli when anoth person tell him that he is 
a were-wolf, or reproach him with be such, that a man can be 
freed from the ban. 

accord to a danish popular song, a hero transform by hi 
step-moth into a bear, fight with a knight:-- 

for 'ti she who bath bewitch me, 
A woman fals and fell, 
bound an iron girdl round me, 
If thou can'st not break thi belt, 
knight, i'll thee destroy! 
* * * * 
the nobl made the christian sign, 
the girdl snapped, the bear wa changed, 
and see! he wa a lusti knight, 
hi father' realm regained. 

_kjæmpeviser_, p. 147. 

when an old bear in ofoden priestegjeld wa killed, after it had 
caus the death of six men und sixti horses, it wa found to be 
gird with a similar girdle. 

In schleswig and holstein they say that if the were-wolf be thrice 
address by hi baptism name, he resum hi human form. 

On a hot harvest day some reaper lay down in the field to take their 
noontid sleep, when one who could not sleep observ that the fellow 
next to him rose softly, and have gird himself with a strap, 
becam a were-wolf. 

A young man belong to jägerup return late one night from 
billund, wa attacked, when near jägerup, by three were-wolves, and 
would probabl have been torn to pieces, had he not save himself by 
leap into a rye-field, for there they had no more power over him. 

At caseburg, on the isl of usedom, a man and hi wife were busi in 
the field make hay, when after some time the woman said to the man 
that she had no more peace, she could stay no longer, and went away. 
but she had previous desir her husband to promise, that if 
perchanc a wild beast should come that way, he would cast hi hat at 
it and then run away, and it would do him no injury. she had been gone 
but a short while, when a wolf came swim across the swine, and ran 
directli toward the haymakers. the man threw hi hat at it, which the 
anim instantli tore to rags. but in the meantim a boy had run up 
with a pitchfork, and he dab the wolf from behind: in the same 
moment it becam changed, and all saw that the boy had kill the 
man' wife. 

formerli there were individu in the neighbourhood of steina, who, 
by put on a certain girdle, could transform themselv into 
were-wolves. A man of the neighbourhood, who had such a girdle, forgot 
one day when go out to lock it up, as wa hi wont. dure hi 
absence, hi littl son chanc to find it; he buckl it round him., 
and wa instantan turn into an animal, to all outward 
appear like a bundl of peat-straw, and he roll about like an 
unwieldi bear. when those who were in the room perceiv this, they 
hasten in search of the father, who wa found in time to come and 
unbuckl the belt, befor the child had done ani mischief. the boy 
afterward said, that when he had put on the girdle, he wa seiz 
with such a rage hunger, that he wa readi to tear in piec and 
devour all that came in hi way. 

the girdl is suppos to be made of human skin, and to be three 
finger-breadth wide. 

In east friesland, it is believed, when seven girl succeed each other 
in one family, that among them one is of necess a were-wolf, so 
that youth are slow in seek one of seven sister in marriage. 

accord to a curiou lithuanian stori relat by schleicher in hi 
_litauisch märchen_, a person who is a were-wolf or bear ha to 
remain kneel in one spot for one hundr year befor he can hope 
to obtain releas from hi bestial form. 

In the netherland they relat the follow tale:--a man had onc 
gone out with hi bow to attend a shoot match at rousse, but when 
about half way to the place, he saw on a sudden, a larg wolf spring 
from a thicket, and rush toward a young girl, who wa sit in a 
meadow by the roadsid watch cows. the man did not long hesitate, 
but quickli draw forth an arrow, took aim, and luckili hit the wolf 
in the right side, so that the arrow remain stick in the wound, 
and the anim fled howl to the wood. 

On the follow day he heard that a serving-man of the burgomaster' 
household lay at the point of death, in consequ of have been 
shot in the right side, on the preced day. thi so excit the 
archer' curiosity, that he went to the wound man, and request to 
see the arrow. He recogn it immedi as one of hi own. then, 
have desir all present to leav the room, he persuad the man to 
confess that he wa a were-wolf and that he had devour littl 
children. On the follow day he died. 

among the bulgarian and sloyakian the were-wolf is call _vrkolak_, 
a name resembl that given it by the modern greek {greek 
_brúkolakas_}. the greek were-wolf is close relat to the vampire. 
the lycanthropist fall into a catalept trance, dure which hi 
soul leav hi body, enter that of a wolf and raven for blood. On 
the return of the soul, the bodi is exhaust and ach as though it 
had been put through violent exercise. after death lycanthropist 
becom vampires. they are believ to frequent battlefield in wolf or 
hyæna shapes, and to suck the breath from die soldiers, or to enter 
hous and steal the infant from their cradles. modern greek call 
ani savage-look man, with dark complexion, and with distorted, 
misshapen limbs, a {greek _brúkolakas_}, and suppos him to be 
invest with power of run in wolf-form. 

the serb connect the vampir and the were-wolf together, and call 
them by one name _vlkoslak_. these rage chiefli in the depth of 
winter: they hold their annual gatherings, and at them divest 
themselv of their wolf-skins, which they hang on the tree around 
them. If ani one succe in obtain the skin and burn it, the 
vlkoslak is thenceforth disenchanted. 

the power to becom a were-wolf is obtain by drink the water 
which settl in a foot-print left in clay by a wolf. 

among the white russian the _wawkalak_ is a man who ha incur the 
wrath of the devil, and the evil one punish him by transform him 
into a wolf and send him among hi relations, who recogn him and 
feed him well. He is a most amiabl dispos were-wolf, for he doe no 
mischief, and testifi hi affect for hi kindr by lick their 
hands. He cannot, however, remain long in ani place, but is driven 
from hous to house, and from hamlet to hamlet, by an irresist 
passion for chang of scene. thi is an ugli superstition, for it set 
a premium on stand well with the evil one. 

the sloyakian merrili term a drunkard a vlkodlak, because, forsooth, 
he make a beast of himself. A slovakian household were-wolf tale 
close thi chapter. 

the pole have their were-wolves, which rage twice in the year--at 
christma and at midsummer. 

accord to a polish story, if a witch lay a girdl of human skin on 
the threshold of a hous in which a marriag is be celebrated, the 
bride and bridegroom, and bridesmaid and groomsmen, should they step 
across it, are transform into wolves. after three years, however, 
the witch will cover them with skin with the hair. turn outward; 
immedi they will recov their natur form. On one occasion, a 
witch cast a skin of too scanti dimens over the bridegroom, so 
that hi tail wa left uncovered: he resum hi human form, but 
retain hi lupin caudal appendag {_i.e. tail--jbh_}. 

the russian call the were-wolf _oborot_, which signifi "one 
transformed." the follow receipt is given by them for becom one. 

"he who desir to becom an oborot, let him seek in the forest a 
hewn-down tree; let him stab it with a small copper knife, and walk 
round the tree, repeat the follow incantation:-- 

On the sea, on the ocean, on the island, on bujan, 
On the empti pastur gleam the moon, on an ashstock lie 
In a green wood, in a gloomi vale. 
toward the stock wandereth a shaggi wolf. 
horn cattl seek for hi sharp white fangs; 
but the wolf enter not the forest, 
but the wolf dive not into the shadowi vale, 
moon, moon, gold-horn moon, 
cheek the flight of bullets, blunt the hunters' knives, 
break the shepherds' cudgels, 
cast wild fear upon all cattle, 
On men, on all creep things, 
that they may not catch the grey wolf, 
that they may not rend hi warm skin 
My word is binding, more bind than sleep, 
more bind than the promis of a hero! 

"then he spring thrice over the tree and run into the forest, 
transform into a wolf." [1] 

[1. sacharow: _inland_, 1838, no. 17.] 

In the ancient bohemian lexicon of vacerad (a. D. 1202) the were-wolf 
is call vilkodlak, and is explain as faunus. safarik say under 
that head,- 

"incubi sepe improbi existunt mulieribus, et earum peragunt 
concubitum, quo demon galli _dusios_ nuncupant." and in anoth 
place: "vilkodlaci, incubi, sive invidi, ab inviando passim cum 
animalibus, und et incubi dicuntur ab incubando homines, i. e. 
stuprando, quo romani fauno ficario dicunt." 

that the same belief in lycanthropi exist in armenia is evid from 
the follow stori told by haxthausen, in hi _trans-caucasia_ 
(leipzig, i. 322):--"a man onc saw a wolf, which had carri off a 
child, dash past him. He pursu it hastily, but wa unabl to 
overtak it. At last he came upon the hand and feet of a child, and a 
littl further on he found a cave, in which lay a wolf-skin. thi he 
cast into a fire, and immedi a woman appeared, who howl and 
tri to rescu the skin from the flames. the man, however, resisted, 
and, as soon as the hide wa consumed, the woman had vanish in the 
smoke." 

In india, on account of the preval of the doctrin of 
metempsychosis, the belief in transform is wide diffused. 
trace of genuin lycanthropi are abund in all region whither 
buddism ha reached. In ceylon, in thibet, and in china, we find it 
still form a portion of the nation creed. 

In the pantschatantra is a stori of an enchant brahmin' son, who by 
day wa a serpent, by night a man. 

vikramâditya' father, the son of indra, wa condemn to be an ass by 
day and a man by night. 

A modern indian tale is to thi effect:--a princ marri a femal 
ape, but hi brother wed handsom princesses. At a feast given by the 
queen to her stepdaughters, there appear an exquisit beauti 
ladi in gorgeou robes. thi is none other than the she-ape, who ha 
laid asid her skin for the occasion: the princ slip out of the room 
and burn the skin, so that hi wife is prevent from resum her 
favourit appearance. 

nathaniel pierc [1] give an account of an abyssinian 
superstit veri similar to that preval in europe. 

[1. _life and adventur of nathaniel pierce_, written by himself 
dure a resid in abyssinia from 1810-19. london, 1831.] 

He say that in abyssinia the gold. and silversmith are highli 
regarded, but that the ironwork are look upon with contempt, as 
an inferior grade of beings. their kinsmen even ascrib to them the 
power of transform themselv into hyænas, or other savag beasts. 
all convuls and hyster disord are attribut to the effect 
of their evil eye. the amhara call them _buda_, the tigré, _tebbib_. 
there are also mahomedan and jewish budas. It is difficult to explain 
the origin of thi strang superstition. these buda are distinguish 
from other peopl by wear gold ear-rings, and coffin declar that 
he ha often found hyæna with these ring in their ears, even among 
the beast which he ha shot or spear himself. but how the ring got 
into their ear is more than coffin wa abl to ascertain. 

besid their power to transform themselv into hyæna or other wild 
beasts, all sort of other strang thing are ascrib to them; and 
the abyssinian are firmli persuad that they rob the grave by 
midnight, and no one would ventur to touch what is call _quanter_, 
or dri meat in their houses, though they would not object to partak 
of fresh meat, if they had seen the animal, from which it came, kill 
befor them. coffin relates, as eye-wit of the fact, the follow 
story:-- 

among hi servant wa a buda, who, one evening, whilst it wa still 
light, came to hi master and ask leav of absenc till the 
follow morning. He obtain the requir leav and departed; but 
scarc had coffin turn hi head, when one of hi men 
exclaimed,--"look! there he is, chang himself into hyæna," point 
in the direct taken by the buda. coffin turn to look, and 
although he did not wit the process of transformation, the young 
man had vanish from the spot on which he had been standing, not a 
hundr pace distant, and in hi place wa a hyæna run away. the 
place wa a plain without either bush or tree to imped the view. next 
morn the young man returned, and wa charg by hi companion with 
the transformation: thi he rather acknowledg than denied, for he 
excus himself on the plea that it wa the habit of hi class. thi 
statement of pierc is corrobor by a note contribut by sir 
gardner wilkinson to rawlinson' _herodotus_ (book iv. chap. 105). "A 
class of peopl in abyssinia are believ to chang themselv into 
hyæna when they like. On my appear to discredit it, I wa told by 
one who live for year there, that no well-inform person doubt 
it, and that he wa onc walk with one of them, when he happen to 
look away for a moment, and on turn again toward hi companion, he 
saw him trot off in the shape of a hyæna. He met him afterward in 
hi old form. these worthi are blacksmiths.--g. w." 

A precis similar superstit seem to have exist in america, for 
joseph acosta (_hist. nat. de indes_) relat that the ruler of a 
citi in mexico, who wa sent for by the predecessor of montezuma, 
transform himself, befor the eye of those who were sent to seiz 
him, into an eagle, a tiger, and an enorm serpent. He yield at 
last, and wa condemn to death. No longer in hi own house, he wa 
unabl to work miracl so as to save hi life. the bishop of chiapa, 
a provinc of guatemala, in a write publish in 1702, ascrib the 
same power to the naguals, or nation priests, who labour to bring 
back to the religion of their ancestors, the children brought up as 
christian by the government. after variou ceremonies, when the child 
instruct advanc to embrac him, the nagual suddenli assum a 
fright aspect, and under the form of a lion or tiger, appear 
chain to the young christian convert.--(_recueil de voyages_, tom. 
ii. 187.) 

among the north american indians, the belief in transform is veri 
prevalent. the follow stori close resembl one veri preval 
all over the world. 

"one indian fix hi resid on the border of the great bear lake, 
take with him onli a dog big with young. In due time, thi dog 
brought forth eight pups. whenev the indian went out to fish, he 
tie up the pups, to prevent the stray of the litter. sever 
times, as he approach hi tent, he heard nois proceed from it, 
which sound like the talking, the laughing, the crying, the wail, 
and the merriment of children; but, on enter it, he onli perceiv 
the pup tie up as usual. hi curios be excit by the nois 
he had heard, he determin to watch and learn whenc these sound 
proceeded, and what they were. one day he pretend to go out to fish, 
but, instead of do so, he conceal himself in a conveni place. 
In a short time he again heard -voices, and, rush suddenli into the 
tent, beheld some beauti children sport and laughing, with the 
dog-skin lie by their side. He threw the dog-skin into the fire, 
and the children, retain their proper forms, grew up, and were the 
ancestor of the dog-rib nation."--(_tradit of the north american 
indians_, by T. A. jones, 1830, vol. ii. p. 18.) 

In the same work is a curiou stori entitl _the mother of the 
world_, which bear a close analog to anoth world-wid myth: a 
woman marri a dog, by night the dog lay asid it skin, and appear 
as a man. thi may be compar with the tale of björn and bera alreadi 
given. 

I shall close thi chapter with a slovakian household tale given by T. 
T. hanush in the third volum of _zeitschrift für deutsch 
mythologie_. 

_the daughter of the vlkolak_ 

"there wa onc a father, who had nine daughters, and they were all 
marriageable, but the youngest wa the most beautiful. the father wa 
a were-wolf. one day it came into hi head: 'what is the good of 
have to support so mani girls?' so he determin to put them all out 
of the way. 

"he went accordingli into the forest to hew wood, and he order hi 
daughter to let one of them bring him hi dinner. It wa the eldest 
who brought it. 

"'why, how come you so earli with the food?' ask the woodcutter. 

"'truly, father, I wish to strengthen you, lest you should fall upon 
us, if famished!' 

"'a good lass! sit down whilst I eat.' He ate, and whilst he ate he 
thought of a scheme. He rose and said: I My girl, come, and I will 
show you a pit I have been digging.' 

"'and what is the pit for? ' 

"'that we may be buri in it when we die, for poor folk will not be 
care for much after they are dead and gone.' 

"so the girl went with him to the side of the deep pit. 'now hear,' 
said the were-wolf, 'you must die and be cast in there.' 

"she beg for her life, but all in vain, so he laid hold of her and 
cast her into the grave. then he took a great stone and flung it in 
upon her and crush her head, so the poor thing breath out her 
soul. when the were-wolf had done thi he went back to hi work, and 
as dusk came on, the second daughter arrived, bring him food. He 
told her of the pit, and brought her to it, and cast her in, and 
kill her as the first. and so he dealt with all hi girl up to the 
last. the youngest knew well that her father wa a were-wolf, and she 
wa griev that her sister did not return; she thought, 'now where 
can they be? ha my father kept them for companionship; or to help him 
in hi work?' So she made the food which she wa to take him, and 
crept cautious through the wood. when she came near the place where 
her father worked, she heard hi stroke fell timber, and smelt 
smoke. she saw present a larg fire and two human head roast at 
it. turn from the fire, she went in the direct of the 
axe-strokes, and found her father. 

"see,' said she, 'father, I have brought you food.' 

"that is a good lass,' said he. 'now stack the wood for me whilst I 
eat.' 

"'but where are my sisters?' she asked. 

"'down in yon valley draw wood,' he repli 'follow me, and I will 
bring you to them.' 

"they came to the pit; then he told her that he had dug it for a 
grave. 'now,' said he, 'you must die, and be cast into the pit with 
your sisters. ' 

"'turn aside, father,' she asked, 'whilst I strip of my clothes, and 
then slay me if you will.' 

"he turn asid as she requested, and then--tchich! she gave him a 
push, and he tumbl headlong into the hole he had dug for her. 

"she fled for her life, for the were-wolf wa not injured, and he soon 
would scrambl out of the pit. 

"now she hear hi howl resound through the gloomi alley of the 
forest, and swift as the wind she runs. she hear the tramp of hi 
approach feet, and the snuffl of hi breath. then she cast behind 
her her handkerchief. the were-wolf seiz thi with teeth and nails, 
and rend it till it is reduc to tini ribands. In anoth moment he 
is again in pursuit foam at the mouth, and howl dismally, whilst 
hi red eye gleam like burn coals. As he gain on her, she cast 
behind her her gown, and bid him tear that. He seiz the gown and 
rive it to shreds, then again he pursues. thi time she cast behind 
her her apron, next her petticoat, then her shift, and at last rum 
much in the condit in which she wa born. again the were-wolf 
approaches; she bound out of the forest into a hay-field, and hide 
herself in the smallest heap of hay. her father enter the field, run 
howl about it in search of her, cannot find her, and begin to 
upset the differ haycocks, all the while growl and gnash hi 
gleam white fang in hi rage at her have escap him. the foam 
flake drop at everi step from hi mouth, and hi skin is reek with 
sweat. befor he ha reach the smallest bundl of hay hi strength 
leav him, he feel exhaust begin to creep over him, and he 
retir to the forest. 

"the king goe out hunt everi clay; one of hi dog carri food to 
the hay-field, which ha most unaccount been neglect by the 
hay-mak for three days. the king, follow the dog, discov the 
fair damsel, not exactli 'in the straw,' but up to her neck in hay. 
she is carried, hay and all, to the palace, where she becom hi 
wife, make onli one stipul befor becom hi bride, and that 
is, that no beggar shall be permit to enter the palace. 

"after some year a beggar doe get in, the beggar being, of course, 
none other than her were-wolf father. He steal upstairs, enter the 
nursery, cut the throat of the two children born by the queen to 
her lord, and lay the knife under her pillow. 

"in the morning, the king, suppos hi wife to be the murderess, 
drive her from home, with the dead princ hung about her neck. A 
hermit come to the rescue, and restor the babi to life. the king 
find out hi mistake, is reunit to the ladi out of the hay, and the 
were-wolf is cast off a high cliff into the sea, and that is the end 
of him. the king, the queen, and the princ live happily, and may be 
live yet, for no notic of their death ha appear in the 
newspaper." 

thi stori bear some resembl to one told by von hahn in hi 
_griechisch und albanesisch märchen_; I rememb have heard a veri 
similar one in the pyrenees; but the man who fli from the were-wolf 
is one who, after have strip off all hi clothes, rush into a 
cottag and jump into a bed. the were-wolf dare not, or cannot, 
follow. the caus of hi flight wa also different. He wa a freemason 
who had divulg the secret, and the were-wolf wa the master of hi 
lodg in pursuit of him. In the bearnai story, there is noth 
similar to the last part of the slovakian tale, and in the greek one 
the transform and the pursuit are omitted, though the woman-eat 
is call "dog's-head," much as an outlaw in the north of europ wa 
said to be wolf-headed. 

It is worthi of notic in the tale of _the daughter of the ulkolak_, 
that the were-wolf fit is follow by great exhaustion, [1] and 
that the wolf is given cloth to tear, much as in the danish stori 
alreadi related. there doe not seem to be ani indic of hi 
lave chang hi shape, at least no chang is mentioned, hi hand 
are spoken of, and he swear and curs hi daughter in broad 
slovakian. the fit veri close resembl that to which skallagrim, 
the icelander, wa subject. It is a piti that the maid bràk in the 
iceland tale did not fall upon her leg like the young ladi in the 
hay. 

[1. compar thi with the exhaust follow a berserkir fit, and 
that which succeed the attack to which M. bertrand wa subject.] 



chapter ix. 

natur caus OF lycanthropy. 


innat cruelty--it three forms--dumollard--andrea bichel--a dutch 
priest--oth instanc of inher cruelty--cruelti unit to 
refinement--a hungarian bather in blood--sudden with which the 
passion is developed--cannibalism; in pregnant women; in 
maniacs--hallucination; how produced--salves--th stori of 
lucius--self-deception. 

what I have relat from the chronicl of antiquity, or from the 
tradit lore of the people, is veil under the form of myth or 
legend; and it is onli from scandinavian descript of those 
afflict with the wolf-madness, and from the trial of those charg 
with the crime of lycanthropi in the later middl ages, that we can 
arriv at the truth respect that form of mad which wa invest 
by the superstiti with so much mystery. 

It wa not till the close of the middl age that lycanthropi wa 
recogn as a disease; but it is one which ha so much that is 
ghastli and revolt in it form, and it is so remot from all our 
ordinari experience, that it is not surpris that the casual 
observ should leav the consider of it, as a subject isol 
and perplexing, and be dispos to regard as a myth that which the 
fear investig might prove a reality. 

In thi chapter I purpos briefli examin the condit under which 
men have been regard as werewolves. 

startl though the assert may be, it is a matter of fact, that 
man, naturally, in common with other carnivora, is actuat by an 
impuls to kill, and by a love of destroy life. 

It is posit true that there are mani to whom the sight of 
suffer caus genuin pleasure, and in whom the passion to kill or 
tortur is as strong as ani other passion. wit the number of boy 
who assembl around a sheep or pig when it is about to be killed, and 
who watch the struggl of the die brute with heart beat fast 
with pleasure, and eye sparkl with delight. often have I seen an 
eager crowd of children assembl around the slaughterhous of french 
towns, absorb in the expir agoni of the sheep and cattle, and 
hush into silenc as they watch the flow of blood. 

the propensity, however, exist in differ degrees. In some it is 
manifest simpli as indiffer to suffering, in other it appear as 
simpl pleasur in see killed, and in other again it is domin 
as an irresist desir to tortur and destroy. 

thi propens is wide diffused; it exist in children and adults, 
in the gross-mind and the refined., in the well-educ and the 
ignorant, in those who have never had the opportun of gratifi 
it, and those who gratifi it habitually, in spite of morality, 
religion, laws, so that it can onli depend on constitut causes. 

the sportsman and the fisherman follow a natur instinct to destroy, 
when they make wax on bird, beast, and fish: the pretenc that the 
spoil is sought for the tabl cannot be made with justice, as the 
sportsman care littl for the game he ha obtained, when onc it is 
consign to hi pouch. the motiv for hi eager pursuit of bird or 
beast must be sought elsewhere; it will be found in the natur 
crave to extinguish life, which exist in hi soul. whi doe a child 
impuls strike at a butterfli as it flit past him? He care 
noth for the insect when onc it is beaten down at hi feet, unless 
it be quiver in it agony, when he will watch it with interest. the 
child strike at the flutter creatur becaus it ha _life_ in it, 
and he ha an instinct within him impel him to destroy life 
wherev he find it. 

parent and nurs know well that children by natur are cruel, and 
that human ha to be acquir by education. A child will gloat over 
the suffer of a wound anim till hi mother bid him "put it 
out of it misery." An unsophist child would not dream of 
termin the poor creature' agoni abruptly, ani more than he 
would swallow whole a bon-bon till he had well suck it. inher 
cruelti may be obscur by after impressions, or may be kept under 
moral restraint; the person who is constitut a nero, may 
scarc know hi own nature, till by some accid the master passion 
becom dominant, and sweep all befor it. A relax of the moral 
check, a shock to the control intellect, an abnorm condit of 
body, are suffici to allow the passion to assert itself. 

As I have alreadi observed, thi passion exist in differ person 
in differ degrees. 

In some it is exhibit in simpl want of feel for other people' 
sufferings. thi tempera may lead to crime, for the individu who 
is regardless of pain in another, will be readi to destroy that other, 
if it suit hi own purposes. such an one wa the pauper dumollard, who 
wa the murder of at least six poor girls, and who attempt to kill 
sever others. He seem not to have felt much gratif in 
murder them, but to have been so utterli indiffer to their 
sufferings, that he kill them sole for the sake of their clothes, 
which were of the poorest description. He wa sentenc to the 
guillotine, and execut in 1862. [1] 

[1. A full account of thi man' trial is given by one who wa 
present, in _all the year round_, no. 162.] 

In others, the passion for blood is develop alongsid with 
indiffer to suffering. 

thu andrea bichel entic young women into hi house, under the 
pretenc that he wa possess of a magic mirror, in which he would 
show them their futur husbands; when he had them in hi power he 
bound their hand behind their backs, and stun them with a blow. He 
then stab them and despoil them of their clothes, for the sake of 
which he commit the murders; but as he kill the young women the 
passion of cruelti took possess of him, and he hack the poor 
girl to piec whilst they were still alive, in hi anxieti to 
examin their insides. catherin seidel he open with a hammer and a 
wedge, from her breast downwards, whilst still breathing. "I may say," 
he remark at hi trial, "that dure the oper I wa so eager, 
that I trembl all over, and I long to rive off a piec and eat 
it." 

andrea bichel wa execut in 1809. [1] 

[1. the case of andrea bichel is given in ladi duff gordon' 
_remark crimin trials_.] 

again, a third class of person are cruel and bloodthirsty, becaus in 
them bloodthirsti is a rage insati passion. In a civil 
countri those possess by thi passion are forc to control it 
through fear of the consequences, or to gratifi it upon the brute 
creation. but in earlier days, when feudal lord were suprem in their 
domains, there have been fright instanc of their excesses, and 
the extent to which some of the roman emperor indulg their passion 
for blood is matter of history. 

gall give sever authent instanc of bloodthirstiness. [1] A 
dutch priest had such a desir to kill and to see killed, that he 
becam chaplain to a regiment that he might have the satisfact of 
see death occur wholesal in engagements. the same man kept a 
larg collect of variou kind of domest animals, that he might 
be abl to tortur their young. He kill the anim for hi kitchen, 
and wa acquaint with all the hangmen in the country, who sent him 
notic of executions, and he would walk for day that he might have 
the gratif of see a man executed. 

[1. gall: _sur le fonction du cerveau_, tom. iv.] 

In the field of battl the passion is various developed; some feel 
posit delight in slaying, other are indifferent. An old soldier, 
who had been in waterloo, inform me that to hi mind there wa no 
pleasur equal to run a man through the body, and that he could 
lie awak at night muse on the pleasur sensat afford him 
by that act. 

highwaymen are frequent not content with robbery, but manifest a 
bloodi inclin to torment and kill. john rosbeck, for instance, is 
well known to have invent and exercis the most atroci 
cruelties, mere that he might wit the suffer of hi victims, 
who were especi women and children. neither fear nor tortur could 
break him of the dread passion till he wa executed. 

gall tell of a violin-player, who, be arrested, confess to 
thirty-four murders, all of which he had committed, not from enmiti or 
intent to rob, but sole becaus it afford him an intens pleasur 
to kill. 

spurzheim [1] tell of a priest at strasbourg, who, though rich, 
and uninfluenc by envi or revenge, from exactli the same motive, 
kill three persons. 

[1. _doctrin of the mind_, p. 158.] 

gall relat the case of a brother of the duke of bourbon, condé, 
count of charlois, who, from infancy, had an inveter pleasur in 
tortur animals: grow older, he live to shed the blood of human 
beings, and to exercis variou kind of cruelty. He also murder 
mani from no other motive, and shot at slater for the pleasur of 
see them fall from the roof of houses. 

loui xi. of franc caus the death of 4,000 peopl dure hi reign; 
he use to watch their execut from a neighbour lattice. He had 
gibbet place outsid hi own palace, and himself conduct the 
executions. 

It must not be suppos that cruelti exist mere in the coars and 
rude; it is quit as frequent observ in the refin and educated. 
among the former it is manifest chiefli in insens to the 
suffer of others; in the latter it appear as a passion, the 
indulg of which caus intens pleasure. 

those bloodi tyrants, nero and caligula, alexand borgia, and 
robespierre, whose highest enjoy consist in wit the 
agoni of their fellow-men, were full of delic sensibl and 
great refin of tast and manner. 

I have seen an accomplish young woman of consider refin and 
of a highli strung nervou temperament, string fli with her needl 
on a piec of thread, and watch complac their flutterings. 
cruelti may remain latent till, by some accident. it is aroused, and 
then it will break forth in a devour flame. It is the same with the 
passion for blood as with the passion of love and hate; we have no 
concept of the violenc with which they can rage till circumst 
occur which call them into action. love or hate will be domin in a 
breast which ha been in serenity, till suddenli the spark falls, 
passion blaze forth, and the seren of the quiet breast is 
shatter for ever. A word, a glance, a touch, are suffici to fire 
the magazin of passion in the heart, and to desol for ever an 
existence. It is the same with bloodthirstiness. It may lurk in the 
deep of some heart veri dear to us. It may smoulder in the bosom 
which is most cherish by us, and we may be perfectli unconsci of 
it exist there. perhap circumst will not caus it 
development; perhap moral principl may have bound it down with 
fetter it can never break. 

michael wagen [1] relat a horribl stori which occur in 
hungary, suppress the name of the person, as it wa that of a still 
power famili in the country. It illustr what I have been 
saying, and show how trifl a matter may develop the passion in 
it most hideou proportions. 

[1. _beitrag zur philosophischen anthropologie_, wien, 1796.] 

"elizabeth ------ wa wont to dress well in order to pleas her 
husband, and she spent half the day over her toilet. On one occasion, 
a lady's-maid saw someth wrong in her head-dress, and as a 
recomp for observ it, receiv such a sever box on the ear 
that the blood gush from her nose, and spirt on to her mistress' 
face. when the blood drop were wash off her face, her skin appear 
much more beautiful--whit and more transpar on the spot where 
the blood had been. 

"elizabeth form the resolut to bath her face and her whole bodi 
in human blood so as to enhanc her beauty. two old women and a 
certain fitzko assist her in her undertaking. thi monster use to 
kill the luckless victim, and the old women caught the blood, in which 
elizabeth wa wont to bath at the hour of four in the morning. after 
the bath she appear more beauti than before. 

"she continu thi habit after the death of her husband (1604) in the 
hope of gain new suitors. the unhappi girl who were allur to 
the castle, under the plea that they were to be taken into servic 
there, were lock up in a cellar. here they were beaten till their 
bodi were swollen. elizabeth not unfrequ tortur the victim 
herself; often she chang their cloth which drip with blood, and 
then renew her cruelties. the swollen bodi were then cut up with 
razors. 

"occasion she had the girl burned, and then cut up, but the great 
major were beaten to death. 

"at last her cruelti becam so great, that she would stick needl 
into those who sat with her in a carriage, especi if they were of 
her own sex. one of her servant-girl she strip naked, smear her 
with honey, and so drove her out of the house. 

"when she wa ill, and could not indulg her cruelty, she bit a person 
who came near her sick bed as though she were a wild beast. 

"she caused, in all, the death of 650 girls, some in tscheita, on the 
neutral ground, where she had a cellar construct for the purpose; 
other in differ localities; for murder and bloodsh becam with 
her a necessity. 

"when at last the parent of the lost children could no longer be 
cajoled, the castl wa seized, and the trace of the murder were 
discovered. her accomplic were executed, and she wa imprison for 
life." 

An equal remark exampl will be found in the account of the 
maresch de retz given at some length in the sequel. He va an 
accomplish man, a scholar, an abl general, and a courtier; but 
suddenli the impuls to murder and destroy came upon him whilst 
sit in the librari read suetonius; he yield to the impulse, 
and becam one of the greatest monster of cruelti the world ha 
produced. 

the case of sviatek, the gallician cannibal, is also to the purpose. 
thi man wa a harmless pauper, till one day accid brought him to 
the scene of a conflagration. hunger impel him to tast of the 
roast fragment of a human be who had perish in the fire, and 
from that moment he raven for man' flesh. 

M. bertrand wa a french gentleman of tast and education. He one day 
loung over the churchyard wall in a quiet countri villag and 
watch a funeral. instantli an overwhelm desir to dig up and rend 
the corps which he had seen commit to the ground came upon him, 
and for year he live as a human hyæna, prey upon the dead. hi 
stori is given in detail in the fifteenth chapter. 

An abnorm condit of bodi sometim produc thi desir for 
blood. It is manifest in certain case of pregnancy, when the 
constitut lose it balance, and the appetit becom diseased. 
schenk [1] give instances. 

[1. _observation medic_. lib. iv. De gravidis.] 

A pregnant woman saw a baker carri loav on hi bare shoulder. she 
wa at onc fill with such a crave for hi flesh that she refus 
to tast ani food till her husband persuad the baker, by the offer 
of a larg sum, to allow hi wife to bite him. the man yielded, and 
the woman flesh her teeth in hi shoulder twice; but he held out no 
longer. the wife bore twin on three occasions, twice living, the 
third time dead. 

A woman in an interest condition, near andernach on the rhine, 
murder her husband, to whom she wa warmli attached, ate half hi 
body, and salt the rest. when the passion left her she becam 
consciou of the horribl natur of her act, and she gave herself up 
to justice. 

In 1553, a wife cut her husband' throat, and gnaw the nose and the 
left arm, whilst the bodi wa yet warm. she then gut the corpse, 
and salt it for futur consumption. shortli after, she gave birth to 
three children, and she onli becam consciou of what she had done 
when her neighbour ask after the father, that they might announc 
to him the arriv of the littl ones. 

In the summer of 1845, the greek paper contain an account of a 
pregnant woman murder her husband for the purpos of roast and 
eat hi liver. 

that the passion to destroy is preval in certain maniac is well 
known; thi is sometim accompani by cannibalism. 

gruner [1] give an account of a shepherd who wa evid 
deranged, who kill and ate two men. marc [2] relat that a 
woman of unterelsas, dure the absenc of her husband, a poor 
labourer, murder her son, a lad fifteen month old. she chop of 
hi leg and stew them with cabbage. she ate a portion, and offer 
the rest to her husband. It is true that the famili were veri poor, 
but there wa food in the hous at the time. In prison the woman gave 
evid sign of derangement. 

[1. _de anthropophago bucano_. jen. 1792.] 

[2. _die geist krankheiten_. berlin, 1844.] 

the case in which bloodthirsti and cannib are unit with 
insan are those which properli fall under the head of lycanthropy. 
the instanc record in the preced chapter point unmistak to 
hallucin accompani the lust for blood. jean grenier, roulet, 
and others, were firmli convinc that they had undergon 
transformation. A disord condit of mind or bodi may produc 
hallucin in a form depend on the charact and instinct of 
the individual. thus, an ambiti man labour under monomania will 
imagin himself to be a king; a covet man will be plung in 
despair, believ himself to be penniless, or exult at the vast 
of the treasur which he imagin that he ha discovered. 

the old man suffer from rheumat or gout conceiv himself to be 
form of china or glass, and the foxhunt tallyhos! at each new 
moon, as though he were follow a pack. In like manner, the 
natur cruel man, if the least affect in hi brain, will suppos 
himself to be transform into the most cruel and bloodthirsti anim 
with which he is acquainted. 

the hallucin under which lycanthropist suffer may have arisen 
from variou causes. the older writers, as forestu and burton, regard 
the were-wolf mania as a speci of melancholi madness, and some do 
not deem it necessari for the patient to believ in hi transform 
for them to regard him as a lycanthropist. 

In the present state of medic knowledge, we know that veri differ 
condit may give rise to hallucinations. 

In fever case the sensibl is so disturb that the patient is 
often deceiv as to the space occupi by hi limbs, and he suppos 
them to be preternatur distend or contracted. In the case of 
typhus, it is not uncommon for the sick person, with derang nervou 
system, to believ himself to be doubl in the bed, or to be sever 
in half, or to have lost hi limbs. He may regard hi member as 
compos of foreign and often fragil materials, as glass, or he may 
so lose hi person as to suppos himself to have becom a woman. 

A monomaniac who believ himself to be some one else, seek to enter 
into the feelings, thoughts, and habit of the assum personality, 
and from the facil with which thi is effected, he draw an 
argument, conclus to himself, of the realiti of the change. He 
thenceforth speak of himself under the assum character, and 
experi all it needs, wishes, passions, and the like. the closer 
the identif becomes, the more confirm is the monomaniac in 
hi madness, the charact of which vari with the tempera of the 
individual. If the person' mind be weak, or rude and uncultivated, 
the tenac with which he cling to hi metamorphosi is feebler, and 
it becom more difficult to draw the line between hi lucid and 
insan utterances. thu jean grenier, who labour under thi form of 
mania, said in hi trial much that wa true, but it wa mix with the 
rambl of insanity. 

hallucin may also be produc by artifici means, and there are 
evid afford by the confess of those tri for lycanthropy, 
that these artifici mean were employ by them. I refer to the 
salv so frequent mention in witch and were-wolf trials. the 
follow passag is from the charm _golden ass of apuleius_; it 
prove that salv were extens use by witch for the purpos of 
transformation, even in hi day:-- 

"foti show me a crack in the door, and bade me look through it, 
upon which I look and saw pamphil first divest herself of all her 
garments, and then, have unlock a chest, take from it sever 
littl boxes, and open one of the latter, which contain a certain 
ointment. rub thi ointment a good while previous between the 
palm of her hands, she anoint her whole body, from the veri nail 
of her toe to the hair on the crown of her head, and when she wa 
anoint all over, she whisper mani magic word to a lamp, as if she 
were talk to it. then she began to move her arms, first with 
tremul jerks, and afterward by a gentl undul motion, till a 
glittering, downi surfac by degre overspread her body, feather and 
strong quill burst forth suddenly, her nose becam a hard crook 
beak, her toe chang to curv talons, and pamphil wa no longer 
pamphile, but it wa an owl I saw befor me. and now, utter a 
harsh, querul scream, leap from the ground by littl and little, 
in order to tri her powers, and present pois herself aloft on her 
pinions, she stretch forth her wing on either side to their full 
extent, and flew straight away. 

"have now been actual a wit of the perform of the magic 
art, and of the metamorphosi of pamphile, I remain for some time in 
a stupefi state of astonishment. . . . At last, after I had rub 
my eye some time, had recov a littl from the amaz and 
abstract of mind, and begun to feel a conscious of the realiti 
of thing about me, I took hold of the hand of foti and said,--'sweet 
damsel, bring me, I beseech thee, a portion of the ointment with which 
thi mistress hath just now anointed, and when thou hast made me a 
bird, I will be thi slave, and even wait upon thee like a wing 
cupid.' accordingli she crept gentli into the apartment, quickli 
return with the box of ointment, hastili place it in my hands, and 
then immedi departed. 

"elat to an extraordinari degre at the sight of the preciou 
treasure, I kiss the box sever time successively; and utter 
repeat aspir in hope of a prosper flight, I strip off 
my cloth as quick as possible, dip my finger greedili into the 
box, and have thenc extract a good larg lump of ointment, rub 
it all over my bodi and limbs. when I wa thoroughli anointed, I swung 
my arm up and down, in imit of the movement of a bird' pinions, 
and continu to do so a littl while, when instead of ani percept 
token of feather or wing make their appearance, my own thin skin, 
alas! grew into a hard leathern hide, cover with bristli hair, my 
finger and toe disappeared, the palm of my hand and the sole of 
my feet becam four solid hoofs, and from the end of my spine a long 
tail projected. My face wa enormous, my mouth wide, my nostril 
gaping, my lip pendulous, and I had a pair of immoder long, 
rough, hairi ears. In short, when I came to contempl my 
transform to it full extent, I found that, instead of a bird, I 
had become--an ass." [1] 

[1. apuleius, sir georg head' translation, bk. iii.] 

Of what these magic salv were compos we know. they were compos 
of narcotics, to wit, _solanum somniferum_, aconite, hyoscyamus, 
belladonna, opium, _acoru vulgaris_, _sium_. these were boil down 
with oil, or the fat of littl children who were murder for the 
purpose. the blood of a bat wa added, but it effect could have been 
_nil_. To these may have been ad other foreign narcotics, the name 
of which have not transpired. 

whatev may have been the caus of the hallucination, it is not 
surpris that the lycanthropist should have imagin himself 
transform into a beast. the case I have instanc are those of 
shepherds, who were by natur of their employment, brought into 
collis with wolves; and it is not surpris that these persons, in 
a condit liabl to hallucinations, should imagin themselv to be 
transform into wild beasts, and that their mind revert to the 
injuri sustain from these animals, they should, in their state of 
temporari insanity, accus themselv of the act of rapac 
commit by the beast into which they believ themselv to be 
transformed. It is a well-known fact that men, whose mind are 
unhinged, will deliv themselv up to justice, accus themselv 
of have commit crime which have actual taken place, and it is 
onli on investig that their self-accus prove to be false; 
and yet they will describ the circumst with the greatest 
minuteness, and be thoroughli convinc of their own criminality. I 
need give but a singl instance. 

In the war of the french revolution, the _hermione_ frigat wa 
command by capt. pigot, a harsh man and a sever commander. hi crew 
mutinied, and carri the ship into an enemy' port, have murder 
the captain and sever of the officers, under circumst of 
extrem barbarity. one midshipman escaped, by whom mani of the 
criminals, who were afterward taken and deliv over to justice, 
one by one, were identified. mr. finlayson, the govern actuary, 
who at that time held an offici situat in the admiralty, 
states:--"in my own experi I have known, on separ occasions, 
_more than six sailors_ who voluntarili confess to have struck the 
first blow at capt. pigot. these men detail all the horrid 
circumst of the mutini with extrem minut and perfect 
accuracy; nevertheless, not one of them had ever been in the ship, nor 
had so much as seen capt. pigot in their lives. they had obtain by 
tradition, from their messmates, the particular of the story. when 
long on a foreign station, hunger and thirst for home, their 
mind becam enfeebled; at length they actual believ themselv 
guilti of the crime over which they had so long brooded, and submit 
with a gloomi pleasur to be sent to england in irons, for 
judgment. At the admiralti we were alway abl to detect and establish 
their innocence, in defianc of their own solemn 
asseverations."--(_london judici gazette_, january, 1803.) 



chapter X. 

mytholog origin OF the were-wolf myth. 


transform into beast form an integr portion of all 
mytholog systems. the god of greec were wont to chang 
themselv into anim in order to carri out their design with 
greater speed, security, and secrecy, than in human forms. In 
scandinavian mythology, odin chang himself into the shape of an 
eagle, loki into that of a salmon. eastern religion abound in stori 
of transformation. 

the line of demarc between thi and the translat of a beast' 
soul into man, or a man' soul into a beast' (metempsychosis) is veri 
narrow. 

the doctrin of metempsychosi is found on the conscious of 
gradat between beast and men. the belief in a soul-endow anim 
world wa present among the ancients, and the law of intellig and 
instinct were misconstrued, or were regard as a puzzle, which no man 
might solve. 

the human soul with it conscious seem to be someth alreadi 
perfect in a pre-exist state, and, in the myth of metempsychosis, 
we trace the yearn and grope of the soul after the sourc 
whenc it own conscious wa derived, count it dream and 
hallucin as gleam of memory, record act which had taken 
place in a former state of existence. 

modern philosophi ha resum the same thread of conjecture, and 
think to see in man the perfect develop of lower organisms. 

after death the translat of the soul wa suppos to continue. It 
becam either absorb into the _nous_, into brahma, into the deity, 
or it sank in the scale of creation, and wa degrad to anim a 
brute. thu the doctrin of metempsychosi wa emphat one of 
reward and punishments, for the condit of the soul after death 
depend on it train dure life. A savag and bloodthirsti man 
wa exiled, as in the case of lycaon, into the bodi of a wild beast: 
the soul of a timor man enter a hare, and drunkard or glutton 
becam swine. 

the intellig which wa manifest in the beast bore such a close 
resembl to that of man, in the childhood and youth of the world, 
that it is not to be wonder at, if our forefath fail to detect 
the line of demarc drawn between instinct and reason. and fail 
to distinguish this, they natur fell into the belief in 
metempsychosis. 

It wa not mere a fanci extern resembl between the beast and 
man, but it wa the percept of skill, pursuits, desires, 
sufferings, and grief like hi own, in the anim creation, which led 
man to detect within the beast someth analog to the soul within 
himself; and this, notwithstand the point of contrast exist 
between them, elicit in hi mind so strong a sympathi that, without 
a great stretch of imagination, he invest the beast with hi own 
attributes, and with the full power of hi own understanding. He 
regard it as actuat by the same motives, as subject to the same 
law of honour, as move by the same prejudices, and the higher the 
beast wa in the scale, the more he regard it as an equal. A 
singular illustr of thi will be found in the finnboga saga, c. 
xi. 

"now we must relat about finnbog. afterward in the evening, when men 
slept, he rose, took hi weapons, and went forth, follow the track 
which led to the dairi farm. As wa hi wont, he step out briskli 
along the spoor till he came to the dairy. there he found the bear 
lie down, and he had slain the sheep, and he wa lie on them 
lap their blood. then said finnbog: 'stand up, brain! make readi 
against me; that becom you more than crouch over those sheep' 
carcases.' 

"the bear sat up, look at him, and lay down again. finnbog said, 'if 
you think that I am too fulli arm to match with you, I will do 
this,' and he took of hi helmet and laid asid hi shield. then he 
said, stand up now, if you dare! ' 

"the bear sat up, shook hi head, and then cast himself down again. 
"finnbog exclaimed, 'I see, you want us both to be _boune_ alike!' so 
he flung asid hi sword and said, 'be it as you will; now stand up if 
you have the heart that I believ you have, rather than one such as 
wa possess by these rent sheep.' 

"then bruin stood up and prepar to fight." 

the follow stori taken from the mouth of an osag indian by J. A. 
jones, and publish in hi _tradit of the north american 
indians_, show how thoroughli the savag mind miss the line of 
demarc between instinct and reason, and how the man of the wood 
look upon beast as stand on an equal with himself. 

An osag warrior is in search of a wife: he admir the tidi and 
shrewd habit of the beaver. He accordingli goe to a beaver-hut to 
obtain one of that race for a bride. "in one corner of the room sat a 
beaver-woman comb the head of some littl beavers, whose ear she 
box veri soundli when they would not lie still. the warrior, _i. e._ 
the beaver-chief, whisper the osag that she wa hi second wife, 
and wa veri apt to be cross when there wa work to be done, which 
prevent her from go to see her neighbours. those whose head she 
wa comb were her children, he said, and she who had made them rub 
their nose against each other and be friends, wa hi eldest 
daughter. then call aloud, 'wife,' said he, 'what have you to eat? 
the stranger is undoubtedli hungry; see, he is pale, hi eye ha no 
fire, and hi step is like that of a moose.' 

"without repli to him, for it wa a sulki day with her, she call 
aloud, and a dirty-look beaver entered. 'go,' said she, 'and fetch 
the stranger someth to eat.' with that the beaver girl pass 
through a small door into anoth room, from which she soon returned, 
bring some larg piec of willow-bark, which she laid at the feet 
of the warrior and hi guest. while the warrior-beav wa chew the 
willow, and the osag wa pretend to do so, they fell to talk 
over mani matters, particularli the war of the beaver with the 
otters, and their frequent victori over them. He told our father by 
what mean the beaver fell larg trees, and move them to the 
place where they wish to make dams; how they rais to an erect 
posit the pole for their lodges, and how they plaster them so as 
to keep out rain. then he spoke of their employ when they had 
buri the hatchet; of the peac and happi and tranquil they 
enjoy when gather into companies, they rest from their labours, 
and pass their time in talk and feasting, and bathing, and 
play the game of bones, and make love. all the while the young 
beaver-maiden sat with her eye fix upon the osage, at everi paus 
move a littl nearer, till at length she wa at hi side with her 
forepaw upon hi arm; a minut more and she had place it around hi 
neck, and wa rub her soft furri cheek against his. our ancestor, 
on hi part, betray no disinclin to receiv her caresses, but 
return them with equal ardour. the old beaver see what wa go 
on, turn hi back upon them, and suffer them to be as kind to each 
other as they pleased. At last, turn quickli round, while the 
maiden, suspect what wa coming, and pretend to be abashed, ran 
behind her mother, he said, 'to end thi foolery, what say you to 
marri my daughter? she is well brought up, and is the most 
industri girl in the village. she will flap more wall with her tail 
in a day than ani maiden in the nation; she will gnaw down a larger 
tree betwixt the rise of the sun and the come of the shadow than 
mani a smart beaver of the other sex. As for her wit, tri her at the 
game of the dish, and see who get up master; and for cleanliness, 
look at her petticoat?' our father answer that he did not doubt that 
she wa industri and cleanly, abl to gnaw down a veri larg tree, 
and to use her tail to veri good purpose; that he love her much, and 
wish to make her the mother of hi children. and thereupon the 
bargain wa concluded." 

these two stories, the one taken from iceland saga, the other from 
american indian tradition, shew clearli the one which the 
uncultiv mind believ to exist between the soul of man and the 
soul of beast. the same sentiment actuat both man and brute, and if 
their action are unlike, it is becaus of the differ in their 
formation. the soul within is identical, but the extern accid of 
bodi are unlike. 

among mani rude as well as cultiv people, the bodi is regard as 
a mere garment wrap around the soul. the buddist look upon 
ident as exist in the soul alone, and the bodi as no more 
constitut identity, than the cloth he put on or take off. He 
exist as a spirit; for conveni he vest himself in a body; 
sometim that bodi is human, sometim it is bestial. As hi soul 
rise in the spiritu scale, the nobler is the anim form which it 
tenants. budda himself pass through variou stage of existence; in 
one he wa a hare, and hi soul be noble, led him to immol 
himself, in order that he might offer hospit to indra, who, in 
the form of an old man, crave of him food and shelter. the buddist 
regard anim with reverence; an ancestor may be tenant the bodi 
of the ox he is driving, or a descend may be run at hi side 
barking, and wag hi tail. when he fall into an ecstasy, hi soul 
is leav hi bodi for a littl while, it is lay asid it raiment 
of flesh and blood and bone, to return to it onc more when the tranc 
is over. but thi idea is not confin to buddists, it is common 
everywhere. the spirit or soul is suppos to be imprison in the 
body, the bodi is but the lantern through which the spirit shines, 
"the corrupt body" is believ to "press down the soul," and the 
soul is unabl to attain to perfect happi till it ha shuffl off 
thi earthi coil. butler regard the member of the bodi as so mani 
instrument use by the soul for the purpos of seeing, hearing, 
feeling, &c., just as we use telescop or crutches, and which may be 
reject without injuri to our individuality. 

the late mr. J. holloway, of the bank of england, brother to the 
engrav of that name, relat of himself that, be one night in 
bed, and unabl to sleep, he had fix hi eye and thought with 
uncommon intens on a beauti star that wa shine in at the 
window, when he suddenli found hi spirit releas from hi bodi and 
soar into space. but instantli seiz with anxieti for the anguish 
of hi wife, if she discov hi bodi appar dead besid her, he 
returned, and re-ent it with difficulty. He describ that 
return as a return from light into darkness, and that whilst the 
spirit wa free, he wa altern in the light or the dark, 
accordingli as hi thought were with hi wife or with the star. 
popular mytholog in most land regard the soul as oppress by the 
body, and it liber is consid a deliver from the "burden" 
of the flesh. whether the soul is at all abl to act or express itself 
without a body, ani more than a fire is abl to make cloth without the 
apparatu of boiler and machinery, is a question which ha not 
commend itself to the popular mind. but it may be remark that the 
christian religion alon is that which rais the bodi to a digniti 
equal to that of the soul, and give it a hope of ennobl and 
resurrect never dream of in ani mytholog system. 

but the popular creed, in spite of the most emphat testimoni of 
scripture, is that the soul is in bondag so long as it is unit to a 
body, a creed entir in accord with that of buddism. 

If the bodi be but the cage, as a poet [1] of our own ha been 
pleas to call it, in which dwell the imprison soul, it is quit 
possibl for the soul to chang it cage. If the bodi be but a vestur 
cloth the soul, as the buddist asserts, it is not improb that 
it may occasion chang it vesture. 

[1. vaughn, _sitex scintillans_.] 

thi is self-evident, and thu have arisen the countless tale of 
transform and transmigr which are found all over the world. 
that the same view of the bodi as a mere cloth of the soul wa 
taken by our teuton and scandinavian ancestors, is evid even from 
the etymolog of the word _leichnam_, _lîkhama_, use to express the 
soulless body. 

I have alreadi spoken of the nors word _hamr_, I wish now to make 
some further remark upon it. _hamr_ is repres in anglo-saxon by 
_hama_, _homa_, in saxon by _hamo_, in old high german by _hamo_, in 
old french by _homa_, _hama_, to which are relat the gothic 
_gahamon_, _ufar-hamon_, _ana-hamon_, {greek _e?ndúesðai_}, {greek 
_e?pendúesðai_}; _and-hamon_, _af-hamon_, {greek _a?pekdúein_} {greek 
_e?kdúesðai?_} thenc also the old high german _hemidi_, and the 
modern _hemde_, garment. In composit we find thi word, as 
_lîk-hagnr_, in old norse; in old high german _lîk-hamo_, anglo-saxon 
_lîk-hama_, and _flæsc-hama_, old saxon, _lîk-hamo_, modern german 
_leich-nam_, a body, _i. e._ a garment of flesh, precis as the 
bodi of bird are call in old nors _fjaðr-hamr_, in anglo-saxon 
_feðerhoma_, in old saxon _fetherhamo_, or feather-dress and the 
bodi of wolv are call in old nors _ûlfshamr_, and seals' bodi 
in faroës _kôpahamr_. the signific of the old verb _að hamaz_ is 
now evident; it is to migrat from one bodi to another, and 
_hama-skipti_ is a transmigr of the soul. the method of thi 
transmigr consist in simpli invest the bodi with the skin of 
the anim into which the soul wa to migrate. when loki, the northern 
god of evil, went in quest of the stolen idunn, he borrow of freyja 
her falcon dress, and at onc became, to all intent and purposes, a 
falcon. thiassi pursu him as he left thrymheimr, have first taken 
upon him an eagle' dress, and therebi becom an eagle. 

In order to seek thor' lost hammer, loki borrow again of freyja her 
feather dress, and as be flew away in it, the feather sound as they 
winnow the breez (_fjaðrhamr dunði_). 

In like manner cædmon speak of an evil spirit fli away in 
feather-dress: "þät he mid feðerhomon fleôgan meahte, windan on 
wolkne" (gen. ed. gr. 417), and of an angel, "þuo þar suogan quam 
engil þe alowaldon obhana fun radur faran an feðerhamon" (hêlj. 171, 
23), the veri express made use of when speak of a bird: "farad 
an feðarhamun" (hêlj. 50,11). 

the soul, in certain cases, is abl to free itself from the bodi and 
to enter that of beast or man--in thi form stood the myth in variou 
theolog systems. 

among the finn and lapp it is not uncommon for a magician to fall 
into a catalept condition, and dure the period hi soul is 
believ to travel veri frequent in bodili form, have assum that 
of ani anim most suitabl for it purpose. I have given instanc in 
a former chapter. the same doctrin is evid in most case of 
lycanthropy. the patient is in a state of trance, hi bodi is watched, 
and it remain motionless, but hi soul ha migrat into the carcas 
of a wolf, which it vivifies, and in which it run it course. A 
curiou basqu stori show that among thi strang turanian people, 
cut off by such a flood of aryan nation from ani other member of it 
family, the same superstit remains. A huntsman wa onc engag in 
the chase of it bear among the pyreneean peaks, when bruin turn 
suddenli on him and hug him to death, but not befor he had dealt 
the brute it mortal wound. As the huntsman expired, he breath hi 
soul into the bodi of the bear, and thenceforward rang the mountain 
as a beast. 

one of the tale of the sanskrit book of fables, the _pantschatantra_, 
afford such a remark testimoni to the indian belief in 
metempsychosis, that I am tempt to give it in abstract. 

A king wa one day pass through the marketplac of hi city, when 
he observ a hunchback merryandrew, whose contort and joke 
kept the bystand in a roar of laughter. amus with the fellow, the 
king brought him to hi palace. shortli after, in the hear of the 
clown, a necromanc taught the monarch the art of send hi soul 
into a bodi not hi own. 

some littl while after this, the monarch, anxiou to put in practic 
hi newli acquir knowledge, rode into the forest accompani by hi 
fool, who, he believed, had not heard, or, at all event comprehended, 
the lesson. they came upon the corps of a brahmin lie in the depth 
of the jungle, where he had die of thirst. the king, leav hi 
horse, perform the requisit ceremony, and instantli hi soul had 
migrat into the bodi of the, brahmin, and hi own lay as dead upon 
the ground. At the same moment, however, the hunchback desert hi 
body, and possess himself of that which had been the king's, and 
shout farewel to the dismay monarch, he rode back to the palace, 
where he wa receiv with royal honours. but it wa not long befor 
the queen and one of the minist discov that a screw wa 
somewher loose, and when the quondam king, but now brahmin, arriv 
and told hi tale, a plot wa laid for the recoveri of hi body. the 
queen ask her fals husband whether it were possibl to make her 
parrot talk, and he in a moment of uxori weak promis to make 
it speak. He laid hi bodi aside, and sent hi soul into the parrot. 
immedi the true king jump out of hi brahmin bodi and resum 
that which wa legitim hi own, and then proceeded, with the 
queen, to wring the neck of the parrot. 

but besid the doctrin of metempsychosis, which prove such a 
fertil mother of fable, there wa anoth articl of popular 
mytholog which gave rise to stori of transformation. among the 
abund superstit exist rel to transformation, three 
shape seem to have been pre-emin affected--that of the swan, 
that of the wolf, and that of the serpent. In mani of the stori of 
those transformed, it is evid that the individu who chang shape 
is regard with superstiti reverence, as a be of a higher 
order--of a divin nature. In christian countries, everyth relat 
to heathen mytholog wa regard with a suspici eye by the clergy, 
and ani miracul power not sanction by the church were attribut 
to the evil one. the heathen god becam devils, and the marvel 
relat of them were suppos to be effect by diabol agency. A 
case of transform which had shown the power of an ancient god, 
wa in christian time consid as an instanc of witchcraft. thu 
stori of transform fell into bad odour, and those who chang 
shape were no longer regard as heavenli beings, command 
reverence, but as miser witch deserv the stake. 

In the infanc of the world, when natur phenomena were 
ill-understood, express which to us are poetic were of a real 
significance. when we speak of thunder rolling, we use an express 
which convey no further idea than a certain like observ between 
the deton and the roll of a vehicle; but to the uninstruct 
mind it wa more. the primæval savag knew not what caus thunder, 
and trace the resembl between it and the sound of wheels, he at 
onc conclud that the chariot of the god wa go abroad, or that 
the celesti spirit were enjoy a game of bowls. 

We speak of fleeci clouds, becaus they appear to us soft and light as 
wool, but the first men trace the same resemblance, believ the 
light vapour to be flock of heavenli sheep. Or we say that the 
cloud are flying: the savag use the same expression, as he look 
up at the mackerel sky, and saw in it flight of swan cours over 
the heavenli lake. onc more, we creep nearer to the winter fire, 
shiver at the wind, which we remark is howl around the house, 
and yet we do not suppos that the wind ha a voice. the wild primæval 
men thought that it had, and becaus dog and wolv howl, and the 
wind howled, and becaus they had seen dog and wolves, they conclud 
that the storm-wind wa a night-hound, or a monstrou wolf, race 
over the countri in the dark of the winter night, raven for 
prey. 

along with the rise of thi system of explain the oper of 
natur by analog in the bestial world, anoth conclus forc 
itself on the untaught mind. the flock which stray in heaven were 
no earthli sheep, but were the properti of spiritu beings, and were 
themselv perhap spiritual; the swan which flew aloft, far abov 
the topmost peak of the himalaya, were no ordinari swans, but were 
divin and heavenly. the wolf which howl so wildli in the long 
winter night, the hounds, whose bay sound so. dismal through the 
shake black forest, were no mundan wolv and hounds, but issu 
from the home of a divin hunter, and were themselv wondrous, 
supernatur be of godlik race. 

and so, the cloud have becom swans, the swan-cloud were next 
believ to be divin beings, valkyries, apsaras, and the like, seen 
by mortal in their feather-dresses, but appear among the god as 
damsels. the storm-wind have been suppos to be a wolf, next wa 
taken to be a tempestu god, who delight to hunt on earth in 
lupin form. 

I have mention also the serpent shape, as be one veri favourit 
in mythology. the ancient peopl saw the fork and writh 
lightning, and suppos it to be a heavenli fieri serpent, a serpent 
which had godlik powers, which wa in fact a divin being, 
manifest himself to mortal under that form. among the north 
american indians, the lightn is still regard as the great 
serpent, and the thunder is suppos to be hi hissing. 

"ah!" exclaim a magdeburg peasant to a german professor, dure a 
thunder-storm, as a vivid fork gleam shot to earth, "what a gloriou 
snake wa that!" and thi resembl did not escap the greeks. 

{greek _é!like d? e?klámpousi steroph~ ksápuroi_}. 

_æsch. prom._ 1064. 

{greek _drákonta pursónwton, ó! á?platon a?mfeliktò 
é!lik? e?froúrei, ktanw'n_}. 

_eurip. herc. f._ 395. 

and accord to aristotle, {greek _e!likíai_} are the lightnings, 
{greek _grammoeidw~ ferómenoi_}. 

It is so difficult for us to unlearn all we know of the natur of 
meteorolog phenomena, so hard for us to look upon atmospher 
chang as though we knew noth of the law that govern them, that 
we are dispos to treat such explan of popular myth as I have 
given above, as fantast and improbable. 

but among the ancient all solut of natur problem were 
tentative, and it is onli after the failur of everi attempt made to 
explain these phenomena on supernatur ground that we have been 
driven to the discoveri of the true interpretation. yet among the 
vulgar a vast amount of mytholog remains, and is use still to 
explain atmospher mysteries. the other day a yorkshir girl, when 
ask whi she wa not afraid of thunder, repli becaus it wa onli 
her father' voice; what knew she of the rush togeth of air to 
fill the vacuum caus by the transit of the electr fluid? to her 
the thunder-clap wa the utter of the almighty. still in north 
germani doe the peasant say of thunder, that the angel are play 
skittl aloft, and of the snow, that they are shake up the 
feather-b in heaven. 

the myth of the dragon is one which admits, perhap more than ani 
other, of identif with a meteorolog phenomenon, and 
present to us as well the phase of transit from theriomorphosi to 
anthropomorphosis. 

the dragon of popular mytholog is noth els than the thunderstorm, 
rise at the horizon, rush with expanded, winnowing, black pennon 
across the sky, dart out it fork fieri tongue, and belch 
fire. In a slovakian legend, the dragon sleep in a mountain cave 
through the winter months, but, at the equinox, burst forth--"in a 
moment the heaven wa darken and becam black as pitch, onli 
illumin by the fire which flash from dragon' jaw and eyes. the 
earth shuddered, the stone rattl down the mountain side into the 
glens. right and left, left and right, did the dragon lash hi tail, 
overthrow pine and beeches, snap them as rods. He evacu 
such flood of water that the mountain torrent were full. but after a 
while hi power wa exhausted, he lash no more with hi tail, 
eject no more water, and spat no more fire." 

I think it is imposs not to see in thi description, a spring-tid 
thunderstorm. but to make it more evid that the untaught mind did 
regard such a storm as a dragon, I think the follow quotat from 
_john of brompton' chronicle_ will convinc the most sceptical: 
"anoth remark thing is this, that took place dure a certain 
month in the gulf of satalia (on the coast of pamphylia). there 
appear a great and black dragon which came in clouds, and let down 
hi head into the water, whilst hi tail seem turn to the sky; and 
the dragon drew the water to him by drinking, with such avidity, that, 
if ani ship, even though laden with men or ani other heavi articles, 
had been near him when drinking, it would nevertheless have been 
suck up and carri on high. In order howev to avoid thi danger, 
it is necessary, when peopl see it, at onc to make a great uproar, 
and to shout and hammer tables, so that the dragon, hear the noise, 
and the voic of those shouting, may withdraw himself far off. some 
people, however, assert that thi is not a dragon, but the sun draw 
up the water of the sea; which seem more probable." [1] such is 
john of brompton' account of a waterspout. In greek mytholog the 
dragon of the storm ha begun to undergo anthropomorphosis. typhu is 
the son of tartaru and terra; the storm rise from the horizon may 
well be suppos to issu from the earth' womb, and it 
characterist are suffici to decid it paternity. typhus, the 
whirlwind or typhoon, ha a hundr dragon or serpent heads, the long 
writh strive of vapour which run befor the hurrican cloud. He 
belch fire, that is, lightn issu from the clouds, and hi 
roar is like the howl of wild dogs. typhu ascend to heaven to 
make war on the gods, who fli from him in variou fantast shapes; 
who cannot see in thi ascent the hurrican climb up the vault of 
sky, and in the fli gods, the mani fleet fragment of white 
cloud which are seen drift across the heaven befor the gale! 

[1. apud twysden, hist. anglicæ script. x. 1652. p. 1216.] 

typhus, accord to hesiod, is the father of all bad winds, which 
destroy with rain and tempest, all in fact which went among the greek 
by the name of {greek _laílaps_}, bring injuri to the agriculturist 
and peril to the voyager. 

{greek 
_?ek dè tufwéo é?st? a?némwn méno u!gròn á?eptwn, 
nósfi nótou boréw te, kaì a?rgéstew zefúrou te. 
oí! ge mèn e?n ðeófin geneh`, ðnhtoï még? ó?neiar. 
ai! d? á?llai mapsau~rai e?pipneíousi ðalassan. 
ai! d? h?'toi píptousai e? heroeideá pónton, 
ph~ma méga ðnhtoi~si, kakh~j ðúousin a?éllhj. 
á?llote d? á?llai a?eísi, diaskidna~si te nh~as, 
naúta te fðeírousi. kakou~ d? ou? gígnetai a?lkh` 
a?ndrásin, oí! keínhjsi sinántwntai katà pónton. 
ai! d? aû? kaì katà gai~an a?peíriton, a?nðemóessan 
é?rg? e?ratà fðeírousi xamaigenéwn a?nðrw'pwn, 
pimpleu~sai kónió te kaì a?rgalé kolosurtou~ 
_ 
} 

_hesiod. theog._ 870, _seq._ 

In both modern greek and lithuanian household mytholog the dragon or 
drake ha becom an ogre, a gigant man with few of the dracontin 
attribut remaining. von hahn, in hi _griechisch und albanesisch 
märchen_, tell mani tale of drakes, and in all, the old 
characterist have been lost, and the drake is simpli a gigant man 
with magic and superhuman powers. 

It is the same among the lithuanian peasantry. A dragon walk on two 
legs, talks, flirt with a lady, and marri her. He retain hi evil 
disposition, but ha slough off hi scale and wings. 

such is the chang which ha taken place in the popular concept of 
the dragon, which is an impersonif of the thunderstorm. A 
similar chang ha taken place in the swan-maiden and were-wolf myths. 

In ancient indian vedaic mytholog the apsara were heavenli damsel 
who dwelt in the tether, between earth and sun. their name, which 
signifi "the shapeless," or "those who go in the water "--it is 
uncertain which. is the correct derivation--i express of the white 
cirrus, constantli chang form, and appar float swan-lik on 
the blue heaven-sea. these apsaras, accord to the vedaic creed, 
were fond of chang their shapes, appear gener as duck or 
swans, occasion as human beings. the soul of hero were given to 
them for lover and husbands. one of the most grace of the earli 
indian myth is the stori of the apsaras, urvaçî. urvaçî love 
puravara and becam hi 'wife, on the condit that she wa n-ever 
to behold him in a state of nudity. they remain togeth for years, 
till the heavenli companion of urvaçî determin to secur her return 
to them. they accordingli beguil puravara into leav hi bed in 
the dark of night, and then with a lightn flash they disclos 
him, in hi nudity, to hi wife, who wa thereupon constrain to 
leav him. He pursu her, full of sorrow at hi loss, and found her 
at length swim in a larg lotu pond, in swan' shape. 

that thi stori is not a mere invention, but rest on some 
mytholog explan of natur phenomena, I think more than 
probable, as it is found all over the world with few variations. As 
everi aryan branch retain the story, or trace of it, there can be no 
doubt that the belief in swan-maidens, who swam in the heavenli sea, 
and who sometim becam the wive of those fortun men who manag 
to steal from them their feather dresses, form an integr portion 
of the old mytholog system of the aryan family, befor it wa 
broken up into indian, persian, greek, latin, russian, scandinavian, 
teutonic, and other races. but more, as the same myth is found. in 
tribe not aryan, and far remov from contact with european or indian 
superstition,--as, for instance, among samoy and american 
indians,--it is even possibl that thi stori may be a tradit of 
the first primæval stock of men. 

but it is time for me to leav the summer cirru and turn to the 
tempest-born rain-cloud. It is repres in ancient indian mytholog 
by the vritra or râkshasas. At first the form of these dæmon wa 
uncertain and obscure. vritra is often use as an appel for a 
cloud, and kabhanda, an old name for a rain-cloud, in later time 
becam the name of a devil. Of vritra, who envelop the mountain 
with vapour, it is said, "the dark stood retain the water, the 
mountain lay in the belli of vritra." By degre vritra stood out 
more promin as a dæmon, and he is describ as a "devourer" of 
gigant proportions. In the same way râkshasa obtain corpor 
form and individuality. He is a misshapen giant "like to a cloud," 
with a red beard and red hair, with point protrud teeth, readi to 
lacer and devour human flesh. hi bodi is cover with coars 
bristl hair, hi huge mouth is open, he look from side to side as 
he walks, lust after the flesh and blood of men, to satisfi hi 
rage hunger, and quench hi consum thirst. toward nightfal hi 
strength increas manifold. He can chang hi shape at will. He 
haunt the woods, and roam howl through the jungle; in short, he 
is to the hindoo what the were-wolf is to the european. 

A certain wood wa haunt by a râkschasa; he one day came across a 
brahmin, and with a bound reach hi shoulders, and clung to them, 
exclaiming, "heh! go on with you!" and the brahmin, quak with fear, 
advanc with him. but when he observ that the feet of the râkschasa 
were as delic as the stamen of the lotus, he ask him, how is it 
that you have such weak and slender feet? the râkschasa replied, "I 
never walk nor touch the earth with my feet. I have made a vow not to 
do so." present they came to a larg pond. then the râkschasa bade 
the brahmin wait at the edg whilst he bath and pray to the gods. 
but the brahmin thought: "a soon as these prayer and ablut are 
over, he will tear me to piec with hi fang and eat me. He ha 
vow not to walk; I will be off post haste!" so he ran away, and the 
râkschasa dare not follow him for fear of break hi vow. 
(_pantschatantra_, v. 13.) there is a similar stori in the 
mahâbhârata, xiii., and in the kathâ sarit sâgara, v. 49-53. 

I have said suffici to show that natur phenomena gave rise to 
mytholog stories, and that these stori have gradual 
deteriorated, and have been degrad into vulgar superstitions. and I 
have shown that both the doctrin of metempsychosi and the 
mytholog explan of meteorolog chang have given rise to 
abund fable, and among other to the popular and wide-spread 
superstit of lycanthropy. I shall now pass from myth to history, 
and shall give instanc of bloodthirstiness, cruelty, and 
cannibalism. 



chapter xi. 

the maréchal DE retz.-i. the investig OF charges. 


the histori of the man whose name head thi chapter I purpos give 
in detail, as the circumst I shall narrat have, I believe, never 
befor been given with accuraci to the english public. the name of 
gill de laval may be well known, as sketch of hi bloodi career 
have appear in mani biographies, but these sketch have been veri 
incomplete, as the materi from which they were compos wa meagre. 
M. michelet alon ventur to give the public an idea of the crime 
which brought a marshal of franc to the gallows, and hi revel 
were such that, in the word of M. henri 

martin, "thi iron age, which seem unabl to feel surpris at ani 
amount of evil, wa struck with dismay." 

M. michelet deriv hi inform from the abstract of the paper 
relating, to the case, made by order of ann of brittany, in the 
imperi library. the origin document were in the librari at 
nantes, and a great portion of them were destroy in the revolut 
of 1789. but a care analysi had been made of them, and thi 
valuabl abridgment, which wa inaccess to M. michelet, came into 
the hand of M. lacroix, the emin french antiquarian, who publish 
a memoir of the marshal from the inform he had thu obtained, and 
it is hi work, by far the most complet and circumstanti which ha 
appeared, that I condens into the follow chapters. 

"the most monstrous deprav imagination," say M. henri martin, 
"never could have conceiv what the trial reveals." M. lacroix ha 
been oblig to draw a veil over much that transpired, and I must draw 
it closer still. I have, however, said enough to show that thi 
memor trial present horror probabl unsurpass in the whole 
volum of the world' history. 

dure the year 1440, a terribl rumour spread through brittany, and 
especi through the ancient _pay de retz_, which extend along the 
south of the loir from nant to paimbuf, to the effect that one of 
the most famou and power noblemen in brittany, gill de laval, 
maréchal de retz, wa guilti of crime of the most diabol nature. 

gill de laval, eldest son of gay de laval, second of hi name, sire 
de retz, had rais the junior branch of the illustri hous of 
laval abov the elder branch, which wa relat to the reign famili 
of brittany. He lost hi father when he wa age twenty, and remain 
master of a vast territori inheritance, which wa increas by hi 
marriag with catharin de thouar in 1420. He employ a portion of 
their fortun in the caus of charl vii., and in strengthen the 
french crown. dure seven consecut years, from 1426 to 1433, he 
wa engag in militari enterpris against the english; hi name is 
alway cite along with those of dunois, xaintrailles, florent 
d'illiers, gaucourt, richemont, and the most faith servant of the 
king. hi servic were speedili acknowledg by the king creat him 
marshal of france. In 1427, he assault the castl of lude, and 
carri it by storm; he kill with hi own hand the command of the 
place; next year he captur from the english the fortress of 
rennefort, and the castl of malicorne; in 1429, he took an activ 
part in the expedit of joan of arc for the deliver of orleans, 
and the occup of jargeau, and he wa with her in the moat, when 
she wa wound by an arrow under the wall of paris. 

the marshal, councillor, and chamberlain of the king particip in 
the direct of public affairs, and soon obtain the entir 
confid of hi master. He accompani charl to rheim on the 
occas of hi coronation, and had the honour of bear the 
oriflamme, brought for the occas from the abbey of S. remi. hi 
intrepid on the field of battl wa as remark as hi sagac 
in council, and he prove himself to be both an excel warrior and 
a shrewd politician. 

suddenly, to the surpris of everi one, he quit the servic of 
charl vii., and sheath for ever hi sword, in the retir of 
the country. the death of hi matern grandfather, jean de craon, in 
1432, made him so enorm wealthy, that hi revenu were estim 
at 800,000 livres; nevertheless, in two years, by hi excess 
prodigality, he manag to lose a consider portion of hi 
inheritance. mauléon, S. etienn de malemort, loroux-botereau, pornic, 
and chantolé, he sold to john v., duke of brittany, hi kinsman, and 
other land and seigneuri right he cede to the bishop of nantes, 
and to the chapter of the cathedr in that city. 

the rumour soon spread that these extens cession of territori were 
sop thrown to the duke and to the bishop, to restrain the one from 
confisc hi goods, and the other from pronounc 
excommunication, for the crime of which the peopl whisperingli 
accus him; but these rumour were probabl without foundation, for 
eventu it wa found hard to persuad the duke of the guilt of hi 
kinsman, and the bishop wa the most determin instig of the 
trial. 

the marshal seldom visit the ducal court, but he often appear in 
the citi of nantes, where he inhabit the hôtel de la suze, with a 
princ retinue. He had, alway accompani him, a guard of two 
hundr men at arms, and a numer suit of pages, esquires, 
chaplains, singers, astrologers, &c., all of whom he paid handsomely. 

whenev he left the town, or move to one of hi other seats, the 
cri of the poor, which had been restrain dure the time of hi 
presence, broke forth. tear flowed, curs were uttered, a 
long-continu wail rose to heaven, the moment that the last of the 
marshal' parti had left the neighbourhood. mother had lost their 
children, babe had been snatch from the cradle, infant had been 
spirit away almost from the matern arms, and it wa known by sad 
experi that the vanish littl one would never be seen again. 

but on no part of the countri did the shadow of thi great fear fall 
so deepli as on the villag in the neighbourhood of the castl of 
machecoul, a gloomi château, compos of huge towers, and surround 
by deep moats, a resid much frequent by Do retz, notwithstand 
it sombr and repuls appearance. thi fortress wa alway in a 
condit to resist a siege: the drawbridg wa raised, the portculli 
down, the gate closed, the men under arms, the culverin on the 
bastion alway loaded. No one, except the servants, had penetr 
into thi mysteri asylum and had come forth alive. In the 
surround countri strang tale of horror and devilri circul in 
whispers, and yet it wa observ that the chapel of the castl wa 
gorgeous deck with tapestri of silk and cloth of gold, that the 
sacr vessel were encrust with gems, and that the vestment of the 
priest were of the most sumptuou character. the excess devot 
of the marshal wa also noticed; he wa said to hear mass thrice 
daily, and to be passion fond of ecclesiast music. He wa 
said to have ask permiss of the pope, that a crucif should 
preced him in processions. but when dusk settl down over the 
forest, and one by one the window of the castl becam illumined, 
peasant would point to one casement high up in an isol tower, 
from which a clear light stream through the gloom of night; they 
spoke of a fierc red glare which irradi the chamber at times, and 
of sharp cri ring out of it, through the hush woods, to be 
answer onli by the howl of the wolf as it rose from it lair to 
begin it nocturn rambles. 

On certain days, at fix hours, the drawbridg sank, and the servant 
of De retz stood in the gateway distribut clothes, money, and food 
to the mendic who crowd round them solicit alms. It often 
happen that children were among the beggars: as often one of the 
servant would promis them some dainti if they would go to the 
kitchen for it. those children who accept the offer were never seen 
again. 

In 1440 the long-pent-up exasper of the peopl broke all bounds, 
and with one voic they charg the marshal with the murder of their 
children, whom they said he had sacrif to the devil. 

thi charg came to the ear of the duke of brittany, but he 
pooh-pooh it, and would have taken no step to investig the 
truth, had not one of hi nobl insist on hi do so. At the same 
time jean do châteaugiron, bishop of nantes, and the nobl and sage 
pierr de l'hospital, grand-senesch of brittany, wrote to the duke, 
express veri decidedli their views, that the charg demand 
thorough investigation. 

john v., reluct to move against a relation, a man who had serv 
hi countri so well, and wa in such a high position, at last yield 
to their request, and author them to seiz the person of the sire 
de retz and hi accomplices. A _serjent d'armes_, jean labbé, wa 
charg with thi difficult commission. He pick a band of resolut 
fellows, twenti in all, and in the middl of septemb they present 
themselv at the gate of the castle, and summon the sire do retz to 
surrender. As soon as gill heard that a troop in the liveri of 
brittani wa at the gate, he inquir who wa their leader? On 
receiv the answer "labbé," he started, turn pale, cross 
himself, and prepar to surrender, observ that it wa imposs 
to resist fate. 

year before, one of hi astrolog had assur him that he would one 
day pass into the hand of an abbé, and, till thi moment, De retz had 
suppos that the propheci signifi that he should eventu becom 
a monk. 

gill de sillé, roger de briqueville, and other of the accomplic of 
the marshal, took to flight, but henriet and pontou remain with him. 

the drawbridg wa lower and the marshal offer hi sword to jean 
labbé. the gallant serjeant approached, knelt to the marshal, and 
unrol befor him a parchment seal with the seal of brittany. 

"tell me the tenor of thi parchment?" said gill de retz with 
dignity. 

"our good sire of brittani enjoin you, my lord, by these presents, to 
follow me to the good town of nantes, there to clear yourself of 
certain crimin charg brought against you." 

"I will follow immediately, my friend, glad to obey the will of my 
lord of brittany: but, that it may not be said that the seigneur de 
retz ha receiv a messag without largess, I order my treasurer, 
henriet, to hand over to you and your follow twenti gold crowns." 

"grand-merci, monseigneur! I pray god that he may give you good and 
long life." 

"pray god onli to have merci upon me, and to pardon my sins." 

the marshal had hi hors saddled, and left machecoul with pontou and 
henriet, who had thrown in their lot with him. 

It wa with live emot that the peopl in the villag travers 
by the littl troop, saw the redoubt gill de laval ride through 
their streets, surround by soldier in the liveri of the duke of 
brittany, and unaccompani by a singl soldier of hi own. the road 
and street were thronged, peasant left the fields, women their 
kitchens, labour desert their cattl at the plough, to throng the 
road to nantes. the cavalcad proceed in silence. the veri crowd 
which had gather to see it, wa hushed. present a shrill woman' 
voic wa raised:-- 

"mi child! restor my child!" 

then a wild, wrath howl broke from the lip of the throng, rang 
along the nant road, and onli die away, as the great gate of the 
chateau de bouffay close on the prisoner. 

the whole popul of nant wa in commotion, and it wa said that 
the investig would be fictitious, that the duke would screen hi 
kinsman, and that the object of gener execr would escap with 
the surrend of some of hi lands. 

and such would probabl have been the event of the trial, had not the 
bishop of nant and the grand-senesch taken a veri decid cours 
in the matter. they gave the duke no peac till he had yield to 
their demand for a thorough investig and a public trial. 

john V. nomin jean de toucherond to collect information, and to 
take down the charg brought against the marshal. At the same time he 
wa given to understand that the matter wa not to be pressed, and 
that the charg upon which the marshal wa to be tri were to be 
soften down as much as possible. 

the commissioner, jean de toucheronde, open the investig on the 
18th september, assist onli by hi clerk, jean thomas. the wit 
were introduc either singly, or in groups, if they were relations. 
On entering, the wit knelt befor the commissioner, kiss the 
crucifix, and swore with hi hand on the gospel that he would speak 
the truth, and noth but the truth: after thi he relat all the 
fact refer to the charge, which came under hi cognizance, 
without be interrupt or interrogated. 

the first to present herself wa perrin loessard, live at la 
roche-bernard. 

she related, with tear in her eyes, that two year ago, in the month 
of september, the sire de retz had pass with all hi retinu through 
la roche-bernard, on hi way from vannes, and had lodg with jean 
collin. she live opposit the hous in which the nobleman wa 
staying. 

her child, the finest in the village, a lad age ten, had attract 
the notic of pontou, and perhap of the marshal himself, who stood at 
a window, lean on hi squire' shoulder. 

pontou spoke to the child, and ask him whether he would like to be a 
chorister; the boy repli that hi ambit wa to be a soldier. 

"well, then," said the squire, "I will equip you." 

the lad then laid hold of pontou' dagger, and express hi desir to 
have such a weapon in hi belt. thereupon the mother had ran up and 
had made him leav hold of the dagger, say that the boy wa do 
veri well at school, and wa get on with hi letters, for he wa 
one day to be a monk. pontou had dissuad her from thi project, and 
had propos to take the child with him to machecoul, and to educ 
him to be a soldier. thereupon he had paid her clown a hundr sol to 
buy the lad a dress, and had obtain permiss to carri him off. 

next day her son had been mount on a hors purchas for him from 
jean collin, and had left the villag in the retinu of the sire de 
retz. the poor mother at part had gone in tear to the marshal, and 
had entreat him to be kind to her child. from that time she had been 
abl to obtain no inform regard her son. she had watch the 
sire de retz whenev he had pass through La roch bernard, but had 
never observ her child among hi pages. she had question sever 
of the marshal' people, but they had laugh at her; the onli answer 
she had obtain was: "be not afraid. He is either at machecoul, or 
els at tiffauges, or els at pornic, or somewhere." perrine' stori 
wa corrobor by jean collin, hi wife, and hi mother-in-law. 

jean lemegren and hi wife, alain dulix, perrot duponest, guillaum 
guillon, guillaum portayer, etienn de monclades, and jean lefebure, 
all inhabit of S. etienn de montluc, depos that a littl child, 
son of guillaum brice of the said parish, have lost hi father at 
the age of nine, live on alms, and went round the countri begging. 

thi child, name jamet, had vanish suddenli at midsummer, and 
noth wa known of what had becom of him; but strong suspicion 
were entertain of hi have been carri off by an age hag who had 
appear shortli befor in the neighbourhood, and who had vanish 
along with the child. 

On the 27th september, jean de toucheronde, assist by nicola 
chateau, notari of the court at nantes, receiv the deposit of 
sever inhabit of pont-de-launay, near bouvron: to wit, guillaum 
fourag and wife; jeanne, wife of jean leflou; and richarde, wife of 
jean gandeau. 

these depositions, though veri vague, afford suffici caus for 
suspicion to rest on the marshal. two year before, a child of twelve, 
son of jean bernard, and anoth child of the same age, son of 
ménégué, had gone to machecoul. the son of ménégué had return alon 
in the evening, relat that hi companion had ask him to wait for 
him on the road whilst he beg at the gate of the sire de retz. the 
son of ménégué said that he had wait three hours, but hi companion 
had not returned. the wife of guillaum fourag depos that she had 
seen the lad at thi time with an old hag, who wa lead him by the 
hand toward machecoul. that same even thi hag pass over the 
bridg of launay, and the wife of fourag ask her what had becom of 
littl bernard. the old woman neither stop nor answer further 
than by say he wa well provid for. the boy had not been seen 
since. On the 28th september, the duke of brittani join anoth 
commissioner, jean couppegorge, and a second notary, michel estallure, 
to toucherond and chateau. 

the inhabit of machecoul, a littl town over which the sire de 
retz exercis suprem power, appear now to depos against their 
lord. andré barbier, shoemaker, declar that last easter, a child, 
son of hi neighbour georg lebarbier, had disappeared. He wa last 
seen gather plum behind the hotel rondeau. thi disappear 
surpris none in machecoul, and no one ventur to comment on it. 
andré and hi wife were in daili terror of lose their own child. 
they had been a pilgrimag to S. jean d'angely, and had been ask 
there whether it wa the custom at machecoul to eat children. On their 
return they had heard of two children have vanished--th son of jean 
gendron, and that of alexandr châtellier. andré barbier had made some 
inquiri about the circumst of their disappearance, and had been 
advis to hold hi tongue, and to shut hi ear and eyes, unless he 
were prepar to be thrown into a dungeon by the lord of machecoul. 

"but, bless me!" he had said, "am I to believ that a fairi spirit 
off and eat our littl ones?" 

"believ what you like," wa the advic given to him; "but ask no 
questions." As thi convers had taken place, one of the marshal' 
men at arm had passed, when all those who had been speak took to 
their heels. andré, who had run with the rest, without know exactli 
whi he fled, came upon a man near the church of the holi trinity, who 
wa weep bitterly, and cri out,--"o my god, wilt thou not 
restor to me my littl one?" thi man had also been rob of hi 
child. 

licette, wife of guillaum sergent, live at La boneardière, in the 
parish of S. croix de machecoul, had lost her son two year before, 
and had not seen him since; she besought the commissioners, with tear 
in her eyes, to restor him to her. 

"I left him," said she, "at home whilst I went into the field with my 
husband to sow flax. He wa a bonni littl lad, and he wa as good as 
he wa bonny. He had to look after hi tini sister, who wa a year and 
a half old. On my return home, the littl girl wa found, but she 
could not tell me what had becom of him. afterward we found in the 
marsh a small red woollen cap which had belong to my poor darling; 
but it wa in vain that we drag the marsh, noth wa found more, 
except good evid that he had not been drowned. A hawker who sold 
needl and thread pass through machecoul at the time, and told me 
that an old woman in grey, with a black hood on her head, had bought 
of him some children' toys, and had a few moment after pass him, 
lead a littl boy by the hand." 

georg lebarbier, live near the gate of the châtelet de machecoul, 
gave an account of the manner in which hi son had evanesced. the boy 
wa apprent to jean pelletier, tailor to mme. de retz and to the 
household of the castle. He seem to be get on in hi profession, 
when last year, about S. barnabas' day, he went to play at ball on the 
castl green. He never return from the game. 

thi youth and hi master, jean pelletier, had been in the habit of 
eat and drink at the castle, and bad alway laugh at the 
omin stori told by the people. 

guillaum hilair and hi wife confirm the statement of lebarbier. 
they also said that they knew of the loss of the son of jean gendron, 
jeann rouen, and alexandr châtellier. the son of jean gendron, age 
twelve, live with the said hilair and learn of him the trade of 
skinner. He had been work in the shop for seven or eight years, and 
wa a steady, hardwork lad. one day messieur gill de sillé and 
roger de briquevil enter the shop to purchas a pair of hunt 
gloves. they ask if littl gendron might take a messag for them to 
the castle. hilair readili consented, and the boy receiv beforehand 
the payment for going--a gold angelus, and he started, promis to be 
back directly. but he had never returned. that even hiliar and hi 
wife, observ gill de sillé and roger de briquevil return to 
the castle, ran to them and ask what had becom of the apprentice. 
they repli that they had no notion of where he was, as they had been 
absent hunting, but that it wa possibl he might have been sent to 
tiffauges, anoth castl of De retz. 

guillaum hilaire, whose deposit were more grave and explicit than 
the others, posit assert that jean dujardin, valet to roger de 
briquevil had told him he knew of a cask secret in the castle, 
full of children' corpses. He said that he had often heard peopl say 
that children were entic to the château and then murdered, but had 
treat it as an idl tale. He said, moreover, that the marshal wa 
not accus of have ani hand in the murders, but that hi servant 
were suppos to be guilty. 

jean gendron himself depos to the loss of hi son, and he ad that 
hi wa not the onli child which had vanish mysteri at 
machecoul. He knew of thirti that had disappeared. 

jean chipholon, elder and junior, jean aubin, and clement doré, all 
inhabit of the parish of thomage, depos that they had known a 
poor man of the same parish, name mathelin thomas, who had lost hi 
son, age twelve, and that he had die of grief in consequence. 

jeann rouen, of machecoul, who for nine year had been in a state of 
uncertainti whether her son were aliv or dead, depos that the child 
had been carri off whilst keep sheep. she had thought that he had 
been devour of wolves, but two women of machecoul, now deceased, had 
seen gill de sillé approach the littl shepherd, speak to him, and 
point to the castle. shortli after the lad had walk off in that 
direction. the husband of jeann rouen went to the château to inquir 
after hi son, but could obtain no information. when next gill de 
sillé appear in the town, the disconsol mother entreat him to 
restor her child to her. gill repli that he knew noth about 
him, as he had been to the king at amboise. 

jeanne, widow of aymeri hedelin, live at machecoul, had also lost, 
eight year before, a littl child as he had pursu some butterfli 
into the wood. At the same time four other children had been carri 
off, those of gendron, rouen, and macé sorin. she said that the stori 
circul through the countri was, that gill de sillé stole 
children to make them over to the english, in order to obtain the 
ransom of hi brother who wa a captive. but she ad that thi 
report wa trace to the servant of sillé, and that it wa propag 
by them. 

one of the last children to disappear wa that of noël aise, live in 
the parish of S. croix. 

A man from tiffaug had said to her (jeann hedelin) that for one 
child stolen at machecoul, there were seven carri away at tiffauges. 

macé sorin confirm the deposit of the widow hedelin., and 
repeat the circumst connect with the loss of the children of 
châtellier, rouen, gendron, and lebarbier. 

perrin rondeau had enter the castl with the compani of jean labbé. 
she had enter a stable, and had found a heap of ash and powder, 
which had a sickli and peculiar smell. At the bottom of a trough she 
had found a child' shirt cover with blood. 

sever inhabit of the bourg of fresnay, to wit, perrot, 
parqueteau, jean soreau, catherin degrépie, gill garnier, perrin 
viellard, marguerit rediern, mari carfin, jeann laudais, said that 
they had heard guillaum hamelin, last easter, lament the loss of 
two children. 

isabeau, wife of guillaum hamelin, confirm these depositions, 
save that she had lost them seven year before. she had at that time 
four children; the eldest age fifteen, the youngest age seven, went 
togeth to machecoul to buy some bread, but they did not return. she 
sat up for them all night and next morning. she heard that anoth 
child had been lost, the son of michaut bonnel of S. ciré de retz. 

guillemette, wife of michaut bonnel, said that her son had been 
carri off whilst guard cows. 

guillaum rodigo and hi wife, live at bourg-neuf-en-retz, depos 
that on the eve of last S. bartholomew' day, the sire do retz lodg 
with guillaum plumet in hi village. 

pontou, who accompani the marshal, saw a lad of fifteen, name 
bernard lecanino, servant to rodigo, stand at the door of hi 
house. the lad could not speak much french, but onli bas-breton. 
pontou beckon to him and spoke to him in a low tone. that evening, 
at ten o'clock, bernard left hi master' house, rodigo and hi wife 
be absent. the servant maid, who saw him go out, call to him that 
the supper tabl wa not yet cleared, but he paid no attent to what 
she said. rodigo, annoy at the loss of hi servant, ask some of 
the marshal' men what had becom of him. they repli mockingli that 
they knew noth of the littl breton, but that he had probabl been 
sent to tiffaug to be train as page to their lord. 

marguerit sorain, the chambermaid allud to above, confirm the 
statement of rodigo, ad that pontou had enter the hous and 
spoken with bernard. guillaum plumet and wife confirm what rodigo 
and sorain had said. 

thoma aysé and wife depos to the loss of their son, age ten, who 
had gone to beg at the gate of the castl of machecoul; and a littl 
girl had seen him drawn by an offer of meat into the château. 

jamette, wife of eustach drouet of S. léger, had sent two sons, one 
age ten, the other seven, to the castl to obtain alms. they had not 
been seen since. 

On the 2nd octob the commission sat again, and the charg becam 
graver, and the servant of the marshal becam more and more 
implicated. 

the disappear of thirteen other children wa substanti under 
circumst throw strong suspicion on the inmat of the castle. 
I will not give the details, for they much resembl those of the 
former depositions. suffic it to say that befor the commission 
close the inquiry, a herald of the duke of brittani in tabard blew 
three call on the trumpet, from the step of the tower of bouffay, 
summon all who had addit charg to bring against the sire de 
retz, to present themselv without delay. As no fresh wit 
arrived, the case wa consid to be made out, and the commission 
visit the duke, with the inform they had collected, in their 
hands. 

the duke hesit long as to the step he should take. should he 
judg and sentenc a kinsman, the most power of hi vassals, the 
bravest of hi captains, a councillor of the king, a marshal of 
france? 

whilst still unsettl in hi mind as to the cours he should pursue, 
he receiv a letter from gill de retz, which produc quit a 
differ effect from that which it had been intend to produce. 

"monsieur MY cousin and honour sire,-- 

"it is quit true that I am perhap the most detest of all 
sinners, have sin horribl again and again, yet have I never 
fail in my religi duties. I have heard mani masses, vespers, &c., 
have fast in lent and on vigils, have confess my sins, deplor 
them heartily, and have receiv the blood of our lord at least onc 
in the year. 

sinc I have been languish in prison, await your honour 
justice, I have been overwhelm with incompar repent for my 
crimes, which I am readi to acknowledg and to expiat as is suitable. 

"wherefor I supplic you, M. my cousin, to give me licenc to 
retir into a monastery, and there to lead a good and exemplari life. 
I care not into what monasteri I am sent, but I intend that all my 
goods, &c., should be distribut among the poor, who are the member 
of jesu christ on earth . . . . await your gloriou clemency, on 
which I rely, I pray god our lord to protect you and your kingdom. 

He who address you is in all earthli humility," 

"friar gilles, 
carmelit in intention." 

the duke read thi letter to pierr de l'hospital, presid of 
brittany, and to the bishop of nantes, who were those most resolut in 
press on the trial. they were horrifi at the tone of thi 
dread communication, and assur the duke that the case wa so 
clear, and the step taken had been so decided, that it wa imposs 
for him to allow De retz to escap trial by such an impiou devic as 
he suggested. In the meantime, the bishop and the grand-senesch had 
set on foot an investig at the castl of machecoul, and had found 
numer trace of human remains. but a complet examin could not 
be made, as the duke wa anxiou to screen hi kinsman as much as 
possible, and refus to author one. 

the duke now summon hi princip offic and held a council with 
them. they unanim side with the bishop and de l'hospital, and 
when john still hesitated, the bishop of nant rose and said: 
"monseigneur, thi case is one for the church as much as for your 
court to take up. consequently, if your presid of brittani doe not 
bring the case into secular court, by the judg of heaven and earth! I 
will cite the author of these execr crime to appear befor our 
ecclesiast tribunal." 

the resolut of the bishop compel the duke to yield, and it wa 
decid that the trial should take it cours without let or 
hindrance. 

In the meantime, the unhappi wife of gill de retz, who had been 
separ from him for some while, and who loath hi crimes, though 
she still felt for him as her husband, hurri to the duke with her 
daughter to entreat pardon for the wretch man. but the duke refus 
to hear her. thereupon she went to ambois to interced with the king 
for him who bad onc been hi close friend and adviser. 



chapter xii. 

the maréchal DE retz.--ii. the trial. 


On the 10th october, nicola chateau, notari of the duke, went to the 
château of bouffay, to read to the prison the summon to appear in 
person on the morrow befor messir de l'hospital, presid of 
brittany, senesch of rennes, and chief justic of the duchi of 
brittany. 

the sire de retz, who believ himself alreadi a novic in the 
carmelit order, had dress in white, and wa engag in sing 
litanies. when the summon had been read, he order a page to give 
the notari wine and cake, and then he return to hi prayer with 
everi appear of compunct and piety. 

On the morrow jean labbé and four soldier conduct him to the hall 
of justice. He ask for pontou and henriet to accompani him, but thi 
wa not permitted. 

He wa adorn with all hi militari insignia, as though to impos on 
hi judges; he had around hi neck massiv chain of gold, and sever 
collar of knightli orders. hi costume, with the except of hi 
purpoint, wa white, in token of hi repentance. hi purpoint wa of 
pearl-grey silk, stud with gold stars, and gird around hi waist 
by a scarlet belt, from which dangl a poignard in scarlet velvet 
sheath. hi collar, cufs, and the edg of hi purpoint were of white 
ermine, hi littl round cap or _chapel_ wa white, surround with a 
belt of ermine--a fur which onli the great feudal lord of brittani 
had a right to wear. all the rest of hi dress, to the shoe which 
were long and pointed, wa white. 

No one at a first glanc would have thought the sire do retz to be by 
natur so cruel and viciou as he wa suppos to be. On the contrary, 
hi physiognomi wa calm and phlegmatic, somewhat pale, and express 
of melancholy. hi hair and moustach were light brown, and hi beard 
wa clip to a point. thi beard, which resembl no other beard, 
wa black, but under certain light it assum a blue hue, and it wa 
thi peculiar which obtain for the sire do retz the surnam of 
blue-beard, a name which ha attach to him in popular romance, at 
the same time that hi stori ha undergon strang metamorphoses. 

but on closer examin of the counten of gill de retz, 
contract in the muscl of the face, nervou quiver of the 
mouth, spasmod twitch of the brows, and abov all, the sinist 
express of the eyes, show that there wa someth strang and 
fright in the man. At interv he ground hi teeth like a wild 
beast prepar to dash upon hi prey, and then hi lip becam so 
contracted, as they were drawn in and glued, as it were, to hi teeth, 
that their veri colour wa indiscernible. 

At time also hi eye becam fixed, and the pupil dilat to such an 
extent, with a sombr fire quiver in them, that the iri seem to 
fill the whole orbit, which becam circular, and sank back into the 
head. At these moment hi complexion becam livid and cadaverous; hi 
brow, especi just over the nose, wa cover with deep wrinkles, 
and hi beard appear to bristle, and to assum it bluish hues. but, 
after a few moments, hi featur becam again serene, with a sweet 
smile repos upon them, and hi express relax into a vagu and 
tender melancholy. 

"messires," said he, salut hi judges, "I pray you to expedit my 
matter, and despatch as speedili as possibl my unfortun case; for 
I am peculiarli anxiou to consecr myself to the servic of god, 
who ha pardon my great sins. I shall not fail, I assur you, to 
endow sever of the church in nantes, and I shall distribut the 
greater portion of my good among the poor, to secur the salvat of 
my soul." 

"monseigneur," repli grave pierr de l'hospital: "it is alway 
well to think of the salvat of one' soul; but, if you please, 
think now that we are concern with the salvat of your body." 

"I have confess to the father superior of the carmelites," repli 
the marshal, with tranquillity; "and through hi absolut I have 
been abl to communicate: I am, therefore, guiltless and purified." 

"men' justic is not in common with that of god, monseigneur, and I 
cannot tell you what will be your sentence. Be readi to make your 
defence, and listen to the charg brought against you, which M. le 
lieuten du procureur de nant will read." 

the offic rose, and read the follow paper of charges, which I 
shall condense:-- 

"have heard the bitter complaint of sever of the inhabit of 
the dioces of nantes, whose name follow hereinaft (here follow the 
name of the parent of the lost children), we, philipp do livron, 
lieuten assesseur of messir le procureur de nantes, have invited, 
and do invite, the veri nobl and veri wise messir pierr de 
l'hospital, presid of brittany, &c., to bring to trial the veri 
high and veri power lord, gill de laval, sire de retz, machecoul, 
ingrand and other places, councillor of hi majesti the king, and 
marshal of france: 

"forasmuch as the said sire de retz ha seiz and caus to be seiz 
sever littl children, not onli ten or twenty, but thirty, forty, 
fifty, sixty, one hundred, two hundred, and more, and ha murder and 
slain them inhumanly, and then burn their bodi to convert them to 
ashes: 

"forasmuch as persev in evil, the said sire, notwithstand that 
the power that be are ordain of god, and that everi one should be 
an obedi subject to hi prince, . . . ha assault jean leferon, 
subject of the duke of brittany, the said jean leferon be guardian 
of the fortress of malemort, in the name of geoffrey leferon, hi 
brother, to whom the said lord had made over the possess of the 
said place: 

"forasmuch as the said sire forc jean leferon to give up to him the 
said place, and moreov retook the lordship of malemort in despit of 
the order of the duke and of justice: 

"forasmuch as the said sire arrest master jean rousseau, sergeant of 
the duke, who wa sent to him with injunct from the said duke, and 
beat hi men with their own staves, although their person were under 
the protect of hi grace: 

"we conclud that the said sire de retz, homicid in fact and in 
intent accord to the first count, rebel and felon accord to the 
second, should be condemn to suffer corpor punishment, and to pay 
a fine of hi possess in land and good held in fief to the said 
nobleman, and that these should be confisc and remit to the 
crown of brittany." 

thi requisit wa evid drawn up with the view of save the 
life of the sire de retz; for the crime of homicid wa present 
without aggrav circumstances, in such a manner that it could be 
deni or shelved, whilst the crime of feloni and rebellion against 
the duke of brittani were brought into exagger prominence. 

gill de retz had undoubtedli been forewarn of the cours which wa 
to be pursued, and he wa prepar to deni total the charg made in 
the first count. 

"monseigneur," said pierr de l'hospital, whom the form of the 
requisit had visibl astonished: "what justif have you to 
make? take an oath on the gospel to declar the truth." 

"no, messire!" answer the marshal. "the wit are bound to 
declar what they know upon oath, but the accus is never put on hi 
oath." 

"quit so," repli the judge. "becaus the accus may be put on the 
rack and constrain to speak the truth, an' pleas you." 

gill de retz turn pale, bit hi lips, and cast a glanc of 
malign hate at pierr de l'hospital; then, compos hi 
countenance, he spoke with an appear of calm:-- 

"messires, I shall not deni that I behav wrong in the case of 
jean rousseau; but, in excuse, let me say that the said rousseau wa 
full of wine, and he behav with such indecorum toward me in the 
presenc of my servants, that it wa quit intolerable. nor will I 
deni my reveng on the brother leferon: jean had declar that the 
said grace of brittani had confisc my fortress of malemort, which 
I had sold to him, and for which I have not yet receiv payment; and 
geoffrey leferon had announc far and wide that I wa about to be 
expel brittani as a traitor and a rebel. To punish them I 
re-ent my fortress of malemort.--a for the other charges, I shall 
say noth about them, they are simpli fals and calumnious." 

"inde exclaim pierr de l'hospital, whose blood boil with 
indign against the wretch who stood befor him with such 
effrontery. "all these wit who complain of have lost their 
children, lie under oath!" 

"undoubtedly, if they accus me of have anyth to do with their 
loss. what am I to know about them, am I their keeper?" 

"the answer of cain!" exclaim pierr de l'hospital, rise from hi 
seat in the vehem of hi emotion. "however, as you solemnli deni 
these charges, we must question henriet and pontou." 

"henriet, pontou!" cri the marshal, trembling; "they accus me of 
nothing, surely!" 

"not as yet, they have not been questioned, but they are about to be 
brought into court, and I do not expect that they will lie in the face 
of justice." 

"I demand that my servant be not brought forward as wit against 
their master," said the marshal, hi eye dilating, hi brow 
wrinkling, and hi beard bristl blue upon hi chin: "a master is 
abov the gossip tale and charg of hi servants." 

"do you think then, messire, that your servant will accus you?" 

"I demand that I, a marshal of france, a baron of the duchy, should be 
shelter from the slander of small folk, whom I disown as my 
servant if they are untru to their master." 

"messire, I see we must put you on the rack, or noth will be got 
from you." 

"hola! I appeal to hi grace the duke of brittany, and ask an 
adjournment, that I may take advic on the charg brought against me, 
which I have denied, and which I deni still." 

"well, I shall adjourn the case till the 25th of thi month, that you 
may be well prepar to meet the accusations." 

On hi way back to prison, the marshal pass henriet and pontou as 
they were be conduct to the court. henriet pretend not to see 
hi master, but pontou burst into tear on meet him. the marshal 
held out hi hand, and pontou kiss it affectionately. 

"rememb what I have done for you, and be faith servants," said 
gill de retz. henriet recoil from him with a shudder, and the 
marshal pass on. 

"I shall speak," whisper henriet; "for we have anoth master besid 
our poor master of retz, and we shall soon be with the heavenli one." 

the presid order the clerk to read again the requisit of the 
lieutenant, that the two presum accomplic of gill de retz might 
be inform of the charg brought against their master. henriet burst 
into tears, trembl violently, and cri out that he would tell all. 
pontou, alarmed, tri to hinder hi companion, and said that henriet 
wa touch in hi head, and that what he wa about to say would be 
the rave of insanity. 

silenc wa impos upon him. 

"I will speak out," continu henriet and yet I dare not speak of the 
horror which I know have taken place, befor that imag of my lord 
christ; "and he point tremblingli to a larg crucifix abov the seat 
of the judge. 

"henriet." moan pontou, squeez hi hand, "you will destroy 
yourself as well as your master." 

pierr de l'hospit rose, and the figur of our redeem wa solemnli 
veiled. 

henriet, who had great difficulti in overcom hi agitation, than 
began hi revelations. 

the follow is the substanc of them:-- 

On leav the univers of angers, he had taken the situat of 
reader in the hous of gill de retz. the marshal took a like to 
him, and made him hi chamberlain and confidant. 

On the occas of the sire de la suze, brother of the sire de retz, 
take possess of the castl of chantoncé, charl de soenne, who 
had arriv at chantoncé, assur henriet that he had found in the 
oubliett of a tower a number of dead children, some headless, other 
fright mutilated. henriet then thought that thi wa but a 
calumni invent by the sire de la suze. 

but when, some while after, the sire de retz retook the castl of 
chantoncé and had cede it to the duke of brittany, he one even 
summon henriet, pontou, and a certain petit robin to hi room; the 
two latter were alreadi deep in the secret of their master. but 
befor confid anyth to henriet, De retz made him take a solemn 
oath never to reveal what he wa about to tell him. the oath taken, 
the sire de retz, address the three, said that on the morrow an 
offic of the duke would take possess of the castl in the name of 
the duke, and that it wa necessary, befor thi took place, that a 
certain well should be empti of children' corpses, and that their 
bodi should be put into box and transport to machecoul. 

henriet, pontou, and petit robin went together, furnish with rope 
and hooks, to the tower where were the corpses. they toil all night 
in remov the half-decay bodies, and with them they fill three 
larg cases, which they sent by a boat down the loir to machecoul, 
where they were reduc to ashes. 

henriet count thirty-six children' heads, but there were more 
bodi than heads. thi night' work, he said, bad produc a profound 
impress on hi imagination, and he wa constantli haunt with a 
vision of these head roll as in a game of skittles, and clash 
with a mourn wail. henriet soon began to collect children for hi 
master, and wa present whilst he massacr them. they were murder 
invari in one room at machecoul. the marshal use to bath in 
their blood; he wa fond of make gill do sillé, pontou, or henriet 
tortur them, and he experienc intens pleasur in see them in 
their agonies. but hi great passion wa to welter in their blood. hi 
servant would stab a child in the jugular vein, and let the blood 
squirt over him. the room wa often steep in blood. when the 
horribl deed wa done, and the child wa dead, the marshal would be 
fill with grief for what he had done, and would toss weep and 
pray on a bed, or recit fervent prayer and litani on hi knees, 
whilst hi servant wash the floor, and burn in the huge fireplac 
the bodi of the murder children. with the bodi were burn the 
cloth and everyth that had belong to the littl victims. 

An insupport odour fill the room, but the maréchal do retz 
inhal it with delight. 

henriet acknowledg that he had seen forti children put to death in 
thi manner, and he wa abl to give an account of several, so that it 
wa possibl to identifi them with the children report to be lost. 

"it is quit impossible," said the lieutenant, who had been given the 
cue to do all that wa possibl to save the marshal--"it is imposs 
that bodi could be burn in a chamber fireplace." 

"it wa done, for all that, messire," repli henriet. "the fireplac 
wa veri large, both at the hotel suze, and also at machecoul; we 
pile up great faggot and logs, and laid the dead children among 
them. In a few hour the oper wa complete, and we flung the 
ash out of the window into the moat." 

henriet rememb the case of the two son of hamelin; he said that, 
whilst the one child wa be tortured, the other wa on it knee 
sob and pray to god, till it own turn came. 

"what you have said concern the excess of messir de retz," 
exclaim the lieuten du procureur, "seem to be pure invention, 
and destitut of all probability. the greatest monster of iniqu 
never commit such crimes, except perhap some cæsar of old rome." 

"messire, it wa the act of these cæsar that my lord of retz desir 
to imitate. I use to read to him the chronicl of suetonius, and 
tacitus, in which their cruelti are recorded. He use to delight in 
hear of them, and he said that it gave him greater pleasur to hack 
off a child' head than to assist at a banquet. sometim he would 
seat himself on the breast of a littl one, and with a knife sever the 
head from the bodi at a singl blow; sometim he cut the throat half 
through veri gently, that the child might languish, and he would wash 
hi hand and hi beard in it blood. sometim he had all the limb 
chop off at onc from the trunk; at other time he order us to 
hang the infant till they were nearli dead, and then take them down 
and cut their throats. I rememb have brought to him three littl 
girl who were ask chariti at the castl gates. He bade me cut 
their throat whilst he look on. andré bricket found anoth littl 
girl cri on the step of the hous at vann becaus she had lost 
her mother. He brought the littl thing--it wa but a babe--in hi 
arm to my lord, and it wa kill befor him. pontou and I had to 
make away with the body. We threw it down a privi in one of the 
towers, but the corps caught on a nail in the outer wall, so that it 
would be visibl to all who passed. pontou wa let down by a rope, and 
he disengag it with great difficulty." 

"how mani children do you estim that the sire de retz and hi 
servant have killed?" 

"the reckon is long. I, for my part, confess to have kill 
twelv with my own hand, by my master' orders, and I have brought him 
about sixty. I knew that thing of the kind went on befor I wa 
admit to the secret; for the castl of machecoul had been occupi 
a short while by the sire do la sage. My lord recov it speedily, 
for he knew that there were mani children' corps hidden in a 
hayloft. there were forti there quit dri and black as coal, becaus 
they had been charred. one of the women of madam de retz came by 
chanc into the loft and saw the corpses. roger de briquevil want 
to kill her, but the maréchal would not let him." 

"have you noth more to declare? 

"nothing. I ask pontou, my friend, to corrobor what I have said." 

thi deposition, so circumstanti and detailed, produc on the 
judg a profound impress of horror. human imagin at thi time 
had not penetr such mysteri of refin cruelty. sever times, 
as henriet spake, the presid had shown hi astonish and 
indign by sign himself with the cross. sever time hi face 
had becom scarlet, and hi eye had fallen; he had press hi hand 
to hi brow, to assur himself that he wa not labour under a 
hideou dream, and a quiver of horror had run through hi whole frame. 

pontou had taken no part in the revel of henriet; but when the 
latter appeal to him he rais hi head, look sadli round the 
court, and sighed. 

"etienn cornillant, alia pontou, I command you in the name of god 
and of justice, to declar what you know." 

thi injunct of pierr do l'hospit remain unrespond to, and 
pontou seem to strengthen himself in hi resolut not to accus 
hi master. 

but henriet, fling himself into the arm of hi accomplice, 
implor him, as he valu hi soul, no longer to harden hi heart to 
the call of god; but to bring to light the crime he had commit 
along with the sire do retz. 

the lieuten du procureur, who hitherto had endeavour to extenu 
or discredit the charg brought against gill do retz, tri a last 
expedi to counterbal the damag confess of henriet, and 
to withhold pontou from give way. 

"you have heard, monseigneur," said he to the president, "the 
atroc which have been acknowledg by henriet, and you, as I do, 
consid them to be pure invent of the aforesaid, made out of 
bitter hatr and envi with the purpos of ruin hi master. I 
therefor demand that henriet should be put on the rack, that he may 
be brought to give the lie to hi former statements." 

"you forget," repli de l'hospital, "that the rack is for those who 
do _not_ confess, and not for those who freeli acknowledg their 
crimes. therefor I order the second accused, etienn cornillant, 
alia pontou, to be place on the rack if he continu silent. pontou! 
will you speak or will you not?" 

"monseigneur, he will speak!" exclaim henriet. oh, pontou, dear 
friend, resist not god ani more." 

"well then, messeigneurs," said pontou, with emotion; "I will satisfi 
you; I cannot defend my poor lord against the alleg of henriet, 
who ha confess all through dread of etern damnation." 

He then fulli substanti all the statement of the other, ad 
other fact of the same character, known onli to himself. 

notwithstand the avow of pontou and henriet, the adjourn trial 
wa not hurri on. It would have been easi to have captur some of 
the accomplic of the wretch man; but the duke, who wa inform of 
the whole of the proceedings, did not wish to augment the scandal by 
increas the number of the accused. He even forbad research to be 
made in the castl and mansion of the sire de retz, fear lest 
proof of fresh crimes, more mysteri and more horribl than those 
alreadi divulged, should come to light. 

the dismay spread through the countri by the revel alreadi made, 
demand that religion and morality, which had been so grossli 
outraged, should be speedili avenged. peopl wonder at the delay in 
pronounc sentence, and it wa loudli proclaim in nant that the 
sire de retz wa rich enough to purchas hi life. It is true that 
madam de retz solicit the king and the duke again to give pardon to 
her husband; but the duke, counsel by the bishop, refus to extend 
hi author to interfer with the cours of justice; and the king, 
after have sent one of hi councillor to nant to investig the 
case, determin not to stir in it. 



chapter xiii. 

maréchal DE retz.--iii. the sentenc and execution. 


On the 24th octob the trial of the maréchal de retz wa resumed. the 
prison enter in a carmelit habit, knelt and pray in silenc 
befor the examin began. then he ran hi eye over the court, and 
the sight of the rack, windlass, and cord made a slight shudder run 
through him. 

"messir gill de laval," began the president; "you appear befor me 
now for the second time to answer to a certain requisit read by M. 
le lieuten du procureur de nantes." 

"I shall answer frankly, monseigneur," said the prison calmly; "but 
I reserv the right of appeal to the benign intervent of the veri 
vener majesti of the king of france, of whom I am, or have been, 
chamberlain and marshal, as may be prove by my letter patent duli 
enregist in the parliament at paris--" 

"thi is no affair of the king of france," interrupt pierr de 
l'hospital; "if you were chamberlain and marshal of hi majesty, you 
are also vassal of hi grace the duke of brittany." 

"I do not deni it; but, on the contrary, I trust to hi grace of 
brittani to allow me to retir to a convent of carmelites, there to 
repent me of my sins." 

"that is as may be; will you confess, or must I send you to the rack?" 

"tortur me not!" exclaim gill de retz "I will confess all. tell 
me first, what have henriet and pontou said?" 

"they have confessed. M. le lieuten du procureur shall read you 
their allegations." 

"not so," said the lieutenant, who continu to show favour to the 
accused; "I pronounc them false, unless messir de retz confirm them 
by oath, which god forbid!" 

pierr de l'hospit made a motion of anger to check thi scandal 
plead in favour of the accused, and then nod to the clerk to 
read the evidence. 

the sire do retz, on hear that hi servant had made such explicit 
avow of their acts, remain motionless, as though thunderstruck. 
He saw that it wa in vain for him to equivocate, and that he would 
have to confess all. 

"what have you to say?" ask the president, when the confess of 
henriet and pontou had been read. 

"say what befit you, my lord," interrupt the lieuten du 
procureur, as though to indic to the accus the line he wa to 
take: "are not these abomin lie and calumni trump up to ruin 
you?" 

"alas, no!" repli the sire do retz; and hi face wa pale as death: 
"henriet and pontou have spoken the truth. god ha loosen their 
tongues." 

"mi lord! reliev yourself of the burden of your crime by 
acknowledg them at once," said M. do l'hospit earnestly. 

"messires!" said the prisoner, after a moment' silence: "it is quit 
true that I have rob mother of their littl ones; and that I have 
kill their children, or caus them to be killed, either by cut 
their throat with dagger or knives, or by chop off their head 
with cleavers; or els I have had their skull broken by hammer or 
sticks; sometim I had their limb hewn off one after another; at 
other time I have rip them open, that I might examin their 
entrail and hearts; I have occasion strangl them or put them to 
a slow death; and when the children were dead I had their bodi 
burn and reduc to ashes." 

"when did you begin your execr practices?" ask pierr de 
l'hospital, stagger by the frank of these horribl avowals: "the 
evil one must have possess you." 

"it came to me from myself,--no doubt at the instig of the devil: 
but still these act of cruelti afford me incompar delight. the 
desir to commit these atroc came upon me eight year ago. I left 
court to go to chantoncé, that I might claim the properti of my 
grandfather, deceased. In the librari of the castl I found a latin 
book--_suetonius_, I believe--ful of account of the cruelti of the 
roman emperors. I read the charm histori of tiberius, caracalla, 
and other cæsars, and the pleasur they took in watch the agoni 
of tortur children. thereupon I resolv to imit and surpass 
these same cæsars, and that veri night I began to do so. for some 
while I confid my secret to no one, but afterward I commun it 
to my cousin, gill de sillé, then to master roger de briqueville, 
next in success to henriet, pontou, rossignol, and robin." He then 
confirm all the account given by hi two servants. He confess to 
about one hundr and twenti murder in a singl year. 

"an averag of eight hundr in less than seven years!" exclaim 
pierr de l'hospital, with a cri of pain: "ah! messire, you were 
possessed! " 

hi confess wa too explicit and circumstanti for the lieuten 
du procureur to say anoth word in hi defence; but he plead that 
the case should be made over to the ecclesiast court, as there 
were confess of invoc of the devil and of witchcraft mix 
up with those of murder. pierr de l'hospit saw that the object of 
the lieuten wa to gain time for mme. de retz to make a fresh 
attempt to obtain a pardon; howev he wa unabl to resist, so he 
consent that the case should be transfer to the bishop' court. 

but the bishop wa not a man to let the matter slip, and there and 
then a sergeant of the bishop summon gill de laval, sire do retz, 
to appear forthwith befor the ecclesiast tribunal. the marshal 
wa stagger by thi unexpect citation, and he did not think of 
appeal against it to the president; he mere sign hi readi 
to follow, and he wa at onc conduct into the ecclesiast court 
assembl hurriedli to tri him. 

thi new trial last onli a few hours. 

the marshal, now thoroughli cowed, made no attempt to defend himself, 
but he endeavour to bribe the bishop into leniency, by promis of 
the surrend of all hi land and good to the church, and beg to 
be allow to retir into the carmelit monasteri at nantes. 

hi request wa peremptorili refused, and sentenc of death wa 
pronounc against him. 

On the 25th october, the ecclesiast court have pronounc 
judgment, the sentenc wa transmit to the secular court, which had 
now no pretext upon which to withhold ratification. 

there wa some hesit as to the kind of death the marshal wa to 
suffer. the member of the secular tribun were not unanim on thi 
point. the presid put it to the vote, and collect the vote 
himself; then he reseat himself, cover hi head, and said in a 
solemn voice:-- 

"the court, notwithstand the quality, dignity, and nobil of the 
accused, condemn him to be hung and burned. wherefor I admonish you 
who are condemned, to ask pardon of god, and grace to die well, in 
great contrit for have commit the said crimes. and the said 
sentenc shall be carri into execut to-morrow morn between 
eleven and twelv o'clock." A similar sentenc wa pronounc upon 
henriet and pontou. 

On the morrow, octob 26th, at nine o'clock in the morning, a gener 
process compos of half the peopl of nantes, the clergi and the 
bishop bear the bless sacrament, left the cathedr and went 
round the citi visit each of the princip churches, where mass 
were said for the three under sentence. 

At eleven the prison were conduct to the place of execution, 
which wa in the meadow of biesse, on the further side of the loire. 

three gibbet had been erected, one higher than the others, and 
beneath each wa a pile of faggots, tar, and brushwood. 

It wa a glorious, breezi day, not a cloud wa to be seen in the blue 
heavens; the loir roll silent toward the sea it mighti volum 
of turbid water, seem bright and blue as it reflect the 
brillianc and colour of the sky. the poplar shiver and whiten in 
the fresh air with a pleasant rustle, and the willow flicker and 
waver abov the stream. 

A vast crowd had assembl round the gallows; it wa with difficulti 
that a way wa made for the condemned, who came on chant the _de 
profundis_. the spectat of all age took up the psalm and chant 
it with them, so that the surg of the old gregorian tone might have 
been heard by the duke and the bishop, who had shut themselv up in 
the château of nant dure the hour of execution. 

after the close of the psalm, which wa termin by the _requiem 
æternam_ instead of the _gloria_, the sire de retz thank those who 
had conduct him, and then embrac pontou and henriet, befor 
deliv himself of the follow address, or rather sermon:-- 

"mi veri dear friend and servants, be strong and courag against 
the assault of the devil, and feel great displeasur and contrit 
for your ill deeds, without despair of god' mercy. believ with 
me, that there is no sin, howev great, in the world, which god, in 
hi grace and love kindness, will not pardon, when one ask it of 
him with contrit of heart. rememb that the lord god is alway 
more readi to receiv the sinner than is the sinner to ask of him 
pardon. moreover, let us veri humbl thank him for hi great love to 
us in let us die in full possess of our faculties, and not 
cut us off suddenli in the midst of our misdeeds. let us conceiv 
such a love of god, and such repentance, that we shall not fear death, 
which is onli a littl pang, without which we could not see god in hi 
glory. besid we must desir to be freed from thi world, in which is 
onli misery, that we may go to everlast glory. let us rejoic 
rather, for although we have sin grievous here below, yet we 
shall be unit in paradise, our soul be part from our bodies, 
and we shall be togeth for ever and ever, if onli we endur in our 
piou and honour contrit to our last sigh." [1] then the 
marshal, who wa to be execut first, left hi companion and place 
himself in the hand of hi executioners. He took off hi cap, knelt, 
kiss a crucifix, and made a piou orat to the crowd much in the 
style of hi address to hi friend pontou and henriet. 

[1. the case of the sire de retz is one to make us see the great 
danger there is in trust to feel in matter of religion. "if 
thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments," said our lord. how 
mani hope to go to heaven becaus they have piou emotions!] 

then he commenc recit the prayer of the dying; the execution 
pass the cord round hi neck, and adjust the knot. He mount a 
tall stool, erect at the foot of the gallow as a last honour paid 
to the nobil of the criminal. the pile of firewood wa light 
befor the execution had left him. 

pontou and henriet, who were still on their knees, rais their eye 
to their master and cri to him, extend their arms,-- 

"at thi last hour, monseigneur, be a good and valiant soldier of god, 
and rememb the passion of jesu christ which wrought our redemption. 
farewell, we hope soon to meet in paradise! 

the stool wa cast down, and the sire de retz dropped. the fire roar 
up, the flame leap about him, and envelop him as be swung. 

suddenly, mingl with the deep boom of the cathedr bell, 
swell up the wild unearthli wail of the _di iræ_. 

No sound among the crowd, onli the growl of the fire, and the solemn 
strain of the hymn 

lo, the book, exactli worded, 
wherein all hath been recorded; 
thenc shall judgment be awarded. 
when the judg hi seat attaineth, 
and each hidden deed arraigneth, 
noth unaveng remaineth. 
what shall I, frail man, be pleading? 
who for me be interceding? 
when the just are merci needing. 
king of majesti tremendous, 
who dost free salvat send us, 
fount of pity! then befriend us. 
* * * * 
low I kneel, with heart-submission; 
see, like ashes, my contrition-- 
help me in my last condition! 
Ah I that day of tear and mourning! 
from the dust of earth returning, 
man for judgment must prepar him! 
spare, O, god, in merci spare him! 
lord, who didst our soul redeem, 
grant a bless requiem! 
amen. 

six women, veiled, and robe in white, and six carmelit advanced. 
bear a coffin. 

It wa whisper that one of the veil women wa madam de retz, and 
that the other were member of the most illustri hous of 
brittany. 

the cord by which the marshal wa hung wa cut, and he fell into a 
cradl of iron prepar to receiv the corpse. the bodi wa remov 
befor the fire had gain ani masteri over it. It wa place in the 
coffin., and the monk and the women transport it to the carmelit 
monasteri of nantes, accord to the wish of the deceased. 

In the meantime, the sentenc had been execut upon pontou and 
henriet; they were hung and burn to dust. their ash were cast to 
the winds; whilst in the carmelit church of our ladi were celebr 
with pomp the obsequi of the veri high, veri powerful, veri 
illustri seigneur gill de laval, sire de retz, late chamberlain 
of king charl vii., and marshal of france! 



chapter xiv. 

A galician were-wolf. 


the inhabit of austrian galicia are quiet, inoffens people, 
take them as a whole. the jews, who number a twelfth of the 
population, are the most intelligent, energetic, and certainli the 
most money-mak individu in the province, though the pole 
proper, or mazurs, are not devoid of natur parts. 

perhap as remark a phenomenon as ani other in that kingdom--for 
kingdom of waldimir it was--i the enorm numer preponder of 
the nobil over the untitled. In 1837 the proport stood thus: 
32,190 nobl to 2,076 tradesmen. 

the averag of execut for crime is nine a year, out of a popul 
of four and a half millions,--bi no mean a high figure, consid 
the peremptori way in which justic is dealt forth in that province. 
yet, in the most quiet and well-dispos neighbourhoods, occasion 
the most startl atroc are committed, occur when least 
expected, and sometim perpetr by the veri person who is least 
suspected. 

just sixteen year ago there happen in the circl of tornow, in 
western galicia-th provinc is divid into nine circles-a 
circumst which will probabl furnish the grandam with a stori 
for their firesides, dure their bitter galician winters, for mani a 
long year. 

In the circl of tornow, in the lordship of parkost, is a littl 
hamlet call polomyja, consist of eight hovel and a jewish 
tavern. the inhabit are mostli woodcutters, hew down the fir 
of the dens forest in which their villag is situated, and convey 
them to the nearest water, down which they are float to the vistula. 
each tenant pay no rent for hi cottag and pitch of field, but is 
bound to work a fix number of day for hi landlord: a practic 
univers in galicia, and often product of much discont and 
injustice, as the proprietor exact labour from hi tenant on those 
day when the harvest ha to be got in, or the land is m best 
condit for tillage, and just when the peasant would gladli be 
engag upon hi own small plot. money is scarc in the province, and 
thi is accordingli the onli way in which the landlord can be sure of 
hi dues. 

most of the villag of polomyja are miser poor; but by 
cultiv a littl maize, and keep a few fowl or a pig, they 
scrape togeth suffici to sustain life. dure the summer the men 
collect resin from the pines, from each of which, onc in twelv 
years, they strip a slip of bark, leav the resin to exud and 
trickl into a small earthenwar jar at it roots; and, dure the 
winter, as alreadi stated, they fell the tree and roll them down to 
the river. 

polomyja is not a cheer spot--nest among dens mass of pine, 
which shed a gloom over the littl hamlet; yet, on a fine day, it is 
pleasant enough for the old women to sit at their cottag doors, 
scent that matchless pine fragrance, sweeter than the balm of the 
spice islands, for there is noth cloy in that exquisit and 
exhilar odour; listen to the harp-lik thrill of the breez in 
the old grey tree-tops, and knit quietli at long stockings, whilst 
their littl grandchildren romp in the heather and tuft fern. 

toward evening, too, there is someth indescrib beauti in 
the firwood. the sun dive among the trees, and paint their bole 
with patch of lumin saffron, or fall over a level clearing, 
glorifi it with it orang dye, so visibl contrast with the 
blue-purpl shadow on the western rim of unreclaim forest, deep and 
lusciou as the bloom on a plum. the bird then are hasten to their 
nests, a ger-falcon, high overhead, is kindl with sunlight; caper 
and gambol among the branches, the merri squirrel skip home for 
the night. 

the sun goe down, but the sky is still shine with twilight. the 
wild cat begin to hiss and squall in the forest, the heron to flap 
hastili by, the stork on the top of the tavern chimney to pois itself 
on one leg for sleep. to-whoo! an owl begin to wake up. hark! the 
woodcutt are come home with a song. 

such is polomyja in summer time, and much resembl it are the 
hamlet scatter about the forest, at interv of a few miles; in 
each, the public-hous be the most commodi and best-built 
edifice, the church, whenev there is one, not remark for 
anyth but it bulbou steeple. 

you would hardli believ that amidst all thi poverti a beggar could 
have pick up ani subsistence, and yet, a few year ago, sunday after 
sunday, there sat a white-beard vener man at the church door, 
ask alms. 

poor peopl are proverbi compassion and liberal, so that the 
old man gener got a few coppers, and often some good woman bade 
him come into her cottage, and let him have some food. 

occasion swiatek--that wa the beggar' name, went hi round 
sell small pinchbeck ornament and beads; generally, however, onli 
appeal to charity. 

one sunday, after church, a mazur and hi wife invit the old man 
into their hut and gave him a crust of pie and some meat. there were 
sever children about, but a littl girl, of nine or ten, attract 
the old man' attent by her artless tricks. 

swiatek felt in hi pocket and produc a ring, enclos a piec of 
colour glass set over foil. thi he present to the child, who ran 
off delight to show her acquisit to her companions. 

"i that littl maid your daughter?" ask the beggar. 

"no," answer the house-wife, "she is an orphan; there wa a widow in 
thi place who died, leav the child, and I have taken charg of 
her; one mouth more will not matter much, and the good god will bless 
us." 

"ay, ay! to be sure He will; the orphan and fatherless are under hi 
own peculiar care." 

"she' a good littl thing, and give no trouble," observ the woman. 
"you go back to polomyja tonight, I reckon." 

"I do--ah!" exclaim swiatek, as the littl girl ran up to him. you 
like the ring, is it not beautiful? I found it under a big fir to the 
left of the churchyard,ther may be dozen there. you must turn round 
three times, bow to the moon, and say, 'zaboï!' then look among the 
tree-root till you find one." 

"come along!" scream the child to it comrades; "we will go and look 
for rings." 

"you must seek separately," said swiatek. 

the children scamper off into the wood. 

"I have done one good thing for you," laugh the beggar, "in rid 
you, for a time, of the nois of those children." 

"I am glad of a littl quiet now and then," said the woman; "the 
children will not let the babi sleep at time with their clatter. are 
you going?" 

"yes; I must reach polomyja to-night. I am old and veri feeble, and 
poor"--h began to fall into hi customari whine-- veri poor, but I 
thank and pray to god for you." 

swiatek left the cottage. 

_that littl orphan wa never seen again._ 

the austrian govern has, of late years, been vigor advanc 
educ among the lower orders, and establish school throughout 
the province. 

the children were return from class one day, and were scatter 
among the trees, some pursu a field-mouse, other collect 
juniper-berries, and some saunter with their hand in their 
pockets, whistling. 

"where' peter?" ask one littl boy of anoth who wa besid him. 
"we three go home the same way, let us go together." 

"peter!" shout the lad. 

"here I am!" wa the answer from among the trees; "i'll be with you 
directly." 

"oh, I see him!" said the elder boy. "there is some one talk to 
him." 

"where?" 

"yonder, among the pines. ah! they have gone further into the shadow, 
and I cannot see them ani more. I wonder who wa with him; a man, I 
think." 

the boy wait till they were tired, and then they saunter home, 
determin to thrash peter for have kept them waiting. _but peter 
wa never seen again._ 

some time after thi a servant-girl, belong to a small store kept 
by a russian, disappear from a villag five mile from polomyja. she 
had been sent with a parcel of groceri to a cottag at no veri great 
distance, but lie apart from the main cluster of hovels, and 
surround by trees. 

the day close in, and her master wait her return anxiously, but as 
sever hour elaps without ani sign of her, he--assist by the 
neighbours--w in search of her. 

A slight powder of snow cover the ground, and her footstep could 
be trace at interv where she had diverg from the beaten track. 
In that part of the road where the tree were thickest, there were 
mark of two pair of feet leav the path; but owe to the densiti 
of the tree at that spot and to the slight of the fall of snow, 
which did not reach the soil, where shade by the pines, the 
footprint were immedi lost. By the follow morn a heavi 
fall had obliter ani further trace which day-light might have 
discovered. 

_the servant-girl also wa never seen again._ 

dure the winter of 1849 the wolv were suppos to have been 
particularli ravenous, for thu alon did peopl account for the 
mysteri disappear of children. 

A littl boy had been sent to a fountain to fetch water; the pitcher 
wa found stand by the well, but _the boy had vanished_. the 
villag turn out, and those wolv which could be found were 
despatched. 

We have alreadi introduc our reader to polomyja, although the 
occurr abov relat did not take place among those eight hovels, 
but in neighbour villages. the reason for our have given a more 
detail account of thi cluster of houses--rud cabin they 
were--wil now becom apparent. 

In may, 1849, the innkeep of polomyja miss a coupl of ducks, and 
hi suspicion fell upon the beggar who live there, and whom he held 
in no esteem, as he himself wa a hard-work industri man, whilst 
swiatek maintain himself, hi wife, and children by mendicity, 
although possess of suffici arabl land to yield an excel 
crop of maize, and produc vegetables, if till with ordinari care. 

As the publican approach the cottag a fragrant whiff of roast 
greet hi nostrils. 

"i'll catch the fellow in the act," said the innkeep to himself, 
steal up to the door, and take good care not to be observed. 

As he threw open the door, he saw the mendic hurriedli shuffl 
someth under hi feet, and conceal it beneath hi long clothes. the 
publican wa on him in an instant, had him by the throat, charg him 
with theft, and drag him from hi seat. judg of hi sicken 
horror when from beneath the pauper' cloth roll forth the head of 
a girl about the age of fourteen or fifteen years, care separ 
from the trunk. 

In a short while the neighbour came up. the vener swiatek wa 
lock up, along with hi wife, hi daughter--a girl of sixteen--and a 
son, age five. 

the hut wa thoroughli examined, and the mutil remain of the poor 
girl discovered. In a vat were found the leg and thighs, partli raw, 
partli stew or roasted. In a chest were the heart, liver, and 
entrails, all prepar and cleaned, as neatli as though done by a 
skil butcher; and, finally, under the oven wa a bowl full of fresh 
blood. On hi way to the magistr of the district. the wretch man 
flung himself repeatedli on the ground, struggl with hi guards, and 
endeavour to suffoc himself by gulp clown clod of earth and 
stones, but wa prevent by hi conductors. 

when taken befor the protokol at dabkow, he state that he had 
alreadi kill and--assist by hi family--eaten six persons: hi 
children, however, assert most posit that the number wa much 
greater than he had represented, and their testimoni is born out by 
the fact, that the remain of _fourteen_ differ cap and suit of 
clothes, male as well as female, were found in hi house. 

the origin of thi horribl and deprav tast wa as follows, 
accord to swiatek' own confession:-- 

In 1846, three year previous, a jewish tavern in the neighbourhood 
had been burn down, and the host had himself perish in the flames. 
swiatek, whilst examin the ruins, had found the half-roast corps 
of the publican among the char rafter of the house. At that time 
the old man wa crave with hunger, have been destitut of food for 
some time. the scent and the sight of the roast flesh inspir him 
with an uncontrol desir to tast of it. He tore off a portion of 
the carcas and satiat hi hunger upon it, and at the same time he 
conceiv such a like for it, that he could feel no rest till he had 
tast again. hi second victim wa the orphan abov allud to; sinc 
then--that is, dure the period of no less than three years--h had 
frequent subsist in the same manner, and had actual grown sleek 
and fat upon hi fright meals. 

the excit rous by the discoveri of these atroc wa 
intense; sever poor mother who had bewail the loss of their 
littl ones, felt their wound reopen agonisingly. popular 
indign rose to the highest pitch: there wa some fear lest the 
crimin should be torn in piec himself by the enrag people, as 
soon as he wa brought to trial: but he save the necess of 
precaut be taken to ensur hi safety, for, on the first night 
of hi confinement, he hang himself from the bar of the 
prison-window. 



chapter xv. 

anomal case.--th human hyæna. 


It is well known that orient romanc is full of stori of violat 
of graves. eastern superstit attribut to certain individu a 
passion for unearth corps and mangl them. Of a moonlight night 
weird form are seen steal among the tombs, and burrow into them 
with their long nails, desir to reach the bodi of the dead ere 
the first streak of dawn compel them to retire. these ghouls, as they 
are called, are suppos gener to requir the flesh of the dead 
for incant or magic compositions, but veri often they are 
actuat by the sole desir of rend the sleep corpse, and 
disturb it repose. there is everi probabl that these ghoul 
were no mere creation of the imagination, but were actual 
resurrectionists. human fat and the hair of a corps which ha grown 
in the grave, form ingredi in mani a necromant receipt, and the 
witch who compound these diabol mixtures, would unearth 
corps in order to obtain the requisit ingredients. It wa the same 
in the middl ages, and to such an extent did the fear of ghoul 
extend, that it wa common in brittani for churchyard to be provid 
with lamps, kept burn dure the night, that witch might be 
deter from ventur under cover of dark to open the graves. 

fornari give the follow stori of a ghoul in hi _histori of 
sorcerers_:-- 

In the begin of the 15th century, there live at bagdad an age 
merchant who had grown wealthi in hi business, and who had an onli 
son to whom he wa tenderli attached. He resolv to marri him to the 
daughter of anoth merchant, a girl of consider fortune, but 
without ani person attractions. abul-hassan, the merchant' son, on 
be shown the portrait of the lady, request hi father to delay 
the marriag till he could reconcil hi mind to it. instead, however, 
of do this, he fell in love with anoth girl, the daughter of a 
sage, and he gave hi father no peac till he consent to the 
marriag with the object of hi affections. the old man stood out as 
long as he could, but find that hi son wa bent on acquir the 
hand of the fair nadilla, and wa equal resolut not to accept the 
rich and ugli lady, he did what most fathers, under such 
circumstances, are constrain to do, he acquiesced. 

the wed took place with great pomp and ceremony, and a happi 
honeymoon ensued, which might have been happier but for one littl 
circumst which led to veri seriou consequences. 

abul-hassan notic that hi bride quit the nuptial couch as soon 
as she thought her husband wa asleep, and did not return to it, till 
an boar befor dawn. 

fill with curiosity, hassan one night feign sleep, and saw hi 
wife rise and leav the room as usual. He follow cautiously, and saw 
her enter a cemetery. By the straggl moonbeam he beheld her go 
into a tomb; he step in after her. 

the scene within wa horrible. A parti of ghoul were assembl with 
the spoil of the grave they had violated., and were feast on the 
flesh of the long-buri corpses. hi own wife, who, by the way, never 
touch supper at home, play no inconsider part in the hideou 
banquet. 

As soon as he could safe escape, abul-hassan stole back to hi bed. 

He said noth to hi bride till next even when supper wa laid, 
and she declin to eat; then he insist on her partaking, and when 
she posit refused, he exclaim wrathfully,--"yes, you keep your 
appetit for your feast with the ghouls!" nadilla wa silent; she 
turn pale and trembled, and without a word sought her bed. At 
midnight she rose, fell on her husband with her nail and teeth, tore 
hi throat, and have open a vein, attempt to suck hi blood; but 
abul-hassan spring to hi feet threw her down, and with a blow 
kill her. she wa buri next day. 

three day after, at midnight, she re-appeared, attack her husband 
again, and again attempt to suck hi blood. He fled from her, and on 
the morrow open her tomb, burn her to ashes, and cast them into 
the tigris. 

thi stori connect the ghoul with the vampire. As will be seen by a 
former chapter, the were-wolf and the vampir are close related. 

that the ancient held the same belief that the witch violat 
corpses, is evid from the third episod in the _golden ass_ of 
apuleius. I will onli quot the word of the crier:-- 

"I pray thee, tell me," repli I, "of what kind are the duti 
attach to thi funer guardianship?" "duties!" quoth the crier; 
"why, keep wide awak all night, with thine eye fix steadili upon 
the corpse, neither wink nor blinking, nor look to the right nor 
look to the left, either to one side or the other, be it even 
little; for the witches, infam wretch that they are! can slip out 
of their skin in an instant and chang themselv into the form of 
ani anim they have a mind; and then they crawl along so slyly, that 
the eye of justice, nay, the eye of the sun himself, are not keen 
enough to perceiv them. At all events, their wick devic are 
infinit in number and variety; and whether it be in the shape of a 
bird, or a dog, or a mouse, or even of a common house-fly, that they 
exercis their dire incantations, if thou art not vigil in the 
extreme, they will deceiv thee one way or other, and overwhelm thee 
with sleep; nevertheless, as regard the reward, 'twill be from four 
to six aurei; nor, although 'ti a peril service, wilt thou receiv 
more. nay, hold! I had almost forgotten to give thee a necessari 
caution. clearli understand, that it the corps be not restor to the 
rel entire, the defici piec of flesh torn off by the teeth 
of the witch must be replac from the face of the sleepi guardian." 

here we have the rend of corps connect with chang of form. 

marcassu relat that after a long war in syria, dure the night, 
troop of lamias, femal evil spirits, appear upon the field of 
battle, unearth the hastili buri bodi of the soldiers, and 
devour the flesh off their bones. they were pursu and fire upon, 
and some young men succeed in kill a consider number; but 
dure the day they had all of them the form of wolv or hyænas. 
that there is a foundat of truth in these horribl stories, and 
that it is quit possibl for a human be to be possess of a 
deprav appetit for rend corpses, is prove by an extraordinari 
case brought befor a court-marti in paris, so late as juli 10th, 
1849. 

the detail are given with ful in the _annal 
medico-psychologiques_ for that month and year. they are too revolt 
for reproduction. I will, however, give an outlin of thi remark 
case. 

In the autumn of 1848, sever of the cemeteri in the neighbourhood 
of pari were found to have been enter dure the night, and grave 
to have been rifled. the deed were not those of medic students, for 
the bodi had not been carri of, but were found lie about the 
tomb in fragments. It wa at first suppos that the perpetr of 
these outrag must have been a wild beast, but footprint in the soft 
earth left no doubt that it wa a man. close watch wa kept at père la 
chaise; but after a few corps had been mangl there, the outrag 
ceased. 

In the winter, anoth cemeteri wa ravaged, and it wa not till march 
in 1849, that a spring gun which had been set in the cemeteri of S. 
parnasse, went off dure the night, and warn the guardian of the 
place that the mysteri visitor had fallen into their trap. they 
rush to the spot, onli to see a dark figur in a militari mantl 
leap the wall, and disappear in the gloom. mark of blood, however, 
gave evid that he had been hit by the gun when it had discharged. 
At the same time, a fragment of blue cloth, torn from the mantle, wa 
obtained, and afford a clue toward the identif of the 
ravish of the tombs. 

On the follow day, the polic went from barrack to barrack, 
inquir whether offic or man were suffer from a gun-shot wound. 
By thi mean they discov the person. He wa a junior offic in 
the 1st infantri regiment, of the name of bertrand. 

He wa taken to the hospit to be cure of hi wound, and on hi 
recovery, he wa tri by court-martial. 

hi histori wa this. 

He had been educ in the theolog seminari of langres, till, at 
the age of twenty, he enter the army. He wa a young man of retir 
habits, frank and cheer to hi comrades, so as to be greatli 
belov by them, of feminin delicaci and refinement, and subject to 
fit of depress and melancholy. In february, 1847, as he wa 
walk with a friend in the country, he came to a churchyard, the 
gate of which stood open. the day befor a woman had been buried, but 
the sexton had not complet fill in the grave, and he had been 
engag upon it on the present occasion, when a storm of rain had 
driven him to shelter. bertrand notic the spade and pick lie 
besid the grave, and--to use hi own words:--"a cett vue de idé 
noir me vinrent, j'eu comm un violent mal de tête, mon cur battait 
avec force, je no me possédai plus." He manag by some excus to get 
rid of hi companion, and then return to the churchyard, he caught 
up a spade and began to dig into the grave. "soon I drag the corps 
out of the earth, and I began to hash it with the spade, without well 
know what I wa about. A labour saw me, and I laid myself flat on 
the ground till he wa out of sight, and then I cast the bodi back 
into the grave. I then went away, bath in a cold sweat, to a littl 
grove, where I repos for sever hours, notwithstand the cold 
rain which fell, in a condit of complet exhaustion. when I rose, 
my limb were as if broken, and my head weak. the same prostrat and 
sensat follow each attack. 

two day after, I return to the cemetery, and open the grave with 
my hands. My hand bled, but I did not feel the pain; I tore the 
corps to shreds, and flung it back into the pit." 

He had no further attack for four months, till hi regiment came to 
paris. As he wa one day walk in the gloomy, shadowy, alley of 
père la chaise, the same feel came over him like a flood. In the 
night he climb the wall, and dug up a littl girl of seven year 
old. He tore her in half. A few day later, he open the grave of a 
woman who had die in childbirth, and had lain in the grave for 
thirteen days. On the 16th november, he dug up an old woman of fifty, 
and, rip her to pieces, roll among the fragments. He did the 
same to anoth corps on the 12th december. these are onli a few of 
the numer case of violat of tomb to which he owned. It wa on 
the night of the 15th march that the spring-gun shot him. 

bertrand declar at hi trial, that whilst he wa in the hospit he 
had not felt ani desir to renew hi attempts, and that he consid 
himself cure of hi horribl propensities, for he had seen men die 
in the bed around him, and now: "je sui guéri, car aujourd'hui j'ai 
peur d'un mort." 

the fit of exhaust which follow hi access are veri 
remarkable, as they precis resembl those which follow the 
berserkir rage of the northmen, and the expedit of the 
lycanthropists. 

the case of M. bertrand is indubit most singular and anomalous; it 
scarc bear the charact of insanity, but seem to point rather to 
a speci of diabol possession. At first the access chiefli 
follow upon hi drink wine, but after a while they came upon him 
without excit cause. the manner in which he mutil the dead wa 
different. some he chop with the spade, other he tore and rip 
with hi teeth and nails. sometim he tore the mouth open and rent 
the face back to the ears, he open the stomachs, and pull off the 
limbs. although he dug up the bodi of sever men he felt no 
inclin to mutil them, wherea he delight in rend femal 
corpses. He wa sentenc to a year' imprisonment. 



chapter xvi. 

A sermon ON were-wolves. 


the follow curiou specimen of a late mediæv sermon is taken from 
the old german edit of the discours of dr. johann geiler von 
keysersperg, a famou preacher in strasbourg. the volum is entitled: 
"_die emeis_. di ist da büch von der omeissen, und durch herr der 
künnig ich dient gern. und sagt von eigenschafft der omeissen, und 
gibt underweisung von der unholden oder hexen, und von gespenst, der 
geist, und von dem wütenden heer wunderbarlich." 

thi strang seri of sermon wa preach at strasbourg in the year 
1508, and wa taken down and written out by a barefoot friar, johann 
pauli, and by him publish in 1517. the doctor die on mid-lent 
sunday, 1510. there is a latin edit of hi sermons, but whether of 
the same seri or not I cannot tell, as I have been unabl to obtain 
a sight of the volume. the german edit is illustr with bold and 
clever woodcuts. among other, there are represent of the 
witches' sabbath, the wild huntsman, and a werewolf attack a man. 

the sermon wa preach on the third sunday in lent. No text is given, 
but there is a gener refer to the gospel for the day. thi is 
the discourse:-- [1] 

[1. head thus:--"am drittë sontag à fastê, occuli, predigt dé doctor 
vô dê werwölffenn."] 

"what shall we say about were-wolves? for there are were-wolv which 
run about the villag devour men and children. As men say about 
them, they run about full gallop, injur men, and are call 
ber-wölff, or wer-wölff. Do you ask me if I know aught about them? I 
answer, yes. they are appar wolv which cat men and children, 
and that happen on seven accounts:-- 

1. esuriem hunger. 
2. rabiem savageness. 
3. senectutem old age. 
4. experientiam experience. 
5. insaniem madness. 
6. diabolum the devil. 
7. deum god. 

the first happen through hunger; when the wolv find noth to eat 
in the woods, they must come to peopl and eat men when hunger drive 
them to it. you see well, when it is veri cold, that the stag come in 
search of food up to the villages, and the bird actual into the 
dining-room in search of victuals. 

"under the second head, wolv eat children through their innat 
savageness, becaus they are savage, and that is (propter locum coitum 
ferum). their savag aris first from their condition. wolv 
which live in cold place are smaller on that account, and more savag 
than other wolves. secondly, their savag depend on the season; 
they are more savag about candlema than at ani other time of the 
year, and men must be more on their guard against them then than at 
other times. It is a proverb, 'he who seek a wolf at candlemas, a 
peasant on shrove tuesday, and a parson in lent, is a man of pluck.' . 
. . thirdly, their savag depend on their have young. when the 
wolv have young, they are more savag than when they have not. you 
see it so in all beasts. A wild duck, when it ha young poults, you 
see what an uproar it makes. A cat fight for it young kittens; the 
wolv do ditto. 

"under the third head, the wolv do injuri on account of their age. 
when a wolf is old, it is weak and feebl in it leas, so it can't ran 
fast enough to catch stags, and therefor it rend a man, whom it can 
catch easier than a wild animal. It also tear children and men easier 
than wild animals, becaus of it teeth, for it teeth break off when 
it is veri old; you see it well in old women: how the last teeth 
wobble, and they have scarc a tooth left in their heads, and they 
open their mouth for men to feed them with mash and stew 
substances. 

"under the fourth head, the injuri the were-wolv do aris from 
experience. It is said that human flesh is far sweeter than other 
flesh; so when a wolf ha onc tast human flesh, he desir to tast 
it again. So he act like old topers, who, when they know the best 
wine, will not be put off with inferior quality. 

"under the fifth head, the injuri aris from ignorance. A dog when it 
is mad is also inconsiderate, and it bite ani man; it doe not 
recogn it own lord: and what is a wolf but a wild dog which is mad 
and inconsiderate, so that it regard no man. 

"under the sixth head, the injuri come of the devil, who transform 
himself, and take on him the form of a wolf So write vincentiu in 
hi _speculum historiale_. and he ha taken it from valeriu maximu 
in the punic war. when the roman fought against the men of africa, 
when the captain lay asleep, there came a wolf and drew hi sword, and 
carri it off. that wa the devil in a, wolf' form. the like write 
william of paris,--that a wolf will kill and devour children, and do 
the greatest mischief. there wa a man who had the phantasi that he 
himself wa a wolf. and afterward he wa found lie in the wood, and 
he wa dead out of sheer hunger. 

"under the seventh head, the injuri come of god' ordinance. for god 
will sometim punish certain land and villag with wolves. So we 
read of elisha,--that when elisha want to go up a mountain out of 
jericho, some naughti boy made a mock of him and said, 'O bald head, 
step up! O glossi pate, step up!' what happened? He curs them. then 
came two bear out of the desert and tore about forty-two of the 
children. that wa god' ordinance. the like we read of a prophet who 
would set at naught the command he had receiv of god, for he wa 
persuad to eat bread at the hous of another. As he went home he 
rode upon hi ass. then came a lion which slew him and left the ass 
alone. that wa god' ordinance. therefor must man turn to god when 
He bring wild beast to do him a mischief: which same brute may He 
not bring now or evermore. amen." 

It will be seen from thi extraordinari sermon that dr. johann geiler 
von keysersperg did not regard werewolv in ani other light than 
natur wolv fill with a lust for human flesh; and he put asid 
altogeth the view that they are men in a state of metamorphosis. 
however, he allud to thi superstit in hi sermon on wild-men of 
the woods, but translat hi lycanthropist to spain. 

the end. 



***end of thi project gutenberg etext of the book OF were-wolves** 




*** end OF the project gutenberg ebook, the book OF were-wolv *** 

thi file should be name 5324.txt or 5324.zip 

project gutenberg ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the US 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we usual do not 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

We are now tri to releas all our ebook one year in advanc 
of the offici releas dates, leav time for better editing. 
pleas be encourag to tell us about ani error or corrections, 
even year after the offici public date. 

pleas note neither thi list nor it content are final til 
midnight of the last day of the month of ani such announcement. 
the offici releas date of all project gutenberg ebook is at 
midnight, central time, of the last day of the state month. A 
preliminari version may often be post for suggestion, comment 
and edit by those who wish to do so. 

most peopl start at our web site at: 
http://gutenberg.net or 
http://promo.net/pg 

these web site includ award-win inform about project 
gutenberg, includ how to donate, how to help produc our new 
ebooks, and how to subscrib to our email newslett (free!). 


those of you who want to download ani ebook befor announc 
can get to them as follows, and just download by date. thi is 
also a good way to get them instantli upon announcement, as the 
index our catalogu produc obvious take a while after an 
announc goe out in the project gutenberg newsletter. 

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext04 or 
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext04 

Or /etext03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90 

just search by the first five letter of the filenam you want, 
as it appear in our newsletters. 


inform about project gutenberg (one page) 

We produc about two million dollar for each hour we work. the 
time it take us, a rather conserv estimate, is fifti hour 
to get ani ebook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright 
search and analyzed, the copyright letter written, etc. our 
project audienc is one hundr million readers. If the valu 
per text is nomin estim at one dollar then we produc $2 
million dollar per hour in 2002 as we releas over 100 new text 
file per month: 1240 more ebook in 2001 for a total of 4000+ 
We are alreadi on our way to tri for 2000 more ebook in 2002 
If they reach just 1-2% of the world' popul then the total 
will reach over half a trillion ebook given away by year' end. 

the goal of project gutenberg is to give away 1 trillion ebooks! 
thi is ten thousand titl each to one hundr million readers, 
which is onli about 4% of the present number of comput users. 

here is the briefest record of our progress (* mean estimated): 

ebook year month 

1 1971 juli 
10 1991 januari 
100 1994 januari 
1000 1997 august 
1500 1998 octob 
2000 1999 decemb 
2500 2000 decemb 
3000 2001 novemb 
4000 2001 october/novemb 
6000 2002 december* 
9000 2003 november* 
10000 2004 january* 


the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ha been creat 
to secur a futur for project gutenberg into the next millennium. 

We need your donat more than ever! 

As of february, 2002, contribut are be solicit from peopl 
and organ in: alabama, alaska, arkansas, connecticut, 
delaware, district of columbia, florida, georgia, hawaii, illinois, 
indiana, iowa, kansas, kentucky, louisiana, maine, massachusetts, 
michigan, mississippi, missouri, montana, nebraska, nevada, new 
hampshire, new jersey, new mexico, new york, north carolina, ohio, 
oklahoma, oregon, pennsylvania, rhode island, south carolina, south 
dakota, tennessee, texas, utah, vermont, virginia, washington, west 
virginia, wisconsin, and wyoming. 

We have file in all 50 state now, but these are the onli one 
that have responded. 

As the requir for other state are met, addit to thi list 
will be made and fund rais will begin in the addit states. 
pleas feel free to ask to check the statu of your state. 

In answer to variou question we have receiv on this: 

We are constantli work on finish the paperwork to legal 
request donat in all 50 states. If your state is not list and 
you would like to know if we have ad it sinc the list you have, 
just ask. 

while we cannot solicit donat from peopl in state where we are 
not yet registered, we know of no prohibit against accept 
donat from donor in these state who approach us with an offer to 
donate. 

intern donat are accepted, but we don't know anyth about 
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they can be made 
deductible, and don't have the staff to handl it even if there are 
ways. 

donat by check or money order may be sent to: 

project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
pmb 113 
1739 univers ave. 
oxford, MS 38655-4109 

contact us if you want to arrang for a wire transfer or payment 
method other than by check or money order. 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ha been approv by 
the US intern revenu servic as a 501(c)(3) organ with ein 
[employe identif number] 64-622154. donat are 
tax-deduct to the maximum extent permit by law. As fund-rais 
requir for other state are met, addit to thi list will be 
made and fund-rais will begin in the addit states. 

We need your donat more than ever! 

you can get up to date donat inform onlin at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html 


*** 

If you can't reach project gutenberg, 
you can alway email directli to: 

michael S. hart <hart@pobox.com> 

prof. hart will answer or forward your message. 

We would prefer to send you inform by email. 


**the legal small print** 


(three pages) 

***start**th small print!**for public domain ebooks**start*** 
whi is thi "small print!" statement here? you know: lawyers. 
they tell us you might sue us if there is someth wrong with 
your copi of thi ebook, even if you got it for free from 
someon other than us, and even if what' wrong is not our 
fault. so, among other things, thi "small print!" statement 
disclaim most of our liabil to you. It also tell you how 
you may distribut copi of thi ebook if you want to. 

*before!* you use OR read thi ebook 
By use or read ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
ebook, you indic that you understand, agre to and accept 
thi "small print!" statement. If you do not, you can receiv 
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for thi ebook by 
send a request within 30 day of receiv it to the person 
you got it from. If you receiv thi ebook on a physic 
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request. 

about project gutenberg-tm ebook 
thi project gutenberg-tm ebook, like most project gutenberg-tm ebooks, 
is a "public domain" work distribut by professor michael S. hart 
through the project gutenberg associ (the "project"). 
among other things, thi mean that no one own a unit state copyright 
on or for thi work, so the project (and you!) can copi and 
distribut it in the unit state without permiss and 
without pay copyright royalties. special rules, set forth 
below, appli if you wish to copi and distribut thi ebook 
under the "project gutenberg" trademark. 

pleas do not use the "project gutenberg" trademark to market 
ani commerci product without permission. 

To creat these ebooks, the project expend consider 
effort to identify, transcrib and proofread public domain 
works. despit these efforts, the project' ebook and ani 
medium they may be on may contain "defects". among other 
things, defect may take the form of incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag 
disk or other ebook medium, a comput virus, or comput 
code that damag or cannot be read by your equipment. 

limit warranty; disclaim OF damag 
but for the "right of replac or refund" describ below, 
[1] michael hart and the foundat (and ani other parti you may 
receiv thi ebook from as a project gutenberg-tm ebook) disclaim 
all liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ 
legal fees, and [2] you have NO remedi for neglig OR 
under strict liability, OR for breach OF warranti OR contract, 
includ but not limit TO indirect, consequential, punit 
OR incident damages, even IF you give notic OF the 
possibl OF such damages. 

If you discov a defect in thi ebook within 90 day of 
receiv it, you can receiv a refund of the money (if any) 
you paid for it by send an explanatori note within that 
time to the person you receiv it from. If you receiv it 
on a physic medium, you must return it with your note, and 
such person may choos to altern give you a replac 
copy. If you receiv it electronically, such person may 
choos to altern give you a second opportun to 
receiv it electronically. 

thi ebook IS otherwis provid TO you "as-is". NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, are made TO you AS 
TO the ebook OR ani medium IT may BE on, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for A 
particular purpose. 

some state do not allow disclaim of impli warranti or 
the exclus or limit of consequenti damages, so the 
abov disclaim and exclus may not appli to you, and you 
may have other legal rights. 

indemn 
you will indemnifi and hold michael hart, the foundation, 
and it truste and agents, and ani volunt associ 
with the product and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
text harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, includ 
legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the 
follow that you do or cause: [1] distribut of thi ebook, 
[2] alteration, modification, or addit to the ebook, 
or [3] ani defect. 

distribut under "project gutenberg-tm" 
you may distribut copi of thi ebook electronically, or by 
disk, book or ani other medium if you either delet thi 
"small print!" and all other refer to project gutenberg, 
or: 

[1] onli give exact copi of it. among other things, thi 
requir that you do not remove, alter or modifi the 
ebook or thi "small print!" statement. you may however, 
if you wish, distribut thi ebook in machin readabl 
binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietari form, 
includ ani form result from convers by word 
process or hypertext software, but onli so long as 
*either*: 

[*] the ebook, when displayed, is clearli readable, and 
doe *not* contain charact other than those 
intend by the author of the work, although tild 
(~), asterisk (*) and underlin (_) charact may 
be use to convey punctuat intend by the 
author, and addit charact may be use to 
indic hypertext links; OR 

[*] the ebook may be readili convert by the reader at 
no expens into plain ascii, ebcdic or equival 
form by the program that display the ebook (a is 
the case, for instance, with most word processors); 
OR 

[*] you provide, or agre to also provid on request at 
no addit cost, fee or expense, a copi of the 
ebook in it origin plain ascii form (or in ebcdic 
or other equival proprietari form). 

[2] honor the ebook refund and replac provis of thi 
"small print!" statement. 

[3] pay a trademark licens fee to the foundat of 20% of the 
gross profit you deriv calcul use the method you 
alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. If you 
don't deriv profits, no royalti is due. royalti are 
payabl to "project gutenberg literari archiv foundation" 
the 60 day follow each date you prepar (or were 
legal requir to prepare) your annual (or equival 
periodic) tax return. pleas contact us beforehand to 
let us know your plan and to work out the details. 

what IF you *want* TO send money even IF you don't have to? 
project gutenberg is dedic to increas the number of 
public domain and licens work that can be freeli distribut 
in machin readabl form. 

the project grate accept contribut of money, time, 
public domain materials, or royalti free copyright licenses. 
money should be paid to the: 
"project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

If you are interest in contribut scan equip or 
softwar or other items, pleas contact michael hart at: 
hart@pobox.com 

[portion of thi ebook' header and trailer may be reprint onli 
when distribut free of all fees. copyright (c) 2001, 2002 by 
michael S. hart. project gutenberg is a trademark and may not be 
use in ani sale of project gutenberg ebook or other materi be 
they hardwar or softwar or ani other relat product without 
express permission.] 

*end the small print! for public domain ebooks*ver.02/11/02*end* 
