the project gutenberg ebook of shadowings, by lafcadio hearn 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: shadow 

author: lafcadio hearn 

releas date: novemb 5, 2010 [ebook #34215] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook shadow *** 




produc by juliet sutherland, ernest schaal, and the 
onlin distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









shadow 

BY lafcadio hearn 
lectur ON english literatur IN 
the imperi university, tôkyô, japan 

_author of_ "exot and retrospectives," 
"in ghostli japan," etc., etc. 


[decoration] 


boston 
little, brown, and compani 
1919 




_copyright, 1900_, 
BY little, brown, and compani 

_all right reserved_ 


printer 
S. J. parkhil & co. boston, U. S. A. 




content 


stori from strang books: 

I. the reconcili 5 

ii. A legend OF fugen-bosatsu 15 

iii. the screen-maiden 23 

iv. the corpse-rid 33 

V. the sympathi OF benten 41 

vi. the gratitud OF the samébito 57 

japanes studies: 

I. sémi 71 

ii. japanes femal name 105 

iii. old japanes song 157 

fantasies: 

I. noctilucæ 197 

ii. A mysteri OF crowd 203 

iii. gothic horror 213 

iv. levit 225 

V. nightmare-touch 235 

vi. read from A dream-book 249 

vii. IN A pair OF eye 265 




illustr 


_face page_ 

plate I 72 
1-2, _young sémi._ 
3-4, _haru-zémi_, also call _nawashiro-zémi_. 

plate II 76 
"_shinné-shinné_" also call _yama-zémi_, and 
_kuma-zémi_. 

plate iii 80 
_aburazémi._ 

plate IV 84 
1-2, _mugikari-zémi_, also call _goshiki-zémi_. 
3, _higurashi_. 
4, "_min-min-zémi_." 

plate V 88 
1, "_tsuku-tsuku-bôshi_," also call 
"_kutsu-kutsu-bôshi_," etc. (_cosmopsaltria 
opalifera?_) 
2, _tsurigané-zémi_. 
3, _the phantom_. 




stori from strang book 

Il avait vu brûler d'étrang pierres, 
jadis, dan le brasier de la pensé ... 

émile verhaeren 




the reconciliation[1] 

[decoration] 

[1] the origin stori is to be found in the curiou volum 
entitl _konséki-monogatari_ 

there wa a young samurai of kyôto who had been reduc to poverti by 
the ruin of hi lord, and found himself oblig to leav hi home, and 
to take servic with the governor of a distant province. befor quit 
the capital, thi samurai divorc hi wife,--a good and beauti 
woman,--und the belief that he could better obtain promot by 
anoth alliance. He then marri the daughter of a famili of some 
distinction, and took her with him to the district whither he had been 
called. 

* * * * * 

but it wa in the time of the thoughtless of youth, and the sharp 
experi of want, that the samurai could not understand the worth of 
the affect so lightli cast away. hi second marriag did not prove a 
happi one; the charact of hi new wife wa hard and selfish; and he 
soon found everi caus to think with regret of kyôto days. then he 
discov that he still love hi first wife--lov her more than he 
could ever love the second; and he began to feel how unjust and how 
thankless he had been. gradual hi repent deepen into a remors 
that left him no peac of mind. memori of the woman he had 
wronged--h gentl speech, her smiles, her dainty, pretti ways, her 
faultless patience--continu haunt him. sometim in dream he saw 
her at her loom, weav as when she toil night and day to help him 
dure the year of their distress: more often he saw her kneel alon 
in the desol littl room where he had left her, veil her tear 
with her poor worn sleeve. even in the hour of offici duty, hi 
thought would wander back to her: then he would ask himself how she wa 
living, what she wa doing. someth in hi heart assur him that she 
could not accept anoth husband, and that she never would refus to 
pardon him. and he secretli resolv to seek her out as soon as he could 
return to kyôto,--then to beg her forgiveness, to take her back, to do 
everyth that a man could do to make atonement. but the year went 
by. 

At last the governor' offici term expired, and the samurai wa free. 
"now I will go back to my dear one," he vow to himself. "ah, what a 
cruelty,--what a folli to have divorc her!" He sent hi second wife to 
her own peopl (she had given him no children); and hurri to kyôto, 
he went at onc to seek hi former companion,--not allow himself even 
the time to chang hi travelling-garb. 

* * * * * 

when he reach the street where she use to live, it wa late in the 
night,--th night of the tenth day of the ninth month;--and the citi wa 
silent as a cemetery. but a bright moon made everyth visible; and he 
found the hous without difficulty. It had a desert look: tall weed 
were grow on the roof. He knock at the sliding-doors, and no one 
answered. then, find that the door had not been fasten from 
within, he push them open, and entered. the front room wa matless and 
empty: a chilli wind wa blow through crevic in the planking; and 
the moon shone through a rag break in the wall of the alcove. other 
room present a like forlorn condition. the house, to all seeming, wa 
unoccupied. nevertheless, the samurai determin to visit one other 
apart at the further end of the dwelling,--a veri small room that 
had been hi wife' favorit resting-place. approach the 
sliding-screen that close it, he wa startl to perceiv a glow 
within. He push the screen aside, and utter a cri of joy; for he saw 
her there,--sew by the light of a paper-lamp. her eye at the same 
instant met hi own; and with a happi smile she greet him,--ask 
only:--"when did you come back to kyôto? how did you find your way here 
to me, through all those black rooms?" the year had not chang her. 
still she seem as fair and young as in hi fondest memori of her;--but 
sweeter than ani memori there came to him the music of her voice, with 
it trembl of pleas wonder. 

then joy he took hi place besid her, and told her all:--how 
deepli he repent hi selfishness,--how wretch he had been without 
her,--how constantli he had regret her,--how long he had hope and 
plan to make amends;--caress her the while, and ask her 
forgiv over and over again. she answer him, with love 
gentleness, accord to hi heart' desire,--entr him to ceas 
all self-reproach. It wa wrong, she said, that he should have allow 
himself to suffer on her account: she had alway felt that she wa not 
worthi to be hi wife. she knew that he had separ from her, 
notwithstanding, onli becaus of poverty; and while he live with her, 
he had alway been kind; and she had never ceas to pray for hi 
happiness. but even if there had been a reason for speak of amends, 
thi honor visit would be ampl amends;--what greater happi than 
thu to see him again, though it were onli for a moment? "onli for a 
moment!" he answered, with a glad laugh,--"say, rather, for the time of 
seven existences! My love one, unless you forbid, I am come back to 
live with you always--always--always! noth shall ever separ us 
again. now I have mean and friends: we need not fear poverty. to-morrow 
my good will be brought here; and my servant will come to wait upon 
you; and we shall make thi hous beautiful.... to-night," he added, 
apologetically, "I came thu late--without even chang my dress--onli 
becaus of the long I had to see you, and to tell you this." she 
seem greatli pleas by these words; and in her turn she told him 
about all that had happen in kyôto sinc the time of hi 
departure,--except her own sorrows, of which she sweetli refus to 
speak. they chat far into the night: then she conduct him to a 
warmer room, face south,--a room that had been their bridal chamber in 
former time. "have you no one in the hous to help you?" he asked, as 
she began to prepar the couch for him. "no," she answered, laugh 
cheerfully: "I could not afford a servant;--so I have been live all 
alone." "you will have plenti of servant to-morrow," he said,--"good 
servants,--and everyth els that you need." they lay down to 
rest,--not to sleep: they had too much to tell each other;--and they 
talk of the past and the present and the future, until the dawn wa 
grey. then, involuntarily, the samurai close hi eyes, and slept. 

* * * * * 

when he awoke, the daylight wa stream through the chink of the 
sliding-shutters; and he found himself, to hi utter amazement, lie 
upon the nake board of a moulder floor.... had he onli dream a 
dream? no: she wa there;--sh slept.... He bent abov her,--and 
looked,--and shrieked;--for the sleeper had no face!... befor him, 
wrap in it grave-sheet only, lay the corps of a woman,--a corps so 
wast that littl remain save the bones, and the long black tangl 
hair. 

* * * * * 

slowly,--a he stood shudder and sicken in the sun,--th ici 
horror yield to a despair so intolerable, a pain so atrocious, that he 
clutch at the mock shadow of a doubt. feign ignor of the 
neighborhood, he ventur to ask hi way to the hous in which hi wife 
had lived. 

"there is no one in that house," said the person questioned. "it use to 
belong to the wife of a samurai who left the citi sever year ago. He 
divorc her in order to marri anoth woman befor he went away; and 
she fret a great deal, and so becam sick. she had no rel in 
kyôto, and nobodi to care for her; and she die in the autumn of the 
same year,--on the tenth day of the ninth month...." 




A legend of fugen-bosatsu[2] 

[decoration] 

[2] from the old story-book, _jikkun-shô_ 


there wa onc a veri piou and learn priest, call shôku shônin, who 
live in the provinc of harima. for mani year he medit daili upon 
the chapter of fugen-bosatsu [the bodhisattva samantabhadra] in the 
sûtra of the loto of the good law; and he use to pray, everi morn 
and evening, that he might at some time be permit to behold 
fugen-bosatsu as a live presence, and in the form describ in the 
holi text.[3] 

[3] the priest' desir wa probabl inspir by the promis 
record in the chapter entitl "the encourag of 
samantabhadra" (see kern' translat of the saddharma 
pundarîka in the _sacr book of the east_,--pp. 
433-434):--"then the bodhisattva mahâsattva samantabhadra 
said to the lord: ... 'when a preacher who appli himself 
to thi dharmaparyâya shall take a walk, then, O lord, will 
I mount a white eleph with six tusks, and betak myself 
to the place where that preacher is walking, in order to 
protect thi dharmaparyâya. and when that preacher, appli 
himself to thi dharmaparyâya, forgets, be it but a singl 
word or syllable, then will I mount the white eleph with 
six tusks, and show my face to that preacher, and repeat 
thi entir dharmaparyâya."--but these promis refer to 
"the end of time." 

one evening, while he wa recit the sûtra, drowsi overcam him; 
and he fell asleep lean upon hi _kyôsoku_.[4] then he dreamed; and 
in hi dream a voic told him that, in order to see fugen-bosatsu, 
he must go to the hous of a certain courtesan, known as the 
"yujô-no-chôja,"[5] who live in the town of kanzaki. immedi upon 
awaken he resolv to go to kanzaki;--and, make all possibl haste, 
he reach the town by the even of the next day. 

[4] the _kyôsoku_ is a kind of pad arm-rest, or arm-stool, 
upon which the priest lean one arm while reading. the use 
of such an arm-rest is not confined, however, to the 
buddhist clergy. 

[5] A yujô, in old days, wa a singing-girl as well as a 
courtesan. the term "yujô-no-chôja," in thi case, would 
mean simpli "the first (or best) of yujô." 

when he enter the hous of the _yujô_, he found mani person alreadi 
there assembled--mostli young men of the capital, who had been attract 
to kanzaki by the fame of the woman' beauty. they were feast and 
drinking; and the _yujô_ wa play a small hand-drum (_tsuzumi_), 
which she use veri skilfully, and sing a song. the song which she 
sang wa an old japanes song about a famou shrine in the town of 
murozumi; and the word were these:-- 

_within the sacr water-tank[6] of murozumi in suwô, 
even though no wind be blowing, 
the surfac of the water is alway rippling._ 

[6] _mitarai_. _mitarai_ (or _mitarashi_) is the name 
especi given to the water-tanks, or water-fonts--of 
stone or bronze--plac befor shintô shrine in order 
that the worshipp may purifi hi lip and hand befor 
make prayer. buddhist tank are not so named. 

the sweet of the voic fill everybodi with surpris and delight. 
As the priest, who had taken a place apart, listen and wondered, the 
girl suddenli fix her eye upon him; and in the same instant he saw 
her form chang into the form of fugen-bosatsu, emit from her brow a 
beam of light that seem to pierc beyond the limit of the universe, 
and ride a snow-whit eleph with six tusks. and still she sang--but 
the song also wa now transformed; and the word came thu to the ear 
of the priest:-- 

_on the vast sea of cessation, 
though the wind of the six desir and of the five corrupt 
never blow, 
yet the surfac of that deep is alway cover 
with the billow of attain to the reality-in-itself._ 

dazzl by the divin ray, the priest close hi eyes: but through their 
lid he still distinctli saw the vision. when he open them again, it 
wa gone: he saw onli the girl with her hand-drum, and heard onli the 
song about the water of murozumi. but he found that as often as he shut 
hi eye he could see fugen-bosatsu on the six-tusk elephant, and 
could hear the mystic song of the sea of cessation. the other person 
present saw onli the _yujô_: they had not beheld the manifestation. 

then the singer suddenli disappear from the banquet-room--non could 
say when or how. from that moment the revelri ceased; and gloom took 
the place of joy. after have wait and sought for the girl to no 
purpose, the compani dispers in great sorrow. last of all, the priest 
departed, bewild by the emot of the evening. but scarc had 
he pass beyond the gate, when the _yujô_ appear befor him, and 
said:--"friend, do not speak yet to ani one of what you have seen thi 
night." and with these word she vanish away,--leav the air fill 
with a delici fragrance. 

* * * * * 

the monk by whom the forego legend wa recorded, comment upon it 
thus:--th condit of a _yujô_ is low and miserable, sinc she is 
condemn to serv the lust of men. who therefor could imagin 
that such a woman might be the _nirmanakaya_, or incarnation, of a 
bodhisattva. but we must rememb that the buddha and the bodhisattva 
may appear in thi world in countless differ forms; choosing, 
for the purpos of their divin compassion, even the most humbl or 
contempt shape when such shape can serv them to lead men into 
the true path, and to save them from the peril of illusion. 




the screen-maiden[7] 

[decoration] 

[7] relat in the _otogi-hyaku-monogatari_ 


say the old japanes author, hakubai-en rosui:--[8] 

"in chines and in japanes book there are relat mani stories,--both 
of ancient and of modern times,--about pictur that were so beauti 
as to exercis a magic influenc upon the beholder. and concern 
such beauti pictures,--wheth pictur of flower or of bird or of 
people, paint by famou artists,--it is further told that the shape 
of the creatur or the persons, therein depicted, would separ 
themselv from the paper or the silk upon which they had been painted, 
and would perform variou acts;--so that they became, by their own will, 
realli alive. We shall not now repeat ani of the stori of thi 
class which have been known to everybodi from ancient times. but 
even in modern time the fame of the pictur paint by hishigawa 
kichibei--'hishigawa' portraits'--ha becom widespread in the land." 

[8] He die in the eighteenth year of kyôhô (1733). the painter 
to whom he refers--bett known to collector as hishigawa 
kichibei moronobu--flourish dure the latter part of the 
seventeenth century. begin hi career as a dyer' 
apprentice, he won hi reput as an artist about 1680, 
when he may be said to have found the _ukiyo-yé_ school of 
illustration. hishigawa wa especi a delin of what 
are call _fûryû_, ("eleg manners"),--th aspect of 
life among the upper class of society. 

He then proce to relat the follow stori about one of the 
so-cal portraits:-- 

there wa a young scholar of kyôto whose name wa tokkei. He 
use to live in the street call muromachi. one evening, 
while on hi way home after a visit, hi attent wa attract 
by an old single-leaf screen (_tsuitaté_), expos for sale 
befor the shop of a dealer in second-hand goods. It wa onli 
a paper-cov screen; but there wa paint upon it the 
full-length figur of a girl which caught the young man' 
fancy. the price ask wa veri small: tokkei bought the 
screen, and took it home with him. 

when he look again at the screen, in the solitud of hi 
own room, the pictur seem to him much more beauti than 
before. appar it wa a real likeness,--th portrait of a 
girl fifteen or sixteen year old; and everi littl detail 
in the paint of the hair, eyes, eyelashes, mouth, had 
been execut with a delicaci and a truth beyond praise. the 
_manajiri_[9] seem "like a lotos-blossom court favor"; the 
lip were "like the smile of a red flower"; the whole young face 
wa inexpress sweet. If the real girl so portray had been 
equal lovely, no man could have look upon her without lose 
hi heart. and tokkei believ that she must have been thu 
lovely;--for the figur seem alive,--readi to repli to anybodi 
who might speak to it. 

[9] also written _méjiri_,--th exterior canthu of the 
eye. the japanes (like the old greek and the old 
arabian poets) have mani curiou dainti word and 
simil to express particular beauti of the hair, 
eyes, eyelids, lips, fingers, etc. 

gradually, as he continu to gaze at the picture, he felt 
himself bewitch by the charm of it. "can there realli have 
been in thi world," he murmur to himself, "so delici a 
creature? how gladli would I give my life--nay, a thousand 
year of life!--to hold her in my arm even for a moment!" (the 
japanes author say "for a few seconds.") In short, he becam 
enamour of the picture,--so much enamour of it as to feel 
that he never could love ani woman except the person whom it 
represented. yet that person, if still alive, could no longer 
resembl the painting: perhap she had been buri long befor 
he wa born! 

day by day, nevertheless, thi hopeless passion grew upon 
him. He could not eat; he could not sleep: neither could he 
occupi hi mind with those studi which had formerli delight 
him. He would sit for hour befor the picture, talk to 
it,--neglect or forget everyth else. and at last he 
fell sick--so sick that he believ himself go to die. 

now among the friend of tokkei there wa one vener scholar 
who knew mani strang thing about old pictur and about young 
hearts. thi age scholar, hear of tokkei' illness, came to 
visit him, and saw the screen, and understood what had happened. 
then tokkei, be questioned, confess everyth to hi 
friend, and declared:--"if I cannot find such a woman, I shall 
die." 

the old man said:-- 

"that pictur wa paint by hishigawa kichibei,--paint from 
life. the person whom it repres is not now in the world. 
but it is said that hishigawa kichibei paint her mind as well 
as her form, and that her spirit live in the picture. So I 
think that you can win her." 

tokkei half rose from hi bed, and stare eagerli at the 
speaker. 

"you must give her a name," the old man continued;--"and you 
must sit befor her pictur everi day, and keep your thought 
constantli fix upon her, and call her gentli by the name which 
you have given her, _until she answer you_...." 

"answer me!" exclaim the lover, in breathless amazement. 

"oh, yes," the advis responded, "she will certainli answer 
you. but you must be ready, when she answer you, to present her 
with what I am go to tell you...." 

"I will give her my life!" cri tokkei. 

"no," said the old man;--"you will present her with a cup of 
wine that ha been bought at one hundr differ wine-shops. 
then she will come out of the screen to accept the wine. after 
that, probabl she herself will tell you what to do." 

with these word the old man went away. hi advic arous 
tokkei from despair. At onc he seat himself befor the 
picture, and call it by the name of a girl--(what name the 
japanes narrat ha forgotten to tell us)--ov and over 
again, veri tenderly. that day it made no answer, nor the next 
day, nor the next. but tokkei did not lose faith or patience; 
and after mani day it suddenli one even answer to it 
name,-- 

"_hai!_" (yes.) 

then quickly, quickly, some of the wine from a hundr differ 
wine-shop wa pour out, and reverenti present in a 
littl cup. and the girl step from the screen, and walk 
upon the mat of the room, and knelt to take the cup from 
tokkei' hand,--asking, with a delici smile:-- 

"how could you love me so much?" 

say the japanes narrator: "she wa much more beauti than the 
picture,--beauti to the tip of her finger-nails,--beauti 
also in heart and temper,--loveli than anybodi els in the 
world." what answer tokkei made to her question is not recorded: 
it will have to be imagined. 

"but will you not soon get tire of me?" she asked. 

"never while I live!" he protested. 

"and after--?" she persisted;--for the japanes bride is not 
satisfi with love for one life-tim only. 

"let us pledg ourselv to each other," he entreated, "for the 
time of seven existences." 

"if you are ever unkind to me," she said, "I will go back to the 
screen." 

* * * * * 

they pledg each other. I suppos that tokkei wa a good 
boy,--for hi bride never return to the screen. the space that 
she had occupi upon it remain a blank. 

* * * * * 

exclaim the japanes author,-- 

"how veri seldom do such thing happen in thi world!" 




the corpse-rider[10] 

[decoration] 

[10] from the _konséki-monogatari_ 


the bodi wa cold as ice; the heart had long ceas to beat: yet there 
were no other sign of death. nobodi even spoke of buri the woman. 
she had die of grief and anger at have been divorced. It would have 
been useless to buri her,--becaus the last undi wish of a die 
person for vengeanc can burst asund ani tomb and rift the heaviest 
graveyard stone. peopl who live near the hous in which she wa lie 
fled from their homes. they knew that she wa onli _wait for the 
return of the man who had divorc her_. 

At the time of her death he wa on a journey. when he came back and wa 
told what had happened, terror seiz him. "if I can find no help befor 
dark," he thought to himself, "she will tear me to pieces." It wa yet 
onli the hour of the dragon;[11] but he knew that he had no time to 
lose. 

[11] _tatsu no koku_, or the hour of the dragon, by old japanes 
time, began at about eight o'clock in the morning. 

He went at onc to an _inyôshi_[12] and beg for succor. the _inyôshi_ 
knew the stori of the dead woman; and he had seen the body. He said to 
the supplicant:--"a veri great danger threaten you. I will tri to save 
you. but you must promis to do whatev I shall tell you to do. there 
is onli one way by which you can be saved. It is a fear way. but 
unless you find the courag to attempt it, she will tear you limb from 
limb. If you can be brave, come to me again in the even befor 
sunset." the man shuddered; but he promis to do whatev should be 
requir of him. 

[12] _inyôshi_, a professor or master of the scienc of 
_in-yô_,--th old chines nature-philosophy, base upon the 
theori of a male and a femal principl pervad the 
universe. 

* * * * * 

At sunset the _inyôshi_ went with him to the hous where the bodi wa 
lying. the _inyôshi_ push open the sliding-doors, and told hi client 
to enter. It wa rapidli grow dark. "I dare not!" gasp the man, 
quak from head to foot;--"i dare not even look at her!" "you will 
have to do much more than look at her," declar the _inyôshi_;--"and 
you promis to obey. Go in!" He forc the trembler into the hous and 
led him to the side of the corpse. 

* * * * * 

the dead woman wa lie on her face. "now you must get astrid upon 
her," said the _inyôshi_, "and sit firmli on her back, as if you were 
ride a horse.... come!--y must do it!" the man shiver so that the 
_inyôshi_ had to support him--shiv horribly; but he obeyed. "now 
take her hair in your hands," command the _inyôshi_,--"half in the 
right hand, half in the left.... so!... you must grip it like a bridle. 
twist your hand in it--both hands--tightly. that is the way!... listen 
to me! you must stay like that till morning. you will have reason to be 
afraid in the night--plenti of reason. but whatev may happen, never 
let go of her hair. If you let go,--even for one second,--sh will tear 
you into gobbets!" 

the _inyôshi_ then whisper some mysteri word into the ear of the 
body, and said to it rider:--"now, for my own sake, I must leav you 
alon with her.... remain as you are!... abov all things, rememb that 
you must not let go of her hair." and he went away,--clos the door 
behind him. 

* * * * * 

hour after hour the man sat upon the corps in black fear;--and the hush 
of the night deepen and deepen about him till he scream to break 
it. instantli the bodi sprang beneath him, as to cast him off; and the 
dead woman cri out loudly, "oh, how heavi it is! yet I shall bring 
that fellow here now!" 

then tall she rose, and leap to the doors, and flung them open, and 
rush into the night,--alway bear the weight of the man. but he, 
shut hi eyes, kept hi hand twist in her long hair,--tightly, 
tightly,--though fear with such a fear that he could not even moan. 
how far she went, he never knew. He saw nothing: he heard onli the sound 
of her nake feet in the dark,--_picha-picha_, _picha-picha_,--and the 
hiss of her breath as she ran. 

At last she turned, and ran back into the house, and lay down upon the 
floor exactli as at first. under the man she pant and moan till the 
cock began to crow. thereaft she lay still. 

but the man, with chatter teeth, sat upon her until the _inyôshi_ 
came at sunrise. "so you did not let go of her hair!"--observ the 
_inyôshi_, greatli pleased. "that is well ... now you can stand up." He 
whisper again into the ear of the corpse, and then said to the 
man:--"you must have pass a fear night; but noth els could have 
save you. hereaft you may feel secur from her vengeance." 

[decoration] 

the conclus of thi stori I do not think to be moral satisfying. 
It is not record that the corpse-rid becam insane, or that hi 
hair turn white: we are told onli that "he worship the _inyôshi_ 
with tear of gratitude." A note append to the recit is equal 
disappointing. "it is reported," the japanes author says, "that a 
grandchild of the man [_who rode the corpse_] still survives, and that a 
grandson of the _inyôshi_ is at thi veri time live in a villag 
call otokunoi-mura [_probabl pronounc otonoi-mura_]." 

thi village-nam doe not appear in ani japanes directori of to-day. 
but the name of mani town and villag have been chang sinc the 
forego stori wa written. 




the sympathi of benten[13] 

[decoration] 

[13] the origin stori is in the _otogi-hyaku-monogatari_ 


IN kyôto there is a famou templ call amadera. sadazumi shinnô, the 
fifth son of the emperor seiwa, pass the greater part of hi life 
there as a priest; and the grave of mani celebr person are to be 
seen in the temple-grounds. 

but the present edific is not the ancient amadera. the origin temple, 
after the laps of ten centuries, fell into such decay that it had to be 
entir rebuilt in the fourteenth year of genroku (1701 A. d.). 

A great festiv wa held to celebr the rebuild of the amadera; 
and among the thousand of person who attend that festiv there wa 
a young scholar and poet name hanagaki baishû. He wander about the 
newly-laid-out ground and gardens, delight by all that he saw, until 
he reach the place of a spring at which he had often drunk in former 
times. He wa then surpris to find that the soil about the spring had 
been dug away, so as to form a squar pond, and that at one corner of 
thi pond there had been set up a wooden tablet bear the word 
_tanjô-sui_ ("birth-water").[14] He also saw that a small, but veri 
handsom templ of the goddess benten had been erect besid the pond. 
while he wa look at thi new temple, a sudden gust of wind blew to 
hi feet a _tanzaku_,[15] on which the follow poem had been written:-- 

shirushi aréto 
iwai zo somuru 
tama hôki, 
toruté bakari no 
chigiri narétomo. 

[14] the word _tanjô_ (birth) should here be understood in it 
mystic buddhist mean of new life or rebirth, rather 
than in the western signif of birth. 

[15] _tanzaku_ is the name given to the long strip or ribbon 
of paper, usual colored, upon which poem are written 
perpendicularly. poem written upon _tanzaku_ are suspend 
to tree in flower, to wind-bells, to ani beauti object 
in which the poet ha found an inspiration. 

thi poem--a poem on first love (_hatsu koi_), compos by the famou 
shunrei kyô--wa not unfamiliar to him; but it had been written upon 
the _tanzaku_ by a femal hand, and so exquisit that he could 
scarc believ hi eyes. someth in the form of the characters,--an 
indefinit grace,--suggest that period of youth between childhood and 
womanhood; and the pure rich color of the ink seem to bespeak the 
puriti and good of the writer' heart.[16] 

[16] It is difficult for the inexperienc european eye to 
distinguish in chines or japanes write those 
characterist impli by our term "hand"--in the sens of 
individu style. but the japanes scholar never forget 
the peculiar of a handwrit onc seen; and he can 
even guess at the approxim age of the writer. chines 
and japanes author claim that the color (quality) of the 
ink use tell someth of the charact of the writer. As 
everi person ground or prepar hi or her own ink, the 
deeper and clearer black would at least indic someth 
of person care and of the sens of beauty. 

baishû care fold up the _tanzaku_, and took it home with him. 
when he look at it again the write appear to him even more 
wonder than at first. hi knowledg in caligraphi assur him onli 
that the poem had been written by some girl who wa veri young, veri 
intelligent, and probabl veri gentle-hearted. but thi assur 
suffic to shape within hi mind the imag of a veri charm person; 
and he soon found himself in love with the unknown. then hi first 
resolv wa to seek out the writer of the verses, and, if possible, make 
her hi wife.... yet how wa he to find her? who wa she? where did she 
live? certainli he could hope to find her onli through the favor of the 
gods. 

but present it occur to him that the god might be veri will 
to lend their aid. the _tanzaku_ had come to him while he wa 
stand in front of the templ of benten-sama; and it wa to thi 
divin in particular that lover were wont to pray for happi union. 
thi reflect impel him to beseech the goddess for assistance. 
He went at onc to the templ of benten-of-the-birth-wat 
(_tanjô-sui-no-benten_) in the ground of the amadera; and there, with 
all the fervor of hi heart, he made hi petition:--"o goddess, piti 
me!--help me to find where the young person live who wrote the 
_tanzaku_!--vouchsaf me but one chanc to meet her,--even if onli for 
a moment!" and after have made thi prayer, he began to perform a 
seven days' religi servic (_nanuka-mairi_)[17] in honor of the 
goddess; vow at the same time to pass the seventh night in ceaseless 
worship befor her shrine. 

[17] there are mani kind of religi exercis call _mairi_. 
the perform of a _nanuka-mairi_ pledg himself to pray 
at a certain templ everi day for seven day in succession. 

* * * * * 

now on the seventh night,--th night of hi vigil,--dur the hour when 
the silenc is most deep, he heard at the main gateway of the 
temple-ground a voic call for admittance. anoth voic from within 
answered; the gate wa opened; and baishû saw an old man of majest 
appear approach with slow steps. thi vener person wa clad 
in robe of ceremony; and he wore upon hi snow-whit head a black cap 
(_eboshi_) of the form indic high rank. reach the littl templ 
of benten, he knelt down in front of it, as if respect await 
some order. then the outer door of the templ wa opened; the hang 
curtain of bamboo behind it, conceal the inner sanctuary, wa roll 
half-way up; and a _chigo_[18] came forward,--a beauti boy, with long 
hair tie back in the ancient manner. He stood at the threshold, and 
said to the old man in a clear loud voice:-- 

[18] the term _chigo_ usual mean the page of a nobl 
household, especi an imperi page. the _chigo_ who 
appear in thi stori is of cours a supernatur 
being,--th court-messeng of the goddess, and her 
mouthpiece. 

"there is a person here who ha been pray for a love-union not 
suitabl to hi present condition, and otherwis difficult to bring 
about. but as the young man is worthi of our pity, you have been call 
to see whether someth can be done for him. If there should prove to 
be ani relat between the parti from the period of a former birth, 
you will introduc them to each other." 

On receiv thi command, the old man bow respect to the 
_chigo_: then, rising, he drew from the pocket of hi long left sleev a 
crimson cord. one end of thi cord he pass round baishû' body, as if 
to bind him with it. the other end he put into the flame of one of the 
temple-lamps; and while the cord wa there burning, he wave hi hand 
three times, as if to summon somebodi out of the dark. 

immediately, in the direct of the amadera, a sound of come step 
wa heard; and in anoth moment a girl appeared,--a charm girl, 
fifteen or sixteen year old. she approach gracefully, but veri 
shyly,--hid the lower part of her face with a fan; and she knelt down 
besid baishû. the _chigo_ then said to baishû:-- 

"recent you have been suffer much heart-pain; and thi desper 
love of your ha even impair your health. We could not allow you to 
remain in so unhappi a condition; and We therefor summon the 
old-man-under-the-moon[19] to make you acquaint with the writer of 
that _tanzaku_. she is now besid you." 

[19] _gekkawô_. thi is a poetic appel for the god 
of marriage, more usual known as _musubi-no-kami_. 
throughout thi stori there is an interest mingl of 
shintô and buddhist ideas. 

with these words, the _chigo_ retir behind the bamboo curtain. then 
the old man went away as he had come; and the young girl follow him. 
simultan baishû heard the great bell of the amadera sound the 
hour of dawn. He prostrat himself in thanksgiv befor the shrine of 
benten-of-the-birth-water, and proceed homeward,--feel as if 
awaken from some delight dream,--happi at have seen the charm 
person whom he had so fervent pray to meet,--unhappi also becaus of 
the fear that he might never meet her again. 

but scarc had he pass from the gateway into the street, when he saw 
a young girl walk alon in the same direct that he wa going; and, 
even in the dusk of the dawn, he recogn her at onc as the person to 
whom he had been introduc befor the templ of benten. As he quicken 
hi pace to overtak her, she turn and salut him with a grace 
bow. then for the first time he ventur to speak to her; and she 
answer him in a voic of which the sweet fill hi heart with 
joy. through the yet silent street they walk on, chat happily, 
till they found themselv befor the hous where baishû lived. there he 
paused--spok to the girl of hi hope and fears. smiling, she 
asked:--"do you not know that I wa sent for to becom your wife?" and 
she enter with him. 

* * * * * 

becom hi wife, she delight him beyond expect by the charm of 
her mind and heart. moreover, he found her to be much more accomplish 
than he had supposed. besid be abl to write so wonderfully, she 
could paint beauti pictures; she knew the art of arrang flowers, 
the art of embroidery, the art of music; she could weav and sew; and 
she knew everyth in regard to the manag of a house. 

* * * * * 

It wa in the earli autumn that the young peopl had met; and they live 
togeth in perfect accord until the winter season began. nothing, 
dure those months, occur to disturb their peace. baishû' love for 
hi gentl wife onli strengthen with the pass of time. yet, 
strang enough, he remain ignor of her history,--knew noth 
about her family. Of such matter she had never spoken; and, as the god 
had given her to him, he imagin that it would not be proper to 
question her. but neither the old-man-under-the-moon nor ani one els 
came--a he had feared--to take her away. nobodi even made ani inquiri 
about her. and the neighbors, for some undiscover reason, act as 
if total unawar of her presence. 

baishû wonder at all this. but stranger experi were await 
him. 

one winter morn he happen to be pass through a somewhat remot 
quarter of the city, when he heard himself loudli call by name, and 
saw a man-serv make sign to him from the gateway of a privat 
residence. As baishû did not know the man' face, and did not have a 
singl acquaint in that part of kyôto, he wa more than startl by 
so abrupt a summons. but the servant, come forward, salut him with 
the utmost respect, and said, "mi master greatli desir the honor of 
speak with you: deign to enter for a moment." after an instant of 
hesitation, baishû allow himself to be conduct to the house. A 
dignifi and richli dress person, who seem to be the master, 
welcom him at the entrance, and led him to the guest-room. when the 
courtesi due upon a first meet had been fulli exchanged, the host 
apolog for the inform manner of hi invitation, and said:-- 

"it must have seem to you veri rude of us to call you in such a way. 
but perhap you will pardon our impolit when I tell you that we 
act thu upon what I firmli believ to have been an inspir from 
the goddess benten. now permit me to explain. 

"I have a daughter, about sixteen year old, who can write rather 
well,[20] and do other thing in the common way: she ha the ordinari 
natur of woman. As we were anxiou to make her happi by find a good 
husband for her, we pray the goddess benten to help us; and we sent to 
everi templ of benten in the citi a _tanzaku_ written by the girl. some 
night later, the goddess appear to me in a dream, and said: 'we have 
heard your prayer, and have alreadi introduc your daughter to the 
person who is to becom her husband. dure the come winter he will 
visit you.' As I did not understand thi assur that a present 
had been made, I felt some doubt; I thought that the dream might have 
been onli a common dream, signifi nothing. but last night again I saw 
benten-sama in a dream; and she said to me: 'to-morrow the young man, of 
whom I onc spoke to you, will come to thi street: then you can call 
him into your house, and ask him to becom the husband of your daughter. 
He is a good young man; and later in life he will obtain a much higher 
rank than he now holds.' then benten-sama told me your name, your age, 
your birthplace, and describ your featur and dress so exactli that 
my servant found no difficulti in recogn you by the indic 
which I wa abl to give him." 

[20] As it is the old japanes rule that parent should speak 
depreciatingli of their children' accomplish the 
phrase "rather well" in thi connect would mean, for the 
visitor, "wonder well." for the same reason the 
express "common way" and "ordinari nature," as 
subsequ used, would impli almost the revers of the 
liter meaning. 

* * * * * 

thi explan bewild baishû instead of reassur him; and hi 
onli repli wa a formal return of thank for the honor which the master 
of the hous had spoken of do him. but when the host invit him to 
anoth room, for the purpos of present him to the young lady, hi 
embarrass becam extreme. yet he could not reason declin the 
introduction. He could not bring himself, under such extraordinari 
circumstances, to announc that he alreadi had a wife,--a wife given to 
him by the goddess benten herself; a wife from whom he could not even 
think of separating. so, in silenc and trepidation, he follow hi 
host to the apart indicated. 

then what wa hi amaz to discover, when present to the daughter 
of the house, that she wa the veri same person whom he had alreadi 
taken to wife! 

_the same,--yet not the same._ 

she to whom he had been introduc by the old-man-under-the-moon, wa 
onli the soul of the beloved. 

she to whom he wa now to be wedded, in her father' house, wa the 
body. 

benten had wrought thi miracl for the sake of her worshippers. 

[decoration] 

the origin stori break off suddenli at thi point, leav sever 
matter unexplained. the end is rather unsatisfactory. one would like 
to know someth about the mental experi of the real maiden dure 
the marri life of her phantom. one would also like to know what becam 
of the phantom,--wheth it continu to lead an independ existence; 
whether it wait patient for the return of it husband; whether it 
paid a visit to the real bride. and the book say noth about these 
things. but a japanes friend explain the miracl thus:-- 

"the spirit-brid wa realli form out of the _tanzaku_. So it is 
possibl that the real girl did not know anyth about the meet at 
the templ of benten. when she wrote those beauti charact upon the 
_tanzaku_, someth of her spirit pass into them. therefor it wa 
possibl to evok from the write the doubl of the writer." 




the gratitud of the samébito[21] 

[decoration] 

[21] the origin of thi stori may be found in the book call 
_kibun-anbaiyoshi_ 


there wa a man name tawaraya tôtarô, who live in the provinc of ômi. 
hi hous wa situat on the shore of lake biwa, not far from the 
famou templ call ishiyamadera. He had some property, and live in 
comfort; but at the age of twenty-nin he wa still unmarried. hi 
greatest ambit wa to marri a veri beauti woman; and he had not 
been abl to find a girl to hi liking. 

one day, as he wa pass over the long bridg of séta,[22] he saw a 
strang be crouch close to the parapet. the bodi of thi be 
resembl the bodi of a man, but wa black as ink; it face wa like the 
face of a demon; it eye were green as emeralds; and it beard wa like 
the beard of a dragon. tôtarô wa at first veri much startled. but the 
green eye look at him so gentli that after a moment' hesit he 
ventur to question the creature. then it answer him, saying: "I am a 
_samébito_,[23]--a shark-man of the sea; and until a short time ago I 
wa in the servic of the eight great dragon-k [_hachi-dai-ryû-ô_] 
as a subordin offic in the dragon-palac [_ryûgû_].[24] but 
becaus of a small fault which I committed, I wa dismiss from the 
dragon-palace, and also banish from the sea. sinc then I have been 
wander about here,--un to get ani food, or even a place to lie 
down. If you can feel ani piti for me, do, I beseech you, help me to 
find a shelter, and let me have someth to eat!" 

[22] the long bridg of séta (_séta-no-naga-hashi_), famou in 
japanes legend, is nearli eight hundr feet in length, 
and command a beauti view. thi bridg cross the 
water of the sétagawa near the junction of the stream with 
lake biwa. ishiyamadera, one of the most picturesqu 
buddhist templ in japan, is situat within a short 
distanc from the bridge. 

[23] literally, "a shark-person," but in thi stori the 
_samébito_ is a male. the charact for _samébito_ can 
also be read _kôjin_,--which is the usual reading. In 
dictionari the word is loos render by "merman" or 
"mermaid;" but as the abov descript shows, the 
_samébito_ or _kôjin_ of the far east is a concept 
have littl in common with the western idea of a merman 
or mermaid. 

[24] _ryûgû_ is also the name given to the whole of that 
fairy-realm beneath the sea which figur in so mani 
japanes legends. 

thi petit wa utter in so plaintiv a tone, and in so humbl a 
manner, that tôtarô' heart wa touched. "come with me," he said. "there 
is in my garden a larg and deep pond where you may live as long as you 
wish; and I will give you plenti to eat." 

the _samébito_ follow tôtarô home, and appear to be much pleas 
with the pond. 

thereafter, for nearli half a year, thi strang guest dwelt in the 
pond, and wa everi day suppli by tôtarô with such food as 
sea-creatur like. 

[_from thi point of the origin narr the shark-man is 
refer to, not as a monster, but as a sympathet person of 
the male sex._] 

now, in the seventh month of the same year, there wa a femal 
pilgrimag (_nyonin-môdé_) to the great buddhist templ call miidera, 
in the neighbor town of ôtsu; and tôtarô went to ôtsu to attend the 
festival. among the multitud of women and young girl there assembled, 
he observ a person of extraordinari beauty. she seem about sixteen 
year old; her face wa fair and pure as snow; and the loveli of 
her lip assur the behold that their everi utter would sound "a 
sweet as the voic of a nightingal sing upon a plum-tree." tôtarô 
fell in love with her at sight. when she left the templ he follow her 
at a respect distance, and discov that she and her mother were 
stay for a few day at a certain hous in the neighbor villag of 
séta. By question some of the villag folk, he wa abl also to learn 
that her name wa tamana; that she wa unmarried; and that her famili 
appear to be unwil that she should marri a man of ordinari 
rank,--for they demand as a betrothal-gift a casket contain ten 
thousand jewels.[25] 

[25] _tama_ in the original. thi word _tama_ ha a multitud of 
meanings; and as here use it is quit as indefinit as our 
own term "jewel," "gem," or "preciou stone." indeed, it 
is more indefinite, for it signifi also a bead of coral, 
a ball of crystal, a polish stone attach to a hairpin, 
etc., etc. later on, however, I ventur to render it by 
"ruby,"--for reason which need no explanation. 

* * * * * 

tôtarô return home veri much dismay by thi information. the more 
that he thought about the strang betrothal-gift demand by the girl' 
parents, the more he felt that he could never expect to obtain her for 
hi wife. even suppos that there were as mani as ten thousand jewel 
in the whole country, onli a great princ could hope to procur them. 

but not even for a singl hour could tôtarô banish from hi mind the 
memori of that beauti being. It haunt him so that he could neither 
eat nor sleep; and it seem to becom more and more vivid as the day 
went by. and at last he becam ill,--so ill that he could not lift hi 
head from the pillow. then he sent for a doctor. 

the doctor, after have made a care examination, utter an 
exclam of surprise. "almost ani kind of sickness," he said, "can be 
cure by proper medic treatment, except the sick of love. your 
ailment is evid love-sickness. there is no cure for it. In ancient 
time rôya-ô hakuyo die of that sickness; and you must prepar yourself 
to die as he died." So saying, the doctor went away, without even give 
ani medicin to tôtarô. 

* * * * * 

about thi time the shark-man that wa live in the garden-pond heard 
of hi master' sickness, and came into the hous to wait upon tôtarô. 
and he tend him with the utmost affect both by day and by night. 
but he did not know either the caus or the seriou natur of the 
sick until nearli a week later, when tôtarô, think himself about 
to die, utter these word of farewell:-- 

"I suppos that I have had the pleasur of care for you thu long, 
becaus of some relat that grew up between us in a former state of 
existence. but now I am veri sick indeed, and everi day my sick 
becom worse; and my life is like the morn dew which pass away 
befor the set of the sun. for your sake, therefore, I am troubl 
in mind. your exist ha depend upon my care; and I fear that there 
will be no one to care for you and to feed you when I am dead.... My 
poor friend!... alas! our hope and our wish are alway disappoint 
in thi unhappi world!" 

No sooner had tôtarô spoken these word than the samébito utter a 
strang wild cri of pain, and began to weep bitterly. and as he wept, 
great tear of blood stream from hi green eye and roll down hi 
black cheek and drip upon the floor. and, falling, they were blood; 
but, have fallen, they becam hard and bright and beautiful,--becam 
jewel of inestim price, rubi splendid as crimson fire. for when 
men of the sea weep, their tear becom preciou stones. 

then tôtarô, behold thi marvel, wa so amaz and overjoy that hi 
strength return to him. He sprang from hi bed, and began to pick up 
and to count the tear of the shark-man, cri out the while: "mi 
sick is cured! I shall live! I shall live!" 

therewith, the shark-man, greatli astonished, ceas to weep, and ask 
tôtarô to explain thi wonder cure; and tôtarô told him about the 
young person seen at miidera, and about the extraordinari marriage-gift 
demand by her family. "a I felt sure," ad tôtarô, "that I should 
never be abl to get ten thousand jewels, I suppos that my suit would 
be hopeless. then I becam veri unhappy, and at last fell sick. but now, 
becaus of your gener weeping, I have mani preciou stones; and I 
think that I shall be abl to marri that girl. only--ther are not yet 
quit enough stones; and I beg that you will be good enough to weep a 
littl more, so as to make up the full number required." 

but at thi request the samébito shook hi head, and answer in a tone 
of surpris and of reproach:-- 

"do you think that I am like a harlot,-- to weep whenev I wish? 
oh, no! harlot shed tear in order to deceiv men; but creatur of the 
sea cannot weep without feel real sorrow. I wept for you becaus of 
the true grief that I felt in my heart at the thought that you were 
go to die. but now I cannot weep for you, becaus you have told me 
that your sick is cured." 

"then what am I to do?" plaintiv ask tôtarô. "unless I can get ten 
thousand jewels, I cannot marri the girl!" 

the samébito remain for a littl while silent, as if thinking. then he 
said:-- 

"listen! to-day I cannot possibl weep ani more. but to-morrow let us go 
togeth to the long bridg of séta, take with us some wine and some 
fish. We can rest for a time on the bridge; and while we are drink 
the wine and eat the fish, I shall gaze in the direct of the 
dragon-palace, and try, by think of the happi day that I spent 
there, to make myself feel homesick--so that I can weep." 

tôtarô joy assented. 

next morn the two, take plenti of wine and fish with them, went to 
the séta bridge, and rest there, and feasted. after have drunk a 
great deal of wine, the samébito began to gaze in the direct of the 
dragon-kingdom, and to think about the past. and gradually, under the 
soften influenc of the wine, the memori of happier day fill hi 
heart with sorrow, and the pain of homesick came upon him, so that 
he could weep profusely. and the great red tear that he shed fell upon 
the bridg in a shower of rubies; and tôtarô gather them as they fell, 
and put them into a casket, and count them until he had count the 
full number of ten thousand. then he utter a shout of joy. 

almost in the same moment, from far away over the lake, a delight 
sound of music wa heard; and there appear in the offing, slowli 
rise from the waters, like some fabric of cloud, a palac of the color 
of the set sun. 

At onc the samébito sprang upon the parapet of the bridge, and looked, 
and laugh for joy. then, turn to tôtarô, he said:-- 

"there must have been a gener amnesti proclaim in the dragon-realm; 
the king are call me. So now I must bid you farewell. I am happi to 
have had one chanc of befriend you in return for your good to 
me." 

with these word he leap from the bridge; and no man ever saw him 
again. but tôtarô present the casket of red jewel to the parent of 
tamana, and so obtain her in marriage. 




japanes studi 

[decoration] 

... life ere long 
came on me in the public ways, and bent 
eye deeper than of old: death met I too, 
and saw the dawn glow through. 
--georg meredith 




[illustration: plate I. 
1-2, _young sémi_. 
3-4, _haru-zémi_, also call _nawashiro-zémi_.] 




sémi 
(cicadæ) 

[decoration] 

koë ni mina 
naki-shimôté ya-- 
sémi no kara! 
--_japanes love-song_ 

the voic have been all consum by crying, there remain onli 
the shell of the _sémi!_ 

I 


A celebr chines scholar, known in japanes literatur as riku-un, 
wrote the follow quaint account of the five virtu of the cicada:-- 

"i.--th cicada ha upon it head certain figur or signs.[26] 
these repres it [written] characters, style, literature. 

[26] the curiou mark on the head of one varieti of 
japanes _sémi_ are believ to be charact which 
are name of souls. 

"ii.--it eat noth belong to earth, and drink onli dew. 
thi prove it cleanliness, purity, propriety. 

"iii.--it alway appear at a certain fix time. thi prove 
it fidelity, sincerity, truthfulness. 

"iv.--it will not accept wheat or rice. thi prove it probity, 
uprightness, honesty. 

"v.--it doe not make for itself ani nest to live in. thi 
prove it frugality, thrift, economy." 

* * * * * 

We might compar thi with the beauti address of anacreon to the 
cicada, written twenty-four hundr year ago: on more than one point 
the greek poet and the chines sage are in perfect accord:-- 

"_we deem thee happy, O cicada, because, have drunk, like a 
king, onli a littl dew, thou dost chirrup on the top of trees. 
for all thing whatsoev that thou seest in the field are 
thine, and whatsoev the season bring forth. yet art thou 
the friend of the tiller of the land,--from no one harm 
take aught. By mortal thou art held in honor as the pleasant 
harbing of summer; and the muse love thee. phoebu himself 
love thee, and ha given thee a shrill song. and old age doe 
not consum thee. O thou gift one,--earth-born, song-loving, 
free from pain, have flesh without blood,--thou art nearli 
equal to the gods!_"[27] 

[27] In thi and other citat from the greek 
anthology, I have depend upon burges' 
translation. 

and we must certainli go back to the old greek literatur in order to 
find a poetri compar to that of the japanes on the subject of 
music insects. perhap of greek vers on the cricket, the most 
beauti are the line of meleager: "_o cricket, the soother of slumber 
... weav the thread of a voic that caus love to wander away!_" ... 
there are japanes poem scarc less delic in sentiment on the 
chirrup of night-crickets; and meleager' promis to reward the 
littl singer with gift of fresh leek, and with "drop of dew cut up 
small," sound strang japanese. then the poem attribut to anyté, 
about the littl girl myro make a tomb for her pet cicada and 
cricket, and weep becaus hades, "hard to be persuaded," had taken 
her playth away, repres an experi familiar to japanes 
child-life. I suppos that littl myro--(how freshli her tear still 
glisten, after seven and twenti centuries!)--prepar that "common tomb" 
for her pet much as the littl maid of nippon would do to-day, put 
a small stone on top to serv for a monument. but the wiser japanes 
myro would repeat over the grave a certain buddhist prayer. 

It is especi in their poem upon the cicada that we find the old 
greek confess their love of insect-melody: wit the line in the 
antholog about the tettix caught in a spider' snare, and "make 
lament in the thin fetters" until freed by the poet;--and the vers by 
leonida of tarentum pictur the "unpaid minstrel to wayfar men" 
as "sit upon lofti trees, warm with the great heat of summer, 
sip the dew that is like woman' milk;"--and the dainti fragment of 
meleager, beginning: "_thou vocal tettix, drunk with drop of dew, 
sit with thi serrat limb upon the top of petals, thou givest 
out the melodi of the lyre from thi duski skin_." ... Or take the 
charm address of evenu to a nightingale:-- 

"_thou attic maiden, honey-fed, hast chirp seiz a chirp 
cicada, and bearest it to thi unfledg young,--thou, a twitterer, 
the twitterer,--thou, the winged, the well-winged,--thou, a 
stranger, the stranger,--thou, a summer-child, the summer-child! 
wilt thou not quickli cast it from thee? for it is not right, it 
is not just, that those engag in song should perish by the 
mouth of those engag in song._" 

On the other hand, we find japanes poet much more inclin to prais 
the voic of night-cricket than those of sémi. there are countless 
poem about sémi, but veri few which commend their singing. Of cours 
the sémi are veri differ from the cicadæ known to the greeks. some 
varieti are truli musical; but the major are astonishingli 
noisy,--so noisi that their stridul is consid one of the great 
afflict of summer. therefor it were vain to seek among the myriad 
of japanes vers on sémi for anyth compar to the line of 
evenu abov quoted; indeed, the onli japanes poem that I could find on 
the subject of a cicada caught by a bird, wa the following:-- 

ana kanashi! 
tobi ni toraruru 
sémi no koë. 
--ransetsu. 

ah! how piteou the cri of the sémi seiz by the kite! 

Or "caught by a boy" the poet might equal well have observed,--thi 
be a much more frequent caus of the piti cry. the lament of 
nicia for the tettix would serv as the elegi of mani a sémi:-- 

"_no more shall I delight myself by send out a sound from my 
quick-mov wings, becaus I have fallen into the savag hand 
of a boy, who seiz me unexpectedly, as I wa sit under the 
green leaves._" 

here I may remark that japanes children usual captur sémi by mean 
of a long slender bamboo tip with bird-lim (_mochi_). the sound made 
by some kind of sémi when caught is realli pitiful,--quit as piti 
as the twitter of a terrifi bird. one find it difficult to persuad 
oneself that the nois is not a _voice_ of anguish, in the human sens 
of the word "voice," but the product of a special exterior 
membrane. recently, on hear a captur sémi thu scream, I becam 
convinc in quit a new way that the stridulatori apparatu of certain 
insect must not be thought of as a kind of music instrument, but 
as an organ of speech, and that it utter are as intim 
associ with simpl form of emotion, as are the note of a 
bird,--th extraordinari differ be that the insect ha it vocal 
chord _outside_. but the insect-world is altogeth a world of goblin 
and fairies: creatur with organ of which we cannot discov the use, 
and sens of which we cannot imagin the nature;--creatur with 
myriad of eyes, or with eye in their backs, or with eye move about 
at the end of trunk and horns;--creatur with ear in their leg and 
bellies, or with brain in their waists! If some of them happen to have 
voic outsid of their bodi instead of inside, the fact ought not to 
surpris anybody. 

* * * * * 

I have not yet succeed in find ani japanes vers allud to the 
stridulatori apparatu of sémi,--though I think it probabl that such 
vers exist. certainli the japanes have been for centuri familiar 
with the peculiar of their own sing insects. but I should not 
now presum to say that their poet are incorrect in speak of the 
"voices" of cricket and of cicadæ. the old greek poet who actual 
describ insect as produc music with their wing and feet, 
nevertheless speak of the "voices," the "songs," and the "chirruping" of 
such creatures,--just as the japanes poet do. for example, meleag 
thu address the cricket: 

"_o thou that art with shrill wing the self-form imit of 
the lyre, chirrup me someth pleasant while beat your vocal 
wing with your feet!_ ..." 


II 

befor speak further of the poetic literatur of sémi, I must 
attempt a few remark about the sémi themselves. but the reader need 
not expect anyth entomological. excepting, perhaps, the butterflies, 
the insect of japan are still littl known to men of science; and all 
that I can say about sémi ha been learn from inquiry, from person 
observation, and from old japanes book of an interest but total 
unscientif kind. not onli do the author contradict each other as to 
the name and characterist of the best-known sémi; they attach the 
word sémi to name of insect which are not cicadæ. 

the follow enumer of sémi is certainli incomplete; but I believ 
that it includ the better-known varieti and the best melodists. I 
must ask the reader, however, to bear in mind that the time of the 
appear of certain sémi differ in differ part of japan; that 
the same kind of sémi may be call by differ name in differ 
provinces; and that these note have been written in tôkyô. 


i.--haru-zémi. 

variou small sémi appear in the spring. but the first of the big sémi 
to make itself heard is the _haru-zémi_ ("spring-sémi"), also call 
_uma-zémi_ ("horse-sémi"), _kuma-zémi_ ("bear-sémi"), and other names. 
It make a shrill wheez sound,--_ji-i-i-i-i-iiiiiiii_,--begin 
low, and gradual rise to a pitch of pain intensity. No other 
cicada is so noisi as the _haru-zémi;_ but the life of the creatur 
appear to end with the season. probabl thi is the sémi refer to in 
an old japanes poem:-- 

hatsu-sémi ya! 
"koré wa atsui" to 
Iu hi yori. 
--taimu. 

the day after the first day on which we exclaim, "oh, how hot 
it is!" the first sémi begin to cry. 


[illustration: plate ii. 
"_shinné-shinné_," 
also call _yama-zémi_, and _kuma-zémi_.] 

ii.--"shinné-shinné." 

the _shinné-shinné_--also call _yama-zémi_, or "mountain-sémi"; 
_kuma-zémi_, or "bear-sémi"; and _ô-sémi_, or "great sémi"--begin to 
sing as earli as may. It is a veri larg insect. the upper part of the 
bodi is almost black, and the belli a silvery-white; the head ha 
curiou red markings. the name _shinné-shinné_ is deriv from the note 
of the creature, which resembl a quick continu repetit of the 
syllabl _shinné_. about kyôto thi sémi is common: it is rare heard 
in tôkyô. 

[mi first opportun to examin an _ô-sémi_ wa in shidzuoka. it 
utter is much more complex than the japanes onomatop implies; I 
should liken it to the nois of a sewing-machin in full operation. 
there is a doubl sound: you hear not onli the success of sharp 
metal clickings, but also, below these, a slower seri of dull 
clank tones. the stridulatori organ are light green, look almost 
like a pair of tini green leav attach to the thorax.] 


[illustration: plate iii. 
_aburazémi._] 

iii.--aburazémi. 

the _aburazémi_, or "oil-sémi," make it appear earli in the 
summer. I am told that it owe it name to the fact that it 
shrill resembl the sound of oil or greas fri in a pan. some 
writer say that the shrill resembl the sound of the syllabl 
_gacharin-gacharin_; but other compar it to the nois of water 
boiling. the _aburazémi_ begin to chant about sunrise; then a great 
soft hiss seem to ascend from all the trees. At such an hour, when 
the foliag of wood and garden still sparkl with dew, might have 
been compos the follow verse,--th onli one in my collect 
relat to the _aburazémi_:-- 

ano koë dé 
tsuyu ga inochi ka?-- 
aburazémi! 

speak with that voice, ha the dew taken life?--onli the 
_aburazémi_! 


[illustration: plate iv. 
1-2, _mugikari-zémi_, also call _goshiki-zémi_. 
3, _higurashi_. 
4, "_min-min-zémi_."] 

iv.--mugi-kari-zémi. 

the _mugi-kari-zémi_, or "barley-harvest sémi," also call 
_goshiki-zémi_, or "five-color sémi," appear earli in the summer. It 
make two distinct sound in differ keys, resembl the syllabl 
_shi-in, shin--chi-i, chi-i_. 


v.--higurashi, OR "kana-kana." 

thi insect, whose name signifi "day-darkening," is the most 
remark of all the japanes cicadæ. It is not the finest singer 
among them; but even as a melodist it rank second onli to the 
_tsuku-tsuku-bôshi_. It is the special minstrel of twilight, 
sing onli at dawn and sunset; wherea most of the other sémi 
make their music onli in the full blaze of day, paus even when 
rain-cloud obscur the sun. In tôkyô the _higurashi_ usual 
appear about the end of june, or the begin of july. it wonder 
cry,--_kana-kana-kana-kana-kana_,--begin alway in a veri high 
clear key, and slowli descending, is almost exactli like the sound of 
a good hand-bell, veri quickli rung. It is not a clash sound, as of 
violent ringing; it is quick, steady, and of surpris sonority. I 
believ that a singl _higurashi_ can be plainli heard a quarter of a 
mile away; yet, as the old japanes poet yayû observed, "no matter 
how mani _higurashi_ be sing together, we never find them noisy." 
though power and penetr as a reson of metal, the 
_higurashi's_ call is music even to the degre of sweetness; and 
there is a peculiar melancholi in it that accord with the hour of 
gloaming. but the most astonish fact in regard to the cri of the 
_higurashi_ is the individu qualiti character the note of each 
insect. No two _higurashi_ sing precis in the same tone. If you 
hear a dozen of them sing at once, you will find that the timbr of 
each voic is recogniz differ from everi other. certain note 
ring like silver, other vibrat like bronze; and, besid varieti 
of timbr suggest bell of variou weight and composition, there 
are even differ in tone, that suggest differ _forms_ of bell. 

I have alreadi said that the name _higurashi_ mean "day-darkening,"--in 
the sens of twilight, gloaming, dusk; and there are mani japanes 
vers contain play on the word,--th poet affect to believe, as 
in the follow example, that the cri of the insect hasten the 
come of darkness:-- 

higurashi ya! 
sutétéoitémo 
kururu hi wo. 

O higurashi!--even if you let it alone, day darken fast 
enough! 

this, intend to express a melancholi mood, may seem to the western 
reader far-fetched. but anoth littl poem--ref to the effect of 
the sound upon the conscienc of an idler--wil be appreci by ani 
one accustom to hear the _higurashi_. I may observe, in thi 
connection, that the first clear even cri of the insect is quit as 
startl as the sudden ring of a bell:-- 

higurashi ya! 
kyô no kétai wo 
omou-toki. 
--rikei. 

already, O higurashi, your call announc the evening! 
alas, for the pass day, with it duti left undone! 


vi.--"minmin"-zémi. 

the _minmin-zémi_ begin to sing in the period of greatest heat. It is 
call "_min-min_" becaus it note is thought to resembl the syllabl 
"_min_" repeat over and over again,--slowli at first, and veri loudly; 
then more and more quickli and softly, till the utter die away in a 
sort of buzz: "_min--min--min-min-min-minminmin-dzzzzzzz_." the sound is 
plaintive, and not unpleasing. It is often compar to the sound of the 
voic of a priest chant the _sûtras_. 


[illustration: plate V. 

1, _"tsuku-tsuku-bôshi_," also call "_kutsu-kutsu-bôshi_," etc. 
(_cosmopsaltria opalifera?_) 

2, _tsurigané-zémi_. 

3, _the phantom_.] 

vii.--tsuku-tsuku-bôshi. 

ON the day immedi follow the festiv of the dead, by the old 
japanes calendar[28] (which is incompar more exact than our 
western calendar in regard to nature-chang and manifestations), 
begin to sing the _tsuku-tsuku-bôshi_. thi creatur may be said 
to sing like a bird. It is also call _kutsu-kutsu-bôshi_, 
_chôko-chôko-uisu_, _tsuku-tsuku-hôshi_, _tsuku-tsuku-oîshi_,--al 
onomatopoet appellations. the sound of it song have been imit 
in differ way by variou writers. In izumo the common version is,-- 

tsuku-tsuku-uisu, 
tsuku-tsuku-uisu, 
tsuku-tsuku-uisu:-- 
ui-ôsu 
ui-ôsu 
ui-ôsu 
ui-ôs-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-su. 

[28] that is to say, upon the 16th day of the 7th month. 

anoth version runs,-- 

tsuku-tsuku-uisu, 
tsuku-tsuku-uisu, 
tsuku-tsuku-uisu:-- 
chi-i yara! 
chi-i yara! 
chi-i yara! 
chi-i, chi, chi, chi, chi, chiii. 

but some say that the sound is _tsukushi-koïshi_. there is a legend 
that in old time a man of tsukushi (the ancient name of kyûshû) 
fell sick and die while far away from home, and that the 
ghost of him becam an autumn cicada, which cri unceasingly, 
_tsukushi-koïshi!--tsukushi-koïshi!_ ("i long for tsukushi!--i want 
to see tsukushi!") 

* * * * * 

It is a curiou fact that the earlier sémi have the harshest and 
simplest notes. the music sémi do not appear until summer; and the 
_tsuku-tsuku-bôshi_, have the most complex and melodi utter of 
all, is one of the latest to mature. 


viii.--tsurigané-sémi.[29] 

the _tsurigané-sémi_ is an autumn cicada. the word _tsurigané_ mean a 
suspend bell,--especi the big bell of a buddhist temple. I am 
somewhat puzzl by the name; for the insect' music realli suggest 
the tone of a japanes harp, or _koto_--a good author declare. 
perhap the appel refer not to the boom of the bell, but to those 
deep, sweet hum which follow after the peal, wave upon wave. 

[29] thi sémi appear to be chiefli known in shikoku. 


iii 

japanes poem on sémi are usual veri brief; and my collect chiefli 
consist of _hokku_,--composit of seventeen syllables. most of these 
_hokku_ relat to the sound made by the sémi,--or, rather, to the 
sensat which the sound produc within the poet' mind. the name 
attach to the follow exampl are nearli all name of old-tim 
poets,--not the real names, of course, but the _gô_, or literari name 
by which artist and men of letter are usual known. 

* * * * * 

yokoi yayû, a japanes poet of the eighteenth century, celebr as a 
compos of _hokku_, ha left us thi naïv record of the feel with 
which he heard the chirrup of cicadæ in summer and in autumn:-- 

"in the sultri period, feel oppress by the great of the 
heat, I made thi verse:-- 

"sémi atsushi 
matsu kirabaya to 
omou-madé. 

[the chirrup of the sémi aggrav the heat until I wish 
to cut down the pine-tre on which it sings.] 

"but the day pass quickly; and later, when I heard the cri 
of the sémi grow fainter and fainter in the time of the autumn 
winds, I began to feel compass for them, and I made thi 
second verse:-- 

"shini-nokoré 
hitotsu bakari wa 
aki no sémi." 

[now there surviv 
but a singl one 
Of the sémi of autumn!] 

lover of pierr loti (the world' greatest prose-writer) may rememb 
in _madam chrysanthème_ a delight passag about a japanes 
house,--describ the old dri woodwork as impregn with sonor by 
the shrill cricket of a hundr summers.[30] there is a japanes 
poem contain a fanci not altogeth dissimilar:-- 

matsu no ki ni 
shimikomu gotoshi 
sémi no koë. 

into the wood of the pine-tre 
seem to soak 
the voic of the sémi. 

[30] speak of hi own attempt to make a draw of the 
interior, he observes: "il manqu à ce logi dessiné son 
air frêle et sa sonorité de violon sec. dan le trait de 
crayon qui représent le boiseries, il n'i a pa la 
précision minutieus avec laquel ell sont ouvragées, ni 
leur antiquité extrême, ni leur propreté parfaite, _ni le 
vibrat de cigal qu' ell semblent avoir emmagasiné 
pendant de centain d'été dan leur fibr 
desséchées_." 

A veri larg number of japanes poem about sémi describ the nois of 
the creatur as an affliction. To fulli sympath with the complaint 
of the poets, one must have heard certain varieti of japanes cicadæ 
in full midsumm chorus; but even by reader without experi of the 
clamor, the follow vers will probabl be found suggestive:-- 

waré hitori 
atsui yô nari,-- 
sémi no koë! 
--bunsô. 

meseem that onli i,--i alon among mortals,-- 
ever suffer such heat!--oh, the nois of the sémi! 

ushiro kara 
tsukamu yô nari,-- 
sémi no koë. 
--jofû. 

oh, the nois of the sémi!--a pain of invis seizure,-- 
clutch in an enemy' grasp,--caught by the hair from behind! 

yama no kami no 
mimi no yamai ka?-- 
sémi no koë! 
--teikoku. 

what ail the divinity' ears?--how can the god of the mountain 
suffer such nois to exist?--oh, the tumult of sémi! 

soko no nai 
atsusa ya kumo ni 
sémi no koë! 
--saren. 

fathomless deepen the heat: the ceaseless shrill of sémi 
mounts, like a hiss of fire, up to the motionless clouds. 

mizu karété, 
sémi wo fudan-no 
taki no koë. 
--gen-u. 

water never a drop: the choru of sémi, incessant, 
mock the tumultu hiss,--th rush and foam of rapids. 

kagéroishi 
kumo mata satté, 
sémi no koë. 
--kitô. 

gone, the shadow clouds!--again the shrill of sémi 
rise and slowli swells,--ev increas the heat! 

daita ki wa, 
Ha mo ugokasazu,-- 
sémi no koë! 
--kafû. 

somewher fast to the bark he clung; but I cannot see him: 
He stir not even a leaf--oh! the nois of that sémi! 

tonari kara 
kono ki nikumu ya! 
sémi no koë. 
--gyukaku. 

all becaus of the sémi that sit and shrill on it branches-- 
oh! how thi tree of mine is hate now by my neighbor! 

thi remind one of yayû. We find anoth poet compassion a tree 
frequent by sémi:-- 

kazé wa mina 
sémi ni suwarété, 
hito-ki kana! 
--chôsui. 

alas! poor solitari tree!--piti now your lot,--everi breath 
of air have been suck up by the sémi! 

sometim the nois of the sémi is describ as a move force:-- 

sémi no koë 
ki-gi ni ugoité, 
kazé mo nashi! 
--sôyô. 

everi tree in the wood quiver with clamor of sémi: 
motion onli of noise--nev a breath of wind! 

také ni kité, 
yuki yori omoshi 
sémi no koë. 
--tôgetsu. 

more heavi than winter-snow the voic of perch sémi: 
see how the bamboo bend under the weight of their song![31] 

[31] japanes artist have found mani a charm 
inspir in the spectacl of bamboo bend 
under the weight of snow cling to their tops. 

morogoë ni 
yama ya ugokasu, 
ki-gi no sémi. 

all shrill together, the multitudin sémi 
make, with their ceaseless clamor, even the mountain move. 

kusunoki mo 
ugoku yô nari, 
sémi no koë. 
--baijaku. 

even the camphor-tre seem to quak with the clamor of sémi! 

sometim the sound is compar to the nois of boil water:-- 

hizakari wa 
niétatsu sémi no 
hayashi kana! 

In the hour of heaviest heat, how simmer the forest with sémi! 

niété iru 
mizu bakari nari-- 
sémi no koë. 
--taimu. 

simmer all the air with sibil of sémi, 
ceaseless, weari sense,--a sound of perpetu boiling. 

other poet complain especi of the multitud of the noise-mak and 
the ubiqu of the noise:-- 

aritaké no 
Ki ni hibiki-kéri 
sémi no koë. 

how mani soever the trees, in each ring the voic of the sémi. 

matsubara wo 
ichi ri wa kitari, 
sémi no koë. 
--senga. 

alon I walk for mile into the wood of pine-trees: 
alway the one same sémi shrill it call in my ears. 

occasion the subject is treat with comic exaggeration:-- 

naité iru 
Ki yori mo futoshi 
sémi no koë. 

the voic of the sémi is bigger [_thicker_] than the tree on 
which it sings. 

sugi takashi 
sarédomo sémi no 
amaru koë! 

high though the cedar be, the voic of the sémi is incompar 
higher! 

koë nagaki 
sémi wa mijikaki 
inochi kana! 

how long, alas! the voic and how short the life of the sémi! 

some poet celebr the neg form of pleasur follow upon the 
cessat of the sound:-- 

sémi ni dété, 
hotaru ni modoru,-- 
suzumi kana! 
--yayû. 

when the sémi ceas their noise, and the firefli come 
out--oh! how refresh the hour! 

sémi no tatsu, 
ato suzushisa yo! 
matsu no koë. 
--baijaku. 

when the sémi ceas their storm, oh, how refresh the 
stillness! 
grate then resound the music speech of the pines. 

[here I may mention, by the way, that there is a littl japanes song 
about the _matsu no koë_, in which the onomatop "zazanza" veri well 
repres the deep hum of the wind in the pine-needles:-- 

zazanza! 
hama-matsu no oto wa,-- 
zazanza, 
zazanza! 
zazanza! 
the sound of the pine of the shore,-- 
zazanza! 
zazanza!] 

there are poets, however, who declar that the feel produc by the 
nois of sémi depend altogeth upon the nervou condit of the 
listener:-- 

mori no sémi 
suzushiki koë ya, 
atsuki koë. 
--otsushu. 

sometim sultri the sound; sometimes, again, refreshing: 
the chant of the forest-sémi accord with the hearer' mood. 

suzushisa mo 
atsusa mo sémi no 
tokoro kana! 
--fuhaku. 

sometim we think it cool,--th resting-plac of the 
sémi;--sometim we think it hot (it is all a matter of fancy). 

suzushii to 
omoéba, suzushi 
sémi no koë. 
--ginkô. 

If we think it is cool, then the voic of the sémi is cool 
(that is, the fanci chang the feeling). 

In view of the mani complaint of japanes poet about the noisi of 
sémi, the reader may be surpris to learn that out of sémi-skin there 
use to be made in both china and japan--perhap upon homoeopath 
principles--a medicin for the cure of ear-ache! 

* * * * * 

one poem, nevertheless, prove that sémi-mus ha it admirers:-- 

omoshiroi zo ya, 
waga-ko no koë wa 
takai mori-ki no 
sémi no koë![32] 

sweet to the ear is the voic of one' own child as the voic 
of a sémi perch on a tall forest tree. 

[32] there is anoth version of thi poem:-- 

omoshiroi zo ya, 
waga-ko no naku wa 
sembu-ségaki no 
kyô yori mo! 

"more sweetli sound the cri of one' own child 
than even the chant of the sûtra in the servic 
for the dead." the buddhist servic allud to is 
held to be particularli beautiful. 

but such admir is rare. more frequent the sémi is repres as 
cri for it nightli repast of dew:-- 

sémi wo kiké,-- 
ichi-nichi naité 
yoru no tsuyu. 
--kikaku. 

hear the sémi shrill! so, from earliest dawning, 
all the summer day he cri for the dew of night. 

yû-tsuyu no 
kuchi ni iru madé 
naku sémi ka? 
--baishitsu. 

will the sémi continu to cri till the night-dew fill it 
mouth? 

occasion the sémi is mention in love-song of which the follow 
is a fair specimen. It belong to that class of ditti commonli sung by 
geisha. mere as a conceit, I think it pretty, in spite of the 
factiti pathos; but to japanes tast it is decidedli vulgar. the 
allus to beat impli jealousy:-- 

nushi ni tatakaré, 
washa matsu no sémi 
sugaritsuki-tsuki 
naku bakari! 

beaten by my jealou lover,-- 
like the sémi on the pine-tre 
I can onli cri and cling! 

and inde the follow tini pictur is a truer bit of work, accord 
to japanes art-principl (I do not know the author' name):-- 

sémi hitotsu 
matsu no yû-hi wo 
kakaé-kéri. 

lo! on the topmost pine, a solitari cicada 
vainli attempt to clasp one last red beam of sun. 


IV 

philosoph vers do not form a numer class of japanes poem 
upon sémi; but they possess an interest altogeth exotic. As the 
metamorphosi of the butterfli suppli to old greek thought an emblem 
of the soul' ascension, so the natur histori of the cicada ha 
furnish buddhism with similitud and parabl for the teach of 
doctrine. 

man shed hi bodi onli as the sémi shed it skin. but each 
reincarn obscur the memori of the previou one: we rememb our 
former exist no more than the sémi rememb the shell from which it 
ha emerged. often a sémi may be found in the act of sing besid it 
cast-off skin; therefor a poet ha written:-- 

waré to waga 
kara ya tomurô-- 
sémi no koë. 
--yayû. 

methink that sémi sit and sing by hi former body,-- 
chant the funer servic over hi own dead self. 

thi cast-off skin, or simulacrum,--cling to bole or branch as in 
life, and seem still to stare with great glaze eyes,--ha suggest 
mani thing both to profan and to religi poets. In love-song it is 
often liken to a bodi consum by passion longing. In buddhist 
poetri it becom a symbol of earthli pomp,--th hollow show of human 
greatness:-- 

Yo no naka yo 
kaëru no hadaka, 
sémi no kinu! 

nake as frog and weak we enter thi life of trouble; 
shed our pomp we pass: so sémi quit their skins. 

but sometim the poet compar the wing and shrill sémi to a human 
ghost, and the broken shell to the bodi left behind:-- 

tamashii wa 
ukiyo ni naité, 
sémi no kara. 

here the forsaken shell: abov me the voic of the creatur 
shrill like the cri of a soul quit thi world of pain. 

then the great sun-quicken tumult of the cicadæ--landstorm of summer 
life foredoom so soon to pass away--i liken by preacher and poet to 
the tumult of human desire. even as the sémi rise from earth, and climb 
to warmth and light, and clamor, and present again return to dust and 
silence,--so rise and clamor and pass the gener of men:-- 

yagaté shinu 
keshiki wa miézu, 
sémi no koë. 
--bashô. 

never an intim in all those voic of sémi 
how quickli the hush will come,--how speedili all must die. 

I wonder whether the thought in thi littl vers doe not interpret 
someth of that summer melancholi which come to us out of nature' 
solitud with the plaint of insect-voices. unconsci those million 
of million of tini be are preach the ancient wisdom of the 
east,--th perpetu sûtra of impermanency. 

yet how few of our modern poet have given heed to the voic of 
insects! 

perhap it is onli to mind inexor haunt by the riddl of life 
that natur can speak to-day, in those thin sweet trillings, as she 
spake of old to solomon. 

the wisdom of the east hear all things. and he that obtain it will 
hear the speech of insects,--a sigurd, tast the dragon' heart, 
heard suddenli the talk of birds. 

note.--for the pictur of sémi accompani thi paper, I am 
indebt to a curiou manuscript work in sever volumes, 
preserv in the imperi librari at uyéno. the work is 
entitl _chûfu-zusetsu_,--which might be freeli render as 
"pictur and descript of insects,"--and is divid into 
twelv books. the writer' name is unknown; but he must have 
been an amiabl and interest person, to judg from the naïv 
prefac which he wrote, apolog for the labor of a 
lifetime. "when I wa young," he says, "I wa veri fond of 
catch worm and insects, and make pictur of their 
shapes,--so that these pictur have now becom sever hundr 
in number." He believ that he ha found a good reason for 
studi insects: "among the multitud of live creatur in 
thi world," he says, "those have larg bodi are familiar: 
we know veri well their names, shapes, and virtues, and the 
poison which they possess. but there remain veri mani small 
creatur whose natur are still unknown, notwithstand the 
fact that such littl be as insect and worm are abl to 
injur men and to destroy what ha value. So I think that it is 
veri import for us to learn what insect or worm have 
special virtu or poisons." It appear that he had sent to him 
"from other countries" some kind of insect "that eat the 
leav and shoot of trees;" but he could not "get their exact 
names." for the name of domest insects, he consult mani 
chines and japanes books, and ha been "abl to write the 
name with the proper chines characters;" but he tell us that 
he did not fail "to pick up also the name given to worm and 
insect by old farmer and littl boys." the prefac is date 
thus:--"_ansei kanoté, the third month--at a littl cottage_" 
[1856]. 

with the introduct of scientif studi the author of the 
_chûfu-zusetsu_ could no longer hope to attract attention. yet 
hi veri modest and veri beauti work wa forgotten onli a 
moment. It is now a preciou curiosity; and the old man' ghost 
might to-day find some happi in a visit to the imperi 
library. 




japanes femal name 

[decoration] 

I 


BY the japanes a certain kind of girl is call a 
rose-girl,--_bara-musumé_. perhap my reader will think of tennyson' 
"queen-ros of the rosebud-garden of girls," and imagin some analog 
between the japanes and the english idea of feminin symbol by 
the rose. but there is no analog whatever. the _bara-musumé_ is not so 
call becaus she is delic and sweet, nor becaus she blushes, nor 
becaus she is rosy; indeed, a rosi face is not admir in japan. no; 
she is compar to a rose chiefli for the reason that a rose ha thorns. 
the man who tri to pull a japanes rose is like to hurt hi fingers. 
the man who tri to win a _bara-musumé_ is apt to hurt himself much 
more seriously,--even unto death. It were better, alon and unarmed, to 
meet a tiger than to invit the caress of a rose-girl. 

now the appel of _bara-musumé_--much more ration as a simil 
than mani of our own floral comparisons--can seem strang onli becaus 
it is not in accord with our poetic usag and emot habits. It is 
one in a thousand possibl exampl of the fact that japanes simil 
and metaphor are not of the sort that he who run may read. and thi 
fact is particularli well exemplifi in the _yobina_, or person name 
of japanes women. becaus a _yobina_ happen to be ident with the 
name of some tree, or bird, or flower, it doe not follow that the 
person appel convey to japanes imagin idea resembl 
those which the correspond english word would convey, under like 
circumstances, to english imagination. Of the _yobina_ that seem to us 
especi beauti in translation, onli a small number are bestow 
for æsthetic reasons. nor is it correct to suppose, as mani person 
still do, that japanes girl are usual name after flowers, or 
grace shrubs, or other beauti objects. æsthetic appel are 
in use; but the major of _yobina_ are not æsthetic. some year ago a 
young japanes scholar publish an interest essay upon thi 
subject. He had collect the person name of about four hundr 
student of the higher normal school for females,--girl from everi part 
of the empire; and he found on hi list onli between fifti and sixti 
name possess æsthetic quality. but concern even these he wa 
care to observ onli that they "_caused_ an æsthetic sensation,"--not 
that they had been given for æsthetic reasons. among them were such 
name as _saki_ (cape), _miné_ (peak), _kishi_ (beach), _hama_ (shore), 
_kuni_ (capital),--origin place-names;--_tsuru_ (stork), _tazu_ 
(ricefield stork), and _chizu_ (thousand storks);--also such 
appel as _yoshino_ (fertil field), _orino_ (weavers' field), 
_shirushi_ (proof), and _masago_ (sand). few of these could seem 
æsthetic to a western mind; and probabl no one of them wa origin 
given for æsthetic reasons. name contain the charact for "stork" 
are name have refer to longevity, not to beauty; and a larg 
number of name with the termin "_no_" (field or plain) are name 
refer to moral qualities. I doubt whether even fifteen per cent of 
_yobina_ are realli æsthetic. A veri much larger proport are name 
express moral or mental qualities. tenderness, kindness, deftness, 
cleverness, are frequent repres by _yobina_; but appel 
impli physic charm, or suggest æsthetic idea only, are 
compar uncommon. one reason for the fact may be that veri 
æsthetic name are given to _geisha_ and to _jôro_, and consequ 
vulgarized. but the chief reason certainli is that the domest virtu 
still occupi in japanes moral estim a place not less import than 
that accord to religi faith in the life of our own middl ages. not 
in theori only, but in every-day practice, moral beauti is place far 
abov physic beauty; and girl are usual select as wives, not for 
their good looks, but for their domest qualities. among the middl 
class a veri æsthetic name would not be consid in the best taste; 
among the poorer classes, it would scarc be thought respectable. 
ladi of rank, on the other hand, are privileg to bear veri poetic 
names; yet the major of the aristocrat yobina also are moral rather 
than æsthetic. 

* * * * * 

but the first great difficulti in the way of a studi of _yobina_ is the 
difficulti of translat them. A knowledg of spoken japanes can help 
you veri littl indeed. A knowledg of chines also is indispensable. 
the mean of a name written in _kana_ only,--in the japanes 
characters,--cannot be, in most cases, even guess at. the chines 
charact of the name can alon explain it. the japanes essayist, 
alreadi refer to, found himself oblig to throw out no less than 
thirty-six name out of a list of two hundr and thirteen, simpli 
becaus these thirty-six, have been record onli in _kana_, could not 
be interpreted. _kana_ give onli the pronunciation; and the 
pronunci of a woman' name explain noth in a major of cases. 
transliter into romaji, a _yobina_ may signifi two, three, or even 
half-a-dozen differ things. one of the name thrown out of the list 
wa _banka_. _banka_ might signifi "mint" (the plant), which would be a 
pretti name; but it might also mean "evening-haze." _yuka_, anoth 
reject name, might be an abbrevi of _yukabutsu_, "precious"; but 
it might just as well mean "a floor." _nochi_, a third example, might 
signifi "future"; yet it could also mean "a descendant," and variou 
other things. My reader will be abl to find mani other homonym in the 
list of name given further on. _ai_ in romaji, for instance, may 
signifi either "love" or "indigo-blue";--_chô_, "a butterfly," or 
"superior," or "long";--_ei_, either "sagacious" or "blooming";--_kei_, 
either "rapture" or "reverence";--_sato_, either "nativ home" or 
"sugar";--_toshi_, either "year" or "arrow-head";--_taka_, "tall," 
"honorable," or "falcon." the chief, and, for the present, insuper 
obstacl to the use of roman letter in write japanese, is the 
prodigi number of homonym in the language. you need onli glanc into 
ani good japanese-english dictionari to understand the graviti of thi 
obstacle. not to multipli examples, I shall mere observ that there 
are nineteen word spell _chô_; twenty-on spell _ki_; twenty-f 
spell _to_ or _tô_; and no less than forty-nin spell _ko_ or _kô_. 

* * * * * 

yet, as I have alreadi suggested, the real signif of a woman' 
name cannot be ascertain even from a liter translat made with the 
help of the chines characters. such a name, for instance, as _kagami_ 
(mirror) realli signifi the pure-minded, and thi not in the 
occidental, but in the confucian sens of the term. _umé_ 
(plum-blossom) is a name refer to wife devot and virtue. 
_matsu_ (pine) doe not refer, as an appellation, to the beauti of the 
tree, but to the fact that it evergreen foliag is the emblem of 
vigor age. the name _také_ (bamboo) is given to a child onli becaus 
the bamboo ha been for centuri a symbol of good-fortune. the name 
_sen_ (wood-fairy) sound charmingli to western fancy; yet it express 
noth more than the parents' hope of long life for their daughter and 
her offspring,--wood-fairi be suppos to live for thousand of 
years.... again, mani name are of so strang a sort that it is 
imposs to discov their mean without question either the 
bearer or the giver; and sometim all inquiri prove vain, becaus the 
origin mean ha been long forgotten. 

befor attempt to go further into the subject, I shall here offer a 
translat of the tôkyô essayist' list of names,--rearrang in 
alphabet order, without honorif prefix or suffixes. although 
some class of common name are not represented, the list will serv to 
show the charact of mani still popular _yobina_, and also to 
illustr sever of the fact to which I have alreadi call 
attention. 

select name OF student and graduat 
OF the higher normal school for 
femal (1880-1895):-- 

number of 
student 
so named. 
_ai_ ("indigo,"--th color) 1 
_ai_ ("love") 1 
_akasuké_ ("the bright helper") 1 
_asa_ ("morning") 1 
_asa_ ("shallow")[33] 2 

[33] probabl a place-nam originally. 

_au_ ("meeting") 2 
_bun_ ("composition"--in the literari sense)[34] 1 

[34] might we not quaintli say, "A fair writing"? 

_chika_ ("near")[35] 5 

[35] probabl in the sens of "near and dear"--but not 
certainli so. 

_chitosé_ ("a thousand years") 1 
_chiyo_ ("a thousand generations") 1 
_chizu_ ("thousand storks") 1 
_chô_ ("butterfly") 1 
_chô_ ("superior") 2 
_ei_ ("clever") 1 
_ei_ ("blooming") 2 
_etsu_ ("delight") 1 
_fudé_ ("writing-brush") 1 
_fuji_ ("fuji,"--th mountain) 1 
_fuji_ ("wistaria-flower") 2 
_fuki_ ("fuki,"--nam of a plant, _nardosmia 
japonica_) 1 
_fuku_ ("good-fortune") 2 
_fumi_ ("letter")[36] 5 

[36] _fumi_ signifi here a letter written by a woman 
only--a letter written accord to the rule of 
feminin epistolari style. 

_fumino_ ("letter-field") 1 
_fusa_ ("tassel") 3 
_gin_ ("silver") 2 
_hama_ ("shore") 3 
_hana_ ("blossom") 3 
_haruë_ ("spring-tim bay") 1 
_hatsu_ ("the first-born") 2 
_hidé_ ("excellent") 4 
_hidé_ ("fruitful") 2 
_hisano_ ("long plain") 2 
_ichi_ ("market") 4 
_iku_ ("nourishing") 3 
_iné_ ("spring rice") 3 
_ishi_ ("stone") 1 
_ito_ ("thread") 4 
_iwa_ ("rock") 1 
_jun_ ("the obedient")[37] 1 

[37] _jun suru_ mean to be obedi unto death. the 
word _jun_ ha a much stronger signif than 
that which attach to our word "obedience" in 
these modern times. 

_kagami_ ("mirror") 3 
_kama_ ("sickle") 1 
_kamé_ ("tortoise") 2 
_kaméyo_ ("generations-of-the-tortoise")[38] 1 

[38] the tortois is suppos to live for a thousand 
years. 

_kan_ ("the forbearing")[39] 11 

[39] abbrevi of _kannin_, "forbearance," 
"self-control," etc. the name might equal well 
be translat "patience." 

_kana_ ("character"--in the sens of written 
character)[40] 2 

[40] _kana_ signifi the japanes syllabary,--th 
charact with which the languag is written. the 
reader may imagine, if he wishes, that the name 
signifi the alpha and omega of all feminin 
charm; but I confess that I have not been abl to 
find ani satisfactori explan of it. 

_kané_ ("bronze") 3 
_katsu_ ("victorious") 2 
_kazashi_ ("hair-pin,"--or ani ornament worn 
in the hair) 1 
_kazu_ ("number,"--i.e., "great number") 1 
_kei_ ("the respectful") 3 
_ken_ ("humility") 1 
_kiku_ ("chrysanthemum") 6 
_kikuë_ ("chrysanthemum-branch") 1 
_kikuno_ ("chrysanthemum-field") 1 
_kimi_ ("sovereign") 1 
_kin_ ("gold") 4 
_kinu_ ("cloth-of-silk") 1 
_kishi_ ("beach") 2 
_kiyo_ ("happi generations") 1 
_kiyo_ ("pure") 5 
_ko_ ("chime,"--th sound of a bell) 1 
_kô_ ("filial piety") 11 
_kô_ ("the fine") 1 
_koma_ ("filly") 1 
_komé_ ("clean rice") 1 
_koto_ ("koto,"--th japanes harp) 4 
_kuma_ ("bear") 1 
_kumi_ ("braid") 1 
_kuni_ ("capital,"--chief city) 1 
_kuni_ ("province") 3 
_kura_ ("treasure-house") 1 
_kurano_ ("storehouse-field") 1 
_kuri_ ("chestnut") 1 
_kuwa_ ("mulberry-tree") 1 
_masa_ ("straightforward,"--upright) 3 
_masago_ ("sand") 1 
_masu_ ("increase") 3 
_masuë_ ("branch-of-increase") 1 
_matsu_ ("pine") 2 
_matsuë_ ("pine-branch") 1 
_michi_ ("the way,"--doctrine) 4 
_mië_ ("tripl branch") 1 
_mikië_ ("main-branch") 1 
_miné_ ("peak") 2 
_mitsu_ ("light") 5 
_mitsuë_ ("shine branch") 1 
_morië_ ("service-bay")[41] 1 

[41] the word "service" here refer especi to 
attend at meal-time,--to the serv of rice, 
etc. 

_naka_ ("the midmost") 4 
_nami_ ("wave") 1 
_nobu_ ("fidelity") 6 
_nobu_ ("the prolonger")[42] 1 

[42] perhap in the hope mean of extend the 
family-line; but more probabl in the signif 
that a daughter' care prolong the life of her 
parents, or of her husband' parents. 

_nobuë_ ("lengthening-branch") 1 
_nui_ ("tapestry,"--or, embroidery) 1 
_orino_ ("weaving-field") 1 
_raku_ ("pleasure") 3 
_ren_ ("the arranger") 1 
_riku_ ("land,"--ground) 1 
_roku_ ("emolument") 1 
_ryô_ ("dragon") 1 
_ryû_ ("lofty") 3 
_sada_ ("the chaste") 8 
_saki_ ("cape,"--promontory) 1 
_saku_ ("composition")[43] 3 

[43] abbrevi of _sakubun_, a literari composition. 

_sato_ ("home,"--n place) 2 
_sawa_ ("marsh") 1 
_sei_ ("force") 1 
_seki_ ("barrier,"--city-gate, toll-gate, etc.). 3 
_sen_ ("fairy")[44] 3 

[44] As a matter of fact, we have no english equival 
for the word "sen," or "sennin,"--signifi a 
be possess magic power of all kind and 
live for thousand of years. some author 
consid the belief in _sennin_ of indian origin, 
and probabl deriv from old tradit of the 
rishi. 

_setsu_ ("true,"--tend and true) 2 
_shidzu_ ("the calmer") 1 
_shidzu_ ("peace") 2 
_shigë_ ("two-fold") 2 
_shika_ ("deer") 2 
_shikaë_ ("deer-inlet") 1 
_shimé_ ("the clasp,"--fastening) 1 
_shin_ ("truth") 1 
_shina_ ("goods") 1 
_shina_ ("virtue") 1 
_shino_ ("slender bamboo") 1 
_shirushi_ ("the proof,"--evidence) 1 
_shun_ ("the excellent") 1 
_sué_ ("the last") 2 
_sugi_ ("cedar,"--cryptomeria) 1 
_suté_ ("forsaken,"--foundling) 1 
_suzu_ ("littl bell") 8 
_suzu_ ("tin") 1 
_suzuë_ ("branch of littl bells") 1 
_taë_ ("exquisite") 1 
_taka_ ("honor") 2 
_taka_ ("lofty") 9 
_také_ ("bamboo") 1 
_tama_ ("jewel") 1 
_tamaki_ ("ring") 1 
_tamé_ ("for-the-sake-of--") 3 
_tani_ ("valley") 4 
_tazu_ ("ricefield-stork") 1 
_tetsu_ ("iron") 4 
_toku_ ("virtue") 2 
_tomé_ ("stop,"--cease)[45] 1 

[45] such a name may signifi that the parent resolved, 
after the birth of the girl, to have no more 
children. 

_tomi_ ("riches") 3 
_tomijû_ ("wealth-and-longevity") 1 
_tomo_ ("the friend") 4 
_tora_ ("tiger") 1 
_toshi_ ("arrowhead") 1 
_toyo_ ("abundance") 3 
_tsugi_ ("next,"--i. e., second in order of birth) 2 
_tsuna_ ("bond,"--rope, or fetter) 1 
_tsuné_ ("the constant,"--or, as we should say, 
constance) 10 
_tsuru_ ("stork") 4 
_umé_ ("plum-blossom") 1 
_umégaë_ ("plumtree-spray") 1 
_uméno_ ("plumtree-field") 2 
_urano_ ("shore-field") 1 
_ushi_ ("cow,"--or ox)[46] 1 

[46] thi extraordinari name is probabl to be explain 
as a refer to date of birth. accord to the 
old chines astrology, years, months, days, and 
hour were all name after the sign of the zodiac, 
and were suppos to have some mystic relat to 
those signs. I surmis that miss ushi wa born at 
the hour of the ox, on the day of the ox, in the 
month of the Ox and the year of the ox--"_ushi no 
toshi no ushi no tsuki no ushi no Hi no ushi no 
koku._" 

_uta_ ("poem,"--or song) 1 
_wakana_ ("young _na_,"--prob the rape-pl 
is refer to) 1 
_yaë_ ("eight-fold") 1 
_yasu_ ("the tranquil") 1 
_yô_ ("the positive,"--a oppos to neg 
or feminin in the old chines 
philosophy;--therefore, perhaps, 
masculine) 1 
_yoné_ ("rice,"--in the old sens of wealth) 4 
_yoshi_ ("the good") 1 
_yoshino_ ("good field") 1 
_yû_ ("the valiant") 1 
_yuri_ ("lily") 1 

It will be observ that in the abov list the name refer to 
constancy, forbearance, and filial pieti have the highest number 
attach to them. 


II 

A few of the more import rule in regard to japanes femal name 
must now be mentioned. 

the great major of these _yobina_ are word of two syllables. 
person name of respect women, belong to the middl and lower 
classes, are nearli alway dissyllables--except in case where the name 
is lengthen by certain curiou suffix which I shall speak of further 
on. formerli a name of three or more syllabl indic that the bearer 
belong to a superior class. but, even among the upper class to-day, 
femal name of onli two syllabl are in fashion. 

among the peopl it is customari that a femal name of two syllabl 
should be preced by the honorif "o," and follow by the titl 
"san,"--a _o-matsu san_, "the honor miss [or mrs.] pine"; _o-umé 
san_, "the honor miss plum-blossom."[47] but if the name happen to 
have three syllables, the honorif "o" is not used. A woman name 
_kikuë_ ("chrysanthemum-branch") is not address as "o-kikuë san," but 
onli as "kikuë san." 

[47] under certain condit of intimacy, both prefix and titl 
are dropped. they are drop also by the superior in 
address an inferior;--for example, a ladi would not 
address her maid as "_o-yoné san_," but mere as "_yoné_." 

befor the name of ladies, the honorif "o" is no longer use as 
formerly,--even when the name consist of one syllabl only. instead of 
the prefix, an honorif suffix is append to the _yobina_,--th suffix 
_ko_. A peasant girl name _tomi_ would be address by her equal as 
_o-tomi san_. but a ladi of the same name would be address as 
_tomiko_. mrs. shimoda, head-teach of the peeresses' school, for 
example, ha the beauti name _uta_. she would be address by letter 
as "shimoda utako," and would so sign herself in replying;--th 
family-name, by japanes custom, alway preced the person name, 
instead of being, as with us, place after it. 

thi suffix _ko_ is written with the chines charact mean "child," 
and must not be confus with the word _ko_, written with a differ 
chines character, and mean "little," which so often appear in the 
name of danc girls. I should ventur to say that thi genteel suffix 
ha the valu of a caress diminutive, and that the name _aiko_ might 
be fairli well render by the "amoretta" of spenser' _faeri queene_. 
Be thi as it may, a japanes ladi name _setsu_ or _sada_ would not be 
address in these day as o-setsu or o-sada, but as setsuko or sadako. 
On the other hand, if a woman of the peopl were to sign herself as 
setsuko or sadako, she would certainli be laugh at,--sinc the suffix 
would give to her appel the mean of "the ladi setsu," or "the 
ladi sada." 

I have said that the honorif "o" is place befor the _yobina_ of 
women of the middl and lower classes. even the wife of a _kurumaya_ 
would probabl be refer to as the "honor mrs. such-a-one." but 
there are veri remark except to thi gener rule regard the 
prefix "o." In some country-district the common _yobina_ of two 
syllabl is made a trisyl by the addit of a peculiar suffix; 
and befor such trisyllab name the "o" is never placed. for example, 
the girl of wakayama, in the provinc of kii, usual have ad to 
their _yobina_ the suffix "_ë_,"[48] signifi "inlet," "bay," 
"frith,"--sometim "river." thu we find such name as _namië_ 
("wave-bay"), _tomië_ ("riches-bay"), _sumië_ ("dwelling-bay"), _shizuë_ 
("quiet-bay"), _tamaë_ ("jewel-bay"). again there is a provinci suffix 
"_no_" mean "field" or "plain," which is attach to the major of 
femal name in certain districts. _yoshino_ ("fertil field"), _uméno_ 
("plumflow field"), _shizuno_ ("quiet field"), _urano_ ("coast 
field"), _utano_ ("song field"), are typic name of thi class. A girl 
call _namië_ or _kikuno_ is not address as "o-namië san" or 
"o-kikuno san," but as "namië san," "kikuno san." 

[48] thi suffix must not be confus with the suffix "_ë_," 
signifi "branch," which is also attach to mani popular 
names. without see the chines character, you cannot 
decid whether the name _tamaë_, for example, mean 
"jewel-branch" or "jewel inlet." 

"san" (abbrevi of _sama_, a word origin mean "form," 
"appearance"), when place after a femal name, correspond to either 
our "miss" or "mrs." place after a man' name it ha at least the valu 
of our "mr.",--perhap even more. the unabbrevi form _sama_ is 
place after the name of high personag of either sex, and after the 
name of divinities: the shintô god are style the _kami-sama_, which 
might be translat as "the lord supreme"; the bodhisattva jizô is 
call _jizô-sama_, "the lord jizô." A ladi may also be style "sama." A 
ladi call _ayako_, for instance, might veri properli be address as 
ayako sama. but when a lady' name, independ of the suffix, 
consist of more than three syllables, it is customari to drop either 
the _ko_ or the title. thu "the ladi ayamé" would not be spoken of as 
"ayaméko sama," but more euphoni as "ayamé sama,"[49] or as 
"ayaméko." 

[49] "ayamé sama," however, is rather familiar; and thi form 
cannot be use by a stranger in verbal address, though a 
letter may be direct with the name so written. As a 
rule, the _ko_ is the more respect form. 

So much have been said as regard the etiquett of prefix 
and suffixes, I shall now attempt a classif of femal 
names,--begin with popular _yobina_. these will be found 
particularli interesting, becaus they reflect someth of race-feel 
in the matter of ethic and æsthetics, and becaus they serv to 
illustr curiou fact relat to japanes custom. the first place I 
have given to name of pure moral meaning,--usu bestow in the 
hope that the children will grow up worthi of them. but the list should 
in no case be regard as complete: they are onli representative. 
furthermore, I must confess my inabl to explain the reason of mani 
names, which prove as much of riddl to japanes friend as to myself. 


name OF virtu and proprieti 

_o-ai_ "love." 
_o-chië_ "intelligence." 
_o-chû_ "loyalty." 
_o-jin_ "tenderness,"--humanity. 
_o-jun_ "faithful-to-death." 
_o-kaiyô_ "forgiveness,"--pardon. 
_o-ken_ "wise,"--in the sens of moral discernment. 
_o-kô_ "filial piety." 
_o-masa_ "righteous,"--just. 
_o-michi_ "the way,"--doctrine. 
_misao_ "honor,"--wif fidelity. 
_o-nao_ "the upright,"--honest. 
_o-nobu_ "the faithful." 
_o-rei_ "propriety,"--in the old chines sense. 
_o-retsu_ "chast and true." 
_o-ryô_ "the generous,"--magnanimous. 
_o-sada_ "the chaste." 
_o-sei_ "truth." 
_o-shin_ "faith,"--in the sens of fidelity, trust. 
_o-shizu_ "the tranquil,"--calm-souled. 
_o-setsu_ "fidelity,"--wif virtue. 
_o-tamé_ "for-the-sake-of,"--a name suggest 
unselfishness. 
_o-tei_ "the docile,"--in the mean of virtuou 
obedience. 
_o-toku_ "virtue." 
_o-tomo_ "the friend,"--especi in the mean of 
mate, companion. 
_o-tsuné_ "constancy." 
_o-yasu_ "the amiable,"--gentle. 
_o-yoshi_ "the good." 
_o-yoshi_ "the respectful." 

the next list will appear at first sight more heterogen than it 
realli is. It contain a larger varieti of appel than the 
previou list; but nearli all of the _yobina_ refer to some good qualiti 
which the parent trust that the child will display, or to some futur 
happi which they hope that she will deserve. To the latter categori 
belong such name of felicit as _miyo_ and _masayo_. 


miscellan name express person qualities, OR parent hope 

_o-atsu_ "the generous,"--liberal. 
_o-chika_ "close dear." 
_o-chika_ "thousand rejoicings." 
_o-chô_ "the long,"--prob in refer to life. 
_o-dai_ "great." 
_o-den_ "transmission,"--bequest from ancestors, tradition. 
_o-é_ "fortunate." 
_o-ei_ "prosperity." 
_o-en_ "charm." 
_o-en_ "prolongation,"--of life. 
_o-etsu_ "surpassing." 
_o-etsu_ "the playful,"--merry, joyous. 
_o-fuku_ "good luck." 
_o-gen_ "source,"--spring, fountain. 
_o-haya_ "the quick,"--light, nimble. 
_o-hidé_ "superior." 
_hidéyo_ "superior generations." 
_o-hiro_ "the broad." 
_o-hisa_ "the long." (?) 
_isamu_ "the vigorous,"--spirited, robust. 
_o-jin_ "superexcellent." 
_kaméyo_ "generations-of-the-tortoise." 
_o-kané_[50] "the doubly-accomplished." 

[50] from the strang verb _kaneru_, signifying, to do two 
thing at the same time. 

_kaoru_ "the fragrant." 
_o-kata_ "worthi person." 
_o-katsu_ "the victorious." 
_o-kei_ "delight." 
_o-kei_ "the respectful." 
_o-ken_ "the humble." 
_o-kichi_ "the fortunate." 
_o-kimi_ "the sovereign,"--peerless. 
_o-kiwa_ "the distinguished." 
_o-kiyo_ } {"the clear,"--in the sens of 
_kiyoshi_ } { bright, beautiful. 
_o-kuru_ "she-who-comes" (?).[51] 

[51] one is remind of, "O whistle, and i'll come to you, 
my lad"--but no japanes femal name could have the 
impli signification. more probabl the refer is 
to household obedience. 

_o-maru_ "the round,"--plump. 
_o-masa_ "the genteel." 
_masayo_ "generations-of-the-just." 
_o-masu_ "increase." 
_o-mië_ "tripl branch." 
_o-miki_ "stem." 
_o-mio_ "tripl cord." 
_o-mitsu_ "abundance." 
_o-miwa_ "the far-seeing." 
_o-miwa_ "three spokes" (?).[52] 

[52] such is the mean of the characters. I cannot 
understand the name. A buddhist explan suggest 
itself; but there are few, if any, buddhist _yobina_. 

_o-miyo_ "beauti generations." 
_miyuki_[53] "deep snow." 

[53] thi beauti name refer to the silenc and calm 
follow a heavi snowfall. but, even for the japanese, 
it is an æsthetic name also--suggest both 
tranquil and beauty. 

_o-moto_ "origin." 
_o-naka_ "friendship." 
_o-rai_ "trust." 
_o-raku_[54] "pleasure." 

[54] the name seem curious, in view of the common proverb, 
_raku wa ku no tané_,--"pleasur is the seed of pain." 

_o-sachi_ "bliss." 
_o-sai_ "the talented." 
_sakaë_ "prosperity." 
_o-saku_ "the blooming." 
_o-sei_ "the refined,"--in the sens of "clear." 
_o-sei_ "force." 
_o-sen_ "sennin,"--wood-fairy. 
_o-shigé_ "exuberant." 
_o-shimé_ "the total,"--_summum bonum_. 
_o-shin_ "the fresh." 
_o-shin_ "truth." 
_o-shina_ "goods,"--possessions. 
_shirushi_ "proof,"--evidence. 
_o-shizu_ "the humble." 
_o-shô_ "truth." 
_o-shun_ "excellence." 
_o-suki_ "the beloved,"--_aimée_. 
_o-suké_ "the helper." 
_o-sumi_ "the refined,"--in the sens of "sifted." 
_o-suté_ "the forsaken,"--foundling.[55] 

[55] not necessarili a real foundling. sometim the name 
may be explain by a curiou old custom. In a certain 
famili sever children in success die shortli after 
birth. It is decided, accord to tradit usage, 
that the next child born must be exposed. A girl is the 
next child born;--sh is carri by a servant to some 
lone place in the fields, or elsewhere, and left 
there. then a peasant, or other person, hire for the 
occas (it is necessari that he should be of no kin 
to the family), promptli appears, pretend to find the 
babe, and carri it back to the parent home. "see 
thi pretti foundling," he say to the father of the 
girl,--"wil you not take care of it?" the child is 
received, and name "suté," the foundling. By thi 
innoc artifice, it wa formerli (and perhap in some 
place is still) suppos that those unseen influences, 
which had caus the death of the other children, might 
be thwarted. 

_o-taë_ "the exquisite." 
_o-taka_ "the honorable." 
_o-taka_ "the tall." 
_takara_ "treasure,"--preci object. 
_o-tama_ "jewel." 
_tamaë_ "jewel-branch." 
_tokiwa_[56] "etern constant." 

[56] lit., "everlasting-rock,"--but the ethic mean is 
"constancy-everlasting-as-the-rocks." "tokiwa" is a 
name famou both in histori and tradition; for it wa 
the name of the mother of yoshitsuné. her touch 
story,--and especi the episod of her flight 
through the deep snow with her boys,--ha been a sourc 
of inspir to gener of artists. 

_o-tomi_ "riches." 
_o-toshi_ "the deft,"--skilful. 
_o-tsuma_ "the wife." 
_o-yori_ "the trustworthy." 
_o-waka_ "the young." 

place-names, or geograph names, are common; but they are 
particularli difficult to explain. A child may be call after a place 
becaus born there, or becaus the parent home wa there, or becaus 
of belief belong to the old chines philosophi regard direct 
and position, or becaus of tradit custom, or becaus of idea 
connect with the religion of shintô. 


place-nam 

_o-fuji_ [mount] "fuji." 
_o-hama_ "coast." 
_o-ichi_ "market,"--fair. 
_o-iyo_ "iyo,"--provinc of iyo, in shikoku. 
_o-kawa_ (rare) "river." 
_o-kishi_ "beach,"--shore. 
_o-kita_ "north." 
_o-kiwa_ "border." 
_o-kuni_ "province." 
_o-kyô_ "capital,"--metropolis,--kyôto. 
_o-machi_ "town." 
_matsuë_ "matsuë,"--chief citi of izumo. 
_o-mina_[57] "south." 

[57] abbrevi of _minami_. 

_o-miné_ "peak." 
_o-miya_ "temple" [_shintô_].[58] 

[58] I must confess that in class thi name as a 
place-name, I am onli make a guess. It seem to me 
that the name probabl refer to the _ichi no miya_, or 
chief shintô templ of some province. 

_o-mon_[59] "gate." 

[59] I fanci that thi name, like that of o-séki, must 
have origin in the custom of name children after 
the place, or neighborhood, where the famili lived. but 
here again, I am guessing. 

_o-mura_ "village." 
_o-nami_[60] "wave." 

[60] thi classif also is a guess. I could learn 
noth about the name, except the curiou fact that it 
is said to be unlucky. 

_naniwa_ "naniwa,"--anci name of ôsaka. 
_o-nishi_ "west." 
_o-rin_ "park." 
_o-saki_ "cape." 
_o-sato_ "nativ place,"--village,--also, home. 
_o-sawa_ "marsh." 
_o-seki_ "toll-gate,"--barrier. 
_shigéki_ "thickwood,"--forest. 
_o-shima_ "island." 
_o-sono_ "flower-garden." 
_o-taki_ "cataract,"--or waterfall. 
_o-tani_ "valley." 
_o-tsuka_ "milestone." 
_o-yama_ "mountain." 

the next list is a curiou medley, so far as regard the qualiti of the 
_yobina_ compris in it. some are realli æsthetic and pleasing; other 
industri only; while a few might be taken for nicknam of the most 
disagre kind. 


name OF object and OF occup especi pertain TO women 

_ayako_ or } "damask-pattern." 
_o-aya_[61] } 

[61] _aya-nishiki_,--th famou figur damask brocad of 
kyôto,--i probabl refer to. 

_o-fumi_ "woman' letter." 
_o-fusa_ "tassel." 
_o-ito_ "thread." 
_o-kama_[62] "rice-sickle." 

[62] _o-kama_ (sickle) is a familiar peasant-name. _o-kama_ 
(caldron, or iron cooking-pot), and sever other 
ugli name in thi list are servants' names. servant 
in old time not onli train their children to becom 
servants, but gave them particular name refer 
to their futur labors. 

_o-kama_ "caldron." 
_kazashi_ "hair-pin." 
_o-kinu_ "cloth-of-silk." 
_o-koto_ "harp." 
_o-nabé_ "pot,"--or cooking-vessel. 
_o-nui_ "embroidery." 
_o-shimé_ "clasp,"--ornament fastening. 
_o-somé_ "the dyer." 
_o-taru_ "cask,"--barrel. 

the follow list consist entir of materi noun use as names. 
there are sever _yobina_ among them of which I cannot find the 
emblemat meaning. gener speaking, the _yobina_ which signifi 
preciou substances, such as silver and gold, are æsthetic names; and 
those which signifi common hard substances, such as stone, rock, iron, 
are intend to suggest firm or strength of character. but the name 
"rock" is also sometim use as a symbol of the wish for long life, or 
long continu of the famili line. the curiou name _suna_ ha 
nothing, however, to do with individu "grit": it is half-mor and 
half-æsthetic. fine sand--especi color sand--i much prize in 
thi fairy-land of landscape-gardening, where it is use to cover space 
that must alway be kept spotless and beautiful, and never 
trodden,--except by the gardener. 


materi noun use AS name 

_o-gin_ "silver." 
_o-ishi_ "stone." 
_o-iwa_ "rock." 
_o-kané_ "bronze." 
_o-kazé_[63] "air,"--perhap wind. 

[63] I cannot find ani explan of thi curiou name. 

_o-kin_ "gold." 
_o-ruri_[64]} "emerald,"--emeraldine? 
_ruriko_ } 

[64] the japanes name doe not give the same qualiti 
of æsthetic sensat as the name esmeralda. the _ruri_ 
is not usual green, but blue; and the term "ruri-iro" 
(emerald color) commonli signifi a dark violet. 

_o-ryû_ "fine metal." 
_o-sato_ "sugar." 
_o-seki_ "stone." 
_o-shiwo_ "salt." 
_o-suna_ "sand." 
_o-suzu_ "tin." 
_o-tané_ "seed." 
_o-tetsu_ "iron." 

the follow five _yobina_ are æsthetic names,--although liter 
signifi thing belong to intellectu work. four of them, at 
least, refer to calligraphy,--th matchless calligraphi of the far 
east,--rath than to anyth that we should call "_literary_ beauty." 


literari name 

_o-bun_ "composition." 
_o-fudé_ "writing-brush." 
_o-fumi_ "letter." 
_o-kaku_ "writing." 
_o-uta_ "poem." 

name relat to number are veri common, but also veri interesting. 
they may be loos divid into two sub-classes,--nam indic the 
order or the time of birth, and name of felicitation. such _yobina_ as 
_ichi_, _san_, _roku_, _hachi_ usual refer to the order of birth; but 
sometim they record the date of birth. for example, I know a person 
call o-roku, who receiv thi name, not becaus she wa the sixth 
child born in the family, but becaus she enter thi world upon the 
sixth day of the sixth month of the sixth meiji. It will be observ 
that the number two, five, and nine are not repres in the list: 
the mere idea of such name as _o-ni_, _o-go_, or _o-ku_ seem to a 
japanes absurd. I do not know exactli why,--unless it be that they 
suggest unpleas puns. the place of _o-ni_ is well supplied, however, 
by the name _o-tsugi_ ("next"), which will be found in a subsequ 
list. name signifi number rang from eighti to a thousand, and 
upward, are name of felicitation. they express the wish that the bearer 
may live to a prodigi age, or that her poster may flourish through 
the centuries. 


numer and word relat TO number 

_o-ichi_ "one." 
_o-san_ "three." 
_o-mitsu_ "three." 
_o-yotsu_ "four." 
_o-roku_ "six." 
_o-shichi_ "seven." 
_o-hachi_ "eight." 
_o-jû_ "ten." 
_o-iso_ "fifty."[65] 

[65] such a name may record the fact that the girl wa a 
first-born child, and the father fifti year old at 
the time of her birth. 

_o-yaso_ "eighty." 
_o-hyaku_ "hundred."[66] 

[66] the "o" befor thi trisyl seem contrari to rule; 
but _hyaku_ is pronounc almost like a dissyllable. 

_o-yao_ "eight hundred." 
_o-sen_ "thousand." 
_o-michi_ "three thousand." 
_o-man_ "ten thousand." 
_o-chiyo_ "thousand generations." 
_yachiyo_ "eight thousand generations." 
_o-shigé_ "two-fold." 
_o-yaë_ "eight-fold." 
_o-kazu_ "great number." 
_o-mina_ "all." 
_o-han_ "half."[67] 

[67] "better half?"--th reader may query. but I believ 
that thi name origin in the old custom of take 
a singl charact of the father' name--sometim 
also a charact of the mother' name--to compos 
the child' name with. perhap in thi case the name 
of the girl' father wa hanyémon, or hanbei. 

_o-iku_ "how many?" (?) 


other name relat TO order OF birth 

_o-hatsu_ "beginning,"--first-born. 
_o-tsugi_ "next,"--th second. 
_o-naka_ "midmost." 
_o-tomé_ "stop,"--cease. 
_o-sué_ "last." 

some few of the next group of name are probabl æsthetic. but such 
name are sometim given onli in refer to the time or season of 
birth; and the reason for ani particular _yobina_ of thi class is 
difficult to decid without person inquiry. 


name relat TO time and season 

_o-haru_ "spring." 
_o-natsu_ "summer." 
_o-aki_ "autumn." 
_o-fuyu_ "winter." 

_o-asa_ "morning." 
_o-chô_ "dawn." 
_o-yoi_ "evening." 
_o-sayo_ "night." 

_o-ima_ "now." 
_o-toki_ "time,"--opportunity. 
_o-toshi_ "year [of plenty]." 

name of animals--r or mythical--form anoth class of _yobina_. A 
name of thi kind gener repres the hope that the child will 
develop some qualiti or capac symbol by the creatur after which 
it ha been called. name such as "dragon," "tiger," "bear," etc., are 
intend in most case to repres moral rather than other qualities. 
the moral symbol of the _koi_ (carp) is too well-known to requir 
explan here. the name _kamé_ and _tsuru_ refer to longevity. 
_koma_, curiou as the fact may seem, is a name of endearment. 


name OF birds, fishes, animals, etc. 

_chidori_ "sanderling." 
_o-kamé_ "tortoise." 
_o-koi_ "carp."[68] 

[68] _cyprinu carpio._ 

_o-koma_ "filly,"--or pony. 
_o-kuma_ "bear." 
_o-ryô_ "dragon." 
_o-shika_ "deer." 
_o-tai_ "bream."[69] 

[69] _chrysophri cardinalis._ 

_o-taka_ "hawk." 
_o-tako_ "cuttlefish." (?) 
_o-tatsu_ "dragon." 
_o-tora_ "tiger." 
_o-tori_ "bird." 
_o-tsuru_ "stork."[70] 

[70] sometim thi name is shorten into _o-tsu_. In 
tôkyô at the present time it is the custom to drop 
the honorif "o" befor such abbreviations, and to 
add to the name the suffix "chan,"--a in the case 
of children' names. thu a young woman may be 
caressingli address as "tsu-chan" (for o-tsuru), 
"ya-chan" (for o-yasu), etc. 

_o-washi_ "eagle." 

even _yobina_ which are the name of flower or fruits, plant or 
trees, are in most case name of moral or felicitous, rather than of 
æsthetic meaning. the plumflow is an emblem of feminin virtue; the 
chrysanthemum, of longevity; the pine, both of longev and constancy; 
the bamboo, of fidelity; the cedar, of moral rectitude; the willow, of 
docil and gentleness, as well as of physic grace. the symbol of 
the loto and of the cherryflow are probabl familiar. but such name 
as _hana_ ("blossom ") and _ben_ ("petal") are æsthetic in the true 
sense; and the lili remain in japan, as elsewhere, an emblem of 
feminin grace. 


flower-nam 

_ayamé_ "iris."[71] 

[71] _iri setosa, or iri sibrisia._ 

_azami_ "thistle-flower." 
_o-ben_ "petal." 
_o-fuji_ "wistaria."[72] 

[72] _wistaria chinensis._ 

_o-hana_ "blossom." 
_o-kiku_ "chrysanthemum." 
_o-ran_ "orchid." 
_o-ren_ "lotos." 
_sakurako_ "cherryblossom." 
_o-umé_ "plumflower." 
_o-yuri_ "lily." 


name OF plants, fruits, and tree 

_o-iné_ "rice-in-the-blade." 
_kaëdé_ "maple-leaf." 
_o-kaya_ "rush."[73] 

[73] _imperata arundinacea._ 

_o-kaya_ "yew."[74] 

[74] _torreya nucifera._ 

_o-kuri_ "chestnut." 
_o-kuwa_ "mulberry." 
_o-maki_ "fir."[75] 

[75] _podocarpu chinensis._ 

_o-mamé_ "bean." 
_o-momo_ "peach,"--th fruit.[76] 

[76] yet thi name may possibl have been written with 
the wrong character. there is anoth _yobina_, 
"momo" signifi "hundred,"--a in the phrase 
_momo yo_, "for a hundr ages." 

_o-nara_ "oak." 
_o-ryû_ "willow." 
_sanaë_ "sprouting-rice." 
_o-sané_ "fruit-seed." 
_o-shino_ "slender bamboo." 
_o-sugé_ "reed."[77] 

[77] _scirpu maritimus._ 

_o-sugi_ "cedar."[78] 

[78] _cryptomeria japonica._ 

_o-také_ "bamboo." 
_o-tsuta_ "ivy."[79] 

[79] _cissu thunbergii._ 

_o-yaë_ "double-blossom."[80] 

[80] A flower-nam certainly; but the _yaë_ here is probabl 
an abbrevi of _yaë-zakura_, the double-flow of a 
particular speci of cherry-tree. 

_o-yoné_ "rice-in-grain." 
_wakana_ "young _na_."[81] 

[81] _brassica chinensis._ 

name signifi light or color seem to us the most æsthetic of all 
_yobina_; and they probabl seem so to the japanese. nevertheless the 
rel purport even of these name cannot be divin at sight. color 
have moral and other valu in the old nature-philosophy; and an 
appel that to the western mind suggest onli luminos or beauti 
may actual refer to moral or social distinction,--to the hope that 
the girl so name will becom "illustrious." 


name signifi bright 

_o-mika_ "new moon."[82] 

[82] _mika_ is an abbrevi of mikazuki, "the moon of the 
third night" [of the old lunar month]. 

_o-mitsu_ "light." 
_o-shimo_ "frost." 
_o-teru_ "the shining." 
_o-tsuki_ "moon." 
_o-tsuya_ "the glossy,"--lustrous. 
_o-tsuyu_ "dew." 
_o-yuki_ "snow." 


color-nam 

_o-ai_ "indigo." 
_o-aka_ "red." 
_o-iro_ "color." 
_o-kon_ "deep blue." 
_o-kuro_ "dark,"--lit., "black." 
_midori_[83] "green." 
_murasaki_[83] "purple." 

[83] _midori_ and _murasaki_, especi the latter, 
should properli be class with aristocrat _yobina_; 
and both are veri rare. I could find neither in the 
collect of aristocrat name which wa made for me 
from the record of the peeresses' school; but I 
discov a "midori" in a list of middle-class names. 
color-nam be remark few among _yobina_, I 
thought it better in thi instanc to group the whole of 
them together, independ of class-distinctions. 

_o-shiro_ "white." 

the follow and final group of femal name contain sever queer 
puzzles. japanes girl are sometim name after the famili crest; and 
heraldri might explain one or two of these _yobina_. but whi a girl 
should be call a ship, I am not sure of be abl to guess. perhap 
some reader may be remind of nietzsche' "littl brig call 
angeline":-- 

"angeline--they call me so-- 
now a ship, one time a maid, 
(ah, and evermor a maid!) 
love the steersman, to and fro, 
turn the wheel so fine made." 

but such a fanci would not enter into a japanes mind. I find, however, 
in a list of famili crests, two varieti of design repres a ship, 
twenti repres an arrow, and two repres a bow. 


name difficult TO classifi OR explain 

_o-fuku_[84] "raiment,"--clothing. 

[84] possibl thi name belong to the same class as _o-nui_ 
("embroidery"), _o-somé_ ("the dyer"); but I am not 
sure. 

_o-funé_ "ship,"--or boat. 
_o-hina_[85] "doll,"--a paper doll? 

[85] probabl a name of caress. the word _hina_ is appli 
especi to the littl paper doll made by hand for 
amusement,--repres young ladi with elabor 
coiffure; and it is also given to the old-fashion 
doll repres courtli personag in full 
ceremoni costume. the true doll--doll-baby--i 
call _ningyô_. 

_o-kono_ "this." 
_o-nao_ "still more." 
_o-nari_ "thunder-peal." 
_o-nibo_ "palanquin" (?). 
_o-rai_ "thunder." 
_o-rui_ "sort,"--kind, species. 
_o-suzu_[86] "littl bell." 

[86] perhap thi name is given becaus of the sweet sound 
of the _suzu_,--a tini metal ball, with a littl stone or 
other hard object inside, to make the ringing.--it is a 
pretti japanes custom to put one of these littl _suzu_ 
in the silk charm-bag (_mamori-bukero_) which is attach 
to a child' girdle. the _suzu_ ring with everi motion 
that the child makes,--somewhat like one of those tini 
bell which we attach to the neck of a pet kitten. 

_suzuë_ "branch-of-little-bells." 
_o-tada_ "the only." 
_tamaki_ "armlet,"--bracelet. 
_o-tami_ "folk,"--common people. 
_o-toshi_ "arrowhead,"--or barb. 
_o-tsui_ "pair,"--match. 
_o-tsuna_ "rope,"--bond. 
_o-yumi_ "bow,"--weapon. 

befor pass on to the subject of aristocrat names, I must mention 
an old rule for japanes names,--a curiou rule that might help to 
account for sundri puzzl in the preced lists. thi rule formerli 
appli to all person names,--masculin or feminine. It cannot be 
fulli explain in the present paper; for a satisfactori explan 
would occupi at least fifti pages. but, state in the briefest possibl 
way, the rule is that the first or "head-character" of a person name 
should be made to "accord" (in the chines philosoph sense) with the 
suppos _sei_, or astrologically-determin nature, of the person to 
whom the name is given;--th requir accord be decided, not by 
the meaning, but by the sound of the chines written character. some 
vagu idea of the difficulti of the subject may be obtain from the 
accompani table. (page 143.) 


[illustration: 

phonet relat OF the five elemental-natur TO the japanes 
syllabari 

a, i, u, é, o. 
----------------------- 
i.--wood-natur { ka, ki, ku, ké, ko. } 
{ ga, gi, gu, gé, go. } 
----------------------- 
{ sa, shi, su, sé, so. } 
{ za, ji, zu, zé, zo. } 
----------------------- 
ii.--fire-natur { ta, chi, tsu, té, to. } 
{ da, ji, dzu, dé, do. } 
----------------------- 
na, ni, nu, né, no. 
iii.--earth-natur ----------------------- 
{ ha, hi, fu, hé, ho. } 
{ ba, bi, bu, bé, bo. } 
{ pa, pi, pu, pé, po. } 
----------------------- 
iv.--metal-natur ma, mi, mu, mé, mo. 
----------------------- 
ya, i, yu, yé, yo. 
----------------------- 
ra, ri, ru, ré, ro. 
v.--water-natur ----------------------- 
wa, i, u, yé, wo.] 


************************************************************ 
* * 
* transcrib note: explan of tabl * 
* * 
* In the tabl above, there were line connect the * 
* five element of natur with the line of japanes * 
* syllabary: * 
* * 
* the wood element wa associ with the * 
* ka/ga lines, * 
* * 
* the fire element wa associ with the * 
* ta/da, na, and ra lines, * 
* * 
* the earth element wa associ with the * 
* a, ka/ga, ya, and wa lines, * 
* * 
* the metal element wa associ with the * 
* sa/za lines, and * 
* * 
* the water element wa associ with the * 
* ha/ba/pa, and ma lines. * 
* * 
************************************************************ 


iii 

for exampl of contemporari aristocrat name I consult the report 
of the _kwazoku-jogakkô_ (peeresses' school), publish between the 
nineteenth and twenty-seventh year of meiji (1886-1895). the 
kwazoku-jogakkô admit other student besid daughter of the nobility; 
but for present purpos the name of the latter only--to the number of 
one hundr and forty-seven--hav been selected. 

It will be observ that name of three or more syllabl are rare among 
these, and also that the modern aristocrat _yobina_ of two syllables, 
as pronounc and explained, differ littl from ordinari _yobina_. but 
as written in chines they differ greatli from other femal names, be 
in most case repres by charact of a complex and unfamiliar 
kind. the use of these more elabor charact chiefli account for 
the rel larg number of homonym to be found in the follow 
list:-- 


person name OF ladi student OF the kwazoku jogakkô 

_aki-ko_ "autumn." 
_aki-ko_ "the clear-minded." 
_aki-ko_ "dawn." 
_asa-ko_ "fair morning." 
_aya-ko_ "silk damask." 
_chiharu-ko_ "A thousand springs." 
_chika-ko_ "near,"--close. 
_chitsuru-ko_ "A thousand storks." 
_chiyo-ko_ "A thousand generations." 
_ei-ko_ "bell-chime." 
_etsu-ko_ "delight." 
_fuji-ko_ "wistaria." 
_fuku-ko_ "good-fortune." 
_fumi-ko_ "A woman' letter." 
_fuyô-ko_ "lotos-flower." 
_fuyu-ko_ "winter." 
_hana-ko_ "flower." 
_hana-ko_ "fair-blooming." 
_haru-ko_ "the tranquil." 
_haru-ko_ "spring,"--th season of flowers. 
_haru-ko_ "the far-removed,"--in the sense, perhaps, of 
superlative. 
_hatsu-ko_ "the first-born." 
_hidé-ko_ "excelling." 
_hidé-ko_ "surpassing." 
_hiro-ko_ "magnanimous,"--literally, "broad," 
"large,"--in the sens of beneficence. 
_hiro-ko_ "wide-spreading,"--with refer to famili 
prosperity. 
_hisa-ko_ "long-lasting." 
_hisa-ko_ "continuing." 
_hoshi-ko_ "star." 
_iku-ko_ "the quick,"--in the sens of living. 
_ima-ko_ "now." 
_iho-ko_ "five hundred,"--prob a name of 
felicitation. 
_ito-ko_ "sewing-thread." 
_kamé-ko_ "tortoise." 
_kané-ko_ "go around" (?).[87] 

[87] It is possibl that thi name wa made simpli by 
take one charact of the father' name. the 
girl' name otherwis convey no intellig 
meaning. 

_kané-ko_ "bell,"--th charact indic a larg 
suspend bell. 
_kata-ko_ "condition"? 
_kazu-ko_ "first." 
_kazu-ko_ "number,"--a great number. 
_kazu-ko_ "the obedient." 
_kiyo-ko_ "the pure." 
_kô_[88] "filial piety." 

[88] the suffix "_ko_" is sometim drop for reason 
of euphony, and sometim for reason of good 
taste--difficult to explain to reader unfamiliar 
with the japanes language--even when the name 
consist of onli one syllabl or of two syllables. 

_kô-ko_ "stork." 
_koto_ "harp." 
_kuni-ko_ "province." 
_kuni_ "country,"--in the largest sense. 
_kyô-ko_ "capital,"--metropolis. 
_machi_ "ten-thousand thousand." 
_makoto_ "true-heart." 
_masa-ko_ "the trustworthy,"--sure. 
_masa-ko_ "the upright." 
_masu-ko_ "increase." 
_mata-ko_ "completely,"--wholly. 
_matsu-ko_ "pine-tree." 
_michi-ko_ "three thousand." 
_miné_ "peak." 
_miné-ko_ "mountain-range." 
_mitsu-ko_ "light,"--radiance. 
_miyo-ko_ "beauti generations." 
_moto-ko_ "origin,"--source. 
_naga-ko_ "long,"--prob in refer to time. 
_naga-ko_ "long life." 
_nami-ko_ "wave." 
_nao-ko_ "correct,"--upright. 
_nyo-ko_[89] "gem-treasure." 

[89] thi name is borrow from the name of the sacr 
gem _nyoihôju_, which figur both in shintô and in 
buddhist legend. the divin jizô is usual 
repres hold in one hand thi gem, which is 
said to have the power of gratifi ani desir 
that it owner can entertain. perhap the _nyoihôju_ 
may be identifi with the gem-treasur _veluriya_, 
mention in the sûtra of the great king of glory, 
chapter i. (see _sacr book of the east_, vol. 
xi.) 

_nobu-ko_ "faithful." 
_nobu-ko_ "abundance,"--plenty. 
_nobu-ko_ "the prolonger." 
_nori-ko_ "precept,"--doctrine. 
_nui_ "embroidery,"--sewing. 
_oki_ "offing,"--perhap origin a place-name.[90] 

[90] A naval offic name oki told me that hi famili 
had origin been settl in the oki island 
("island of the offing"). thi interest 
coincid suggest to me that the abov _yobina_ 
might have had the same origin. 

_sada-ko_ "the chaste." 
_sada-ko_ "the sure,"--trustworthy. 
_sakura-ko_ "cherry-blossom." 
_sakaë_ "the prosperous." 
_sato-ko_ "home." 
_sato-ko_ "the discriminating." 
_seki-ko_ "great." 
_setsu-ko_ "the chaste." 
_shigé-ko_ "flourishing." 
_shigé-ko_ "exuberant,"--in the sens of rich growth. 
_shigé-ko_ "upgrowing." 
_shigé-ko_ "fragrance." 
_shiki-ko_ "prudence." 
_shima-ko_ "island." 
_shin-ko_ "the fresh,"--new. 
_shizu-ko_ "the quiet,"--calm. 
_shizuë_ "quiet river." 
_sono-ko_ "garden." 
_suë-ko_ "last,"--in the sens of youngest. 
_suké-ko_ "the helper." 
_sumi-ko_ "the clear,"--spotless, refined. 
_sumi-ko_ "the veritable,"--real. 
_sumië-ko_ "clear river." 
_suzu-ko_ "tin." 
_suzu-ko_ "littl bell." 
_suzunë_ "sound of littl bell." 
_taka-ko_ "high,"--lofty, superior. 
_taka-ko_ "filial piety." 
_taka-ko_ "precious." 
_také-ko_ "bamboo." 
_taki-ko_ "waterfall." 
_tama-ko_ "gem,"--jewel. 
_tama-ko_ "gem,"--written with a differ character. 
_tamé-ko_ "for the sake of--" 
_tami-ko_ "people,"--folks. 
_tané-ko_ "successful." 
_tatsu-ko_ "attaining." 
_tatsuru-ko_[91] "mani storks." 

[91] So written, but probabl pronounc as two syllabl 
only. 

_tatsuru-ko_ "ricefield stork." 
_teru-ko_ "beaming,"--luminous. 
_tetsu-ko_ "iron." 
_toki-ko_ "time." 
_tomé-ko_ "cessation." 
_tomi-ko_ "riches." 
_tomo_ "intelligence." 
_tomo_ "knowledge." 
_tomo-ko_ "friendship." 
_toshi-ko_ "the quickly-perceiving." 
_toyo-ko_ "fruitful." 
_tsuné_ "constancy." 
_tsuné-ko_ "ordinary,"--usual, common. 
_tsuné-ko_ "ordinary,"--written with a differ 
character. 
_tsuné-ko_ "faithful,"--in the sens of wife fidelity. 
_tsuru-ko_ "stork." 
_tsuya-ko_ "the lustrous,"--shining, glossy. 
_umé_ "femal hare." 
_umé-ko_ "plum-blossom." 
_yachi-ko_ "eight thousand." 
_yaso-ko_ "eighty." 
_yasoshi-ko_ "eighty-four." 
_yasu-ko_ "the maintainer,"--supporter. 
_yasu-ko_ "the respectful." 
_yasu-ko_ "the tranquil-minded." 
_yoné-ko_ "rice." 
_yori-ko_ "the trustful." 
_yoshi_ "eminent,"--celebrated. 
_yoshi-ko_ "fragrance." 
_yoshi-ko_ "the good,"--or gentle. 
_yoshi-ko_ "the lovable." 
_yoshi-ko_ "the lady-like,"--gentl in the sens of 
refined. 
_yoshi-ko_ "the joyful." 
_yoshi-ko_ "congratulation." 
_yoshi-ko_ "the happy." 
_yoshi-ko_ "bright and clear." 
_yuki-ko_ "the lucky." 
_yuki-ko_ "snow." 
_yuku-ko_ "going." 
_yutaka_ "plenty,"--affluence, superabundance. 


IV 

IN the first part of thi paper I suggest that the custom of give 
veri poetic name to _geisha_ and to _jorô_ might partli account for 
the unpopular of pure æsthetic _yobina_. and in the hope of 
correct certain foreign misapprehensions, I shall now ventur a few 
remark about the name of _geisha_. 

_geisha_-names,--lik other class of names,--although full of curiou 
interest, and often in themselv realli beautiful, have becom 
hopelessli vulgar by associ with a call the revers of 
respectable. strictli speaking, they have noth to do with the subject 
of the present study,--inasmuch as they are not real person names, but 
profession appel only,--not _yobina_, but _geimyô_. 

A larg proport of such name can be distinguish by certain 
prefix or suffix attach to them. they can be known, for example,-- 

(1) By the prefix _waka_, signifi "young";--a in the name 
_wakagusa_, "young grass"; _wakazuru_, "young stork"; 
_wakamurasaki_, "young purple"; _wakakoma_, "young filly". 

(2) By the prefix _ko_, signifi "little";--a in the names, _ko-en_, 
"littl charm"; _ko-hana_, "littl flower"; _kozakura_, "littl 
cherry-tree". 

(3) By the suffix _ryô_, signifi "dragon" (the ascend dragon be 
especi a symbol of success);--a _tama-ryô_, "jewel-dragon"; 
_hana-ryô_, "flower-dragon"; _kin-ryô_, "golden-dragon". 

(4) By the suffix _ji_, signifi "to serve", "to administer";--a in 
the name _uta-ji_, _shinné-ji_, _katsu-ji_. 

(5) By the suffix _suké_, signifi "help";--a in the name 
_tama-suké_, _koma-suké_. 

(6) By the suffix _kichi_, signifi "luck", "fortune";--a 
_uta-kichi_, "song-luck"; _tama-kichi_, "jewel-fortune". 

(7) By the suffix _giku_ (i. e., _kiku_) signifi "chrysanthemum";--a 
_mitsu-giku_, "three chrysanthemums"; _hina-giku_, 
"doll-chrysanthemum"; _ko-giku_, "littl chrysanthemum". 

(8) By the suffix tsuru, signifi "stork" (emblem of longevity);--a 
_koma-tsuru_, "filly-stork"; _ko-tsuru_, "littl stork"; _ito-zuru_, 
"thread-stork". 

these form will serv for illustration; but there are others. _geimyô_ 
are written, as a gener rule, with onli two chines characters, and 
are pronounc as three or as four syllables. _geimyô_ of five syllabl 
are occasion to be met with; _geimyô_ of onli two syllabl are 
rare--at least among name of danc girls. and these profession 
appel have seldom ani moral meaning: they signifi thing relat 
to longevity, wealth, pleasure, youth, or luck,--perhap especi to 
luck. 

* * * * * 

Of late year it becam a fashion among certain class of _geisha_ in 
the capit to assum real name with the genteel suffix _ko_, and even 
aristocrat _yobina_. In 1889 some of the tôkyô newspap demand 
legisl measur to check the practice. thi incid would seem to 
afford proof of public feel upon the subject. 




old japanes song 

[decoration] 


thi new year' morn I find upon my tabl two most welcom gift from 
a young poet of my literari class. one is a roll of cloth for a new 
kimono,--cloth such as my western reader never saw. the brown warp is 
cotton thread; but the woof is soft white paper string, irregularli 
speckl with black. when close examined, the black speckl prove 
to be chines and japanes characters;--for the paper woof is made out 
of manuscript,--manuscript of poems,--which ha been deftli twist into 
fine cord, with the written surfac outwards. the gener effect of the 
white, black, and brown in the textur is a warm mouse-grey. In mani 
izumo home a similar kind of cloth is manufactur for famili use; but 
thi piec wa woven especi for me by the mother of my pupil. It 
will make a most comfort winter-robe; and when wear it, I shall 
be liter cloth with poetry,--even as a divin might be cloth 
with the sun. 

the other gift is poetri also, but poetri in the origin state: a 
wonder manuscript collect of japanes song gather from 
unfamiliar sources, and particularli interest from the fact that 
nearli all of them are furnish with refrains. there are hundr of 
compositions, old and new,--includ sever extraordinari ballads, 
mani dancing-songs, and a surpris varieti of love-songs. neither in 
sentiment nor in construct do ani of these resembl the japanes 
poetri of which I have already, in previou books, offer specimen in 
translation. the form are, in most cases, curious irregular; but 
their irregular is not without a strang charm of it own. 

* * * * * 

I am go to offer exampl of these compositions,--partli becaus of 
their unfamiliar emot quality, and partli becaus I think that 
someth can be learn from their strang art of construction, the 
older songs--select from the antiqu drama--seem to me particularli 
worthi of notice. the thought or feel and it utter are 
suprem simple; yet by primit devic of reiter and of pause, 
veri remark result have been obtained. what strike me especi 
noteworthi in the follow specimen is the way that the phrase, begun 
with the third line of the first stanza, and interrupt by a kind of 
burthen, is repeat and finish in the next stanza. perhap the 
suspens will recal to western reader the effect of some english 
ballad with doubl refrains, or of such quaint form of french song as 
the famous-- 

Au jardin de mon père-- 
_vole, mon coeur, vole!_ 
Il y a un pommier doux, 
_tout doux!_ 

but in the japanes song the reiter of the broken phrase produc a 
slow dreami effect as unlik the effect of the french composit as the 
movement of a japanes danc are unlik those of ani western round:-- 


kano yuku WA 

(_probabl from the eleventh century_) 

kano yuku wa, 
kari ka?--kugui ka? 
kari naraba,-- 

(ref.) _haréya tôtô!_ 
_haréya tôtô!_ 

kari nara 
nanori zo sémashi;-- 
nao kugui nari-ya!-- 

(ref.) _tôtô!_ 

that which yonder flies,-- 
wild goos is it?--swan is it? 
wild goos if it be,-- 

_haréya tôtô!_ 
_haréya tôtô!_ 

wild goos if it be, 
it name I soon shall say: 
wild swan if it be,--bett still! 

_tôtô!_ 

there are mani old lyric in the abov form. here is anoth song, of 
differ construction, also from the old drama: there is no refrain, 
but there is the same peculiar suspens of phrase; and the effect of 
the quadrupl repetit is emot impressive:-- 

isora ga saki ni 
tai tsuru ama mo, 
tai tsuru ama mo,-- 

wagimoko ga tamé to, 
tai tsuru ama mo, 
tai tsuru ama mo! 

off the cape of isora, 
even the fisherman catch _tai_,[92] 
even the fisherman catch _tai_,-- 

[works] for the sake of the woman beloved,-- 
even the fisherman catch _tai_, 
even the fisherman catch _tai_! 

[92] _chrysopbri cardinalis_, a kind of 
sea-bream,--gener esteem the best of 
japanes fishes. 

but a still more remark effect is obtain in the follow ancient 
song by the extraordinari reiter of an uncomplet phrase, and by a 
doubl suspension. I can imagin noth more pure natural: inde the 
realism of these simpl utter ha almost the qualiti of pathos:-- 


agémaki 

(_old lyric drama--d uncertain_) 

agémaki[93] wo 
waséda ni yarité ya! 
So omou to, 
So omou to, 
So omou to, 
So omou to, 
So omou to,-- 

So omou to, 
nani-mo sezushité,-- 
harubi sura, 
harubi sura, 
harubi sura, 
harubi sura, 
harubi sura! 

My darl boy!-- 
oh! they have sent him to the ricefields! 
when I think about him,-- 
when I think, 
when I think, 
when I think, 
when I think,-- 

when I think about him! 
i--do noth at all,-- 
even on thi spring-day, 
even thi spring-day, 
even thi spring-day, 
even thi spring-day, 
even on thi spring-day!-- 

[93] It wa formerli the custom to shave the head of 
boys, leav onli a tuft or lock of hair on either 
temple. such a lock wa call _agémaki_, a word 
also mean "tassel"; and eventu the term came 
to signifi a boy or lad. In these song it is use 
as a term of endearment,--much as an english girl 
might speak of her sweetheart as "mi dear lad," or 
"mi darl boy." 

other form of repetit and of refrain are furnish in the two 
follow lyrics:-- 


bindatara 

(_suppos to have been compos as earli as the twelfth century_) 

bindatara wo 
ayugaséba koso, 
ayugaséba koso, 
aikyô zuitaré! 

_yaréko tôtô, 
yaréko tôtô!_ 

with loosen hair,-- 
onli becaus of have toss it, 
onli becaus of have shaken it,-- 
oh, sweet she is! 

_yaréko tôtô! 
yaréko tôtô!_ 


sama WA tennin 

(_probabl from the sixteenth century_) 

sama wa tennin! 
_soré-soré_, 
_tontorori!_ 

otomé no sugata 
kumo no kayoiji 
chirato mita! 
_tontorori!_ 

otomé no sugata 
kumo no kayoiji 
chirato mita! 
_tontorori!_ 

My belov an angel is![94] 
_soré-soré!_ 
_tontorori!_ 

the maiden' form, 
In the pass of clouds, 
In a glimps I saw! 
_tontorori!_ 

the maiden' form, 
In the passag of clouds, 
In a glimps I saw! 
_tontorori!_ 

[94] lit., "a tennin";--that is to say, an inhabit 
of the buddhist heaven. the tennin are usual 
repres as beauti maidens. 

My next select is from a love-song of uncertain date, belong to 
the kamakura period (1186-1332). thi fragment is chiefli remark for 
it buddhist allusions, and for it veri regular form of stanza:-- 

makoto yara, 
kashima no minato ni 
miroku no mifuné ga 
tsuité gozarimôsu. 

_yono!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 

hobashira wa, 
kogané no hobashira; 
Ho niwa hokkékyô no 
Go no man-makimono. 

_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 

* * * * * 

I know not if 't is true 
that to the port of kashima 
the august ship of miroku[95] ha come! 

_yono!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 

[95] miroku bosatsu (maitrêya bodhisattva) is the next 
great buddha to come. 

As for the mast, 
It is a mast of gold;-- 
the sail is the fifth august roll 
Of the hokkékyô![96] 

_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë_ 

[96] japanes popular name for the chines version of 
the saddhârma pundarîka sûtra.--mani of the old 
buddhist scriptur were written upon long scrolls, 
call _makimono_,--a name also given to pictur 
print upon long roll of silk or paper. 

* * * * * 

otherwis interesting, with it queer refrain, is anoth song call 
"agémaki,"--belong to one of the curiou class of lyric drama 
known as _saibara_. thi may be found fault with as somewhat "free"; but 
I cannot think it more open to object than some of our much-admir 
elizabethan song which were probabl produc at about the same time:-- 


agémaki 

(_probabl from the sixteenth century_) 

agémaki ya! 
_tonton!_ 
hiro bakari ya-- 
_tonton!_ 
sakarité netarédomo, 
marobi-ainikéri,-- 
_tonton!_ 
kayori-ainikéri, 
_tonton!_ 

oh! my darl boy! 
_tonton!_ 
though a fathom[97] apart, 
_tonton!_ 
sleep separated, 
By roll we came together! 
_tonton!_ 
By slow approach we came together, 
_tonton!_ 

[97] lit., "_hiro_." the _hiro_ is a measur of about 
five feet english, and is use to measur breadth 
as well as depth. 

My next group of select consist of "local songs"--bi which term the 
collector mean song peculiar to particular district or provinces. 
they are old--though less old than the composit previous 
cited;--and their interest is chiefli emotional. but several, it will be 
observed, have curiou refrains. song of thi sort are sung especi 
at the village-dances--_bon-odori_ and _hônen-odori_:-- 


love-song 

(_provinc of echigo_) 

hana ka?--chôchô ka? 
chôchô ka?--hana ka? 

_don-don!_ 

kité wa chira-chira mayowaséru, 
kité wa chira-chira mayowaséru! 

_taichokané!_ 
_sôkané don-don!_ 

flower is it?--butterfli is it? 
butterfli or flower? 

_don-don!_ 

when you come thu flickering, I am deluded!-- 
when you come thu twinkling, I am bewitched! 

_taichokané!_ 
_sôkané don-don!_ 


love-song 

(_provinc of kii,--villag of ogawa_) 

koë wa surédomo 
sugata wa miénu-- 
fuka-no no kirigirisu! 

though I hear the voic [_of the beloved_], the form I cannot 
see--a _kirigirisu_[98] in the high grass. 

[98] _the kirigirisu_ is a kind of grasshopp with a 
veri music note. It is veri difficult to see it, 
even when it is sing close by, for it color is 
exactli the color of the grass. the song allud to 
the happi peasant custom of sing while at work 
in the fields. 


love-song 

(_provinc of mutsu,--district of sugaru_) 

washi no kokoro to 
oki kuru funé wa, 
raku ni misétémo, 
Ku ga taënu. 

My heart and a ship in the offing--eith seem to move with 
ease; yet in both there is troubl enough. 


love-song 

(_provinc of suwô,--villag of iséki_) 

namida koboshité 
shinku wo kataru, 
kawairashi-sa ga 
mashimasuru! 

As she tell me all the pain of her toil, shed tears,--ev 
her sweet seem to increase. 


love-song 

(_provinc of suruga, villag of gotemba_) 

hana ya, yoku kiké! 
shô aru naraba, 
hito ga fusagu ni 
nazé hiraku? 

O flower, hear me well if thou hast a soul! when ani one sorrow 
as I am sorrowing, whi dost thou bloom? 


old tôkyô song 

iya-na o-kata no 
shinsetsu yori ka 
suita o-kata no 
muri ga yoi. 

better than the kind of the dislik is the violenc of the 
beloved. 


love-song 

(_provinc of iwami_) 

kawairashi-sa ya! 
hotaru no mushi wa 
shinobu nawaté ni 
Hi wo tomosu. 

ah, the darling!... ever as I steal along the ricefield-path 
[_to meet my lover_], the firefli kindl a light to show me 
the way. 


comic song 

(_provinc of shinano_) 

ano yama kagé dé 
hikaru wa nanja?-- 
tsuki ka, hoshi ka, hotaru no mushi ka? 
tsuki démo naiga; 
hoshi démo naiga;-- 
shûto no o-uba no mé ga hikaru,-- 
(chorus) _mé ga hikaru!_ 

In the shadow of the mountain 
what is it that shine so? 
moon is it, or star?--or is it the firefly-insect? 
neither is it moon, 
nor yet star;-- 
It is the old woman' eye;--it is the eye of my 
mother-in-law that shines,-- 
(chorus) _it is her eye that shines!_ 


kaëri-odori[99] 

(_provinc of sanuki_) 

[99] I am not sure of the real mean of the name 
_kaëri-odori_ (lit. "turn-dance" or "return-dance"). 

oh! the cruelty, the cruelti of my mother-in-law!-- 

(chorus) _oh! the cruelty!_ 

even tell me to paint a pictur on run water! 
If ever I paint a pictur on run water, 
you will count the star in the night-sky! 

_count the star in the night-sky!_ 

--_come! let us danc the danc of the honor 
garden!_-- 

_chan-chan! 
cha-cha! 
yoitomosé, 
yoitomosé!_ 

who cut the bamboo at the back of the house?-- 

(chorus) _who cut the bamboo?_-- 

My sweet lord' own bamboo, the first he planted,-- 

_the first be planted?_ 

--_come! let us danc the danc of the honor garden!_-- 

_chan-chan! 
cha-cha! 
yoitomosé, 
yoitomosé!_ 

oh! the cruelty, the cruelti of my mother-in-law!-- 

_oh! the cruelty!_ 

tell me to cut and make a hakama[100] out of rock! 
If ever I cut and sew a hakama of rock, 
then you will learn to twist the fine sand into thread,-- 

_twist it into thread._ 

--_come! let us danc the danc of the honor 
garden!_-- 

_chan-chan! 
cha-cha! 
yoitomosé, 
yoitomosé! 
chan-chan-chan!_ 

[100] A divid skirt of a peculiar form, worn formerli 
by men chiefly, to-day worn by femal student 
also. 


otera-odori (temple-dance) 

(_provinc of iga, villag call uenomachi_) 

visit the honor temple, when I see the august gate, 
the august gate I find to be of silver, the panel of gold. 
nobl inde is the gate of the honor temple,-- 
_the honor temple!_ 

visit the honor temple, when I see the garden, 
I see young pinetre flourish in the four directions: 
On the first littl branch of one the _shijûgara_[101] ha 
made her nest,-- 
_ha made her nest_. 

visit the honor temple, when I see the water-tank, 
I see littl flower of mani color set all about it, 
each one have a differ color of it own,-- 
_A differ color._ 

visit the honor temple, when I see the parlor-room, 
I find mani kind of littl bird gather all together, 
each one sing a differ song of it own,-- 
_A differ song._ 

visit the honor temple, when I see the guest-room, 
there I see the priest, with a lamp besid him, 
read behind a folding-screen--oh, how admir it is!-- 
_how admir it is!_ 

[101] the manchurian great tit. It is said to bring good 
fortun to the owner of the garden in which it 
build a nest,--provid that the nest be not 
disturb and that the brood be protected. 

mani kind of popular songs--and especi the class of song sung at 
country-dances--ar compos after a mnemon plan. the stanza are 
usual ten in number; and the first syllabl of each should correspond 
in sound to the first syllabl of the numer place befor the verse. 
sometim chines numer are used; sometim japanese. but the rule is 
not alway perfectli observed. In the follow exampl it will be 
observ that the correspond of the first two syllabl in the first 
vers with the first two syllabl of the japanes word for one 
(_hitotsu_) is a correspond of mean only;--_ichi_ be the 
chines numeral:-- 


song OF fishermen 

(_provinc of shimosa,--town of chôshi_)[102] 

[102] chôshi, a town of some importance, is situat at 
the mouth of the tonégawa. It is celebr for 
it _iwashi_-fishery. the _iwashi_ is a fish about 
the size of the sardine, and is sought chiefli for 
the sake of it oil. immens quantiti of 
_iwashi_ are taken off the coast. they are boil 
to extract the oil; and the dri residu is sent 
inland to serv as manure. 

_hitotsutosé_,-- 
ichiban buné é tsumi-kondé, 
kawaguchi oshikomu ô-yagoë. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_futatsutosé_,-- 
futaba no oki kara togawa madé 
tsuzuité oshikomu ô-yagoë. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_mitsutosé_,-- 
mina ichidô-ni manéki wo agé, 
kayowasé-buné no nigiyakasa 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_yotsutosé_,-- 
yoru-hiru taitémo taki-amaru, 
san-bai itchô no ô-iwashi! 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_itsutsutosé_,-- 
itsu kité mitémo hoshika-ba ni 
akima sukima wa sarani nai. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_mutsutoyé_,-- 
mutsu kara mutsu madé kasu-wari ga 
ô-wari ko-wari dé té ni owaré. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_nanatsutosé_,-- 
natakaki tonégawa ichi-men ni 
kasu-ya abura wo tsumi-okuru 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_yatsutosé_,-- 
yatébuné no okiai wakashu ga, 
ban-shuku soroété miya-mairi. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_kokonotsutosé_,-- 
kono ura mamoru kawa-guchi no 
myôjin riyaku wo arawasuru. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_firstly_ (or "number one"),-- 

the first ship, fill up with fish, squeez her way through 
the river-mouth, with a great shouting.[103] 

[103] _ô-yagoë._ the chorus-cri or chant of sailors, 
pull all together, is call yagoë. 

_O thi ship of great fishing!_[104] 

[104] _tai-ryô buné_, lit.:--"great-fishing," or 
"great-catching-ship." the adject refer to the 
fishing, not to the ship. the real mean of the 
refrain is, "this-most-successful-in-fish of 
ships." 

_secondly_,-- 

from the of of futaba even to the togawa,[105] the ships, fast 
following, press in, with a great shouting. 

_O thi ship of great fishing!_ 

[105] perhap the refer is to a villag at the mouth 
of the river togawa,--not far from chôshi on the 
tonégawa. the two river are unit by a canal. 
but the text leav it uncertain whether river or 
villag is meant. 

_thirdly_,-- 

when, all together, we hoist our signal-flags, see how fast the 
cargo-boat come hurrying! 

_O thi ship of great fishing!_ 

_fourthly_,-- 

night and day though the boil be, there is still too much to 
boil--oh, the heap of _iwashi_ from the three ship together! 

_O thi ship of great fishing!_ 

_fifthly_,-- 

whenev you go to look at the place where the dri fish are 
kept,[106] never do you find ani room,--not even a crevice. 

_O thi ship of great fishing!_ 

[106] _hoshika-ba_: lit., "the hoshika-place" or 
"hoshika-room." "hoshika" is the name given to 
dri fish prepar for use as fertilizer. 

_sixthly_,-- 

from six to six o'clock is clean and washing: the great 
cut and the small cut are more than can be done. 

_O thi ship of great fishing!_ 

_seventhly_,-- 

all up and down the famou river tonégawa we send our load of 
oil and fertilizer. 

_O thi ship of great fishing!_ 

_eighthly_,-- 

all the young folk, draw the _yatai-buné_,[107] with ten 
thousand rejoicings, visit the shrine of the god. 

_O thi ship of great fishing!_ 

[107] _yatai_ is the name given to the ornament car 
drawn with rope in a religi procession. 
_yatai-buné_ here seem to mean either the model 
of a boat mount upon such a car, or a real boat 
so display in a religi procession. I have 
seen real boat mount upon festival-car in a 
religi process at mionoséki. 

_ninthly_,-- 

augustli protect all thi coast, the deiti of the river-mouth 
show to us hi divin favor. 

_O thi ship of great fishing!_ 

A stranger exampl of thi mnemon arrang is furnish by a 
children' song, compos at least a hundr year ago. littl girl of 
yedo use to sing it while play ball. you can see the same ball-gam 
be play by girl to-day, in almost ani quiet street of tôkyô. the 
ball is kept bound in a nearli perpendicular line by skil tap of 
the hand deliv in time to the measur of a song; and a good player 
should be abl to sing the song through without miss a stroke. If she 
misses, she must yield the ball to anoth player.[108] there are mani 
pretti "ball-play songs;" but thi old-fashion and long-forgotten one 
is a moral curiosity:-- 

[108] thi is the more common form of the game; but there are 
mani other forms. sometim two girl play at onc with 
the same ball--strik it altern as it bounds. 

_hitotsu to ya:_-- 

hito wa kô na hito to iu; 
On wo shiranéba kô naraji. 

_futatsu to ya:_-- 

fuji yori takaki chichi no on; 
tsuné-ni omouté wasuré-naji. 

_mitsu to ya:_-- 

mizu-umi kaetté asashi to wa, 
haha no on zo ya omou-beshi. 

_yotsu to ya:_-- 

yoshiya mazushiku kurasu tomo, 
sugu-naru michi wo maguru-moji. 

_itsutsu to ya:_-- 

itsumo kokoro no kawaranu wo, 
makoto no hito to omou-beshi. 

_mutsu to ya:_-- 

munashiku tsukihi wo kurashi-naba, 
nochi no nagéki to shirinu-beshi. 

_nanatsu to ya:_-- 

nasaki wa hito no tamé narodé, 
waga mi no tamé to omou-beshi. 

_yatsu to ya:_-- 

yaku-nan muryô no wazawai mo 
kokoro zen nara nogaru-beshi. 

_kokonotsu to ya:_-- 

kokoro kotoba no sugu-naraba, 
kami ya hotoké mo mamoru-beshi. 

_tô to ya_:-- 

tôtoi hito to naru naraba, 
kôkô mono to iwaru-beshi. 

_thi is the first_:-- 

[only] a person have filial pieti is [worthi to be] call 
a person:[109] 
If one doe not know the good of parents, one ha not 
filial piety. 

[109] lit., "A person have filial pieti is call a 
person." the word _hito_ (person), usual 
indic either a man or a woman, is often use 
in the signif of "people" or "mankind." the 
full mean of the sentenc is that no unfili 
person deserv to be call a human being. 

_the second_:-- 

higher than the [mountain] fuji is the favor of a father: 
think of it always;--nev forget it. 

_the third_:-- 

[compar with a mother' love] the great lake is shallow 
indeed! 
[bi thi saying] the good of a mother should be 
estimated. 

_the fourth_:-- 

even though in poverti we have to pass our days, 
let us never turn asid from the one straight path. 

_the fifth:_-- 

the person whose heart never chang with time, 
A true man or woman that person must be deemed. 

_the sixth_:-- 

If the time [of the present] be spent in vain, 
In the time of the futur must sorrow be borne. 

_the seventh_:-- 

that a kind done is not for the sake of other only, 
but also for one' own sake, should well be kept in mind. 

_the eighth_:-- 

even the sorrow of numberless misfortun 
We shall easili escap if the heart be pure. 

_the ninth_:-- 

If the heart and the speech be kept straight and true, 
the god and the buddha will sure guard us well. 

_the tenth_:-- 

In order to becom a person held in honor, 
As a filial person one must [first] be known. 

the reader may think to himself, "how terribl exig the train that 
could requir the repetit of moral lesson even in a 'ball-play 
song'!" true,--but it produc perhap the veri sweetest type of woman 
that thi world ha ever known. 

* * * * * 

In some dance-song the burthen is made by the mere repetit of the 
last line, or of part of the last line, of each stanza. the follow 
queer ballad exemplifi the practice, and is furthermor remark by 
reason of the curiou onomatopoet chorus introduc at certain 
passag of the recitative:-- 

kané-maki-odori uta 

("_bell-wrapping-d song_."--_provinc of iga--naga district_) 

A yamabushi of kyôto went to kumano. there rest in the inn 
chôjaya, by the beach of shirotaka, he saw a littl girl three 
year old; and he pet and hug her, play promis to 
make her hi wife,-- 

(chorus) _play promising._ 

thereaft that yamabushi travel in variou provinces; 
return onli when that girl wa thirteen year old. "O my 
princess, my princess!" he cri to her,--"mi littl princess, 
pledg to me by promise!"--"o sir yamabushi," made she 
answer,--"good sir yamabushi, take me with you now!-- 

"_take me with you now!_" 

"O soon," he said, "I shall come again; soon I shall come again: 
then, when I come again, I shall take you with me,-- 

"_take you with me._" 

therewith the yamabushi, escap from her, quickly, quickli 
fled away;--with all hast he fled away. have pass through 
tanabé and pass through minabé, he fled on over the komatsu 
moor,-- 

_over the komatsu moor._ 

kakkara, kakkara, kakkara, kakka![110] 

[110] these syllables, form a sort of special chorus, 
are simpli onomatopes; intend to repres the 
sound of sandal feet run at utmost speed. 

therewith the damsel, pursuing, quickly, quickli follow after 
him;--with all speed she follow after him. have pass 
through tanabé and pass through minabé, she pursu him over 
the komatsu moor,-- 

_over the komatsu moor._ 

then the yamabushi, fleeing, came as he fled to the river of 
amoda, and cri to the boatman of the river of amoda,--"o good 
boatman, good sir boatman, behind me come a maid 
pursuing!--pray do not take her across, good boatman,-- 

"_good sir boatman!_" 

_deboku, deboku, deboku, denden!_[111] 

[111] these onomatopes, chant by all the dancer 
togeth in chorus, with appropri gesture, 
repres the sound of the ferryman' singl oar, 
or scull, work upon it wooden peg. the 
syllabl have no mean in themselves. 

then the damsel, pursuing, came to the river of amoda and 
call to the boatman, "bring hither the boat!--tak me over in 
the boat!"--"no, I will not bring the boat; I will not take you 
over: my boat is forbidden to carri women!-- 

"_forbidden to carri women!_" 

"if you do not take me over, I will cross!--if you do not take 
me over, I will cross!--ther is a way to cross the river of 
amoda!" take off her sandal and hold them aloft, she 
enter the water, and at onc turn into a dragon with twelv 
horn fulli grown,-- 

_with twelv horn fulli grown._ 

then the yamabushi, fleeing, reach the templ dôjôji, and 
cri to the priest of the templ dôjôji:--"o good priests, 
behind me a damsel come pursuing!--hid me, I beseech you, 
good sir priests!-- 

"_good sir priests!_" 

then the priests, after hold consultation, took down from it 
place the big bell of the temple; and under it they hid him,-- 

_under it they hid him_. 

then the dragon-maid, pursuing, follow him to the templ 
dôjôji. for a moment she stood in the gate of the temple: she 
saw that bell, and view it with suspicion. she thought:--"i 
must wrap myself about it once." she thought:--"i must wrap 
myself about it twice!" At the third wrapping, the bell wa 
melted, and began to flow like boil water,-- 

_like boil water_. 

So is told the stori of the wrap of the bell. mani damsel 
dwell by the seashor of japan;--but who among them, like the 
daughter of the chôja, will becom a dragon?-- 

_becom a dragon?_ 

thi is all the song of the wrap of the bell!--thi is all 
the song,-- 

_all the song!_[112] 

[112] thi legend form the subject of sever japanes 
dramas, both ancient and modern. the origin 
stori is that a buddhist priest, call anchin, 
have rashli excit the affect of a maiden 
name kiyohimé, and being, by reason of hi vows, 
unabl to wed her, sought safeti from her advanc 
in flight. kiyohimé, by the violenc of her 
frustrat passion, therewith becam transform 
into a fieri dragon; and in that shape she 
pursu the priest to the templ call dôjôji, 
in kumano (modern kishû), where he tri to hide 
himself under the great temple-bell. but the 
dragon coil herself round the bell, which at 
onc becam red-hot, so that the bodi of the 
priest wa total consumed. 

In thi rude ballad kiyohimé figur onli as the 
daughter of an inn-keeper,--th _chôja_, or rich 
man of hi village; while the priest anchin is 
chang into a yamabushi. the yamabushi are, or at 
least were, wander priest of the strang sect 
call shugendo,--itiner exorcist and 
diviners, profess both shinto and buddhism. Of 
late year their practic have been prohibit by 
law; and a real yamabushi is now seldom to be met 
with. 

the templ dôjôji is still a famou place of 
pilgrimage. It is situat not far from gobô, on 
the western coast of kishû. the incid of anchin 
and the dragon is said to have occur in the 
earli part of the tenth century. 

I shall give onli one specimen of the true street-ballad,--th kind of 
ballad commonli sung by wander samisen-players. It is written in an 
irregular measure, vari from twelv to sixteen syllabl in length; 
the greater number of line have thirteen syllables. I do not know the 
date of it composition; but I am told by age person who rememb 
hear it sung when they were children, that it wa popular in the 
period of tenpô (1830-1843). It is not divid into stanzas; but there 
are paus at irregular intervals,--mark by the refrain, _yanrei!_ 

o-kichi-seiza kudoki 

("_the ditti of o-kichi and seiza_") 

now hear the piti stori of two that die for love.--in kyôto 
wa the thread-shop of yoëmon, a merchant known far and near,--a 
man of much wealth. hi busi prospered; hi life wa 
fortunate. one daughter he had, an onli child, by name o-kichi: 
at sixteen year she wa love as a flower. also he had a clerk 
in hi house, by name seiza, just in the prime of youth, age 
twenty-and-two. 

_yanrei!_ 

now the young man seiza wa handsome; and o-kichi fell in love 
with him at sight. and the two were so often togeth that their 
secret affect becam known; and the matter came to the ear 
of the parent of o-kichi; and the parents, hear of it, felt 
that such a thing could not be suffer to continue. 

_yanrei!_ 

So at last, the mother, have call o-kichi into a privat 
room, thu spoke to her:--"o my daughter, I hear that you have 
form a secret relat with the young man seiza, of our shop. 
are you will to end that relat at once, and not to think 
ani more about that man, o-kichi?--answ me, O my daughter." 

_yanrei!_ 

"O my dear mother," answer o-kichi, "what is thi that you ask 
me to do? the close of the relat between seiza and me is 
the close of the relat of the ink to the paper that it 
penetrates.[113] therefore, whatev may happen, O mother of 
mine, to separ from seiza is more than I can bear." 

_yanrei!_ 

[113] lit.:--"that affin as-for, ink-and-paper-soaked-lik 
affinity." 

then, the father, have call seiza to the innermost privat 
room, thu spoke to him:--"i call you here onli to tell you 
this: you have turn the mind of our daughter away from what is 
right; and even to hear of such a matter is not to be borne. 
pack up your thing at once, and go!--to-day is the utmost limit 
of the time that you remain in thi house." 

_yanrei!_ 

now seiza wa a nativ of ôsaka. without say more than 
"yes--yes," he obey and went away, return to hi home. 
there he remain four or five days, think onli of o-kichi. 
and becaus of hi long for her, he fell sick; and as there 
wa no cure and no hope for him, he died. 

_yanrei!_ 

then one night o-kichi, in a moment of sleep, saw the face of 
seiza close to her pillow,--so plainli that she could not tell 
whether it wa real, or onli a dream. and rise up, she look 
about; but the form of seiza had vanished. 

_yanrei!_ 

becaus of thi she made up her mind to go at onc to the hous 
of seiza. and, without be seen by ani one, she fled from the 
home of her parents. 

_yanrei!_ 

when she came to the ferri at the next village, she did not take 
the boat, but went round by anoth road; and make all hast 
she found her way to the citi of ôsaka. there she ask for the 
hous of seiza; and she learn that it wa in a certain street, 
the third hous from a certain bridge. 

_yanrei!_ 

arriv at last befor the home of seiza, she took off her 
travel hat of straw; and seat herself on the threshold 
of the entrance, she cri out:--"pardon me kindly!--i not thi 
the hous of master seiza?" 

_yanrei!_ 

then--o the piti of it!--sh saw the mother of seiza, weep 
bitterly, and hold in her hand a buddhist rosary. "O my good 
young lady," the mother of seiza asked, "whenc have you come; 
and whom do you want to see?" 

_yanrei!_ 

and o-kichi said:--"i am the daughter of the thread-merch 
of kyôto. and I have come all the way here onli becaus of the 
relat that ha long exist between master seiza and myself. 
therefore, I pray you, kindli permit me to see him." 

_yanrei!_ 

"alas!" made answer the mother, weeping, "seiza, whom you have 
come so far to see, is dead. to-day is the seventh day from the 
day on which he died." ... hear these words, o-kichi herself 
could onli shed tears. 

_yanrei!_ 

but after a littl while she took her way to the cemetery. and 
there she found the sotoba[114] erect abov the grave of 
seiza; and lean upon it, she wept aloud. 

_yanrei!_ 

[114] A wooden lath, bear buddhist texts, plant 
abov graves. for a full account of the sotoba see 
_mi exot and retrospectives_: "the literatur 
of the dead." 

then--how fear a thing is the long of a person[115]--th 
grave of seiza split asunder; and the form of seiza rose up 
therefrom and spoke. 

_yanrei!_ 

[115] In the original:--_hito no omoi wa osoroshi mono 
yo!_--("how fear a thing is the think of a 
person!"). the word _omoi_, use here in the sens 
of "longing," refer to the weird power of seiza' 
die wish to see hi sweetheart. even after hi 
burial, thi long ha the strength to burst 
open the tomb. 

--in the old english ballad of "william and 
marjorie" (see child: vol. ii. p. 151) there is 
also a remark fanci about the open and 
close of a grave:-- 

she follow him high, she follow him low, 
till she came to yon churchyard green; 
_and there the deep grave open up_, 
and young william he lay down. 

"ah! is not thi o-kichi that ha come? kind inde it wa to 
have come to me from so far away! My o-kichi, do not weep thus. 
never again--even though you weep--can we be unit in thi 
world. but as you love me truly, I pray you to set some fragrant 
flower befor my tomb, and to have a buddhist servic said for 
me upon the anniversari of my death." 

_yanrei!_ 

and with these word the form of seiza vanished. "O wait, wait 
for me!" cri o-kichi,--"wait one littl moment![116] I cannot 
let you return alone!--i shall go with you in a littl time!" 

_yanrei!_ 

[116] with thi episod compar the close of the english 
ballad "sweet william' ghost" (child: vol. ii., 
page 148):-- 

"O stay, my onli true love, stay!" 
the constant margaret cried: 
wan grew her cheeks; she close her een, 
stretch her soft limbs, and died. 

then quickli she went beyond the temple-g to a moat some four 
or five _chô_[117] distant; and have fill her sleev with 
small stones, into the deep water she cast her forlorn body. 

_yanrei!_ 

[117] A _chô_ is about one fifteenth of a mile. 

and now I shall termin thi brief excurs into unfamiliar 
song-field by the citat of two buddhist pieces. the first is from 
the famou work _gempei seisuiki_ ("account of the prosper and 
declin of the hous of gen and hei"), probabl compos dure the 
latter part of the twelfth, or at the begin of the thirteenth 
century. It is written in the measur call _imayô_,--that is to say, 
in short line altern of seven and of five syllabl (7, 5; 7, 5; 
7, 5, _ad libitum_). the other philosoph composit is from a 
collect of song call _ryûtachi-bushi_ ("ryûtachi airs"), belong 
to the sixteenth century:-- 

I 

(_measure, imayô_) 

sama mo kokoro mo 
kawaru kana! 
otsuru namida wa 
taki no mizu: 
myô-hô-rengé no 
iké to nari; 
guzé no funé ni 
sao sashité; 
shizumu waga mi wo 
nosé-tamaë! 

both form and mind-- 
lo! how these change! 
the fall of tear 
Is like the water of a cataract. 
let them becom the pool 
Of the loto of the good law! 
pole thereupon 
the boat of salvation, 
vouchsaf that my sink 
bodi may ride! 

II 

(_period of bunrokû--1592-1596_) 

who twice shall live hi youth? 
what flower fade bloom again? 
fugit as dew 
Is the form regretted, 
seen onli 
In a moment of dream. 




fantasi 

[decoration] 

... vainli doe each, as he glides, 
fabl and dream 
Of the land which the river of time 
had left ere he woke on it breast, 
Or shall reach when hi eye have 
been closed. 
matthew arnold 




noctilucæ 

[decoration] 


the moon had not yet risen; but the vast of the night wa all seeth 
with stars, and bridg by a milki way of extraordinari brightness. 
there wa no wind; but the sea, far as sight could reach, wa run in 
rippl of fire,--a vision of infern beauty. onli the rippl were 
radiant (between them wa black absolute);--and the luminos wa 
amazing. most of the undul were yellow like candle-flame; but 
there were crimson lamp also,--and azure, and orange, and emerald. 
and the sinuou flicker of all seemed, not a puls of mani waters, 
but a labor of mani wills,--a fleet consciou and monstrous,--a 
writh and a swarm incalculable, as of dragon-lif in some depth of 
erebus. 

and life inde wa make the sinist splendor of that spectacle--but 
life infinitesimal, and of ghostliest delicacy,--lif illimitable, yet 
ephemeral, flame and fade in ceaseless altern over the whole 
round of water even to the sky-line, abov which, in the vaster abyss, 
other countless light were throb with other spectral colors. 

* * * * * 

watching, I wonder and I dreamed. I thought of the ultim ghost 
reveal in that scintil tremend of night and sea;--quicken 
abov me, in system aglow with aw fusion of the past dissolved, with 
vapor of the life again to be;--quicken also beneath me, in 
meteor-gush and constel and nebulos of colder 
fire,--til I found myself doubt whether the million age of the 
sun-star could realli signify, in the flux of perpetu dissolution, 
anyth more than the momentari sparkl of one expir noctiluca. 

even with the doubt, the vision changed. I saw no longer the sea of the 
ancient east, with it shudder of fire, but that flood whose width 
and depth and altitud are one with the night of eternity,--th 
shoreless and timeless sea of death and birth. and the lumin haze of 
a hundr million of suns,--th arch of the milki way,--wa a singl 
smoulder surg in the flow of the infinit tides. 

* * * * * 

yet again there came a change. I saw no more that vapori surg of suns; 
but the live dark stream and thrill about me with infinit 
sparkling; and everi sparkl wa beat like a heart,--beat out 
color like the tint of the sea-fires. and the lamp of all 
continu flow away, as shiver thread of radiance, into 
illimit mystery.... 

then I knew myself also a phosphor-point,--on fugit float sparkl 
of the measureless current;--and I saw that the light which wa mine 
shift tint with each chang of thought. rubi it sometim shone, and 
sometim sapphire: now it wa flame of topaz; again, it wa fire of 
emerald. and the mean of the chang I could not fulli know. but 
thought of the earthli life seem to make the light burn red; while 
thought of supern being,--of ghostli beauti and of ghostli 
bliss,--seem to kindl ineff rhythm of azur and of violet. 

* * * * * 

but of white light there were none in all the visible. and I 
marvelled. 

then a voic said to me:-- 

"the white are of the altitudes. By the blend of the billion they 
are made. thi part is to help to their kindling. even as the color of 
thi burning, so is the worth of thee. for a moment onli is thi 
quickening; yet the light of thi puls live on: by thi thought, in 
that shine moment, thou becomest a maker of gods." 




A mysteri of crowd 

[decoration] 


who ha not at some time lean over the parapet of a bridg to watch 
the wrinkl and dimpl of the current below,--to wonder at the 
trembl perman of surface-shap that never change, though the 
substanc of them is never for two success moment the same? the 
mysteri of the spectacl fascinates; and it is worth think about. 
symbol of the riddl of our own be are those shudder forms. In 
ourselv likewis the substanc perpetu chang with the flow of 
the infinit stream; but the shapes, though ever agit by variou 
inter-oppos forces, remain throughout the years. 

and who ha not been fascin also by the sight of the human stream 
that pour and puls through the street of some great metropolis? 
this, too, ha it current and counter-curr and eddyings,--al 
strengthen or weaken accord to the tide-ris or tide-ebb of the 
city' sea of toil. but the attract of the greater spectacl for us 
is not realli the mysteri of motion: it is rather the mysteri of man. As 
outsid observ we are interest chiefli by the pass form and 
faces,--bi their intim of personality, their suggest of 
sympathi or repulsion. We soon ceas to think about the gener flow. 
for the atom of the human current are visibl to our gaze: we see them 
walk, and deem their movement suffici explain by our own 
experi of walking. and, nevertheless, the motion of the visibl 
individu are more mysteri than those of the alway invis 
molecul of water.--i am not forget the truth that all form of 
motion are ultim incomprehensible: I am refer onli to the fact 
that our common rel knowledg of motions, which are suppos to 
depend upon will, is even less than our possibl rel knowledg of 
the behavior of the atom of a water-current. 

* * * * * 

everi one who ha live in a great citi is awar of certain law of 
movement which regul the flow of popul through the more crowd 
thoroughfares. (we need not for present purpos concern ourselv about 
the complex middle-curr of the live river, with their thunder of 
hoof and wheels: I shall speak of the side-curr only.) On either 
footpath the crowd natur divid itself into an upward and a 
downward stream. all person go in one direct take the right-hand 
side; all go in the other direct take the left-hand side. By 
move with either one of these two stream you can proceed even 
quickly; but you cannot walk against it: onli a drunken or insan person 
is like to attempt such a thing. between the two current there is 
go on, by reason of the pressure, a continu self-displac of 
individu to left and right, alternately,--such a yield and 
swerv as might be represented, in a draw of the double-current, by 
zigzag medial line ascend and descending. thi constant yield 
alon make progress possible: without it the contrari stream would 
quickli bring each other to a standstil by later pressure. but it is 
especi where two crowd-stream intersect each other, as at 
street-angles, that thi systemat self-displac is worthi of 
study. everybodi observ the phenomenon; but few person think about 
it. whoever realli think about it will discov that there is a mysteri 
in it,--a mysteri which no individu experi can fulli explain. 

* * * * * 

In ani throng street of a great metropoli thousand of peopl are 
constantli turn asid to left or right in order to pass each other. 
whenev two person walk in contrari direct come face to face in 
such a press, one of three thing is like to happen:--eith there is 
a mutual yielding,--or one make room for the other,--or els both, in 
their endeavor to be accommodating, step at onc in the same direction, 
and as quickli repeat the blunder by tri to correct it, and so keep 
danc to and fro in each other' way,--until the first to perceiv the 
absurd of the situat stand still, or until the more irrit 
actual push hi _vis-à-vis_ to one side. but these blunder are 
rel infrequent: all necessari yielding, as a rule, is done 
quickli and correctly. 

Of cours there must be some gener law regul all thi 
self-displacement,--som law in accord with the univers law of motion 
in the direct of least resistance. you have onli to watch ani 
crowd street for half an hour to be convinc of this. but the law is 
not easili found or formulated: there are puzzl in the phenomenon. 

* * * * * 

If you studi the crowd-mov closely, you will perceiv that those 
encount in which one person yield to make way for the other are much 
less common than those in which both parti give way. but a littl 
reflect will convinc you that, even in case of mutual yielding, one 
person must of necess yield sooner than the other,--though the 
differ in time of the impulse-manifest should be--a it often 
is--altogeth inappreciable. for the sum of character, physic and 
psychical, cannot be precis the same in two human beings. No two 
person can have exactli equal faculti of percept and will, nor 
exactli similar qualiti of that experi which express itself in 
mental and physic activities. and therefor in everi case of appar 
mutual yielding, the yield must realli be successive, not 
simultaneous. now although what we might here call the "person 
equation" prove that in everi case of mutual yield one individu 
necessarili yield sooner than the other, it doe not at all explain the 
mysteri of the individu impuls in case where the yield is not 
mutual;--it doe not explain whi you feel at one time that you are about 
to make your _vis-à-vis_ give place, and feel at anoth time that you 
must yourself give place. what origin the feeling? 

A friend onc attempt to answer thi question by the ingeni theori 
of a sort of eye-duel between everi two person come face to face in a 
street-throng; but I feel sure that hi theori could account for the 
psycholog fact in scarc half-a-dozen of a thousand such 
encounters. the greater number of peopl hurri by each other in a 
dens press rare observ faces: onli the disinterest idler ha time 
for that. hundr actual pass along the street with their eye fix 
upon the pavement. certainli it is not the man in a hurri who can guid 
himself by ocular snap-shot view of physiognomy;--h is usual 
absorb in hi own thoughts.... I have studi my own case repeatedly. 
while in a crowd I seldom look at faces; but without ani consciou 
observ I am alway abl to tell when I should give way, or when my 
_vis-à-vis_ is go to save me that trouble. My knowledg is certainli 
intuitive--a mere knowledg of feeling; and I know not with what to 
compar it except that blind faculti by which, in absolut darkness, one 
becom awar of the proxim of bulki object without touch them. 
and my intuit is almost infallible. If I hesit to obey it, a 
collis is the invari consequence. 

furthermore, I find that whenev automatic, or at least semi-conscious, 
action is replac by reason action--in plainer words, whenev I 
begin to think about my movements--i alway blunder. It is onli while I 
am think of other matters,--onli while I am act almost 
automatically,--that I can thread a dens crowd with ease. indeed, my 
person experi ha convinc me that what pilot one quickli and 
safe through a thick press is not consciou observ at all, but 
unreasoning, intuit perception. now intuit action of ani kind 
repres inherit knowledge, the experi of past lives,--in thi 
case the experi of past live incalculable. 

utterli incalculable.... whi do I think so? well, simpli becaus thi 
faculti of intuit self-direct in a crowd is share by man with 
veri inferior form of anim being,--evolut proof that it must be 
a faculti immens older than man. doe not a herd of cattle, a herd of 
deer, a flock of sheep, offer us the same phenomenon of mutual yielding? 
Or a flock of birds--gregari bird especially: crows, sparrows, wild 
pigeons? Or a shoal of fish? even among insects--bees, ants, 
termites--w can studi the same law of intuit self-displacement. the 
yielding, in all these cases, must still repres an inherit 
experi unimagin old. could we endeavor to retrac the whole 
cours of such inheritance, the attempt would probabl lead us back, not 
onli to the veri begin of sentient life upon thi planet, but 
further,--back into the histori of non-senti substance,--back even to 
the primal evolut of those mysteri tendenc which are store up 
in the atom of elements. such atom we know of onli as point of 
multipl resistance,--incomprehens knit of incomprehens 
forces. even the tendenc of atom doubtless repres accumul 
of inheritance----but here thought check with a shock at the etern 
barrier of the infinit riddle. 




gothic horror 

[decoration] 

I 


long befor I had arriv at what catech call the age of reason, I 
wa frequent taken, much against my will, to church. the church wa 
veri old; and I can see the interior of it at thi moment just as 
plainli as I saw it forti year ago, when it appear to me like an evil 
dream. there I first learn to know the peculiar horror that certain 
form of gothic architectur can inspire.... I am use the word 
"horror" in a classic sense,--in it antiqu mean of ghostli fear. 

On the veri first day of thi experience, my child-fanc could place the 
sourc of the horror. the wizen and point shape of the window 
immedi terrifi me. In their outlin I found the form of 
apparit that torment me in sleep;--and at onc I began to imagin 
some dread affin between goblin and gothic churches. presently, 
in the tall doorways, in the arch of the aisles, in the rib and 
groin of the roof, I discov other and wilder suggest of 
fear. even the façad of the organ,--peak high into the shadow abov 
it gallery,--seem to me a fright thing.... had I been then 
suddenli oblig to answer the question, "what are you afraid of?" I 
should have whispered, "_those points!_" I could not have otherwis 
explain the matter: I onli knew that I wa afraid of the "points." 

Of cours the real enigma of what I felt in that church could not 
present itself to my mind while I continu to believ in goblins. but 
long after the age of superstiti terrors, other gothic experi 
sever reviv the childish emot in so startl a way as to 
convinc me that childish fanci could not account for the feeling. then 
my curios wa aroused; and I tri to discov some ration caus 
for the horror. I read mani books, and ask mani questions; but the 
mysteri seem onli to deepen. 

book about architectur were veri disappointing. I wa much less 
impress by what I could find in them than by refer in pure 
fiction to the aw of gothic art,--particularli by one writer' 
confess that the interior of a gothic church, seen at night, gave him 
the idea of be insid the skeleton of some monstrou animal; and by a 
far-fam comparison of the window of a cathedr to eyes, and of it 
door to a great mouth, "devour the people." these imagin 
explain little; they could not be develop beyond the phase of vagu 
intimation: yet they stir such emot respons that I felt sure 
they had touch some truth. certainli the architectur of a gothic 
cathedr offer strang resembl to the architectur of bone; and 
the gener impress that it make upon the mind is an impress 
of life. but thi impress or sens of life I found to be 
indefinable,--not a sens of ani life organic, but of a life latent and 
dæmonic. and the manifest of that life I felt to be in the 
_pointing_ of the structure. 

attempt to interpret the emot by effect of altitud and gloom and 
vast appear to me of no worth; for build loftier and larger 
and darker than ani gothic cathedral, but of a differ order of 
architecture,--egyptian, for instance,--could not produc a like 
impression. I felt certain that the horror wa made by someth 
altogeth peculiar to gothic construction, and that thi someth 
haunt the top of the arches. 

"yes, gothic architectur is awful," said a religi friend, "becaus 
it is the visibl express of christian faith. No other religi 
architectur symbol spiritu longing; but the gothic embodi it. 
everi part climb or leaps; everi suprem detail soar and point 
like fire...." "there may be consider truth in what you say," I 
replied;--"but it doe not relat to the riddl that baffl me. whi 
should shape that symbol spiritu long creat horror? whi should 
ani express of christian ecstasi inspir alarm?..." 

* * * * * 

other hypothes in multitud I test without avail; and I return to 
the simpl and savag convict that the secret of the horror somehow 
belong to the point of the archings. but for year I could not find 
it. At last, at last, in the earli hour of a certain tropic morning, 
it reveal itself quit unexpectedly, while I wa look at a gloriou 
group of palms. 

then I wonder at my stupid in not have guess the riddl before. 


II 

the characterist of mani kind of palm have been made familiar by 
pictur and photographs. but the giant palm of the american tropic 
cannot be adequ repres by the modern method of pictori 
illustration: they must be seen. you cannot draw or photograph a palm 
two hundr feet high. 

the first sight of a group of such forms, in their natur environ 
of tropic forest, is a magnific surprise,--a surpris that strike 
you dumb. noth seen in temper zones,--not even the huger growth 
of the californian slope,--could have prepar your imagin for the 
weird solemn of that mighti colonnade. each stone-grey trunk is a 
perfect pillar,--but a pillar of which the stupend grace ha no 
counterpart in the work of man. you must strain your head well back to 
follow the soar of the prodigi column, up, up, up through abyss 
of green twilight, till at last--far beyond a break in that infinit 
interweav of limb and liana which is the roof of the forest--y 
catch one dizzi glimps of the capital: a parasol of emerald feather 
outspread in a sky so blind as to suggest the notion of azur 
electricity. 

* * * * * 

now what is the emot that such a vision excites,--an emot too 
power to be call wonder, too weird to be call delight? onli 
when the first shock of it ha passed,--when the sever element 
that were combin in it have begun to set in motion wide differ 
group of ideas,--can you comprehend how veri complex it must have 
been. mani impress belong to person experi were 
doubtless reviv in it, but also with them a multitud of sensat 
more shadowy,--accumul of organ memory; possibl even vagu 
feel older than man,--for the tropic shape that arous the 
emot have a histori more ancient than our race. 

one of the first element of the emot to becom clearli 
distinguish is the æsthetic; and this, in it gener mass, might be 
term the sens of terribl beauty. certainli the spectacl of that 
unfamiliar life,--silent, tremendous, spring to the sun in coloss 
aspiration, strive for light against titans, and heedless of man in 
the gloom beneath as of a grope beetle,--thril like the rhythm of 
some singl marvel vers that is learn in a glanc and rememb 
forever. yet the delight, even at it vividest, is shadow by a queer 
disquiet. the aspect of that monstrous, pale, naked, smooth-stretch 
column suggest a life as consciou as the serpent's. you stare at the 
tower line of the shape,--vagu fear to discern some sign of 
stealthi movement, some begin of undulation. then sight and reason 
combin to correct the suspicion. yes, motion is there, and life 
enormous--but a life seek onli sun,--life, rush like the jet of a 
geyser, straight to the giant day. 


iii 

dure my own experi I could perceiv that certain feel 
commingl in the wave of delight,--feel relat to idea of power 
and splendor and triumph,--wer accompani by a faint sens of 
religi awe. perhap our modern æsthetic sentiment are so interwoven 
with variou inherit element of religi emotion that the 
recognit of beauti cannot aris independ of reverenti 
feeling. Be thi as it may, such a feel defin itself while I 
gazed;--and at onc the great grey trunk were chang to the pillar of 
a mighti aisle; and from altitud of dream there suddenli descend 
upon me the old dark thrill of gothic horror. 

even befor it die away, I recogn that it must have been due to 
some old cathedral-memori reviv by the vision of those giant trunk 
upris into gloom. but neither the height nor the gloom could account 
for anyth beyond the memory. column tall as those palms, but 
support a classic entablature, could evok no sens of disquiet 
resembl the gothic horror. I felt sure of this,--becaus I wa able, 
without ani difficulty, to shape immedi the imagin of such a 
façade. but present the mental pictur distorted. I saw the architrav 
elbow upward in each of the space between the pillars, and curv and 
point itself into a rang of prodigi arches;--and again the sombr 
thrill descend upon me. simultan there flash to me the 
solut of the mystery. I understood that the gothic horror wa a 
_horror of monstrou motion_,--and that it had seem to belong to the 
point of the arch becaus the idea of such motion wa chiefli 
suggest by the extraordinari angl at which the curv of the arch 
touched. 

* * * * * 

To ani experienc eye, the curv of gothic arch offer a strike 
resembl to certain curv of veget growth;--th curv of the 
palm-branch being, perhaps, especi suggested. but observ that the 
architectur form suggest more than ani veget comparison could 
illustrate! the meet of two palm-crest would inde form a kind of 
gothic arch; yet the effect of so short an arch would be insignificant. 
for natur to repeat the strang impress of the real gothic arch, it 
were necessari that the branch of the touch crest should vastli 
exceed, both in length of curv and strength of spring, anyth of 
their kind exist in the veget world. the effect of the gothic 
arch depend altogeth upon the intim of energy. An arch form by 
the intersect of two short sprout line could suggest onli a 
feebl power of growth; but the line of the tall mediæv arch seem to 
express a crescent forc immens surpass that of nature. and the 
horror of gothic architectur is not in the mere suggest of a 
grow life, but in the suggest of an energi supernatur and 
tremendous. 

* * * * * 

Of cours the child, oppress by the strang of gothic forms, is 
yet incap of analyz the impress received: he is frighten 
without comprehending. He cannot divin that the point and the curv 
are terribl to him becaus they repres the prodigi exagger 
of a real law of veget growth. He dread the shape becaus they 
seem alive; yet he doe not know how to express thi dread. without 
suspect why, he feel that thi silent manifest of power, 
everywher point and pierc upward, is not natural. To hi startl 
imagination, the build stretch itself like a phantasm of 
sleep,--mak itself tall and taller with intent to frighten. even 
though built by hand of men, it ha ceas to be a mass of dead stone: 
it is infus with someth that think and threatens;--it ha becom 
a shadow malevolence, a multipl goblinry, a monstrou fetish! 




levit 

[decoration] 


out of some upper-stori window I wa look into a street of 
yellow-tint houses,--a coloni street, old-fashioned, narrow, with 
palm-head show abov it roof of tile. there were no shadows; there 
wa no sun,--onli a grey soft light, as of earli gloaming. 

suddenli I found myself fall from the window; and my heart gave one 
sicken leap of terror. but the distanc from window to pavement 
prove to be much greater than I supposed,--so great that, in spite of 
my fear, I began to wonder. still I kept falling, falling,--and still 
the dread shock did not come. then the fear ceased, and a queer 
pleasur took it place;--for I discov that I wa not fall 
quickly, but onli _floating_ down. moreover, I wa float feet 
foremost--must have turn in descending. At last I touch the 
stones--but very, veri lightly, with onli one foot; and instantli at 
that touch I went up again,--ros to the level of the eaves. peopl 
stop to stare at me. I felt the exult of power superhuman;--i 
felt for the moment as a god. 

then softli I began to sink; and the sight of faces, gather below me, 
prompt a sudden resolv to fli down the street, over the head of the 
gazers. again like a bubbl I rose, and, with the same impulse, I sail 
in one grand curv to a distanc that astound me. I felt no wind;--i 
felt noth but the joy of motion triumphant. onc more touch 
pavement, I soar at a bound for a thousand yards. then, reach the 
end of the street, I wheel and came back by great swoops,--bi long 
slow aerial leap of surpris altitude. In the street there wa dead 
silence: mani peopl were looking; but nobodi spoke. I wonder what 
they thought of my feat, and what they would say if they knew how easili 
the thing wa done. By the merest chanc I had found out how to do it; 
and the onli reason whi it seem a feat wa that no one els had ever 
attempt it. instinct I felt that to say anyth about the 
accident, which had led to the discovery, would be imprudent. then the 
real mean of the strang hush in the street began to dawn upon me. I 
said to myself:-- 

"thi silenc is the silenc of dreams;--i am quit well awar that thi 
is a dream. I rememb have dream the same dream before. but the 
discoveri of thi power is not a dream: _it is a revelation!_ ... now 
that I have learn how to fly, I can no more forget it than a swimmer 
can forget how to swim. to-morrow morn I shall astonish the people, 
by sail over the roof of the town." 

morn came; and I woke with the fix resolv to fli out of the 
window. but no sooner had I risen from bed than the knowledg of 
physic relat returned, like a sensat forgotten, and compel 
me to recogn the unwelcom truth that I had not made ani discoveri at 
all. 

* * * * * 

thi wa neither the first nor the last of such dreams; but it wa 
particularli vivid, and I therefor select it for narrat as a good 
exampl of it class. I still fli occasionally,--sometim over field 
and streams,--sometim through familiar streets; and the dream is 
invari accompani by remembr of like dream in the past, as 
well as by the convict that I have realli found out a secret, realli 
acquir a new faculty. "thi time, at all events," I say to myself, "it 
is imposs that I can be mistaken;--i _know_ that I shall be abl to 
fli after I awake. mani time before, in other dreams, I learn the 
secret onli to forget it on awakening; but thi time I am absolut 
sure that I shall not forget." and the convict actual stay with me 
until I rise from bed, when the physic effort at onc remind me of 
the formid realiti of gravitation. 

* * * * * 

the oddest part of thi experi is the feel of buoyancy. It is 
much like the feel of floating,--of rise or sink through tepid 
water, for example;--and there is no sens of real effort. It is a 
delight; yet it usual leav someth to be desired. I am a low 
flyer; I can proceed onli like a pteromi or a flying-fish--and far less 
quickly: moreover, I must tread earth occasion in order to obtain a 
fresh impulsion. I seldom rise to a height of more than twenty-f or 
thirti feet;--th greater part of the time I am mere skim 
surfaces. touch the ground onli at interv of sever hundr 
yard is pleasant skimming; but I alway feel, in a faint and wateri 
way, the dead pull of the world beneath me. 

* * * * * 

now the experi of most dream-flyer I find to be essenti like my 
own. I have met but one who claim superior powers: he say that he 
fli over mountains--go sail from peak to peak like a kite. all 
other whom I have question acknowledg that they fli low,--in long 
parabol curves,--and thi onli by touch ground from time to time. 
most of them also tell me that their flight usual begin with an 
imagin fall, or desper leap; and no less than four say that the 
start is commonli taken from the top of a stairway. 

[decoration] 

for myriad of year human ha thu been fli by night. how did the 
fanci motion, have so littl in common with ani experi of activ 
life, becom a univers experi of the life of sleep? 

It may be that memory-impress of certain kind of aerial 
motion,--exult experi of leap or swinging, for example,--ar 
in dream-reviv so magnifi and prolong as to creat the illus 
of flight. We know that in actual time the durat of most dream is 
veri brief. but in the half-lif of sleep--(nightmar offer some 
startl exceptions)--ther is scarc more than a faint smoulder 
of conscious by comparison with the quick flash and vivid thrill of 
activ cerebration;--and time, to the dream brain, would seem to be 
magnified, somewhat as it must be rel magnifi to the feebl 
conscious of an insect. suppos that ani memori of the sensat 
of falling, togeth with the memori of the concomit fear, should be 
accident reviv in sleep, the dream-prolong of the sensat 
and the emotion--uncheck by the natur sequenc of shock--might 
suffic to reviv other and even pleasur memori of airi motion. 
and these, again, might quicken other combin of interrel 
memori abl to furnish all the incid and sceneri of the long 
phantasmagoria. 

but thi hypothesi will not fulli explain certain feel and idea of 
a charact differ from ani experi of waking-hours,--th 
exult of voluntari motion without exertion,--th pleasur of the 
utterli impossible,--th ghostli delight of imponderability. neither 
can it serv to explain other dream-experi of levit which do 
not begin with the sensat of leap or falling, and are seldom of a 
pleasur kind. for example, it sometim happen dure nightmar 
that the dreamer, depriv of all power to move or speak, actual feel 
hi bodi lift into the air and float away by the forc of the horror 
within him. again, there are dream in which the dreamer ha no physic 
being. I have thu found myself without ani body,--a viewless and 
voiceless phantom, hover upon a mountain-road in twilight time, and 
tri to frighten lone folk by make small moan noises. the 
sensat wa of move through the air by mere act of will: there wa 
no touch of surfaces; and I seem to glide alway about a foot abov 
the road. 

* * * * * 

could the feel of dream-flight be partli interpret by organ 
memori of condit of life more ancient than man,--lif weighty, and 
winged, and fli heavily, _a littl abov the ground?_ 

Or might we suppos that some all-perm over-soul, dormant in other 
time, waken within the brain at rare moment of our sleep-life? the 
limit human conscious ha been beauti compar to the visibl 
solar spectrum, abov and below which whole zone of color invis 
await the evolut of superior senses; and mystic aver that someth 
of the ultra-violet or infra-r ray of the vaster mind may be 
momentarili glimps in dreams. certainli the cosmic life in each of us 
ha been all thing in all form of space and time. perhap you would 
like to believ that it may bestir, in slumber, some vagu sense-memori 
of thing more ancient than the sun,--memori of vanish planet with 
fainter power of gravitation, where the normal mode of voluntari 
motion would have been like the realiz of our fli dreams?... 




nightmare-touch 

[decoration] 

I 


what _is_ the fear of ghost among those who believ in ghosts? 

all fear is the result of experience,--experi of the individu or 
of the race,--experi either of the present life or of live 
forgotten. even the fear of the unknown can have no other origin. and 
the fear of ghost must be a product of past pain. 

probabl the fear of ghosts, as well as the belief in them, had it 
begin in dreams. It is a peculiar fear. No other fear is so 
intense; yet none is so vague. feel thu volumin and dim are 
super-individu mostly,--feel inherited,--feel made within us 
by the experi of the dead. 

what experience? 

nowher do I rememb read a plain statement of the reason whi ghost 
are feared. ask ani ten intellig person of your acquaintance, who 
rememb have onc been afraid of ghosts, to tell you exactli whi they 
were afraid,--to defin the fanci behind the fear;--and I doubt whether 
even one will be abl to answer the question. the literatur of 
folk-lore--or and written--throw no clear light upon the subject. We 
find, indeed, variou legend of men torn asund by phantoms; but such 
gross imagin could not explain the peculiar qualiti of ghostli fear. 
It is not a fear of bodili violence. It is not even a reason 
fear,--not a fear that can readili explain itself,--which would not be 
the case if it were found upon definit idea of physic danger. 
furthermore, although primit ghost may have been imagin as capabl 
of tear and devouring, the common idea of a ghost is certainli that 
of a be intang and imponderable.[118] 

[118] I may remark here that in mani old japanes legend and 
ballads, ghost are repres as have power to _pull 
off_ people' heads. but so far as the origin of the fear 
of ghost is concerned, such stori explain nothing,--sinc 
the experi that evolv the fear must have been real, 
not imaginary, experiences. 

now I ventur to state boldli that the common fear of ghost is _the 
fear of be touch by ghosts_,--or, in other words, that the imagin 
supernatur is dread mainli becaus of it imagin power to touch. 
onli to _touch_, remember!--not to wound or to kill. 

but thi dread of the touch would itself be the result of 
experience,--chiefly, I think, of prenat experi store up in the 
individu by inheritance, like the child' fear of darkness. and who 
can ever have had the sensat of be touch by ghosts? the answer 
is simple:--_everybodi who ha been seiz by phantom in a dream._ 

element of primev fears--fear older than humanity--doubtless enter 
into the child-terror of darkness. but the more definit fear of 
ghost may veri possibl be compos with inherit result of 
dream-pain,--ancestr experi of nightmare. and the intuit terror 
of supernatur touch can thu be evolut explained. 

let me now tri to illustr my theori by relat some typic 
experiences. 


II 

when about five year old I wa condemn to sleep by myself in a 
certain isol room, thereaft alway call the child' room. (at 
that time I wa scarc ever mention by name, but onli refer to as 
"the child.") the room wa narrow, but veri high, and, in spite of one 
tall window, veri gloomy. It contain a fire-plac wherein no fire wa 
ever kindled; and the child suspect that the chimney wa haunted. 

A law wa made that no light should be left in the child' room at 
night,--simpli becaus the child wa afraid of the dark. hi fear of the 
dark wa judg to be a mental disord requir sever treatment. but 
the treatment aggrav the disorder. previous I had been accustom 
to sleep in a well-light room, with a nurs to take care of me. I 
thought that I should die of fright when sentenc to lie alon in the 
dark, and--what seem to me then abomin cruel--actu _locked_ 
into my room, the most dismal room of the house. night after night when 
I had been warmli tuck into bed, the lamp wa removed; the key click 
in the lock; the protect light and the footstep of my guardian 
reced together. then an agoni of fear would come upon me. someth in 
the black air would seem to gather and grow--(i thought that I could 
even _hear_ it grow)--til I had to scream. scream regularli brought 
punishment; but it also brought back the light, which more than consol 
for the punishment. thi fact be at last found out, order were given 
to pay no further heed to the scream of the child. 

* * * * * 

whi wa I thu insan afraid? partli becaus the dark had alway 
been peopl for me with shape of terror. So far back as memori 
extended, I had suffer from ugli dreams; and when arous from them 
I could alway _see_ the form dream of, lurk in the shadow of 
the room. they would soon fade out; but for sever moment they would 
appear like tangibl realities. and they were alway the same 
figures.... sometimes, without ani prefac of dreams, I use to see 
them at twilight-time,--follow me about from room to room, or 
reach long dim hand after me, from stori to story, up through the 
interspac of the deep stairways. 

I had complain of these haunter onli to be told that I must never 
speak of them, and that they did not exist. I had complain to 
everybodi in the house; and everybodi in the hous had told me the veri 
same thing. but there wa the evid of my eyes! the denial of that 
evid I could explain onli in two ways:--eith the shape were 
afraid of big people, and show themselv to me alone, becaus I wa 
littl and weak; or els the entir household had agreed, for some 
ghastli reason, to say what wa not true. thi latter theori seem to 
me the more probabl one, becaus I had sever time perceiv the 
shape when I wa not unattended;--and the consequ appear of 
secreci frighten me scarc less than the vision did. whi wa I 
forbidden to talk about what I saw, and even heard,--on creak 
stairways,--behind waver curtains? 

"noth will hurt you,"--thi wa the merciless answer to all my 
plead not to be left alon at night. but the haunter _did_ hurt me. 
only--they would wait until after I had fallen asleep, and so into their 
power,--for they possess occult mean of prevent me from rise or 
move or cri out. 

needless to comment upon the polici of lock me up alon with these 
fear in a black room. unutter wa I torment in that room--for 
years! therefor I felt rel happi when sent away at last to a 
children' boarding-school, where the haunter veri seldom ventur to 
show themselves. 

* * * * * 

they were not like ani peopl that I had ever known. they were shadowi 
dark-rob figures, capabl of atroci self-distortion,--capable, for 
instance, of grow up to the ceiling, and then across it, and then 
lengthen themselves, head-downwards, along the opposit wall. onli 
their face were distinct; and I tri not to look at their faces. I 
tri also in my dreams--or thought that I tried--to awaken myself from 
the sight of them by pull at my eyelid with my fingers; but the 
eyelid would remain closed, as if sealed.... mani year afterwards, the 
fright plate in orfila' _traité de exhumés_, beheld for the first 
time, recal to me with a sicken start the dream-terror of 
childhood. but to understand the child' experience, you must imagin 
orfila' draw intens alive, and continu elong or 
distorting, as in some monstrou anamorphosis. 

nevertheless the mere sight of those nightmare-fac wa not the worst 
of the experi in the child' room. the dream alway began with a 
suspicion, or sensat of someth heavi in the air,--slowli quench 
will,--slowli numb my power to move. At such time I usual found 
myself alon in a larg unlight apartment; and, almost simultan 
with the first sensat of fear, the atmospher of the room would 
becom suffused, half-way to the ceiling, with a sombre-yellowish glow, 
make object dimli visible,--though the ceil itself remain 
pitch-black. thi wa not a true appear of light: rather it seem 
as if the black air were chang color from beneath.... certain 
terribl aspect of sunset, on the eve of storm, offer like effect of 
sinist color.... forthwith I would tri to escape,--(feel at everi 
step a sensat _a of wading_),--and would sometim succeed in 
struggl half-way across the room;--but there I would alway find 
myself brought to a standstill,--paralyz by some innomin 
opposition. happi voic I could hear in the next room;--i could see 
light through the transom over the door that I had vainli endeavor to 
reach;--i knew that one loud cri would save me. but not even by the 
most frantic effort could I rais my voic abov a whisper.... and all 
thi signifi onli that the nameless wa coming,--wa nearing,--wa 
mount the stairs. I could hear the step,--boom like the sound of a 
muffl drum,--and I wonder whi nobodi els heard it. A long, long 
time the haunter would take to come,--malevol paus after each 
ghastli footfall. then, without a creak, the bolt door would 
open,--slowly, slowly,--and the thing would enter, gibber 
soundlessly,--and put out hands,--and clutch me,--and toss me to the 
black ceiling,--and catch me descend to toss me up again, and again, 
and again.... In those moment the feel wa not fear: fear itself had 
been torpifi by the first seizure. It wa a sensat that ha no name 
in the languag of the living. for everi touch brought a shock of 
someth infinit wors than pain,--someth that thrill into the 
innermost secret be of me,--a sort of abomin electricity, 
discov unimagin capac of suffer in total unfamiliar 
region of sentiency.... thi wa commonli the work of a singl 
tormentor; but I can also rememb have been caught by a group, and 
toss from one to another,--seemingli for a time of mani minutes. 


iii 

whenc the fanci of those shapes? I do not know. possibl from some 
impress of fear in earliest infancy; possibl from some experi of 
fear in other live than mine. that mysteri is forev insoluble. but 
the mysteri of the shock of the touch admit of a definit hypothesis. 

first, allow me to observ that the experi of the sensat itself 
cannot be dismiss as "mere imagination." imagin mean cerebr 
activity: it pain and it pleasur are alik insepar from nervou 
operation, and their physic import is suffici prove by their 
physiolog effects. dream-fear may kill as well as other fear; and no 
emot thu power can be reason deem undeserv of study. 

one remark fact in the problem to be consid is that the 
sensat of seizur in dream differ total from all sensat 
familiar to ordinari wake life. whi thi differentiation? how 
interpret the extraordinari massiv and depth of the thrill? 

I have alreadi suggest that the dreamer' fear is most probabl not a 
reflect of rel experience, but repres the incalcul total 
of ancestr experi of dream-fear. If the sum of the experi of 
activ life be transmit by inheritance, so must likewis be 
transmit the sum experi of the life of sleep. and in normal 
hered either class of transmiss would probabl remain distinct. 

now, grant thi hypothesis, the sensat of dream-seizur would have 
had it begin in the earliest phase of dream-consciousness,--long 
prior to the apparit of man. the first creatur capabl of thought 
and fear must often have dream of be caught by their natur 
enemies. there could not have been much imagin of pain in these 
primal dreams. but higher nervou develop in later form of 
be would have been accompani with larger suscept to 
dream-pain. still later, with the growth of reasoning-power, idea 
of the supernatur would have chang and intensifi the charact of 
dream-fear. furthermore, through all the cours of evolution, hered 
would have been accumul the experi of such feeling. under those 
form of imagin pain evolv through reaction of religi beliefs, 
there would persist some dim surviv of savag primit fears, and 
again, under this, a dimmer but incompar deeper substratum of 
ancient animal-terrors. In the dream of the modern child all these 
latenc might quicken,--on below another,--unfathomably,--with the 
come and the grow of nightmare. 

It may be doubt whether the phantasm of ani particular nightmar have 
a histori older than the brain in which they move. but the shock of the 
touch would seem to indic _some point of dream-contact with the total 
race-experi of shadowi seizure_. It may be that profund of 
self,--abyss never reach by ani ray from the life of sun,--ar 
strang stir in slumber, and that out of their black 
immedi respond a shudder of memory, measureless even by 
million of years. 




read from a dream-book 

[decoration] 


often, in the blind dead of the night, I find myself read a book,--a 
big broad book,--a dream-book. By "dream-book," I do not mean a book 
about dreams, but a book made of the stuff that dream are made of. 

I do not know the name of the book, nor the name of it author: I have 
not been abl to see the title-page; and there is no run title. As 
for the back of the volume, it remains,--lik the back of the 
moon,--invis forever. 

At no time have I touch the book in ani way,--not even to turn a leaf. 
somebody, alway viewless, hold it up and open befor me in the dark; 
and I can read it onli becaus it is light by a light that come from 
nowhere. abov and beneath and on either side of the book there is 
dark absolute; but the page seem to retain the yellow glow of 
lamp that onc illumin them. 

A queer fact is that I never see the entir text of a page at once, 
though I see the whole page itself plainly. the text rises, or seem to 
rise, to the surfac of the paper as I gaze, and fade out almost 
immedi after have been read. By a simpl effort of will, I can 
recal the vanish sentenc to the page; but they do not come back in 
the same form as before: they seem to have been oddli revis dure the 
interval. never can I coax even one fugit line to reproduc itself 
exactli as it read at first. but I can alway forc someth to return; 
and thi someth remain sharpli distinct dure perusal. then it 
turn faint grey, and appear to sink--a through thick milk--backward 
out of sight. 

* * * * * 

By regularli take care to write down, immedi upon awakening, 
whatev I could rememb read in the dream-book, I found myself abl 
last year to reproduc portion of the text. but the order in which I 
now present these fragment is not at all the order in which I recov 
them. If they seem to have ani interconnection, thi is onli becaus I 
tri to arrang them in what I imagin to be the ration sequence. Of 
their origin place and relation, I know scarc anything. and, even 
regard the charact of the book itself, I have been abl to discov 
onli that a great part of it consist of dialogu about the 
unthinkable. 


fr. I 

... then the wave pray to remain a wave forever. 

the sea made answer:-- 

"nay, thou must break: there is no rest in me. billion of billion of 
time thou wilt rise again to break, and break to rise again." 

the wave complained:-- 

"I fear. thou sayest that I shall rise again. but when did ever a wave 
return from the place of breaking?" 

the sea responded:-- 

"time countless beyond utter thou hast broken; and yet thou art! 
behold the myriad of the wave that run befor thee, and the myriad 
that pursu behind thee!--al have been to the place of break time 
unspeakable; and thither they hasten now to break again. into me they 
melt, onli to swell anew. but pass they must; for there is not ani rest 
in me." 

murmuring, the wave replied:-- 

"shall I not be scatter present to mix with the mingl of all 
these myriads? how should I rise again? never, never again can I becom 
the same." 

"the same thou never art," return the sea, "at ani two moment in thi 
running: perpetu chang is the law of thi being. what is thine 'i'? 
alway thou art shape with the substanc of wave forgotten,--wav 
numberless beyond the sand of the shore of me. In thi multipl 
what art thou?--a phantom, an impermanency!" 

"real is pain," sob the wave,--"and fear and hope, and the joy of the 
light. whenc and what are these, if I be not real?" 

"thou hast no pain," the sea responded,--"nor fear nor hope nor joy. 
thou art nothing--sav in me. I am thi self, thine 'i': thi form is my 
dream; thi motion is my will; thi break is my pain. break thou must, 
becaus there is no rest in me; but thou wilt break onli to rise 
again,--for death is the rhythm of life. lo! I, too, die that I may 
live: these my water have passed, and will pass again, with wreck of 
innumer world to the burn of innumer suns. I, too, am 
multipl unspeakably: dead tide of million of ocean reviv in mine 
ebb and flow. suffic thee to learn that onli becaus thou wast thou 
art, and that becaus thou art thou wilt becom again." 

mutter the wave,-- 

"I cannot understand." 

answer the sea,-- 

"thi part is to puls and pass,--nev to understand. I also,--even I, 
the great sea,--do not understand...." 


fr. II 

... "the stone and the rock have felt; the wind have been breath and 
speech; the river and ocean of earth have been lock into chamber of 
hearts. and the palingenesi cannot ceas till everi cosmic particl 
shall have pass through the uttermost possibl experi of the 
highest possibl life." 

"but what of the planetari core?--ha that, too, felt and thought?" 

"even so sure as that all flesh ha been sun-fire! In the ceaseless 
success of integr and dissolutions, all thing have shift 
relat and place numberless billion of times. heart of old moon 
will make the surfac of futur worlds...." 


fr. iii 

... "no regret is vain. It is sorrow that spin the thread,--soft 
than moonshine, thinner than fragrance, stronger than death,--th 
gleipnir-chain of the greater memory.... 

"in million of year you will meet again;--and the time will not seem 
long; for a million year and a moment are the same to the dead. then 
you will not be all of your present self, nor she be all that she ha 
been: both of you will at onc be less, and yet incompar more. then, 
to the long that must come upon you, bodi itself will seem but a 
barrier through which you would leap to her--or, it may be, to him; for 
sex will have shift numberless time ere then. neither will remember; 
but each will be fill with a feel immeasur of have met 
before...." 


fr. IV 

... "so wrong the be who loves,--th be blindli imagin but of 
yesterday,--thi mocker mock the divin in the past of the soul of the 
world. then in that heart is reviv the countless million sorrow 
buri in forgotten graves,--al the old pain of love, in it patient 
contest with hate, sinc the begin of time. 

"and the god know,--th dim one who dwell beyond space,--spin the 
mysteri of shape and name. for they sit at the root of life; and the 
pain run back to them; and they feel that wrong,--a the spider feel 
in the trembl of her web that a thread is broken...." 


fr. V 

"love at sight is the choic of the dead. but the most of them are older 
than ethic systems; and the decis of their major is rare 
moral. they choos by beauty,--accord to their memori of physic 
excellence; and as bodili fit make the foundat of mental and of 
moral power, they are not apt to choos ill. nevertheless they are 
sometim strang cheated. they have been known to want be that 
could never help ghost to a body,--hollow goblins...." 


fr. VI 

... "the animulæ make the self do not fear death as dissolution. they 
fear death onli as reintegration,--recombin with the strang and 
the hate of other lives: they fear the imprisonment, within anoth 
body, of that which love togeth with that which loathes...." 


fr. vii 

... "in other time the el-woman sat onli in wast places, and by 
solitari ways. but now in the shadow of citi she offer her breast 
to youth; and he whom she entices, present goe mad, and becomes, like 
herself, a hollowness. for the higher ghost that enter into the 
make of him perish at that goblin-touch,--di as the pupa die in the 
cocoon, leav onli a shell and dust behind...." 


fr. viii 

... the man said to the multitud remain of hi souls:-- 

"I am weari of life." 

and the remnant repli to him:-- 

"we also are weari of the shame and pain of dwell in so vile a 
habitation. continu we strive that the beam may break, and the 
pillar crack, and the roof fall in upon us." 

"sure there is a curs upon me," groan the man. "there is no justic 
in the gods!" 

then the soul tumultu laugh in scorn,--even as the leav of a 
wood in the wind do chuckl all together. and they made answer to him:-- 

"a a fool thou liest! did ani save thyself make thi vile body? wa it 
shapen--or misshapen--bi ani deed or thought except thine own?" 

"no deed or thought can I remember," return the man, "deserv that 
which ha come upon me." 

"remember!" laugh the souls. "no--th folli wa in other lives. but we 
remember; and remembering, we hate." 

"ye are all one with me!" cri the man,--"how can ye hate?" 

"one with thee," mock the souls,--"a the wearer is one with hi 
garment!... how can we hate? As the fire that devour the wood from 
which it is drawn by the fire-maker--even so we can hate." 

"it is a curs world!" cri the man--"whi did ye not guid me?" 

the soul repli to him:-- 

"thou wouldst not heed the guid of ghost that were wiser than we.... 
coward and weakl curs the world. the strong do not blame the 
world: it give them all that they desire. By power they break and take 
and keep. life for them is a joy, a triumph, an exultation. but 
creatur without power merit nothing; and nothing becom their 
portion. thou and we shall present enter into nothingness." 

"do ye fear?"--ask the man. 

"there is reason for fear," the soul answered. "yet no one of us would 
wish to delay the time of what we fear by continu to make part of 
such an exist as thine." 

"but ye have die innumer times?"--wonderingli said the man. 

"no, we have not," said the souls,--"not even onc that we can remember; 
and our memori reach back to the begin of thi world. We die onli 
with the race." 

the man said nothing,--b afraid. the soul resumed:-- 

"thi race ceases. it continu depend upon thi power to serv our 
purposes. thou hast lost all power. what art thou but a charnel-house, 
a mortuary-pit? freedom we needed, and space: here we have been 
compact together, a billion to a pin-point! doorless our chamber and 
blind;--and the passag are block and broken;--and the stairway lead 
to nothing. also there are haunter here, not of our kind,--th never 
to be named." 

for a littl time the man thought grate of death and dust. but 
suddenli there came into hi memori a vision of hi enemy' face, with a 
wick smile upon it. and then he wish for longer life,--a hundr 
year of life and pain,--onli to see the grass grow tall abov the 
grave of that enemy. and the soul mock hi desire:-- 

"thine enemi will not wast much thought upon thee. He is no 
half-man,--thin enemy! the ghost in that bodi have room and great 
light. high are the ceil of their habitation; wide and clear the 
passageways; lumin the court and pure. like a fortress excel 
garrison is the brain of thine enemy;--and to ani point thereof the 
defend host can be gather for battl in a moment together. _his_ 
gener will not cease--nay! that face of hi will multipli 
throughout the centuries! becaus thine enemi in everi time provid for 
the need of hi higher ghosts: he gave heed to their warnings; he 
pleasur them in all just ways; he did not fail in rever to them. 
wherefor they now have power to help him at hi need.... how hast thou 
reverenc or pleasur us?" 

* * * * * 

the man remain silent for a space. then, as in horror of doubting, he 
questioned:-- 

"wherefor should ye fear--if nothing be the end?" 

"what is nothingness?" the soul responded. "onli in the languag of 
delus is there an end. that which thou callest the end is in truth 
but the veri beginning. the essenc of us cannot cease. In the burn 
of world it cannot be consumed. It will shudder in the core of great 
stars;--it will quiver in the light of other suns. and onc more, in 
some futur cosmos, it will reconqu knowledge--but onli after 
evolut unthink for multitude. even out of the nameless 
begin of form, and thenc through everi cycl of vanish 
being,--through all success of exhaust pain,--through all the 
abyss of the past,--it must climb again." 

the man utter no word: the soul spoke on:-- 

"for million of million of age must we shiver in tempest of fire: 
then shall we enter anew into some slime primordial,--ther to quicken, 
and again writh upward through all foul dumb blind shapes. innumer 
the metamorphoses!--immeasur the agonies!... and the fault is not of 
ani gods: it is thine!" 

"good or evil," mutter the man,--"what signifi either? the best must 
becom as the worst in the grind of the endless change." 

"nay!" cri out the souls; "for the strong there is a goal,--th goal 
that thou couldst not strive to gain. they will help to the fashion 
of fairer worlds;--they will win to larger light;--they will tower and 
soar as flame to enter the zone of the divine. but thou and we go 
back to slime! think of the billion summer that might have been for 
us!--think of the joys, the loves, the triumph cast away!--th dawn 
of the knowledg undreamed,--th glori of sens unimagined,--th 
exult of illimit power!... think, think, O fool, of all that 
thou hast lost!" 

then the soul of the man turn themselv into worms, and devour 
him. 




In a pair of eye 

[decoration] 


there is one adolesc moment never to be forgotten,--th moment when 
the boy learn that thi world contain noth more wonder than a 
certain pair of eyes. At first the surpris of the discoveri leav 
him breathless: instinct he turn away hi gaze. that vision 
seem too delici to be true. but present he ventur to look 
again,--fear with a new fear,--afraid of the reality, afraid also 
of be observed;--and lo! hi doubt dissolv in a new shock of 
ecstasy. those eye are even more wonder than he had imagined--nay! 
they becom more and yet more entranc everi success time that he 
look at them! sure in all the univers there cannot be anoth such 
pair of eyes! what can lend them such enchantment? whi do they appear 
divine?... He feel that he must ask somebodi to explain,--must 
propound to older and wiser head the riddl of hi new emotions. then 
he make hi confession, with a faint intuit fear of be laugh 
at, but with a strange, fresh sens of raptur in the telling. laugh 
at he is--tenderly; but thi doe not embarrass him nearli so much as 
the fact that he can get no answer to hi question,--to the simpl 
"why?" made so interest by hi frank surpris and hi timid 
blushes. No one is abl to enlighten him; but all can sympath with 
the bewilder of hi sudden awaken from the long soul-sleep of 
childhood. 

* * * * * 

perhap that "why?" never can be fulli answered. but the mysteri that 
prompt it constantli tempt one to theorize; and theori may have a 
worth independ of immedi results. had it not been for old theori 
concern the unknowable, what should we have been abl to learn about 
the knowable? wa it not while in pursuit of the imposs that we 
stumbl upon the undreamed-of and infinit marvel possible? 

* * * * * 

whi inde should a pair of human eye appear for a time to us so 
beauti that, when liken their radianc to splendor of diamond or 
amethyst or emerald, we feel the comparison a blasphemy? whi should we 
find them deeper than the sea, deeper than the day,--deep even as the 
night of space, with it scintil mist of suns? certainli not becaus 
of mere wild fancy. these thoughts, these feelings, must spring from 
some actual percept of the marvellous,--som verit revel of 
the unspeakable. there is, in veri truth, one brief hour of life dure 
which the world hold for us noth so wonder as a pair of eyes. and 
then, while look into them, we discov a thrill of awe vibrat 
through our delight,--aw made by a someth _felt_ rather than seen: a 
latency,--a power,--a shadow of depth unfathom as the cosmic 
ether. It is as though, through some intens and sudden stimul of 
vital being, we had obtained--for one supercelesti moment--th glimps 
of a reality, never befor imagined, and never again to be revealed. 

there is, indeed, an illusion. We seem to view the divine; but thi 
divin itself, wherebi we are dazzl and duped, is a ghost. not to 
actual belong the spell,--not to anyth that is,--but to some 
infinit composit phantom of what ha been. wondrou the vision--but 
wondrou onli becaus our mortal sight then pierc beyond the surfac 
of the present into profund of myriad of years,--pierc beyond 
the mask of life into the enorm night of death. for a moment we are 
made awar of a beauti and a mysteri and a depth unutterable: then the 
veil fall again forever. 

the splendor of the eye that we worship belong to them onli as 
bright to the morning-star. It is a reflex from beyond the shadow of 
the now,--a ghost-light of vanish suns. unknowingli within that 
maiden-gaz we meet the gaze of eye more countless than the host of 
heaven,--ey otherwher pass into dark and dust. 

thus, and onli thus, the depth of that gaze is the depth of the sea of 
death and birth,--and it mysteri is the world-soul' vision, watch 
us out of the silent vast of the abyss of being. 

thus, and onli thus, do truth and illus mingl in the magic of 
eyes,--th spectral past suffus with charm ineff the apparit 
of the present;--and the sudden splendor in the soul of the seer is but 
a flash,--on soundless sheet-lightn of the infinit memory. 




transcriber' notes: 

some of the illustr have been move so that they do not break up 
paragraph and so they correspond to the text, thu the page number of 
the illustr no longer match the page number in the list of 
illustrations. 

repeat chapter titl have been deleted. 

throughout the document, vowel have macron in japanes word are 
indic by vowel have circumflexes. for example, english word for 
the japanes capit (current written in japanes romanji as toukyou) 
use to be written as tokyo, but with macron associ with each 
letter "o". In thi text the japanes capit would be written as tôkyô. 

throughout the document, there are instanc where punctuat seem to 
be missing, but it is unclear whether the miss punctuat is 
deliber or what the miss punctuat should be. In those case the 
punctuat wa not "corrected". 

also, throughout the document, the [oe] ligatur wa replac with "oe". 

passag in ital were indic by _underscores_. 

small cap have been replac with all caps. 

sometim in the text the word "samébito" wa italic and sometim 
it wa not italicized. that inconsist wa persevered. 

In the third footnote, which began on page 15, there wa a miss close 
quotat mark. that "error in punctuation" wa not changed, as it 
appear in a quotat from anoth work. 

On page 55, a period wa ad after "kibun-anbaiyoshi". 

On page 57, "setagawa" wa replac with "sétagawa". 

On page 140, two footnot marker point to footnot 83. that is becaus 
the footnot is about the two word mark by the two footnot marker. 
that wa how it wa in the origin text. 

On page 143, a transcriber' note wa ad right after the illustr 
explain the connect draw between the five elemental-natur and 
the japanes syllabary. 

On page 178, an emdash wa ad after "sixthly,". 

On page 178, "processsion" wa replac with "procession". 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of shadowings, by lafcadio hearn 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook shadow *** 

***** thi file should be name 34215-8.txt or 34215-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/2/1/34215/ 

produc by juliet sutherland, ernest schaal, and the 
onlin distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
