the project gutenberg ebook, round the fire stories, by arthur conan doyl 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and most 
other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 
whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term of 
the project gutenberg licens includ with thi ebook or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the unit states, you'll have 
to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use thi ebook. 




title: round the fire stori 


author: arthur conan doyl 



releas date: februari 4, 2017 [ebook #54109] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook round the fire stories*** 


e-text prepar by richard tons and the onlin distribut proofread 
team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page imag gener made avail by 
internet archiv (https://archive.org) 



note: project gutenberg also ha an html version of thi 
file which includ the origin illustration. 
see 54109-h.htm or 54109-h.zip: 
(http://www.gutenberg.org/files/54109/54109-h/54109-h.htm) 
or 
(http://www.gutenberg.org/files/54109/54109-h.zip) 


imag of the origin page are avail through 
internet archive. see 
https://archive.org/details/roundfirestories00doylrich 


transcriber’ note: 

text enclos by underscor is in ital (_italics_). 

text enclos by equal sign is in bold face (=bold=). 





[illustration: 

“I burst with A shriek into MY own life.” 

[_page 12._] 


round the fire stori 

by 

arthur conan doyl 

author of 
“the white company,” etc., etc. 

with a frontispiec by A. castaign 






london 
smith, elder & co., 15, waterloo place 
1908 

(all right reserved) 

print by 
william clow and sons, limited, 
london and beccles. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




prefac 


[illustration] 

In a previou volume, “the green flag,” I have assembl a number of my 
stori which deal with warfar or with sport. In the present collect 
those have been brought togeth which are concern with the grotesqu 
and with the terrible—such tale as might well be read “round the fire” 
upon a winter’ night. thi would be my ideal atmospher for such 
stories, if an author might choos hi time and place as an artist doe 
the light and hang of hi picture. however, if they have the good 
fortun to give pleasur to ani one, at ani time or place, their author 
will be veri satisfied. 

arthur conan doyle. 

windlesham, 
crowborough. 




content 


page 

I. the leather funnel 1 

ii. the beetl hunter 18 

iii. the man with the watch 41 

iv. the pot OF caviar 65 

V. the japan box 85 

vi. the black doctor 103 

vii. play with fire 129 

viii. the jew’ breastplat 149 

ix. the lost special 177 

X. the club-foot grocer 202 

xi. the seal room 229 

xii. the brazilian cat 248 

xiii. the usher OF lea hous school 276 

xiv. the brown hand 299 

xv. the fiend OF the cooperag 321 

xvi. jelland’ voyag 340 

xvii. B. 24 351 


“I burst with A shriek into MY own life.” _frontispiece_. 
(_from a draw by A. castaigne._) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




round the fire stori 


[illustration] 




the leather funnel 


My friend, lionel dacre, live in the avenu de wagram, paris. hi hous 
wa that small one, with the iron rail and grass plot in front of 
it, on the left-hand side as you pass down from the arc de triomphe. I 
fanci that it had been there long befor the avenu wa constructed, for 
the grey tile were stain with lichens, and the wall were mildew 
and discolour with age. It look a small hous from the street, five 
window in front, if I rememb right, but it deepen into a singl 
long chamber at the back. It wa here that dacr had that singular 
librari of occult literature, and the fantast curios which serv 
as a hobbi for himself, and an amus for hi friends. A wealthi man 
of refin and eccentr tastes, he had spent much of hi life and 
fortun in gather togeth what wa said to be a uniqu privat 
collect of talmudic, cabalistic, and magic works, mani of them of 
great rariti and value. hi tast lean toward the marvel and the 
monstrous, and I have heard that hi experi in the direct of the 
unknown have pass all the bound of civil and of decorum. To 
hi english friend he never allud to such matters, and took the tone 
of the student and _virtuoso_; but a frenchman whose tast were of the 
same natur ha assur me that the worst excess of the black mass 
have been perpetr in that larg and lofti hall, which is line with 
the shelv of hi books, and the case of hi museum. 

dacre’ appear wa enough to show that hi deep interest in these 
psychic matter wa intellectu rather than spiritual. there wa no 
trace of ascetic upon hi heavi face, but there wa much mental forc 
in hi huge dome-lik skull, which curv upward from amongst hi 
thin locks, like a snow-peak abov it fring of fir trees. hi 
knowledg wa greater than hi wisdom, and hi power were far superior 
to hi character. the small bright eyes, buri deepli in hi fleshi 
face, twinkl with intellig and an unab curios of life, but 
they were the eye of a sensualist and an egotist. enough of the man, 
for he is dead now, poor devil, dead at the veri time that he had made 
sure that he had at last discov the elixir of life. It is not with 
hi complex charact that I have to deal, but with the veri strang and 
inexplic incid which had it rise in my visit to him in the earli 
spring of the year ‘82. 

I had known dacr in england, for my research in the assyrian room of 
the british museum had been conduct at the time when he wa 
endeavour to establish a mystic and esoter mean in the 
babylonian tablets, and thi commun of interest had brought us 
together. chanc remark had led to daili conversation, and that to 
someth verg upon friendship. I had promis him that on my next 
visit to pari I would call upon him. At the time when I wa abl to 
fulfil my compact I wa live in a cottag at fontainebleau, and as the 
even train were inconvenient, he ask me to spend the night in hi 
house. 

“I have onli that one spare couch,” said he, point to a broad sofa in 
hi larg salon; “I hope that you will manag to be comfort there.” 

It wa a singular bedroom, with it high wall of brown volumes, but 
there could be no more agreeabl furnitur to a bookworm like myself, 
and there is no scent so pleasant to my nostril as that faint, subtl 
reek which come from an ancient book. I assur him that I could desir 
no more charm chamber, and no more congeni surroundings. 

“if the fit are neither conveni nor conventional, they are at 
least costly,” said he, look round at hi shelves. “I have expend 
nearli a quarter of a million of money upon these object which surround 
you. books, weapons, gems, carvings, tapestries, images—ther is hardli 
a thing here which ha not it history, and it is gener one worth 
telling.” 

He wa seat as he spoke at one side of the open fireplace, and I at 
the other. hi read tabl wa on hi right, and the strong lamp abov 
it ring it with a veri vivid circl of golden light. A half-rol 
palimpsest lay in the centre, and around it were mani quaint articl of 
bric-à-brac. one of these wa a larg funnel, such as is use for 
fill wine casks. It appear to be made of black wood, and to be 
rim with discolour brass. 

“that is a curiou thing,” I remarked. “what is the histori of that?” 

“ah!” said he, “it is the veri question which I have had occas to ask 
myself. I would give a good deal to know. take it in your hand and 
examin it.” 

I did so, and found that what I had imagin to be wood wa in realiti 
leather, though age had dri it into an extrem hardness. It wa a 
larg funnel, and might hold a quart when full. the brass rim encircl 
the wide end, but the narrow wa also tip with metal. 

“what do you make of it?” ask dacre. 

“I should imagin that it belong to some vintner or maltster in the 
middl ages,” said I. “I have seen in england leathern drink flagon 
of the seventeenth century—‘black jacks’ as they were called—which were 
of the same colour and hard as thi filler.” 

“I dare say the date would be about the same,” said dacre, “and no 
doubt, also, it wa use for fill a vessel with liquid. If my 
suspicion are correct, however, it wa a queer vintner who use it, and 
a veri singular cask which wa filled. Do you observ noth strang at 
the spout end of the funnel.” 

As I held it to the light I observ that at a spot some five inch 
abov the brass tip the narrow neck of the leather funnel wa all 
haggl and scored, as if some one had notch it round with a blunt 
knife. onli at that point wa there ani roughen of the dead black 
surface. 

“some one ha tri to cut off the neck.” 

“would you call it a cut?” 

“it is torn and lacerated. It must have taken some strength to leav 
these mark on such tough material, whatev the instrument may have 
been. but what do you think of it? I can tell that you know more than 
you say.” 

dacr smiled, and hi littl eye twinkl with knowledge. 

“have you includ the psycholog of dream among your learn studies?” 
he asked. 

“I did not even know that there wa such a psychology.” 

“mi dear sir, that shelf abov the gem case is fill with volumes, from 
albertu magnu onward, which deal with no other subject. It is a 
scienc in itself.” 

“A scienc of charlatans.” 

“the charlatan is alway the pioneer. from the astrolog came the 
astronomer, from the alchemist the chemist, from the mesmerist the 
experiment psychologist. the quack of yesterday is the professor of 
to-morrow. even such subtl and elus thing as dream will in time be 
reduc to system and order. when that time come the research of our 
friend in the book-shelf yonder will no longer be the amus of the 
mystic, but the foundat of a science.” 

“suppos that is so, what ha the scienc of dream to do with a larg 
black brass-rim funnel?” 

“I will tell you. you know that I have an agent who is alway on the 
lookout for rariti and curios for my collection. some day ago he 
heard of a dealer upon one of the quai who had acquir some old 
rubbish found in a cupboard in an ancient hous at the back of the rue 
mathurin, in the quartier latin. the dining-room of thi old hous is 
decor with a coat of arms, chevrons, and bar roug upon a field 
argent, which prove, upon inquiry, to be the shield of nichola de la 
reynie, a high offici of king loui xiv. there can be no doubt that 
the other articl in the cupboard date back to the earli day of that 
king. the infer is, therefore, that they were all the properti of 
thi nichola de la reynie, who was, as I understand, the gentleman 
special concern with the mainten and execut of the dracon 
law of that epoch.” 

“what then?” 

“I would ask you now to take the funnel into your hand onc more and to 
examin the upper brass rim. can you make out ani letter upon it?” 

there were certainli some scratch upon it, almost obliter by time. 
the gener effect wa of sever letters, the last of which bore some 
resembl to a B. 

“you make it a b?” 

“yes, I do.” 

“so do I. In fact, I have no doubt whatev that it is a b.” 

“but the nobleman you mention would have had R for hi initial.” 

“exactly! that’ the beauti of it. He own thi curiou object, and yet 
he had some one else’ initi upon it. whi did he do this?” 

“I can’t imagine; can you?” 

“well, I might, perhaps, guess. Do you observ someth drawn a littl 
further along the rim?” 

“I should say it wa a crown.” 

“it is undoubtedli a crown; but if you examin it in a good light, you 
will convinc yourself that it is not an ordinari crown. It is a 
herald crown—a badg of rank, and it consist of an altern of 
four pearl and strawberri leaves, the proper badg of a marquis. We may 
infer, therefore, that the person whose initi end in B wa entitl 
to wear that coronet.” 

“then thi common leather filler belong to a marquis?” 

dacr gave a peculiar smile. 

“or to some member of the famili of a marquis,” said he. “so much we 
have clearli gather from thi engrav rim.” 

“but what ha all thi to do with dreams?” I do not know whether it wa 
from a look upon dacre’ face, or from some subtl suggest in hi 
manner, but a feel of repulsion, of unreason horror, came upon me 
as I look at the gnarl old lump of leather. 

“I have more than onc receiv import inform through my 
dreams,” said my companion, in the didact manner which he love to 
affect. “I make it a rule now when I am in doubt upon ani materi point 
to place the articl in question besid me as I sleep, and to hope for 
some enlightenment. the process doe not appear to me to be veri 
obscure, though it ha not yet receiv the bless of orthodox 
science. accord to my theory, ani object which ha been intim 
associ with ani suprem paroxysm of human emotion, whether it be joy 
or pain, will retain a certain atmospher or associ which it is 
capabl of commun to a sensit mind. By a sensit mind I do 
not mean an abnorm one, but such a train and educ mind as you or 
I possess.” 

“you mean, for example, that if I slept besid that old sword upon the 
wall, I might dream of some bloodi incid in which that veri sword 
took part?” 

“an excel example, for, as a matter of fact, that sword wa use in 
that fashion by me, and I saw in my sleep the death of it owner, who 
perish in a brisk skirmish, which I have been unabl to identify, but 
which occur at the time of the war of the frondists. If you think of 
it, some of our popular observ show that the fact ha alreadi been 
recogn by our ancestors, although we, in our wisdom, have class it 
among superstitions.” 

“for example?” 

“well, the place of the bride’ cake beneath the pillow in order that 
the sleeper may have pleasant dreams. that is one of sever instanc 
which you will find set forth in a small _brochure_ which I am myself 
write upon the subject. but to come back to the point, I slept one 
night with thi funnel besid me, and I had a dream which certainli 
throw a curiou light upon it use and origin.” 

“what did you dream?” 

“I dreamed—” He paused, and an intent look of interest came over hi 
massiv face. “bi jove, that’ well thought of,” said he. “thi realli 
will be an exceedingli interest experiment. you are yourself a 
psychic subject—with nerv which respond readili to ani impression.” 

“I have never test myself in that direction.” 

“then we shall test you to-night. might I ask you as a veri great 
favour, when you occupi that couch to-night, to sleep with thi old 
funnel place by the side of your pillow?” 

the request seem to me a grotesqu one; but I have myself, in my 
complex nature, a hunger after all which is bizarr and fantastic. I had 
not the faintest belief in dacre’ theory, nor ani hope for success in 
such an experiment; yet it amus me that the experi should be made. 
dacre, with great gravity, drew a small stand to the head of my settee, 
and place the funnel upon it. then, after a short conversation, he 
wish me good-night and left me. 

* * * * * 

I sat for some littl time smoke by the smoulder fire, and turn 
over in my mind the curiou incid which had occurred, and the strang 
experi which might lie befor me. sceptic as I was, there wa 
someth impress in the assur of dacre’ manner, and my 
extraordinari surroundings, the huge room with the strang and often 
sinist object which were hung round it, struck solemn into my 
soul. final I undressed, and, turn out the lamp, I lay down. after 
long toss I fell asleep. let me tri to describ as accur as I 
can the scene which came to me in my dreams. It stand out now in my 
memori more clearli than anyth which I have seen with my wake eyes. 

there wa a room which bore the appear of a vault. four spandrel 
from the corner ran up to join a sharp cup-shap roof. the 
architectur wa rough, but veri strong. It wa evid part of a 
great building. 

three men in black, with curiou top-heavi black velvet hats, sat in a 
line upon a red-carpet dais. their face were veri solemn and sad. On 
the left stood two long-gown men with portfolio in their hands, which 
seem to be stuf with papers. upon the right, look toward me, wa 
a small woman with blond hair and singular light-blu eyes—th eye of 
a child. she wa past her first youth, but could not yet be call 
middle-aged. her figur wa inclin to stoutness, and her bear wa 
proud and confident. her face wa pale, but serene. It wa a curiou 
face, come and yet feline, with a subtl suggest of cruelti about 
the straight, strong littl mouth and chubbi jaw. she wa drape in some 
sort of loos white gown. besid her stood a thin, eager priest, who 
whisper in her ear, and continu rais a crucifix befor her eyes. 
she turn her head and look fixedli past the crucifix at the three 
men in black, who were, I felt, her judges. 

As I gaze the three men stood up and said something, but I could 
distinguish no words, though I wa awar that it wa the central one who 
wa speaking. they then swept out of the room, follow by the two men 
with the papers. At the same instant sever rough-look fellow in 
stout jerkin came bustl in and remov first the red carpet, and 
then the board which form the dais, so as to entir clear the room. 
when thi screen wa remov I saw some singular articl of furnitur 
behind it. one look like a bed with wooden roller at each end, and a 
winch handl to regul it length. anoth wa a wooden horse. there 
were sever other curiou objects, and a number of swing cord which 
play over pulleys. It wa not unlik a modern gymnasium. 

when the room had been clear there appear a new figur upon the 
scene. thi wa a tall thin person clad in black, with a gaunt and 
auster face. the aspect of the man made me shudder. hi cloth were 
all shine with greas and mottl with stains. He bore himself with a 
slow and impress dignity, as if he took command of all thing from 
the instant of hi entrance. In spite of hi rude appear and sordid 
dress, it wa now _his_ business, _his_ room, hi to command. He carri 
a coil of light rope over hi left fore-arm. the ladi look him up and 
down with a search glance, but her express wa unchanged. It wa 
confident—even defiant. but it wa veri differ with the priest. hi 
face wa ghastli white, and I saw the moistur glisten and run on hi 
high, slope forehead. He threw up hi hand in prayer, and he stoop 
continu to mutter frantic word in the lady’ ear. 

the man in black now advanced, and take one of the cord from hi left 
arm, he bound the woman’ hand together. she held them meekli toward 
him as he did so. then he took her arm with a rough grip and led her 
toward the wooden horse, which wa littl higher than her waist. On to 
thi she wa lift and laid, with her back upon it, and her face to the 
ceiling, while the priest, quiver with horror, had rush out of the 
room. the woman’ lip were move rapidly, and though I could hear 
nothing, I knew that she wa praying. her feet hung down on either side 
of the horse, and I saw that the rough varlet in attend had 
fasten cord to her ankl and secur the other end to iron ring in 
the stone floor. 

My heart sank within me as I saw these omin preparations, and yet I 
wa held by the fascin of horror, and I could not take my eye from 
the strang spectacle. A man had enter the room with a bucket of water 
in either hand. anoth follow with a third bucket. they were laid 
besid the wooden horse. the second man had a wooden dipper—a bowl with 
a straight handle—in hi other hand. thi he gave to the man in black. 
At the same moment one of the varlet approach with a dark object in 
hi hand, which even in my dream fill me with a vagu feel of 
familiarity. It wa a leathern filler. with horribl energi he thrust 
it—but I could stand no more. My hair stood on end with horror. I 
writhed, I struggled, I broke through the bond of sleep, and I burst 
with a shriek into my own life, and found myself lie shiver with 
terror in the huge library, with the moonlight flood through the 
window and throw strang silver and black traceri upon the opposit 
wall. oh, what a bless relief to feel that I wa back in the 
nineteenth century—back out of that mediev vault into a world where 
men had human heart within their bosoms. I sat up on my couch, 
trembl in everi limb, my mind divid between thank and 
horror. To think that such thing were ever done—that they _could_ be 
done without god strike the villain dead. wa it all a fantasy, or 
did it realli stand for someth which had happen in the black, cruel 
day of the world’ history? I sank my throb head upon my shake 
hands. and then, suddenly, my heart seem to stand still in my bosom, 
and I could not even scream, so great wa my terror. someth wa 
advanc toward me through the dark of the room. 

It is a horror come upon a horror which break a man’ spirit. I could 
not reason, I could not pray; I could onli sit like a frozen image, and 
glare at the dark figur which wa come down the great room. and then 
it move out into the white lane of moonlight, and I breath onc more. 
It wa dacre, and hi face show that he wa as frighten as myself. 

“wa that you? for god’ sake what’ the matter?” he ask in a huski 
voice. 

“oh, dacre, I am glad to see you! I have been down into hell. It wa 
dreadful.” 

“then it wa you who screamed?” 

“I dare say it was.” 

“it rang through the house. the servant are all terrified.” He struck a 
match and lit the lamp. “I think we may get the fire to burn up again,” 
he added, throw some log upon the embers. “good god, my dear chap, 
how white you are! you look as if you had seen a ghost.” 

“so I have—sever ghosts.” 

“the leather funnel ha acted, then?” 

“I wouldn’t sleep near the infern thing again for all the money you 
could offer me.” 

dacr chuckled. 

“I expect that you would have a live night of it,” said he. “you 
took it out of me in return, for that scream of your wasn’t a veri 
pleasant sound at two in the morning. I suppos from what you say that 
you have seen the whole dread business.” 

“what dread business?” 

“the tortur of the water—th ‘extraordinari question,’ as it wa call 
in the genial day of ‘le roi soleil.’ did you stand it out to the end?” 

“no, thank god, I awok befor it realli began.” 

“ah! it is just as well for you. I held out till the third bucket. well, 
it is an old story, and they are all in their grave now anyhow, so what 
doe it matter how they got there. I suppos that you have no idea what 
it wa that you have seen?” 

“the tortur of some criminal. she must have been a terribl malefactor 
inde if her crime are in proport to her penalty.” 

“well, we have that small consolation,” said dacre, wrap hi 
dressing-gown round him and crouch closer to the fire. “they _were_ 
in proport to her penalty. that is to say, if I am correct in the 
lady’ identity.” 

“how could you possibl know her identity?” 

for answer dacr took down an old vellum-cov volum from the shelf. 

“just listen to this,” said he; “it is in the french of the seventeenth 
century, but I will give a rough translat as I go. you will judg for 
yourself whether I have solv the riddl or not. 

“the prison wa brought befor the grand chamber and tournel 
of parliament, sit as a court of justice, charg with the 
murder of master dreux d’aubray, her father, and of her two 
brothers, mm. d’aubray, one be civil lieutenant, and the other 
a counsellor of parliament. In person it seem hard to believ 
that she had realli done such wick deeds, for she wa of a mild 
appearance, and of short stature, with a fair skin and blue eyes. 
yet the court, have found her guilty, condemn her to the 
ordinari and to the extraordinari question in order that she might 
be forc to name her accomplices, after which she should be 
carri in a cart to the place de grève, there to have her head 
cut off, her bodi be afterward burn and her ash scatter 
to the winds.” 

the date of thi entri is juli 16, 1676.” 

“it is interesting,” said I, “but not convincing. how do you prove the 
two women to be the same?” 

“I am come to that. the narr goe on to tell of the woman’ 
behaviour when questioned. ‘when the execution approach her she 
recogn him by the cord which he held in hi hands, and she at onc 
held out her own hand to him, look at him from head to foot without 
utter a word.’ how’ that?” 

“yes, it wa so.” 

“‘she gaze without winc upon the wooden hors and ring which had 
twist so mani limb and caus so mani shriek of agony. when her eye 
fell upon the three pail of water, which were all readi for her, she 
said with a smile, “all that water must have been brought here for the 
purpos of drown me, monsieur. you have no idea, I trust, of make a 
person of my small statur swallow it all.”’ shall I read the detail of 
the torture?” 

“no, for heaven’ sake, don’t.” 

“here is a sentenc which must sure show you that what is here 
record is the veri scene which you have gaze upon to-night: ‘the good 
abbé pirot, unabl to contempl the agoni which were suffer by hi 
penitent, had hurri from the room.’ doe that convinc you?” 

“it doe entirely. there can be no question that it is inde the same 
event. but who, then, is thi ladi whose appear wa so attract 
and whose end wa so horrible?” 

for answer dacr came across to me, and place the small lamp upon the 
tabl which stood by my bed. lift up the ill-omen filler, he turn 
the brass rim so that the light fell full upon it. seen in thi way the 
engrav seem clearer than on the night before. 

“we have alreadi agre that thi is the badg of a marqui or of a 
marquise,” said he. “we have also settl that the last letter is b.” 

“it is undoubtedli so.” 

“I now suggest to you that the other letter from left to right are, M, 
M, a small d, A, a small d, and then the final b.” 

“yes, I am sure that you are right. I can make out the two small d’ 
quit plainly.” 

“what I have read to you to-night,” said dacre, “i the offici record 
of the trial of mari madelein d’aubray, marquis de brinvilliers, one 
of the most famou poison and murder of all time.” 

I sat in silence, overwhelm at the extraordinari natur of the 
incident, and at the complet of the proof with which dacr had 
expos it real meaning. In a vagu way I rememb some detail of 
the woman’ career, her unbridl debauchery, the coldblood and 
protract tortur of her sick father, the murder of her brother for 
motiv of petti gain. I recollect also that the braveri of her end 
had done someth to aton for the horror of her life, and that all 
pari had sympath with her last moments, and bless her as a martyr 
within a few day of the time when they had curs her as a murderess. 
one objection, and one only, occur to my mind. 

“how came her initi and her badg of rank upon the filler? sure 
they did not carri their mediev homag to the nobil to the point of 
decor instrument of tortur with their titles?” 

“I wa puzzl with the same point,” said dacre, “but it admit of a 
simpl explanation. the case excit extraordinari interest at the time, 
and noth could be more natur than that La reynie, the head of the 
police, should retain thi filler as a grim souvenir. It wa not often 
that a marchio of franc underw the extraordinari question. that 
he should engrav her initi upon it for the inform of other wa 
sure a veri ordinari proceed upon hi part.” 

“and this?” I asked, point to the mark upon the leathern neck. 

“she wa a cruel tigress,” said dacre, as he turn away. “I think it is 
evid that like other tigress her teeth were both strong and sharp.” 




the beetle-hunt 


A curiou experience? said the doctor. yes, my friends, I have had one 
veri curiou experience. I never expect to have another, for it is 
against all doctrin of chanc that two such event would befal ani 
one man in a singl lifetime. you may believ me or not, but the thing 
happen exactli as I tell it. 

I had just becom a medic man, but I had not start in practice, and 
I live in room in gower street. the street ha been renumb sinc 
then, but it wa in the onli hous which ha a bow-window, upon the 
left-hand side as you go down from the metropolitan station. A widow 
name murchison kept the hous at that time, and she had three medic 
student and one engin as lodgers. I occupi the top room, which wa 
the cheapest, but cheap as it wa it wa more than I could afford. My 
small resourc were dwindl away, and everi week it becam more 
necessari that I should find someth to do. yet I wa veri unwil 
to go into gener practice, for my tast were all in the direct of 
science, and especi of zoology, toward which I had alway a strong 
leaning. I had almost given the fight up and resign myself to be a 
medic drudg for life, when the turning-point of my struggl came in 
a veri extraordinari way. 

one morn I had pick up the _standard_ and wa glanc over it 
contents. there wa a complet absenc of news, and I wa about to toss 
the paper down again, when my eye were caught by an advertis at 
the head of the person column. It wa word in thi way:— 

want for one or more day the servic of a medic man. It 
is essenti that he should be a man of strong physique, of 
steadi nerves, and of a resolut nature. must be an 
entomologist—coleopterist preferred. apply, in person, at 77b, 
brook street. applic must be made befor twelv o’clock 
to-day. 

now, I have alreadi said that I wa devot to zoology. Of all branch 
of zoology, the studi of insect wa the most attract to me, and of 
all insect beetl were the speci with which I wa most familiar. 
butterfli collector are numerous, but beetl are far more varied, and 
more access in these island than are butterflies. It wa thi fact 
which had attract my attent to them, and I had myself made a 
collect which number some hundr varieties. As to the other 
requisit of the advertisement, I knew that my nerv could be depend 
upon, and I had won the weight-throw competit at the 
inter-hospit sports. clearly, I wa the veri man for the vacancy. 
within five minut of my have read the advertis I wa in a cab 
and on my way to brook street. 

As I drove, I kept turn the matter over in my head and tri to make 
a guess as to what sort of employ it could be which need such 
curiou qualifications. A strong physique, a resolut nature, a medic 
training, and a knowledg of beetles—what connect could there be 
between these variou requisites? and then there wa the dishearten 
fact that the situat wa not a perman one, but termin from day 
to day, accord to the term of the advertisement. the more I ponder 
over it the more unintellig did it become; but at the end of my 
medit I alway came back to the ground fact that, come what might, 
I had noth to lose, that I wa complet at the end of my resources, 
and that I wa readi for ani adventure, howev desperate, which would 
put a few honest sovereign into my pocket. the man fear to fail who 
ha to pay for hi failure, but there wa no penalti which fortun could 
exact from me. I wa like the gambler with empti pockets, who is still 
allow to tri hi luck with the others. 

no. 77b, brook street, wa one of those dingi and yet impos houses, 
dun-colour and flat-faced, with the intens respect and solid 
air which mark the georgian builder. As I alight from the cab, a 
young man came out of the door and walk swiftli down the street. In 
pass me, I notic that he cast an inquisit and somewhat 
malevol glanc at me, and I took the incid as a good omen, for hi 
appear wa that of a reject candidate, and if he resent my 
applic it meant that the vacanc wa not yet fill up. full of 
hope, I ascend the broad step and rap with the heavi knocker. 

A footman in powder and liveri open the door. clearli I wa in touch 
with peopl of wealth and fashion. 

“yes, sir?” said the footman. 

“I came in answer to——” 

“quit so, sir,” said the footman. “lord linchmer will see you at onc 
in the library.” 

lord linchmere! I had vagu heard the name, but could not for the 
instant recal anyth about him. follow the footman, I wa shown 
into a large, book-lin room in which there wa seat behind a 
writing-desk a small man with a pleasant, clean-shaven, mobil face, and 
long hair shot with grey, brush back from hi forehead. He look me 
up and down with a veri shrewd, penetr glance, hold the card 
which the footman had given him in hi right hand. then he smile 
pleasantly, and I felt that extern at ani rate I possess the 
qualif which he desired. 

“you have come in answer to my advertisement, dr. hamilton?” he asked. 

“yes, sir.” 

“do you fulfil the condit which are there laid down?” 

“I believ that I do.” 

“you are a power man, or so I should judg from your appearance.” 

“I think that I am fairli strong.” 

“and resolute?” 

“I believ so.” 

“have you ever known what it wa to be expos to immin danger?” 

“no, I don’t know that I ever have.” 

“but you think you would be prompt and cool at such a time?” 

“I hope so.” 

“well, I believ that you would. I have the more confid in you 
becaus you do not pretend to be certain as to what you would do in a 
posit that wa new to you. My impress is that, so far as person 
qualiti go, you are the veri man of whom I am in search. that be 
settled, we may pass on to the next point.” 

“which is?” 

“to talk to me about beetles.” 

I look across to see if he wa joking, but, on the contrary, he wa 
lean eagerli forward across hi desk, and there wa an express of 
someth like anxieti in hi eyes. 

“I am afraid that you do not know about beetles,” he cried. 

“on the contrary, sir, it is the one scientif subject about which I 
feel that I realli do know something.” 

“I am overjoy to hear it. pleas talk to me about beetles.” 

I talked. I do not profess to have said anyth origin upon the 
subject, but I gave a short sketch of the characterist of the beetle, 
and ran over the more common species, with some allus to the 
specimen in my own littl collect and to the articl upon “buri 
beetles” which I had contribut to the _journal of entomolog 
science_. 

“what! not a collector?” cri lord linchmere. “you don’t mean that you 
are yourself a collector?” hi eye danc with pleasur at the thought. 

“you are certainli the veri man in london for my purpose. I thought that 
among five million of peopl there must be such a man, but the 
difficulti is to lay one’ hand upon him. I have been extraordinarili 
fortun in find you.” 

He rang a gong upon the table, and the footman entered. 

“ask ladi rossit to have the good to step thi way,” said hi 
lordship, and a few moment later the ladi wa usher into the room. 
she wa a small, middle-ag woman, veri like lord linchmer in 
appearance, with the same quick, alert featur and grey-black hair. the 
express of anxiety, however, which I had observ upon hi face wa 
veri much more mark upon hers. some great grief seem to have cast 
it shadow over her features. As lord linchmer present me she turn 
her face full upon me, and I wa shock to observ a half-heal scar 
extend for two inch over her right eyebrow. It wa partli conceal 
by plaster, but none the less I could see that it had been a seriou 
wound and not long inflicted. 

“dr. hamilton is the veri man for our purpose, evelyn,” said lord 
linchmere. “he is actual a collector of beetles, and he ha written 
articl upon the subject.” 

“really!” said ladi rossiter. “then you must have heard of my husband. 
everi one who know anyth about beetl must have heard of sir thoma 
rossiter.” 

for the first time a thin littl ray of light began to break into the 
obscur business. here, at last, wa a connect between these peopl 
and beetles. sir thoma rossiter—h wa the greatest author upon the 
subject in the world. He had made it hi life-long study, and had 
written a most exhaust work upon it. I hasten to assur her that I 
had read and appreci it. 

“have you met my husband?” she asked. 

“no, I have not.” 

“but you shall,” said lord linchmere, with decision. 

the ladi wa stand besid the desk, and she put her hand upon hi 
shoulder. It wa obviou to me as I saw their face togeth that they 
were brother and sister. 

“are you realli prepar for this, charles? It is nobl of you, but you 
fill me with fears.” her voic quaver with apprehension, and he 
appear to me to be equal moved, though he wa make strong effort 
to conceal hi agitation. 

“yes, yes, dear; it is all settled, it is all decided; in fact, there is 
no other possibl way, that I can see.” 

“there is one obviou way.” 

“no, no, evelyn, I shall never abandon you—never. It will come 
right—depend upon it; it will come right, and sure it look like the 
interfer of provid that so perfect an instrument should be put 
into our hands.” 

My posit wa embarrassing, for I felt that for the instant they had 
forgotten my presence. but lord linchmer came back suddenli to me and 
to my engagement. 

“the busi for which I want you, dr. hamilton, is that you should put 
yourself absolut at my disposal. I wish you to come for a short 
journey with me, to remain alway at my side, and to promis to do 
without question whatev I may ask you, howev unreason it may 
appear to you to be.” 

“that is a good deal to ask,” said I. 

“unfortun I cannot put it more plainly, for I do not myself know 
what turn matter may take. you may be sure, however, that you will not 
be ask to do anyth which your conscienc doe not approve; and I 
promis you that, when all is over, you will be proud to have been 
concern in so good a work.” 

“if it end happily,” said the lady. 

“exactly; if it end happily,” hi lordship repeated. 

“and terms?” I asked. 

“twenti pound a day.” 

I wa amaz at the sum, and must have show my surpris upon my 
features. 

“it is a rare combin of qualities, as must have struck you when you 
first read the advertisement,” said lord linchmere; “such vari gift 
may well command a high return, and I do not conceal from you that your 
duti might be arduou or even dangerous. besides, it is possibl that 
one or two day may bring the matter to an end.” 

“pleas god!” sigh hi sister. 

“so now, dr. hamilton, may I reli upon your aid?” 

“most undoubtedly,” said I. “you have onli to tell me what my duti 
are.” 

“your first duti will be to return to your home. you will pack up 
whatev you may need for a short visit to the country. We start 
togeth from paddington station at 3.40 thi afternoon.” 

“do we go far?” 

“a far as pangbourne. meet me at the bookstal at 3.30. I shall have 
the tickets. good-bye, dr. hamilton! and, by the way, there are two 
thing which I should be veri glad if you would bring with you, in case 
you have them. one is your case for collect beetles, and the other is 
a stick, and the thicker and heavier the better.” 

* * * * * 

you may imagin that I had plenti to think of from the time that I left 
brook street until I set out to meet lord linchmer at paddington. the 
whole fantast busi kept arrang and re-arrang itself in 
kaleidoscop form insid my brain, until I had thought out a dozen 
explanations, each of them more grotesqu improb than the last. 
and yet I felt that the truth must be someth grotesqu improb 
also. At last I gave up all attempt at find a solution, and 
content myself with exactli carri out the instruct which I had 
received. with a hand valise, specimen-case, and a load cane, I wa 
wait at the paddington bookstal when lord linchmer arrived. He wa 
an even smaller man than I had thought—frail and peaky, with a manner 
which wa more nervou than it had been in the morning. He wore a long, 
thick travel ulster, and I observ that he carri a heavi 
blackthorn cudgel in hi hand. 

“I have the tickets,” said he, lead the way up the platform. “thi is 
our train. I have engag a carriage, for I am particularli anxiou to 
impress one or two thing upon you while we travel down.” 

and yet all that he had to impress upon me might have been said in a 
sentence, for it wa that I wa to rememb that I wa there as a 
protect to himself, and that I wa not on ani consider to leav 
him for an instant. thi he repeat again and again as our journey drew 
to a close, with an insist which show that hi nerv were 
thoroughli shaken. 

“yes,” he said at last, in answer to my look rather than to my words, 
“I _am_ nervous, dr. hamilton. I have alway been a timid man, and my 
timid depend upon my frail physic health. but my soul is firm, and 
I can bring myself up to face a danger which a less nervou man might 
shrink from. what I am do now is done from no compulsion, but 
entir from a sens of duty, and yet it is, beyond doubt, a desper 
risk. If thing should go wrong, I will have some claim to the titl of 
martyr.” 

thi etern read of riddl wa too much for me. I felt that I must 
put a term to it. 

“I think it would be veri much better, sir, if you were to trust me 
entirely,” said I. “it is imposs for me to act effectively, when I 
do not know what are the object which we have in view, or even where we 
are going.” 

“oh, as to where we are going, there need be no mysteri about that,” 
said he; “we are go to delamer court, the resid of sir thoma 
rossiter, with whose work you are so conversant. As to the exact object 
of our visit, I do not know that at thi stage of the proceed 
anyth would be gained, dr. hamilton, by my take you into my 
complet confidence. I may tell you that we are acting—i say ‘we,’ 
becaus my sister, ladi rossiter, take the same view as myself—with the 
one object of prevent anyth in the natur of a famili scandal. 
that be so, you can understand that I am loth to give ani 
explan which are not absolut necessary. It would be a differ 
matter, dr. hamilton, if I were ask your advice. As matter stand, it 
is onli your activ help which I need, and I will indic to you from 
time to time how you can best give it.” 

there wa noth more to be said, and a poor man can put up with a good 
deal for twenti pound a day, but I felt none the less that lord 
linchmer wa act rather scurvili toward me. He wish to convert me 
into a passiv tool, like the blackthorn in hi hand. with hi sensit 
disposit I could imagine, however, that scandal would be abhorr to 
him, and I realiz that he would not take me into hi confid until 
no other cours wa open to him. I must trust to my own eye and ear to 
solv the mystery, but I had everi confid that I should not trust to 
them in vain. 

delamer court lie a good five mile from pangbourn station, and we 
drove for that distanc in an open fly. lord linchmer sat in deep 
thought dure the time, and he never open hi mouth until we were 
close to our destination. when he did speak it wa to give me a piec of 
inform which surpris me. 

“perhap you are not aware,” said he, “that I am a medic man like 
yourself?” 

“no, sir, I did not know it.” 

“yes, I qualifi in my younger days, when there were sever live 
between me and the peerage. I have not had occas to practise, but I 
have found it a use education, all the same. I never regret the 
year which I devot to medic study. these are the gate of delamer 
court.” 

We had come to two high pillar crown with herald monster which 
flank the open of a wind avenue. over the laurel bush and 
rhododendron I could see a long, many-g mansion, girdl with ivy, 
and tone to the warm, cheery, mellow glow of old brick-work. My eye 
were still fix in admir upon thi delight hous when my 
companion pluck nervous at my sleeve. 

“here’ sir thomas,” he whispered. “pleas talk beetl all you can.” 

A tall, thin figure, curious angular and bony, had emerg through a 
gap in the hedg of laurels. In hi hand he held a spud, and he wore 
gauntlet gardener’ gloves. A broad-brimmed, grey hat cast hi face 
into shadow, but it struck me as exceedingli austere, with an 
ill-nourish beard and harsh, irregular features. the fli pull up and 
lord linchmer sprang out. 

“mi dear thomas, how are you?” said he, heartily. 

but the hearti wa by no mean reciprocal. the owner of the ground 
glare at me over hi brother-in-law’ shoulder, and I caught broken 
scrap of sentences—“well-known wish ... hatr of stranger ... 
unjustifi intrus ... perfectli inexcusable.” then there wa a 
mutter explanation, and the two of them came over togeth to the side 
of the fly. 

“let me present you to sir thoma rossiter, dr. hamilton,” said lord 
linchmere. “you will find that you have a strong commun of tastes.” 

I bowed. sir thoma stood veri stiffly, look at me sever from 
under the broad brim of hi hat. 

“lord linchmer tell me that you know someth about beetles,” said 
he. “what do you know about beetles?” 

“I know what I have learn from your work upon the coleoptera, sir 
thomas,” I answered. 

“give me the name of the better-known speci of the british scarabæi,” 
said he. 

I had not expect an examination, but fortun I wa readi for one. 
My answer seem to pleas him, for hi stern featur relaxed. 

“you appear to have read my book with some profit, sir,” said he. “it is 
a rare thing for me to meet ani one who take an intellig interest in 
such matters. peopl can find time for such trivial as sport or 
society, and yet the beetl are overlooked. I can assur you that the 
greater part of the idiot in thi part of the countri are unawar that 
I have ever written a book at all—i, the first man who ever describ 
the true function of the elytra. I am glad to see you, sir, and I have 
no doubt that I can show you some specimen which will interest you.” He 
step into the fli and drove up with us to the house, expound to me 
as we went some recent research which he had made into the anatomi of 
the lady-bird. 

I have said that sir thoma rossit wore a larg hat drawn down over 
hi brows. As he enter the hall he uncov himself, and I wa at 
onc awar of a singular characterist which the hat had concealed. hi 
forehead, which wa natur high, and higher still on account of 
reced hair, wa in a continu state of movement. some nervou 
weak kept the muscl in a constant spasm, which sometim produc 
a mere twitch and sometim a curiou rotari movement unlik anyth 
which I had ever seen before. It wa strikingli visibl as he turn 
toward us after enter the study, and seem the more singular from 
the contrast with the hard, steadi grey eye which look out from 
underneath those palpit brows. 

“I am sorry,” said he, “that ladi rossit is not here to help me to 
welcom you. By the way, charles, did evelyn say anyth about the date 
of her return?” 

“she wish to stay in town for a few more days,” said lord linchmere. 
“you know how ladies’ social duti accumul if they have been for 
some time in the country. My sister ha mani old friend in london at 
present.” 

“well, she is her own mistress, and I should not wish to alter her 
plans, but I shall be glad when I see her again. It is veri lone here 
without her company.” 

“I wa afraid that you might find it so, and that wa partli whi I ran 
down. My young friend, dr. hamilton, is so much interest in the 
subject which you have made your own, that I thought you would not mind 
hi accompani me.” 

“I lead a retir life, dr. hamilton, and my avers to stranger grow 
upon me,” said our host. “I have sometim thought that my nerv are 
not so good as they were. My travel in search of beetl in my younger 
day took me into mani malari and unhealthi places. but a brother 
coleopterist like yourself is alway a welcom guest, and I shall be 
delight if you will look over my collection, which I think that I may 
without exagger describ as the best in europe.” 

and so no doubt it was. He had a huge oaken cabinet arrang in shallow 
drawers, and here, neatli ticket and classified, were beetl from 
everi corner of the earth, black, brown, blue, green, and mottled. everi 
now and then as he swept hi hand over the line and line of impal 
insect he would catch up some rare specimen, and, handl it with as 
much delicaci and rever as if it were a preciou relic, he would 
hold forth upon it peculiar and the circumst under which it 
came into hi possession. It wa evid an unusu thing for him to 
meet with a sympathet listener, and he talk and talk until the 
spring even had deepen into night, and the gong announc that it 
wa time to dress for dinner. all the time lord linchmer said nothing, 
but he stood at hi brother-in-law’ elbow, and I caught him continu 
shoot curiou little, question glanc into hi face. and hi own 
featur express some strong emotion, apprehension, sympathy, 
expectation: I seem to read them all. I wa sure that lord linchmer 
wa fear someth and await something, but what that someth 
might be I could not imagine. 

the even pass quietli but pleasantly, and I should have been 
entir at my eas if it had not been for that continu sens of 
tension upon the part of lord linchmere. As to our host, I found that he 
improv upon acquaintance. He spoke constantli with affect of hi 
absent wife, and also of hi littl son, who had recent been sent to 
school. the house, he said, wa not the same without them. If it were 
not for hi scientif studies, he did not know how he could get through 
the days. after dinner we smoke for some time in the billiard-room, and 
final went earli to bed. 

and then it wa that, for the first time, the suspicion that lord 
linchmer wa a lunat cross my mind. He follow me into my bedroom, 
when our host had retired. 

“doctor,” said he, speak in a low, hurri voice, “you must come with 
me. you must spend the night in my bedroom.” 

“what do you mean?” 

“I prefer not to explain. but thi is part of your duties. My room is 
close by, and you can return to your own befor the servant call you in 
the morning.” 

“but why?” I asked. 

“becaus I am nervou of be alone,” said he. “that’ the reason, 
sinc you must have a reason.” 

It seem rank lunacy, but the argument of those twenti pound would 
overcom mani objections. I follow him to hi room. 

“well,” said I, “there’ onli room for one in that bed.” 

“onli one shall occupi it,” said he. 

“and the other?” 

“must remain, on watch.” 

“why?” said I. “one would think you expect to be attacked.” 

“perhap I do.” 

“in that case, whi not lock your door?” 

“perhap I _want_ to be attacked.” 

It look more and more like lunacy. however, there wa noth for it 
but to submit. I shrug my shoulder and sat down in the arm-chair 
besid the empti fireplace. 

“I am to remain on watch, then?” said I, ruefully. 

“we will divid the night. If you will watch until two, I will watch the 
remainder.” 

“veri good.” 

“call me at two o’clock, then.” 

“I will do so.” 

“keep your ear open, and if you hear ani sound wake me 
instantly—instantly, you hear?” 

“you can reli upon it.” I tri to look as solemn as he did. 

“and for god’ sake don’t go to sleep,” said he, and so, take off onli 
hi coat, he threw the coverlet over him and settl down for the night. 

It wa a melancholi vigil, and made more so by my own sens of it 
folly. suppos that by ani chanc lord linchmer had caus to suspect 
that he wa subject to danger in the hous of sir thoma rossiter, whi 
on earth could he not lock hi door and so protect himself? hi own 
answer that he might wish to be attack wa absurd. whi should he 
possibl wish to be attacked? and who would wish to attack him? clearly, 
lord linchmer wa suffer from some singular delusion, and the result 
wa that on an imbecil pretext I wa to be depriv of my night’ rest. 
still, howev absurd, I wa determin to carri out hi injunct to 
the letter as long as I wa in hi employment. I sat therefor besid 
the empti fireplace, and listen to a sonor chime clock somewher 
down the passage, which gurgl and struck everi quarter of an hour. It 
wa an endless vigil. save for that singl clock, an absolut silenc 
reign throughout the great house. A small lamp stood on the tabl at 
my elbow, throw a circl of light round my chair, but leav the 
corner of the room drape in shadow. On the bed lord linchmer wa 
breath peacefully. I envi him hi quiet sleep, and again and again 
my own eyelid drooped, but everi time my sens of duti came to my help, 
and I sat up, rub my eye and pinch myself with a determin 
to see my irrat watch to an end. 

and I did so. from down the passag came the chime of two o’clock, and 
I laid my hand upon the shoulder of the sleeper. instantli he wa 
sit up, with an express of the keenest interest upon hi face. 

“you have heard something?” 

“no, sir. It is two o’clock.” 

“veri good. I will watch. you can go to sleep.” I lay down under the 
coverlet as he had done, and wa soon unconscious. My last recollect 
wa of that circl of lamplight, and of the small, hunched-up figur and 
strained, anxiou face of lord linchmer in the centr of it. 

how long I slept I do not know; but I wa suddenli arous by a sharp 
tug at my sleeve. the room wa in darkness, but a hot smell of oil told 
me that the lamp had onli that instant been extinguished. 

“quick! quick!” said lord linchmere’ voic in my ear. 

I sprang out of bed, he still drag at my arm. 

“over here!” he whispered, and pull me into a corner of the room. 
“hush! listen!” 

In the silenc of the night I could distinctli hear that someon wa 
come down the corridor. It wa a stealthi step, faint and 
intermittent, as of a man who paus cautious after everi stride. 
sometim for half a minut there wa no sound, and then came the 
shuffl and creak which told of a fresh advance. My companion wa 
trembl with excitement. hi hand which still held my sleev twitch 
like a branch in the wind. 

“what is it?” I whispered. 

“it’ he!” 

“sir thomas?” 

“yes.” 

“what doe he want?” 

“hush! Do noth until I tell you.” 

I wa consciou now that someon wa tri the door. there wa the 
faintest littl rattl from the handle, and then I dimli saw a thin slit 
of subdu light. there wa a lamp burn somewher far down the 
passage, and it just suffic to make the outsid visibl from the 
dark of our room. the greyish slit grew broader and broader, veri 
gradually, veri gently, and then outlin against it I saw the dark 
figur of a man. He wa squat and crouching, with the silhouett of a 
bulki and misshapen dwarf. slowli the door swung open with thi omin 
shape frame in the centr of it. and then, in an instant the crouch 
figur shot up, there wa a tiger spring across the room, and thud, 
thud, thud, came three tremend blow from some heavi object upon the 
bed. 

I wa so paralyz with amaz that I stood motionless and stare 
until I wa arous by a yell for help from my companion. the open door 
shed enough light for me to see the outlin of things, and there wa 
littl lord linchmer with hi arm round the neck of hi 
brother-in-law, hold brave on to him like a game bull-terri with 
it teeth into a gaunt deerhound. the tall, boni man dash himself 
about, writh round and round to get a grip upon hi assailant; but 
the other, clutch on from behind, still kept hi hold, though hi 
shrill, frighten cri show how unequ he felt the contest to be. I 
sprang to the rescue, and the two of us manag to throw sir thoma to 
the ground, though he made hi teeth meet in my shoulder. with all my 
youth and weight and strength, it wa a desper struggl befor we 
could master hi frenzi struggles; but at last we secur hi arm 
with the waist-cord of the dressing-gown which he wa wearing. I wa 
hold hi leg while lord linchmer wa endeavour to relight the 
lamp, when there came the patter of mani feet in the passage, and the 
butler and two footmen, who had been alarm by the cries, rush into 
the room. with their aid we had no further difficulti in secur our 
prisoner, who lay foam and glare upon the ground. one glanc at hi 
face wa enough to prove that he wa a danger maniac, while the 
short, heavi hammer which lay besid the bed show how murder had 
been hi intentions. 

“do not use ani violence!” said lord linchmere, as we rais the 
struggl man to hi feet. “he will have a period of stupor after thi 
excitement. I believ that it is come on already.” As he spoke the 
convuls becam less violent, and the madman’ head fell forward upon 
hi breast, as if he were overcom by sleep. We led him down the passag 
and stretch him upon hi own bed, where he lay unconscious, breath 
heavily. 

“two of you will watch him,” said lord linchmere. “and now, dr. 
hamilton, if you will return with me to my room, I will give you the 
explan which my horror of scandal ha perhap caus me to delay 
too long. come what may, you will never have caus to regret your share 
in thi night’ work. 

“the case may be made clear in a veri few words,” he continued, when we 
were alone. “mi poor brother-in-law is one of the best fellow upon 
earth, a love husband and an estim father, but he come from a 
stock which is deepli taint with insanity. He ha more than onc had 
homicid outbreaks, which are the more pain becaus hi inclin 
is alway to attack the veri person to whom he is most attached. hi son 
wa sent away to school to avoid thi danger, and then came an attempt 
upon my sister, hi wife, from which she escap with injuri that you 
may have observ when you met her in london. you understand that he 
know noth of the matter when he is in hi sound senses, and would 
ridicul the suggest that he could under ani circumst injur 
those whom he love so dearly. It is often, as you know, a 
characterist of such maladi that it is absolut imposs to 
convinc the man who suffer from them of their existence. 

“our great object was, of course, to get him under restraint befor he 
could stain hi hand with blood, but the matter wa full of difficulty. 
He is a reclus in hi habits, and would not see ani medic man. 
besides, it wa necessari for our purpos that the medic man should 
convinc himself of hi insanity; and he is sane as you or I, save on 
these veri rare occasions. but, fortunately, befor he ha these attack 
he alway show certain premonitori symptoms, which are providenti 
danger-signals, warn us to be upon our guard. the chief of these is 
that nervou contort of the forehead which you must have observed. 
thi is a phenomenon which alway appear from three to four day befor 
hi attack of frenzy. the moment it show itself hi wife came into 
town on some pretext, and took refug in my hous in brook street. 

“it remain for me to convinc a medic man of sir thomas’ insanity, 
without which it wa imposs to put him where he could do no harm. 
the first problem wa how to get a medic man into hi house. I 
bethought me of hi interest in beetles, and hi love for ani one who 
share hi tastes. I advertised, therefore, and wa fortun enough to 
find in you the veri man I wanted. A stout companion wa necessary, for 
I knew that the lunaci could onli be prove by a murder assault, and 
I had everi reason to believ that that assault would be made upon 
myself, sinc he had the warmest regard for me in hi moment of sanity. 
I think your intellig will suppli all the rest. I did not know that 
the attack would come by night, but I thought it veri probable, for the 
crise of such case usual do occur in the earli hour of the morning. 
I am a veri nervou man myself, but I saw no other way in which I could 
remov thi terribl danger from my sister’ life. I need not ask you 
whether you are will to sign the lunaci papers.” 

“undoubtedly. but _two_ signatur are necessary.” 

“you forget that I am myself a holder of a medic degree. I have the 
paper on a side-t here, so if you will be good enough to sign them 
now, we can have the patient remov in the morning.” 

* * * * * 

So that wa my visit to sir thoma rossiter, the famou beetle-hunter, 
and that wa also my first step upon the ladder of success, for ladi 
rossit and lord linchmer have prove to be staunch friends, and they 
have never forgotten my associ with them in the time of their need. 
sir thoma is out and said to be cured, but I still think that if I 
spent anoth night at delamer court, I should be inclin to lock my 
door upon the inside. 




the man with the watch 


there are mani who will still bear in mind the singular circumst 
which, under the head of the rugbi mystery, fill mani column of 
the daili press in the spring of the year 1892. come as it did at a 
period of except dulness, it attract perhap rather more 
attent than it deserved, but it offer to the public that mixtur of 
the whimsic and the tragic which is most stimul to the popular 
imagination. interest drooped, however, when, after week of fruitless 
investigation, it wa found that no final explan of the fact wa 
forthcoming, and the tragedi seem from that time to the present to 
have final taken it place in the dark catalogu of inexplic and 
unexpi crimes. A recent commun (the authent of which 
appear to be abov question) has, however, thrown some new and clear 
light upon the matter. befor lay it befor the public it would be as 
well, perhaps, that I should refresh their memori as to the singular 
fact upon which thi commentari is founded. these fact were briefli as 
follows:— 

At five o’clock on the even of the 18th of march in the year alreadi 
mention a train left euston station for manchester. It wa a rainy, 
squalli day, which grew wilder as it progressed, so it wa by no mean 
the weather in which ani one would travel who wa not driven to do so by 
necessity. the train, however, is a favourit one among manchest 
busi men who are return from town, for it doe the journey in 
four hour and twenti minutes, with onli three stoppag upon the way. 
In spite of the inclement even it was, therefore, fairli well fill 
upon the occas of which I speak. the guard of the train wa a tri 
servant of the company—a man who had work for twenty-two year without 
blemish or complaint. hi name wa john palmer. 

the station clock wa upon the stroke of five, and the guard wa about 
to give the customari signal to the engine-driv when he observ two 
belat passeng hurri down the platform. the one wa an 
except tall man, dress in a long black overcoat with astrakhan 
collar and cuffs. I have alreadi said that the even wa an inclement 
one, and the tall travel had the high, warm collar turn up to 
protect hi throat against the bitter march wind. He appeared, as far as 
the guard could judg by so hurri an inspection, to be a man between 
fifti and sixti year of age, who had retain a good deal of the vigour 
and activ of hi youth. In one hand he carri a brown leather 
gladston bag. hi companion wa a lady, tall and erect, walk with a 
vigor step which outpac the gentleman besid her. she wore a long, 
fawn-colour dust-cloak, a black, close-fit toque, and a dark veil 
which conceal the greater part of her face. the two might veri well 
have pass as father and daughter. they walk swiftli down the line of 
carriages, glanc in at the windows, until the guard, john palmer, 
overtook them. 

“now, then, sir, look sharp, the train is going,” said he. 

“first-class,” the man answered. 

the guard turn the handl of the nearest door. In the carriage, which 
he had opened, there sat a small man with a cigar in hi mouth. hi 
appear seem to have impress itself upon the guard’ memory, for 
he wa prepared, afterwards, to describ or to identifi him. He wa a 
man of thirty-four or thirty-f year of age, dress in some grey 
material, sharp-nosed, alert, with a ruddy, weather-beaten face, and a 
small, close crop black beard. He glanc up as the door wa 
opened. the tall man paus with hi foot upon the step. 

“thi is a smoke compartment. the ladi dislik smoke,” said he, 
look round at the guard. 

“all right! here you are, sir!” said john palmer. He slam the door of 
the smoke carriage, open that of the next one, which wa empty, and 
thrust the two travel in. At the same moment he sound hi whistl 
and the wheel of the train began to move. the man with the cigar wa at 
the window of hi carriage, and said someth to the guard as he roll 
past him, but the word were lost in the bustl of the departure. palmer 
step into the guard’ van, as it came up to him, and thought no more 
of the incident. 

twelv minut after it departur the train reach willesden junction, 
where it stop for a veri short interval. An examin of the 
ticket ha made it certain that no one either join or left it at thi 
time, and no passeng wa seen to alight upon the platform. At 5.14 the 
journey to manchest wa resumed, and rugbi wa reach at 6.50, the 
express be five minut late. 

At rugbi the attent of the station offici wa drawn to the fact 
that the door of one of the first-class carriag wa open. An 
examin of that compartment, and of it neighbour, disclos a 
remark state of affairs. 

the smoke carriag in which the short, red-fac man with the black 
beard had been seen wa now empty. save for a half-smok cigar, there 
wa no trace whatev of it recent occupant. the door of thi carriag 
wa fastened. In the next compartment, to which attent had been 
origin drawn, there wa no sign either of the gentleman with the 
astrakhan collar or of the young ladi who accompani him. all three 
passeng had disappeared. On the other hand, there wa found upon the 
floor of thi carriage—th one in which the tall travel and the ladi 
had been—a young man, fashion dress and of eleg appearance. He 
lay with hi knee drawn up, and hi head rest against the further 
door, an elbow upon either seat. A bullet had penetr hi heart and 
hi death must have been instantaneous. No one had seen such a man enter 
the train, and no railway ticket wa found in hi pocket, neither were 
there ani mark upon hi linen, nor paper nor person properti 
which might help to identifi him. who he was, whenc he had come, and 
how he had met hi end were each as great a mysteri as what had occur 
to the three peopl who had start an hour and a half befor from 
willesden in those two compartments. 

I have said that there wa no person properti which might help to 
identifi him, but it is true that there wa one peculiar about thi 
unknown young man which wa much comment upon at the time. In hi 
pocket were found no fewer than six valuabl gold watches, three in the 
variou pocket of hi waistcoat, one in hi ticket-pocket, one in hi 
breast-pocket, and one small one set in a leather strap and fasten 
round hi left wrist. the obviou explan that the man wa a 
pickpocket, and that thi wa hi plunder, wa discount by the fact 
that all six were of american make, and of a type which is rare in 
england. three of them bore the mark of the rochest watchmak 
company; one wa by mason, of elmira; one wa unmarked; and the small 
one, which wa highli jewel and ornamented, wa from tiffany, of new 
york. the other content of hi pocket consist of an ivori knife with 
a corkscrew by rodgers, of sheffield; a small circular mirror, one inch 
in diameter; a re-admiss slip to the lyceum theatre; a silver box 
full of vesta matches, and a brown leather cigar-cas contain two 
cheroots—also two pound fourteen shill in money. It wa clear, 
then, that whatev motiv may have led to hi death, robberi wa not 
among them. As alreadi mentioned, there were no mark upon the man’ 
linen, which appear to be new, and no tailor’ name upon hi coat. In 
appear he wa young, short, smooth-cheeked, and delic featured. 
one of hi front teeth wa conspicu stop with gold. 

On the discoveri of the tragedi an examin wa instantli made of the 
ticket of all passengers, and the number of the passeng themselv 
wa counted. It wa found that onli three ticket were unaccount for, 
correspond to the three travel who were missing. the express wa 
then allow to proceed, but a new guard wa sent with it, and john 
palmer wa detain as a wit at rugby. the carriag which includ 
the two compart in question wa uncoupl and side-tracked. then, 
on the arriv of inspector vane, of scotland yard, and of mr. 
henderson, a detect in the servic of the railway company, an 
exhaust inquiri wa made into all the circumstances. 

that crime had been commit wa certain. the bullet, which appear to 
have come from a small pistol or revolver, had been fire from some 
littl distance, as there wa no scorch of the clothes. No weapon wa 
found in the compart (which final dispos of the theori of 
suicide), nor wa there ani sign of the brown leather bag which the 
guard had seen in the hand of the tall gentleman. A lady’ parasol wa 
found upon the rack, but no other trace wa to be seen of the travel 
in either of the sections. apart from the crime, the question of how or 
whi three passeng (one of them a lady) could get out of the train, 
and one other get in dure the unbroken run between willesden and 
rugby, wa one which excit the utmost curios among the gener 
public, and gave rise to much specul in the london press. 

john palmer, the guard, wa abl at the inquest to give some evid 
which threw a littl light upon the matter. there wa a spot between 
tring and cheddington, accord to hi statement, where, on account of 
some repair to the line, the train had for a few minut slow down to 
a pace not exceed eight or ten mile an hour. At that place it might 
be possibl for a man, or even for an except activ woman, to 
have left the train without seriou injury. It wa true that a gang of 
platelay wa there, and that they had seen nothing, but it wa their 
custom to stand in the middl between the metals, and the open carriag 
door wa upon the far side, so that it wa conceiv that someon 
might have alight unseen, as the dark would by that time be 
draw in. A steep embank would instantli screen anyon who sprang 
out from the observ of the navvies. 

the guard also depos that there wa a good deal of movement upon the 
platform at willesden junction, and that though it wa certain that no 
one had either join or left the train there, it wa still quit 
possibl that some of the passeng might have chang unseen from one 
compart to another. It wa by no mean uncommon for a gentleman to 
finish hi cigar in a smoke carriag and then to chang to a clearer 
atmosphere. suppos that the man with the black beard had done so at 
willesden (and the half-smok cigar upon the floor seem to favour the 
supposition), he would natur go into the nearest section, which 
would bring him into the compani of the two other actor in thi drama. 
thu the first stage of the affair might be surmis without ani great 
breach of probability. but what the second stage had been, or how the 
final one had been arriv at, neither the guard nor the experienc 
detect offic could suggest. 

A care examin of the line between willesden and rugbi result 
in one discoveri which might or might not have a bear upon the 
tragedy. near tring, at the veri place where the train slow down, 
there wa found at the bottom of the embank a small pocket 
testament, veri shabbi and worn. It wa print by the bibl societi of 
london, and bore an inscription: “from john to alice. jan. 13th, 1856,” 
upon the fly-leaf. underneath wa written: “james, juli 4th, 1859,” and 
beneath that again: “edward. nov. 1st, 1869,” all the entri be in 
the same handwriting. thi wa the onli clue, if it could be call a 
clue, which the polic obtained, and the coroner’ verdict of “murder by 
a person or person unknown” wa the unsatisfactori end of a singular 
case. advertisement, rewards, and inquiri prove equal fruitless, 
and noth could be found which wa solid enough to form the basi for 
a profit investigation. 

It would be a mistake, however, to suppos that no theori were 
form to account for the facts. On the contrary, the press, both in 
england and in america, teem with suggest and suppositions, most 
of which were obvious absurd. the fact that the watch were of 
american make, and some peculiar in connect with the gold 
stop of hi front tooth, appear to indic that the deceas wa 
a citizen of the unit states, though hi linen, clothes, and boot 
were undoubtedli of british manufacture. It wa surmised, by some, that 
he wa conceal under the seat, and that, be discovered, he wa for 
some reason, possibl becaus he had overheard their guilti secrets, put 
to death by hi fellow-passengers. when coupl with gener as to 
the feroc and cun of anarch and other secret societies, thi 
theori sound as plausibl as any. 

the fact that he should be without a ticket would be consist with 
the idea of concealment, and it wa well known that women play a 
promin part in the nihilist propaganda. On the other hand, it wa 
clear, from the guard’ statement, that the man must have been hidden 
there _before_ the other arrived, and how unlik the coincid that 
conspir should stray exactli into the veri compart in which a 
spi wa alreadi concealed! besides, thi explan ignor the man in 
the smoke carriage, and gave no reason at all for hi simultan 
disappearance. the polic had littl difficulti in show that such a 
theori would not cover the facts, but they were unprepar in the 
absenc of evid to advanc ani altern explanation. 

there wa a letter in the _daili gazette_, over the signatur of a 
well-known crimin investigator, which gave rise to consider 
discuss at the time. He had form a hypothesi which had at least 
ingenu to recommend it, and I cannot do better than append it in hi 
own words. 

“whatev may be the truth,” said he, “it must depend upon some 
bizarr and rare combin of events, so we need have no hesit in 
postul such event in our explanation. In the absenc of data we 
must abandon the analyt or scientif method of investigation, and 
must approach it in the synthet fashion. In a word, instead of take 
known event and deduc from them what ha occurred, we must build up 
a fanci explan if it will onli be consist with known events. 
We can then test thi explan by ani fresh fact which may arise. If 
they all fit into their places, the probabl is that we are upon the 
right track, and with each fresh fact thi probabl increas in a 
geometr progress until the evid becom final and convincing. 

“now, there is one most remark and suggest fact which ha not 
met with the attent which it deserves. there is a local train run 
through harrow and king’ langley, which is time in such a way that the 
express must have overtaken it at or about the period when it eas down 
it speed to eight mile an hour on account of the repair of the line. 
the two train would at that time be travel in the same direct at 
a similar rate of speed and upon parallel lines. It is within everyone’ 
experi how, under such circumstances, the occup of each carriag 
can see veri plainli the passeng in the other carriag opposit to 
him. the lamp of the express had been lit at willesden, so that each 
compart wa brightli illuminated, and most visibl to an observ 
from outside. 

“now, the sequenc of event as I reconstruct them would be after thi 
fashion. thi young man with the abnorm number of watch wa alon in 
the carriag of the slow train. hi ticket, with hi paper and glove 
and other things, was, we will suppose, on the seat besid him. He wa 
probabl an american, and also probabl a man of weak intellect. the 
excess wear of jewelleri is an earli symptom in some form of 
mania. 

“a he sat watch the carriag of the express which were (on 
account of the state of the line) go at the same pace as himself, he 
suddenli saw some peopl in it whom he knew. We will suppos for the 
sake of our theori that these peopl were a woman whom he love and a 
man whom he hated—and who in return hate him. the young man wa 
excit and impulsive. He open the door of hi carriage, step 
from the footboard of the local train to the footboard of the express, 
open the other door, and made hi way into the presenc of these two 
people. the feat (on the supposit that the train were go at the 
same pace) is by no mean so peril as it might appear. 

“have now got our young man without hi ticket into the carriag in 
which the elder man and the young woman are travelling, it is not 
difficult to imagin that a violent scene ensued. It is possibl that 
the pair were also americans, which is the more probabl as the man 
carri a weapon—an unusu thing in england. If our supposit of 
incipi mania is correct, the young man is like to have assault 
the other. As the upshot of the quarrel the elder man shot the intruder, 
and then made hi escap from the carriage, take the young ladi with 
him. We will suppos that all thi happen veri rapidly, and that the 
train wa still go at so slow a pace that it wa not difficult for 
them to leav it. A woman might leav a train go at eight mile an 
hour. As a matter of fact, we know that thi woman _did_ do so. 

“and now we have to fit in the man in the smoke carriage. presum 
that we have, up to thi point, reconstruct the tragedi correctly, we 
shall find noth in thi other man to caus us to reconsid our 
conclusions. accord to my theory, thi man saw the young fellow cross 
from one train to the other, saw him open the door, heard the 
pistol-shot, saw the two fugit spring out on to the line, realiz 
that murder had been done, and sprang out himself in pursuit. whi he ha 
never been heard of since—wheth he met hi own death in the pursuit, 
or whether, as is more likely, he wa made to realiz that it wa not a 
case for hi interference—i a detail which we have at present no mean 
of explaining. I acknowledg that there are some difficulti in the 
way. At first sight, it might seem improb that at such a moment a 
murder would burden himself in hi flight with a brown leather bag. My 
answer is that he wa well awar that if the bag were found hi ident 
would be established. It wa absolut necessari for him to take it 
with him. My theori stand or fall upon one point, and I call upon the 
railway compani to make strict inquiri as to whether a ticket wa found 
unclaim in the local train through harrow and king’ langley upon the 
18th of march. If such a ticket were found my case is proved. If not, my 
theori may still be the correct one, for it is conceiv either that 
he travel without a ticket or that hi ticket wa lost.” 

To thi elabor and plausibl hypothesi the answer of the polic 
and of the compani was, first, that no such ticket wa found; secondly, 
that the slow train would never run parallel to the express; and, 
thirdly, that the local train had been stationari in king’ langley 
station when the express, go at fifti mile an hour, had flash past 
it. So perish the onli satisfi explanation, and five year have 
elaps without suppli a new one. now, at last, there come a 
statement which cover all the facts, and which must be regard as 
authentic. It took the shape of a letter date from new york, and 
address to the same crimin investig whose theori I have quoted. 
It is given here in extenso, with the except of the two open 
paragraphs, which are person in their nature:— 

“you’ll excus me if i’m not veri free with names. there’ less reason 
now than there wa five year ago when mother wa still living. but for 
all that, I had rather cover up our track all I can. but I owe you an 
explanation, for if your idea of it wa wrong, it wa a mighti ingeni 
one all the same. i’ll have to go back a littl so as you may understand 
all about it. 

“mi peopl came from bucks, england, and emigr to the state in 
the earli fifties. they settl in rochester, in the state of new york, 
where my father ran a larg dri good store. there were onli two sons: 
myself, james, and my brother, edward. I wa ten year older than my 
brother, and after my father die I sort of took the place of a father 
to him, as an elder brother would. He wa a bright, spirit boy, and 
just one of the most beauti creatur that ever lived. but there wa 
alway a soft spot in him, and it wa like mould in cheese, for it 
spread and spread, and noth that you could do would stop it. mother 
saw it just as clearli as I did, but she went on spoil him all the 
same, for he had such a way with him that you could refus him nothing. 
I did all I could to hold him in, and he hate me for my pains. 

“at last he fairli got hi head, and noth that we could do would 
stop him. He got off into new york, and went rapidli from bad to worse. 
At first he wa onli fast, and then he wa criminal; and then, at the 
end of a year or two, he wa one of the most notori young crook in 
the city. He had form a friendship with sparrow maccoy, who wa at the 
head of hi profess as a bunco-steerer, green goods-man, and gener 
rascal. they took to card-sharping, and frequent some of the best 
hotel in new york. My brother wa an excel actor (he might have 
made an honest name for himself if he had chosen), and he would take the 
part of a young englishman of title, of a simpl lad from the west, or 
of a colleg undergraduate, whichev suit sparrow maccoy’ purpose. 
and then one day he dress himself as a girl, and he carri it off so 
well, and made himself such a valuabl decoy, that it wa their 
favourit game afterwards. they had made it right with tammani and with 
the police, so it seem as if noth could ever stop them, for those 
were in the day befor the lexow commission, and if you onli had a 
pull, you could do pretti nearli everyth you wanted. 

“and noth would have stop them if they had onli stuck to card 
and new york, but they must need come up rochest way, and forg a 
name upon a check. It wa my brother that did it, though everyon knew 
that it wa under the influenc of sparrow maccoy. I bought up that 
check, and a pretti sum it cost me. then I went to my brother, laid it 
befor him on the table, and swore to him that I would prosecut if he 
did not clear out of the country. At first he simpli laughed. I could 
not prosecute, he said, without break our mother’ heart, and he knew 
that I would not do that. I made him understand, however, that our 
mother’ heart wa be broken in ani case, and that I had set firm on 
the point that I would rather see him in a rochest gaol than in a new 
york hotel. So at last he gave in, and he made me a solemn promis that 
he would see sparrow maccoy no more, that he would go to europe, and 
that he would turn hi hand to ani honest trade that I help him to 
get. I took him down right away to an old famili friend, joe willson, 
who is an export of american watch and clocks, and I got him to give 
edward an agenc in london, with a small salari and a 15 per cent. 
commiss on all business. hi manner and appear were so good that 
he won the old man over at once, and within a week he wa sent off to 
london with a case full of samples. 

“it seem to me that thi busi of the check had realli given my 
brother a fright, and that there wa some chanc of hi settl down 
into an honest line of life. My mother had spoken with him, and what she 
said had touch him, for she had alway been the best of mother to 
him, and he had been the great sorrow of her life. but I knew that thi 
man sparrow maccoy had a great influenc over edward, and my chanc of 
keep the lad straight lay in break the connect between them. I 
had a friend in the new york detect force, and through him I kept a 
watch upon maccoy. when within a fortnight of my brother’ sail I 
heard that maccoy had taken a berth in the _etruria_, I wa as certain 
as if he had told me that he wa go over to england for the purpos 
of coax edward back again into the way that he had left. In an 
instant I had resolv to go also, and to put my influenc against 
maccoy’s. I knew it wa a lose fight, but I thought, and my mother 
thought, that it wa my duty. We pass the last night togeth in 
prayer for my success, and she gave me her own testament that my father 
had given her on the day of their marriag in the old country, so that I 
might alway wear it next my heart. 

“I wa a fellow-traveller, on the steamship, with sparrow maccoy, and 
at least I had the satisfact of spoil hi littl game for the 
voyage. the veri first night I went into the smoking-room, and found him 
at the head of a card table, with half-a-dozen young fellow who were 
carri their full purs and their empti skull over to europe. He wa 
settl down for hi harvest, and a rich one it would have been. but I 
soon chang all that. 

“‘gentlemen,’ said I, ‘are you awar whom you are play with?’ 

“‘what’ that to you? you mind your own business!’ said he, with an 
oath. 

“‘who is it, anyway?’ ask one of the dudes. 

“‘he’ sparrow maccoy, the most notori cardsharp in the states.’ 

“up he jump with a bottl in hi hand, but he rememb that he wa 
under the flag of the effet old country, where law and order run, and 
tammani ha no pull. gaol and the gallow wait for violenc and murder, 
and there’ no slip out by the back door on board an ocean liner. 

“‘prove your words, you——!’ said he. 

“‘i will!’ said I. ‘if you will turn up your right shirt-sleev to the 
shoulder, I will either prove my word or I will eat them.’ 

“he turn white and said not a word. you see, I knew someth of hi 
ways, and I wa awar that part of the mechan which he and all such 
sharper use consist of an elast down the arm with a clip just abov 
the wrist. It is by mean of thi clip that they withdraw from their 
hand the card which they do not want, while they substitut other 
card from anoth hiding-place. I reckon on it be there, and it 
was. He curs me, slunk out of the saloon, and wa hardli seen again 
dure the voyage. for once, at ani rate, I got level with mister 
sparrow maccoy. 

“but he soon had hi reveng upon me, for when it came to influenc 
my brother he outweigh me everi time. edward had kept himself straight 
in london for the first few weeks, and had done some busi with hi 
american watches, until thi villain came across hi path onc more. I 
did my best, but the best wa littl enough. the next thing I heard 
there had been a scandal at one of the northumberland avenu hotels: a 
travel had been fleec of a larg sum by two confeder 
card-sharpers, and the matter wa in the hand of scotland yard. the 
first I learn of it wa in the even paper, and I wa at onc 
certain that my brother and maccoy were back at their old games. I 
hurri at onc to edward’ lodgings. they told me that he and a tall 
gentleman (whom I recogn as maccoy) had gone off together, and that 
he had left the lodg and taken hi thing with him. the landladi had 
heard them give sever direct to the cabman, end with euston 
station, and she had accident overheard the tall gentleman say 
someth about manchester. she believ that that wa their 
destination. 

“A glanc at the time-t show me that the most like train wa at 
five, though there wa anoth at 4.35 which they might have caught. I 
had onli time to get the later one, but found no sign of them either at 
the depôt or in the train. they must have gone on by the earlier one, so 
I determin to follow them to manchest and search for them in the 
hotel there. one last appeal to my brother by all that he owe to my 
mother might even now be the salvat of him. My nerv were 
overstrung, and I lit a cigar to steadi them. At that moment, just as 
the train wa move off, the door of my compart wa flung open, and 
there were maccoy and my brother on the platform. 

“they were both disguised, and with good reason, for they knew that the 
london polic were after them. maccoy had a great astrakhan collar drawn 
up, so that onli hi eye and nose were showing. My brother wa dress 
like a woman, with a black veil half down hi face, but of cours it did 
not deceiv me for an instant, nor would it have done so even if I had 
not known that he had often use such a dress before. I start up, and 
as I did so maccoy recogn me. He said something, the conductor 
slam the door, and they were shown into the next compartment. I tri 
to stop the train so as to follow them, but the wheel were alreadi 
moving, and it wa too late. 

“when we stop at willesden, I instantli chang my carriage. It 
appear that I wa not seen to do so, which is not surprising, as the 
station wa crowd with people. maccoy, of course, wa expect me, 
and he had spent the time between euston and willesden in say all he 
could to harden my brother’ heart and set him against me. that is what 
I fancy, for I had never found him so imposs to soften or to move. I 
tri thi way and I tri that; I pictur hi futur in an english 
gaol; I describ the sorrow of hi mother when I came back with the 
news; I said everyth to touch hi heart, but all to no purpose. He 
sat there with a fix sneer upon hi handsom face, while everi now and 
then sparrow maccoy would throw in a taunt at me, or some word of 
encourag to hold my brother to hi resolutions. 

“‘whi don’t you run a sunday-school?’ he would say to me, and then, in 
the same breath: ‘he think you have no will of your own. He think you 
are just the babi brother and that he can lead you where he likes. he’ 
onli just find out that you are a man as well as he.’ 

“it wa those word of hi which set me talk bitterly. We had left 
willesden, you understand, for all thi took some time. My temper got 
the better of me, and for the first time in my life I let my brother see 
the rough side of me. perhap it would have been better had I done so 
earlier and more often. 

“‘a man!’ said I. ‘well, i’m glad to have your friend’ assur of it, 
for no one would suspect it to see you like a boarding-school missy. I 
don’t suppos in all thi countri there is a more contemptible-look 
creatur than you are as you sit there with that dolli pinafor upon 
you.’ He colour up at that, for he wa a vain man, and he winc from 
ridicule. 

“‘it’ onli a dust-cloak,’ said he, and he slip it off. ‘one ha to 
throw the copper off one’ scent, and I had no other way to do it.’ He 
took hi toqu off with the veil attached, and he put both it and the 
cloak into hi brown bag. ‘anyway, I don’t need to wear it until the 
conductor come round,’ said he. 

“‘nor then, either,’ said I, and take the bag I slung it with all my 
forc out of the window. ‘now,’ said I, ‘you’ll never make a mari jane 
of yourself while I can help it. If noth but that disguis stand 
between you and a gaol, then to gaol you shall go.’ 

“that wa the way to manag him. I felt my advantag at once. hi suppl 
natur wa one which yield to rough far more readili than to 
entreaty. He flush with shame, and hi eye fill with tears. but 
maccoy saw my advantag also, and wa determin that I should not 
pursu it. 

“‘he’ my pard, and you shall not bulli him,’ he cried. 

“‘he’ my brother, and you shall not ruin him,’ said I. ‘I believ a 
spell of prison is the veri best way of keep you apart, and you shall 
have it, or it will be no fault of mine.’ 

“‘oh, you would squeal, would you?’ he cried, and in an instant he 
whip out hi revolver. I sprang for hi hand, but saw that I wa too 
late, and jump aside. At the same instant he fired, and the bullet 
which would have struck me pass through the heart of my unfortun 
brother. 

“he drop without a groan upon the floor of the compartment, and 
maccoy and I, equal horrified, knelt at each side of him, tri to 
bring back some sign of life. maccoy still held the load revolv in 
hi hand, but hi anger against me and my resent toward him had 
both for the moment been swallow up in thi sudden tragedy. It wa he 
who first realiz the situation. the train wa for some reason go 
veri slowli at the moment, and he saw hi opportun for escape. In an 
instant he had the door open, but I wa as quick as he, and jump upon 
him the two of us fell off the footboard and roll in each other’ arm 
down a steep embankment. At the bottom I struck my head against a stone, 
and I rememb noth more. when I came to myself I wa lie among 
some low bushes, not far from the railroad track, and somebodi wa 
bath my head with a wet handkerchief. It wa sparrow maccoy. 

“‘i guess I couldn’t leav you,’ said he. ‘I didn’t want to have the 
blood of two of you on my hand in one day. you love your brother, i’v 
no doubt; but you didn’t love him a cent more than I love him, though 
you’ll say that I took a queer way to show it. anyhow, it seem a mighti 
empti world now that he is gone, and I don’t care a continent whether 
you give me over to the hangman or not.’ 

“he had turn hi ankl in the fall, and there we sat, he with hi 
useless foot, and I with my throb head, and we talk and talk 
until gradual my bitter began to soften and to turn into someth 
like sympathy. what wa the use of reveng hi death upon a man who 
wa as much stricken by that death as I was? and then, as my wit 
gradual returned, I began to realiz also that I could do noth 
against maccoy which would not recoil upon my mother and myself. how 
could we convict him without a full account of my brother’ career be 
made public—th veri thing which of all other we wish to avoid? It 
wa realli as much our interest as hi to cover the matter up, and from 
be an aveng of crime I found myself chang to a conspir 
against justice. the place in which we found ourselv wa one of those 
pheasant preserv which are so common in the old country, and as we 
grope our way through it I found myself consult the slayer of my 
brother as to how far it would be possibl to hush it up. 

“I soon realiz from what he said that unless there were some paper of 
which we knew noth in my brother’ pockets, there wa realli no 
possibl mean by which the polic could identifi him or learn how he 
had got there. hi ticket wa in maccoy’ pocket, and so wa the ticket 
for some baggag which they had left at the depôt. like most americans, 
he had found it cheaper and easier to buy an outfit in london than to 
bring one from new york, so that all hi linen and cloth were new and 
unmarked. the bag, contain the dust cloak, which I had thrown out of 
the window, may have fallen among some brambl patch where it is still 
concealed, or may have been carri off by some tramp, or may have come 
into the possess of the police, who kept the incid to themselves. 
anyhow, I have seen noth about it in the london papers. As to the 
watches, they were a select from those which had been intrust to 
him for busi purposes. It may have been for the same busi 
purpos that he wa take them to manchester, but—well, it’ too late 
to enter into that. 

“I don’t blame the polic for be at fault. I don’t see how it could 
have been otherwise. there wa just one littl clew that they might have 
follow up, but it wa a small one. I mean that small circular mirror 
which wa found in my brother’ pocket. It isn’t a veri common thing for 
a young man to carri about with him, is it? but a gambler might have 
told you what such a mirror may mean to a cardsharper. If you sit back a 
littl from the table, and lay the mirror, face upwards, upon your lap, 
you can see, as you deal, everi card that you give to your adversary. It 
is not hard to say whether you see a man or rais him when you know hi 
card as well as your own. It wa as much a part of a sharper’ outfit 
as the elast clip upon sparrow maccoy’ arm. take that, in 
connect with the recent fraud at the hotels, the polic might have 
got hold of one end of the string. 

“I don’t think there is much more for me to explain. We got to a villag 
call amersham that night in the charact of two gentlemen upon a 
walk tour, and afterward we made our way quietli to london, whenc 
maccoy went on to cairo and I return to new york. My mother die six 
month afterwards, and I am glad to say that to the day of her death she 
never knew what happened. she wa alway under the delus that edward 
wa earn an honest live in london, and I never had the heart to 
tell her the truth. He never wrote; but, then, he never did write at ani 
time, so that made no difference. hi name wa the last upon her lips. 

“there’ just one other thing that I have to ask you, sir, and I should 
take it as a kind return for all thi explanation, if you could do it 
for me. you rememb that testament that wa pick up. I alway carri 
it in my insid pocket, and it must have come out in my fall. I valu it 
veri highly, for it wa the famili book with my birth and my brother’ 
mark by my father in the begin of it. I wish you would appli at 
the proper place and have it sent to me. It can be of no possibl valu 
to ani one else. If you address it to X, bassano’ library, broadway, 
new york, it is sure to come to hand.” 




the pot OF caviar 


It wa the fourth day of the siege. ammunit and provis were both 
near an end. when the boxer insurrect had suddenli flame up, and 
roared, like a fire in dri grass, across northern china, the few 
scatter european in the outli provinc had huddl togeth at 
the nearest defens post and had held on for dear life until rescu 
came—or until it did not. In the latter case, the less said about their 
fate the better. In the former, they came back into the world of men 
with that upon their face which told that they had look veri close 
upon such an end as would ever haunt their dreams. 

ichau wa onli fifti mile from the coast, and there wa a european 
squadron in the gulf of liantong. therefor the absurd littl garrison, 
consist of nativ christian and railway men, with a german offic 
to command them and five civilian european to support him, held on 
brave with the convict that help must soon come sweep down to 
them from the low hill to eastward. the sea wa visibl from those 
hills, and on the sea were their arm countrymen. surely, then, they 
could not feel deserted. with brave heart they man the loophol in 
the crumbl brick wall outlin the tini european quarter, and they 
fire away briskly, if ineffectively, at the rapidli advanc sangar 
of the boxers. It wa certain that in anoth day or so they would be at 
the end of their resources, but then it wa equal certain that in 
anoth day or so they must be relieved. It might be a littl sooner or 
it might be a littl later, but there wa no one who ever ventur to 
hint that the relief would not arriv in time to pluck them out of the 
fire. Up to tuesday night there wa no word of discouragement. 

It wa true that on the wednesday their robust faith in what wa go 
forward behind those eastern hill had weaken a little. the grey 
slope lay bare and unrespons while the deadli sangar push ever 
nearer, so near that the dread face which shriek imprec at 
them from time to time over the top could be seen in everi hideou 
feature. there wa not so much of that now sinc young ainslie, of the 
diplomat service, with hi neat littl .303 sport rifle, had 
settl down in the squat church tower, and had devot hi day to 
abat the nuisance. but a silent sangar is an even more impress 
thing than a clamor one, and steadily, irresistibly, inevitably, the 
line of brick and rubbl drew closer. soon they would be so near that 
one rush would assuredli carri the frantic swordsmen over the frail 
entrenchment. It all seem veri black upon the wednesday evening. 
colonel dresler, the german ex-infantri soldier, went about with an 
imperturb face, but a heart of lead. ralston, of the railway, wa up 
half the night write farewel letters. professor mercer, the old 
entomologist, wa even more silent and grimli thought than ever. 
ainsli had lost some of hi flippancy. On the whole, the ladies—miss 
sinclair, the nurs of the scotch mission, mrs. patterson, and her 
pretti daughter jessie, were the most compos of the party. father 
pierr of the french mission, wa also unaffected, as wa natur to one 
who regard martyrdom as a gloriou crown. the boxer yell for hi 
blood beyond the wall disturb him less than hi forc associ 
with the sturdi scotch presbyterian presenc of mr. patterson, with whom 
for ten year he had wrangl over the soul of the natives. they pass 
each other now in the corridor as dog pass cat, and each kept a 
watch eye upon the other lest even in the trench he might filch 
some sheep from the rival fold, whisper heresi in hi ear. 

but the wednesday night pass without a crisis, and on the thursday all 
wa bright onc more. It wa ainsli up in the clock tower who had first 
heard the distant thud of a gun. then dresler heard it, and within half 
an hour it wa audibl to all—that strong iron voice, call to them 
from afar and bid them to be of good cheer, sinc help wa coming. 
It wa clear that the land parti from the squadron wa well on it 
way. It would not arriv an hour too soon. the cartridg were nearli 
finished. their half-rat of food would soon dwindl to an even more 
piti supply. but what need to worri about that now that relief wa 
assured? there would be no attack that day, as most of the boxer could 
be seen stream off in the direct of the distant firing, and the 
long line of sangar were silent and deserted. they were all able, 
therefore, to assembl at the lunch-table, a merry, talk party, 
full of that joy of live which sparkl most brightli under the 
immin shadow of death. 

“the pot of caviare!” cri ainslie. “come, professor, out with the 
pot of caviare!” 

“potz-tausend! yes,” grunt old dresler. “it is certainli time that 
we had that famou pot.” 

the ladi join in, and from all part of the long, ill-furnish 
tabl there came the demand for caviare. 

It wa a strang time to ask for such a delicacy, but the reason is 
soon told. professor mercer, the old californian entomologist, had 
receiv a jar of caviar in a hamper of good from san francisco, 
arriv a day or two befor the outbreak. In the gener pool and 
distribut of provis thi one dainti and three bottl of lachryma 
christi from the same hamper had been except and set aside. By common 
consent they were to be reserv for the final joyou meal when the end 
of their peril should be in sight. even as they sat the thud-thud of the 
reliev gun came to their ears—mor luxuri music to their lunch 
than the most sybarit restaur of london could have supplied. befor 
even the relief would certainli be there. why, then, should their 
stale bread not be glorifi by the treasur caviare? 

but the professor shook hi gnarl old head and smile hi 
inscrut smile. 

“better wait,” said he. 

“wait! whi wait?” cri the company. 

“they have still far to come,” he answered. 

“they will be here for supper at the latest,” said ralston, of the 
railway—a keen, birdlik man, with bright eye and long, project 
nose. “they cannot be more than ten mile from us now. If they onli did 
two mile an hour it would make them due at seven.” 

“there is a battl on the way,” remark the colonel. “you will grant 
two hour or three hour for the battle.” 

“not half an hour,” cri ainslie. “they will walk through them as if 
they were not there. what can these rascal with their matchlock and 
sword do against modern weapons?” 

“it depend on who lead the column of relief,” said dresler. “if they 
are fortun enough to have a german officer——” 

“an englishman for my money!” cri ralston. 

“the french commodor is said to be an excel strategist,” remark 
father pierre. 

“I don’t see that it matter a toss,” cri the exuber ainslie. “mr. 
mauser and mr. maxim are the two men who will see us through, and with 
them on our side no leader can go wrong. I tell you they will just brush 
them asid and walk through them. So now, professor, come on with that 
pot of caviare!” 

but the old scientist wa unconvinced. 

“we shall reserv it for supper,” said he. 

“after all,” said mr. patterson, in hi slow, precis scottish 
intonation, “it will be a courtesi to our guests—th offic of the 
relief—if we have some palat food to lay befor them. i’m in 
agreement with the professor that we reserv the caviar for supper.” 

the argument appeal to their sens of hospitality. there wa someth 
pleasantli chivalrous, too, in the idea of keep their one littl 
delicaci to give a savour to the meal of their preservers. there wa no 
more talk of the caviare. 

“bi the way, professor,” said mr. patterson, “i’v onli heard to-day 
that thi is the second time that you have been besieg in thi way. 
i’m sure we should all be veri interest to hear some detail of your 
previou experience.” 

the old man’ face set veri grimly. 

“I wa in sung-tong, in south china, in ‘eighty-nine,” said he. 

“it’ a veri extraordinari coincid that you should twice have been 
in such a peril situation,” said the missionary. “tell us how you 
were reliev at sung-tong.” 

the shadow deepen upon the weari face. 

“we were not relieved,” said he. 

“what! the place fell?” 

“yes, it fell.” 

“and you came through alive?” 

“I am a doctor as well as an entomologist. they had mani wounded; they 
spare me.” 

“and the rest?” 

“assez! assez!” cri the littl french priest, rais hi hand in 
protest. He had been twenti year in china. the professor had said 
nothing, but there wa something, some lurk horror, in hi dull, grey 
eye which had turn the ladi pale. 

“I am sorry,” said the missionary. “I can see that it is a pain 
subject. I should not have asked.” 

“no,” the professor answered, slowly. “it is wiser not to ask. It is 
better not to speak about such thing at all. but sure those gun are 
veri much nearer?” 

there could be no doubt of it. after a silenc the thud-thud had 
recommenc with a live rippl of rifle-fir play all round that 
deep bass master-note. It must be just at the farther side of the 
nearest hill. they push back their chair and ran out to the ramparts. 
the silent-foot nativ servant came in and clear the scanti remain 
from the table. but after they had left, the old professor sat on there, 
hi massive, grey-crown head lean upon hi hand and the same 
pensiv look of horror in hi eyes. some ghost may be laid for years, 
but when they do rise it is not so easi to drive them back to their 
slumbers. the gun had ceas outside, but he had not observ it, lost 
as he wa in the one suprem and terribl memori of hi life. 

hi thought were interrupt at last by the entranc of the commandant. 
there wa a complac smile upon hi broad german face. 

“the kaiser will be pleased,” said he, rub hi hands. “yes, 
certainli it should mean a decoration. ‘defenc of ichau against the 
boxer by colonel dresler, late major of the 114th hanoverian infantry. 
splendid resist of small garrison against overwhelm odds.’ It 
will certainli appear in the berlin papers.” 

“then you think we are saved?” said the old man, with neither emot 
nor exult in hi voice. 

the colonel smiled. 

“why, professor,” said he, “I have seen you more excit on the morn 
when you brought back _lepidu mercerensis_ in your collecting-box.” 

“the fli wa safe in my collecting-box first,” the entomologist 
answered. “I have seen so mani strang turn of fate in my long life 
that I do not griev nor do I rejoic until I know that I have cause. 
but tell me the news.” 

“well,” said the colonel, light hi long pipe, and stretch hi 
gaiter leg in the bamboo chair, “i’ll stake my militari reput 
that all is well. they are advanc swiftly, the fire ha die down 
to show that resist is at an end, and within an hour we’ll see them 
over the brow. ainsli is to fire hi gun three time from the church 
tower as a signal, and then we shall make a littl salli on our own 
account.” 

“and you are wait for thi signal?” 

“yes, we are wait for ainslie’ shots. I thought I would spend the 
time with you, for I had someth to ask you.” 

“what wa it?” 

“well, you rememb your talk about the other siege—th sieg of 
sung-tong. It interest me veri much from a profession point of view. 
now that the ladi and civilian are gone you will have no object to 
discuss it.” 

“it is not a pleasant subject.” 

“no, I dare say not. mein gott! it wa inde a tragedy. but you have 
seen how I have conduct the defenc here. wa it wise? wa it good? 
wa it worthi of the tradit of the german army?” 

“I think you could have done no more.” 

“thank you. but thi other place, wa it as abli defended? To me a 
comparison of thi sort is veri interesting. could it have been saved?” 

“no; everyth possibl wa done—sav onli one thing.” 

“ah! there wa one omission. what wa it?” 

“no one—abov all, no woman—should have been allow to fall aliv into 
the hand of the chinese.” 

the colonel held out hi broad red hand and enfold the long, white, 
nervou finger of the professor. 

“you are right—a thousand time right. but do not think that thi ha 
escap my thoughts. for myself I would die fighting, so would ralston, 
so would ainslie. I have talk to them, and it is settled. but the 
others, I have spoken with them, but what are you to do? there are the 
priest, and the missionary, and the women.” 

“would they wish to be taken alive?” 

“they would not promis to take step to prevent it. they would not lay 
hand on their own lives. their conscienc would not permit it. Of 
course, it is all over now, and we need not speak of such dread 
things. but what would you have done in my place?” 

“kill them.” 

“mein gott! you would murder them?” 

“in merci I would kill them. man, I have been through it. I have seen 
the death of the hot eggs; I have seen the death of the boil kettle; 
I have seen the women—mi god! I wonder that I have ever slept sound 
again.” hi usual impass face wa work and quiver with the 
agoni of the remembrance. “I wa strap to a stake with thorn in my 
eyelid to keep them open, and my grief at their tortur wa a less 
thing than my self-reproach when I thought that I could with one tube of 
tasteless tablet have snatch them at the last instant from the hand 
of their tormentors. murder! I am readi to stand at the divin bar and 
answer for a thousand murder such as that! sin! why, it is such an act 
as might well cleans the stain of real sin from the soul. but if, 
know what I do, I should have fail thi second time to do it, then, 
by heaven! there is no hell deep enough or hot enough to receiv my 
guilti craven spirit.” 

the colonel rose, and again hi hand clasp that of the professor. 

“you speak sense,” said he. “you are a brave, strong man, who know your 
own mind. yes, by the lord! you would have been my great help had thing 
gone the other way. I have often thought and wonder in the dark, earli 
hour of the morning, but I did not know how to do it. but we should 
have heard ainslie’ shot befor now; I will go and see.” 

again the old scientist sat alon with hi thoughts. finally, as neither 
the gun of the reliev forc nor yet the signal of their approach 
sound upon hi ears, he rose, and wa about to go himself upon the 
rampart to make inquiri when the door flew open, and colonel dresler 
stagger into the room. hi face wa of a ghastli yellow-white, and hi 
chest heav like that of a man exhaust with running. there wa brandi 
on the side-table, and he gulp down a glassful. then he drop 
heavili into a chair. 

“well,” said the professor, coldly, “they are not coming?” 

“no, they cannot come.” 

there wa silenc for a minut or more, the two men stare blankli at 
each other. 

“do they all know?” 

“no one know but me.” 

“how did you learn?” 

“I wa at the wall near the postern gate—th littl wooden gate that 
open on the rose garden. I saw someth crawl among the bushes. 
there wa a knock at the door. I open it. It wa a christian 
tartar, badli cut about with swords. He had come from the battle. 
commodor wyndham, the englishman, had sent him. the reliev forc had 
been checked. they had shot away most of their ammunition. they had 
entrench themselv and sent back to the ship for more. three day 
must pass befor they could come. that wa all. mein gott! it wa 
enough.” 

the professor bent hi shaggi grey brows. 

“where is the man?” he asked. 

“he is dead. He die of loss of blood. hi bodi lie at the postern 
gate.” 

“and no one saw him?” 

“not to speak to.” 

“oh! they did see him, then?” 

“ainsli must have seen him from the church tower. He must know that I 
have had tidings. He will want to know what they are. If I tell him they 
must all know.” 

“how long can we hold out?” 

“an hour or two at the most.” 

“i that absolut certain?” 

“I pledg my credit as a soldier upon it.” 

“then we must fall?” 

“yes, we must fall.” 

“there is no hope for us?” 

“none.” 

the door flew open and young ainsli rush in. behind him crowd 
ralston, patterson, and a crowd of white men and of nativ christians. 

“you’v had news, colonel?” 

professor mercer push to the front. 

“colonel dresler ha just been tell me. It is all right. they have 
halted, but will be here in the earli morning. there is no longer ani 
danger.” 

A cheer broke from the group in the doorway. everyon wa laugh and 
shake hands. 

“but suppos they rush us befor to-morrow morning?” cri ralston, in a 
petul voice. “what infern fool these fellow are not to push on! 
lazi devils, they should be court-martialled, everi man of them.” 

“it’ all safe,” said ainslie. “these fellow have had a bad knock. We 
can see their wound be carri by the hundr over the hill. they 
must have lost heavily. they won’t attack befor morning.” 

“no, no,” said the colonel; “it is certain that they won’t attack befor 
morning. none the less, get back to your posts. We must give no point 
away.” He left the room with the rest, but as he did so he look back, 
and hi eye for an instant met those of the old professor. “I leav it 
in your hands,” wa the messag which he flashed. A stern set smile wa 
hi answer. 

* * * * * 

the afternoon wore away without the boxer make their last attack. To 
colonel dresler it wa clear that the unwont still meant onli that 
they were reassembl their forc from their fight with the relief 
column, and were gather themselv for the inevit and final rush. 
To all the other it appear that the sieg wa inde over, and that 
the assail had been crippl by the loss which they had alreadi 
sustained. It wa a joyou and noisi party, therefore, which met at the 
supper-table, when the three bottl of lachryma christi were uncork 
and the famou port of caviar wa final opened. It wa a larg jar, 
and, though each had a tablespoon of the delicacy, it wa by no mean 
exhausted. ralston, who wa an epicure, had a doubl allowance. He 
peck away at it like a hungri bird. ainslie, too, had a second 
helping. the professor took a larg spoon himself, and colonel 
dresler, watch him narrowly, did the same. the ladi ate freely, 
save onli pretti miss patterson, who dislik the salty, pungent taste. 
In spite of the hospit entreati of the professor, her portion lay 
hardli touch at the side of her plate. 

“you don’t like my littl delicacy. It is a disappoint to me when I 
had kept it for your pleasure,” said the old man. “I beg that you will 
eat the caviare.” 

“I have never tast it before. No doubt I should like it in time.” 

“well, you must make a beginning. whi not start to educ your tast 
now? do, please!” 

pretti jessi patterson’ bright face shone with her sunny, boyish 
smile. 

“why, how earnest you are!” she laughed. “I had no idea you were so 
polite, professor mercer. even if I do not eat it I am just as 
grateful.” 

“you are foolish not to eat it,” said the professor, with such intens 
that the smile die from her face and her eye reflect the earnest 
of hi own. “I tell you it is foolish not to eat caviar to-night.” 

“but why—why?” she asked. 

“becaus you have it on your plate. becaus it is sin to wast it.” 

“there! there!” said stout mrs. patterson, lean across. “don’t 
troubl her ani more. I can see that she doe not like it. but it shall 
not be wasted.” she pass the blade of her knife under it, and scrape 
it from jessie’ plate on to her own. “now it won’t be wasted. your mind 
will be at ease, professor.” 

but it did not seem at ease. On the contrary, hi face wa agit like 
that of a man who encount an unexpect and formid obstacle. He 
wa lost in thought. 

the convers buzz cheerily. everyon wa full of hi futur plans. 

“no, no, there is no holiday for me,” said father pierre. “we priest 
don’t get holidays. now that the mission and school are form I am to 
leav it to father amiel, and to push westward to found another.” 

“you are leaving?” said mr. patterson. “you don’t mean that you are 
go away from ichau?” 

father pierr shook hi vener head in waggish reproof. “you must not 
look so pleased, mr. patterson.” 

“well, well, our view are veri different,” said the presbyterian, “but 
there is no person feel toward you, father pierre. At the same 
time, how ani reason educ man at thi time of the world’ 
histori can teach these poor benight heathen that——” 

A gener buzz of remonstr silenc the theology. 

“what will you do yourself, mr. patterson?” ask someone. 

“well, i’ll take three month in edinburgh to attend the annual meeting. 
you’ll be glad to do some shop in princ street, i’m thinking, 
mary. and you, jessie, you’ll see some folk your own age. then we can 
come back in the fall, when your nerv have had a rest.” 

“indeed, we shall all need it,” said miss sinclair, the mission nurse. 
“you know, thi long strain take me in the strangest way. At the 
present moment I can hear such a buzz in my ears.” 

“well, that’ funny, for it’ just the same with me,” cri ainslie. “an 
absurd up-and-down buzzing, as if a drunken bluebottl were tri 
experi on hi register. As you say, it must be due to nervou 
strain. for my part I am go back to peking, and I hope I may get some 
promot over thi affair. I can get good polo here, and that’ as fine 
a chang of thought as I know. how about you, ralston?” 

“oh, I don’t know. i’v hardli had time to think. I want to have a real 
good sunny, bright holiday and forget it all. It wa funni to see all 
the letter in my room. It look so black on wednesday night that I had 
settl up my affair and written to all my friends. I don’t quit know 
how they were to be delivered, but I trust to luck. I think I will 
keep those paper as a souvenir. they will alway remind me of how close 
a shave we have had.” 

“yes, I would keep them,” said dresler. 

hi voic wa so deep and solemn that everi eye wa turn upon him. 

“what is it, colonel? you seem in the blue to-night.” It wa ainsli 
who spoke. 

“no, no; I am veri contented.” 

“well, so you should be when you see success in sight. I am sure we are 
all indebt to you for your scienc and skill. I don’t think we could 
have held the place without you. ladi and gentlemen, I ask you to 
drink the health of colonel dresler, of the imperi german army. Er 
soll leben—hoch!” 

they all stood up and rais their glass to the soldier, with smile 
and bows. 

hi pale face flush with profession pride. 

“I have alway kept my book with me. I have forgotten nothing,” said 
he. “I do not think that more could be done. If thing had gone wrong 
with us and the place had fallen you would, I am sure, have freed me 
from ani blame or responsibility.” He look wist round him. 

“i’m voic the sentiment of thi company, colonel dresler,” said the 
scotch minister, “when I say——but, lord save us! what’ amiss with mr. 
ralston?” 

He had drop hi face upon hi fold arm and wa placidli sleeping. 

“don’t mind him,” said the professor, hurriedly. “we are all in the 
stage of reaction now. I have no doubt that we are all liabl to 
collapse. It is onli to-night that we shall feel what we have gone 
through.” 

“i’m sure I can fulli sympath with him,” said mrs. patterson. “I 
don’t know when I have been more sleepy. I can hardli hold my own head 
up.” she cuddl back in her chair and shut her eyes. 

“well, i’v never known mari do that before,” cri her husband, 
laugh heartily. “gone to sleep over her supper! what ever will she 
think when we tell her of it afterwards? but the air doe seem hot and 
heavy. I can certainli excus ani one who fall asleep to-night. I think 
that I shall turn in earli myself.” 

ainsli wa in a talkative, excit mood. He wa on hi feet onc more 
with hi glass in hi hand. 

“I think that we ought to have one drink all together, and then sing 
‘auld lang syne,’” said he, smile round at the company. “for a week we 
have all pull in the same boat, and we’v got to know each other as 
peopl never do in the quiet day of peace. we’v learn to appreci 
each other, and we’v learn to appreci each other’ nations. 
there’ the colonel here stand for germany. and father pierr is for 
france. then there’ the professor for america. ralston and I are 
britishers. then there’ the ladies, god bless ‘em! they have been 
angel of merci and compass all through the siege. I think we should 
drink the health of the ladies. wonder thing—th quiet courage, the 
patience, the—what shall I say?—th fortitude, the—the—bi george, look 
at the colonel! he’ gone to sleep, too—most infern sleepi weather.” 
hi glass crash down upon the table, and he sank back, mumbl and 
muttering, into hi seat. miss sinclair, the pale mission nurse, had 
drop off also. she lay like a broken lili across the arm of her 
chair. mr. patterson look round him and sprang to hi feet. He pass 
hi hand over hi flush forehead. 

“thi isn’t natural, jessie,” he cried. “whi are they all asleep? 
there’ father pierre—he’ off too. jessie, jessie, your mother is cold. 
Is it sleep? Is it death? open the windows! help! help! help!” He 
stagger to hi feet and rush to the windows, but midway hi head 
spun round, hi knee sank under him, and he pitch forward upon hi 
face. 

the young girl had also sprung to her feet. she look round her with 
horror-stricken eye at her prostrat father and the silent ring of 
figures. 

“professor mercer! what is it? what is it?” she cried. “oh, my god, they 
are dying! they are dead!” 

the old man had rais himself by a suprem effort of hi will, though 
the dark wa alreadi gather thickli round him. 

“mi dear young lady,” he said, stutter and stumbl over the words, 
“we would have spare you this. It would have been painless to mind and 
body. It wa cyanide. I had it in the caviare. but you would not have 
it.” 

“great heaven!” she shrank away from him with dilat eyes. “oh, you 
monster! you monster! you have poison them!” 

“no, no! I save them. you don’t know the chinese. they are horrible. In 
anoth hour we should all have been in their hands. take it now, 
child.” even as he spoke, a burst of fire broke out under the veri 
window of the room. “hark! there they are! quick, dear, quick, you may 
cheat them yet!” but hi word fell upon deaf ears, for the girl had 
sunk back senseless in her chair. the old man stood listen for an 
instant to the fire outside. but what wa that? merci father, what 
wa that? wa he go mad? wa it the effect of the drug? sure it wa 
a european cheer? yes, there were sharp order in english. there wa the 
shout of sailors. He could no longer doubt it. By some miracl the 
relief had come after all. He threw hi long arm upward in hi 
despair. “what _have_ I done? oh, good lord, what have I done?” he 
cried. 

* * * * * 

It wa commodor wyndham himself who wa the first, after hi desper 
and success night attack, to burst into that terribl supper-room. 
round the tabl sat the white and silent company. onli in the young girl 
who moan and faintli stir wa ani sign of life to be seen. and yet 
there wa one in the circl who had the energi for a last suprem duty. 
the commodore, stand stupefi at the door, saw a grey head slowli 
lift from the table, and the tall form of the professor stagger for 
an instant to it feet. 

“take care of the caviare! for god’ sake, don’t touch the caviare!” he 
croaked. 

then he sank back onc more and the circl of death wa complete. 




the japan box 


It _was_ a curiou thing, said the privat tutor; one of those grotesqu 
and whimsic incid which occur to one as one goe through life. I 
lost the best situat which I am ever like to have through it. but I 
am glad that I went to thorp place, for I gained—well, as I tell you 
the stori you will learn what I gained. 

I don’t know whether you are familiar with that part of the midland 
which is drain by the avon. It is the most english part of england. 
shakespeare, the flower of the whole race, wa born right in the middl 
of it. It is a land of roll pastures, rise in higher fold to the 
westward, until they swell into the malvern hills. there are no towns, 
but numer villages, each with it grey norman church. you have left 
the brick of the southern and eastern counti behind you, and 
everyth is stone—ston for the walls, and lichen slab of stone for 
the roofs. It is all grim and solid and massive, as befit the heart of 
a great nation. 

It wa in the middl of thi country, not veri far from evesham, that 
sir john bollamor live in the old ancestr home of thorp place, and 
thither it wa that I came to teach hi two littl sons. sir john wa a 
widower—hi wife had die three year before—and he had been left with 
these two lad age eight and ten, and one dear littl girl of seven. 
miss witherton, who is now my wife, wa gover to thi littl girl. I 
wa tutor to the two boys. could there be a more obviou prelud to an 
engagement? she govern me now, and I tutor two littl boy of our own. 
but, there—i have alreadi reveal what it wa which I gain in thorp 
place! 

It wa a very, veri old house, incred old—pre-norman, some of it—and 
the bollamor claim to have live in that situat sinc long befor 
the conquest. It struck a chill to my heart when first I came there, 
those enorm thick grey walls, the rude crumbl stones, the smell 
as from a sick anim which exhal from the rot plaster of the age 
building. but the modern wing wa bright and the garden wa well kept. 
No hous could be dismal which had a pretti girl insid it and such a 
show of rose in front. 

apart from a veri complet staff of servant there were onli four of us 
in the household. these were miss witherton, who wa at that time 
four-and-twenti and as pretty—well, as pretti as mrs. colmor is 
now—myself, frank colmore, age thirty, mrs. stevens, the housekeeper, a 
dry, silent woman, and mr. richards, a tall, military-look man, who 
act as steward to the bollamor estates. We four alway had our meal 
together, but sir john had hi usual alon in the library. sometim 
he join us at dinner, but on the whole we were just as glad when he 
did not. 

for he wa a veri formid person. imagin a man six feet three inch 
in height, majest built, with a high-nosed, aristocrat face, 
brindl hair, shaggi eyebrows, a small, point mephistophelian beard, 
and line upon hi brow and round hi eye as deep as if they had been 
carv with a penknife. He had grey eyes, weary, hopeless-look eyes, 
proud and yet pathetic, eye which claim your piti and yet dare you 
to show it. hi back wa round with study, but otherwis he wa as 
fine a look man of hi age—five-and-fifti perhaps—a ani woman would 
wish to look upon. 

but hi presenc wa not a cheer one. He wa alway courteous, alway 
refined, but singularli silent and retiring. I have never live so long 
with ani man and known so littl of him. If he were indoor he spent hi 
time either in hi own small studi in the eastern tower, or in the 
librari in the modern wing. So regular wa hi routin that one could 
alway say at ani hour exactli where he would be. twice in the day he 
would visit hi study, onc after breakfast, and onc about ten at 
night. you might set your watch by the slam of the heavi door. for the 
rest of the day he would be in hi library—sav that for an hour or two 
in the afternoon he would take a walk or a ride, which wa solitari like 
the rest of hi existence. He love hi children, and wa keenli 
interest in the progress of their studies, but they were a littl awe 
by the silent, shaggy-brow figure, and they avoid him as much as 
they could. indeed, we all did that. 

It wa some time befor I came to know anyth about the circumst 
of sir john bollamore’ life, for mrs. stevens, the housekeeper, and mr. 
richards, the land-steward, were too loyal to talk easili of their 
employer’ affairs. As to the governess, she knew no more than I did, 
and our common interest wa one of the caus which drew us together. At 
last, however, an incid occur which led to a closer acquaint 
with mr. richard and a fuller knowledg of the life of the man whom I 
served. 

the immedi caus of thi wa no less than the fall of master 
percy, the youngest of my pupils, into the mill-race, with immin 
danger both to hi life and to mine, sinc I had to risk myself in order 
to save him. drip and exhausted—for I wa far more spent than the 
child—i wa make for my room when sir john, who had heard the hubbub, 
open the door of hi littl studi and ask me what wa the matter. I 
told him of the accident, but assur him that hi child wa in no 
danger, while he listen with a rugged, immobil face, which express 
in it intens eye and tighten lip all the emot which he tri to 
conceal. 

“one moment! step in here! let me have the details!” said he, turn 
back through the open door. 

and so I found myself within that littl sanctum, insid which, as I 
afterward learned, no other foot had for three year been set save that 
of the old servant who clean it out. It wa a round room, conform 
to the shape of the tower in which it wa situated, with a low ceiling, 
a singl narrow, ivy-wreath window, and the simplest of furniture. An 
old carpet, a singl chair, a deal table, and a small shelf of book 
made up the whole contents. On the tabl stood a full-length photograph 
of a woman—i took no particular notic of the features, but I rememb 
that a certain graciou gentl wa the prevail impression. besid 
it were a larg black japan box and one or two bundl of letter or 
paper fasten togeth with elast bands. 

our interview wa a short one, for sir john bollamor perceiv that I 
wa soaked, and that I should chang without delay. the incid led, 
however, to an instruct talk with richards, the agent, who had never 
penetr into the chamber which chanc had open to me. that veri 
afternoon he came to me, all curiosity, and walk up and down the 
garden path with me, while my two charg play tenni upon the lawn 
besid us. 

“you hardli realiz the except which ha been made in your favour,” 
said he. “that room ha been kept such a mystery, and sir john’ visit 
to it have been so regular and consistent, that an almost superstiti 
feel ha arisen about it in the household. I assur you that if I 
were to repeat to you the tale which are fli about, tale of 
mysteri visitor there, and of voic overheard by the servants, you 
might suspect that sir john had relaps into hi old ways.” 

“whi do you say relapsed?” I asked. 

He look at me in surprise. 

“i it possible,” said he, “that sir john bollamore’ previou histori 
is unknown to you?” 

“absolutely.” 

“you astound me. I thought that everi man in england knew someth of 
hi antecedents. I should not mention the matter if it were not that you 
are now one of ourselves, and that the fact might come to your ear in 
some harsher form if I were silent upon them. I alway took it for 
grant that you knew that you were in the servic of ‘devil’ 
bollamore.” 

“but whi ‘devil’?” I asked. 

“ah, you are young and the world move fast, but twenti year ago the 
name of ‘devil’ bollamor wa one of the best known in london. He wa 
the leader of the fastest set, bruiser, driver, gambler, drunkard—a 
surviv of the old type, and as bad as the worst of them.” 

I stare at him in amazement. 

“what!” I cried, “that quiet, studious, sad-fac man?” 

“the greatest rip and debauche in england! all between ourselves, 
colmore. but you understand now what I mean when I say that a woman’ 
voic in hi room might even now give rise to suspicions.” 

“but what can have chang him so?” 

“littl beryl clare, when she took the risk of becom hi wife. that 
wa the turn point. He had got so far that hi own fast set had 
thrown him over. there is a world of difference, you know, between a man 
who drink and a drunkard. they all drink, but they taboo a drunkard. He 
had becom a slave to it—hopeless and helpless. then she step in, saw 
the possibl of a fine man in the wreck, took her chanc in 
marri him, though she might have had the pick of a dozen, and, by 
devot her life to it, brought him back to manhood and decency. you 
have observ that no liquor is ever kept in the house. there never ha 
been ani sinc her foot cross it threshold. A drop of it would be 
like blood to a tiger even now.” 

“then her influenc still hold him?” 

“that is the wonder of it. when she die three year ago, we all 
expect and fear that he would fall back into hi old ways. she 
fear it herself, and the thought gave a terror to death, for she wa 
like a guardian angel to that man, and live onli for the one purpose. 
By the way, did you see a black japan box in hi room?” 

“yes.” 

“I fanci it contain her letters. If ever he ha occas to be away, if 
onli for a singl night, he invari take hi black japan box with 
him. well, well, colmore, perhap I have told you rather more than I 
should, but I shall expect you to reciproc if anyth of interest 
should come to your knowledge.” I could see that the worthi man wa 
consum with curios and just a littl piqu that I, the new-comer, 
should have been the first to penetr into the untrodden chamber. but 
the fact rais me in hi esteem, and from that time onward I found 
myself upon more confidenti term with him. 

and now the silent and majest figur of my employ becam an object 
of greater interest to me. I began to understand that strang human 
look in hi eyes, those deep line upon hi careworn face. He wa a man 
who wa fight a ceaseless battle, hold at arm’ length, from 
morn till night, a horribl adversary, who wa for ever tri to 
close with him—an adversari which would destroy him bodi and soul could 
it but fix it claw onc more upon him. As I watch the grim, 
round-back figur pace the corridor or walk in the garden, thi 
immin danger seem to take bodili shape, and I could almost fanci 
that I saw thi most loathsom and danger of all the fiend crouch 
close in hi veri shadow, like a half-cow beast which slink besid 
it keeper, readi at ani unguard moment to spring at hi throat. and 
the dead woman, the woman who had spent her life in ward off thi 
danger, took shape also to my imagination, and I saw her as a shadowi 
but beauti presenc which interven for ever with arm uplift to 
screen the man whom she loved. 

In some subtl way he divin the sympathi which I had for him, and he 
show in hi own silent fashion that he appreci it. He even invit 
me onc to share hi afternoon walk, and although no word pass between 
us on thi occasion, it wa a mark of confid which he had never 
shown to ani one before. He ask me also to index hi librari (it wa 
one of the best privat librari in england), and I spent mani hour in 
the even in hi presence, if not in hi society, he read at hi 
desk and I sit in a recess by the window reduc to order the chao 
which exist among hi books. In spite of these close relat I wa 
never again ask to enter the chamber in the turret. 

and then came my revuls of feeling. A singl incid chang all my 
sympathi to loathing, and made me realiz that my employ still 
remain all that he had ever been, with the addit vice of 
hypocrisy. what happen wa as follows. 

one even miss witherton had gone down to broadway, the neighbour 
village, to sing at a concert for some charity, and I, accord to my 
promise, had walk over to escort her back. the drive sweep round 
under the eastern turret, and I observ as I pass that the light wa 
lit in the circular room. It wa a summer evening, and the window, which 
wa a littl higher than our heads, wa open. We were, as it happened, 
engross in our own convers at the moment, and we had paus upon 
the lawn which skirt the old turret, when suddenli someth broke in 
upon our talk and turn our thought away from our own affairs. 

It wa a voice—th voic undoubtedli of a woman. It wa low—so low that 
it wa onli in that still night air that we could have heard it, but, 
hush as it was, there wa no mistak it feminin timbre. It spoke 
hurriedly, gaspingli for a few sentences, and then wa silent—a piteous, 
breathless, implor sort of voice. miss witherton and I stood for an 
instant stare at each other. then we walk quickli in the direct 
of the hall-door. 

“it came through the window,” I said. 

“we must not play the part of eavesdroppers,” she answered. “we must 
forget that we have ever heard it.” 

there wa an absenc of surpris in her manner which suggest a new 
idea to me. 

“you have heard it before,” I cried. 

“I could not help it. My own room is higher up on the same turret. It 
ha happen frequently.” 

“who can the woman be?” 

“I have no idea. I had rather not discuss it.” 

her voic wa enough to show me what she thought. but grant that our 
employ led a doubl and dubiou life, who could she be, thi 
mysteri woman who kept him compani in the old tower? I knew from my 
own inspect how bleak and bare a room it was. she certainli did not 
live there. but in that case where did she come from? It could not be 
ani one of the household. they were all under the vigil eye of mrs. 
stevens. the visitor must come from without. but how? 

and then suddenli I rememb how ancient thi build was, and how 
probabl that some mediæv passag exist in it. there is hardli an 
old castl without one. the mysteri room wa the basement of the 
turret, so that if there were anyth of the sort it would open through 
the floor. there were numer cottag in the immedi vicinity. the 
other end of the secret passag might lie among some tangl of brambl 
in the neighbour copse. I said noth to ani one, but I felt that 
the secret of my employ lay within my power. 

and the more convinc I wa of thi the more I marvel at the manner 
in which he conceal hi true nature. often as I watch hi auster 
figure, I ask myself if it were inde possibl that such a man should 
be live thi doubl life, and I tri to persuad myself that my 
suspicion might after all prove to be ill-founded. but there wa the 
femal voice, there wa the secret nightli rendezv in the turret 
chamber—how could such fact admit of an innoc interpretation? I 
conceiv a horror of the man. I wa fill with loath at hi deep, 
consist hypocrisy. 

onli onc dure all those month did I ever see him without that sad 
but impass mask which he usual present toward hi fellow-man. 
for an instant I caught a glimps of those volcan fire which he had 
damp down so long. the occas wa an unworthi one, for the object of 
hi wrath wa none other than the age charwoman whom I have alreadi 
mention as be the one person who wa allow within hi mysteri 
chamber. I wa pass the corridor which led to the turret—for my own 
room lay in that direction—when I heard a sudden, startl scream, and 
merg in it the husky, growl note of a man who is inarticul with 
passion. It wa the snarl of a furiou wild beast. then I heard hi 
voic thrill with anger. “you would dare!” he cried. “you would dare 
to disobey my directions!” An instant later the charwoman pass me, 
fli down the passage, white face and tremulous, while the terribl 
voic thunder behind her. “go to mrs. steven for your money! never 
set foot in thorp place again!” consum with curiosity, I could not 
help follow the woman, and found her round the corner lean against 
the wall and palpit like a frighten rabbit. 

“what is the matter, mrs. brown?” I asked. 

“it’ master!” she gasped. “oh ‘ow ‘e frighten me! If you had seen ‘i 
eyes, mr. colmore, sir. I thought ‘e would ‘ave been the death of me.” 

“but what had you done?” 

“done, sir! nothing. At least noth to make so much of. just laid my 
‘and on that black box of ‘is—‘adn’t even open it, when in ‘e came and 
you ‘eard the way ‘e went on. i’v lost my place, and glad I am of it, 
for I would never trust myself within reach of ‘im again.” 

So it wa the japan box which wa the caus of thi outburst—th box 
from which he would never permit himself to be separated. what wa the 
connection, or wa there ani connect between thi and the secret 
visit of the ladi whose voic I had overheard? sir john bollamore’ 
wrath wa endur as well as fiery, for from that day mrs. brown, the 
charwoman, vanish from our ken, and thorp place knew her no more. 

and now I wish to tell you the singular chanc which solv all these 
strang question and put my employer’ secret in my possession. the 
stori may leav you with some linger doubt as to whether my curios 
did not get the better of my honour, and whether I did not condescend to 
play the spy. If you choos to think so I cannot help it, but can onli 
assur you that, improb as it may appear, the matter came about 
exactli as I describ it. 

the first stage in thi _dénouement_ wa that the small room on the 
turret becam uninhabitable. thi occur through the fall of the 
worm-eaten oaken beam which support the ceiling. rotten with age, it 
snap in the middl one morning, and brought down a quantiti of 
plaster with it. fortun sir john wa not in the room at the time. 
hi preciou box wa rescu from amongst the _débris_ and brought into 
the library, where, henceforward, it wa lock within hi bureau. sir 
john took no step to repair the damage, and I never had an opportun 
of search for that secret passage, the exist of which I had 
surmised. As to the lady, I had thought that thi would have brought her 
visit to an end, had I not one even heard mr. richard ask mrs. 
steven who the woman wa whom he had overheard talk to sir john in 
the library. I could not catch her reply, but I saw from her manner that 
it wa not the first time that she had had to answer or avoid the same 
question. 

“you’v heard the voice, colmore?” said the agent. 

I confess that I had. 

“and what do _you_ think of it?” 

I shrug my shoulders, and remark that it wa no busi of mine. 

“come, come, you are just as curiou as ani of us. Is it a woman or 
not?” 

“it is certainli a woman.” 

“which room did you hear it from?” 

“from the turret-room, befor the ceil fell.” 

“but I heard it from the librari onli last night. I pass the door as 
I wa go to bed, and I heard someth wail and pray just as 
plainli as I hear you. It may be a woman——” 

“why, what els _could_ it be?” 

He look at me hard. 

“there are more thing in heaven and earth,” said he. “if it is a woman, 
how doe she get there?” 

“I don’t know.” 

“no, nor I. but if it is the other thing—but there, for a practic 
busi man at the end of the nineteenth centuri thi is rather a 
ridicul line of conversation.” He turn away, but I saw that he felt 
even more than he had said. To all the old ghost stori of thorp place 
a new one wa be ad befor our veri eyes. It may by thi time have 
taken it perman place, for though an explan came to me, it 
never reach the others. 

and my explan came in thi way. I had suffer a sleepless night 
from neuralgia, and about mid-day I had taken a heavi dose of chlorodyn 
to allevi the pain. At that time I wa finish the index of sir 
john bollamore’ library, and it wa my custom to work there from five 
till seven. On thi particular day I struggl against the doubl effect 
of my bad night and the narcotic. I have alreadi mention that there 
wa a recess in the library, and in thi it wa my habit to work. I 
settl down steadili to my task, but my weari overcam me and, 
fall back upon the settee, I drop into a heavi sleep. 

how long I slept I do not know, but it wa quit dark when I awoke. 
confus by the chlorodyn which I had taken, I lay motionless in a 
semi-consci state. the great room with it high wall cover with 
book loom darkli all round me. A dim radianc from the moonlight came 
through the farther window, and against thi lighter background I saw 
that sir john bollamor wa sit at hi studi table. hi well-set 
head and clearli cut profil were sharpli outlin against the 
glimmer squar behind him. He bent as I watch him, and I heard the 
sharp turn of a key and the rasp of metal upon metal. As if in a 
dream I wa vagu consciou that thi wa the japan box which stood 
in front of him, and that he had drawn someth out of it, someth 
squat and uncouth, which now lay befor him upon the table. I never 
realized—it never occur to my bemuddl and torpid brain that I wa 
intrud upon hi privacy, that he imagin himself to be alon in the 
room. and then, just as it rush upon my horrifi perceptions, and I 
had half risen to announc my presence, I heard a strange, crisp, 
metal clicking, and then the voice. 

yes, it wa a woman’ voice; there could not be a doubt of it. but a 
voic so charg with entreati and with yearn love, that it will ring 
for ever in my ears. It came with a curiou far-away tinkle, but everi 
word wa clear, though faint—veri faint, for they were the last word of 
a die woman. 

“I am not realli gone, john,” said the thin, gasp voice. “I am here 
at your veri elbow, and shall be until we meet onc more. I die happi to 
think that morn and night you will hear my voice. oh, john, be 
strong, be strong, until we meet again.” 

I say that I had risen in order to announc my presence, but I could not 
do so while the voic wa sounding. I could onli remain half lying, half 
sitting, paralyzed, astounded, listen to those yearn distant 
music words. and he—h wa so absorb that even if I had spoken he 
might not have heard me. but with the silenc of the voic came my half 
articul apolog and explanations. He sprang across the room, 
switch on the electr light, and in it white glare I saw him, hi 
eye gleam with anger, hi face twist with passion, as the hapless 
charwoman may have seen him week before. 

“mr. colmore!” he cried. “you here! what is the mean of this, sir?” 

with halt word I explain it all, my neuralgia, the narcotic, my 
luckless sleep and singular awakening. As he listen the glow of anger 
fade from hi face, and the sad, impass mask close onc more over 
hi features. 

“mi secret is yours, mr. colmore,” said he. “I have onli myself to blame 
for relax my precautions. half confid are wors than no 
confidences, and so you may know all sinc you know so much. the stori 
may go where you will when I have pass away, but until then I reli 
upon your sens of honour that no human soul shall hear it from your 
lips. I am proud still—god help me!—or, at least, I am proud enough to 
resent that piti which thi stori would draw upon me. I have smile at 
envy, and disregard hatred, but piti is more than I can tolerate. 

“you have heard the sourc from which the voic comes—that voic which 
has, as I understand, excit so much curios in my household. I am 
awar of the rumour to which it ha given rise. these speculations, 
whether scandal or superstitious, are such as I can disregard and 
forgive. what I should never forgiv would be a disloy spi and 
eavesdrop in order to satisfi an illicit curiosity. but of that, mr. 
colmore, I acquit you. 

“when I wa a young man, sir, mani year younger than you are now, I wa 
launch upon town without a friend or adviser, and with a purs which 
brought onli too mani fals friend and fals advis to my side. I 
drank deepli of the wine of life—if there is a man live who ha drank 
more deepli he is not a man whom I envy. My purs suffered, my charact 
suffered, my constitut suffered, stimul becam a necess to me, 
I wa a creatur from whom my memori recoils. and it wa at that time, 
the time of my blackest degradation, that god sent into my life the 
gentlest, sweetest spirit that ever descend as a minist angel 
from above. she love me, broken as I was, love me, and spent her life 
in make a man onc more of that which had degrad itself to the level 
of the beasts. 

“but a fell diseas struck her, and she wither away befor my eyes. In 
the hour of her agoni it wa never of herself, of her own suffer and 
her own death that she thought. It wa all of me. the one pang which her 
fate brought to her wa the fear that when her influenc wa remov I 
should revert to that which I had been. It wa in vain that I made oath 
to her that no drop of wine would ever cross my lips. she knew onli too 
well the hold that the devil had upon me—sh who had striven so to 
loosen it—and it haunt her night and day the thought that my soul 
might again be within hi grip. 

“it wa from some friend’ gossip of the sick room that she heard of 
thi invention—thi phonograph—and with the quick insight of a love 
woman she saw how she might use it for her ends. she sent me to london 
to procur the best which money could buy. with her die breath she 
gasp into it the word which have held me straight ever since. lone 
and broken, what els have I in all the world to uphold me? but it is 
enough. pleas god, I shall face her without shame when He is pleas to 
reunit us! that is my secret, mr. colmore, and whilst I live I leav it 
in your keeping.” 




the black doctor 


bishop’ cross is a small villag lie ten mile in a south-westerli 
direct from liverpool. here in the earli seventi there settl a 
doctor name aloysiu lana. noth wa known local either of hi 
anteced or of the reason which had prompt him to come to thi 
lancashir hamlet. two fact onli were certain about him: the one that 
he had gain hi medic qualif with some distinct at 
glasgow; the other that he came undoubtedli of a tropic race, and wa 
so dark that he might almost have had a strain of the indian in hi 
composition. hi predomin featur were, however, european, and he 
possess a state courtesi and carriag which suggest a spanish 
extraction. A swarthi skin, raven-black hair, and dark, sparkl eye 
under a pair of heavily-tuft brow made a strang contrast to the 
flaxen or chestnut rustic of england, and the new-com wa soon known 
as “the black doctor of bishop’ crossing.” At first it wa a term of 
ridicul and reproach; as the year went on it becam a titl of honour 
which wa familiar to the whole country-side, and extend far beyond 
the narrow confin of the village. 

for the new-com prove himself to be a capabl surgeon and an 
accomplish physician. the practic of that district had been in the 
hand of edward rowe, the son of sir william rowe, the liverpool 
consultant, but he had not inherit the talent of hi father, and dr. 
lana, with hi advantag of presenc and of manner, soon beat him out 
of the field. dr. lana’ social success wa as rapid as hi 
professional. A remark surgic cure in the case of the hon. jame 
lowry, the second son of lord belton, wa the mean of introduc him 
to counti society, where he becam a favourit through the charm of hi 
convers and the eleg of hi manners. An absenc of anteced 
and of rel is sometim an aid rather than an impedi to social 
advancement, and the distinguish individu of the handsom doctor 
wa it own recommendation. 

hi patient had one fault—and one fault only—to find with him. He 
appear to be a confirm bachelor. thi wa the more remark sinc 
the hous which he occupi wa a larg one, and it wa known that hi 
success in practic had enabl him to save consider sums. At first 
the local match-mak were continu coupl hi name with one or 
other of the elig ladies, but as year pass and dr. lana remain 
unmarried, it came to be gener understood that for some reason he 
must remain a bachelor. some even went so far as to assert that he wa 
alreadi married, and that it wa in order to escap the consequ of 
an earli misalli that he had buri himself at bishop’ crossing. 
and then, just as the match-mak had final given him up in despair, 
hi engag wa suddenli announc to miss franc morton, of leigh 
hall. 

miss morton wa a young ladi who wa well known upon the country-side, 
her father, jame haldan morton, have been the squir of bishop’ 
crossing. both her parent were, however, dead, and she live with her 
onli brother, arthur morton, who had inherit the famili estate. In 
person miss morton wa tall and stately, and she wa famou for her 
quick, impetu natur and for her strength of character. she met dr. 
lana at a garden-party, and a friendship, which quickli ripen into 
love, sprang up between them. noth could exceed their devot to 
each other. there wa some discrep in age, he be thirty-seven, 
and she twenty-four; but, save in that one respect, there wa no 
possibl object to be found with the match. the engag wa in 
february, and it wa arrang that the marriag should take place in 
august. 

upon the 3rd of june dr. lana receiv a letter from abroad. In a small 
villag the postmast is also in a posit to be the gossip-master, 
and mr. bankley, of bishop’ crossing, had mani of the secret of hi 
neighbour in hi possession. Of thi particular letter he remark onli 
that it wa in a curiou envelope, that it wa in a man’ handwriting, 
that the postscript wa bueno ayres, and the stamp of the argentin 
republic. It wa the first letter which he had ever known dr. lana to 
have from abroad, and thi wa the reason whi hi attent wa 
particularli call to it befor he hand it to the local postman. It 
wa deliv by the even deliveri of that date. 

next morning—that is, upon the 4th of june—dr. lana call upon miss 
morton, and a long interview followed, from which he wa observ to 
return in a state of great agitation. miss morton remain in her room 
all that day, and her maid found her sever time in tears. In the 
cours of a week it wa an open secret to the whole villag that the 
engag wa at an end, that dr. lana had behav shame to the 
young lady, and that arthur morton, her brother, wa talk of 
horse-whip him. In what particular respect the doctor had behav 
badli wa unknown—som surmis one thing and some another; but it wa 
observed, and taken as the obviou sign of a guilti conscience, that he 
would go for mile round rather than pass the window of leigh hall, and 
that he gave up attend morn servic upon sunday where he might 
have met the young lady. there wa an advertis also in the _lancet_ 
as to the sale of a practic which mention no names, but which wa 
thought by some to refer to bishop’ crossing, and to mean that dr. lana 
wa think of abandon the scene of hi success. such wa the 
posit of affair when, upon the even of monday, june 21st, there 
came a fresh develop which chang what had been a mere villag 
scandal into a tragedi which arrest the attent of the whole nation. 
some detail is necessari to caus the fact of that even to present 
their full significance. 

the sole occup of the doctor’ hous were hi housekeeper, an 
elderli and most respect woman, name martha woods, and a young 
servant—mari pilling. the coachman and the surgery-boy slept out. It wa 
the custom of the doctor to sit at night in hi study, which wa next 
the surgeri in the wing of the hous which wa farthest from the 
servants’ quarters. thi side of the hous had a door of it own for the 
conveni of patients, so that it wa possibl for the doctor to admit 
and receiv a visitor there without the knowledg of ani one. As a 
matter of fact, when patient came late it wa quit usual for him to 
let them in and out by the surgeri entrance, for the maid and the 
housekeep were in the habit of retir early. 

On thi particular night martha wood went into the doctor’ studi at 
half-past nine, and found him write at hi desk. she bade him 
good-night, sent the maid to bed, and then occupi herself until a 
quarter to eleven in household matters. It wa strike eleven upon the 
hall clock when she went to her own room. she had been there about a 
quarter of an hour or twenti minut when she heard a cri or call, which 
appear to come from within the house. she wait some time, but it wa 
not repeated. much alarmed, for the sound wa loud and urgent, she put 
on a dressing-gown, and ran at the top of her speed to the doctor’ 
study. 

“who’ there?” cri a voice, as she tap at the door. 

“I am here, sir—mrs. woods.” 

“I beg that you will leav me in peace. Go back to your room thi 
instant!” cri the voice, which was, to the best of her belief, that of 
her master. the tone wa so harsh and so unlik her master’ usual 
manner, that she wa surpris and hurt. 

“I thought I heard you calling, sir,” she explained, but no answer wa 
given to her. mrs. wood look at the clock as she return to her 
room, and it wa then half-past eleven. 

At some period between eleven and twelv (she could not be posit as 
to the exact hour) a patient call upon the doctor and wa unabl to 
get ani repli from him. thi late visitor wa mrs. madding, the wife of 
the villag grocer who wa danger ill of typhoid fever. dr. lana 
had ask her to look in the last thing and let him know how her husband 
wa progressing. she observ that the light wa burn in the study, 
but have knock sever time at the surgeri door without response, 
she conclud that the doctor had been call out, and so return home. 

there is a short, wind drive with a lamp at the end of it lead 
down from the hous to the road. As mrs. mad emerg from the gate a 
man wa come along the footpath. think that it might be dr. lana 
return from some profession visit, she wait for him, and wa 
surpris to see that it wa mr. arthur morton, the young squire. In the 
light of the lamp she observ that hi manner wa excited, and that he 
carri in hi hand a heavi hunting-crop. He wa turn in at the gate 
when she address him. 

“the doctor is not in, sir,” said she. 

“how do you know that?” he asked, harshly. 

“I have been to the surgeri door, sir.” 

“I see a light,” said the young squire, look up the drive. “that is 
in hi study, is it not?” 

“yes, sir; but I am sure that he is out.” 

“well, he must come in again,” said young morton, and pass through the 
gate while mrs. mad went upon her homeward way. 

At three o’clock that morn her husband suffer a sharp relapse, and 
she wa so alarm by hi symptom that she determin to call the 
doctor without delay. As she pass through the gate she wa surpris 
to see some one lurk among the laurel bushes. It wa certainli a man, 
and to the best of her belief mr. arthur morton. preoccupi with her 
own troubles, she gave no particular attent to the incident, but 
hurri on upon her errand. 

when she reach the hous she perceiv to her surpris that the light 
wa still burn in the study. she therefor tap at the surgeri 
door. there wa no answer. she repeat the knock sever time 
without effect. It appear to her to be unlik that the doctor would 
either go to bed or go out leav so brilliant a light behind him, and 
it struck mrs. mad that it wa possibl that he might have drop 
asleep in hi chair. she tap at the studi window, therefore, but 
without result. then, find that there wa an open between the 
curtain and the woodwork, she look through. 

the small room wa brilliantli light from a larg lamp on the central 
table, which wa litter with the doctor’ book and instruments. No 
one wa visible, nor did she see anyth unusual, except that in the 
further shadow thrown by the tabl a dingi white glove wa lie upon 
the carpet. and then suddenly, as her eye becam more accustom to the 
light, a boot emerg from the other end of the shadow, and she 
realized, with a thrill of horror, that what she had taken to be a glove 
wa the hand of a man, who wa prostrat upon the floor. understand 
that someth terribl had occurred, she rang at the front door, rous 
mrs. woods, the housekeeper, and the two women made their way into the 
study, have first dispatch the maidserv to the police-station. 

At the side of the table, away from the window, dr. lana wa discov 
stretch upon hi back and quit dead. It wa evid that he had been 
subject to violence, for one of hi eye wa blackened, and there were 
mark of bruis about hi face and neck. A slight thicken and 
swell of hi featur appear to suggest that the caus of hi death 
had been strangulation. He wa dress in hi usual profession 
clothes, but wore cloth slippers, the sole of which were perfectli 
clean. the carpet wa mark all over, especi on the side of the 
door, with trace of dirti boots, which were presum left by the 
murderer. It wa evid that some one had enter by the surgeri door, 
had kill the doctor, and had then made hi escap unseen. that the 
assail wa a man wa certain, from the size of the footprint and 
from the natur of the injuries. but beyond that point the polic found 
it veri difficult to go. 

there were no sign of robbery, and the doctor’ gold watch wa safe in 
hi pocket. He kept a heavi cash-box in the room, and thi wa 
discov to be lock but empty. mrs. wood had an impress that a 
larg sum wa usual kept there, but the doctor had paid a heavi corn 
bill in cash onli that veri day, and it wa conjectur that it wa to 
thi and not to a robber that the empti of the box wa due. one 
thing in the room wa missing—but that one thing wa suggestive. the 
portrait of miss morton, which had alway stood upon the side-table, had 
been taken from it frame, and carri off. mrs. wood had observ it 
there when she wait upon her employ that evening, and now it wa 
gone. On the other hand, there wa pick up from the floor a green 
eye-patch, which the housekeep could not rememb to have seen before. 
such a patch might, however, be in the possess of a doctor, and there 
wa noth to indic that it wa in ani way connect with the crime. 

suspicion could onli turn in one direction, and arthur morton, the young 
squire, wa immedi arrested. the evid against him wa 
circumstantial, but damning. He wa devot to hi sister, and it wa 
shown that sinc the ruptur between her and dr. lana he had been heard 
again and again to express himself in the most vindict term toward 
her former lover. He had, as stated, been seen somewher about eleven 
o’clock enter the doctor’ drive with a hunting-crop in hi hand. He 
had then, accord to the theori of the police, broken in upon the 
doctor, whose exclam of fear or of anger had been loud enough to 
attract the attent of mrs. woods. when mrs. wood descended, dr. lana 
had made up hi mind to talk it over with hi visitor, and had, 
therefore, sent hi housekeep back to her room. thi convers had 
last a long time, had becom more and more fiery, and had end by a 
person struggle, in which the doctor lost hi life. the fact, reveal 
by a _post-mortem_, that hi heart wa much diseased—an ailment quit 
unsuspect dure hi life—would make it possibl that death might in 
hi case ensu from injuri which would not be fatal to a healthi man. 
arthur morton had then remov hi sister’ photograph, and had made hi 
way homeward, step asid into the laurel bush to avoid mrs. 
mad at the gate. thi wa the theori of the prosecution, and the 
case which they present wa a formid one. 

On the other hand, there were some strong point for the defence. morton 
wa high-spirit and impetuous, like hi sister, but he wa respect 
and like by everyone, and hi frank and honest natur seem to be 
incap of such a crime. hi own explan wa that he wa anxiou 
to have a convers with dr. lana about some urgent famili matter 
(from first to last he refus even to mention the name of hi sister). 
He did not attempt to deni that thi convers would probabl have 
been of an unpleas nature. He had heard from a patient that the 
doctor wa out, and he therefor wait until about three in the morn 
for hi return, but as he had seen noth of him up to that hour, he 
had given it up and had return home. As to hi death, he knew no more 
about it than the constabl who arrest him. He had formerli been an 
intim friend of the deceas man; but circumstances, which he would 
prefer not to mention, had brought about a chang in hi sentiments. 

there were sever fact which support hi innocence. It wa certain 
that dr. lana wa aliv and in hi studi at half-past eleven o’clock. 
mrs. wood wa prepar to swear that it wa at that hour that she had 
heard hi voice. the friend of the prison contend that it wa 
probabl that at that time dr. lana wa not alone. the sound which had 
origin attract the attent of the housekeeper, and her master’ 
unusu impati that she should leav him in peace, seem to point 
to that. If thi were so, then it appear to be probabl that he had 
met hi end between the moment when the housekeep heard hi voic and 
the time when mrs. mad made her first call and found it imposs 
to attract hi attention. but if thi were the time of hi death, then 
it wa certain that mr. arthur morton could not be guilty, as it wa 
_after_ thi that she had met the young squir at the gate. 

If thi hypothesi were correct, and someon wa with dr. lana befor 
mrs. mad met mr. arthur morton, then who wa thi someone, and what 
motiv had he for wish evil to the doctor? It wa univers 
admit that if the friend of the accus could throw light upon this, 
they would have gone a long way toward establish hi innocence. but 
in the meanwhil it wa open to the public to say—a they did say—that 
there wa no proof that ani one had been there at all except the young 
squire; while, on the other hand, there wa ampl proof that hi motiv 
in go were of a sinist kind. when mrs. mad called, the doctor 
might have retir to hi room, or he might, as she thought at the time, 
have gone out and return afterward to find mr. arthur morton wait 
for him. some of the support of the accus laid stress upon the fact 
that the photograph of hi sister frances, which had been remov from 
the doctor’ room, had not been found in her brother’ possession. thi 
argument, however, did not count for much, as he had ampl time befor 
hi arrest to burn it or to destroy it. As to the onli posit evid 
in the case—th muddi footmark upon the floor—they were so blur by 
the soft of the carpet that it wa imposs to make ani 
trustworthi deduct from them. the most that could be said wa that 
their appear wa not inconsist with the theori that they were 
made by the accused, and it wa further shown that hi boot were veri 
muddi upon that night. there had been a heavi shower in the afternoon, 
and all boot were probabl in the same condition. 

such is a bald statement of the singular and romant seri of event 
which centr public attent upon thi lancashir tragedy. the unknown 
origin of the doctor, hi curiou and distinguish personality, the 
posit of the man who wa accus of the murder, and the love affair 
which had preced the crime, all combin to make the affair one of 
those drama which absorb the whole interest of a nation. throughout the 
three kingdom men discuss the case of the black doctor of bishop’ 
crossing, and mani were the theori put forward to explain the facts; 
but it may safe be said that among them all there wa not one which 
prepar the mind of the public for the extraordinari sequel, which 
caus so much excit upon the first day of the trial, and came to a 
climax upon the second. the long file of the _lancast weekly_ with 
their report of the case lie befor me as I write, but I must content 
myself with a synopsi of the case up to the point when, upon the 
even of the first day, the evid of miss franc morton threw a 
singular light upon the case. 

mr. porlock carr, the counsel for the prosecution, had marshal hi 
fact with hi usual skill, and as the day wore on, it becam more and 
more evid how difficult wa the task which mr. humphrey, who had been 
retain for the defence, had befor him. sever wit were put up 
to swear to the intemper express which the young squir had been 
heard to utter about the doctor, and the fieri manner in which he 
resent the alleg ill-treat of hi sister. mrs. mad repeat 
her evid as to the visit which had been paid late at night by the 
prison to the deceased, and it wa shown by anoth wit that the 
prison wa awar that the doctor wa in the habit of sit up alon 
in thi isol wing of the house, and that he had chosen thi veri 
late hour to call becaus he knew that hi victim would then be at hi 
mercy. A servant at the squire’ hous wa compel to admit that he 
had heard hi master return about three that morning, which corrobor 
mrs. madding’ statement that she had seen him among the laurel bush 
near the gate upon the occas of her second visit. the muddi boot and 
an alleg similar in the footprint were duli dwelt upon, and it wa 
felt when the case for the prosecut had been present that, howev 
circumstanti it might be, it wa none the less so complet and so 
convincing, that the fate of the prison wa sealed, unless someth 
quit unexpect should be disclos by the defence. It wa three 
o’clock when the prosecut closed. At half-past four, when the court 
rose, a new and unlook for develop had occurred. I extract the 
incident, or part of it, from the journal which I have alreadi 
mentioned, omit the preliminari observ of the counsel. 

consider sensat wa caus in the crowd court when the first 
wit call for the defenc prove to be miss franc morton, the 
sister of the prisoner. our reader will rememb that the young ladi 
had been engag to dr. lana, and that it wa hi anger over the sudden 
termin of thi engag which wa thought to have driven her 
brother to the perpetr of thi crime. miss morton had not, however, 
been directli implic in the case in ani way, either at the inquest 
or at the police-court proceedings, and her appear as the lead 
wit for the defenc came as a surpris upon the public. 

miss franc morton, who wa a tall and handsom brunette, gave her 
evid in a low but clear voice, though it wa evid throughout that 
she wa suffer from extrem emotion. she allud to her engag to 
the doctor, touch briefli upon it termination, which wa due, she 
said, to person matter connect with hi family, and surpris the 
court by assert that she had alway consid her brother’ 
resent to be unreason and intemperate. In answer to a direct 
question from her counsel, she repli that she did not feel that she 
had ani grievanc whatev against dr. lana, and that in her opinion he 
had act in a perfectli honour manner. her brother, on an 
insuffici knowledg of the facts, had taken anoth view, and she wa 
compel to acknowledg that, in spite of her entreaties, he had 
utter threat of person violenc against the doctor, and had, upon 
the even of the tragedy, announc hi intent of “have it out 
with him.” she had done her best to bring him to a more reason frame 
of mind, but he wa veri headstrong where hi emot or prejudic 
were concerned. 

Up to thi point the young lady’ evid had appear to make against 
the prison rather than in hi favour. the question of her counsel, 
however, soon put a veri differ light upon the matter, and disclos 
an unexpect line of defence. 

mr. humphrey: Do you believ your brother to be guilti of thi crime? 

the judge: I cannot permit that question, mr. humphrey. We are here to 
decid upon question of fact—not of belief. 

mr. humphrey: Do you know that your brother is not guilti of the death 
of doctor lana? 

miss morton: yes. 

mr. humphrey: how do you know it? 

miss morton: becaus dr. lana is not dead. 

there follow a prolong sensat in court, which interrupt the 
cross-examin of the witness. 

mr. humphrey: and how do you know, miss morton, that dr. lana is not 
dead? 

miss morton: becaus I have receiv a letter from him sinc the date of 
hi suppos death. 

mr. humphrey: have you thi letter? 

miss morton: yes, but I should prefer not to show it. 

mr. humphrey: have you the envelope? 

miss morton: yes, it is here. 

mr. humphrey: what is the post-mark? 

miss morton: liverpool. 

mr. humphrey: and the date? 

miss morton: june the 22nd. 

mr. humphrey: that be the day after hi alleg death. are you 
prepar to swear to thi handwriting, miss morton? 

miss morton: certainly. 

mr. humphrey: I am prepar to call six other witnesses, my lord, to 
testifi that thi letter is in the write of doctor lana. 

the judge: then you must call them to-morrow. 

mr. porlock carr (counsel for the prosecution): In the meantime, my 
lord, we claim possess of thi document, so that we may obtain expert 
evid as to how far it is an imit of the handwrit of the 
gentleman whom we still confid assert to be deceased. I need not 
point out that the theori so unexpectedli sprung upon us may prove to be 
a veri obviou devic adopt by the friend of the prison in order to 
divert thi inquiry. I would draw attent to the fact that the young 
ladi must, accord to her own account, have possess thi letter 
dure the proceed at the inquest and at the police-court. she 
desir us to believ that she permit these to proceed, although she 
held in her pocket evid which would at ani moment have brought them 
to an end. 

mr. humphrey: can you explain this, miss morton? 

miss morton: dr. lana desir hi secret to be preserved. 

mr. porlock carr: then whi have you made thi public? 

miss morton: To save my brother. 

A murmur of sympathi broke out in court, which wa instantli suppress 
by the judge. 

the judge: admit thi line of defence, it lie with you, mr. 
humphrey, to throw a light upon who thi man is whose bodi ha been 
recognis by so mani friend and patient of dr. lana as be that of 
the doctor himself. 

A juryman: ha ani one up to now express ani doubt about the matter? 

mr. porlock carr: not to my knowledge. 

mr. humphrey: We hope to make the matter clear. 

the judge: then the court adjourn until to-morrow. 

* * * * * 

thi new develop of the case excit the utmost interest among the 
gener public. press comment wa prevent by the fact that the trial 
wa still undecided, but the question wa everywher argu as to how 
far there could be truth in miss morton’ declaration, and how far it 
might be a dare ruse for the purpos of save her brother. the 
obviou dilemma in which the miss doctor stood wa that if by ani 
extraordinari chanc he wa not dead, then he must be held respons 
for the death of thi unknown man, who resembl him so exactly, and who 
wa found in hi study. thi letter which miss morton refus to produc 
wa possibl a confess of guilt, and she might find herself in the 
terribl posit of onli be abl to save her brother from the 
gallow by the sacrific of her former lover. the court next morn wa 
cram to overflowing, and a murmur of excit pass over it when 
mr. humphrey wa observ to enter in a state of emotion, which even hi 
train nerv could not conceal, and to confer with the oppos 
counsel. A few hurri words—word which left a look of amaz upon 
mr. porlock carr’ face—pass between them, and then the counsel for 
the defence, address the judge, announc that, with the consent of 
the prosecution, the young ladi who had given evid upon the sit 
befor would not be recalled. 

* * * * * 

the judge: but you appear, mr. humphrey, to have left matter in a veri 
unsatisfactori state. 

mr. humphrey: perhaps, my lord, my next wit may help to clear them 
up. 

the judge: then call your next witness. 

mr. humphrey: I call dr. aloysiu lana. 

the learn counsel ha made mani tell remark in hi day, but he ha 
certainli never produc such a sensat with so short a sentence. the 
court wa simpli stun with amaz as the veri man whose fate had 
been the subject of so much content appear bodili befor them in 
the witness-box. those among the spectat who had known him at 
bishop’ cross saw him now, gaunt and thin, with deep line of care 
upon hi face. but in spite of hi melancholi bear and despond 
expression, there were few who could say that they had ever seen a man 
of more distinguish presence. bow to the judge, he ask if he 
might be allow to make a statement, and have been duli inform that 
whatev he said might be use against him, he bow onc more, and 
proceeded:— 

“mi wish,” said he, “i to hold noth back, but to tell with perfect 
frank all that occur upon the night of the 21st of june. had I 
known that the innoc had suffered, and that so much troubl had been 
brought upon those whom I love best in the world, I should have come 
forward long ago; but there were reason which prevent these thing 
from come to my ears. It wa my desir that an unhappi man should 
vanish from the world which had known him, but I had not foreseen that 
other would be affect by my actions. let me to the best of my abil 
repair the evil which I have done. 

“to ani one who is acquaint with the histori of the argentin republ 
the name of lana is well known. My father, who came of the best blood of 
old spain, fill all the highest offic of the state, and would have 
been presid but for hi death in the riot of san juan. A brilliant 
career might have been open to my twin brother ernest and myself had it 
not been for financi loss which made it necessari that we should 
earn our own living. I apologize, sir, if these detail appear to be 
irrelevant, but they are a necessari introduct to that which is to 
follow. 

“I had, as I have said, a twin brother name ernest, whose resembl 
to me wa so great that even when we were togeth peopl could see no 
differ between us. down to the smallest detail we were exactli the 
same. As we grew older thi like becam less mark becaus our 
express wa not the same, but with our featur in repos the point 
of differ were veri slight. 

“it doe not becom me to say too much of one who is dead, the more so 
as he is my onli brother, but I leav hi charact to those who knew 
him best. I will onli say—for I _have_ to say it—that in my earli 
manhood I conceiv a horror of him, and that I had good reason for the 
avers which fill me. My own reput suffer from hi actions, 
for our close resembl caus me to be credit with mani of them. 
eventually, in a peculiarli disgrac business, he contriv to throw 
the whole odium upon me in such a way that I wa forc to leav the 
argentin for ever, and to seek a career in europe. the freedom from hi 
hate presenc more than compens me for the loss of my nativ land. 
I had enough money to defray my medic studi at glasgow, and I 
final settl in practic at bishop’ crossing, in the firm convict 
that in that remot lancashir hamlet I should never hear of him again. 

“for year my hope were fulfilled, and then at last he discov me. 
some liverpool man who visit bueno ayr put him upon my track. He 
had lost all hi money, and he thought that he would come over and share 
mine. know my horror of him, he rightli thought that I would be 
will to buy him off. I receiv a letter from him say that he wa 
coming. It wa at a crisi in my own affairs, and hi arriv might 
conceiv bring trouble, and even disgrace, upon some whom I wa 
especi bound to shield from anyth of the kind. I took step to 
insur that ani evil which might come should fall on me only, and 
that”—her he turn and look at the prisoner—“wa the caus of 
conduct upon my part which ha been too harshli judged. My onli motiv 
wa to screen those who were dear to me from ani possibl connect 
with scandal or disgrace. that scandal and disgrac would come with my 
brother wa onli to say that what had been would be again. 

“mi brother arriv himself one night not veri long after my receipt of 
the letter. I wa sit in my studi after the servant had gone to 
bed, when I heard a footstep upon the gravel outside, and an instant 
later I saw hi face look in at me through the window. He wa a 
clean-shaven man like myself, and the resembl between us wa still 
so great that, for an instant, I thought it wa my own reflect in the 
glass. He had a dark patch over hi eye, but our featur were 
absolut the same. then he smile in a sardon way which had been a 
trick of hi from hi boyhood, and I knew that he wa the same brother 
who had driven me from my nativ land, and brought disgrac upon what 
had been an honour name. I went to the door and I admit him. that 
would be about ten o’clock that night. 

“when he came into the glare of the lamp, I saw at onc that he had 
fallen upon veri evil days. He had walk from liverpool, and he wa 
tire and ill. I wa quit shock by the express upon hi face. My 
medic knowledg told me that there wa some seriou intern malady. 
He had been drink also, and hi face wa bruis as the result of a 
scuffl which he had had with some sailors. It wa to cover hi injur 
eye that he wore thi patch, which he remov when he enter the room. 
He wa himself dress in a pea-jacket and flannel shirt, and hi feet 
were burst through hi boots. but hi poverti had onli made him more 
savag vindict toward me. hi hatr rose to the height of a 
mania. I had been roll in money in england, accord to hi account, 
while he had been starv in south america. I cannot describ to you 
the threat which he utter or the insult which he pour upon me. My 
impress is, that hardship and debaucheri had unhing hi reason. He 
pace about the room like a wild beast, demand drink, demand 
money, and all in the foulest language. I am a hot-temp man, but I 
thank god that I am abl to say that I remain master of myself, and 
that I never rais a hand against him. My cool onli irrit him 
the more. He raved, he cursed, he shook hi fist in my face, and then 
suddenli a horribl spasm pass over hi features, he clap hi hand 
to hi side, and with a loud cri he fell in a heap at my feet. I rais 
him up and stretch him upon the sofa, but no answer came to my 
exclamations, and the hand which I held in mine wa cold and clammy. hi 
diseas heart had broken down. hi own violenc had kill him. 

“for a long time I sat as if I were in some dread dream, stare at 
the bodi of my brother. I wa arous by the knock of mrs. woods, who 
had been disturb by that die cry. I sent her away to bed. shortli 
afterward a patient tap at the surgeri door, but as I took no 
notice, he or she went off again. slowli and gradual as I sat there a 
plan wa form itself in my head in the curiou automat way in which 
plan do form. when I rose from my chair my futur movement were 
final decid upon without my have been consciou of ani process of 
thought. It wa an instinct which irresist inclin me toward one 
course. 

“ever sinc that chang in my affair to which I have alluded, bishop’ 
cross had becom hate to me. My plan of life had been ruined, and 
I had met with hasti judgment and unkind treatment where I had expect 
sympathy. It is true that ani danger of scandal from my brother had 
pass away with hi life; but still, I wa sore about the past, and 
felt that thing could never be as they had been. It may be that I wa 
unduli sensitive, and that I had not made suffici allow for 
others, but my feel were as I describe. ani chanc of get away 
from bishop’ cross and of everyon in it would be most welcom to 
me. and here wa such a chanc as I could never have dare to hope for, 
a chanc which would enabl me to make a clean break with the past. 

“there wa thi dead man lie upon the sofa, so like me that save for 
some littl thick and coars of the featur there wa no 
differ at all. No one had seen him come and no one would miss him. 
We were both clean shaven, and hi hair wa about the same length as my 
own. If I chang cloth with him, then dr. aloysiu lana would be 
found lie dead in hi study, and there would be an end of an 
unfortun fellow, and of a blight career. there wa plenti of readi 
money in the room, and thi I could carri away with me to help me to 
start onc more in some other land. In my brother’ cloth I could walk 
by night unobserv as far as liverpool, and in that great seaport I 
would soon find some mean of leav the country. after my lost hopes, 
the humblest exist where I wa unknown wa far preferable, in my 
estimation, to a practice, howev successful, in bishop’ crossing, 
where at ani moment I might come face to face with those whom I should 
wish, if it were possible, to forget. I determin to effect the change. 

“and I did so. I will not go into particulars, for the recollect is 
as pain as the experience; but in an hour my brother lay, dress 
down to the smallest detail in my clothes, while I slunk out by the 
surgeri door, and take the back path which led across some fields, I 
start off to make the best of my way to liverpool, where I arriv the 
same night. My bag of money and a certain portrait were all I carri 
out of the house, and I left behind me in my hurri the shade which my 
brother had been wear over hi eye. everyth els of hi I took 
with me. 

“I give you my word, sir, that never for one instant did the idea occur 
to me that peopl might think that I had been murdered, nor did I 
imagin that ani one might be caus seriou danger through thi 
stratagem by which I endeavour to gain a fresh start in the world. On 
the contrary, it wa the thought of reliev other from the burden of 
my presenc which wa alway uppermost in my mind. A sail vessel wa 
leav liverpool that veri day for corunna, and in thi I took my 
passage, think that the voyag would give me time to recov my 
balance, and to consid the future. but befor I left my resolut 
softened. I bethought me that there wa one person in the world to whom 
I would not caus an hour of sadness. she would mourn me in her heart, 
howev harsh and unsympathet her rel might be. she understood 
and appreci the motiv upon which I had acted, and if the rest of 
her famili condemn me, she, at least, would not forget. and so I sent 
her a note under the seal of secreci to save her from a baseless grief. 
If under the pressur of event she broke that seal, she ha my entir 
sympathi and forgiveness. 

“it wa onli last night that I return to england, and dure all thi 
time I have heard noth of the sensat which my suppos death had 
caused, nor of the accus that mr. arthur morton had been concern 
in it. It wa in a late even paper that I read an account of the 
proceed of yesterday, and I have come thi morn as fast as an 
express train could bring me to testifi to the truth.” 

such wa the remark statement of dr. aloysiu lana which brought the 
trial to a sudden termination. A subsequ investig corrobor 
it to the extent of find out the vessel in which hi brother ernest 
lana had come over from south america. the ship’ doctor wa abl to 
testifi that he had complain of a weak heart dure the voyage, and 
that hi symptom were consist with such a death as wa described. 

As to dr. aloysiu lana, he return to the villag from which he had 
made so dramat a disappearance, and a complet reconcili wa 
effect between him and the young squire, the latter have 
acknowledg that he had entir misunderstood the other’ motiv in 
withdraw from hi engagement. that anoth reconcili follow 
may be judg from a notic extract from a promin column in the 
_morn post_:— 

A marriag wa solemn upon septemb 19th, by the rev. stephen 
johnson, at the parish church of bishop’ crossing, between 
aloysiu xavier lana, son of don alfredo lana, formerli foreign 
minist of the argentin republic, and franc morton, onli 
daughter of the late jame morton, j.p., of leigh hall, bishop’ 
crossing, lancashire. 




play with fire 


I cannot pretend to say what occur on the 14th of april last at no. 
17, badderli gardens. put down in black and white, my surmis might seem 
too crude, too grotesque, for seriou consideration. and yet that 
someth did occur, and that it wa of a natur which will leav it 
mark upon everi one of us for the rest of our lives, is as certain as 
the unanim testimoni of five wit can make it. I will not enter 
into ani argument or speculation. I will onli give a plain statement, 
which will be submit to john moir, harvey deacon, and mrs. delamere, 
and withheld from public unless they are prepar to corrobor 
everi detail. I cannot obtain the sanction of paul Le duc, for he 
appear to have left the country. 

It wa john moir (the well-known senior partner of moir, moir, and 
sanderson) who had origin turn our attent to occult subjects. 
He had, like mani veri hard and practic men of business, a mystic side 
to hi nature, which had led him to the examination, and eventu to 
the acceptance, of those elus phenomena which are group togeth 
with much that is foolish, and much that is fraudulent, under the common 
head of spiritualism. hi researches, which had begun with an open 
mind, end unhappili in dogma, and he becam as posit and fanat 
as ani other bigot. He repres in our littl group the bodi of men 
who have turn these singular phenomena into a new religion. 

mrs. delamere, our medium, wa hi sister, the wife of delamere, the 
rise sculptor. our experi had shown us that to work on these 
subject without a medium wa as futil as for an astronom to make 
observ without a telescope. On the other hand, the introduct of 
a paid medium wa hate to all of us. wa it not obviou that he or 
she would feel bound to return some result for money received, and that 
the temptat to fraud would be an overpow one? No phenomena could 
be reli upon which were produc at a guinea an hour. but, 
fortunately, moir had discov that hi sister wa mediumistic—in 
other words, that she wa a batteri of that anim magnet forc which 
is the onli form of energi which is subtl enough to be act upon from 
the spiritu plane as well as from our own materi one. Of course, 
when I say this, I do not mean to beg the question; but I am simpli 
indic the theori upon which we were ourselves, rightli or 
wrongly, explain what we saw. the ladi came, not altogeth with the 
approv of her husband, and though she never gave indic of ani 
veri great psychic force, we were able, at least, to obtain those usual 
phenomena of message-tilt which are at the same time so pueril and 
so inexplicable. everi sunday even we met in harvey deacon’ studio 
at badderli gardens, the next hous to the corner of merton park road. 

harvey deacon’ imagin work in art would prepar ani one to find 
that he wa an ardent lover of everyth which wa _outré_ and 
sensational. A certain picturesqu in the studi of the occult had 
been the qualiti which had origin attract him to it, but hi 
attent wa speedili arrest by some of those phenomena to which I 
have referred, and he wa come rapidli to the conclus that what he 
had look upon as an amus romanc and an after-dinn entertain 
wa realli a veri formid reality. He is a man with a remark 
clear and logic brain—a true descend of hi ancestor, the 
well-known scotch professor—and he repres in our small circl the 
critic element, the man who ha no prejudices, is prepar to follow 
fact as far as he can see them, and refus to theoriz in advanc of 
hi data. hi caution annoy moir as much as the latter’ robust faith 
amus deacon, but each in hi own way wa equal keen upon the matter. 

and I? what am I to say that I represented? I wa not the devotee. I wa 
not the scientif critic. perhap the best that I can claim for myself 
is that I wa the dilettant man about town, anxiou to be in the swim 
of everi fresh movement, thank for ani new sensat which would take 
me out of myself and open up fresh possibl of existence. I am not 
an enthusiast myself, but I like the compani of those who are. moir’ 
talk, which made me feel as if we had a privat pass-key through the 
door of death, fill me with a vagu contentment. the sooth 
atmospher of the séanc with the darken light wa delight to me. 
In a word, the thing amus me, and so I wa there. 

It was, as I have said, upon the 14th of april last that the veri 
singular event which I am about to put upon record took place. I wa the 
first of the men to arriv at the studio, but mrs. delamer wa alreadi 
there, have had afternoon tea with mrs. harvey deacon. the two ladi 
and deacon himself were stand in front of an unfinish pictur of 
hi upon the easel. I am not an expert in art, and I have never 
profess to understand what harvey deacon meant by hi pictures; but I 
could see in thi instanc that it wa all veri clever and imaginative, 
fairi and anim and allegor figur of all sorts. the ladi 
were loud in their praises, and inde the colour effect wa a 
remark one. 

“what do you think of it, markham?” he asked. 

“well, it’ abov me,” said I. “these beasts—what are they?” 

“mythic monsters, imaginari creatures, herald emblems—a sort of 
weird, bizarr process of them.” 

“with a white hors in front!” 

“it’ not a horse,” said he, rather testily—which wa surprising, for he 
wa a veri good-humour fellow as a rule, and hardli ever took himself 
seriously. 

“what is it, then?” 

“can’t you see the horn in front? it’ a unicorn. I told you they were 
herald beasts. can’t you recogn one?” 

“veri sorry, deacon,” said I, for he realli seem to be annoyed. 

He laugh at hi own irritation. 

“excus me, markham!” said he; “the fact is that I have had an aw job 
over the beast. all day I have been paint him in and paint him 
out, and tri to imagin what a real live, ramp unicorn would look 
like. At last I got him, as I hoped; so when you fail to recogn it, 
it took me on the raw.” 

“why, of cours it’ a unicorn,” said I, for he wa evid depress 
at my obtuseness. “I can see the horn quit plainly, but I never saw a 
unicorn except besid the royal arms, and so I never thought of the 
creature. and these other are griffin and cockatrices, and dragon of 
sorts?” 

“yes, I had no difficulti with them. It wa the unicorn which bother 
me. however, there’ an end of it until to-morrow.” He turn the 
pictur round upon the easel, and we all chat about other subjects. 

moir wa late that evening, and when he did arriv he brought with him, 
rather to our surprise, a small, stout frenchman, whom he introduc as 
monsieur paul Le duc. I say to our surprise, for we held a theori that 
ani intrus into our spiritu circl derang the conditions, and 
introduc an element of suspicion. We knew that we could trust each 
other, but all our result were vitiat by the presenc of an outsider. 
however, moir soon reconcil us to the innovation. monsieur paul Le duc 
wa a famou student of occultism, a seer, a medium, and a mystic. He 
wa travel in england with a letter of introduct to moir from the 
presid of the parisian brother of the rosi cross. what more natur 
than that he should bring him to our littl séance, or that we should 
feel honour by hi presence? 

He was, as I have said, a small, stout man, undistinguish in 
appearance, with a broad, smooth, clean-shaven face, remark onli for 
a pair of large, brown, velveti eyes, stare vagu out in front of 
him. He wa well dressed, with the manner of a gentleman, and hi 
curiou littl turn of english speech set the ladi smiling. mrs. 
deacon had a prejudic against our research and left the room, upon 
which we lower the lights, as wa our custom, and drew up our chair 
to the squar mahogani tabl which stood in the centr of the studio. 
the light wa subdued, but suffici to allow us to see each other 
quit plainly. I rememb that I could even observ the curious, podgi 
littl square-top hand which the frenchman laid upon the table. 

“what a fun!” said he. “it is mani year sinc I have sat in thi 
fashion, and it is to me amusing. madam is medium. doe madam make the 
trance?” 

“well, hardli that,” said mrs. delamere. “but I am alway consciou of 
extrem sleepiness.” 

“it is the first stage. then you encourag it, and there come the 
trance. when the tranc comes, then out jump your littl spirit and in 
jump anoth littl spirit, and so you have direct talk or writing. 
you leav your machin to be work by another. _hein?_ but what have 
unicorn to do with it?” 

harvey deacon start in hi chair. the frenchman wa move hi head 
slowli round and stare into the shadow which drape the walls. 

“what a fun!” said he. “alway unicorns. who ha been think so hard 
upon a subject so bizarre?” 

“thi is wonderful!” cri deacon. “I have been tri to paint one all 
day. but how could you know it?” 

“you have been think of them in thi room.” 

“certainly.” 

“but thought are things, my friend. when you imagin a thing you make a 
thing. you did not know it, _hein_? but I can see your unicorn becaus 
it is not onli with my eye that I can see.” 

“do you mean to say that I creat a thing which ha never exist by 
mere think of it?” 

“but certainly. It is the fact which lie under all other facts. that is 
whi an evil thought is also a danger.” 

“they are, I suppose, upon the astral plane?” said moir. 

“ah, well, these are but words, my friends. they are 
there—somewhere—everywhere—i cannot tell myself. I see them. I could not 
touch them.” 

“you could not make _us_ see them.” 

“it is to materi them. hold! It is an experiment. but the power is 
wanting. let us see what power we have, and then arrang what we shall 
do. may I place you as I should wish?” 

“you evid know a great deal more about it than we do,” said harvey 
deacon; “I wish that you would take complet control.” 

“it may be that the condit are not good. but we will tri what we can 
do. madam will sit where she is, I next, and thi gentleman besid me. 
meester moir will sit next to madame, becaus it is well to have black 
and blond in turn. so! and now with your permiss I will turn the 
light all out.” 

“what is the advantag of the dark?” I asked. 

“becaus the forc with which we deal is a vibrat of ether and so 
also is light. We have the wire all for ourselv now—_hein_? you will 
not be frighten in the darkness, madame? what a fun is such a séance!” 

At first the dark appear to be absolut pitchy, but in a few 
minut our eye becam so far accustom to it that we could just make 
out each other’ presence—veri dimli and vaguely, it is true. I could 
see noth els in the room—onli the black loom of the motionless 
figures. We were all take the matter much more serious than we had 
ever done before. 

“you will place your hand in front. It is hopeless that we touch, sinc 
we are so few round so larg a table. you will compos yourself, madame, 
and if sleep should come to you you will not fight against it. and now 
we sit in silenc and we expect——_hein_?” 

So we sat in silenc and expected, stare out into the black in 
front of us. A clock tick in the passage. A dog bark intermitt 
far away. onc or twice a cab rattl past in the street, and the gleam 
of it lamp through the chink in the curtain wa a cheer break in 
that gloomi vigil. I felt those physic symptom with which previou 
séanc had made me familiar—th cold of the feet, the tingl in 
the hands, the glow of the palms, the feel of a cold wind upon the 
back. strang littl shoot pain came in my forearms, especi as 
it seem to me in my left one, which wa nearest to our visitor—du no 
doubt to disturb of the vascular system, but worthi of some 
attent all the same. At the same time I wa consciou of a strain 
feel of expect which wa almost painful. from the rigid, absolut 
silenc of my companion I gather that their nerv were as tens as 
my own. 

and then suddenli a sound came out of the darkness—a low, sibil 
sound, the quick, thin breath of a woman. quicker and thinner yet it 
came, as between clench teeth, to end in a loud gasp with a dull 
rustl of cloth. 

“what’ that? Is all right?” someon ask in the darkness. 

“yes, all is right,” said the frenchman. “it is madame. she is in her 
trance. now, gentlemen, if you will wait quiet you will see something, I 
think, which will interest you much.” 

still the tick in the hall. still the breathing, deeper and fuller 
now, from the medium. still the occasion flash, more welcom than 
ever, of the pass light of the hansoms. what a gap we were bridging, 
the half-rais veil of the etern on the one side and the cab of 
london on the other. the tabl wa throb with a mighti pulse. It 
sway steadily, rhythmically, with an easi swooping, scoop motion 
under our fingers. sharp littl rap and crack came from it substance, 
file-firing, volley-firing, the sound of a fagot burn briskli on a 
frosti night. 

“there is much power,” said the frenchman. “see it on the table!” 

I had thought it wa some delus of my own, but all could see it now. 
there wa a greenish-yellow phosphoresc light—or I should say a 
lumin vapour rather than a light—which lay over the surfac of the 
table. It roll and wreath and undul in dim glimmer folds, 
turn and swirl like cloud of smoke. I could see the white, 
square-end hand of the french medium in thi bale light. 

“what a fun!” he cried. “it is splendid!” 

“shall we call the alphabet?” ask moir. 

“but no—for we can do much better,” said our visitor. “it is but a 
clumsi thing to tilt the tabl for everi letter of the alphabet, and 
with such a medium as madam we should do better than that.” 

“yes, you will do better,” said a voice. 

“who wa that? who spoke? wa that you, markham?” 

“no, I did not speak.” 

“it wa madam who spoke.” 

“but it wa not her voice.” 

“i that you, mrs. delamere?” 

“it is not the medium, but it is the power which use the organ of the 
medium,” said the strange, deep voice. 

“where is mrs. delamere? It will not hurt her, I trust.” 

“the medium is happi in anoth plane of existence. she ha taken my 
place, as I have taken hers.” 

“who are you?” 

“it cannot matter to you who I am. I am one who ha live as you are 
living, and who ha die as you will die.” 

We heard the creak and grate of a cab pull up next door. there wa an 
argument about the fare, and the cabman grumbl hoars down the 
street. the green-yellow cloud still swirl faintli over the table, 
dull elsewhere, but glow into a dim luminos in the direct of 
the medium. It seem to be pile itself up in front of her. A sens of 
fear and cold struck into my heart. It seem to me that lightli and 
flippantli we had approach the most real and august of sacraments, 
that communion with the dead of which the father of the church had 
spoken. 

“don’t you think we are go too far? should we not break up thi 
séance?” I cried. 

but the other were all earnest to see the end of it. they laugh at my 
scruples. 

“all the power are made for use,” said harvey deacon. “if we _can_ do 
this, we _should_ do this. everi new departur of knowledg ha been 
call unlaw in it inception. It is right and proper that we should 
inquir into the natur of death.” 

“it is right and proper,” said the voice. 

“there, what more could you ask?” cri moir, who wa much excited. “let 
us have a test. will you give us a test that you are realli there?” 

“what test do you demand?” 

“well, now—i have some coin in my pocket. will you tell me how many?” 

“we come back in the hope of teach and of elevating, and not to guess 
childish riddles.” 

“ha, ha, meester moir, you catch it that time,” cri the frenchman. 
“but sure thi is veri good sens what the control is saying.” 

“it is a religion, not a game,” said the cold, hard voice. 

“exactly—th veri view I take of it,” cri moir. “I am sure I am veri 
sorri if I have ask a foolish question. you will not tell me who you 
are?” 

“what doe it matter?” 

“have you been a spirit long?” 

“yes.” 

“how long?” 

“we cannot reckon time as you do. our condit are different.” 

“are you happy?” 

“yes.” 

“you would not wish to come back to life?” 

“no—certainli not.” 

“are you busy?” 

“we could not be happi if we were not busy.” 

“what do you do?” 

“I have said that the condit are entir different.” 

“can you give us no idea of your work?” 

“we labour for our own improv and for the advanc of others.” 

“do you like come here to-night?” 

“I am glad to come if I can do ani good by coming.” 

“then to do good is your object?” 

“it is the object of all life on everi plane.” 

“you see, markham, that should answer your scruples.” 

It did, for my doubt had pass and onli interest remained. 

“have you pain in your life?” I asked. 

“no; pain is a thing of the body.” 

“have you mental pain?” 

“yes; one may alway be sad or anxious.” 

“do you meet the friend whom you have known on earth?” 

“some of them.” 

“whi onli some of them?” 

“onli those who are sympathetic.” 

“do husband meet wives?” 

“those who have truli loved.” 

“and the others?” 

“they are noth to each other.” 

“there must be a spiritu connection?” 

“of course.” 

“i what we are do right?” 

“if done in the right spirit.” 

“what is the wrong spirit?” 

“curios and levity.” 

“may harm come of that?” 

“veri seriou harm.” 

“what sort of harm?” 

“you may call up forc over which you have no control.” 

“evil forces?” 

“undevelop forces.” 

“you say they are dangerous. danger to bodi or mind?” 

“sometim to both.” 

there wa a pause, and the black seem to grow blacker still, while 
the yellow-green fog swirl and smoke upon the table. 

“ani question you would like to ask, moir?” said harvey deacon. 

“onli this—do you pray in your world?” 

“one should pray in everi world.” 

“why?” 

“becaus it is the acknowledg of forc outsid ourselves.” 

“what religion do you hold over there?” 

“we differ exactli as you do.” 

“you have no certain knowledge?” 

“we have onli faith.” 

“these question of religion,” said the frenchman, “they are of interest 
to you seriou english people, but they are not so much fun. It seem to 
me that with thi power here we might be abl to have some great 
experience—_hein_? someth of which we could talk.” 

“but noth could be more interest than this,” said moir. 

“well, if you think so, that is veri well,” the frenchman answered, 
peevishly. “for my part, it seem to me that I have heard all thi 
before, and that to-night I should weesh to tri some experi with all 
thi forc which is given to us. but if you have other questions, then 
ask them, and when you are finish we can tri someth more.” 

but the spell wa broken. We ask and asked, but the medium sat silent 
in her chair. onli her deep, regular breath show that she wa 
there. the mist still swirl upon the table. 

“you have disturb the harmony. she will not answer.” 

“but we have learn alreadi all that she can tell—_hein_? for my part I 
wish to see someth that I have never seen before.” 

“what then?” 

“you will let me try?” 

“what would you do?” 

“I have said to you that thought are things. now I wish to _prove_ it 
to you, and to show you that which is onli a thought. yes, yes, I can do 
it and you will see. now I ask you onli to sit still and say nothing, 
and keep ever your hand quiet upon the table.” 

the room wa blacker and more silent than ever. the same feel of 
apprehens which had lain heavili upon me at the begin of the 
séanc wa back at my heart onc more. the root of my hair were 
tingling. 

“it is working! It is working!” cri the frenchman, and there wa a 
crack in hi voic as he spoke which told me that he also wa strung to 
hi tightest. 

the lumin fog drift slowli off the table, and waver and flicker 
across the room. there in the farther and darkest corner it gather and 
glowed, harden down into a shine core—a strange, shifty, luminous, 
and yet non-illumin patch of radiance, bright itself, but throw 
no ray into the darkness. It had chang from a greenish-yellow to a 
duski sullen red. then round thi centr there coil a dark, smoki 
substance, thickening, hardening, grow denser and blacker. and then 
the light went out, smother in that which had grown round it. 

“it ha gone.” 

“hush—there’ someth in the room.” 

We heard it in the corner where the light had been, someth which 
breath deepli and fidget in the darkness. 

“what is it? Le duc, what have you done?” 

“it is all right. No harm will come.” the frenchman’ voic wa trebl 
with agitation. 

“good heavens, moir, there’ a larg anim in the room. here it is, 
close by my chair! Go away! Go away!” 

It wa harvey deacon’ voice, and then came the sound of a blow upon 
some hard object. and then ... and then ... how can I tell you what 
happen then? 

some huge thing hurtl against us in the darkness, rearing, stamping, 
smashing, springing, snorting. the tabl wa splintered. We were 
scatter in everi direction. It clatter and scrambl amongst us, 
rush with horribl energi from one corner of the room to another. We 
were all scream with fear, grovel upon our hand and knee to get 
away from it. someth trod upon my left hand, and I felt the bone 
splinter under the weight. 

“A light! A light!” someon yelled. 

“moir, you have matches, matches!” 

“no, I have none. deacon, where are the matches? for god’ sake, the 
matches!” 

“I can’t find them. here, you frenchman, stop it!” 

“it is beyond me. oh, _mon dieu_, I cannot stop it. the door! where is 
the door?” 

My hand, by good luck, lit upon the handl as I grope about in the 
darkness. the hard-breathing, snorting, rush creatur tore past me 
and but with a fear crash against the oaken partition. the instant 
that it had pass I turn the handle, and next moment we were all 
outsid and the door shut behind us. from within came a horribl 
crash and rend and stamping. 

“what is it? In heaven’ name, what is it?” 

“A horse. I saw it when the door opened. but mrs. delamere——?” 

“we must fetch her out. come on, markham; the longer we wait the less we 
shall like it.” 

He flung open the door and we rush in. she wa there on the ground 
amidst the splinter of her chair. We seiz her and drag her swiftli 
out, and as we gain the door I look over my shoulder into the 
darkness. there were two strang eye glow at us, a rattl of hoofs, 
and I had just time to slam the door when there came a crash upon it 
which split it from top to bottom. 

“it’ come through! it’ coming!” 

“run, run for your lives!” cri the frenchman. 

anoth crash, and someth shot through the riven door. It wa a long 
white spike, gleam in the lamplight. for a moment it shone befor us, 
and then with a snap it disappear again. 

“quick! quick! thi way!” harvey deacon shouted. “carri her in! here! 
quick!” 

We had taken refug in the dining-room, and shut the heavi oak door. We 
laid the senseless woman upon the sofa, and as we did so, moir, the hard 
man of business, droop and faint across the hearthrug. harvey deacon 
wa as white as a corpse, jerk and twitch like an epileptic. with 
a crash we heard the studio door fli to pieces, and the snort and 
stamp were in the passage, up and down, up and down, shake the 
hous with their fury. the frenchman had sunk hi face on hi hands, and 
sob like a frighten child. 

“what shall we do?” I shook him roughli by the shoulder. “i a gun ani 
use?” 

“no, no. the power will pass. then it will end.” 

“you might have kill us all—you unspeak fool—with your infern 
experiments.” 

“I did not know. how could I tell that it would be frightened? It is mad 
with terror. It wa hi fault. He struck it.” 

harvey deacon sprang up. “good heavens!” he cried. 

A terribl scream sound through the house. 

“it’ my wife! here, i’m go out. If it’ the evil one himself I am 
go out!” 

He had thrown open the door and rush out into the passage. At the end 
of it, at the foot of the stairs, mrs. deacon wa lie senseless, 
struck down by the sight which she had seen. but there wa noth else. 

with eye of horror we look about us, but all wa perfectli quiet and 
still. I approach the black squar of the studio door, expect with 
everi slow step that some atroci shape would hurl itself out of it. 
but noth came, and all wa silent insid the room. peep and 
peering, our heart in our mouths, we came to the veri threshold, and 
stare into the darkness. there wa still no sound, but in one direct 
there wa also no darkness. A luminous, glow cloud, with an 
incandesc centre, hover in the corner of the room. slowli it dim 
and faded, grow thinner and fainter, until at last the same dense, 
velveti black fill the whole studio. and with the last flicker 
gleam of that bale light the frenchman broke into a shout of joy. 

“what a fun!” he cried. “no one is hurt, and onli the door broken, and 
the ladi frightened. but, my friends, we have done what ha never been 
done before.” 

“and as far as I can help it,” said harvey deacon, “it will certainli 
never be done again.” 

and that wa what befel on the 14th of april last at no. 17, badderli 
gardens. I began by say that it would seem too grotesqu to dogmat 
as to what it wa which actual did occur; but I give my impressions, 
_our_ impress (sinc they are corrobor by harvey deacon and john 
moir), for what they are worth. you may, if it pleas you, imagin that 
we were the victim of an elabor and extraordinari hoax. Or you may 
think with us that we underw a veri real and a veri terribl 
experience. Or perhap you may know more than we do of such occult 
matters, and can inform us of some similar occurrence. In thi latter 
case a letter to william markham, 146m, the albany, would help to throw 
a light upon that which is veri dark to us. 




the jew’ breastplat 


My particular friend ward mortim wa one of the best men of hi day at 
everyth connect with orient archæology. He had written larg 
upon the subject, he had live two year in a tomb at thebes, while he 
excav in the valley of the kings, and final he had creat a 
consider sensat by hi exhum of the alleg mummi of 
cleopatra in the inner room of the templ of horus, at philæ. with such 
a record at the age of thirty-one, it wa felt that a consider 
career lay befor him, and no one wa surpris when he wa elect to 
the curatorship of the belmor street museum, which carri with it the 
lectureship at the orient college, and an incom which ha sunk with 
the fall in land, but which still remain at that ideal sum which is 
larg enough to encourag an investigator, but not so larg as to 
enerv him. 

there wa onli one reason which made ward mortimer’ posit a littl 
difficult at the belmor street museum, and that wa the extrem 
emin of the man whom he had to succeed. professor andrea wa a 
profound scholar and a man of european reputation. hi lectur were 
frequent by student from everi part of the world, and hi admir 
manag of the collect intrust to hi care wa a commonplac in 
all learn societies. there was, therefore, consider surpris when, 
at the age of fifty-five, he suddenli resign hi posit and retir 
from those duti which had been both hi livelihood and hi pleasure. 
He and hi daughter left the comfort suit of room which had form 
hi offici resid in connect with the museum, and my friend, 
mortimer, who wa a bachelor, took up hi quarter there. 

On hear of mortimer’ appoint professor andrea had written him a 
veri kindli and flatter congratulatori letter. I wa actual present 
at their first meeting, and I went with mortim round the museum when 
the professor show us the admir collect which he had cherish 
so long. the professor’ beauti daughter and a young man, captain 
wilson, who was, as I understood, soon to be her husband, accompani us 
in our inspection. there were fifteen rooms, but the babylonian, the 
syrian, and the central hall, which contain the jewish and egyptian 
collection, were the finest of all. professor andrea wa a quiet, dry, 
elderli man, with a clean-shaven face and an impass manner, but hi 
dark eye sparkl and hi featur quicken into enthusiast life as 
he point out to us the rariti and the beauti of some of hi specimens. 
hi hand linger so fondli over them, that one could read hi pride in 
them and the grief in hi heart now that they were pass from hi care 
into that of another. 

He had shown us in turn hi mummies, hi papyri, hi rare scarabs, hi 
inscriptions, hi jewish relics, and hi duplic of the famou 
seven-branch candlestick of the temple, which wa brought to rome by 
titus, and which is suppos by some to be lie at thi instant in the 
bed of the tiber. then he approach a case which stood in the veri 
centr of the hall, and he look down through the glass with rever 
in hi attitud and manner. 

“thi is no novelti to an expert like yourself, mr. mortimer,” said he; 
“but I daresay that your friend, mr. jackson, will be interest to see 
it.” 

lean over the case I saw an object, some five inch square, which 
consist of twelv preciou stone in a framework of gold, with golden 
hook at two of the corners. the stone were all vari in sort and 
colour, but they were of the same size. their shapes, arrangement, and 
gradat of tint made me think of a box of water-colour paints. each 
stone had some hieroglyph scratch upon it surface. 

“you have heard, mr. jackson, of the urim and thummim?” 

I had heard the term, but my idea of it mean wa exceedingli vague. 

“the urim and thummim wa a name given to the jewel plate which lay 
upon the breast of the high priest of the jews. they had a veri special 
feel of rever for it—someth of the feel which an ancient 
roman might have for the sibyllin book in the capitol. there are, as 
you see, twelv magnific stones, inscrib with mystic characters. 
count from the left-hand top corner, the stone are carnelian, 
peridot, emerald, ruby, lapi lazuli, onyx, sapphire, agate, amethyst, 
topaz, beryl, and jasper.” 

I wa amaz at the varieti and beauti of the stones. 

“ha the breastplat ani particular history?” I asked. 

“it is of great age and of immens value,” said professor andreas. 
“without be abl to make an absolut assertion, we have mani reason 
to think that it is possibl that it may be the origin urim and 
thummim of solomon’ temple. there is certainli noth so fine in ani 
collect in europe. My friend, captain wilson here, is a practic 
author upon preciou stones, and he would tell you how pure these 
are.” 

captain wilson, a man with a dark, hard, incis face, wa stand 
besid hi _fiancée_ at the other side of the case. 

“yes,” said he, curtly, “I have never seen finer stones.” 

“and the gold-work is also worthi of attention. the ancient excel in 
——”—he wa appar about to indic the set of the stones, when 
captain wilson interrupt him. 

“you will see a finer exampl of their gold-work in thi candlestick,” 
said he, turn to anoth table, and we all join him in hi 
admir of it emboss stem and delic ornament branches. 
altogeth it wa an interest and a novel experi to have object 
of such rariti explain by so great an expert; and when, finally, 
professor andrea finish our inspect by formal hand over the 
preciou collect to the care of my friend, I could not help piti 
him and envi hi successor whose life wa to pass in so pleasant a 
duty. within a week, ward mortim wa duli instal in hi new set of 
rooms, and had becom the autocrat of the belmor street museum. 

about a fortnight afterward my friend gave a small dinner to 
half-a-dozen bachelor friend to celebr hi promotion. when hi 
guest were depart he pull my sleev and signal to me that he 
wish me to remain. 

“you have onli a few hundr yard to go,” said he—i wa live in 
chamber in the albany. “you may as well stay and have a quiet cigar 
with me. I veri much want your advice.” 

I relaps into an arm-chair and lit one of hi excel matronas. when 
he had return from see the last of hi guest out, he drew a letter 
from hi dress-jacket and sat down opposit to me. 

“thi is an anonym letter which I receiv thi morning,” said he. “I 
want to read it to you and to have your advice.” 

“you are veri welcom to it for what it is worth.” 

“thi is how the note runs: ‘sir,—i should strongli advis you to keep a 
veri care watch over the mani valuabl thing which are commit to 
your charge. I do not think that the present system of a singl watchman 
is sufficient. Be upon your guard, or an irrepar misfortun may 
occur.” 

“i that all?” 

“yes, that is all.” 

“well,” said I, “it is at least obviou that it wa written by one of 
the limit number of peopl who are awar that you have onli one 
watchman at night.” 

ward mortim hand me the note, with a curiou smile. “have you an eye 
for handwriting?” said he. “now, look at this!” He put anoth letter in 
front of me. “look at the _c_ in ‘congratulate’ and the _c_ in 
‘committed.’ look at the capit _i_. look at the trick of put in a 
dash instead of a stop!” 

“they are undoubtedli from the same hand—with some attempt at disguis 
in the case of thi first one.” 

“the second,” said ward mortimer, “i the letter of congratul which 
wa written to me by professor andrea upon my obtain my 
appointment.” 

I stare at him in amazement. then I turn over the letter in my hand, 
and there, sure enough, wa “martin andreas” sign upon the other side. 
there could be no doubt, in the mind of ani one who had the slightest 
knowledg of the scienc of graphology, that the professor had written 
an anonym letter, warn hi successor against thieves. It wa 
inexplicable, but it wa certain. 

“whi should he do it?” I asked. 

“precis what I should wish to ask you. If he had ani such misgivings, 
whi could he not come and tell me direct?” 

“will you speak to him about it?” 

“there again I am in doubt. He might choos to deni that he wrote it.” 

“at ani rate,” said I, “thi warn is meant in a friendli spirit, and 
I should certainli act upon it. are the present precaut enough to 
insur you against robbery?” 

“I should have thought so. the public are onli admit from ten till 
five, and there is a guardian to everi two rooms. He stand at the door 
between them, and so command them both.” 

“but at night?” 

“when the public are gone, we at onc put up the great iron shutters, 
which are absolut burglar-proof. the watchman is a capabl fellow. He 
sit in the lodge, but he walk round everi three hours. We keep one 
electr light burn in each room all night.” 

“it is difficult to suggest anyth more—short of keep your day 
watcher all night.” 

“we could not afford that.” 

“at least, I should commun with the police, and have a special 
constabl put on outsid in belmor street,” said I. “a to the letter, 
if the writer wish to be anonymous, I think he ha a right to remain 
so. We must trust to the futur to show some reason for the curiou 
cours which he ha adopted.” 

So we dismiss the subject, but all that night after my return to my 
chamber I wa puzzl my brain as to what possibl motiv professor 
andrea could have for write an anonym warn letter to hi 
successor—for that the write wa hi wa as certain to me as if I had 
seen him actual do it. He foresaw some danger to the collection. 
wa it becaus he foresaw it that he abandon hi charg of it? but if 
so, whi should he hesit to warn mortim in hi own name? I puzzl 
and puzzl until at last I fell into a troubl sleep, which carri me 
beyond my usual hour of rising. 

I wa arous in a singular and effect method, for about nine o’clock 
my friend mortim rush into my room with an express of 
constern upon hi face. He wa usual one of the most tidi men of 
my acquaintance, but now hi collar wa undon at one end, hi tie wa 
flying, and hi hat at the back of hi head. I read hi whole stori in 
hi frantic eyes. 

“the museum ha been robbed!” I cried, spring up in bed. 

“I fear so! those jewels! the jewel of the urim and thummim!” he 
gasped, for he wa out of breath with running. “i’m go on to the 
police-station. come to the museum as soon as you can, jackson! 
good-bye!” He rush distractedli out of the room, and I heard him 
clatter down the stairs. 

I wa not long in follow hi directions, but I found when I arriv 
that he had alreadi return with a polic inspector, and anoth 
elderli gentleman, who prove to be mr. purvis, one of the partner of 
morson and company, the well-known diamond merchants. As an expert in 
stone he wa alway prepar to advis the police. they were group 
round the case in which the breastplat of the jewish priest had been 
exposed. the plate had been taken out and laid upon the glass top of the 
case, and the three head were bent over it. 

“it is obviou that it ha been tamper with,” said mortimer. “it 
caught my eye the moment that I pass through the room thi morning. I 
examin it yesterday evening, so that it is certain that thi ha 
happen dure the night.” 

It was, as he had said, obviou that some one had been at work upon it. 
the set of the uppermost row of four stones—th carnelian, peridot, 
emerald, and ruby-wer rough and jag as if some one had scrape all 
round them. the stone were in their places, but the beauti gold-work 
which we had admir onli a few day befor had been veri clumsili 
pull about. 

“it look to me,” said the polic inspector, “a if some one had been 
tri to take out the stones.” 

“mi fear is,” said mortimer, “that he not onli tried, but succeeded. I 
believ these four stone to be skil imit which have been put 
in the place of the originals.” 

the same suspicion had evid been in the mind of the expert, for he 
had been care examin the four stone with the aid of a lens. He 
now submit them to sever tests, and final turn cheer to 
mortimer. 

“I congratul you, sir,” said he, heartily. “I will pledg my 
reput that all four of these stone are genuine, and of a most 
unusu degre of purity.” 

the colour began to come back to my poor friend’ frighten face, and 
he drew a long breath of relief. 

“thank god!” he cried. “then what in the world did the thief want?” 

“probabl he meant to take the stones, but wa interrupted.” 

“in that case one would expect him to take them out one at a time, but 
the set of each of these ha been loosened, and yet the stone are 
all here.” 

“it is certainli most extraordinary,” said the inspector. “I never 
rememb a case like it. let us see the watchman.” 

the commissionair wa called—a soldierly, honest-fac man, who seem 
as concern as ward mortim at the incident. 

“no, sir, I never heard a sound,” he answered, in repli to the question 
of the inspector. “I made my round four times, as usual, but I saw 
noth suspicious. i’v been in my posit ten years, but noth of 
the kind ha ever occur before.” 

“no thief could have come through the windows?” 

“impossible, sir.” 

“or pass you at the door?” 

“no, sir; I never left my post except when I walk my rounds.” 

“what other open are there in the museum?” 

“there is the door into mr. ward mortimer’ privat rooms.” 

“that is lock at night,” my friend explained, “and in order to reach 
it ani one from the street would have to open the outsid door as well.” 

“your servants?” 

“their quarter are entir separate.” 

“well, well,” said the inspector, “thi is certainli veri obscure. 
however, there ha been no harm done, accord to mr. purvis.” 

“I will swear that those stone are genuine.” 

“so that the case appear to be mere one of malici damage. but none 
the less, I should be veri glad to go care round the premises, and 
to see if we can find ani trace to show us who your visitor may have 
been.” 

hi investigation, which last all the morn wa care and 
intelligent, but it led in the end to nothing. He point out to us that 
there were two possibl entranc to the museum which we had not 
considered. the one wa from the cellar by a trap-door open in the 
passage. the other through a skylight from the lumber-room, overlook 
that veri chamber to which the intrud had penetrated. As neither the 
cellar nor the lumber-room could be enter unless the thief wa alreadi 
within the lock doors, the matter wa not of ani practic importance, 
and the dust of cellar and attic assur us that no one had use either 
one or the other. finally, we end as we began, without the slightest 
clue as to how, why, or by whom the set of these four jewel had 
been tamper with. 

there remain one cours for mortim to take, and he took it. leav 
the polic to continu their fruitless researches, he ask me to 
accompani him that afternoon in a visit to professor andreas. He took 
with him the two letters, and it wa hi intent to openli tax hi 
predecessor with have written the anonym warning, and to ask him to 
explain the fact that he should have anticip so exactli that which 
had actual occurred. the professor wa live in a small villa in 
upper norwood, but we were inform by the servant that he wa away from 
home. see our disappointment, she ask us if we should like to see 
miss andreas, and show us into the modest drawing-room. 

I have mention incident that the professor’ daughter wa a veri 
beauti girl. she wa a blonde, tall and graceful, with a skin of that 
delic tint which the french call “mat,” the colour of old ivori or of 
the lighter petal of the sulphur rose. I wa shocked, however, as she 
enter the room to see how much she had chang in the last fortnight. 
her young face wa haggard and her bright eye heavi with trouble. 

“father ha gone to scotland,” she said. “he seem to be tired, and ha 
had a good deal to worri him. He onli left us yesterday.” 

“you look a littl tire yourself, miss andreas,” said my friend. 

“I have been so anxiou about father.” 

“can you give me hi scotch address?” 

“yes, he is with hi brother, the rev. david andreas, 1, arran villas, 
ardrossan.” 

ward mortim made a note of the address, and we left without say 
anyth as to the object of our visit. We found ourselv in belmor 
street in the even in exactli the same posit in which we had been 
in the morning. our onli clue wa the professor’ letter, and my friend 
had made up hi mind to start for ardrossan next day, and to get to the 
bottom of the anonym letter, when a new develop came to alter our 
plans. 

veri earli on the follow morn I wa arous from my sleep by a tap 
upon my bedroom door. It wa a messeng with a note from mortimer. 

“do come round,” it said; “the matter is becom more and more 
extraordinary.” 

when I obey hi summon I found him pace excitedli up and down the 
central room, while the old soldier who guard the premis stood with 
militari stiff in a corner. 

“mi dear jackson,” he cried, “I am so delight that you have come, for 
thi is a most inexplic business.” 

“what ha happened, then?” 

He wave hi hand toward the case which contain the breastplate. 

“look at it,” said he. 

I did so, and could not restrain a cri of surprise. the set of the 
middl row of preciou stone had been profan in the same manner as 
the upper ones. Of the twelv jewels, eight had been now tamper with 
in thi singular fashion. the set of the lower four wa neat and 
smooth. the other jag and irregular. 

“have the stone been altered?” I asked. 

“no, I am certain that these upper four are the same which the expert 
pronounc to be genuine, for I observ yesterday that littl 
discolor on the edg of the emerald. sinc they have not extract 
the upper stones, there is no reason to think the lower have been 
transposed. you say that you heard nothing, simpson?” 

“no, sir,” the commissionair answered. “but when I made my round after 
daylight I had a special look at these stones, and I saw at onc that 
some one had been meddl with them. then I call you, sir, and told 
you. I wa backward and forward all the night, and I never saw a soul 
or heard a sound.” 

“come up and have some breakfast with me,” said mortimer, and he took me 
into hi own chambers.—“now, what _do_ you think of this, jackson?” he 
asked. 

“it is the most objectless, futile, idiot busi that ever I heard 
of. It can onli be the work of a monomaniac.” 

“can you put forward ani theory?” 

A curiou idea came into my head. “thi object is a jewish relic of 
great antiqu and sanctity,” said I. “how about the anti-semit 
movement? could one conceiv that a fanat of that way of think 
might desecrate——” 

“no, no, no!” cri mortimer. “that will never do! such a man might push 
hi lunaci to the length of destroy a jewish relic, but whi on earth 
should he nibbl round everi stone so care that he can onli do four 
stone in a night? We must have a better solut than that, and we must 
find it for ourselves, for I do not think that our inspector is like 
to help us. first of all, what do you think of simpson, the porter?” 

“have you ani reason to suspect him?” 

“onli that he is the one person on the premises.” 

“but whi should he indulg in such wanton destruction? noth ha been 
taken away. He ha no motive.” 

“mania?” 

“no, I will swear to hi sanity.” 

“have you ani other theory?” 

“well, yourself, for example. you are not a somnambulist, by ani 
chance?” 

“noth of the sort, I assur you.” 

“then I give it up.” 

“but I don’t—and I have a plan by which we will make it all clear.” 

“to visit professor andreas?” 

“no, we shall find our solut nearer than scotland, I will tell you 
what we shall do. you know that skylight which overlook the central 
hall? We will leav the electr light in the hall, and we will keep 
watch in the lumber-room, you and I, and solv the mysteri for 
ourselves. If our mysteri visitor is do four stone at a time, he 
ha four still to do, and there is everi reason to think that he will 
return to-night and complet the job.” 

“excellent!” I cried. 

“we will keep our own secret, and say noth either to the polic or to 
simpson. will you join me?” 

“with the utmost pleasure,” said I; and so it wa agreed. 

It wa ten o’clock that night when I return to the belmor street 
museum. mortim was, as I could see, in a state of suppress nervou 
excitement, but it wa still too earli to begin our vigil, so we 
remain for an hour or so in hi chambers, discuss all the 
possibl of the singular busi which we had met to solve. At 
last the roar stream of hansom cab and the rush of hurri feet 
becam lower and more intermitt as the pleasure-seek pass on 
their way to their station or their homes. It wa nearli twelv when 
mortim led the way to the lumber-room which overlook the central 
hall of the museum. 

He had visit it dure the day, and had spread some sack so that we 
could lie at our ease, and look straight down into the museum. the 
skylight wa of unfrost glass, but wa so cover with dust that it 
would be imposs for ani one look up from below to detect that he 
wa overlooked. We clear a small piec at each corner, which gave us a 
complet view of the room beneath us. In the cold white light of the 
electr lamp everyth stood out hard and clear, and I could see the 
smallest detail of the content of the variou cases. 

such a vigil is an excel lesson, sinc one ha no choic but to look 
hard at those object which we usual pass with such half-heart 
interest. through my littl peep-hol I employ the hour in studi 
everi specimen, from the huge mummy-cas which lean against the wall 
to those veri jewel which had brought us there, gleam and sparkl 
in their glass case immedi beneath us. there wa much preciou 
gold-work and mani valuabl stone scatter through the numer cases, 
but those wonder twelv which made up the urim and thummim glow and 
burn with a radianc which far eclips the others. I studi in turn 
the tomb-pictur of sicara, the friez from karnak, the statu of 
memphis, and the inscript of thebes, but my eye would alway come 
back to that wonder jewish relic, and my mind to the singular mysteri 
which surround it. I wa lost in the thought of it when my companion 
suddenli drew hi breath sharpli in, and seiz my arm in a convuls 
grip. At the same instant I saw what it wa which had excit him. 

I have said that against the wall—on the right-hand side of the doorway 
(the right-hand side as we look at it, but the left as one 
entered)—ther stood a larg mummy-case. To our unutter amaz it 
wa slowli opening. gradually, gradual the lid wa swing back, and 
the black slit which mark the open wa becom wider and wider. So 
gentli and care wa it done that the movement wa almost 
imperceptible. then, as we breathlessli watch it, a white thin hand 
appear at the opening, push back the paint lid, then anoth 
hand, and final a face—a face which wa familiar to us both, that of 
professor andreas. stealthili he slunk out of the mummy-case, like a fox 
steal from it burrow, hi head turn incessantli to left and to 
right, stepping, then pausing, then step again, the veri imag of 
craft and of caution. onc some sound in the street struck him 
motionless, and he stood listening, with hi ear turned, readi to dart 
back to the shelter behind him. then he crept onward again upon tiptoe, 
very, veri softli and slowly, until he had reach the case in the 
centr of the room. there he took a bunch of key from hi pocket, 
unlock the case, took out the jewish breastplate, and, lay it upon 
the glass in front of him, began to work upon it with some sort of 
small, glisten tool. He wa so directli underneath us that hi bent 
head cover hi work, but we could guess from the movement of hi hand 
that he wa engag in finish the strang disfigur which he had 
begun. 

I could realiz from the heavi breath of my companion, and the 
twitch of the hand which still clutch my wrist, the furiou 
indign which fill hi heart as he saw thi vandal in the 
quarter of all other where he could least have expect it. he, the 
veri man who a fortnight befor had rever bent over thi uniqu 
relic, and who had impress it antiqu and it sanctiti upon us, wa 
now engag in thi outrag profanation. It wa impossible, 
unthinkable—and yet there, in the white glare of the electr light 
beneath us, wa that dark figur with the bent, grey head, and the 
twitch elbow. what inhuman hypocrisy, what hate depth of malic 
against hi successor must underli these sinist nocturn labours. It 
wa pain to think of and dread to watch. even I, who had none of 
the acut feel of a virtuoso, could not bear to look on and see thi 
deliber mutil of so ancient a relic. It wa a relief to me when 
my companion tug at my sleev as a signal that I wa to follow him as 
he softli crept out of the room. It wa not until we were within hi own 
quarter that he open hi lips, and then I saw by hi agit face 
how deep wa hi consternation. 

“the abomin goth!” he cried. “could you have believ it?” 

“it is amazing.” 

“he is a villain or a lunatic—on or the other. We shall veri soon see 
which. come with me, jackson, and we shall get to the bottom of thi 
black business.” 

A door open out of the passag which wa the privat entranc from hi 
room into the museum. thi he open softli with hi key, have first 
kick off hi shoes, an exampl which I followed. We crept togeth 
through room after room, until the larg hall lay befor us, with that 
dark figur still stoop and work at the central case. with an 
advanc as cautiou as hi own we close in upon him, but softli as we 
went we could not take him entir unawares. We were still a dozen 
yard from him when he look round with a start, and utter a huski 
cri of terror, ran frantic down the museum. 

“simpson! simpson!” roar mortimer, and far away down the vista of 
electr light door we saw the stiff figur of the old soldier 
suddenli appear. professor andrea saw him also, and stop running, 
with a gestur of despair. At the same instant we each laid a hand upon 
hi shoulder. 

“yes, yes, gentlemen,” he panted, “I will come with you. To your room, 
mr. ward mortimer, if you please! I feel that I owe you an explanation.” 

My companion’ indign wa so great that I could see that he dare 
not trust himself to reply. We walk on each side of the old professor, 
the astonish commissionair bring up the rear. when we reach the 
violat case, mortim stop and examin the breastplate. alreadi 
one of the stone of the lower row had had it set turn back in 
the same manner as the others. My friend held it up and glanc 
furious at hi prisoner. 

“how could you!” he cried. “how could you!” 

“it is horrible—horrible!” said the professor. “I don’t wonder at your 
feelings. take me to your room.” 

“but thi shall not be left exposed!” cri mortimer. He pick the 
breastplat up and carri it tenderli in hi hand, while I walk 
besid the professor, like a policeman with a malefactor. We pass into 
mortimer’ chambers, leav the amaz old soldier to understand 
matter as best he could. the professor sat down in mortimer’ 
arm-chair, and turn so ghastli a colour that for the instant, all our 
resent wa chang to concern. A stiff glass of brandi brought the 
life back to him onc more. 

“there, I am better now!” said he. “these last few day have been too 
much for me. I am convinc that I could not stand it ani longer. It is 
a nightmare—a horribl nightmare—that I should be arrest as a burglar 
in what ha been for so long my own museum. and yet I cannot blame you. 
you could not have done otherwise. My hope alway wa that I should get 
it all over befor I wa detected. thi would have been my last night’ 
work.” 

“how did you get in?” ask mortimer. 

“bi take a veri great liberti with your privat door. but the object 
justifi it. the object justifi everything. you will not be angri 
when you know everything—at least, you will not be angri with me. I had 
a key to your side door and also to the museum door. I did not give them 
up when I left. and so you see it wa not difficult for me to let myself 
into the museum. I use to come in earli befor the crowd had clear 
from the street. then I hid myself in the mummy-case, and took refug 
there whenev simpson came round. I could alway hear him coming. I 
use to leav in the same way as I came.” 

“you ran a risk.” 

“I had to.” 

“but why? what on earth wa your object—_you_ to do a thing like that?” 
mortim point reproach at the plate which lay befor him on the 
table. 

“I could devis no other means. I thought and thought, but there wa no 
altern except a hideou public scandal, and a privat sorrow which 
would have cloud our lives. I act for the best, incred as it may 
seem to you, and I onli ask your attent to enabl me to prove it.” 

“I will hear what you have to say befor I take ani further steps,” said 
mortimer, grimly. 

“I am determin to hold back nothing, and to take you both complet 
into my confidence. I will leav it to your own generos how far you 
will use the fact with which I suppli you.” 

“we have the essenti fact already.” 

“and yet you understand nothing. let me go back to what pass a few 
week ago, and I will make it all clear to you. believ me that what I 
say is the absolut and exact truth. 

“you have met the person who call himself captain wilson. I say ‘call 
himself’ becaus I have reason now to believ that it is not hi correct 
name. It would take me too long if I were to describ all the mean by 
which he obtain an introduct to me and ingrati himself into my 
friendship and the affect of my daughter. He brought letter from 
foreign colleagu which compel me to show him some attention. and 
then, by hi own attainments, which are considerable, he succeed in 
make himself a veri welcom visitor at my rooms. when I learn that 
my daughter’ affect had been gain by him, I may have thought it 
premature, but I certainli wa not surprised, for he had a charm of 
manner and of convers which would have made him conspicu in ani 
society. 

“he wa much interest in orient antiquities, and hi knowledg of 
the subject justifi hi interest. often when he spent the even with 
us he would ask permiss to go down into the museum and have an 
opportun of privat inspect the variou specimens. you can 
imagin that I, as an enthusiast, wa in sympathi with such a request, 
and that I felt no surpris at the constanc of hi visits. after hi 
actual engag to elise, there wa hardli an even which he did not 
pass with us, and an hour or two were gener devot to the museum. 
He had the free run of the place, and when I have been away for the 
even I had no object to hi do whatev he wish here. thi 
state of thing wa onli termin by the fact of my resign of my 
offici duti and my retir to norwood, where I hope to have the 
leisur to write a consider work which I had planned. 

“it wa immedi after this—within a week or so—that I first realiz 
the true natur and charact of the man whom I had so imprud 
introduc into my family. the discoveri came to me through letter from 
my friend abroad, which show me that hi introduct to me had been 
forgeries. aghast at the revelation, I ask myself what motiv thi man 
could origin have had in practis thi elabor decept upon 
me. I wa too poor a man for ani fortune-hunt to have mark me down. 
why, then, had he come? I rememb that some of the most preciou gem 
in europ had been under my charge, and I rememb also the ingeni 
excus by which thi man had made himself familiar with the case in 
which they were kept. He wa a rascal who wa plan some gigant 
robbery. how could I, without strike my own daughter, who wa 
infatu about him, prevent him from carri out ani plan which he 
might have formed? My devic wa a clumsi one, and yet I could think of 
noth more effective. If I had written a letter under my own name, you 
would natur have turn to me for detail which I did not wish to 
give. I resort to an anonym letter, beg you to be upon your 
guard. 

“I may tell you that my chang from belmor street to norwood had not 
affect the visit of thi man, who had, I believe, a real and 
overpow affect for my daughter. As to her, I could not have 
believ that ani woman could be so complet under the influenc of a 
man as she was. hi stronger natur seem to entir domin her. I 
had not realiz how far thi wa the case, or the extent of the 
confid which exist between them, until that veri even when hi 
true charact for the first time wa made clear to me. I had given 
order that when he call he should be shown into my studi instead of 
to the drawing-room. there I told him bluntli that I knew all about him, 
that I had taken step to defeat hi designs, and that neither I nor my 
daughter desir ever to see him again. I ad that I thank god that 
I had found him out befor he had time to harm those preciou object 
which it had been the work of my lifetim to protect. 

“he wa certainli a man of iron nerve. He took my remark without a sign 
either of surpris or of defiance, but listen grave and attent 
until I had finished. then he walk across the room without a word and 
struck the bell. 

“‘ask miss andrea to be so kind as to step thi way,’ said he to the 
servant. 

“mi daughter entered, and the man close the door behind her. then he 
took her hand in his. 

“‘elise,’ said he, ‘your father ha just discov that I am a villain. 
He know now what you knew before.’ 

“she stood in silence, listening. 

“‘he say that we are to part for ever,’ said he. 

“she did not withdraw her hand. 

“‘will you be true to me, or will you remov the last good influenc 
which is ever like to come into my life?’ 

“‘john,’ she cried, passionately, ‘I will never abandon you! never, 
never, not if the whole world were against you.’ 

“in vain I argu and plead with her. It wa absolut useless. her 
whole life wa bound up in thi man befor me. My daughter, gentlemen, 
is all that I have left to love, and it fill me with agoni when I saw 
how powerless I wa to save her from her ruin. My helpless seem to 
touch thi man who wa the caus of my trouble. 

“‘it may not be as bad as you think, sir,’ said he, in hi quiet, 
inflex way. ‘I love elis with a love which is strong enough to 
rescu even one who ha such a record as I have. It wa but yesterday 
that I promis her that never again in my whole life would I do a thing 
of which she should be ashamed. I have made up my mind to it, and never 
yet did I make up my mind to a thing which I did not do.’ 

“he spoke with an air which carri convict with it. As he conclud 
he put hi hand into hi pocket and he drew out a small cardboard box. 

“‘i am about to give you a proof of my determination,’ said he. ‘this, 
elise, shall be the first-fruit of your redeem influenc over me. 
you are right, sir, in think that I had design upon the jewel in 
your possession. such ventur have had a charm for me, which depend 
as much upon the risk run as upon the valu of the prize. those famou 
and antiqu stone of the jewish priest were a challeng to my dare 
and my ingenuity. I determin to get them.’ 

“‘i guess as much.’ 

“‘there wa onli one thing that you did not guess.’ 

“‘and what is that?’ 

“‘that I got them. they are in thi box.’ 

“he open the box, and tilt out the content upon the corner of my 
desk. My hair rose and my flesh grew cold as I looked. there were twelv 
magnific squar stone engrav with mystic characters. there could 
be no doubt that they were the jewel of the urim and thummim. 

“‘good god!’ I cried. ‘how have you escap discovery?’ 

“bi the substitut of twelv others, made especi to my order, in 
which the origin are so care imit that I defi the eye to 
detect the difference.’ 

“‘then the present stone are false?’ I cried. 

“‘they have been for some weeks.’ 

“we all stood in silence, my daughter white with emotion, but still 
hold thi man by the hand. 

“‘you see what I am capabl of, elise,’ said he. 

“‘i see that you are capabl of repent and restitution,’ she 
answered. 

“‘yes, thank to your influence! I leav the stone in your hands, sir. 
Do what you like about it. but rememb that whatev you do against me, 
is done against the futur husband of your onli daughter. you will hear 
from me soon again, elise. It is the last time that I will ever caus 
pain to your tender heart,’ and with these word he left both the room 
and the house. 

“mi posit wa a dread one. here I wa with these preciou relic 
in my possession, and how could I return them without a scandal and an 
exposure? I knew the depth of my daughter’ natur too well to suppos 
that I would ever be abl to detach her from thi man now that she had 
entir given him her heart. I wa not even sure how far it wa right 
to detach her if she had such an amelior influenc over him. how 
could I expos him without injur her—and how far wa I justifi in 
expos him when he had voluntarili put himself into my power? I 
thought and thought, until at last I form a resolut which may seem 
to you to be a foolish one, and yet, if I had to do it again, I believ 
it would be the best cours open to me. 

“mi idea wa to return the stone without ani one be the wiser. with 
my key I could get into the museum at ani time, and I wa confid 
that I could avoid simpson, whose hour and method were familiar to me. 
I determin to take no one into my confidence—not even my daughter—whom 
I told that I wa about to visit my brother in scotland. I want a free 
hand for a few nights, without inquiri as to my come and goings. To 
thi end I took a room in hard street that veri night, with an 
intim that I wa a pressman, and that I should keep veri late 
hours. 

“that night I made my way into the museum, and I replac four of the 
stones. It wa hard work, and took me all night when simpson came round 
I alway heard hi footsteps, and conceal myself in the mummy-case. I 
had some knowledg of gold-work, but wa far less skil than the thief 
had been. He had replac the set so exactli that I defi ani one to 
see the difference. My work wa rude and clumsy. however, I hope that 
the plate might not be care examined, or the rough of the 
set observed, until my task wa done. next night I replac four 
more stones. and to-night I should have finish my task had it not been 
for the unfortun circumst which ha caus me to reveal so much 
which I should have wish to keep concealed. I appeal to you, 
gentlemen, to your sens of honour and of compassion, whether what I 
have told you should go ani farther or not. My own happiness, my 
daughter’ future, the hope of thi man’ regeneration, all depend upon 
your decision.” 

“which is,” said my friend, “that all is well that end well, and that 
the whole matter end here and at once. to-morrow the loos set 
shall be tighten by an expert goldsmith, and so pass the greatest 
danger to which, sinc the destruct of the temple, the urim and 
thummim have been exposed. here is my hand, professor andreas, and I can 
onli hope that under such difficult circumst I should have carri 
myself as unselfishli and as well.” 

just one footnot to thi narrative. within a month elis andrea wa 
marri to a man whose name, had I the indiscret to mention it, would 
appeal to my reader as one who is now wide and deservedli honoured. 
but if the truth were known, that honour is due not to him but to the 
gentl girl who pluck him back when he had gone so far down that dark 
road along which few return. 




the lost special 


the confess of herbert de lernac, now lie under sentenc of death 
at marseilles, ha thrown a light upon one of the most inexplic 
crime of the century—an incid which is, I believe, absolut 
unpreced in the crimin annal of ani country. although there is a 
reluct to discuss the matter in offici circles, and littl 
inform ha been given to the press, there are still indic 
that the statement of thi arch-crimin is corrobor by the facts, 
and that we have at last found a solut for a most astound 
business. As the matter is eight year old, and as it import wa 
somewhat obscur by a polit crisi which wa engag the public 
attent at the time, it may be as well to state the fact as far as we 
have been abl to ascertain them. they are collat from the liverpool 
paper of that date, from the proceed at the inquest upon john 
slater, the engine-driver, and from the record of the london and west 
coast railway company, which have been courteous put at my disposal. 
briefly, they are as follows. 

On the 3rd of june, 1890, a gentleman, who gave hi name as monsieur 
loui caratal, desir an interview with mr. jame bland, the 
superintend of the london and west coast central station in 
liverpool. He wa a small man, middle-ag and dark, with a stoop which 
wa so mark that it suggest some deform of the spine. He wa 
accompani by a friend, a man of impos physique, whose deferenti 
manner and constant attent show that hi posit wa one of 
dependence. thi friend or companion, whose name did not transpire, wa 
certainli a foreigner, and probably, from hi swarthi complexion, either 
a spaniard or a south american. one peculiar wa observ in him. He 
carri in hi left hand a small black leather dispatch-box, and it wa 
notic by a sharp-ey clerk in the central offic that thi box wa 
fasten to hi wrist by a strap. No import wa attach to the fact 
at the time, but subsequ event endow it with some significance. 
monsieur carat wa shown up to mr. bland’ office, while hi companion 
remain outside. 

monsieur caratal’ busi wa quickli dispatched. He had arriv that 
afternoon from central america. affair of the utmost import 
demand that he should be in pari without the loss of an unnecessari 
hour. He had miss the london express. A special must be provided. 
money wa of no importance. time wa everything. If the compani would 
speed him on hi way, they might make their own terms. 

mr. bland struck the electr bell, summon mr. potter hood, the 
traffic manager, and had the matter arrang in five minutes. the train 
would start in three-quart of an hour. It would take that time to 
insur that the line should be clear. the power engin call 
rochdal (no. 247 on the company’ register) wa attach to two 
carriages, with a guard’ van behind. the first carriag wa sole for 
the purpos of decreas the inconveni aris from the 
oscillation. the second wa divided, as usual, into four compartments, a 
first-class, a first-class smoking, a second-class, and a second-class 
smoking. the first compartment, which wa nearest to the engine, wa the 
one allot to the travellers. the other three were empty. the guard of 
the special train wa jame mcpherson, who had been some year in the 
servic of the company. the stoker, william smith, wa a new hand. 

monsieur caratal, upon leav the superintendent’ office, rejoin hi 
companion, and both of them manifest extrem impati to be off. 
have paid the money asked, which amount to fifti pound five 
shillings, at the usual special rate of five shill a mile, they 
demand to be shown the carriage, and at onc took their seat in it, 
although they were assur that the better part of an hour must elaps 
befor the line could be cleared. In the meantim a singular coincid 
had occur in the offic which monsieur carat had just quitted. 

A request for a special is not a veri uncommon circumst in a rich 
commerci centre, but that two should be requir upon the same 
afternoon wa most unusual. It so happened, however, that mr. bland had 
hardli dismiss the first travel befor a second enter with a 
similar request. thi wa a mr. horac moore, a gentlemanli man of 
militari appearance, who alleg that the sudden seriou ill of hi 
wife in london made it absolut imper that he should not lose an 
instant in start upon the journey. hi distress and anxieti were so 
evid that mr. bland did all that wa possibl to meet hi wishes. A 
second special wa out of the question, as the ordinari local servic 
wa alreadi somewhat derang by the first. there wa the alternative, 
however, that mr. moor should share the expens of monsieur caratal’ 
train, and should travel in the other empti first-class compartment, if 
monsieur carat object to have him in the one which he occupied. It 
wa difficult to see ani object to such an arrangement, and yet 
monsieur caratal, upon the suggest be made to him by mr. potter 
hood, absolut refus to consid it for an instant. the train wa 
his, he said, and he would insist upon the exclus use of it. all 
argument fail to overcom hi ungraci objections, and final the 
plan had to be abandoned. mr. horac moor left the station in great 
distress, after learn that hi onli cours wa to take the ordinari 
slow train which leav liverpool at six o’clock. At four thirty-on 
exactli by the station clock the special train, contain the crippl 
monsieur carat and hi gigant companion, steam out of the 
liverpool station. the line wa at that time clear, and there should 
have been no stoppag befor manchester. 

the train of the london and west coast railway run over the line of 
anoth compani as far as thi town, which should have been reach by 
the special rather befor six o’clock. At a quarter after six 
consider surpris and some constern were caus amongst the 
offici at liverpool by the receipt of a telegram from manchest to 
say that it had not yet arrived. An inquiri direct to st. helens, 
which is a third of the way between the two cities, elicit the 
follow reply:— 

“to jame bland, superintendent, central L. & W. c., liverpool.—speci 
pass here at 4.52, well up to time.—dowser, st. helens.” 

thi telegram wa receiv at 6.40. At 6.50 a second messag wa 
receiv from manchester:— 

“no sign of special as advis by you.” 

and then ten minut later a third, more bewildering:— 

“presum some mistak as to propos run of special. local train 
from st. helen time to follow it ha just arriv and ha seen noth 
of it. kindli wire advices.—manchester.” 

the matter wa assum a most amaz aspect, although in some respect 
the last telegram wa a relief to the author at liverpool. If an 
accid had occur to the special, it seem hardli possibl that the 
local train could have pass down the same line without observ it. 
and yet, what wa the alternative? where could the train be? had it 
possibl been side-track for some reason in order to allow the slower 
train to go past? such an explan wa possibl if some small repair 
had to be effected. A telegram wa dispatch to each of the station 
between st. helen and manchester, and the superintend and traffic 
manag wait in the utmost suspens at the instrument for the seri 
of repli which would enabl them to say for certain what had becom of 
the miss train. the answer came back in the order of questions, 
which wa the order of the station begin at the st. helen end:— 

“special pass here five o’clock.—collin green.” 

“special pass here six past five.—earlestown.” 

“special pass here 5.10.—newton.” 

“special pass here 5.20.—kenyon junction.” 

“no special train ha pass here.—barton moss.” 

the two offici stare at each other in amazement. 

“thi is uniqu in my thirti year of experience,” said mr. bland. 

“absolut unpreced and inexplicable, sir. the special ha gone 
wrong between kenyon junction and barton moss.” 

“and yet there is no siding, so far as my memori serv me, between the 
two stations. the special must have run off the metals.” 

“but how could the four-fifti parliamentari pass over the same line 
without observ it?” 

“there’ no alternative, mr. hood. It _must_ be so. possibl the local 
train may have observ someth which may throw some light upon the 
matter. We will wire to manchest for more information, and to kenyon 
junction with instruct that the line be examin instantli as far as 
barton moss.” 

the answer from manchest came within a few minutes. 

“no news of miss special. driver and guard of slow train posit no 
accid between kenyon junction and barton moss. line quit clear, and 
no sign of anyth unusual.—manchester.” 

“that driver and guard will have to go,” said mr. bland, grimly. “there 
ha been a wreck and they have miss it. the special ha obvious run 
off the metal without disturb the line—how it could have done so 
pass my comprehension—but so it must be, and we shall have a wire from 
kenyon or barton moss present to say that they have found her at the 
bottom of an embankment.” 

but mr. bland’ propheci wa not destin to be fulfilled. half an hour 
passed, and then there arriv the follow messag from the 
station-mast of kenyon junction:— 

“there are no trace of the miss special. It is quit certain that 
she pass here, and that she did not arriv at barton moss. We have 
detach engin from good train, and I have myself ridden down the 
line, but all is clear, and there is no sign of ani accident.” 

mr. bland tore hi hair in hi perplexity. 

“thi is rank lunacy, hood!” he cried. “doe a train vanish into thin 
air in england in broad daylight? the thing is preposterous. An engine, 
a tender, two carriages, a van, five human beings—and all lost on a 
straight line of railway! unless we get someth posit within the 
next hour i’ll take inspector collins, and go down myself.” 

and then at last someth posit did occur. It took the shape of 
anoth telegram from kenyon junction. 

“regret to report that the dead bodi of john slater, driver of the 
special train, ha just been found among the gors bush at a point two 
and a quarter mile from the junction. had fallen from hi engine, 
pitch down the embankment, and roll among bushes. injuri to hi 
head, from the fall, appear to be caus of death. ground ha now been 
care examined, and there is no trace of the miss train.” 

the countri was, as ha alreadi been stated, in the throe of a 
polit crisis, and the attent of the public wa further distract 
by the import and sensat develop in paris, where a huge 
scandal threaten to destroy the govern and to wreck the 
reput of mani of the lead men in france. the paper were full 
of these events, and the singular disappear of the special train 
attract less attent than would have been the case in more peac 
times. the grotesqu natur of the event help to detract from it 
importance, for the paper were disinclin to believ the fact as 
report to them. more than one of the london journal treat the 
matter as an ingeni hoax, until the coroner’ inquest upon the 
unfortun driver (an inquest which elicit noth of importance) 
convinc them of the tragedi of the incident. 

mr. bland, accompani by inspector collins, the senior detect 
offic in the servic of the company, went down to kenyon junction the 
same evening, and their research last throughout the follow day, 
but wa attend with pure neg results. not onli wa no trace 
found of the miss train, but no conjectur could be put forward which 
could possibl explain the facts. At the same time, inspector collins’ 
offici report (which lie befor me as I write) serv to show that 
the possibl were more numer than might have been expected. 

“in the stretch of railway between these two points,” said he, “the 
countri is dot with ironwork and collieries. Of these, some are 
be work and some have been abandoned. there are no fewer than 
twelv which have small gaug line which run trolly-car down to the 
main line. these can, of course, be disregarded. besid these, however, 
there are seven which have or have had, proper line run down and 
connect with point to the main line, so as to convey their produc 
from the mouth of the mine to the great centr of distribution. In 
everi case these line are onli a few mile in length. out of the seven, 
four belong to collieri which are work out, or at least to shaft 
which are no longer used. these are the redgauntlet, hero, slough of 
despond, and heartseas mines, the latter have ten year ago been one 
of the princip mine in lancashire. these four side line may be 
elimin from our inquiry, for, to prevent possibl accidents, the 
rail nearest to the main line have been taken up, and there is no 
longer ani connection. there remain three other side line leading— 

(_a_) To the carnstock iron works; 

(_b_) To the big ben colliery; 

(_c_) To the persever colliery. 

“of these the big ben line is not more than a quarter of a mile long, 
and end at a dead wall of coal wait remov from the mouth of the 
mine. noth had been seen or heard there of ani special. the carnstock 
iron work line wa block all day upon the 3rd of june by sixteen 
truckload of hematite. It is a singl line, and noth could have 
passed. As to the persever line, it is a larg doubl line, which 
doe a consider traffic, for the output of the mine is veri large. 
On the 3rd of june thi traffic proceed as usual; hundr of men, 
includ a gang of railway platelayers, were work along the two 
mile and a quarter which constitut the total length of the line, and 
it is inconceiv that an unexpect train could have come down there 
without attract univers attention. It may be remark in conclus 
that thi branch line is nearer to st. helen than the point at which 
the engine-driv wa discovered, so that we have everi reason to 
believ that the train wa past that point befor misfortun overtook 
her. 

“a to john slater, there is no clue to be gather from hi appear 
or injuries. We can onli say that, so far as we can see, he met hi end 
by fall off hi engine, though whi he fell, or what becam of the 
engin after hi fall, is a question upon which I do not feel qualifi 
to offer an opinion.” In conclusion, the inspector offer hi 
resign to the board, be much nettl by an accus of 
incompet in the london papers. 

A month elapsed, dure which both the polic and the compani prosecut 
their inquiri without the slightest success. A reward wa offer and 
a pardon promis in case of crime, but they were both unclaimed. everi 
day the public open their paper with the convict that so grotesqu 
a mysteri would at last be solved, but week after week pass by, and a 
solut remain as far off as ever. In broad daylight, upon a june 
afternoon in the most thickli inhabit portion of england, a train with 
it occup had disappear as complet as if some master of subtl 
chemistri had volatil it into gas. indeed, among the variou 
conjectur which were put forward in the public press there were some 
which serious assert that supernatural, or, at least, preternatural, 
agenc had been at work, and that the deform monsieur carat wa 
probabl a person who wa better known under a less polit name. other 
fix upon hi swarthi companion as be the author of the mischief, 
but what it wa exactli which he had done could never be clearli 
formul in words. 

amongst the mani suggest put forward by variou newspap or 
privat individuals, there were one or two which were feasibl enough to 
attract the attent of the public. one which appear in the _times_, 
over the signatur of an amateur reason of some celebr at that 
date, attempt to deal with the matter in a critic and 
semi-scientif manner. An extract must suffice, although the curiou 
can see the whole letter in the issu of the 3rd of july. 

“it is one of the elementari principl of practic reasoning,” he 
remarked, “that when the imposs ha been elimin the residuum, 
_howev improbable_, must contain the truth. It is certain that the 
train left kenyon junction. It is certain that it did not reach barton 
moss. It is in the highest degre unlikely, but still possible, that it 
may have taken one of the seven avail side lines. It is obvious 
imposs for a train to run where there are no rails, and, therefore, 
we may reduc our improb to the three open lines, namely, the 
carnstock iron works, the big ben, and the perseverance. Is there a 
secret societi of colliers, an english _camorra_, which is capabl of 
destroy both train and passengers? It is improbable, but it is not 
impossible. I confess that I am unabl to suggest ani other solution. I 
should certainli advis the compani to direct all their energi toward 
the observ of those three lines, and of the workmen at the end of 
them. A care supervis of the pawnbrokers’ shop of the district 
might possibl bring some suggest fact to light.” 

the suggest come from a recogn author upon such matter 
creat consider interest, and a fierc opposit from those who 
consid such a statement to be a preposter libel upon an honest 
and deserv set of men. the onli answer to thi critic wa a 
challeng to the objector to lay ani more feasibl explan befor 
the public. In repli to thi two other were forthcom (_times_, juli 
7th and 9th). the first suggest that the train might have run off the 
metal and be lie submerg in the lancashir and staffordshir canal, 
which run parallel to the railway for some hundr of yards. thi 
suggest wa thrown out of court by the publish depth of the canal, 
which wa entir insuffici to conceal so larg an object. the 
second correspond wrote call attent to the bag which appear 
to be the sole luggag which the travel had brought with them, and 
suggest that some novel explos of immens and pulver power 
might have been conceal in it. the obviou absurdity, however, of 
suppos that the whole train might be blown to dust while the metal 
remain uninjur reduc ani such explan to a farce. the 
investig had drift into thi hopeless posit when a new and 
most unexpect incid occurred. 

thi wa noth less than the receipt by mrs. mcpherson of a letter 
from her husband, jame mcpherson, who had been the guard of the miss 
train. the letter, which wa date juli 5th, 1890, wa post from new 
york, and came to hand upon juli 14th. some doubt were express as to 
it genuin character, but mrs. mcpherson wa posit as to the 
writing, and the fact that it contain a remitt of a hundr 
dollar in five-dollar note wa enough in itself to discount the idea 
of a hoax. No address wa given in the letter, which ran in thi way:— 

“mi dear wife,— 

“I have been think a great deal, and I find it veri hard to 
give you up. the same with lizzie. I tri to fight against it, but 
it will alway come back to me. I send you some money which will 
chang into twenti english pounds. thi should be enough to bring 
both lizzi and you across the atlantic, and you will find the 
hamburg boat which stop at southampton veri good boats, and 
cheaper than liverpool. If you could come here and stop at the 
johnston hous I would tri and send you word how to meet, but 
thing are veri difficult with me at present, and I am not veri 
happy, find it hard to give you both up. So no more at present, 
from your love husband, 

“jame mcpherson.” 

for a time it wa confid anticip that thi letter would lead to 
the clear up of the whole matter, the more so as it wa ascertain 
that a passeng who bore a close resembl to the miss guard had 
travel from southampton under the name of summer in the hamburg and 
new york liner _vistula_, which start upon the 7th of june. mrs. 
mcpherson and her sister lizzi dolton went across to new york as 
directed, and stay for three week at the johnston house, without 
hear anyth from the miss man. It is probabl that some 
injudici comment in the press may have warn him that the polic 
were use them as a bait. howev thi may be, it is certain that he 
neither wrote nor came, and the women were eventu compel to 
return to liverpool. 

and so the matter stood, and ha continu to stand up to the present 
year of 1898. incred as it may seem, noth ha transpir dure 
these eight year which ha shed the least light upon the extraordinari 
disappear of the special train which contain monsieur carat and 
hi companion. care inquiri into the anteced of the two 
travel have onli establish the fact that monsieur carat wa well 
known as a financi and polit agent in central america, and that 
dure hi voyag to europ he had betray extraordinari anxieti to 
reach paris. hi companion, whose name wa enter upon the passeng 
list as eduardo gomez, wa a man whose record wa a violent one, and 
whose reput wa that of a bravo and a bully. there wa evid to 
show, however, that he wa honestli devot to the interest of monsieur 
caratal, and that the latter, be a man of puni physique, employ the 
other as a guard and protector. It may be ad that no inform came 
from pari as to what the object of monsieur caratal’ hurri journey 
may have been. thi compris all the fact of the case up to the 
public in the marseil paper of the recent confess of herbert 
de lernac, now under sentenc of death for the murder of a merchant 
name bonvalot. thi statement may be liter translat as follows:— 

“it is not out of mere pride or boast that I give thi information, 
for, if that were my object, I could tell a dozen action of mine which 
are quit as splendid; but I do it in order that certain gentlemen in 
pari may understand that I, who am abl here to tell about the fate of 
monsieur caratal, can also tell in whose interest and at whose request 
the deed wa done, unless the repriev which I am await come to me 
veri quickly. take warning, messieurs, befor it is too late! you know 
herbert de lernac, and you are awar that hi deed are as readi as hi 
words. hasten then, or you are lost! 

“at present I shall mention no names—if you onli heard the names, what 
would you not think!—but I shall mere tell you how cleverli I did it. 
I wa true to my employ then, and no doubt they will be true to me 
now. I hope so, and until I am convinc that they have betray me, 
these names, which would convuls europe, shall not be divulged. but on 
that day ... well, I say no more! 

“in a word, then, there wa a famou trial in paris, in the year 1890, 
in connect with a monstrou scandal in polit and finance. how 
monstrou that scandal wa can never be known save by such confidenti 
agent as myself. the honour and career of mani of the chief men in 
franc were at stake. you have seen a group of nine-pin standing, all 
so rigid, and prim, and unbending. then there come the ball from far 
away and pop, pop, pop—ther are your nine-pin on the floor. well, 
imagin some of the greatest men in franc as these nine-pins, and then 
thi monsieur carat wa the ball which could be seen come from far 
away. If he arrived, then it wa pop, pop, pop for all of them. It wa 
determin that he should not arrive. 

“I do not accus them all of be consciou of what wa to happen. 
there were, as I have said, great financi as well as polit 
interest at stake, and a syndic wa form to manag the business. 
some subscrib to the syndic who hardli understood what were it 
objects. but other understood veri well, and they can reli upon it that 
I have not forgotten their names. they had ampl warn that monsieur 
carat wa come long befor he left south america, and they knew that 
the evid which he held would certainli mean ruin to all of them. the 
syndic had the command of an unlimit amount of money—absolut 
unlimited, you understand. they look round for an agent who wa 
capabl of wield thi gigant power. the man chosen must be 
inventive, resolute, adaptive—a man in a million. they chose herbert de 
lernac, and I admit that they were right. 

“mi duti were to choos my subordinates, to use freeli the power which 
money gives, and to make certain that monsieur carat should never 
arriv in paris. with characterist energi I set about my commiss 
within an hour of receiv my instructions, and the step which I took 
were the veri best for the purpos which could possibl be devised. 

“A man whom I could trust wa dispatch instantli to south america to 
travel home with monsieur caratal. had he arriv in time the ship would 
never have reach liverpool; but, alas! it had alreadi start befor 
my agent could reach it. I fit out a small arm brig to intercept 
it, but again I wa unfortunate. like all great organ I was, 
however, prepar for failure, and had a seri of altern 
prepared, one or the other of which must succeed. you must not underr 
the difficulti of my undertaking, or imagin that a mere commonplac 
assassin would meet the case. We must destroy not onli monsieur 
caratal, but monsieur caratal’ documents, and monsieur caratal’ 
companion also, if we had reason to believ that he had commun 
hi secret to them. and you must rememb that they were on the alert, 
and keenli suspici of ani such attempt. It wa a task which wa in 
everi way worthi of me, for I am alway most master where anoth 
would be appalled. 

“I wa all readi for monsieur caratal’ recept in liverpool, and I 
wa the more eager becaus I had reason to believ that he had made 
arrang by which he would have a consider guard from the moment 
that he arriv in london. anyth which wa to be done must be done 
between the moment of hi set foot upon the liverpool quay and that 
of hi arriv at the london and west coast terminu in london. We 
prepar six plans, each more elabor than the last; which plan would 
be use would depend upon hi own movements. Do what he would, we were 
readi for him. If he had stay in liverpool, we were ready. If he took 
an ordinari train, an express, or a special, all wa ready. everyth 
had been foreseen and provid for. 

“you may imagin that I could not do all thi myself. what could I know 
of the english railway lines? but money can procur will agent all 
the world over, and I soon had one of the acutest brain in england to 
assist me. I will mention no names, but it would be unjust to claim all 
the credit for myself. My english alli wa worthi of such an alliance. 
He knew the london and west coast line thoroughly, and he had the 
command of a band of worker who were trustworthi and intelligent. the 
idea wa his, and my own judgment wa onli requir in the details. We 
bought over sever officials, amongst whom the most import wa jame 
mcpherson, whom we had ascertain to be the guard most like to be 
employ upon a special train. smith, the stoker, wa also in our 
employ. john slater, the engine-driver, had been approached, but had 
been found to be obstin and dangerous, so we desisted. We had no 
certainti that monsieur carat would take a special, but we thought it 
veri probable, for it wa of the utmost import to him that he should 
reach pari without delay. It wa for thi contingency, therefore, that 
we made special preparations—prepar which were complet down to 
the last detail long befor hi steamer had sight the shore of 
england. you will be amus to learn that there wa one of my agent in 
the pilot-boat which brought that steamer to it moorings. 

“the moment that carat arriv in liverpool we knew that he suspect 
danger and wa on hi guard. He had brought with him as an escort a 
danger fellow, name gomez, a man who carri weapons, and wa 
prepar to use them. thi fellow carri caratal’ confidenti paper 
for him, and wa readi to protect either them or hi master. the 
probabl wa that carat had taken him into hi counsels, and that 
to remov carat without remov gomez would be a mere wast of 
energy. It wa necessari that they should be involv in a common fate, 
and our plan to that end were much facilit by their request for a 
special train. On that special train you will understand that two out of 
the three servant of the compani were realli in our employ, at a price 
which would make them independ for a lifetime. I do not go so far as 
to say that the english are more honest than ani other nation, but I 
have found them more expens to buy. 

“I have alreadi spoken of my english agent—who is a man with a 
consider futur befor him, unless some complaint of the throat 
carri him off befor hi time. He had charg of all arrang at 
liverpool, whilst I wa station at the inn at kenyon, where I await 
a cipher signal to act. when the special wa arrang for, my agent 
instantli telegraph to me and warn me how soon I should have 
everyth ready. He himself under the name of horac moor appli 
immedi for a special also, in the hope that he would be sent down 
with monsieur caratal, which might under certain circumst have been 
help to us. if, for example, our great _coup_ had failed, it would 
then have becom the duti of my agent to have shot them both and 
destroy their papers. carat wa on hi guard, however, and refus 
to admit ani other traveller. My agent then left the station, return 
by anoth entrance, enter the guard’ van on the side farthest from 
the platform, and travel down with mcpherson the guard. 

“in the meantim you will be interest to know what my movement were. 
everyth had been prepar for day before, and onli the finish 
touch were needed. the side line which we had chosen had onc join 
the main line, but it had been disconnected. We had onli to replac a 
few rail to connect it onc more. these rail had been laid down as far 
as could be done without danger of attract attention, and now it wa 
mere a case of complet a junctur with the line, and arrang the 
point as they had been before. the sleeper had never been removed, and 
the rails, fish-plates, and rivet were all ready, for we had taken them 
from a side on the abandon portion of the line. with my small but 
compet band of workers, we had everyth readi long befor the 
special arrived. when it did arrive, it ran off upon the small side line 
so easili that the jolt of the point appear to have been entir 
unnot by the two travellers. 

“our plan had been that smith the stoker should chloroform john slater 
the driver, so that he should vanish with the others. In thi respect, 
and in thi respect only, our plan miscarried—i except the crimin 
folli of mcpherson in write home to hi wife. our stoker did hi 
busi so clumsili that slater in hi struggl fell off the engine, 
and though fortun wa with us so far that he broke hi neck in the 
fall, still he remain as a blot upon that which would otherwis have 
been one of those complet masterpiec which are onli to be 
contempl in silent admiration. the crimin expert will find in john 
slater the one flaw in all our admir combinations. A man who ha had 
as mani triumph as I can afford to be frank, and I therefor lay my 
finger upon john slater, and I proclaim him to be a flaw. 

“but now I have got our special train upon the small line two 
kilomètres, or rather more than one mile, in length, which leads, or 
rather use to lead, to the abandon heartseas mine, onc one of the 
largest coal mine in england. you will ask how it is that no one saw 
the train upon thi unus line. I answer that along it entir length 
it run through a deep cutting, and that, unless some one had been on 
the edg of that cutting, he could not have seen it. there _was_ some 
one on the edg of that cutting. I wa there. and now I will tell you 
what I saw. 

“mi assist had remain at the point in order that he might 
superintend the switch off of the train. He had four arm men with 
him, so that if the train ran off the line—w thought it probable, 
becaus the point were veri rusty—w might still have resourc to fall 
back upon. have onc seen it safe on the side line, he hand over 
the respons to me. I wa wait at a point which overlook the 
mouth of the mine, and I wa also armed, as were my two companions. come 
what might, you see, I wa alway ready. 

“the moment that the train wa fairli on the side line, smith, the 
stoker, slowed-down the engine, and then, have turn it on to the 
fullest speed again, he and mcpherson, with my english lieutenant, 
sprang off befor it wa too late. It may be that it wa thi 
slowing-down which first attract the attent of the travellers, but 
the train wa run at full speed again befor their head appear at 
the open window. It make me smile to think how bewild they must 
have been. pictur to yourself your own feel if, on look out of 
your luxuri carriage, you suddenli perceiv that the line upon 
which you ran were rust and corroded, red and yellow with disus and 
decay! what a catch must have come in their breath as in a second it 
flash upon them that it wa not manchest but death which wa wait 
for them at the end of that sinist line. but the train wa run 
with frantic speed, roll and rock over the rotten line, while the 
wheel made a fright scream sound upon the rust surface. I wa 
close to them, and could see their faces. carat wa praying, I 
think—ther wa someth like a rosari dangl out of hi hand. the 
other roar like a bull who smell the blood of the slaughter-house. He 
saw us stand on the bank, and he beckon to us like a madman. then 
he tore at hi wrist and threw hi dispatch-box out of the window in our 
direction. Of course, hi mean wa obvious. here wa the evidence, 
and they would promis to be silent if their live were spared. It would 
have been veri agreeabl if we could have done so, but busi is 
business. besides, the train wa now as much beyond our control as 
theirs. 

“he ceas howl when the train rattl round the curv and they saw 
the black mouth of the mine yawn befor them. We had remov the 
board which had cover it, and we had clear the squar entrance. the 
rail had formerli run veri close to the shaft for the conveni of 
load the coal, and we had onli to add two or three length of rail in 
order to lead to the veri brink of the shaft. In fact, as the length 
would not quit fit, our line project about three feet over the edge. 
We saw the two head at the window: carat below, gomez above; but they 
had both been struck silent by what they saw. and yet they could not 
withdraw their heads. the sight seem to have paralyz them. 

“I had wonder how the train run at a great speed would take the 
pit into which I had guid it, and I wa much interest in watch 
it. one of my colleagu thought that it would actual jump it, and 
inde it wa not veri far from do so. fortunately, however, it fell 
short, and the buffer of the engin struck the other lip of the shaft 
with a tremend crash. the funnel flew off into the air. the tender, 
carriages, and van were all smash up into one jumble, which, with the 
remain of the engine, choke for a minut or so the mouth of the pit. 
then someth gave way in the middle, and the whole mass of green iron, 
smoke coals, brass fittings, wheels, woodwork, and cushion all 
crumbl togeth and crash down into the mine. We heard the rattle, 
rattle, rattle, as the _débris_ struck against the walls, and then quit 
a long time afterward there came a deep roar as the remain of the 
train struck the bottom. the boiler may have burst, for a sharp crash 
came after the roar, and then a dens cloud of steam and smoke swirl 
up out of the black depths, fall in a spray as thick as rain all 
round us. then the vapour shred off into thin wisps, which float 
away in the summer sunshine, and all wa quiet again in the heartseas 
mine. 

“and now, have carri out our plan so successfully, it onli remain 
to leav no trace behind us. our littl band of worker at the other end 
had alreadi rip up the rail and disconnect the side line, 
replac everyth as it had been before. We were equal busi at the 
mine. the funnel and other fragment were thrown in, the shaft wa 
plank over as it use to be, and the line which led to it were torn 
up and taken away. then, without flurry, but without delay, we all made 
our way out of the country, most of us to paris, my english colleagu to 
manchester, and mcpherson to southampton, whenc he emigr to 
america. let the english paper of that date tell how thoroughli we had 
done our work, and how complet we had thrown the cleverest of their 
detect off our track. 

“you will rememb that gomez threw hi bag of paper out of the window, 
and I need not say that I secur that bag and brought them to my 
employers. It may interest my employ now, however, to learn that out 
of that bag I took one or two littl paper as a souvenir of the 
occasion. I have no wish to publish these papers; but, still, it is 
everi man for himself in thi world, and what els can I do if my 
friend will not come to my aid when I want them? messieurs, you may 
believ that herbert de lernac is quit as formid when he is against 
you as when he is with you, and that he is not a man to go to the 
guillotin until he ha seen that everi one of you is _en route_ for new 
caledonia. for your own sake, if not for mine, make haste, monsieur 
de ——, and gener ——, and baron —— (you can fill up the blank for 
yourselv as you read this). I promis you that in the next edit 
there will be no blank to fill. 

“p.s.—a I look over my statement there is onli one omiss which I can 
see. It concern the unfortun man mcpherson, who wa foolish enough 
to write to hi wife and to make an appoint with her in new york. It 
can be imagin that when interest like our were at stake, we could 
not leav them to the chanc of whether a man in that class of life 
would or would not give away hi secret to a woman. have onc broken 
hi oath by write to hi wife, we could not trust him ani more. We 
took step therefor to insur that he should not see hi wife. I have 
sometim thought that it would be a kind to write to her and to 
assur her that there is no impedi to her marri again.” 




the club-foot grocer 


My uncle, mr. stephen maple, had been at the same time the most 
success and the least respect of our family, so that we hardli 
knew whether to take credit for hi wealth or to feel asham of hi 
position. He had, as a matter of fact, establish a larg groceri in 
stepney which did a curiou mix business, not always, as we had heard, 
of a veri savouri character, with the riversid and seafar people. He 
wa ship’ chandler, provis merchant, and, if rumour spoke truly, 
some other thing as well. such a trade, howev lucrative, had it 
drawbacks, as wa evid when, after twenti year of prosperity, he wa 
savag assault by one of hi custom and left for dead, with three 
smash rib and a broken leg, which mend so badli that it remain 
for ever three inch shorter than the other. thi incid seemed, not 
unnaturally, to disgust him with hi surroundings, for, after the trial, 
in which hi assail wa condemn to fifteen years’ penal servitude, 
he retir from hi busi and settl in a lone part of the north 
of england, whence, until that morning, we had never onc heard of 
him—not even at the death of my father, who wa hi onli brother. 

My mother read hi letter aloud to me: “if your son is with you, ellen, 
and if he is as stout a lad as he promis for when last I heard from 
you, then send him up to me by the first train after thi come to hand. 
He will find that to serv me will pay him better than the engineering, 
and if I pass away (though, thank god, there is no reason to complain as 
to my health) you will see that I have not forgotten my brother’ son. 
congleton is the station, and then a drive of four mile to greta house, 
where I am now living. I will send a trap to meet the seven o’clock 
train, for it is the onli one which stop here. mind that you send him, 
ellen, for I have veri strong reason for wish him to be with me. let 
bygon be bygon if there ha been anyth between us in the past. If 
you should fail me now you will live to regret it.” 

We were seat at either side of the breakfast table, look blankli at 
each other and wonder what thi might mean, when there came a ring at 
the bell, and the maid walk in with a telegram. It wa from uncl 
stephen. 

“on no account let john get out at congleton,” said the message. “he 
will find trap wait seven o’clock even train sted bridge, one 
station further down line. let him drive not me, but garth farm 
house—six miles. there will receiv instructions. Do not fail; onli you 
to look to.” 

“that is true enough,” said my mother. “a far as I know, your uncl ha 
not a friend in the world, nor ha he ever deserv one. He ha alway 
been a hard man in hi dealings, and he held back hi money from your 
father at a time when a few pound would have save him from ruin. whi 
should I send my onli son to serv him now?” 

but my own inclin were all for the adventure. 

“if I have him for a friend, he can help me in my profession,” I argued, 
take my mother upon her weakest side. 

“I have never known him to help ani one yet,” said she, bitterly. “and 
whi all thi mysteri about get out at a distant station and drive 
to the wrong address? He ha got himself into some troubl and he wish 
us to get him out of it. when he ha use us he will throw us asid as 
he ha done before. your father might have been live now if he had 
onli help him.” 

but at last my argument prevailed, for, as I point out, we had much 
to gain and littl to lose, and whi should we, the poorest member of a 
family, go out of our way to offend the rich one? My bag wa pack and 
my cab at the door, when there came a second telegram. 

“good shooting. let john bring gun. rememb sted bridge, not 
congleton.” and so, with a gun-cas ad to my luggag and some 
surpris at my uncle’ insistence, I start off upon my adventure. 

the journey lie over the main northern railway as far as the station of 
carnfield, where one chang for the littl branch line which wind over 
the fells. In all england there is no harsher or more impress 
scenery. for two hour I pass through desol roll plains, rise 
at place into low, stone-litt hills, with long, straight outcrop 
of jag rock show upon their surface. here and there littl 
grey-roofed, grey-wal cottag huddl into villages, but for mani 
mile at a time no hous wa visibl nor ani sign of life save the 
scatter sheep which wander over the mountain sides. It wa a 
depress country, and my heart grew heavier and heavier as I near my 
journey’ end, until at last the train pull up at the littl villag 
of sted bridge, where my uncl had told me to alight. A singl 
ramshackl trap, with a countri lout to drive it, wa wait at the 
station. 

“i thi mr. stephen maple’s?” I asked. 

the fellow look at me with eye which were full of suspicion. “what is 
your name?” he asked, speak a dialect which I will not attempt to 
reproduce. 

“john maple.” 

“anyth to prove it?” 

I half rais my hand, for my temper is none of the best, and then I 
reflect that the fellow wa probabl onli carri out the direct 
of my uncle. for answer I point to my name print upon my gun-case. 

“yes, yes, that is right. it’ john maple, sure enough!” said he, slowli 
spell it out. “get in, maister, for we have a bit of a drive befor 
us.” 

the road, white and shining, like all the road in that limeston 
country, ran in long sweep over the fells, with low wall of loos 
stone upon either side of it. the huge moors, mottl with sheep and 
with boulders, roll away in gradual ascend curv to the misti 
sky-line. In one place a fall of the land gave a glimps of a grey angl 
of distant sea. bleak and sad and stern were all my surroundings, and I 
felt, under their influence, that thi curiou mission of mine wa a 
more seriou thing than it had appear when view from london. thi 
sudden call for help from an uncl whom I had never seen, and of whom I 
had heard littl that wa good, the urgenc of it, hi refer to my 
physic powers, the excus by which he had ensur that I should bring 
a weapon, all hung togeth and point to some vagu but sinist 
meaning. thing which appear to be imposs in kensington becam 
veri probabl upon these wild and isol hillsides. At last, oppress 
with my own dark thoughts, I turn to my companion with the intent 
of ask some question about my uncle, but the express upon hi 
face drove the idea from my head. 

He wa not look at hi old, unclip chestnut horse, nor at the road 
along which he wa driving, but hi face wa turn in my direction, and 
he wa stare past me with an express of curios and, as I 
thought, of apprehension. He rais the whip to lash the horse, and then 
drop it again, as if convinc that it wa useless. At the same time, 
follow the direct of hi gaze, I saw what it wa which had excit 
him. 

A man wa run across the moor. He ran clumsily, stumbl and 
slip among the stones; but the road curved, and it wa easi for him 
to cut us off. As we came up to the spot for which he had been making, 
he scrambl over the stone wall and stood waiting, with the even sun 
shine on hi brown, clean-shaven face. He wa a burli fellow, and in 
bad condition, for he stood with hi hand on hi ribs, pant and 
blow after hi short run. As we drove up I saw the glint of ear 
in hi ears. 

“say, mate, where are you bound for?” he asked, in a rough but 
good-humour fashion. 

“farmer purcell’s, at the garth farm,” said the driver. 

“sorri to stop you,” cri the other, stand aside; “I thought as I 
would hail you as you passed, for if so be as you had been go my way 
I should have made bold to ask you for a passage.” 

hi excus wa an absurd one, sinc it wa evid that our littl trap 
wa as full as it could be, but my driver did not seem dispos to 
argue. He drove on without a word, and, look back, I could see the 
stranger sit by the roadsid and cram tobacco into hi pipe. 

“A sailor,” said I. 

“yes, maister. we’r not more than a few mile from morecamb bay,” the 
driver remarked. 

“you seem frighten of him,” I observed. 

“did i?” said he, drily; and then, after a long pause, “mayb I was.” As 
to hi reason for fear, I could get noth from him, and though I 
ask him mani question he wa so stupid, or els so clever, that I 
could learn noth from hi replies. I observed, however, that from 
time to time he swept the moor with a troubl eye, but their huge 
brown expans wa unbroken by ani move figure. At last in a sort of 
cleft in the hill in front of us I saw a long, low-li farm building, 
the centr of all those scatter flocks. 

“garth farm,” said my driver. “there is farmer purcel himself,” he 
added, as a man stroll out of the porch and stood wait for our 
arrival. He advanc as I descend from the trap, a hard, weather-worn 
fellow with light blue eyes, and hair and beard like sun-bleach grass. 
In hi express I read the same surli ill-wil which I had alreadi 
observ in my driver. their malevol could not be direct toward a 
complet stranger like myself, and so I began to suspect that my uncl 
wa no more popular on the north-countri fell than he had been in 
stepney highway. 

“you’r to stay here until nightfall. that’ mr. stephen maple’ wish,” 
said he, curtly. “you can have some tea and bacon if you like. it’ the 
best we can give you.” 

I wa veri hungry, and accept the hospit in spite of the churlish 
tone in which it wa offered. the farmer’ wife and hi two daughter 
came into the sitting-room dure the meal, and I wa awar of a certain 
curios with which they regard me. It may have been that a young man 
wa a rariti in thi wilderness, or it may be that my attempt at 
convers won their goodwill, but they all three show a kindli 
in their manner. It wa get dark, so I remark that it wa time for 
me to be push on to greta house. 

“you’v made up your mind to go, then?” said the older woman. 

“certainly. I have come all the way from london.” 

“there’ no one hinder you from go back there.” 

“but I have come to see mr. maple, my uncle.” 

“oh, well, no one can stop you if you want to go on,” said the woman, 
and becam silent as her husband enter the room. 

with everi fresh incid I felt that I wa move in an atmospher of 
mysteri and peril, and yet it wa all so intang and so vagu that I 
could not guess where my danger lay. I should have ask the farmer’ 
wife point-blank, but her surli husband seem to divin the sympathi 
which she felt for me, and never again left us together. “it’ time you 
were going, mister,” said he at last, as hi wife lit the lamp upon the 
table. 

“i the trap ready?” 

“you’ll need no trap. you’ll walk,” said he. 

“how shall I know the way?” 

“william will go with you.” 

william wa the youth who had driven me up from the station. He wa 
wait at the door, and he shoulder my gun-cas and bag. I stay 
behind to thank the farmer for hi hospitality, but he would have none 
of it. “I ask no thank from mr. stephen mapl nor ani friend of his,” 
said he, bluntly. “I am paid for what I do. If I wa not paid I would 
not do it. Go your way, young man, and say no more.” He turn rude on 
hi heel and re-ent hi house, slam the door behind him. 

It wa quit dark outside, with heavi black cloud drift slowli 
across the sky. onc clear of the farm inclosur and out on the moor I 
should have been hopelessli lost if it had not been for my guide, who 
walk in front of me along narrow sheep-track which were quit 
invis to me. everi now and then, without see anything, we heard 
the clumsi scuffl of the creatur in the darkness. At first my guid 
walk swiftli and carelessly, but gradual hi pace slow down, until 
at last he wa go veri slowli and stealthily, like one who walk 
light-foot amid immin menace. thi vague, inexplic sens of 
danger in the midst of the loneli of that vast moor wa more 
daunt than ani evid peril could be, and I had begun to press him 
as to what it wa that he feared, when suddenli he stop and drag 
me down among some gors bush which line the path. hi tug at my coat 
wa so strenuou and imper that I realiz that the danger wa a 
press one, and in an instant I wa squat down besid him as still 
as the bush which shadow us. It wa so dark there that I could not 
even see the lad besid me. 

It wa a warm night, and a hot wind puf in our faces. suddenli in 
thi wind there came someth home and familiar—th smell of burn 
tobacco. and then a face, illumin by the glow bowl of a pipe, 
came float toward us. the man wa all in shadow, but just that one 
dim halo of light with the face which fill it, brighter below and 
shade away into dark above, stood out against the univers 
blackness. A thin, hungri face, thickli freckl with yellow over the 
cheek bones, blue, wateri eyes, an ill-nourished, light-colour 
moustache, a peak yacht cap—that wa all that I saw. He pass us, 
look vacantli in front of him, and we heard the step die away 
along the path. 

“who wa it?” I asked, as we rose to our feet. 

“I don’t know.” 

the fellow’ continu profess of ignor made me angry. 

“whi should you hide yourself, then?” I asked, sharply. 

“becaus maister mapl told me. He said that I were to meet no one. If I 
met ani one I should get no pay.” 

“you met that sailor on the road?” 

“yes, and I think he wa one of them.” 

“one of whom?” 

“one of the folk that have come on the fells. they are watchin’ greta 
house, and maister mapl is afeard of them. that’ whi he want us to 
keep clear of them, and that’ whi i’v been a-tri to dodg ‘em.” 

here wa someth definit at last. some bodi of men were threaten 
my uncle. the sailor wa one of them. the man with the peak 
cap—prob a sailor also—wa another. I bethought me of stepney 
highway and of the murder assault made upon my uncl there. thing 
were fit themselv into a connect shape in my mind when a light 
twinkl over the fell, and my guid inform me that it wa greta. the 
place lay in a dip among the moors, so that one wa veri near it befor 
one saw it. A short walk brought us up to the door. 

I could see littl of the build save that the lamp which shone 
through a small lattic window show me dimli that it wa both long 
and lofty. the low door under an overhang lintel wa loos fitted, 
and light wa burst out on each side of it. the inmat of thi 
lone hous appear to be keenli on their guard, for they had heard 
our footsteps, and we were challeng befor we reach the door. 

“who is there?” cri a deep-boom voice, and urgently, “who is it, I 
say?” 

“it’ me, maister maple. I have brought the gentleman.” 

there wa a sharp click, and a small wooden shutter flew open in the 
door. the gleam of a lantern shone upon us for a few seconds. then the 
shutter close again; with a great rasp of lock and clatter of 
bars, the door wa opened, and I saw my uncl stand frame in that 
vivid yellow squar cut out of the darkness. 

He wa a small, thick man, with a great rounded, bald head and one thin 
border of gingeri curls. It wa a fine head, the head of a thinker, but 
hi larg white face wa heavi and commonplace, with a broad, 
loose-lip mouth and two hang dewlap on either side of it. hi 
eye were small and restless, and hi light-colour lash were 
continu moving. My mother had said onc that they remind her of 
the leg of a woodlouse, and I saw at the first glanc what she meant. I 
heard also that in stepney he had learn the languag of hi customers, 
and I blush for our kinship as I listen to hi villain accent. 
“so, nephew,” said he, hold out hi hand. “come in, come in, man, 
quick, and don’t leav the door open. your mother said you were grown a 
big lad, and, my word, she ‘a a right to say so. ‘ere’ a ‘alf-crown 
for you, william, and you can go back again. put the thing down. ‘ere, 
enoch, take mr. john’ things, and see that ‘i supper is on the table.” 

As my uncle, after fasten the door, turn to show me into the 
sitting-room, I becam awar of hi most strike peculiarity. the 
injuri which he had receiv some year ago had, as I have alreadi 
remarked, left one leg sever inch shorter than the other. To aton 
for thi he wore one of those enorm wooden sole to hi boot which 
are prescrib by surgeon in such cases. He walk without a limp, but 
hi tread on the stone floor made a curiou clack-click, clack-click, 
as the wood and the leather alternated. whenev he move it wa to the 
rhythm of thi singular castanet. 

the great kitchen, with it huge fireplac and carv settl corners, 
show that thi dwell wa an old-tim farmhouse. On one side of the 
room a line of box stood all cord and packed. the furnitur wa 
scant and plain, but on a trestle-t in the centr some supper, cold 
meat, bread, and a jug of beer wa laid for me. An elderli manservant, 
as manifest a cockney as hi master, wait upon me, while my uncle, 
sit in a comer, ask me mani question as to my mother and myself. 
when my meal wa finish he order hi man enoch to unpack my gun. I 
observ that two other guns, old rust weapons, were lean against 
the wall besid the window. 

“it’ the window i’m afraid of,” said my uncle, in the deep, reverber 
voic which contrast oddli with hi plump littl figure. “the door’ 
safe against anyth short of dynamite, but the window’ a terror. hi! 
hi!” he yelled, “don’t walk across the light! you can duck when you pass 
the lattice.” 

“for fear of be seen?” I asked. 

“for fear of bein’ shot, my lad. that’ the trouble. now, come an’ sit 
besid me on the trestl ‘ere, and i’ll tell you all about it, for I can 
see that you are the right sort and can be trusted.” 

hi flatteri wa clumsi and halting, and it wa evid that he wa veri 
eager to concili me. I sat down besid him, and he drew a fold 
paper from hi pocket. It wa a _western morn news_, and the date wa 
ten day before. the passag over which he press a long, black nail 
wa concern with the releas from dartmoor of a convict name elias, 
whose term of sentenc had been remit on account of hi defenc of a 
warder who had been attack in the quarries. the whole account wa onli 
a few line long. 

“who is he, then?” I asked. 

My uncl cock hi distort foot into the air. “that’ ‘i mark!” said 
he. “‘e wa doin’ time for that. how ‘e’ out an’ after me again.” 

“but whi should he be after you?” 

“becaus ‘e want to kill me. becaus ‘e’ll never rest, the worri 
devil, until ‘e ‘a ‘ad ‘i reveng on me. it’ thi way, nephew! i’v 
no secret from you. ‘E think i’v wrong ‘im. for argument’ sake 
we’ll suppos I ‘ave wrong ‘im. and now ‘im and ‘i friend are after 
me.” 

“who are hi friends?” 

My uncle’ boom sank suddenli to a frighten whisper. “sailors!” said 
he. “I knew they would come when I saw that ‘ere paper, and two day ago 
I look through that window and three of them wa standin’ lookin’ at 
the ‘ouse. It wa after that that I wrote to your mother. they’v mark 
me down, and they’r waitin’ for ‘im.” 

“but whi not send for the police?” 

My uncle’ eye avoid mine. 

“polic are no use,” said he. “it’ you that can help me.” 

“what can I do?” 

“i’ll tell you. i’m go to move. that’ what all these box are for. 
everyth will soon be pack and ready. I ‘ave friend at leeds, and I 
shall be safer there. not safe, mind you, but safer. I start to-morrow 
evening, and if you will stand by me until then I will make it worth 
your while. there’ onli enoch and me to do everything, but we shall 
‘ave it all ready, I promis you, by to-morrow evening. the cart will be 
round then, and you and me and enoch and the boy william can guard the 
thing as far as congleton station. did you see anyth of them on the 
fells?” 

“yes,” said I; “a sailor stop us on the way.” 

“ah, I knew they were watch us. that wa whi I ask you to get out 
at the wrong station and to drive to purcell’ instead of comin’ ‘ere. 
We are blockaded—that’ the word.” 

“and there wa another,” said I, “a man with a pipe.” 

“what wa ‘e like?” 

“thin face, freckles, a peaked——” 

My uncl gave a hoars scream. 

“that’ ‘im! that’ ‘im! ‘e’ come! god be merci to me, a sinner!” He 
went click-clack about the room with hi great foot like one 
distracted. there wa someth piteou and baby-lik in that big bald 
head, and for the first time I felt a gush of piti for him. 

“come, uncle,” said I, “you are live in a civil land. there is a 
law that will bring these gentri to order. let me drive over to the 
counti police-st to-morrow morn and i’ll soon set thing right.” 

but he shook hi head at me. 

“e’ cun and ‘e’ cruel,” said he. “I can’t draw a breath without 
think of him, co ‘e buckl up three of my ribs. ‘e’ll kill me thi 
time, sure. there’ onli one chance. We must leav what we ‘ave not 
packed, and we must be off first thing to-morrow mornin’. great god, 
what’ that!” 

A tremend knock upon the door had reverber through the hous and 
then anoth and another. An iron fist seem to be beat upon it. My 
uncl collaps into hi chair. I seiz a gun and ran to the door. 

“who’ there?” I shouted. 

there wa no answer. 

I open the shutter and look out. 

No one wa there. 

and then suddenli I saw that a long slip of paper wa protrud through 
the slit of the door. I held it to the light. In rude but vigor 
handwrit the messag ran:— 

“put them out on the doorstep and save your skin.” 

“what do they want?” I asked, as I read him the message. 

“what they’ll never ‘ave! no, by the lord, never!” he cried, with a fine 
burst of spirit. “‘ere, enoch! enoch!” 

the old fellow came run to the call. 

“enoch, i’v been a good master to you all my life, and it’ your turn 
now. will you take a risk for me?” 

I thought better of my uncl when I saw how readili the man consented. 
whomev els he had wronged, thi one at least seem to love him. 

“put your cloak on and your ‘at, enoch, and out with you by the back 
door. you know the way across the moor to the purcells’. tell them that 
I must ‘ave the cart first thing in the mornin’, and that purcel must 
come with the shepherd as well. We must get clear of thi or we are 
done. first thing in the mornin’, enoch, and ten pound for the job. keep 
the black cloak on and move slow, and they will never see you. we’ll 
keep the ‘ous till you come back.” 

It wa a job for a brave man to ventur out into the vagu and invis 
danger of the fell, but the old servant took it as the most ordinari of 
messages. pick hi long, black cloak and hi soft hat from the hook 
behind the door, he wa readi on the instant. We extinguish the small 
lamp in the back passage, softli unbar the back door, slip him 
out, and bar it up again. look through the small hall window, I 
saw hi black garment merg instantli into the night. 

“it is but a few hour befor the light comes, nephew,” said my uncle, 
after he had tri all the bolt and bars. “you shall never regret thi 
night’ work. If we come through safe it will be the make of you. 
stand by me till mornin’, and I stand by you while there’ breath in my 
body. the cart will be ‘ere by five. what isn’t readi we can afford to 
leav be’ind. we’v onli to load up and make for the earli train at 
congleton.” 

“will they let us pass?” 

“in broad daylight they dare not stop us. there will be six of us, if 
they all come, and three guns. We can fight our way through. where can 
they get guns, common, wander seamen? A pistol or two at the most. If 
we can keep them out for a few hour we are safe. enoch must be ‘alfway 
to purcell’ by now.” 

“but what do these sailor want?” I repeated. “you say yourself that you 
wrong them.” 

A look of mulish obstinaci came over hi large, white face. 

“don’t ask questions, nephew, and just do what I ask you,” said he. 
“enoch won’t come back. ‘e’ll just bide there and come with the cart. 
‘ark, what is that?” 

A distant cri rang from out of the darkness, and then anoth one, short 
and sharp like the wail of the curlew. 

“it’ enoch!” said my uncle, grip my arm. “they’r killin’ poor old 
enoch.” 

the cri came again, much nearer, and I heard the sound of hurri step 
and a shrill call for help. 

“they are after ‘im!” cri my uncle, rush to the front door. He 
pick up the lantern and flash it through the littl shutter. Up the 
yellow funnel of light a man wa run frantically, hi head bow and 
a black cloak flutter behind him. the moor seem to be aliv with 
dim pursuers. 

“the bolt! the bolt!” gasp my uncle. He push it back whilst I turn 
the key, and we swung the door open to admit the fugitive. He dash in 
and turn at onc with a long yell of triumph. “come on, lads! tumbl 
up, all hands, tumbl up! smartli there, all of you!” 

It wa so quickli and neatli done that we were taken by storm befor we 
knew that we were attacked. the passag wa full of rush sailors. I 
slip out of the clutch of one and ran for my gun, but it wa onli to 
crash down on to the stone floor an instant later with two of them 
hold on to me. they were so deft and quick that my hand were lash 
togeth even while I struggled, and I wa drag into the settl 
corner, unhurt but veri sore in spirit at the cun with which our 
defenc had been forc and the eas with which we had been overcome. 
they had not even troubl to bind my uncle, but he had been push into 
hi chair, and the gun had been taken away. He sat with a veri white 
face, hi home figur and absurd row of curl look curious out of 
place among the wild figur who surround him. 

there were six of them, all evid sailors. one I recogn as the 
man with the ear whom I had alreadi met upon the road that evening. 
they were all fine, weather-bronz bewhisk fellows. In the midst of 
them, lean against the table, wa the freckl man who had pass me 
on the moor. the great black cloak which poor enoch had taken out with 
him wa still hang from hi shoulders. He wa of a veri differ 
type from the others—crafty, cruel, dangerous, with sly, thought eye 
which gloat over my uncle. they suddenli turn themselv upon me and 
I never knew how one’ skin can creep at a man’ glanc before. 

“who are you?” he asked. “speak out, or we’ll find a way to make you.” 

“I am mr. stephen maple’ nephew, come to visit him.” 

“you are, are you? well, I wish you joy of your uncl and of your visit 
too. quick’ the word, lads, for we must be aboard befor morning. what 
shall we do with the old ‘un?” 

“trice him up yanke fashion and give him six dozen,” said one of the 
seamen. 

“d’you hear, you curs cockney thief? we’ll beat the life out of you if 
you don’t give back what you’v stolen. where are they? I know you never 
part with them.” 

My uncl purs up hi lip and shook hi head, with a face in which hi 
fear and hi obstinaci contended. 

“won’t tell, won’t you? we’ll see about that! get him ready, jim!” 

one of the seamen seiz my uncle, and pull hi coat and shirt over 
hi shoulders. He sat lump in hi chair, hi bodi all creas into 
white roll which shiver with cold and with terror. 

“up with him to those hooks.” 

there were row of them along the wall where the smoke meat use to be 
hung. the seamen tie my uncl by the wrist to two of these. then one 
of them undid hi leather belt. 

“the buckl end, jim,” said the captain. “give him the buckle.” 

“you cowards,” I cried; “to beat an old man!” 

“we’ll beat a young one next,” said he, with a malevol glanc at my 
corner. “now, jim, cut a wad out of him!” 

“give him one more chance!” cri one of the seamen. 

“aye, aye,” growl one or two others. “give the swab a chance!” 

“if you turn soft, you may give them up for ever,” said the captain. 
“one thing or the other! you must lash it out of him; or you may give up 
what you took such pain to win and what would make you gentlemen for 
life—everi man of you. there’ noth els for it. which shall it be?” 

“let him have it,” they cried, savagely. 

“then stand clear!” the buckl of the man’ belt whine savag as he 
whirl it over hi shoulder. 

but my uncl cri out befor the blow fell. 

“I can’t stand it!” he cried. “let me down!” 

“where are they, then?” 

“i’ll show you if you’ll let me down.” 

they cast off the handkerchief and he pull hi coat over hi fat, 
round shoulders. the seamen stood round him, the most intens curios 
and excit upon their swarthi faces. 

“no gammon!” cri the man with the freckles. “we’ll kill you joint by 
joint if you tri to fool us. now then! where are they?” 

“in my bedroom.” 

“where is that?” 

“the room above.” 

“whereabouts?” 

“in the corner of the oak ark by the bed.” 

the seamen all rush to the stair, but the captain call them back. 

“we don’t leav thi cun old fox behind us. ha, your face drop at 
that, doe it? By the lord, I believ you are tri to slip your 
anchor. here, lads, make him fast and take him along!” 

with a confus trampl of feet they rush up the stairs, drag my 
uncl in the midst of them. for an instant I wa alone. My hand were 
tie but not my feet. If I could find my way across the moor I might 
rous the polic and intercept these rascal befor they could reach the 
sea. for a moment I hesit as to whether I should leav my uncl 
alon in such a plight. but I should be of more servic to him—or, at 
the worst, to hi property—if I went than if I stayed. I rush to the 
hall door, and as I reach it I heard a yell abov my head, a 
shattering, splinter noise, and then amid a choru of shout a huge 
weight fell with a horribl thud at my veri feet. never while I live 
will that squelch thud pass out of my ears. and there, just in front 
of me, in the lane of light cast by the open door, lay my unhappi uncle, 
hi bald head twist on to one shoulder, like the wrung neck of a 
chicken. It need but a glanc to see that hi spine wa broken and 
that he wa dead. 

the gang of seamen had rush downstair so quickli that they were 
cluster at the door and crowd all round me almost as soon as I had 
realiz what had occurred. 

“it’ no do of ours, mate,” said one of them to me. “he hove himself 
through the window, and that’ the truth. don’t you put it down to us.” 

“he thought he could get to windward of us if onc he wa out in the 
dark, you see,” said another. “but he came head foremost and broke hi 
bloomin’ neck.” 

“and a bless good job too!” cri the chief, with a savag oath. “i’d 
have done it for him if he hadn’t took the lead. don’t make ani mistake, 
my lads, thi is murder, and we’r all in it, together. there’ onli one 
way out of it, and that is to hang together, unless, as the say goes, 
you mean to hang apart. there’ onli one witness——” 

He look at me with hi malici littl eyes, and I saw that he had 
someth that gleamed—eith a knife or a revolver—in the breast of hi 
pea-jacket. two of the men slip between us. 

“stow that, captain elias,” said one of them. “if thi old man met hi 
end it is through no fault of ours. the worst we ever meant him wa to 
take some of the skin off hi back. but as to thi young fellow, we have 
no quarrel with him——” 

“you fool, you may have no quarrel with him, but he ha hi quarrel with 
you. he’ll swear your life away if you don’t silenc hi tongue. it’ 
hi life or ours, and don’t you make ani mistake.” 

“aye, aye, the skipper ha the longest head of ani of us. better do what 
he tell you,” cri another. 

but my champion, who wa the fellow with the earrings, cover me with 
hi own broad chest and swore roundli that no one should lay a finger on 
me. the other were equal divided, and my fate might have been the 
caus of a quarrel between them when suddenli the captain gave a cri of 
delight and amaz which wa taken up by the whole gang. I follow 
their eye and outstretch fingers, and thi wa what I saw. 

My uncl wa lie with hi leg outstretched, and the club foot wa 
that which wa furthest from us. all round thi foot a dozen brilliant 
object were twinkl and flash in the yellow light which stream 
from the open door. the captain caught up the lantern and held it to the 
place. the huge sole of hi boot had been shatter in the fall, and it 
wa clear now that it had been a hollow box in which he stow hi 
valuables, for the path wa all sprinkl with preciou stones. three 
which I saw were of an unusu size, and as mani as forty, I should 
think, of fair value. the seamen had cast themselv down and were 
greedili gather them up, when my friend with the ear pluck me 
by the sleeve. 

“here’ your chance, mate,” he whispered. “off you go befor wors come 
of it.” 

It wa a time hint, and it did not take me long to act upon it. A few 
cautiou step and I had pass unobserv beyond the circl of light. 
then I set off running, fall and rise and fall again, for no one 
who ha not tri it can tell how hard it is to run over uneven ground 
with hand which are fasten together. I ran and ran, until for want of 
breath I could no longer put one foot befor the other. but I need not 
have hurri so, for when I had gone a long way I stop at last to 
breathe, and, look back, I could still see the gleam of the lantern 
far away, and the outlin of the seamen who squat round it. then at 
last thi singl point of light went suddenli out, and the whole great 
moor wa left in the thickest darkness. 

So deftli wa I tied, that it took me a long half-hour and a broken 
tooth befor I got my hand free. My idea wa to make my way across to 
the purcells’ farm, but north wa the same as south under that pitchi 
sky, and for hour I wander among the rustling, scuttl sheep 
without ani certainti as to where I wa going. when at last there came a 
glimmer in the east, and the undul fells, grey with the morn 
mist, roll onc more to the horizon, I recogn that I wa close by 
purcell’ farm, and there a littl in front of me I wa startl to see 
anoth man walk in the same direction. At first I approach him 
warily, but befor I overtook him I knew by the bent back and totter 
step that it wa enoch, the old servant, and right glad I wa to see 
that he wa living. He had been knock down, beaten, and hi cloak and 
hat taken away by these ruffians, and all night he had wander in the 
darkness, like myself, in search of help. He burst into tear when I 
told him of hi master’ death, and sat hiccough with the hard, dri 
sob of an old man among the stone upon the moor. 

“it’ the men of the _black mogul_,” he said. “yes, yes, I knew that 
they would be the end of ‘im.” 

“who are they?” I asked. 

“well, well, you are one of ‘i own folk,” said he. “‘e ‘a pass away; 
yes, yes, it is all over and done. I can tell you about it, no man 
better, but mum’ the word with old enoch unless master want ‘im to 
speak. but hi own nephew who came to ‘elp ‘im in the hour of need—yes, 
yes, mister john, you ought to know. 

“it wa like this, sir. your uncl ‘ad ‘i grocer’ busi at stepney, 
but ‘e ‘ad anoth busi also. ‘E would buy as well as sell, and when 
‘e bought ‘e never ask no question where the stuff came from. whi 
should ‘e? It wasn’t no busi of ‘is, wa it? If folk brought him a 
stone or a silver plate, what wa it to ‘im where they got it? that’ 
good sense, and it ought to be good law, as I ‘old. any’ow, it wa good 
enough for us at stepney. 

“well, there wa a steamer came from south africa what founder at sea. 
At least, they say so, and lloyd’ paid the money. she ‘ad some veri 
fine diamond invoic as be aboard of ‘er. soon after there came the 
brig _black mogul_ into the port o’ london, with ‘er paper all right as 
‘avin’ clear from port elizabeth with a cargo of ‘ides. the captain, 
which ‘i name wa elias, ‘e came to see the master, and what d’you 
think that ‘e ‘ad to sell? why, sir, as i’m a livin’ sinner ‘e ‘ad a 
packet of diamond for all the world just the same as what wa lost out 
o’ that there african steamer. ‘ow did ‘e get them? I don’t know. master 
didn’t know. ‘E didn’t seek to know either. the captain ‘e wa anxiou 
for reason of ‘i own to get them safe, so ‘e gave them to master, same 
as you might put a thing in a bank. but master ‘e’d ‘ad time to get fond 
of them, and ‘e wasn’t over satisfi as to where the _black mogul_ ‘ad 
been tradin’, or where her captain ‘ad got the stones, so when ‘e come 
back for them the master ‘e said as ‘e thought they were best in ‘i own 
‘ands. mind I don’t ‘old with it myself, but that wa what master said 
to captain elia in the littl back parlour at stepney. that wa ‘ow ‘e 
got ‘i leg broke and three of hi ribs. 

“so the captain got jug for that, and the master, when ‘e wa abl to 
get about, thought that ‘e would ‘ave peac for fifteen years, and ‘e 
came away from london becaus ‘e wa afraid of the sailor men; but, at 
the end of five years, the captain wa out and after ‘im, with as mani 
of ‘i crew as ‘e could gather. send for the perlice, you says! well, 
there are two side to that, and the master ‘e wasn’t much more fond of 
the perlic than elia was. but they fair ‘em master in, as you ‘ave 
seen for yourself, and they best ‘im at last, and the loneli that 
‘e thought would be ‘i safeti ‘a prove ‘i ruin. well, well, ‘e wa 
‘ard to many, but a good master to me, and it’ long befor I come on 
such another.” 

one word in conclusion. A strang cutter, which had been hang about 
the coast, wa seen to beat down the irish sea that morning, and it is 
conjectur that elia and hi men were on board of it. At ani rate, 
noth ha been heard of them since. It wa shown at the inquest that 
my uncl had live in a sordid fashion for years, and he left littl 
behind him. the mere knowledg that he possess thi treasure, which he 
carri about with him in so extraordinari a fashion, had appear to be 
the joy of hi life, and he had never, as far as we could learn, tri 
to realiz ani of hi diamonds. So hi disreput name when live wa 
not aton for by ani posthum benevolence, and the family, equal 
scandal by hi life and by hi death, have final buri all memori 
of the club-foot grocer of stepney. 




the seal room 


A solicitor of an activ habit and athlet tast who is compel by 
hi hope of busi to remain within the four wall of hi offic from 
ten till five must take what exercis he can in the evenings. henc it 
wa that I wa in the habit of indulg in veri long nocturn 
excursions, in which I sought the height of hampstead and highgat in 
order to cleans my system from the impur air of abchurch lane. It wa 
in the cours of one of these aimless rambl that I first met felix 
stanniford, and so led up to what ha been the most extraordinari 
adventur of my lifetime. 

one evening—it wa in april or earli may of the year 1894—i made my way 
to the extrem northern fring of london, and wa walk down one of 
those fine avenu of high brick villa which the huge citi is for ever 
push farther and farther out into the country. It wa a fine, clear 
spring night, the moon wa shine out of an uncloud sky, and I, 
have alreadi left mani mile behind me, wa inclin to walk slowli 
and look about me. In thi contempl mood, my attent wa arrest 
by one of the hous which I wa passing. 

It wa a veri larg building, stand in it own grounds, a littl back 
from the road. It wa modern in appearance, and yet it wa far less so 
than it neighbours, all of which were crude and pain new. their 
symmetr line wa broken by the gap caus by the laurel-stud 
lawn, with the great, dark, gloomi hous loom at the back of it. 
evid it had been the countri retreat of some wealthi merchant, 
built perhap when the nearest street wa a mile off, and now gradual 
overtaken and surround by the red brick tentacl of the london 
octopus. the next stage, I reflected, would be it digest and 
absorption, so that the cheap builder might rear a dozen 
eighty-pound-a-year villa upon the garden frontage. and then, as all 
thi pass vagu through my mind, an incid occur which brought 
my thought into quit anoth channel. 

A four-wheel cab, that opprobrium of london, wa come jolt and 
creak in one direction, while in the other there wa a yellow glare 
from the lamp of a cyclist. they were the onli move object in the 
whole long, moonlit road, and yet they crash into each other with that 
malign accuraci which bring two ocean liner togeth in the broad 
wast of the atlantic. It wa the cyclist’ fault. He tri to cross in 
front of the cab, miscalcul hi distance, and wa knock sprawl 
by the horse’ shoulder. He rose, snarling; the cabman swore back at 
him, and then, realiz that hi number had not yet been taken, lash 
hi hors and lumber off. the cyclist caught at the handl of hi 
prostrat machine, and then suddenli sat down with a groan. “oh, lord!” 
he said. 

I ran across the road to hi side. “ani harm done?” I asked. 

“it’ my ankle,” said he. “onli a twist, I think; but it’ pretti 
painful. just give me your hand, will you?” 

He lay in the yellow circl of the cycl lamp, and I note as I help 
him to hi feet that he wa a gentlemanli young fellow, with a slight 
dark moustach and large, brown eyes, sensit and nervou in 
appearance, with indic of weak health upon hi sunken cheeks. work 
or worri had left it trace upon hi thin, yellow face. He stood up 
when I pull hi hand, but he held one foot in the air, and he groan 
as he move it. 

“I can’t put it to the ground,” said he. 

“where do you live?” 

“here!” he nod hi head toward the big, dark hous in the garden. “I 
wa cut across to the gate when that confound cab ran into me. 
could you help me so far?” 

It wa easili done. I put hi cycl insid the gate, and then I 
support him down the drive, and up the step to the hall door. there 
wa not a light anywhere, and the place wa as black and silent as if no 
one had ever live in it. 

“that will do. thank you veri much,” said he, fumbl with hi key in 
the lock. 

“no, you must allow me to see you safe.” 

He made some feeble, petul protest, and then realiz that he could 
realli do noth without me. the door had open into a pitch-dark 
hall. He lurch forward, with my hand still on hi arm. 

“thi door to the right,” said he, feel about in the darkness. 

I open the door, and at the same moment he manag to strike a light. 
there wa a lamp upon the table, and we lit it between us. “now, i’m all 
right. you can leav me now! good-bye!” said he, and with the word he 
sat down in the arm-chair and faint dead away. 

It wa a queer posit for me. the fellow look so ghastly, that 
realli I wa not sure that he wa not dead. present hi lip quiver 
and hi breast heaved, but hi eye were two white slit and hi colour 
wa horrible. the respons wa more than I could stand. I pull 
at the bell-rope, and heard the bell ring furious far away. but no 
one came in response. the bell tinkl away into silence, which no 
murmur or movement came to break. I waited, and rang again, with the 
same result. there must be some one about. thi young gentleman could 
not live all alon in that huge house. hi peopl ought to know of hi 
condition. If they would not answer the bell, I must hunt them out 
myself. I seiz the lamp and rush from the room. 

what I saw outsid amaz me. the hall wa empty. the stair were bare, 
and yellow with dust. there were three door open into spaciou 
rooms, and each wa uncarpet and undraped, save for the grey web 
which droop from the cornice, and rosett of lichen which had form 
upon the walls. My feet reverber in those empti and silent chambers. 
then I wander on down the passage, with the idea that the kitchens, at 
least, might be tenanted. some caretak might lurk in some seclud 
room. no, they were all equal desolate. despair of find ani 
help, I ran down anoth corridor, and came on someth which surpris 
me more than ever. 

the passag end in a large, brown door, and the door had a seal of red 
wax the size of a five-shil piec over the keyhole. thi seal gave 
me the impress of have been there for a long time, for it wa dusti 
and discoloured. I wa still stare at it, and wonder what that door 
might conceal, when I heard a voic call behind me, and, run 
back, found my young man sit up in hi chair and veri much 
astonish at find himself in darkness. 

“whi on earth did you take the lamp away?” he asked. 

“I wa look for assistance.” 

“you might look for some time,” said he. “I am alon in the house.” 

“awkward if you get an illness.” 

“it wa foolish of me to faint. I inherit a weak heart from my mother, 
and pain or emot ha that effect upon me. It will carri me off some 
day, as it did her. you’r not a doctor, are you?” 

“no, a lawyer. frank alder is my name.” 

“mine is felix stanniford. funni that I should meet a lawyer, for my 
friend, mr. perceval, wa say that we should need one soon.” 

“veri happy, I am sure.” 

“well, that will depend upon him, you know. did you say that you had run 
with that lamp all over the ground floor?” 

“yes.” 

“_all_ over it?” he asked, with emphasis, and he look at me veri hard. 

“I think so. I kept on hope that I should find someone.” 

“did you enter _all_ the rooms?” he asked, with the same intent gaze. 

“well, all that I could enter.” 

“oh, then you _did_ notic it!” said he, and he shrug hi shoulder 
with the air of a man who make the best of a bad job. 

“notic what?” 

“why, the door with the seal on it.” 

“yes, I did.” 

“weren’t you curiou to know what wa in it?” 

“well, it did strike me as unusual.” 

“do you think you could go on live alon in thi house, year after 
year, just long all the time to know what is at the other side of 
that door, and yet not looking?” 

“do you mean to say,” I cried, “that you don’t know yourself?” 

“no more than you do.” 

“then whi don’t you look?” 

“I mustn’t,” said he. 

He spoke in a constrain way, and I saw that I had blunder on to some 
delic ground. I don’t know that I am more inquisit than my 
neighbours, but there certainli wa someth in the situat which 
appeal veri strongli to my curiosity. however, my last excus for 
remain in the hous wa gone now that my companion had recov hi 
senses. I rose to go. 

“are you in a hurry?” he asked. 

“no; I have noth to do.” 

“well, I should be veri glad if you would stay with me a little. the 
fact is that I live a veri retir and seclud life here. I don’t 
suppos there is a man in london who lead such a life as I do. It is 
quit unusu for me to have ani one to talk with.” 

I look round at the littl room, scantili furnished, with a sofa-b 
at one side. then I thought of the great, bare house, and the sinist 
door with the discolour red seal upon it. there wa someth queer 
and grotesqu in the situation, which made me long to know a littl 
more. perhap I should, if I waited. I told him that I should be veri 
happy. 

“you will find the spirit and a siphon upon the side table. you must 
forgiv me if I cannot act as host, but I can’t get across the room. 
those are cigar in the tray there. i’ll take one myself, I think. and 
so you are a solicitor, mr. alder?” 

“yes.” 

“and I am nothing. I am that most helpless of live creatures, the son 
of a millionaire. I wa brought up with the expect of great wealth; 
and here I am, a poor man, without ani profess at all. and then, on 
the top of it all, I am left with thi great mansion on my hands, which 
I cannot possibl keep up. isn’t it an absurd situation? for me to use 
thi as my dwell is like a coster draw hi barrow with a 
thoroughbred. A donkey would be more use to him, and a cottag to 
me.” 

“but whi not sell the house?” I asked. 

“I mustn’t.” 

“let it, then?” 

“no, I mustn’t do that either.” 

I look puzzled, and my companion smiled. 

“i’ll tell you how it is, if it won’t bore you,” said he. 

“on the contrary, I should be exceedingli interested.” 

“I think, after your kind attent to me, I cannot do less than reliev 
ani curios that you may feel. you must know that my father wa 
stanislau stanniford, the banker.” 

stanniford, the banker! I rememb the name at once. hi flight from 
the countri some seven year befor had been one of the scandal and 
sensat of the time. 

“I see that you remember,” said my companion. “mi poor father left the 
countri to avoid numer friends, whose save he had invest in an 
unsuccess speculation. He wa a nervous, sensit man, and the 
respons quit upset hi reason. He had commit no legal 
offence. It wa pure a matter of sentiment. He would not even face hi 
own family, and he die among stranger without ever let us know 
where he was.” 

“he died!” said I. 

“we could not prove hi death, but we know that it must be so, becaus 
the specul came right again, and so there wa no reason whi he 
should not look ani man in the face. He would have return if he were 
alive. but he must have die in the last two years.” 

“whi in the last two years?” 

“becaus we heard from him two year ago.” 

“did he not tell you then where he wa living?” 

“the letter came from paris, but no address wa given. It wa when my 
poor mother died. He wrote to me then, with some instruct and some 
advice, and I have never heard from him since.” 

“had you heard before?” 

“oh, yes, we had heard before, and that’ where our mysteri of the 
seal door, upon which you stumbl to-night, ha it origin. pass me 
that desk, if you please. here I have my father’ letters, and you are 
the first man except mr. percev who ha seen them.” 

“who is mr. perceval, may I ask?” 

“he wa my father’ confidenti clerk, and he ha continu to be the 
friend and advis of my mother and then of myself. I don’t know what we 
should have done without perceval. He saw the letters, but no one else. 
thi is the first one, which came on the veri day when my father fled, 
seven year ago. read it to yourself.” 

thi is the letter which I read:— 

“mi ever dearest wife,— 

“sinc sir william told me how weak your heart is, and how harm 
ani shock might be, I have never talk about my busi affair 
to you. the time ha come when at all risk I can no longer 
refrain from tell you that thing have been go badli with 
me. thi will caus me to leav you for a littl time, but it is 
with the absolut assur that we shall see each other veri 
soon. On thi you can thoroughli rely. our part is onli for a 
veri short time, my own darling, so don’t let it fret you, and 
abov all don’t let it impair your health, for that is what I want 
abov all thing to avoid. 

“now, I have a request to make, and I implor you by all that 
bind us togeth to fulfil it exactli as I tell you. there are 
some thing which I do not wish to be seen by ani one in my dark 
room—th room which I use for photograph purpos at the end of 
the garden passage. To prevent ani pain thoughts, I may assur 
you onc for all, dear, that it is noth of which I need be 
ashamed. but still I do not wish you or felix to enter that room. 
It is locked, and I implor you when you receiv thi to at onc 
place a seal over the lock, and leav it so. Do not sell or let 
the house, for in either case my secret will be discovered. As 
long as you or felix are in the house, I know that you will compli 
with my wishes. when felix is twenty-on he may enter the room—not 
before. 

“and now, good-bye, my own best of wives. dure our short 
separ you can consult mr. percev on ani matter which may 
arise. He ha my complet confidence. I hate to leav felix and 
you—even for a time—but there is realli no choice. 

“ever and alway your love husband, 

stanislau stanniford. 

“june 4th, 1887.” 

“these are veri privat famili matter for me to inflict upon you,” said 
my companion, apologetically. “you must look upon it as done in your 
profession capacity. I have want to speak about it for years.” 

“I am honour by your confidence,” I answered, “and exceedingli 
interest by the facts.” 

“mi father wa a man who wa note for hi almost morbid love of truth. 
He wa alway pedant accurate. when he said, therefore, that he 
hope to see my mother veri soon, and when he said that he had noth 
to be asham of in that dark room, you may reli upon it that he meant 
it.” 

“then what can it be?” I ejaculated. 

“neither my mother nor I could imagine. We carri out hi wish to the 
letter, and place the seal upon the door; there it ha been ever since. 
My mother live for five year after my father’ disappearance, although 
at the time all the doctor said that she could not surviv long. her 
heart wa terribl diseased. dure the first few month she had two 
letter from my father. both had the pari post-mark, but no address. 
they were short and to the same effect: that they would soon be 
reunited, and that she should not fret. then there wa a silence, which 
last until her death; and then came a letter to me of so privat a 
natur that I cannot show it to you, beg me never to think evil of 
him, give me much good advice, and say that the seal of the room 
wa of less import now than dure the lifetim of my mother, but 
that the open might still caus pain to others, and that, therefore, 
he thought it best that it should be postpon until my twenty-first 
year, for the laps of time would make thing easier. In the meantime, 
he commit the care of the room to me; so now you can understand how 
it is that, although I am a veri poor man, I can neither let nor sell 
thi great house.” 

“you could mortgag it.” 

“mi father had alreadi done so.” 

“it is a most singular state of affairs.” 

“mi mother and I were gradual compel to sell the furnitur and to 
dismiss the servants, until now, as you see, I am live unattend in a 
singl room. but I have onli two more months.” 

“what do you mean?” 

“why, that in two month I come of age. the first thing that I do will 
be to open that door; the second, to get rid of the house.” 

“whi should your father have continu to stay away when these 
invest had recov themselves?” 

“he must be dead.” 

“you say that he had not commit ani legal offenc when he fled the 
country?” 

“none.” 

“whi should he not take your mother with him?” 

“I do not know.” 

“whi should he conceal hi address?” 

“I do not know.” 

“whi should he allow your mother to die and be buri without come 
back?” 

“I do not know.” 

“mi dear sir,” said I, “if I may speak with the frank of a 
profession adviser, I should say that it is veri clear that your 
father had the strongest reason for keep out of the country, and 
that, if noth ha been prove against him, he at least thought that 
someth might be, and refus to put himself within the power of the 
law. sure that must be obvious, for in what other possibl way can the 
fact be explained?” 

My companion did not take my suggest in good part. 

“you had not the advantag of know my father, mr. alder,” he said, 
coldly. “I wa onli a boy when he left us, but I shall alway look upon 
him as my ideal man. hi onli fault wa that he wa too sensit and 
too unselfish. that ani one should lose money through him would cut him 
to the heart. hi sens of honour wa most acute, and ani theori of hi 
disappear which conflict with that is a mistaken one.” 

It pleas me to hear the lad speak out so roundly, and yet I knew that 
the fact were against him, and that he wa incap of take an 
unprejud view of the situation. 

“I onli speak as an outsider,” said I. “and now I must leav you, for I 
have a long walk befor me. your stori ha interest me so much that I 
should be glad if you could let me know the sequel.” 

“leav me your card,” said he; and so, have bade him “good-night,” I 
left him. 

I heard noth more of the matter for some time, and had almost fear 
that it would prove to be one of those fleet experi which drift 
away from our direct observ and end onli in a hope or a suspicion. 
one afternoon, however, a card bear the name of mr. J. H. percev 
wa brought up to my offic in abchurch lane, and it bearer, a small 
dry, bright-ey fellow of fifty, wa usher in by the clerk. 

“I believe, sir,” said he, “that my name ha been mention to you by my 
young friend, mr. felix stanniford?” 

“of course,” I answered, “I remember.” 

“he spoke to you, I understand, about the circumst in connect 
with the disappear of my former employer, mr. stanislau stanniford, 
and the exist of a seal room in hi former residence.” 

“he did.” 

“and you express an interest in the matter.” 

“it interest me extremely.” 

“you are awar that we hold mr. stanniford’ permiss to open the door 
on the twenty-first birthday of hi son?” 

“I remember.” 

“the twenty-first birthday is to-day.” 

“have you open it?” I asked, eagerly. 

“not yet, sir,” said he, gravely. “I have reason to believ that it 
would be well to have wit present when that door is opened. you 
are a lawyer, and you are acquaint with the facts. will you be present 
on the occasion?” 

“most certainly.” 

“you are employ dure the day, and so am I. shall we meet at nine 
o’clock at the house?” 

“I will come with pleasure.” 

“then you will find us wait for you. good-bye, for the present.” He 
bow solemnly, and took hi leave. 

I kept my appoint that evening, with a brain which wa weari with 
fruitless attempt to think out some plausibl explan of the 
mysteri which we were about to solve. mr. percev and my young 
acquaint were wait for me in the littl room. I wa not surpris 
to see the young man look pale and nervous, but I wa rather 
astonish to find the dri littl citi man in a state of intense, though 
partial suppressed, excitement. hi cheek were flushed, hi hand 
twitching, and he could not stand still for an instant. 

stanniford greet me warmly, and thank me mani time for have come. 
“and now, perceval,” said he to hi companion, “I suppos there is no 
obstacl to our put the thing through without delay? I shall be glad 
to get it over.” 

the banker’ clerk took up the lamp and led the way. but he paus in 
the passag outsid the door, and hi hand wa shaking, so that the 
light flicker up and down the high, bare walls. 

“mr. stanniford,” said he, in a crack voice, “I hope you will prepar 
yourself in case ani shock should be await you when that seal is 
remov and the door is opened.” 

“what could there be, perceval? you are tri to frighten me.” 

“no, mr. stanniford; but I should wish you to be readi ... to be brace 
up ... not to allow yourself....” He had to lick hi dri lip between 
everi jerki sentence, and I suddenli realized, as clearli as if he had 
told me, that he knew what wa behind that close door, and that it 
_was_ someth terrible. “here are the keys, mr. stanniford, but 
rememb my warning!” 

He had a bunch of assort key in hi hand, and the young man snatch 
them from him. then he thrust a knife under the discolour red seal and 
jerk it off. the lamp wa rattl and shake in perceval’ hands, so 
I took it from him and held it near the key hole, while stanniford tri 
key after key. At last one turn in the lock, the door flew open, he 
took one step into the room, and then, with a horribl cry, the young 
man fell senseless at our feet. 

If I had not given heed to the clerk’ warning, and brace myself for a 
shock, I should certainli have drop the lamp. the room, windowless 
and bare, wa fit up as a photograph laboratory, with a tap and 
sink at the side of it. A shelf of bottl and measur stood at one 
side, and a peculiar, heavi smell, partli chemical, partli animal, 
fill the air. A singl tabl and chair were in front of us, and at 
this, with hi back turn toward us, a man wa seat in the act of 
writing. hi outlin and attitud were as natur as life; but as the 
light fell upon him, it made my hair rise to see that the nape of hi 
neck wa black and wrinkled, and no thicker than my wrist. dust lay upon 
him—thick, yellow dust—upon hi hair, hi shoulders, hi shrivelled, 
lemon-colour hands. hi head had fallen forward upon hi breast. hi 
pen still rest upon a discolour sheet of paper. 

“mi poor master! My poor, poor master!” cri the clerk, and the tear 
were run down hi cheeks. 

“what!” I cried, “mr. stanislau stanniford!” 

“here he ha sat for seven years. oh, whi would he do it? I beg him, 
I implor him, I went on my knee to him, but he would have hi way. 
you see the key on the table. He had lock the door upon the inside. 
and he ha written something. We must take it.” 

“yes, yes, take it, and for god’ sake, let us get out of this,” I 
cried; “the air is poisonous. come, stanniford, come!” take an arm 
each, we half led and half carri the terrifi man back to hi own 
room. 

“it wa my father!” he cried, as he recov hi consciousness. “he is 
sit there dead in hi chair. you knew it, perceval! thi wa what 
you meant when you warn me.” 

“yes, I knew it, mr. stanniford. I have act for the best all along, 
but my posit ha been a terribl difficult one. for seven year I 
have known that your father wa dead in that room.” 

“you knew it, and never told us!” 

“don’t be harsh with me, mr. stanniford, sir! make allow for a man 
who ha had a hard part to play.” 

“mi head is swim round. I cannot grasp it!” He stagger up, and 
help himself from the brandi bottle. “these letter to my mother and 
to myself—wer they forgeries?” 

“no, sir; your father wrote them and address them, and left them in my 
keep to be posted. I have follow hi instruct to the veri 
letter in all things. He wa my master, and I have obey him.” 

the brandi had steadi the young man’ shaken nerves. “tell me about 
it. I can stand it now,” said he. 

“well, mr. stanniford, you know that at one time there came a period of 
great troubl upon your father, and he thought that mani poor peopl 
were about to lose their save through hi fault. He wa a man who wa 
so tender-heart that he could not bear the thought. It worri him and 
torment him, until he determin to end hi life. oh, mr. stanniford, 
if you knew how I have pray him and wrestl with him over it, you 
would never blame me! and he in turn pray me as no man ha ever pray 
me before. He had made up hi mind, and he would do it in ani case, he 
said; but it rest with me whether hi death should be happi and easi 
or whether it should be most miserable. I read in hi eye that he meant 
what he said. and at last I yield to hi prayers, and I consent to 
do hi will. 

“what wa troubl him wa this. He had been told by the first doctor 
in london that hi wife’ heart would fail at the slightest shock. He 
had a horror of acceler her end, and yet hi own exist had 
becom unendur to him. how could he end himself without injur 
her? 

“you know now the cours that he took. He wrote the letter which she 
received. there wa noth in it which wa not liter true. when he 
spoke of see her again so soon, he wa refer to her own 
approach death, which he had been assur could not be delay more 
than a veri few months. So convinc wa he of this, that he onli left 
two letter to be forward at interv after hi death. she live five 
years, and I had no letter to send. 

“he left anoth letter with me to be sent to you, sir, upon the 
occas of the death of your mother. I post all these in pari to 
sustain the idea of hi be abroad. It wa hi wish that I should say 
nothing, and I have said nothing. I have been a faith servant. seven 
year after hi death, he thought no doubt that the shock to the 
feel of hi surviv friend would be lessened. He wa alway 
consider for others.” 

there wa silenc for some time. It wa broken by young stanniford. 

“I cannot blame you, perceval. you have spare my mother a shock, which 
would certainli have broken her heart. what is that paper?” 

“it is what your father wa writing, sir. shall I read it to you?” 

“do so.” 

“‘i have taken the poison, and I feel it work in my veins. It is 
strange, but not painful. when these word are read I shall, if my 
wish have been faith carri out, have been dead mani years. 
sure no one who ha lost money through me will still bear me 
animosity. and you, felix, you will forgiv me thi famili scandal. may 
god find rest for a sore weari spirit!’” 

“amen!” we cried, all three. 




the brazilian cat 


It is hard luck on a young fellow to have expens tastes, great 
expectations, aristocrat connections, but no actual money in hi 
pocket, and no profess by which he may earn any. the fact wa that my 
father, a good, sanguine, easy-go man, had such confid in the 
wealth and benevol of hi bachelor elder brother, lord southerton, 
that he took it for grant that I, hi onli son, would never be call 
upon to earn a live for myself. He imagin that if there were not a 
vacanc for me on the great southerton estates, at least there would be 
found some post in that diplomat servic which still remain the 
special preserv of our privileg classes. He die too earli to realiz 
how fals hi calcul had been. neither my uncl nor the state took 
the slightest notic of me, or show ani interest in my career. An 
occasion brace of pheasants, or basket of hares, wa all that ever 
reach me to remind me that I wa heir to otwel hous and one of the 
richest estat in the country. In the meantime, I found myself a 
bachelor and man about town, live in a suit of apart in 
grosvenor mansions, with no occup save that of pigeon-shoot and 
polo-play at hurlingham. month by month I realiz that it wa more 
and more difficult to get the broker to renew my bills, or to cash ani 
further post-obit upon an unentail property. ruin lay right across my 
path, and everi day I saw it clearer, nearer, and more absolut 
unavoidable. 

what made me feel my own poverti the more wa that, apart from the great 
wealth of lord southerton, all my other relat were fairli 
well-to-do. the nearest of these wa everard king, my father’ nephew 
and my own first cousin, who had spent an adventur life in brazil, 
and had now return to thi countri to settl down on hi fortune. We 
never knew how he made hi money, but he appear to have plenti of it, 
for he bought the estat of greylands, near clipton-on-the-marsh, in 
suffolk. for the first year of hi resid in england he took no more 
notic of me than my miserli uncle; but at last one summer morning, to 
my veri great relief and joy, I receiv a letter ask me to come down 
that veri day and spend a short visit at greyland court. I wa 
expect a rather long visit to bankruptci court at the time, and thi 
interrupt seem almost providential. If I could onli get on term 
with thi unknown rel of mine, I might pull through yet. for the 
famili credit he could not let me go entir to the wall. I order my 
valet to pack my valise, and I set off the same even for 
clipton-on-the-marsh. 

after chang at ipswich, a littl local train deposit me at a small, 
desert station lie amidst a roll grassi country, with a sluggish 
and wind river curv in and out amidst the valleys, between high, 
silt banks, which show that we were within reach of the tide. No 
carriag wa await me (I found afterward that my telegram had been 
delayed), so I hire a dog-cart at the local inn. the driver, an 
excel fellow, wa full of my relative’ praises, and I learn from 
him that mr. everard king wa alreadi a name to conjur with in that 
part of the country. He had entertain the school-children, he had 
thrown hi ground open to visitors, he had subscrib to charities—in 
short, hi benevol had been so univers that my driver could onli 
account for it on the supposit that he had parliamentari ambitions. 

My attent wa drawn away from my driver’ panegyr by the appear 
of a veri beauti bird which settl on a telegraph-post besid the 
road. At first I thought that it wa a jay, but it wa larger, with a 
brighter plumage. the driver account for it presenc at onc by 
say that it belong to the veri man whom we were about to visit. It 
seem that the acclimat of foreign creatur wa one of hi 
hobbies, and that he had brought with him from brazil a number of bird 
and beast which he wa endeavour to rear in england. when onc we 
had pass the gate of greyland park we had ampl evid of thi 
tast of his. some small spot deer, a curiou wild pig known, I 
believe, as a peccary, a gorgeous feather oriole, some sort of 
armadillo, and a singular lumber into beast like a veri fat badger, 
were among the creatur which I observ as we drove along the wind 
avenue. 

mr. everard king, my unknown cousin, wa stand in person upon the 
step of hi house, for he had seen us in the distance, and guess that 
it wa I. hi appear wa veri home and benevolent, short and 
stout, forty-f year old perhaps, with a round, good-humour face, 
burn brown with the tropic sun, and shot with a thousand wrinkles. 
He wore white linen clothes, in true planter style, with a cigar between 
hi lips, and a larg panama hat upon the back of hi head. It wa such 
a figur as one associ with a verandah bungalow, and it look 
curious out of place in front of thi broad, stone english mansion, 
with it solid wing and it palladio pillar befor the doorway. 

“mi dear!” he cried, glanc over hi shoulder; “mi dear, here is our 
guest! welcome, welcom to greylands! I am delight to make your 
acquaintance, cousin marshall, and I take it as a great compliment that 
you should honour thi sleepi littl countri place with your presence.” 

noth could be more hearti than hi manner, and he set me at my eas 
in an instant. but it need all hi cordial to aton for the 
frigid and even rude of hi wife, a tall, haggard woman, who came 
forward at hi summons. she was, I believe, of brazilian extraction, 
though she spoke excel english, and I excus her manner on the 
score of her ignor of our customs. she did not attempt to conceal, 
however, either then or afterwards, that I wa no veri welcom visitor 
at greyland court. her actual word were, as a rule, courteous, but she 
wa the possessor of a pair of particularli express dark eyes, and I 
read in them veri clearli from the first that she heartili wish me 
back in london onc more. 

however, my debt were too press and my design upon my wealthi 
rel were too vital for me to allow them to be upset by the 
ill-temp of hi wife, so I disregard her cold and reciproc 
the extrem cordial of hi welcome. No pain had been spare by him 
to make me comfortable. My room wa a charm one. He implor me to 
tell him anyth which could add to my happiness. It wa on the tip of 
my tongu to inform him that a blank chequ would materi help 
toward that end, but I felt that it might be prematur in the present 
state of our acquaintance. the dinner wa excellent, and as we sat 
togeth afterward over hi havana and coffee, which latter he told me 
wa special prepar upon hi own plantation, it seem to me that all 
my driver’ eulog were justified, and that I had never met a more 
large-heart and hospit man. 

but, in spite of hi cheeri good nature, he wa a man with a strong will 
and a fieri temper of hi own. Of thi I had an exampl upon the 
follow morning. the curiou avers which mrs. everard king had 
conceiv toward me wa so strong, that her manner at breakfast wa 
almost offensive. but her mean becam unmistak when her husband 
had quit the room. 

“the best train in the day is at twelv fifteen,” said she. 

“but I wa not think of go to-day,” I answered, frankly—perhap 
even defiantly, for I wa determin not to be driven out by thi woman. 

“oh, if it rest with you——” said she, and stopped, with a most insol 
express in her eyes. 

“I am sure,” I answer “that mr. everard king would tell me if I were 
outstay my welcome.” 

“what’ this? what’ this?” said a voice, and there he wa in the room. 
He had overheard my last words, and a glanc at our face had told him 
the rest. In an instant hi chubby, cheeri face set into an express 
of absolut ferocity. 

“might I troubl you to walk outside, marshall,” said he. (I may mention 
that my own name is marshal king.) 

He close the door behind me, and then, for an instant, I heard him 
talk in a low voic of concentr passion to hi wife. thi gross 
breach of hospit had evid hit upon hi tenderest point. I am 
no eavesdropper, so I walk out on to the lawn. present I heard a 
hurri step behind me, and there wa the lady, her face pale with 
excitement, and her eye red with tears. 

“mi husband ha ask me to apolog to you, mr. marshal king,” said 
she, stand with downcast eye befor me. 

“pleas do not say anoth word, mrs. king.” 

her dark eye suddenli blaze out at me. 

“you fool!” she hissed, with frantic vehemence, and turn on her heel 
swept back to the house. 

the insult wa so outrageous, so insufferable, that I could onli stand 
stare after her in bewilderment. I wa still there when my host join 
me. He wa hi cheery, chubbi self onc more. 

“I hope that my wife ha apolog for her foolish remarks,” said he. 

“oh, yes—yes, certainly!” 

He put hi hand through my arm and walk with me up and down the lawn. 

“you must not take it seriously,” said he. “it would griev me 
inexpress if you curtail your visit by one hour. the fact is—ther 
is no reason whi there should be ani conceal between relatives—that 
my poor dear wife is incred jealous. she hate that ani one—mal or 
female—should for an instant come between us. her ideal is a desert 
island and an etern _tête-à-tête_. that give you the clue to her 
actions, which are, I confess, upon thi particular point, not veri far 
remov from mania. tell me that you will think no more of it.” 

“no, no; certainli not.” 

“then light thi cigar and come round with me and see my littl 
menagerie.” 

the whole afternoon wa occupi by thi inspection, which includ all 
the birds, beasts, and even reptil which he had imported. some were 
free, some in cages, a few actual in the house. He spoke with 
enthusiasm of hi success and hi failures, hi birth and hi deaths, 
and he would cri out in hi delight, like a schoolboy, when, as we 
walked, some gaudi bird would flutter up from the grass, or some curiou 
beast slink into the cover. final he led me down a corridor which 
extend from one wing of the house. At the end of thi there wa a 
heavi door with a slide shutter in it, and besid it there project 
from the wall an iron handl attach to a wheel and a drum. A line of 
stout bar extend across the passage. 

“I am about to show you the jewel of my collection,” said he. “there is 
onli one other specimen in europe, now that the rotterdam cub is dead. 
It is a brazilian cat.” 

“but how doe that differ from ani other cat?” 

“you will soon see that,” said he, laughing. “will you kindli draw that 
shutter and look through?” 

I did so, and found that I wa gaze into a large, empti room, with 
stone flags, and small, bar window upon the farther wall. 

In the centr of thi room, lie in the middl of a golden patch of 
sunlight, there wa stretch a huge creature, as larg as a tiger, but 
as black and sleek as ebony. It wa simpli a veri enorm and veri 
well-kept black cat, and it cuddl up and bask in that yellow pool of 
light exactli as a cat would do. It wa so graceful, so sinewy, and so 
gentli and smoothli diabolical, that I could not take my eye from the 
opening. 

“isn’t he splendid?” said my host, enthusiastically. 

“glorious! I never saw such a nobl creature.” 

“some peopl call it a black puma, but realli it is not a puma at all. 
that fellow is nearli eleven feet from tail to tip. four year ago he 
wa a littl ball of black fluff, with two yellow eye stare out of 
it. He wa sold me as a new-born cub up in the wild countri at the 
head-wat of the rio negro. they spear hi mother to death after she 
had kill a dozen of them.” 

“they are ferocious, then?” 

“the most absolut treacher and blood-thirsti creatur upon earth. 
you talk about a brazilian cat to an up-countri indian, and see him get 
the jumps. they prefer human to game. thi fellow ha never tast 
live blood yet, but when he doe he will be a terror. At present he 
won’t stand ani one but me in hi den. even baldwin, the groom, dare not 
go near him. As to me, I am hi mother and father in one.” 

As he spoke he suddenly, to my astonishment, open the door and slip 
in, close it instantli behind him. At the sound of hi voic the huge, 
lith creatur rose, yawned, and rub it round, black head 
affection against hi side, while he pat and fondl it. 

“now, tommy, into your cage!” said he. 

the monstrou cat walk over to one side of the room and coil itself 
up under a grating. everard king came out, and take the iron handl 
which I have mentioned, he began to turn it. As he did so the line of 
bar in the corridor began to pass through a slot in the wall and close 
up the front of thi grating, so as to make an effect cage. when it 
wa in posit he open the door onc more and invit me into the 
room, which wa heavi with the pungent, musti smell peculiar to the 
great carnivora. 

“that’ how we work it,” said he. “we give him the run of the room for 
exercise, and then at night we put him in hi cage. you can let him out 
by turn the handl from the passage, or you can, as you have seen, 
coop him up in the same way. no, no, you should not do that!” 

I had put my hand between the bar to pat the glossy, heav flank. He 
pull it back, with a seriou face. 

“I assur you that he is not safe. don’t imagin that becaus I can take 
liberti with him ani one els can. He is veri exclus in hi 
friends—aren’t you, tommy? ah, he hear hi lunch come to him! don’t 
you, boy?” 

A step sound in the stone-flag passage, and the creatur had sprung 
to hi feet, and wa pace up and down the narrow cage, hi yellow eye 
gleaming, and hi scarlet tongu rippl and quiver over the white 
line of hi jag teeth. A groom enter with a coars joint upon a 
tray, and thrust it through the bar to him. He pounc lightli upon it, 
carri it off to the corner, and there, hold it between hi paws, 
tore and wrench at it, rais hi bloodi muzzl everi now and then to 
look at us. It wa a malign and yet fascin sight. 

“you can’t wonder that I am fond of him, can you?” said my host, as we 
left the room, “especi when you consid that I have had the rear 
of him. It wa no joke bring him over from the centr of south 
america; but here he is safe and sound—and, as I have said, far the most 
perfect specimen in europe. the peopl at the zoo are die to have him, 
but I realli can’t part with him. how, I think that I have inflict my 
hobbi upon you long enough, so we cannot do better than follow tommy’ 
example, and go to our lunch.” 

My south american rel wa so engross by hi ground and their 
curiou occupants, that I hardli gave him credit at first for have ani 
interest outsid them. that he had some, and press ones, wa soon 
born in upon me by the number of telegram which he received. they 
arriv at all hours, and were alway open by him with the utmost 
eager and anxieti upon hi face. sometim I imagin that it must 
be the turf, and sometim the stock exchange, but certainli he had some 
veri urgent busi go forward which wa not transact upon the 
down of suffolk. dure the six day of my visit he had never fewer 
than three or four telegram a day, and sometim as mani as seven or 
eight. 

I had occupi these six day so well, that by the end of them I had 
succeed in get upon the most cordial term with my cousin. everi 
night we had sat up late in the billiard-room, he tell me the most 
extraordinari stori of hi adventur in america—stori so desper 
and reckless, that I could hardli associ them with the brown little, 
chubbi man befor me. In return, I ventur upon some of my own 
reminisc of london life, which interest him so much, that he 
vow he would come up to grosvenor mansion and stay with me. He wa 
anxiou to see the faster side of citi life, and certainly, though I say 
it, he could not have chosen a more compet guide. It wa not until 
the last day of my visit that I ventur to approach that which wa on 
my mind. I told him frankli about my pecuniari difficulti and my 
impend ruin, and I ask hi advice—though I hope for someth more 
solid. He listen attentively, puf hard at hi cigar. 

“but surely,” said he, “you are the heir of our relative, lord 
southerton?” 

“I have everi reason to believ so, but he would never make me ani 
allowance.” 

“no, no, I have heard of hi miserli ways. My poor marshall, your 
posit ha been a veri hard one. By the way, have you heard ani news 
of lord southerton’ health lately?” 

“he ha alway been in a critic condit ever sinc my childhood.” 

“exactly—a creak hinge, if ever there wa one. your inherit may 
be a long way off. dear me, how awkwardli situat you are!” 

“I had some hopes, sir, that you, know all the facts, might be 
inclin to advance——” 

“don’t say anoth word, my dear boy,” he cried, with the utmost 
cordiality; “we shall talk it over to-night, and I give you my word that 
whatev is in my power shall be done.” 

I wa not sorri that my visit wa draw to a close, for it is 
unpleas to feel that there is one person in the hous who eagerli 
desir your departure. mrs. king’ sallow face and forbid eye had 
becom more and more hate to me. she wa no longer activ rude—h 
fear of her husband prevent her—but she push her insan jealousi to 
the extent of ignor me, never address me, and in everi way make 
my stay at greyland as uncomfort as she could. So offens wa her 
manner dure that last day, that I should certainli have left had it 
not been for that interview with my host in the even which would, I 
hoped, retriev my broken fortunes. 

It wa veri late when it occurred, for my relative, who had been 
receiv even more telegram than usual dure the day, went off to hi 
studi after dinner, and onli emerg when the household had retir to 
bed. I heard him go round lock the doors, as hi custom wa of a 
night, and final he join me in the billiard-room. hi stout figur 
wa wrap in a dressing-gown, and he wore a pair of red turkish 
slipper without ani heels. settl down into an arm-chair, he brew 
himself a glass of grog, in which I could not help notic that the 
whiski consider predomin over the water. 

“mi word!” said he, “what a night!” 

It was, indeed. the wind wa howl and scream round the house, and 
the lattic window rattl and shook as if they were come in. the 
glow of the yellow lamp and the flavour of our cigar seem the 
brighter and more fragrant for the contrast. 

“now, my boy,” said my host, “we have the hous and the night to 
ourselves. let me have an idea of how your affair stand, and I will see 
what can be done to set them in order. I wish to hear everi detail.” 

thu encouraged, I enter into a long exposition, in which all my 
tradesmen and creditors, from my landlord to my valet, figur in turn. 
I had note in my pocket-book, and I marshal my facts, and gave, I 
flatter myself, a veri business-lik statement of my own 
un-business-lik way and lament position. I wa depressed, however, 
to notic that my companion’ eye were vacant and hi attent 
elsewhere. when he did occasion throw out a remark, it wa so 
entir perfunctori and pointless, that I wa sure he had not in the 
least follow my remarks. everi now and then he rous himself and put 
on some show of interest, ask me to repeat or to explain more fully, 
but it wa alway to sink onc more into the same brown study. At last 
he rose and threw the end of hi cigar into the grate. 

“i’ll tell you what, my boy,” said he. “I never had a head for figures, 
so you will excus me. you must jot it all down upon paper, and let me 
have a note of the amount. i’ll understand it when I see it in black and 
white.” 

the propos wa encouraging. I promis to do so. 

“and now it’ time we were in bed. By jove, there’ one o’clock strike 
in the hall.” 

the ting of the chime clock broke through the deep roar of the 
gale. the wind wa sweep past with the rush of a great river. 

“I must see my cat befor I go to bed,” said my host. “A high wind 
excit him. will you come?” 

“certainly,” said I. 

“then tread softli and don’t speak, for everi one is asleep.” 

We pass quietli down the lamp-lit persian-rug hall, and through the 
door at the farther end. all wa dark in the stone corridor, but a 
stabl lantern hung on a hook, and my host took it down and lit it. 
there wa no grate visibl in the passage, so I knew that the beast 
wa in it cage. 

“come in!” said my relative, and open the door. 

A deep growl as we enter show that the storm had realli excit 
the creature. In the flicker light of the lantern, we saw it, a huge 
black mass, coil in the corner of it den and throw a squat, 
uncouth shadow upon the whitewash wall. it tail switch angrili 
among the straw. 

“poor tommi is not in the best of tempers,” said everard king, hold 
up the lantern and look in at him. “what a black devil he looks, 
doesn’t he? I must give him a littl supper to put him in a better 
humour. would you mind hold the lantern for a moment?” 

I took it from hi hand and he step to the door. 

“hi larder is just outsid here,” said he. “you will excus me for an 
instant, won’t you?” He pass out, and the door shut with a sharp 
metal click behind him. 

that hard crisp sound made my heart stand still. A sudden wave of terror 
pass over me. A vagu percept of some monstrou treacheri turn me 
cold. I sprang to the door, but there wa no handl upon the inner side. 

“here!” I cried. “let me out!” 

“all right! don’t make a row!” said my host from the passage. “you’v 
got the light all right.” 

“yes, but I don’t care about be lock in alon like this.” 

“don’t you?” I heard hi hearty, chuckl laugh. “you won’t be alon 
long.” 

“let me out, sir!” I repeat angrily. “I tell you I don’t allow 
practic joke of thi sort.” 

“practic is the word,” said he, with anoth hate chuckle. and then 
suddenli I heard, amidst the roar of the storm, the creak and whine of 
the winch-handl turning, and the rattl of the grate as it pass 
through the slot. great god, he wa let loos the brazilian cat! 

In the light of the lantern I saw the bar slide slowli befor me. 
alreadi there wa an open a foot wide at the farther end. with a 
scream I seiz the last bar with my hand and pull with the strength 
of a madman. I _was_ a madman with rage and horror. for a minut or more 
I held the thing motionless. I knew that he wa strain with all hi 
forc upon the handle, and that the leverag wa sure to overcom me. I 
gave inch by inch, my feet slide along the stones, and all the time I 
beg and pray thi inhuman monster to save me from thi horribl 
death. I conjur him by hi kinship. I remind him that I wa hi 
guest; I beg to know what harm I had ever done him. hi onli answer 
were the tug and jerk upon the handle, each of which, in spite of all 
my struggles, pull anoth bar through the opening. cling and 
clutching, I wa drag across the whole front of the cage, until at 
last, with ach wrist and lacer fingers, I gave up the hopeless 
struggle. the grate clang back as I releas it, and an instant 
later I heard the shuffl of the turkish slipper in the passage, and 
the slam of the distant door. then everyth wa silent. 

the creatur had never move dure thi time. He lay still in the 
corner, and hi tail had ceas switching. thi apparit of a man 
adher to hi bar and drag scream across him had appar 
fill him with amazement. I saw hi great eye stare steadili at me. 
I had drop the lantern when I seiz the bars, but it still burn 
upon the floor, and I made a movement to grasp it, with some idea that 
it light might protect me. but the instant I moved, the beast gave a 
deep and menac growl. I stop and stood still, quiver with fear 
in everi limb. the cat (if one may call so fear a creatur by so 
home a name) wa not more than ten feet from me. the eye glimmer 
like two disc of phosphoru in the darkness. they appal and yet 
fascin me. I could not take my own eye from them. natur play 
strang trick with us at such moment of intensity, and those 
glimmer light wax and wane with a steadi rise and fall. sometim 
they seem to be tini point of extrem brilliancy—littl electr 
spark in the black obscurity—then they would widen and widen until all 
that corner of the room wa fill with their shift and sinist 
light. and then suddenli they went out altogether. 

the beast had close it eyes. I do not know whether there may be ani 
truth in the old idea of the domin of the human gaze, or whether the 
huge cat wa simpli drowsy, but the fact remain that, far from show 
ani symptom of attack me, it simpli rest it sleek, black head upon 
it huge forepaw and seem to sleep. I stood, fear to move lest I 
should rous it into malign life onc more. but at least I wa abl 
to think clearli now that the bale eye were off me. here I wa shut 
up for the night with the feroci beast. My own instincts, to say 
noth of the word of the plausibl villain who laid thi trap for me, 
warn me that the anim wa as savag as it master. how could I stave 
it off until morning? the door wa hopeless, and so were the narrow, 
bar windows. there wa no shelter anywher in the bare, stone-flag 
room. To cri for assist wa absurd. I knew that thi den wa an 
outhouse, and that the corridor which connect it with the hous wa at 
least a hundr feet long. besides, with that gale thunder outside, 
my cri were not like to be heard. I had onli my own courag and my 
own wit to trust to. 

and then, with a fresh wave of horror, my eye fell upon the lantern. 
the candl had burn low, and wa alreadi begin to gutter. In ten 
minut it would be out. I had onli ten minut then in which to do 
something, for I felt that if I were onc left in the dark with that 
fear beast I should be incap of action. the veri thought of it 
paralyz me. I cast my despair eye round thi chamber of death, and 
they rest upon one spot which seem to promis I will not say safety, 
but less immedi and immin danger than the open floor. 

I have said that the cage had a top as well as a front, and thi top wa 
left stand when the front wa wound through the slot in the wall. It 
consist of bar at a few inches’ interval, with stout wire net 
between, and it rest upon a strong stanchion at each end. It stood now 
as a great bar canopi over the crouch figur in the corner. the 
space between thi iron shelf and the roof may have been from two to 
three feet. If I could onli get up there, squeez in between bar and 
ceiling, I should have onli one vulner side. I should be safe from 
below, from behind, and from each side. onli on the open face of it 
could I be attacked. there, it is true, I had no protect whatever; 
but, at least, I should be out of the brute’ path when he began to pace 
about hi den. He would have to come out of hi way to reach me. It wa 
now or never, for if onc the light were out it would be impossible. 
with a gulp in my throat I sprang up, seiz the iron edg of the top, 
and swung myself pant on to it. I writh in face downwards, and 
found myself look straight into the terribl eye and yawn jaw of 
the cat. it fetid breath came up into my face like the steam from some 
foul pot. 

It appeared, however, to be rather curiou than angry. with a sleek 
rippl of it long, black back it rose, stretch itself, and then 
rear itself on it hind legs, with one fore paw against the wall, it 
rais the other, and drew it claw across the wire mesh beneath me. 
one sharp, white hook tore through my trousers—for I may mention that I 
wa still in even dress—and dug a furrow in my knee. It wa not meant 
as an attack, but rather as an experiment, for upon my give a sharp 
cri of pain he drop down again, and spring lightli into the room, 
he began walk swiftli round it, look up everi now and again in my 
direction. for my part I shuffl backward until I lay with my back 
against the wall, screw myself into the smallest space possible. the 
farther I got the more difficult it wa for him to attack me. 

He seem more excit now that he had begun to move about, and he ran 
swiftli and noiselessli round and round the den, pass continu 
underneath the iron couch upon which I lay. It wa wonder to see so 
great a bulk pass like a shadow, with hardli the softest thud of 
velveti pads. the candl wa burn low—so low that I could hardli see 
the creature. and then, with a last flare and splutter it went out 
altogether. I wa alon with the cat in the dark! 

It help one to face a danger when one know that one ha done all that 
possibl can be done. there is noth for it then but to quietli await 
the result. In thi case, there wa no chanc of safeti anywher except 
the precis spot where I was. I stretch myself out, therefore, and lay 
silently, almost breathlessly, hope that the beast might forget my 
presenc if I did noth to remind him. I reckon that it must alreadi 
be two o’clock. At four it would be full dawn. I had not more than two 
hour to wait for daylight. 

outside, the storm wa still raging, and the rain lash continu 
against the littl windows. inside, the poison and fetid air wa 
overpowering. I could neither hear nor see the cat. I tri to think 
about other things—but onli one had power enough to draw my mind from my 
terribl position. that wa the contempl of my cousin’ villainy, 
hi unparallel hypocrisy, hi malign hatr of me. beneath that 
cheer face there lurk the spirit of a mediæv assassin. and as I 
thought of it I saw more clearli how cunningli the thing had been 
arranged. He had appar gone to bed with the others. No doubt he had 
hi wit to prove it. then, unknown to them, he had slip down, 
had lure me into thi den and abandon me. hi stori would be so 
simple. He had left me to finish my cigar in the billiard-room. I had 
gone down on my own account to have a last look at the cat. I had 
enter the room without observ that the cage wa opened, and I had 
been caught. how could such a crime be brought home to him? suspicion, 
perhaps—but proof, never! 

how slowli those dread two hour went by! onc I heard a low, rasp 
sound, which I took to be the creatur lick it own fur. sever 
time those greenish eye gleam at me through the darkness, but never 
in a fix stare, and my hope grew stronger that my presenc had been 
forgotten or ignored. At last the least faint glimmer of light came 
through the windows—i first dimli saw them as two grey squar upon the 
black wall, then grey turn to white, and I could see my terribl 
companion onc more. and he, alas, could see me! 

It wa evid to me at onc that he wa in a much more danger and 
aggress mood than when I had seen him last. the cold of the morn 
had irrit him, and he wa hungri as well. with a continu growl he 
pace swiftli up and down the side of the room which wa farthest from 
my refuge, hi whisker bristl angrily, and hi tail switch and 
lashing. As he turn at the corner hi savag eye alway look 
upward at me with a dread menace. I knew then that he meant to kill 
me. yet I found myself even at that moment admir the sinuou grace of 
the devilish thing, it long, undulating, rippl movements, the gloss 
of it beauti flanks, the vivid, palpit scarlet of the 
glisten tongu which hung from the jet-black muzzle. and all the time 
that deep, threaten growl wa rise and rise in an unbroken 
crescendo. I knew that the crisi wa at hand. 

It wa a miser hour to meet such a death—so cold, so comfortless, 
shiver in my light dress cloth upon thi gridiron of torment upon 
which I wa stretched. I tri to brace myself to it, to rais my soul 
abov it, and at the same time, with the lucid which come to a 
perfectli desper man, I cast round for some possibl mean of escape. 
one thing wa clear to me. If that front of the cage wa onli back in 
it posit onc more, I could find a sure refug behind it. could I 
possibl pull it back? I hardli dare to move for fear of bring the 
creatur upon me. slowly, veri slowly, I put my hand forward until it 
grasp the edg of the front, the final bar which protrud through the 
wall. To my surpris it came quit easili to my jerk. Of cours the 
difficulti of draw it out aros from the fact that I wa cling to 
it. I pull again, and three inch of it came through. It ran 
appar on wheels. I pull again ... and then the cat sprang! 

It wa so quick, so sudden, that I never saw it happen. I simpli heard 
the savag snarl, and in an instant afterward the blaze yellow eyes, 
the flatten black head with it red tongu and flash teeth, were 
within reach of me. the impact of the creatur shook the bar upon which 
I lay, until I thought (a far as I could think of anyth at such a 
moment) that they were come down. the cat sway there for an instant, 
the head and front paw quit close to me, the hind paw claw to find 
a grip upon the edg of the grating. I heard the claw rasp as they 
clung to the wire netting, and the breath of the beast made me sick. but 
it bound had been miscalculated. It could not retain it position. 
slowly, grin with rage and scratch madli at the bars, it swung 
backward and drop heavili upon the floor. with a growl it instantli 
face round to me and crouch for anoth spring. 

I knew that the next few moment would decid my fate. the creatur had 
learn by experience. It would not miscalcul again. I must act 
promptly, fearlessly, if I were to have a chanc for life. In an instant 
I had form my plan. pull off my dress-coat, I threw it down over 
the head of the beast. At the same moment I drop over the edge, 
seiz the end of the front grating, and pull it frantic out of 
the wall. 

It came more easili than I could have expected. I rush across the 
room, bear it with me; but, as I rushed, the accid of my posit 
put me upon the outer side. had it been the other way, I might have come 
off scathless. As it was, there wa a moment’ paus as I stop it and 
tri to pass in through the open which I had left. that moment wa 
enough to give time to the creatur to toss off the coat with which I 
had blind him and to spring upon me. I hurl myself through the gap 
and pull the rail to behind me, but he seiz my leg befor I could 
entir withdraw it. one stroke of that huge paw tore off my calf as a 
shave of wood curl off befor a plane. the next moment, bleed and 
fainting, I wa lie among the foul straw with a line of friendli bar 
between me and the creatur which ramp so frantic against them. 

too wound to move, and too faint to be consciou of fear, I could onli 
lie, more dead than alive, and watch it. It press it broad, black 
chest against the bar and angl for me with it crook paw as I have 
seen a kitten do befor a mouse-trap. It rip my clothes, but, stretch 
as it would, it could not quit reach me. I have heard of the curiou 
numb effect produc by wound from the great carnivora, and now I 
wa destin to experi it, for I had lost all sens of personality, 
and wa as interest in the cat’ failur or success as if it were some 
game which I wa watching. and then gradual my mind drift away into 
strange, vagu dreams, alway with that black face and red tongu come 
back into them, and so I lost myself in the nirvana of delirium, the 
bless relief of those who are too sore tried. 

trace the cours of event afterwards, I conclud that I must have 
been insens for about two hours. what rous me to conscious 
onc more wa that sharp metal click which had been the precursor of 
my terribl experience. It wa the shoot back of the spring lock. 
then, befor my sens were clear enough to entir apprehend what they 
saw, I wa awar of the round, benevol face of my cousin peer in 
through the open door. what he saw evid amaz him. there wa the 
cat crouch on the floor. I wa stretch upon my back in my 
shirtsleev within the cage, my trouser torn to ribbon and a great 
pool of blood all round me. I can see hi amaz face now, with the 
morn sunlight upon it. He peer at me, and peer again. then he 
close the door behind him, and advanc to the cage to see if I were 
realli dead. 

I cannot undertak to say what happened. I wa not in a fit state to 
wit or to chronicl such events. I can onli say that I wa suddenli 
consciou that hi face wa away from me—that he wa look toward the 
animal. 

“good old tommy!” he cried. “good old tommy!” 

then he came near the bars, with hi back still toward me. 

“down, you stupid beast!” he roared. “down, sir! don’t you know your 
master?” 

suddenli even in my bemuddl brain a remembr came of those word of 
hi when he had said that the tast of blood would turn the cat into a 
fiend. My blood had done it, but he wa to pay the price. 

“get away!” he screamed. “get away, you devil! baldwin! baldwin! oh, my 
god!” 

and then I heard him fall, and rise, and fall again, with a sound like 
the rip of sacking. hi scream grew fainter until they were lost in 
the worri snarl. and then, after I thought that he wa dead, I saw, 
as in a nightmare, a blinded, tattered, blood-soak figur run 
wildli round the room—and that wa the last glimps which I had of him 
befor I faint onc again. 

* * * * * 

I wa mani month in my recovery—in fact, I cannot say that I have ever 
recovered, for to the end of my day I shall carri a stick as a sign of 
my night with the brazilian cat. baldwin, the groom, and the other 
servant could not tell what had occur when, drawn by the death cri 
of their master, they found me behind the bars, and hi remains—or what 
they afterward discov to be hi remains—in the clutch of the 
creatur which he had reared. they stall him off with hot irons, and 
afterward shot him through the loophol of the door befor they could 
final extric me. I wa carri to my bedroom, and there, under the 
roof of my would-b murderer, I remain between life and death for 
sever weeks. they had sent for a surgeon from clipton and a nurs from 
london, and in a month I wa abl to be carri to the station, and so 
convey back onc more to grosvenor mansions. 

I have one remembr of that illness, which might have been part of 
the ever-chang panorama conjur up by a deliri brain were it not 
so definit fix in my memory. one night, when the nurs wa absent, 
the door of my chamber opened, and a tall woman in blackest mourn 
slip into the room. she came across to me, and as she bent her sallow 
face I saw by the faint gleam of the night-light that it wa the 
brazilian woman whom my cousin had married. she stare intent into my 
face, and her express wa more kindli than I had ever seen it. 

“are you conscious?” she asked. 

I feebli nodded—for I wa still veri weak. 

“well, then, I onli wish to say to you that you have yourself to 
blame. did I not do all I could for you? from the begin I tri to 
drive you from the house. By everi means, short of betray my husband, 
I tri to save you from him. I knew that he had a reason for bring 
you here. I knew that he would never let you get away again. No one knew 
him as I knew him, who had suffer from him so often. I did not dare to 
tell you all this. He would have kill me. but I did my best for you. 
As thing have turn out, you have been the best friend that I have 
ever had. you have set me free, and I fanci that noth but death 
would do that. I am sorri if you are hurt, but I cannot reproach myself. 
I told you that you were a fool—and a fool you have been.” she crept out 
of the room, the bitter, singular woman, and I wa never destin to see 
her again. with what remain from her husband’ properti she went back 
to her nativ land, and I have heard that she afterward took the veil 
at pernambuco. 

It wa not until I had been back in london for some time that the 
doctor pronounc me to be well enough to do business. It wa not a 
veri welcom permiss to me, for I fear that it would be the signal 
for an inrush of creditors; but it wa summers, my lawyer, who first 
took advantag of it. 

“I am veri glad to see that your lordship is so much better,” said he. 
“I have been wait a long time to offer my congratulations.” 

“what do you mean, summers? thi is no time for joking.” 

“I mean what I say,” he answered. “you have been lord southerton for the 
last six weeks, but we fear that it would retard your recoveri if you 
were to learn it.” 

lord southerton! one of the richest peer in england! I could not 
believ my ears. and then suddenli I thought of the time which had 
elapsed, and how it coincid with my injuries. 

“then lord southerton must have die about the same time that I wa 
hurt?” 

“hi death occur upon that veri day.” summer look hard at me as I 
spoke, and I am convinced—for he wa a veri shrewd fellow—that he had 
guess the true state of the case. He paus for a moment as if 
await a confid from me, but I could not see what wa to be gain 
by expos such a famili scandal. 

“yes, a veri curiou coincidence,” he continued, with the same know 
look. “of course, you are awar that your cousin everard king wa the 
next heir to the estates. now, if it had been you instead of him who had 
been torn to piec by thi tiger, or whatev it was, then of cours he 
would have been lord southerton at the present moment.” 

“no doubt,” said I. 

“and he took such an interest in it,” said summers. “I happen to know 
that the late lord southerton’ valet wa in hi pay, and that he use 
to have telegram from him everi few hour to tell him how he wa 
get on. that would be about the time when you were down there. wa 
it not strang that he should wish to be so well informed, sinc he knew 
that he wa not the direct heir?” 

“veri strange,” said I. “and now, summers, if you will bring me my bill 
and a new cheque-book, we will begin to get thing into order.” 




the usher OF lea hous school 


mr. lumsden, the senior partner of lumsden and westmacott, the 
well-known scholast and cleric agents, wa a small, dapper man, with 
a sharp, abrupt manner, a critic eye, and an incis way of speaking. 

“your name, sir?” said he, sit pen in hand with hi long, red-lin 
folio in front of him. 

“harold weld.” 

“oxford or cambridge?” 

“cambridge.” 

“honours?” 

“no, sir.” 

“athlete?” 

“noth remarkable, I am afraid.” 

“not a blue?” 

“oh, no.” 

mr. lumsden shook hi head despond and shrug hi shoulder in a 
way which sent my hope down to zero. “there is a veri keen competit 
for masterships, mr. weld,” said he. “the vacanc are few and the 
applic innumerable. A first-class athlete, oar, or cricketer, or a 
man who ha pass veri high in hi examinations, can usual find a 
vacancy—i might say alway in the case of the cricketer. but the averag 
man—if you will excus the description, mr. weld—ha a veri great 
difficulty, almost an insurmount difficulty. We have alreadi more 
than a hundr such name upon our lists, and if you think it worth 
while our ad yours, I daresay that in the cours of some year we 
may possibl be abl to find you some open which——” 

He paus on account of a knock at the door. It wa a clerk with a note. 
mr. lumsden broke the seal and read it. 

“why, mr. weld,” said he, “thi is realli rather an interest 
coincidence. I understand you to say that latin and english are your 
subjects, and that you would prefer for a time to accept a place in an 
elementari establishment, where you would have time for privat study?” 

“quit so.” 

“thi note contain a request from an old client of ours, dr. phelp 
mccarthy, of willow lea hous academy, west hampstead, that I should at 
onc send him a young man who should be qualifi to teach latin and 
english to a small class of boy under fourteen year of age. hi 
vacanc appear to be the veri one which you are look for. the term 
are not munificent—sixti pounds, board, lodging, and washing—but the 
work is not onerous, and you would have the even to yourself.” 

“that would do,” I cried, with all the eager of the man who see 
work at last after weari month of seeking. 

“I don’t know that it is quit fair to these gentlemen whose name have 
been so long upon our list,” said mr. lumsden, glanc down at hi open 
ledger. “but the coincid is so strike that I feel we must realli 
give you the refus of it.” 

“then I accept it, sir, and I am much oblig to you.” 

“there is one small provis in dr. mccarthy’ letter. He stipul 
that the applic must be a man with an imperturb good temper.” 

“I am the veri man,” said I, with conviction. 

“well,” said mr. lumsden, with some hesitation, “I hope that your temper 
is realli as good as you say, for I rather fanci that you may need it.” 

“I presum that everi elementari schoolmast does.” 

“yes, sir, but it is onli fair to you to warn you that there may be some 
especi tri circumst in thi particular situation. dr. phelp 
mccarthi doe not make such a condit without some veri good and 
press reason.” 

there wa a certain solemn in hi speech which struck a chill in the 
delight with which I had welcom thi providenti vacancy. 

“may I ask the natur of these circumstances?” I asked. 

“we endeavour to hold the balanc equal between our clients, and to be 
perfectli frank with all of them. If I knew of object to you I 
should certainli commun them to dr. mccarthy, and so I have no 
hesit in do as much for you. I find,” he continued, glanc 
over the page of hi ledger, “that within the last twelv month we 
have suppli no fewer than seven latin master to willow lea hous 
academy, four of them have left so abruptli as to forfeit their 
month’ salary, and none of them have stay more than eight weeks.” 

“and the other masters? have they stayed?” 

“there is onli one other residenti master, and he appear to be 
unchanged. you can understand, mr. weld,” continu the agent, close 
both the ledger and the interview, “that such rapid chang are not 
desir from a master’ point of view, whatev may be said for them 
by an agent work on commission. I have no idea whi these gentlemen 
have resign their situat so early. I can onli give you the facts, 
and advis you to see dr. mccarthi at onc and to form your own 
conclusions.” 

great is the power of the man who ha noth to lose, and it wa 
therefor with perfect serenity, but with a good deal of curiosity, that 
I rang earli that afternoon the heavi wrought-iron bell of the willow 
lea hous academy. the build wa a massiv pile, squar and ugly, 
stand in it own extens grounds, with a broad carriage-sweep 
curv up to it from the road. It stood high, and command a view on 
the one side of the grey roof and bristl spire of northern london, 
and on the other of the well-wood and beauti countri which fring 
the great city. the door wa open by a boy in buttons, and I wa shown 
into a well-appoint study, where the princip of the academi 
present join me. 

the warn and insinu of the agent had prepar me to meet a 
choler and overbear person—on whose manner wa an insupport 
provoc to those who work under him. anyth further from the 
realiti cannot be imagined. He wa a frail, gentl creature, 
clean-shaven and round-shouldered, with a bear which wa so courteou 
that it becam almost deprecating. hi bushi hair wa thickli shot with 
grey, and hi age I should imagin to verg upon sixty. hi voic wa 
low and suave, and he walk with a certain minc delicaci of manner. 
hi whole appear wa that of a kindli scholar, who wa more at home 
among hi book than in the practic affair of the world. 

“I am sure that we shall be veri happi to have your assistance, mr. 
weld,” said he, after a few profession questions. “mr. perciv 
manner left me yesterday, and I should be glad if you could take over 
hi duti to-morrow.” 

“may I ask if that is mr. perciv manner of selwyn?” I asked. 

“precisely. did you know him?” 

“yes; he is a friend of mine.” 

“an excel teacher, but a littl hasti in hi disposition. It wa hi 
onli fault. now, in your case, mr. weld, is your own temper under good 
control? suppos for argument’ sake that I were to so far forget 
myself as to be rude to you or to speak roughli or to jar your feel 
in ani way, could you reli upon yourself to control your emotions?” 

I smile at the idea of thi courteous, little, minc creatur 
ruffl my nerves. 

“I think that I could answer for it, sir,” said I. 

“quarrel are veri pain to me,” said he. “I wish everi one to live in 
harmoni under my roof. I will not deni mr. perciv manner had 
provocation, but I wish to find a man who can rais himself abov 
provocation, and sacrific hi own feel for the sake of peac and 
concord.” 

“I will do my best, sir.” 

“you cannot say more, mr. weld. In that case I shall expect you 
to-night, if you can get your thing readi so soon.” 

I not onli succeed in get my thing ready, but I found time to 
call at the benedict club in piccadilly, where I knew that I should find 
manner if he were still in town. there he wa sure enough in the 
smoking-room, and I question him, over a cigarette, as to hi reason 
for throw up hi recent situation. 

“you don’t tell me that you are go to dr. phelp mccarthy’ academy?” 
he cried, stare at me in surprise. “mi dear chap, it’ no use. you 
can’t possibl remain there.” 

“but I saw him, and he seem the most courtly, inoffens fellow. I 
never met a man with more gentl manners.” 

“he! oh, he’ all right. there’ no vice in him. have you seen 
theophilu st. james?” 

“I have never heard the name. who is he?” 

“your colleague. the other master.” 

“no, I have not seen him.” 

“_he’s_ the terror. If you can stand him, you have either the spirit of 
a perfect christian or els you have no spirit at all. A more perfect 
bounder never bounded.” 

“but whi doe mccarthi stand it?” 

My friend look at me significantli through hi cigarett smoke, and 
shrug hi shoulders. 

“you will form your own conclus about that. mine were form veri 
soon, and I never found occas to alter them.” 

“it would help me veri much if you would tell me them.” 

“when you see a man in hi own hous allow hi busi to be ruined, 
hi comfort destroyed, and hi author defi by anoth man in a 
subordin position, and calmli submit to it without so much as a 
word of protest, what conclus do you come to?” 

“that the one ha a hold over the other.” 

perciv manner nod hi head. 

“there you are! you’v hit it first barrel. It seem to me that there’ 
no other explan which will cover the facts. At some period in hi 
life the littl doctor ha gone astray. _humanum est errare._ I have 
even done it myself. but thi wa someth serious, and the other man 
got a hold of it and ha never let go. that’ the truth. blackmail is at 
the bottom of it. but he had no hold over me, and there wa no reason 
whi _i_ should stand hi insolence, so I came away—and I veri much 
expect to see you do the same.” 

for some time he talk over the matter, but he alway came to the same 
conclusion—that I should not retain my new situat veri long. 

It wa with no veri pleasant feel after thi prepar that I 
found myself face to face with the veri man of whom I had receiv so 
evil an account. dr. mccarthi introduc us to each other in hi studi 
on the even of that same day immedi after my arriv at the 
school. 

“thi is your new colleague, mr. st. james,” said he, in hi genial, 
courteou fashion. “I trust that you will mutual agree, and that I 
shall find noth but good feel and sympathi beneath thi roof.” 

I share the good doctor’ hope, but my expect of it were not 
increas by the appear of my _confrère_. He wa a young, 
bull-neck fellow about thirti year of age, dark-ey and 
black-haired, with an exceedingli vigor physique. I have never seen a 
more strongli built man, though he tend to run to fat in a way which 
show that he wa in the worst of training. hi face wa coarse, 
swollen, and brutal, with a pair of small black eye deepli sunken in 
hi head. hi heavi jowl, hi project ears, and hi thick bandi leg 
all went to make up a person which wa as formid as it wa 
repellent. 

“I hear you’v never been out before,” said he, in a rude, brusqu 
fashion. “well, it’ a poor life: hard work and starvat pay, as 
you’ll find out for yourself.” 

“but it ha some compensations,” said the principal. “sure you will 
allow that, mr. st. james?” 

“ha it? I never could find them. what do you call compensations?” 

“even to be in the continu presenc of youth is a privilege. It ha 
the effect of keep youth in one’ own soul, for one reflect 
someth of their high spirit and their keen enjoy of life.” 

“littl beasts!” cri my colleague. 

“come, come, mr. st. james, you are too hard upon them.” 

“I hate the sight of them! If I could put them and their bless 
copybook and lexicon and slate into one bonfir i’d do it to-night.” 

“thi is mr. st. james’ way of talking,” said the principal, smile 
nervous as he glanc at me. “you must not take him too seriously. 
now, mr. weld, you know where your room is, and no doubt you have your 
own littl arrang to make. the sooner you make them the sooner you 
will feel yourself at home.” 

It seem to me that he wa onli too anxiou to remov me at onc from 
the influenc of thi extraordinari colleague, and I wa glad to go, for 
the convers had becom embarrassing. 

and so began an epoch which alway seem to me as I look back to it to 
be the most singular in all my experience. the school wa in mani way 
an excel one. dr. phelp mccarthi wa an ideal principal. hi 
method were modern and rational. the manag wa all that could be 
desired. and yet in the middl of thi well-ord machin there 
intrud the incongru and imposs mr. st. james, throw 
everyth into confusion. hi duti were to teach english and 
mathematics, and how he acquit himself of them I do not know, as our 
class were held in separ rooms. I can answer for it, however, that 
the boy fear him and loath him, and I know that they had good 
reason to do so, for frequent my own teach wa interrupt by hi 
bellow of anger, and even by the sound of hi blows. dr. mccarthi 
spent most of hi time in hi class, but it was, I suspect, to watch 
over the master rather than the boys, and to tri to moder hi 
feroci temper when it threaten to becom dangerous. 

It wa in hi bear to the head master, however, that my colleague’ 
conduct wa most outrageous. the first convers which I have 
record prove to be typic of their intercourse. He domin over 
him openli and brutally. I have heard him contradict him roughli befor 
the whole school. At no time would he show him ani mark of respect, and 
my temper often rose within me when I saw the quiet acquiesc of the 
old doctor, and hi patient toler of thi monstrou treatment. and 
yet the sight of it surround the princip also with a certain vagu 
horror in my mind, for suppos my friend’ theori to be correct—and I 
could devis no better one—how black must have been the stori which 
could be held over hi head by thi man and, by fear of it publicity, 
forc him to undergo such humiliations. thi quiet, gentl doctor might 
be a profound hypocrite, a criminal, a forger possibly, or a poisoner. 
onli such a secret as thi could account for the complet power which 
the young man held over him. whi els should he admit so hate a 
presenc into hi hous and so harm an influenc into hi school? whi 
should he submit to degrad which could not be witnessed, far less 
endured, without indignation? 

and yet, if it were so, I wa forc to confess that my princip 
carri it off with extraordinari duplicity. never by word or sign did 
he show that the young man’ presenc wa distast to him. I have 
seen him look pained, it is true, after some peculiarli outrag 
exhibition, but he gave me the impress that it wa alway on account 
of the scholar or of me, never on account of himself. He spoke to and 
of st. jame in an indulg fashion, smile gentli at what made my 
blood boil within me. In hi way of look at him and address him, 
one could see no trace of resentment, but rather a sort of timid and 
deprec good will. hi compani he certainli courted, and they spent 
mani hour togeth in the studi and the garden. 

As to my own relat with theophilu st. james, I made up my mind from 
the begin that I should keep my temper with him, and to that 
resolut I steadfastli adhered. If dr. mccarthi chose to permit thi 
disrespect, and to condon these outrages, it wa hi affair and not 
mine. It wa evid that hi one wish wa that there should be peac 
between us, and I felt that I could help him best by respect thi 
desire. My easiest way to do so wa to avoid my colleague, and thi I 
did to the best of my ability. when we were thrown togeth I wa quiet, 
polite, and reserved. he, on hi part, show me no ill-will, but met me 
rather with a coars joviality, and a rough familiar which he meant 
to be ingratiating. He wa insist in hi attempt to get me into hi 
room at night, for the purpos of play euchr and of drinking. 

“old mccarthi doesn’t mind,” said he. “don’t you be afraid of him. we’ll 
do what we like, and i’ll answer for it that he won’t object.” onc onli 
I went, and when I left, after a dull and gross evening, my host wa 
stretch dead drunk upon the sofa. after that I gave the excus of a 
cours of study, and spent my spare hour alon in my own room. 

one point upon which I wa anxiou to gain inform wa as to how 
long these proceed had been go on. when did st. jame assert hi 
hold over dr. mccarthy? from neither of them could I learn how long my 
colleagu had been in hi present situation. one or two lead 
question upon my part were elud or ignor in a manner so mark that 
it wa easi to see that they were both of them as eager to conceal the 
point as I wa to know it. but at last one even I had the chanc of a 
chat with mrs. carter, the matron—for the doctor wa a widower—and from 
her I got the inform which I wanted. It need no question to 
get at her knowledge, for she wa so full of indign that she shook 
with passion as she spoke of it, and rais her hand into the air in 
the earnest of her denunciation, as she describ the grievanc 
which she had against my colleague. 

“it wa three year ago, mr. weld, that he first darken thi 
doorstep,” she cried. “three bitter year they have been to me. the 
school had fifti boy then. now it ha twenty-two. that’ what he ha 
done for us in three years. In anoth three there won’t be one. and the 
doctor, that angel of patience, you see how he treat him, though he is 
not fit to lace hi boot for him. If it wasn’t for the doctor, you may 
be sure that I wouldn’t stay an hour under the same roof with such a 
man, and so I told him to hi own face, mr. weld. If the doctor would 
onli pack him about hi business—but I know that I am say more than I 
should!” she stop herself with an effort, and spoke no more upon the 
subject. she had rememb that I wa almost a stranger in the school, 
and she fear that she had been indiscreet. 

there were one or two veri singular point about my colleague. the chief 
one wa that he rare took ani exercise. there wa a playing-field 
within the colleg grounds, and that wa hi farthest point. If the boy 
went out, it wa I or dr. mccarthi who accompani them. st. jame gave 
as a reason for thi that he had injur hi knee some year before, and 
that walk wa pain to him. for my own part I put it down to pure 
lazi upon hi part, for he wa of an obese, heavi temperament. 
twice, however, I saw him from my window steal out of the ground 
late at night, and the second time I watch him return in the grey of 
the morn and slink in through an open window. these furtiv 
excurs were never allud to, but they expos the hollow of hi 
stori about hi knee, and they increas the dislik and distrust which 
I had of the man. hi natur seem to be viciou to the core. 

anoth point, small but suggestive, wa that he hardli ever dure the 
month that I wa at willow lea hous receiv ani letters, and on those 
few occas they were obvious tradesmen’ bills. I am an earli 
riser, and use everi morn to pick my own correspond out of the 
bundl upon the hall table. I could judg therefor how few were ever 
there for mr. theophilu st. james. there seem to me to be someth 
peculiarli omin in this. what sort of a man could he be who dure 
thirti year of life had never made a singl friend, high or low, who 
care to continu to keep in touch with him? and yet the sinist fact 
remain that the head master not onli tolerated, but wa even intim 
with him. more than onc on enter a room I have found them talk 
confidenti together, and they would walk arm in arm in deep 
convers up and down the garden paths. So curiou did I becom to 
know what the tie wa which bound them, that I found it gradual push 
out my other interest and becom the main purpos of my life. In school 
and out of school, at meal and at play, I wa perpetu engag in 
watch dr. phelp mccarthi and mr. theophilu st. james, and in 
endeavour to solv the mysteri which surround them. 

but, unfortunately, my curios wa a littl too open. I had not the 
art to conceal the suspicion which I felt about the relat which 
exist between these two men and the natur of the hold which the one 
appear to have over the other. It may have been my manner of watch 
them, it may have been some indiscreet question, but it is certain that 
I show too clearli what I felt. one night I wa consciou that the 
eye of theophilu st. jame were fix upon me in a surli and menac 
stare. I had a forebod of evil, and I wa not surpris when dr. 
mccarthi call me next morn into hi study. 

“I am veri sorry, mr. weld,” said he, “but I am afraid that I shall be 
compel to dispens with your services.” 

“perhap you would give me some reason for dismiss me,” I answered, 
for I wa consciou of have done my duti to the best of my power, 
and knew well that onli one reason could be given. 

“I have no fault to find with you,” said he, and the colour came to hi 
cheeks. 

“you send me away at the suggest of my colleague.” 

hi eye turn away from mine. 

“we will not discuss the question, mr. weld. It is imposs for me to 
discuss it. In justic to you, I will give you the strongest 
recommend for your next situation. I can say no more. I hope that 
you will continu your duti here until you have found a place 
elsewhere.” 

My whole soul rose against the injustic of it, and yet I had no appeal 
and no redress. I could onli bow and leav the room, with a bitter sens 
of ill-usag at my heart. 

My first instinct wa to pack my box and leav the house. but the head 
master had given me permiss to remain until I had found anoth 
situation. I wa sure that st. jame desir me to go, and that wa a 
strong reason whi I should stay. If my presenc annoy him, I should 
give him as much of it as I could. I had begun to hate him and to long 
to have my reveng upon him. If he had a hold over our principal, might 
not I in turn obtain one over him? It wa a sign of weak that he 
should be so afraid of my curiosity. He would not resent it so much if 
he had not someth to fear from it. I enter my name onc more upon 
the book of the agents, but meanwhil I continu to fulfil my duti 
at willow lea house, and so it came about that I wa present at the 
dénouement of thi singular situation. 

dure that week—for it wa onli a week befor the crisi came—i wa in 
the habit of go down each evening, after the work of the day wa 
done, to inquir about my new arrangements. one night, it wa a cold and 
windi even in march, I had just step out from the hall door when a 
strang sight met my eyes. A man wa crouch befor one of the window 
of the house. hi knee were bent and hi eye were fix upon the small 
line of light between the curtain and the sash. the window threw a 
squar of bright in front of it, and in the middl of thi the dark 
shadow of thi omin visitor show clear and hard. It wa but for an 
instant that I saw him, for he glanc up and wa off in a moment 
through the shrubbery. I could hear the patter of hi feet as he ran 
down the road, until it die away in the distance. 

It wa evid my duti to turn back and to tell dr. mccarthi what I 
had seen. I found him in hi study. I had expect him to be disturb 
at such an incident, but I wa not prepar for the state of panic into 
which he fell. He lean back in hi chair, white and gasping, like one 
who ha receiv a mortal blow. 

“which window, mr. weld?” he asked, wipe hi forehead. “which window 
wa it?” 

“the next to the dining-room—mr. st. james’ window.” 

“dear me! dear me! thi is, indeed, unfortunate! A man look through 
mr. st. james’ window!” He wrung hi hand like a man who is at hi 
wits’ end what to do. 

“I shall be pass the police-station, sir. would you wish me to 
mention the matter?” 

“no, no,” he cried, suddenly, master hi extrem agitation; “I have 
no doubt that it wa some poor tramp who intend to beg. I attach no 
import to the incident—non at all. don’t let me detain you, mr. 
weld, if you wish to go out.” 

I left him sit in hi studi with reassur word upon hi lips, but 
with horror upon hi face. My heart wa heavi for my littl employ as 
I start off onc more for town. As I look back from the gate at the 
squar of light which mark the window of my colleague, I suddenli saw 
the black outlin of dr. mccarthy’ figur pass against the lamp. He 
had hasten from hi studi then to tell st. jame what he had heard. 
what wa the mean of it all, thi atmospher of mystery, thi 
inexplic terror, these confid between two such dissimilar men? 
I thought and thought as I walked, but do what I would I could not hit 
upon ani adequ conclusion. I littl knew how near I wa to the 
solut of the problem. 

It wa veri late—nearli twelv o’clock—when I returned, and the light 
were all out save one in the doctor’ study. the black, gloomi hous 
loom befor me as I walk up the drive, it sombr bulk broken onli 
by the one glimmer point of brightness. I let myself in with my 
latch-key, and wa about to enter my own room when my attent wa 
arrest by a short, sharp cri like that of a man in pain. I stood and 
listened, my hand upon the handl of my door. 

all wa silent in the hous save for a distant murmur of voic which 
came, I knew, from the doctor’ room. I stole quietli down the corridor 
in that direction. the sound resolv itself now into two voices, the 
rough bulli tone of st. jame and the lower tone of the doctor, the 
one appar insist and the other argu and pleading. four thin 
line of light in the black show me the door of the doctor’ room, 
and step by step I drew nearer to it in the darkness. st. james’ voic 
within rose louder and louder, and hi word now came plainli to my ear. 

“i’ll have everi pound of it. If you won’t give it me i’ll take it. Do 
you hear?” 

dr. mccarthy’ repli wa inaudible, but the angri voic broke in again. 

“leav you destitute! I leav you thi littl goldmin of a school, and 
that’ enough for one old man, is it not? how am I to set up in 
australia without money? answer me that!” 

again the doctor said someth in a sooth voice, but hi answer onli 
rous hi companion to a higher pitch of fury. 

“done for me! what have you ever done for me except what you couldn’t 
help doing? It wa for your good name, not for my safety, that you 
cared. but enough cackle! I must get on my way befor morning. will you 
open your safe or will you not?” 

“oh, james, how can you use me so?” cri a wail voice, and then 
there came a sudden littl scream of pain. At the sound of that helpless 
appeal from brutal violenc I lost for onc that temper upon which I had 
pride myself. everi bit of manhood in me cri out against ani further 
neutrality. with my walk cane in my hand I rush into the study. As 
I did so I wa consciou that the hall-door bell wa violent ringing. 

“you villain!” I cried, “let him go!” 

the two men were stand in front of a small safe, which stood against 
one wall of the doctor’ room. st. jame held the old man by the wrist, 
and he had twist hi arm round in order to forc him to produc the 
key. My littl head master, white but resolute, wa struggl furious 
in the grip of the burli athlete. the bulli glare over hi shoulder at 
me with a mixtur of furi and terror upon hi brutal features. then, 
realiz that I wa alone, he drop hi victim and made for me with a 
horribl curse. 

“you infern spy!” he cried. “i’ll do for you anyhow befor I leave.” 

I am not a veri strong man, and I realiz that I wa helpless if onc 
at close quarters. twice I cut at him with my stick, but he rush in at 
me with a murder growl, and seiz me by the throat with both hi 
muscular hands. I fell backward and he on the top of me, with a grip 
which wa squeez the life from me. I wa consciou of hi malign 
yellow-ting eye within a few inch of my own, and then with a 
beat of puls in my head and a sing in my ears, my sens slip 
away from me. but even in that suprem moment I wa awar that the 
door-bel wa still violent ringing. 

when I came to myself, I wa lie upon the sofa in dr. mccarthy’ 
study, and the doctor himself wa seat besid me. He appear to be 
watch me intent and anxiously, for as I open my eye and look 
about me he gave a great cri of relief. “thank god!” he cried. “thank 
god!” 

“where is he?” I asked, look round the room. As I did so, I becam 
awar that the furnitur wa scatter in everi direction, and that 
there were trace of an even more violent struggl than that in which I 
had been engaged. 

the doctor sank hi face between hi hands. 

“they have him,” he groaned. “after these year of trial they have him 
again. but how thank I am that he ha not for a second time stain 
hi hand in blood.” 

As the doctor spoke I becam awar that a man in the braid jacket of 
an inspector of polic wa stand in the doorway. 

“yes, sir,” he remarked, “you have had a pretti narrow escape. If we had 
not got in when we did, you would not be here to tell the tale. I don’t 
know that I ever saw ani one much nearer to the undertaker.” 

I sat up with my hand to my throb head. 

“dr. mccarthy,” said I, “thi is all a mysteri to me. I should be glad 
if you could explain to me who thi man is, and whi you have toler 
him so long in your house.” 

“I owe you an explanation, mr. weld—and the more so sinc you have, in 
so chivalr a fashion, almost sacrif your life in my defence. 
there is no reason now for secrecy. In a word, mr. weld, thi unhappi 
man’ real name is jame mccarthy, and he is my onli son.” 

“your son?” 

“alas, yes. what sin have I ever commit that I should have such a 
punishment? He ha made my whole life a miseri from the first year of 
hi boyhood. violent, headstrong, selfish, unprincipled, he ha alway 
been the same. At eighteen he wa a criminal. At twenty, in a paroxysm 
of passion, he took the life of a boon companion and wa tri for 
murder. He onli just escap the gallows, and he wa condemn to penal 
servitude. three year ago he succeed in escaping, and managed, in 
face of a thousand obstacles, to reach my hous in london. My wife’ 
heart had been broken by hi condemnation, and as he had succeed in 
get a suit of ordinari clothes, there wa no one here to recogn 
him. for month he lay conceal in the attic until the first search of 
the polic should be over. then I gave him employ here, as you have 
seen, though by hi rough and overbear manner he made my own life 
miserable, and that of hi fellow-mast unbearable. you have been with 
us for four months, mr. weld, but no other master endur him so long. I 
apolog now for all you have had to submit to, but I ask you what els 
could I do? for hi dead mother’ sake I could not let harm come to him 
as long as it wa in my power to fend it off. onli under my roof could 
he find a refuge—th onli spot in all the world—and how could I keep him 
here without it excit remark unless I gave him some occupation? I 
made him english master therefore, and in that capac I have protect 
him here for three years. you have no doubt observ that he never 
dure the daytim went beyond the colleg grounds. you now understand 
the reason. but when to-night you came to me with your report of a man 
who wa look through hi window, I understood that hi retreat wa at 
last discovered. I besought him to fli at once, but he had been 
drinking, the unhappi fellow, and my word fell upon deaf ears. when at 
last he made up hi mind to go he wish to take from me in hi flight 
everi shill which I possessed. It wa your entranc which save me 
from him, while the polic in turn arriv onli just in time to rescu 
you. I have made myself amen to the law by harbour an escap 
prisoner, and remain here in the custodi of the inspector, but a prison 
ha no terror for me after what I have endur in thi hous dure the 
last three years.” 

“it seem to me, doctor,” said the inspector, “that, if you have broken 
the law, you have had quit enough punish already.” 

“god know I have!” cri dr. mccarthy, and sank hi haggard face upon 
hi hands. 




the brown hand 


everi one know that sir dominick holden, the famou indian surgeon, 
made me hi heir, and that hi death chang me in an hour from a 
hard-work and impecuni medic man to a well-to-do land 
proprietor. mani know also that there were at least five peopl between 
the inherit and me, and that sir dominick’ select appear to be 
altogeth arbitrari and whimsical. I can assur them, however, that 
they are quit mistaken, and that, although I onli knew sir dominick in 
the close year of hi life, there were none the less veri real 
reason whi he should show hi goodwil toward me. As a matter of fact, 
though I say it myself, no man ever did more for anoth than I did for 
my indian uncle. I cannot expect the stori to be believed, but it is so 
singular that I should feel that it wa a breach of duti if I did not 
put it upon record—so here it is, and your belief or incredul is your 
own affair. 

sir dominick holden, c.b., k.c.s.i., and I don’t know what besides, wa 
the most distinguish indian surgeon of hi day. In the armi 
originally, he afterward settl down into civil practic in bombay, 
and visit as a consult everi part of india. hi name is best 
rememb in connect with the orient hospital, which he found 
and supported. the time came, however, when hi iron constitut began 
to show sign of the long strain to which he had subject it, and hi 
brother practition (who were not, perhaps, entir disinterest 
upon the point) were unanim in recommend him to return to england. 
He held on so long as he could, but at last he develop nervou 
symptom of a veri pronounc character, and so came back, a broken man, 
to hi nativ counti of wiltshire. He bought a consider estat with 
an ancient manor-hous upon the edg of salisburi plain, and devot hi 
old age to the studi of compar pathology, which had been hi 
learn hobbi all hi life, and in which he wa a foremost authority. 

We of the famili were, as may be imagined, much excit by the news of 
the return of thi rich and childless uncl to england. On hi part, 
although by no mean exuber in hi hospitality, he show some sens 
of hi duti to hi relations, and each of us in turn had an invit 
to visit him. from the account of my cousin it appear to be a 
melancholi business, and it wa with mix feel that I at last 
receiv my own summon to appear at rodenhurst. My wife wa so 
care exclud in the invit that my first impuls wa to refus 
it, but the interest of the children had to be considered, and so, with 
her consent, I set out one octob afternoon upon my visit to wiltshire, 
with littl thought of what that visit wa to entail. 

My uncle’ estat wa situat where the arabl land of the plain 
begin to swell upward into the round chalk hill which are 
characterist of the county. As I drove from dinton station in the 
wane light of that autumn day, I wa impress by the weird natur of 
the scenery. the few scatter cottag of the peasant were so dwarf 
by the huge evid of prehistor life, that the present appear to 
be a dream and the past to be the obtrus and master reality. the 
road wound through the valleys, form by a success of grassi hills, 
and the summit of each wa cut and carv into the most elabor 
fortifications, some circular and some square, but all on a scale which 
ha defi the wind and the rain of mani centuries. some call them 
roman and some british, but their true origin and the reason for thi 
particular tract of countri be so interlac with entrench have 
never been final made clear. here and there on the long, smooth, 
olive-colour slope there rose small round barrow or tumuli. 
beneath them lie the cremat ash of the race which cut so deepli into 
the hills, but their grave tell us noth save that a jar full of dust 
repres the man who onc labour under the sun. 

It wa through thi weird countri that I approach my uncle’ resid 
of rodenhurst, and the hous was, as I found, in due keep with it 
surroundings. two broken and weather-stain pillars, each surmount by 
a mutil herald emblem, flank the entranc to a neglect drive. 
A cold wind whistl through the elm which line it, and the air wa 
full of the drift leaves. At the far end, under the gloomi arch of 
trees, a singl yellow lamp burn steadily. In the dim half-light of 
the come night I saw a long, low build stretch out two irregular 
wings, with deep eaves, a slope gambrel roof, and wall which were 
criss-cross with timber balk in the fashion of the tudors. the cheeri 
light of a fire flicker in the broad, lattic window to the left of 
the low-porch door, and this, as it proved, mark the studi of my 
uncle, for it wa thither that I wa led by hi butler in order to make 
my host’ acquaintance. 

He wa cower over hi fire, for the moist chill of an english autumn 
had set him shivering. hi lamp wa unlit, and I onli saw the red glow 
of the ember beat upon a huge, craggi face, with a red indian nose 
and cheek, and deep furrow and seam from eye to chin, the sinist 
mark of hidden volcan fires. He sprang up at my entranc with 
someth of an old-world courtesi and welcom me warmli to rodenhurst. 
At the same time I wa conscious, as the lamp wa carri in, that it 
wa a veri critic pair of light-blu eye which look out at me from 
under shaggi eyebrows, like scout beneath a bush, and that thi 
outlandish uncl of mine wa care read off my charact with all 
the eas of a practis observ and an experienc man of the world. 

for my part I look at him, and look again, for I had never seen a 
man whose appear wa more fit to hold one’ attention. hi figur 
wa the framework of a giant, but he had fallen away hi coat dangl 
straight down in a shock fashion from a pair of broad and boni 
shoulders. all hi limb were huge and yet emaciated, and I could not 
take my gaze from hi knobbi wrists, and long, gnarl hands. but hi 
eyes—thos peer light-blu eyes—they were the most arrest of ani 
of hi peculiarities. It wa not their colour alone, nor wa it the 
ambush of hair in which they lurked; but it wa the express which I 
read in them. for the appear and bear of the man were masterful, 
and one expect a certain correspond arrog in hi eyes, but 
instead of that I read the look which tell of a spirit cow and 
crushed, the furtive, expect look of the dog whose master ha taken 
the whip from the rack. I form my own medic diagnosi upon one 
glanc at those critic and yet appeal eyes. I believ that he wa 
stricken with some mortal ailment, that he knew himself to be expos to 
sudden death, and that he live in terror of it. such wa my judgment—a 
fals one, as the event showed; but I mention it that it may help you to 
realiz the look which I read in hi eyes. 

My uncle’ welcom was, as I have said, a courteou one, and in an hour 
or so I found myself seat between him and hi wife at a comfort 
dinner, with curiou pungent delicaci upon the table, and a stealthy, 
quick-ey orient waiter behind hi chair. the old coupl had come 
round to that tragic imit of the dawn of life when husband and 
wife, have lost or scatter all those who were their intimates, find 
themselv face to face and alon onc more, their work done, and the 
end near fast. those who have reach that stage in sweet and 
love, who can chang their winter into a gentl indian summer, have come 
as victor through the ordeal of life. ladi holden wa a small, alert 
woman, with a kindli eye, and her express as she glanc at him wa a 
certif of charact to her husband. and yet, though I read a mutual 
love in their glances, I read also a mutual horror, and recogn in 
her face some reflect of that stealthi fear which I detect in his. 
their talk wa sometim merri and sometim sad, but there wa a forc 
note in their merriment and a natur in their sad which told me 
that a heavi heart beat upon either side of me. 

We were sit over our first glass of wine, and the servant had left 
the room, when the convers took a turn which produc a remark 
effect upon my host and hostess. I cannot recal what it wa which 
start the topic of the supernatural, but it end in my show them 
that the abnorm in psychic experi wa a subject to which I had, 
like mani neurologists, devot a great deal of attention. I conclud 
by narrat my experi when, as a member of the psychic research 
society, I had form one of a committe of three who spent the night in 
a haunt house. our adventur were neither excit nor convincing, 
but, such as it was, the stori appear to interest my auditor in a 
remark degree. they listen with an eager silence, and I caught a 
look of intellig between them which I could not understand. ladi 
holden immedi afterward rose and left the room. 

sir dominick push the cigar-box over to me, and we smoke for some 
littl time in silence. that huge boni hand of hi wa twitch as he 
rais it with hi cheroot to hi lips, and I felt that the man’ nerv 
were vibrat like fiddle-strings. My instinct told me that he wa on 
the verg of some intim confidence, and I fear to speak lest I 
should interrupt it. At last he turn toward me with a spasmod 
gestur like a man who throw hi last scrupl to the winds. 

“from the littl that I have seen of you it appear to me, dr. 
hardacre,” said he, “that you are the veri man I have want to meet.” 

“I am delight to hear it, sir.” 

“your head seem to be cool and steady. you will acquit me of ani desir 
to flatter you, for the circumst are too seriou to permit of 
insincerities. you have some special knowledg upon these subjects, and 
you evid view them from that philosoph standpoint which rob 
them of all vulgar terror. I presum that the sight of an apparit 
would not serious discompos you?” 

“I think not, sir.” 

“would even interest you, perhaps?” 

“most intensely.” 

“a a psychic observer, you would probabl investig it in as 
imperson a fashion as an astronom investig a wander comet?” 

“precisely.” 

He gave a heavi sigh. 

“believ me, dr. hardacre, there wa a time when I could have spoken as 
you do now. My nerv wa a by-word in india. even the mutini never shook 
it for an instant. and yet you see what I am reduc to—th most 
timor man, perhaps, in all thi counti of wiltshire. Do not speak too 
brave upon thi subject, or you may find yourself subject to as 
long-drawn a test as I am—a test which can onli end in the madhous or 
the grave.” 

I wait patient until he should see fit to go farther in hi 
confidence. hi preambl had, I need not say, fill me with interest 
and expectation. 

“for some years, dr. hardacre,” he continued, “mi life and that of my 
wife have been made miser by a caus which is so grotesqu that it 
border upon the ludicrous. and yet familiar ha never made it more 
easi to bear—on the contrary, as time pass my nerv becom more worn 
and shatter by the constant attrition. If you have no physic fears, 
dr. hardacre, I should veri much valu your opinion upon thi phenomenon 
which troubl us so.” 

“for what it is worth my opinion is entir at your service. may I ask 
the natur of the phenomenon?” 

“I think that your experi will have a higher evidenti valu if 
you are not told in advanc what you may expect to encounter. you are 
yourself awar of the quibbl of unconsci cerebr and subject 
impress with which a scientif sceptic may throw a doubt upon your 
statement. It would be as well to guard against them in advance.” 

“what shall I do, then?” 

“I will tell you. would you mind follow me thi way?” He led me out 
of the dining-room and down a long passag until we came to a termin 
door. insid there wa a larg bare room fit as a laboratory, with 
numer scientif instrument and bottles. A shelf ran along one side, 
upon which there stood a long line of glass jar contain patholog 
and anatom specimens. 

“you see that I still dabbl in some of my old studies,” said sir 
dominick. “these jar are the remain of what wa onc a most excel 
collection, but unfortun I lost the greater part of them when my 
hous wa burn down in bombay in ‘92. It wa a most unfortun affair 
for me—in more way than one. I had exampl of mani rare conditions, 
and my splenic collect wa probabl unique. these are the survivors.” 

I glanc over them, and saw that they realli were of a veri great valu 
and rariti from a patholog point of view: bloat organs, gape 
cysts, distort bones, odiou parasites—a singular exhibit of the 
product of india. 

“there is, as you see, a small sette here,” said my host. “it wa far 
from our intent to offer a guest so meagr an accommodation, but 
sinc affair have taken thi turn, it would be a great kind upon 
your part if you would consent to spend the night in thi apartment. I 
beg that you will not hesit to let me know if the idea should be at 
all repugn to you.” 

“on the contrary,” I said, “it is most acceptable.” 

“mi own room is the second on the left, so that if you should feel that 
you are in need of compani a call would alway bring me to your side.” 

“I trust that I shall not be compel to disturb you.” 

“it is unlik that I shall be asleep. I do not sleep much. Do not 
hesit to summon me.” 

and so with thi agreement we join ladi holden in the drawing-room and 
talk of lighter things. 

It wa no affect upon my part to say that the prospect of my 
night’ adventur wa an agreeabl one. I have no pretenc to greater 
physic courag than my neighbours, but familiar with a subject rob 
it of those vagu and undefin terror which are the most appal to 
the imagin mind. the human brain is capabl of onli one strong 
emot at a time, and if it be fill with curios or scientif 
enthusiasm, there is no room for fear. It is true that I had my uncle’ 
assur that he had himself origin taken thi point of view, but I 
reflect that the breakdown of hi nervou system might be due to hi 
forti year in india as much as to ani psychic experi which had 
befallen him. I at least wa sound in nerv and brain, and it wa with 
someth of the pleasur thrill of anticip with which the 
sportsman take hi posit besid the haunt of hi game that I shut 
the laboratori door behind me, and partial undressing, lay down upon 
the rug-cov settee. 

It wa not an ideal atmospher for a bedroom. the air wa heavi with 
mani chemic odours, that of methyl spirit predominating. nor were 
the decor of my chamber veri sedative. the odiou line of glass 
jar with their relic of diseas and suffer stretch in front of my 
veri eyes. there wa no blind to the window, and a three-quart moon 
stream it white light into the room, trace a silver squar with 
filigre lattic upon the opposit wall. when I had extinguish my 
candl thi one bright patch in the midst of the gener gloom had 
certainli an eeri and discompos aspect. A rigid and absolut silenc 
reign throughout the old house, so that the low swish of the branch 
in the garden came softli and soothingli to my ears. It may have been 
the hypnot lullabi of thi gentl susurrus, or it may have been the 
result of my tire day, but after mani doze and mani effort to 
regain my clear of perception, I fell at last into a deep and 
dreamless sleep. 

I wa awaken by some sound in the room, and I instantli rais myself 
upon my elbow on the couch. some hour had passed, for the squar patch 
upon the wall had slid downward and sideway until it lay obliqu at 
the end of my bed. the rest of the room wa in deep shadow. At first I 
could see nothing, presently, as my eye becam accustom to the faint 
light, I wa aware, with a thrill which all my scientif absorpt 
could not entir prevent, that someth wa move slowli along the 
line of the wall. A gentle, shuffl sound, as of soft slippers, came 
to my ears, and I dimli discern a human figur walk stealthili from 
the direct of the door. As it emerg into the patch of moonlight I 
saw veri clearli what it wa and how it wa employed. It wa a man, 
short and squat, dress in some sort of dark-grey gown, which hung 
straight from hi shoulder to hi feet. the moon shone upon the side of 
hi face, and I saw that it wa chocolate-brown in colour, with a ball 
of black hair like a woman’ at the back of hi head. He walk slowly, 
and hi eye were cast upward toward the line of bottl which 
contain those gruesom remnant of humanity. He seem to examin each 
jar with attention, and then to pass on to the next. when he had come to 
the end of the line, immedi opposit my bed, he stopped, face me, 
threw up hi hand with a gestur of despair, and vanish from my 
sight. 

I have said that he threw up hi hands, but I should have said hi arms, 
for as he assum that attitud of despair I observ a singular 
peculiar about hi appearance. He had onli one hand! As the sleev 
droop down from the upflung arm I saw the left plainly, but the right 
end in a knobbi and unsightli stump. In everi other way hi appear 
wa so natural, and I had both seen and heard him so clearly, that I 
could easili have believ that he wa an indian servant of sir 
dominick’ who had come into my room in search of something. It wa onli 
hi sudden disappear which suggest anyth more sinist to me. 
As it wa I sprang from my couch, lit a candle, and examin the whole 
room carefully. there were no sign of my visitor, and I wa forc to 
conclud that there had realli been someth outsid the normal law of 
natur in hi appearance. I lay awak for the remaind of the night, 
but noth els occur to disturb me. 

I am an earli riser, but my uncl wa an even earlier one, for I found 
him pace up and down the lawn at the side of the house. He ran toward 
me in hi eager when he saw me come out from the door. 

“well, well!” he cried. “did you see him?” 

“an indian with one hand?” 

“precisely.” 

“yes, I saw him”—and I told him all that occurred. when I had finished, 
he led the way into hi study. 

“we have a littl time befor breakfast,” said he. “it will suffic to 
give you an explan of thi extraordinari affair—so far as I can 
explain that which is essenti inexplicable. In the first place, when 
I tell you that for four year I have never pass one singl night, 
either in bombay, aboard ship, or here in england without my sleep be 
broken by thi fellow, you will understand whi it is that I am a wreck 
of my former self. hi programm is alway the same. He appear by my 
bedside, shake me roughli by the shoulder, pass from my room into the 
laboratory, walk slowli along the line of my bottles, and then 
vanishes. for more than a thousand time he ha gone through the same 
routine.” 

“what doe he want?” 

“he want hi hand.” 

“hi hand?” 

“yes, it came about in thi way. I wa summon to peshawur for a 
consult some ten year ago, and while there I wa ask to look at 
the hand of a nativ who wa pass through with an afghan caravan. the 
fellow came from some mountain tribe live away at the back of beyond 
somewher on the other side of kaffiristan. He talk a bastard pushtoo, 
and it wa all I could do to understand him. He wa suffer from a 
soft sarcomat swell of one of the metacarp joints, and I made 
him realiz that it wa onli by lose hi hand that he could hope to 
save hi life. after much persuas he consent to the operation, and 
he ask me, when it wa over, what fee I demanded. the poor fellow wa 
almost a beggar, so that the idea of a fee wa absurd, but I answer in 
jest that my fee should be hi hand, and that I propos to add it to my 
patholog collection. 

“to my surpris he demur veri much to the suggestion, and he 
explain that accord to hi religion it wa an all-import matter 
that the bodi should be reunit after death, and so make a perfect 
dwell for the spirit. the belief is, of course, an old one, and the 
mummi of the egyptian aros from an analog superstition. I 
answer him that hi hand wa alreadi off, and ask him how he 
intend to preserv it. He repli that he would pickl it in salt and 
carri it about with him. I suggest that it might be safer in my 
keep than in his, and that I had better mean than salt for 
preserv it. On realiz that I realli intend to care keep it, 
hi opposit vanish instantly. ‘but remember, sahib,’ said he, ‘I 
shall want it back when I am dead.’ I laugh at the remark, and so the 
matter ended. I return to my practice, and he no doubt in the cours 
of time wa abl to continu hi journey to afghanistan. 

“well, as I told you last night, I had a bad fire in my hous at bombay. 
half of it wa burn down, and, among other things, my patholog 
collect wa larg destroyed. what you see are the poor remain of 
it. the hand of the hillman went with the rest, but I gave the matter no 
particular thought at the time. that wa six year ago. 

“four year ago—two year after the fire—i wa awaken one night by a 
furiou tug at my sleeve. I sat up under the impress that my 
favourit mastiff wa tri to arous me. instead of this, I saw my 
indian patient of long ago, dress in the long grey gown which wa the 
badg of hi people. He wa hold up hi stump and look 
reproach at me. He then went over to my bottles, which at that time 
I kept in my room, and he examin them carefully, after which he gave a 
gestur of anger and vanished. I realiz that he had just died, and 
that he had come to claim my promis that I should keep hi limb in 
safeti for him. 

“well, there you have it all, dr. hardacre. everi night at the same hour 
for four year thi perform ha been repeated. It is a simpl thing 
in itself, but it ha worn me out like water drop on a stone. It ha 
brought a vile insomnia with it, for I cannot sleep now for the 
expect of hi coming. It ha poison my old age and that of my 
wife, who ha been the sharer in thi great trouble. but there is the 
breakfast gong, and she will be wait impati to know how it fare 
with you last night. We are both much indebt to you for your 
gallantry, for it take someth from the weight of our misfortun when 
we share it, even for a singl night, with a friend, and it reassur us 
as to our sanity, which we are sometim driven to question.” 

thi wa the curiou narr which sir dominick confid to me—a stori 
which to mani would have appear to be a grotesqu impossibility, but 
which, after my experi of the night before, and my previou 
knowledg of such things, I wa prepar to accept as an absolut fact. 
I thought deepli over the matter, and brought the whole rang of my 
read and experi to bear upon it. after breakfast, I surpris my 
host and hostess by announc that I wa return to london by the 
next train. 

“mi dear doctor,” cri sir dominick in great distress, “you make me 
feel that I have been guilti of a gross breach of hospit in 
intrud thi unfortun matter upon you. I should have born my own 
burden.” 

“it is, indeed, that matter which is take me to london,” I answered; 
“but you are mistaken, I assur you, if you think that my experi of 
last night wa an unpleas one to me. On the contrary, I am about to 
ask your permiss to return in the even and spend one more night in 
your laboratory. I am veri eager to see thi visitor onc again.” 

My uncl wa exceedingli anxiou to know what I wa about to do, but my 
fear of rais fals hope prevent me from tell him. I wa back 
in my own consulting-room a littl after luncheon, and wa confirm my 
memori of a passag in a recent book upon occult which had arrest 
my attent when I read it. 

“in the case of earth-bound spirits,” said my authority, “some one 
domin idea obsess them at the hour of death is suffici to hold 
them to thi materi world. they are the amphibia of thi life and of 
the next, capabl of pass from one to the other as the turtl pass 
from land to water. the caus which may bind a soul so strongli to a 
life which it bodi ha abandon are ani violent emotion. avarice, 
revenge, anxiety, love, and piti have all been known to have thi 
effect. As a rule it spring from some unfulfil wish, and when the 
wish ha been fulfil the materi bond relaxes. there are mani case 
upon record which show the singular persist of these visitors, and 
also their disappear when their wish have been fulfilled, or in 
some case when a reason compromis ha been effected.” 

“_a reason compromis effected_”—thos were the word which I had 
brood over all the morning, and which I now verifi in the original. 
No actual aton could be made here—but a reason compromise! I 
made my way as fast as a train could take me to the shadwel seamen’ 
hospital, where my old friend jack hewett wa house-surgeon. without 
explain the situat I made him understand exactli what it wa that 
I wanted. 

“A brown man’ hand!” said he, in amazement. “what in the world do you 
want that for?” 

“never mind. i’ll tell you some day. I know that your ward are full of 
indians.” 

“I should think so. but a hand——” He thought a littl and then struck a 
bell. 

“travers,” said he to a student-dresser, “what becam of the hand of 
the lascar which we took off yesterday? I mean the fellow from the east 
india dock who got caught in the steam winch.” 

“they are in the _post-mortem_ room, sir.” 

“just pack one of them in antisept and give it to dr. hardacre.” 

and so I found myself back at rodenhurst befor dinner with thi curiou 
outcom of my day in town. I still said noth to sir dominick, but I 
slept that night in the laboratory, and I place the lascar’ hand in 
one of the glass jar at the end of my couch. 

So interest wa I in the result of my experi that sleep wa out of 
the question. I sat with a shade lamp besid me and wait patient 
for my visitor. thi time I saw him clearli from the first. He appear 
besid the door, nebul for an instant, and then harden into as 
distinct an outlin as ani live man. the slipper beneath hi grey 
gown were red and heelless, which account for the low, shuffl sound 
which he made as he walked. As on the previou night he pass slowli 
along the line of bottl until he paus befor that which contain 
the hand. He reach up to it, hi whole figur quiver with 
expectation, took it down, examin it eagerly, and then, with a face 
which wa convuls with furi and disappointment, he hurl it down on 
the floor. there wa a crash which resound through the house, and when 
I look up the mutil indian had disappeared. A moment later my door 
flew open and sir dominick rush in. 

“you are not hurt?” he cried. 

“no—but deepli disappointed.” 

He look in astonish at the splinter of glass, and the brown hand 
lie upon the floor. 

“good god!” he cried. “what is this?” 

I told him my idea and it wretch sequel. He listen intently, but 
shook hi head. 

“it wa well thought of,” said he, “but I fear that there is no such 
easi end to my sufferings. but one thing I now insist upon. It is that 
you shall never again upon ani pretext occupi thi room. My fear that 
someth might have happen to you—when I heard that crash—hav been 
the most acut of all the agoni which I have undergone. I will not 
expos myself to a repetit of it.” 

He allow me, however, to spend the remaind of that night where I 
was, and I lay there worri over the problem and lament my own 
failure. with the first light of morn there wa the lascar’ hand 
still lie upon the floor to remind me of my fiasco. I lay look at 
it—and as I lay suddenli an idea flew like a bullet through my head and 
brought me quiver with excit out of my couch. I rais the grim 
relic from where it had fallen. yes, it wa inde so. the hand wa the 
_left_ hand of the lascar. 

By the first train I wa on my way to town, and hurri at onc to the 
seamen’ hospital. I rememb that both hand of the lascar had been 
amputated, but I wa terrifi lest the preciou organ which I wa in 
search of might have been alreadi consum in the crematory. My suspens 
wa soon ended. It had still been preserv in the _post-mortem_ room. 
and so I return to rodenhurst in the even with my mission 
accomplish and the materi for a fresh experiment. 

but sir dominick holden would not hear of my occupi the laboratori 
again. To all my entreati he turn a deaf ear. It offend hi sens 
of hospitality, and he could no longer permit it. I left the hand, 
therefore, as I had done it fellow the night before, and I occupi a 
comfort bedroom in anoth portion of the house, some distanc from 
the scene of my adventures. 

but in spite of that my sleep wa not destin to be uninterrupted. In 
the dead of night my host burst into my room, a lamp in hi hand. hi 
huge gaunt figur wa envelop in a loos dressing-gown, and hi whole 
appear might certainli have seem more formid to a weak-nerv 
man than that of the indian of the night before. but it wa not hi 
entranc so much as hi express which amaz me. He had turn 
suddenli younger by twenti year at the least. hi eye were shining, 
hi featur radiant, and he wave one hand in triumph over hi head. I 
sat up astounded, stare sleepili at thi extraordinari visitor. but 
hi word soon drove the sleep from my eyes. 

“we have done it! We have succeeded!” he shouted. “mi dear hardacre, how 
can I ever in thi world repay you?” 

“you don’t mean to say that it is all right?” 

“inde I do. I wa sure that you would not mind be awaken to hear 
such bless news.” 

“mind! I should think not indeed. but is it realli certain?” 

“I have no doubt whatev upon the point. I owe you such a debt, my dear 
nephew, as I have never owe a man before, and never expect to. what 
can I possibl do for you that is commensurate? provid must have 
sent you to my rescue. you have save both my reason and my life, for 
anoth six month of thi must have seen me either in a cell or a 
coffin. and my wife—it wa wear her out befor my eyes. never could I 
have believ that ani human be could have lift thi burden off 
me.” He seiz my hand and wrung it in hi boni grip. 

“it wa onli an experiment—a forlorn hope—but I am delight from my 
heart that it ha succeeded. but how do you know that it is all right? 
have you seen something?” 

He seat himself at the foot of my bed. 

“I have seen enough,” said he. “it satisfi me that I shall be troubl 
no more. what ha pass is easili told. you know that at a certain hour 
thi creatur alway come to me. to-night he arriv at the usual time, 
and arous me with even more violenc than is hi custom. I can onli 
surmis that hi disappoint of last night increas the bitter 
of hi anger against me. He look angrili at me, and then went on hi 
usual round. but in a few minut I saw him, for the first time sinc 
thi persecut began, return to my chamber. He wa smiling. I saw the 
gleam of hi white teeth through the dim light. He stood face me at 
the end of my bed, and three time he made the low eastern salaam which 
is their solemn leave-taking. and the third time that he bow he rais 
hi arm over hi head, and I saw hi _two_ hand outstretch in the 
air. So he vanished, and, as I believe, for ever.” 

* * * * * 

So that is the curiou experi which won me the affect and the 
gratitud of my celebr uncle, the famou indian surgeon. hi 
anticip were realized, and never again wa he disturb by the 
visit of the restless hillman in search of hi lost member. sir 
dominick and ladi holden spent a veri happi old age, unclouded, so far 
as I know, by ani trouble, and they final die dure the great 
influenza epidem within a few week of each other. In hi lifetim he 
alway turn to me for advic in everyth which concern that 
english life of which he knew so little; and I aid him also in the 
purchas and develop of hi estates. It wa no great surpris to me, 
therefore, that I found myself eventu promot over the head of 
five exasper cousins, and chang in a singl day from a 
hard-work countri doctor into the head of an import wiltshir 
family. I at least have reason to bless the memori of the man with the 
brown hand, and the day when I wa fortun enough to reliev 
rodenhurst of hi unwelcom presence. 




the fiend OF the cooperag 


It wa no easi matter to bring the _gamecock_ up to the island, for the 
river had swept down so much silt that the bank extend for mani mile 
out into the atlantic. the coast wa hardli to be seen when the first 
white curl of the breaker warn us of our danger, and from there 
onward we made our way veri care under mainsail and jib, keep 
the broken water well to the left, as is indic on the chart. more 
than onc her bottom touch the sand (we were draw someth under 
six feet at the time), but we had alway way enough and luck enough to 
carri us through. finally, the water shoal veri rapidly, but they had 
sent a cano from the factory, and the krooboy pilot brought us within 
two hundr yard of the island. here we drop our anchor, for the 
gestur of the negro indic that we could not hope to get ani 
farther. the blue of the sea had chang to the brown of the river, and, 
even under the shelter of the island, the current wa sing and 
swirl round our bows. the stream appear to be in spate, for it wa 
over the root of the palm trees, and everywher upon it muddy, greasi 
surfac we could see log of wood and debri of all sort which had been 
carri down by the flood. 

when I had assur myself that we swung secur at our moorings, I 
thought it best to begin water at once, for the place look as if it 
reek with fever. the heavi river, the muddy, shine banks, the bright 
poison green of the jungle, the moist steam in the air, they were all 
so mani danger signal to one who could read them. I sent the long-boat 
off, therefore, with two larg hogsheads, which should be suffici to 
last us until we made st. paul de loanda. for my own part I took the 
dinghi and row for the island, for I could see the union jack 
flutter abov the palm to mark the posit of armitag and wilson’ 
trade station. 

when I had clear the grove, I could see the place, a long, low, 
whitewash building, with a deep verandah in front, and an immens pile 
of palm oil barrel heap upon either flank of it. A row of surf boat 
and cano lay along the beach, and a singl small jetti project into 
the river. two men in white suit with red cummerbund round their 
waist were wait upon the end of it to receiv me. one wa a larg 
portli fellow with a greyish beard. the other wa slender and tall, with 
a pale pinch face, which wa half conceal by a great mushroom-shap 
hat. 

“veri glad to see you,” said the latter, cordially. “I am walker, the 
agent of armitag and wilson. let me introduc dr. several of the same 
company. It is not often we see a privat yacht in these parts.” 

“she’ the _gamecock_,” I explained. “i’m owner and captain—meldrum is 
the name.” 

“exploring?” he asked. 

“i’m a lepidopterist—a butterfly-catcher. i’v been do the west coast 
from seneg downwards.” 

“good sport?” ask the doctor, turn a slow yellow-shot eye upon me. 

“I have forti case full. We came in here to water, and also to see what 
you have in my line.” 

these introduct and explan had fill up the time whilst my 
two krooboy were make the dinghi fast. then I walk down the jetti 
with one of my new acquaint upon either side, each pli me with 
questions, for they had seen no white man for months. 

“what do we do?” said the doctor, when I had begun ask question in 
my turn. “our busi keep us pretti busy, and in our leisur time we 
talk politics.” 

“yes, by the special merci of provid several is a rank radic and 
I am a good stiff unionist, and we talk home rule for two solid hour 
everi evening.” 

“and drink quinin cocktails,” said the doctor. “we’r both pretti well 
salt now, but our normal temperatur wa about 103 last year. I 
shouldn’t, as an imparti adviser, recommend you to stay here veri long 
unless you are collect bacilli as well as butterflies. the mouth of 
the ogowai river will never develop into a health resort.” 

there is noth finer than the way in which these outli picket of 
civil distil a grim humour out of their desol situation, and 
turn not onli a bold, but a laugh face upon the chanc which their 
live may bring. everywher from sierra leon downward I had found the 
same reek swamps, the same isol fever-rack commun and the 
same bad jokes. there is someth approach to the divin in that 
power of man to rise abov hi condit and to use hi mind for the 
purpos of mock at the miseri of hi body. 

“dinner will be readi in about half an hour, captain meldrum,” said the 
doctor. “walker ha gone in to see about it; he’ the housekeep thi 
week. meanwhile, if you like, we’ll stroll round and i’ll show you the 
sight of the island.” 

the sun had alreadi sunk beneath the line of palm trees, and the great 
arch of the heaven abov our head wa like the insid of a huge shell, 
shimmer with dainti pink and delic iridescence. No one who ha 
not live in a land where the weight and heat of a napkin becom 
intoler upon the knee can imagin the bless relief which the 
cool of even bring along with it. In thi sweeter and purer air 
the doctor and I walk round the littl island, he point out the 
stores, and explain the routin of hi work. 

“there’ a certain romanc about the place,” said he, in answer to some 
remark of mine about the dul of their lives. “we are live here 
just upon the edg of the great unknown. Up there,” he continued, 
point to the north-east, “du chaillu penetrated, and found the home 
of the gorilla. that is the gaboon country—th land of the great apes. 
In thi direction,” point to the south-east, “no one ha been veri 
far. the land which is drain by thi river is practic unknown to 
europeans. everi log which is carri past us by the current ha come 
from an undiscov country. i’v often wish that I wa a better 
botanist when I have seen the singular orchid and curious-look 
plant which have been cast up on the eastern end of the island.” 

the place which the doctor indic wa a slope brown beach, freeli 
litter with the flotsam of the stream. At each end wa a curv point, 
like a littl natur breakwater, so that a small shallow bay wa left 
between. thi wa full of float vegetation, with a singl huge 
splinter tree lie strand in the middl of it, the current rippl 
against it high black side. 

“these are all from up country,” said the doctor. “they get caught in 
our littl bay, and then when some extra freshet come they are wash 
out again and carri out to sea.” 

“what is the tree?” I asked. 

“oh, some kind of teak I should imagine, but pretti rotten by the look 
of it. We get all sort of big hardwood tree float past here, to say 
noth of the palms. just come in here, will you?” 

He led the way into a long build with an immens quantiti of barrel 
stave and iron hoop litter about in it. 

“thi is our cooperage,” said he. “we have the stave sent out in 
bundles, and we put them togeth ourselves. now, you don’t see anyth 
particularli sinist about thi building, do you?” 

I look round at the high corrug iron roof, the white wooden walls, 
and the earthen floor. In one corner lay a mattress and a blanket. 

“I see noth veri alarming,” said I. 

“and yet there’ someth out of the common, too,” he remarked. “you 
see that bed? well, I intend to sleep there to-night. I don’t want to 
buck, but I think it’ a bit of a test for nerve.” 

“why?” 

“oh, there have been some funni go on. you were talk about the 
monotoni of our lives, but I assur you that they are sometim quit as 
excit as we wish them to be. you’d better come back to the hous now, 
for after sundown we begin to get the fever-fog up from the marshes. 
there, you can see it come across the river.” 

I look and saw long tentacl of white vapour writh out from among 
the thick green underwood and crawl at us over the broad swirl 
surfac of the brown river. At the same time the air turn suddenli 
dank and cold. 

“there’ the dinner gong,” said the doctor. “if thi matter interest 
you i’ll tell you about it afterwards.” 

It did interest me veri much, for there wa someth earnest and 
subdu in hi manner as he stood in the empti cooperage, which appeal 
veri forcibl to my imagination. He wa a big, bluff, hearti man, thi 
doctor, and yet I had detect a curiou express in hi eye as he 
glanc about him—an express which I would not describ as one of 
fear, but rather that of a man who is alert and on hi guard. 

“bi the way,” said I, as we return to the house, “you have shown me 
the hut of a good mani of your nativ assistants, but I have not seen 
ani of the nativ themselves.” 

“they sleep in the hulk over yonder,” the doctor answered, point over 
to one of the banks. 

“indeed. I should not have thought in that case that they would need the 
huts.” 

“oh, they use the hut until quit recently. we’v put them on the hulk 
until they recov their confid a little. they were all half mad 
with fright, so we let them go, and nobodi sleep on the island except 
walker and myself.” 

“what frighten them?” I asked. 

“well, that bring us back to the same story. I suppos walker ha no 
object to your hear all about it. I don’t know whi we should make 
ani secret about it, though it is certainli a pretti bad business.” 

He made no further allus to it dure the excel dinner which had 
been prepar in my honour. It appear that no sooner had the littl 
white topsail of the _gamecock_ shown round cape lopez than these kind 
fellow had begun to prepar their famou pepper-pot—which is the 
pungent stew peculiar to the west coast—and to boil their yam and sweet 
potatoes. We sat down to as good a nativ dinner as one could wish, 
serv by a smart sierra leon wait boy. I wa just remark to 
myself that he at least had not share in the gener flight when, 
have laid the dessert and wine upon the table, he rais hi hand to 
hi turban. 

“anyt els I do, massa walker?” he asked. 

“no, I think that is all right, moussa,” my host answered. “I am not 
feel veri well to-night, though, and I should much prefer if you 
would stay on the island.” 

I saw a struggl between hi fear and hi duti upon the swarthi face of 
the african. hi skin had turn of that livid purplish tint which 
stand for pallor in a negro, and hi eye look furtiv about him. 

“no, no, massa walker,” he cried, at last, “you better come to the hulk 
with me, sah. look after you much better in the hulk, sah!” 

“that won’t do, moussa. white men don’t run away from the post where 
they are placed.” 

again I saw the passion struggl in the negro’ face, and again hi 
fear prevailed. 

“no use, massa walker, sah!” he cried. “s’elp me, I can’t do it. If it 
wa yesterday or if it wa to-morrow, but thi is the third night, sah, 
an’ it’ more than I can face.” 

walker shrug hi shoulders. 

“off with you then!” said he. “when the mail-boat come you can get back 
to sierra leone, for i’ll have no servant who desert me when I need him 
most. I suppos thi is all mysteri to you, or ha the doctor told you, 
captain meldrum?” 

“I show captain meldrum the cooperage, but I did not tell him 
anything,” said dr. severall. “you’r look bad, walker,” he added, 
glanc at hi companion. “you have a strong touch come on you.” 

“yes, i’v had the shiver all day, and now my head is like a 
cannon-ball. I took ten grain of quinine, and my ear are sing like 
a kettle. but I want to sleep with you in the cooperag to-night.” 

“no, no, my dear chap. I won’t hear of such a thing. you must get to bed 
at once, and I am sure meldrum will excus you. I shall sleep in the 
cooperage, and I promis you that i’ll be round with your medicin 
befor breakfast.” 

It wa evid that walker had been struck by one of those sudden and 
violent attack of remitt fever which are the curs of the west 
coast. hi sallow cheek were flush and hi eye shine with fever, 
and suddenli as he sat there he began to croon out a song in the 
high-pitch voic of delirium. 

“come, come, we must get you to bed, old chap,” said the doctor, and 
with my aid he led hi friend into hi bedroom. there we undress him, 
and presently, after take a strong sedative, he settl down into a 
deep slumber. 

“he’ right for the night,” said the doctor, as we sat down and fill 
our glass onc more. “sometim it is my turn and sometim his, but, 
fortunately, we have never been down together. I should have been sorri 
to be out of it to-night, for I have a littl mysteri to unravel. I told 
you that I intend to sleep in the cooperage.” 

“yes, you said so.” 

“when I said sleep I meant watch, for there will be no sleep for me. 
we’v had such a scare here that no nativ will stay after sundown, and 
I mean to find out to-night what the caus of it all may be. It ha 
alway been the custom for a nativ watchman to sleep in the cooperage, 
to prevent the barrel hoop be stolen. well, six day ago the fellow 
who slept there disappeared, and we have never seen a trace of him 
since. It wa certainli singular, for no cano had been taken, and these 
water are too full of crocodil for ani man to swim to shore. what 
becam of the fellow, or how he could have left the island is a complet 
mystery. walker and I were mere surprised, but the black were badli 
scared, and queer voodoo tale began to get about amongst them. but the 
real stamped broke out three night ago, when the new watchman in the 
cooperag also disappeared.” 

“what becam of him?” I asked. 

“well, we not onli don’t know, but we can’t even give a guess which 
would fit the facts. the nigger swear there is a fiend in the cooperag 
who claim a man everi third night. they wouldn’t stay in the 
island—noth could persuad them. even moussa, who is a faith boy 
enough, would, as you have seen, leav hi master in a fever rather than 
remain for the night. If we are to continu to run thi place we must 
reassur our niggers, and I don’t know ani better way of do it than 
by put in a night there myself. thi is the third night, you see, so 
I suppos the thing is due, whatev it may be.” 

“have you no clue?” I asked. “wa there no mark of violence, no 
blood-stain, no footprints, noth to give a hint as to what kind of 
danger you may have to meet?” 

“absolut nothing. the man wa gone and that wa all. last time it wa 
old ali, who ha been wharf-tend here sinc the place wa started. He 
wa alway as steadi as a rock, and noth but foul play would take him 
from hi work.” 

“well,” said I, “I realli don’t think that thi is a one-man job. your 
friend is full of laudanum, and come what might he can be of no 
assist to you. you must let me stay and put in a night with you at 
the cooperage.” 

“well, now, that’ veri good of you, meldrum,” said he heartily, shake 
my hand across the table. “it’ not a thing that I should have ventur 
to propose, for it is ask a good deal of a casual visitor, but if you 
realli mean it——” 

“certainli I mean it. If you will excus me a moment, I will hail the 
_gamecock_ and let them know that they need not expect me.” 

As we came back from the other end of the littl jetti we were both 
struck by the appear of the night. A huge blue-black pile of cloud 
had built itself up upon the landward side, and the wind came from it in 
littl hot pants, which beat upon our face like the draught from a 
blast furnace. under the jetti the river wa swirl and hissing, 
toss littl white spurt of spray over the planking. 

“confound it!” said doctor severall. “we are like to have a flood on 
the top of all our troubles. that rise in the river mean heavi rain 
up-country, and when it onc begin you never know how far it will go. 
we’v had the island nearli cover befor now. well, we’ll just go and 
see that walker is comfortable, and then if you like we’ll settl down 
in our quarters.” 

the sick man wa sunk in a profound slumber, and we left him with some 
crush lime in a glass besid him in case he should awak with the 
thirst of fever upon him. then we made our way through the unnatur 
gloom thrown by that menac cloud. the river had risen so high that 
the littl bay which I have describ at the end of the island had 
becom almost obliter through the submerg of it flank 
peninsula. the great raft of driftwood, with the huge black tree in the 
middle, wa sway up and down in the swollen current. 

“that’ one good thing a flood will do for us,” said the doctor. “it 
carri away all the veget stuff which is brought down on to the 
east end of the island. It came down with the freshet the other day, and 
here it will stay until a flood sweep it out into the main stream. 
well, here’ our room, and here are some books, and here is my tobacco 
pouch, and we must tri and put in the night as best we may.” 

By the light of our singl lantern the great lone room look veri 
gaunt and dreary. save for the pile of stave and heap of hoop there 
wa absolut noth in it, with the except of the mattress for the 
doctor, which had been laid in the corner. We made a coupl of seat and 
a tabl out of the staves, and settl down togeth for a long vigil. 
several had brought a revolv for me, and wa himself arm with a 
double-barrel shot-gun. We load our weapon and laid them cock 
within reach of our hands. the littl circl of light and the black 
shadow arch over us were so melancholi that he went off to the 
house, and return with two candles. one side of the cooperag wa 
pierced, however, by sever open windows, and it wa onli by screen 
our light behind stave that we could prevent them from be 
extinguished. 

the doctor, who appear to be a man of iron nerves, had settl down to 
a book, but I observ that everi now and then he laid it upon hi knee, 
and took an earnest look all round him. for my part, although I tri 
onc or twice to read, I found it imposs to concentr my thought 
upon the book. they would alway wander back to thi great empti silent 
room, and to the sinist mysteri which overshadow it. I rack my 
brain for some possibl theori which would explain the disappear of 
these two men. there wa the black fact that they were gone, and not the 
least tittl of evid as to whi or whither. and here we were wait 
in the same place—wait without an idea as to what we were wait 
for. I wa right in say that it wa not a one-man job. It wa tri 
enough as it was, but no forc upon earth would have kept me there 
without a comrade. 

what an endless, tediou night it was! outsid we heard the lap and 
gurgl of the great river, and the sough of the rise wind. 
within, save for our breathing, the turn of the doctor’ pages, and 
the high, shrill ping of an occasion mosquito, there wa a heavi 
silence. onc my heart sprang into my mouth as severall’ book suddenli 
fell to the ground and he sprang to hi feet with hi eye on one of the 
windows. 

“did you see anything, meldrum?” 

“no. did you?” 

“well, I had a vagu sens of movement outsid that window.” He caught 
up hi gun and approach it. “no, there’ noth to be seen, and yet I 
could have sworn that someth pass slowli across it.” 

“A palm leaf, perhaps,” said I, for the wind wa grow stronger everi 
instant. 

“veri likely,” said he, and settl down to hi book again, but hi eye 
were for ever dart littl suspici glanc up at the window. I 
watch it also, but all wa quiet outside. 

and then suddenli our thought were turn into a new direct by the 
burst of the storm. A blind flash wa follow by a clap which 
shook the building. again and again came the vivid white glare with 
thunder at the same instant, like the flash and roar of a monstrou 
piec of artillery. and then down came the tropic rain, crash and 
rattl on the corrug iron roof of the cooperage. the big hollow 
room boom like a drum. from the dark aros a strang mixtur of 
noises, a gurgling, splashing, tinkling, bubbling, washing, 
dripping—everi liquid sound that natur can produc from the thrash 
and swish of the rain to the deep steadi boom of the river. hour 
after hour the uproar grew louder and more sustained. 

“mi word,” said severall, “we are go to have the father of all the 
flood thi time. well, here’ the dawn come at last and that is a 
blessing. we’v about explod the third night superstit anyhow.” 

A grey light wa steal through the room, and there wa the day upon 
us in an instant. the rain had eas off, but the coffee-colour river 
wa roar past like a waterfall. it power made me fear for the anchor 
of the _gamecock_. 

“I must get aboard,” said I. “if she drag she’ll never be abl to beat 
up the river again.” 

“the island is as good as a breakwater,” the doctor answered. “I can 
give you a cup of coffe if you will come up to the house.” 

I wa chill and miserable, so the suggest wa a welcom one. We 
left the ill-omen cooperag with it mysteri still unsolved, and we 
splash our way up to the house. 

“there’ the spirit lamp,” said severall. “if you would just put a light 
to it, I will see how walker feel thi morning.” 

He left me, but wa back in an instant with a dread face. 

“he’ gone!” he cri hoarsely. 

the word sent a thrill of horror through me. I stood with the lamp in 
my hand, glare at him. 

“yes, he’ gone!” he repeated. “come and look!” 

I follow him without a word, and the first thing that I saw as I 
enter the bedroom wa walker himself lie huddl on hi bed in the 
grey flannel sleep suit in which I had help to dress him on the 
night before. 

“not dead, surely!” I gasped. 

the doctor wa terribl agitated. hi hand were shake like leav in 
the wind. 

“he’ been dead some hours.” 

“wa it fever?” 

“fever! look at hi foot!” 

I glanc down and a cri of horror burst from my lips. one foot wa not 
mere disloc but wa turn complet round in a most grotesqu 
contortion. 

“good god!” I cried. “what can have done this?” 

several had laid hi hand upon the dead man’ chest. 

“feel here,” he whispered. 

I place my hand at the same spot. there wa no resistance. the bodi wa 
absolut soft and limp. It wa like press a sawdust doll. 

“the breast-bon is gone,” said several in the same awe whisper. “he’ 
broken to bits. thank god that he had the laudanum. you can see by hi 
face that he die in hi sleep.” 

“but who can have done this?” 

“i’v had about as much as I can stand,” said the doctor, wipe hi 
forehead. “I don’t know that i’m a greater coward than my neighbours, 
but thi get beyond me. If you’r go out to the _gamecock_——” 

“come on!” said I, and off we started. If we did not run it wa becaus 
each of us wish to keep up the last shadow of hi self-respect befor 
the other. It wa danger in a light cano on that swollen river, but 
we never paus to give the matter a thought. He bail and I paddl 
we kept her abov water, and gain the deck of the yacht. there, with 
two hundr yard of water between us and thi curs island, we felt 
that we were our own men onc more. 

“well go back in an hour or so,” said he. “but we need a littl time to 
steadi ourselves. I wouldn’t have had the nigger see me as I wa just 
now for a year’ salary.” 

“i’v told the steward to prepar breakfast. then we shall go back,” 
said I. “but in god’ name, doctor severall, what do you make of it 
all?” 

“it beat me—beat me clean. i’v heard of voodoo devilry, and i’v 
laugh at it with the others. but that poor old walker, a decent, 
god-fearing, nineteenth-century, primrose-leagu englishman should go 
under like thi without a whole bone in hi body—it’ given me a shake, 
I won’t deni it. but look there, meldrum, is that hand of your mad or 
drunk, or what is it?” 

old patterson, the oldest man of my crew, and as steadi as the pyramids, 
had been station in the bow with a boat-hook to fend off the drift 
log which came sweep down with the current. now he stood with 
crook knees, glare out in front of him, and one forefing stab 
furious at the air. 

“look at it!” he yelled. “look at it!” 

and at the same instant we saw it. 

A huge black tree trunk wa come down the river, it broad glisten 
back just lap by the water. and in front of it—about three feet in 
front—arch upward like the figure-head of a ship, there hung a 
dread face, sway slowli from side to side. It wa flattened, 
malignant, as larg as a small beer-barrel, of a fade fungoid colour, 
but the neck which support it wa mottl with a dull yellow and 
black. As it flew past the _gamecock_ in the swirl of the water I saw 
two immens coil roll up out of some great hollow in the tree, and the 
villain head rose suddenli to the height of eight or ten feet, 
look with dull, skin-cov eye at the yacht. An instant later the 
tree had shot past us and wa plung with it horribl passeng 
toward the atlantic. 

“what wa it?” I cried. 

“it is our fiend of the cooperage,” said dr. severall, and he had becom 
in an instant the same bluff, self-confid man that he had been 
before. “yes, that is the devil who ha been haunt our island. It is 
the great python of the gaboon.” 

I thought of the stori which I had heard all down the coast of the 
monstrou constrictor of the interior, of their period appetite, 
and of the murder effect of their deadli squeeze. then it all took 
shape in my mind. there had been a freshet the week before. It had 
brought down thi huge hollow tree with it hideou occupant. who know 
from what far distant tropic forest it may have come. It had been 
strand on the littl east bay of the island. the cooperag had been 
the nearest house. twice with the return of it appetit it had carri 
off the watchman. last night it had doubtless come again, when several 
had thought he saw someth move at the window, but our light had 
driven it away. It had writh onward and had slain poor walker in hi 
sleep. 

“whi did it not carri him off?” I asked. 

“the thunder and lightn must have scare the brute away. there’ your 
steward, meldrum. the sooner we have breakfast and get back to the 
island the better, or some of those nigger might think that we had been 
frightened.” 




jelland’ voyag 


“well,” said our anglo-jap as we all drew up our chair round the 
smoking-room fire, “it’ an old tale out yonder, and may have spilt over 
into print for all I know. I don’t want to turn thi club-room into a 
chestnut stall, but it is a long way to the yellow sea, and it is just 
as like that none of you have ever heard of the yawl _matilda_, and of 
what happen to henri jelland and willi mcevoy aboard of her. 

“the middl of the sixti wa a stir time out in japan. that wa 
just after the simonosaki bombardment, and befor the daimio affair. 
there wa a tori parti and there wa a liber parti among the natives, 
and the question that they were wrangl over wa whether the throat 
of the foreign should be cut or not. I tell you all, polit have 
been tame to me sinc then. If you live in a treati port, you were 
bound to wake up and take an interest in them. and to make it better, 
the outsid had no way of know how the game wa going. If the 
opposit won it would not be a newspap paragraph that would tell him 
of it, but a good old tori in a suit of chain mail, with a sword in each 
hand, would drop in and let him know all about it in a singl upper cut. 

“of cours it make men reckless when they are live on the edg of a 
volcano like that. just at first they are veri jumpy, and then there 
come a time when they learn to enjoy life while they have it. I tell 
you, there’ noth make life so beauti as when the shadow of death 
begin to fall across it. time is too preciou to be dawdl away then, 
and a man live everi minut of it. that wa the way with us in 
yokohama. there were mani european place of busi which had to go on 
running, and the men who work them made the place live for seven 
night in the week. 

“one of the head of the european coloni wa randolph moore, the big 
export merchant. hi offic were in yokohama, but he spent a good deal 
of hi time at hi hous up in jeddo, which had onli just been open to 
the trade. In hi absenc he use to leav hi affair in the hand of 
hi head clerk, jelland, whom he knew to be a man of great energi and 
resolution. but energi and resolut are two-edg things, you know, 
and when they are use against you you don’t appreci them so much. 

“it wa gambl that set jelland wrong. He wa a littl dark-ey 
fellow with black curli hair—mor than three-quart celt, I should 
imagine. everi night in the week you would see him in the same place, on 
the left-hand side of the croupier at matheson’ _roug et noir_ table. 
for a long time he won, and live in better style than hi employer. and 
then came a turn of luck, and he began to lose so that at the end of a 
singl week hi partner and he were stone broke, without a dollar to 
their names. 

“thi partner wa a clerk in the employ of the same firm—a tall, 
straw-hair young englishman call mcevoy. He wa a good boy enough at 
the start, but he wa clay in the hand of jelland, who fashion him 
into a kind of weak model of himself. they were for ever on the prowl 
together, but it wa jelland who led and mcevoy who followed. lynch and 
I and one or two other tri to show the youngster that he could come 
to no good along that line, and when we were talk to him we could win 
him round easili enough, but five minut of jelland would swing him 
back again. It may have been anim magnet or what you like, but the 
littl man could pull the big one along like a sixty-foot tug in front 
of a full-rig ship. even when they had lost all their money they 
would still take their place at the tabl and look on with shine eye 
when ani one els wa rake in the stamps. 

“but one even they could keep out of it no longer. red had turn up 
sixteen time running, and it wa more than jelland could bear. He 
whisper to mcevoy, and then said a word to the croupier. 

“‘certainly, mr. jelland; your chequ is as good as notes,’ said he. 

“jelland scribbl a chequ and threw it on the black. the card wa the 
king of hearts, and the croupier rake in the littl bit of paper. 
jelland grew angry, and mcevoy white. anoth and a heavier chequ wa 
written and thrown on the table. the card wa the nine of diamonds. 
mcevoy lean hi head upon hi hand and look as if he would faint. 
‘bi god!’ growl jelland, ‘I won’t be beat,’ and he threw on a chequ 
that cover the other two. the card wa the deuc of hearts. A few 
minut later they were walk down the bund, with the cool night-air 
play upon their fever faces. 

“‘of cours you know what thi means,’ said jelland, light a cheroot; 
‘we’ll have to transfer some of the offic money to our current account. 
there’ no occas to make a fuss over it. old moor won’t look over 
the book befor easter. If we have ani luck, we can easili replac it 
befor then.’ 

“‘but if we have no luck?’ falter mcevoy. 

“‘tut, man, we must take thing as they come. you stick to me, and i’ll 
stick to you, and we’ll pull through together. you shall sign the 
chequ to-morrow night, and we shall see if your luck is better than 
mine.’ 

“but if anyth it wa worse. when the pair rose from the tabl on the 
follow evening, they had spent over £5,000 of their employer’ money. 
but the resolut jelland wa as sanguin as ever. 

“‘we have a good nine week befor us befor the book will be 
examined,’ said he. ‘we must play the game out, and it will all come 
straight.’ 

“mcevoy return to hi room that night in an agoni of shame and 
remorse. when he wa with jelland he borrow strength from him; but 
alon he recogn the full danger of hi position, and the vision of 
hi old white-cap mother in england, who had been so proud when he 
had receiv hi appointment, rose up befor him to fill him with 
loath and madness. He wa still toss upon hi sleepless couch when 
hi japanes servant enter the bedroom. for an instant mcevoy thought 
that the long-expect outbreak had come, and plung for hi revolver. 
then, with hi heart in hi mouth, he listen to the messag which the 
servant had brought. 

“jelland wa downstairs, and want to see him. 

“what on earth could he want at that hour of night? mcevoy dress 
hurriedli and rush downstairs. hi companion, with a set smile upon 
hi lips, which wa beli by the ghastli pallor of hi face, wa 
sit in the dim light of a solitari candle, with a slip of paper in 
hi hands. 

“‘sorri to knock you up, willy,’ said he. ‘no eavesdroppers, I suppose?’ 

“mcevoy shook hi head. He could not trust himself to speak. 

“‘well, then, our littl game is play out. thi note wa wait for 
me at home. It is from moore, and say that he will be down on monday 
morn for an examin of the books. It leav us in a tight place.’ 

“‘monday!’ gasp mcevoy; ‘to-day is friday.’ 

“‘saturday, my son, and 3 a.m. We have not much time to turn round in.’ 

“‘we are lost!’ scream mcevoy. 

“‘we soon will be, if you make such an infern row,’ said jelland 
harshly. ‘now do what I tell you, willy, and we’ll pull through yet.’ 

“‘i will do anything—anything.’ 

“‘that’ better. where’ your whisky? it’ a beastli time of the day to 
have to get your back stiff, but there must be no soft with us, or 
we are gone. first of all, I think there is someth due to our 
relations, don’t you?’ 

“mcevoy stared. 

“‘we must stand or fall together, you know. now I, for one, don’t intend 
to set my foot insid a felon’ dock under ani circumstances. d’ye see? 
i’m readi to swear to that. are you?’ 

“‘what d’you mean?’ ask mcevoy, shrink back. 

“‘why, man, we all have to die, and it’ onli the press of a trigger. 
I swear that I shall never be taken alive. will you? If you don’t, I 
leav you to your fate.’ 

“‘all right. i’ll do whatev you think best.’ 

“‘you swear it?’ 

“‘yes.’ 

“‘well, mind, you must be as good as your word. now we have two clear 
day to get off in. the yawl _matilda_ is on sale, and she ha all her 
fix and plenti of tin stuff aboard. we’ll buy the lot to-morrow 
morning, and whatev we want, and get away in her. but, first, we’ll 
clear all that is left in the office. there are 5,000 sovereign in the 
safe. after dark we’ll get them aboard the yawl, and take our chanc of 
reach california. there’ no use hesitating, my son, for we have no 
ghost of a look-in in ani other direction. it’ that or nothing.’ 

“‘i’ll do what you advise.’ 

“‘all right; and mind you get a bright face on you to-morrow, for if 
moor get the tip and come befor monday, then——’ He tap the 
side-pocket of hi coat and look across at hi partner with eye that 
were full of a sinist meaning. 

“all went well with their plan next day. the _matilda_ wa bought 
without difficulty; and, though she wa a tini craft for so long a 
voyage, had she been larger two men could not have hope to manag her. 
she wa stock with water dure the day, and after dark the two clerk 
brought down the money from the offic and stow it in the hold. befor 
midnight they had collect all their own possess without excit 
suspicion, and at two in the morn they left their moor and stole 
quietli out from among the shipping. they were seen, of course, and were 
set down as keen yachtsmen who were on for a good long sunday cruise; 
but there wa no one who dream that that cruis would onli end either 
on the american coast or at the bottom of the north pacif ocean. 
strain and hauling, they got their mainsail up and set their foresail 
and jib. there wa a slight breez from the south-east, and the littl 
craft went dip along upon her way. seven mile from land, however, 
the wind fell away and they lay becalmed, rise and fall on the long 
swell of a glassi sea. all sunday they did not make a mile, and in the 
even yokohama still lay along the horizon. 

“on monday morn down came randolph moor from jeddo, and made 
straight for the offices. He had had the tip from some one that hi 
clerk had been spread themselv a bit, and that had made him come 
down out of hi usual routine; but when he reach hi place and found 
the three junior wait in the street with their hand in their 
pocket he knew that the matter wa serious. 

“‘what’ this?’ he asked. He wa a man of action, and a nasti chap to 
deal with when he had hi topmast lowered. 

“‘we can’t get in,’ said the clerks. 

“‘where is mr. jelland?’ 

“‘he ha not come to-day.’ 

“‘and mr. mcevoy?’ 

“‘he ha not come either.’ 

“randolph moor look serious. ‘we must have the door down,’ said he. 

“they don’t build hous veri solid in that land of earthquakes, and in 
a brace of shake they were all in the office. Of cours the thing told 
it own story. the safe wa open, the money gone, and the clerk fled. 
their employ lost no time in talk. 

“‘where were they seen last?’ 

“‘on saturday they bought the _matilda_ and start for a cruise.’ 

“saturday! the matter seem hopeless if they had got two days’ start. 
but there wa still the shadow of a chance. He rush to the beach and 
swept the ocean with hi glasses. 

“‘mi god!’ he cried. ‘there’ the _matilda_ out yonder. I know her by 
the rake of her mast. I have my hand upon the villain after all!’ 

“but there wa a hitch even then. No boat had steam up, and the eager 
merchant had not patienc to wait. cloud were bank up along the 
haunch of the hills, and there wa everi sign of an approach chang 
of weather. A polic boat wa readi with ten arm men in her, and 
randolph moor himself took the tiller as she shot out in pursuit of the 
becalm yawl. 

“jelland and mcevoy, wait wearili for the breez which never came, 
saw the dark speck which sprang out from the shadow of the land and grew 
larger with everi swish of the oars. As she drew nearer, they could see 
also that she wa pack with men, and the gleam of weapon told what 
manner of men they were. jelland stood lean against the tiller, and 
he look at the threaten sky, the limp sails, and the approach 
boat. 

“‘it’ a case with us, willy,’ said he. ‘bi the lord, we are two most 
unlucki devils, for there’ wind in that sky, and anoth hour would 
have brought it to us.’ 

“mcevoy groaned. 

“‘there’ no good soften over it, my lad,’ said jelland. ‘it’ the 
polic boat right enough, and there’ old moor drive them to row like 
hell. it’ll be a ten-dollar job for everi man of them.’ 

“willi mcevoy crouch against the side with hi knee on the deck. ‘mi 
mother! my poor old mother!’ he sobbed. 

“‘she’ll never hear that you have been in the dock anyway,’ said 
jelland. ‘mi peopl never did much for me, but I will do that much for 
them. it’ no good, mac. We can chuck our hands. god bless you, old man! 
here’ the pistol!’ 

“he cock the revolver, and held the butt toward the youngster. but 
the other shrunk away from it with littl gasp and cries. jelland 
glanc at the approach boat. It wa not more than a few hundr 
yard away. 

“‘there’ no time for nonsense,’ said he. ‘damn it! man, what’ the use 
of flinching? you swore it!’ 

“‘no, no, jelland!’ 

“‘well, anyhow, I swore that neither of us should be taken. will you do 
it?’ 

“‘i can’t! I can’t!’ 

“‘then I will for you.’ 

“the rower in the boat saw him lean forwards, they heard two pistol 
shots, they saw him doubl himself across the tiller, and then, befor 
the smoke had lifted, they found that they had someth els to think 
of. 

“for at that instant the storm broke—on of those short sudden squall 
which are common in these seas. the _matilda_ heel over, her sail 
belli out, she plung her lee-rail into a wave, and wa off like a 
frighten deer. jelland’ bodi had jam the helm, and she kept a 
cours right befor the wind, and flutter away over the rise sea 
like a blown piec of paper. the rower work frantically, but the yawl 
still drew ahead, and in five minut it had plung into the storm 
wrack never to be seen again by mortal eye. the boat put back, and 
reach yokohama with the water wash half-way up to the thwarts. 

“and that wa how it came that the yawl _matilda_, with a cargo of five 
thousand pound and a crew of two dead young men, set sail across the 
pacif ocean. what the end of jelland’ voyag may have been no man 
knows. He may have founder in that gale, or he may have been pick up 
by some canni merchantman, who stuck to the bullion and kept hi mouth 
shut, or he may still be cruis in that vast wast of waters, blown 
north to the behr sea, or south to the malay islands. it’ better to 
leav it unfinish than to spoil a true stori by invent a tag to 
it.” 




B. 24 


I told my stori when I wa taken, and no one would listen to me. then I 
told it again at the trial—th whole thing absolut as it happened, 
without so much as a word added. I set it all out truly, so help me god, 
all that ladi manner said and did, and then all that I had said and 
done, just as it occurred. and what did I get for it? “the prison put 
forward a rambl and inconsequenti statement, incred in it 
details, and unsupport by ani shred of corrobor evidence.” that 
wa what one of the london paper said, and other let it pass as if I 
had made no defenc at all. and yet, with my own eye I saw lord 
manner murdered, and I am as guiltless of it as ani man on the juri 
that tri me. 

now, sir, you are there to receiv the petit of prisoners. It all 
lie with you. all I ask is that you read it—just read it—and then that 
you make an inquiri or two about the privat charact of thi “lady” 
mannering, if she still keep the name that she had three year ago, 
when to my sorrow and ruin I came to meet her. you could use a privat 
inquiri agent or a good lawyer, and you would soon learn enough to show 
you that my stori is the true one. think of the glori it would be to you 
to have all the paper say that there would have been a shock 
miscarriag of justic if it had not been for your persever and 
intelligence! that must be your reward, sinc I am a poor man and can 
offer you nothing. but if you don’t do it, may you never lie easi in 
your bed again! may no night pass that you are not haunt by the 
thought of the man who rot in gaol becaus you have not done the duti 
which you are paid to do! but you will do it, sir, I know. just make one 
or two inquiries, and you will soon find which way the wind blows. 
remember, also, that the onli person who profit by the crime wa 
herself, sinc it chang her from an unhappi wife to a rich young 
widow. there’ the end of the string in your hand, and you onli have to 
follow it up and see where it lead to. 

mind you, sir, I make no complaint as far as the burglari goes. I don’t 
whine about what I have deserved, and so far I have had no more than I 
have deserved. burglari it was, right enough, and my three year have 
gone to pay for it. It wa shown at the trial that I had had a hand in 
the merton cross business, and did a year for that, so my stori had the 
less attent on that account. A man with a previou convict never 
get a realli fair trial. I own to the burglary, but when it come to 
the murder which brought me a lifer—ani judg but sir jame might have 
given me the gallows—then I tell you that I had noth to do with it, 
and that I am an innoc man. and now i’ll take that night, the 13th of 
september, 1894, and i’ll give you just exactli what occurred, and may 
god’ hand strike me down if I go one inch over the truth. 

I had been at bristol in the summer look for work, and then I had a 
notion that I might get someth at portsmouth, for I wa train as a 
skill mechanic, so I came tramp my way across the south of england, 
and do odd job as I went. I wa tri all I knew to keep off the 
cross, for I had done a year in exet gaol, and I had had enough of 
visit queen victoria. but it’ cruel hard to get work when onc the 
black mark is against your name, and it wa all I could do to keep soul 
and bodi together. At last, after ten day of wood-cut and 
stone-break on starvat pay, I found myself near salisburi with a 
coupl of shill in my pocket, and my boot and my patienc clean 
wore out. there’ an ale-hous call “the will mind,” which stand 
on the road between blandford and salisbury, and it wa there that night 
I engag a bed. I wa sit alon in the tap-room just about close 
time, when the innkeeper—allen hi name was—cam besid me and began 
yarn about the neighbours. He wa a man that like to talk and to 
have some one to listen to hi talk, so I sat there smoke and drink 
a mug of ale which he had stood me; and I took no great interest in what 
he said until he began to talk (a the devil would have it) about the 
rich of manner hall. 

“mean the larg hous on the right befor I came to the village?” 
said I. “the one that stand in it own park?” 

“exactly,” said he—and I am give all our talk so that you may know 
that I am tell you the truth and hide nothing. “the long white 
hous with the pillars,” said he. “at the side of the blandford road.” 

now I had look at it as I passed, and it had cross my mind, as such 
thought will, that it wa a veri easi hous to get into with that great 
row of ground window and glass doors. I had put the thought away from 
me, and now here wa thi landlord bring it back with hi talk about 
the rich within. I said nothing, but I listened, and as luck would 
have it, he would alway come back to thi one subject. 

“he wa a miser young, so you can think what he is now in hi age,” said 
he. “well, he’ had some good out of hi money.” 

“what good can he have had if he doe not spend it?” said I. 

“well, it bought him the prettiest wife in england, and that wa some 
good that he got out of it. she thought she would have the spend of 
it, but she know the differ now.” 

“who wa she then?” I asked, just for the sake of someth to say. 

“she wa nobodi at all until the old lord made her hi lady,” said he. 
“she came from up london way, and some said that she had been on the 
stage there, but nobodi knew. the old lord wa away for a year, and when 
he came home he brought a young wife back with him, and there she ha 
been ever since. stephens, the butler, did tell me onc that she wa the 
light of the hous when fust she came, but what with her husband’ mean 
and aggravatin’ way, and what with her loneliness—for he hate to see a 
visitor within hi doors; and what with hi bitter words—for he ha a 
tongu like a hornet’ sting, her life all went out of her, and she 
becam a white, silent creature, mope about the countri lanes. some 
say that she love anoth man, and that it wa just the rich of the 
old lord which tempt her to be fals to her lover, and that now she is 
eat her heart out becaus she ha lost the one without be ani 
nearer to the other, for she might be the poorest woman in the parish 
for all the money that she ha the handl of.” 

well, sir, you can imagin that it did not interest me veri much to hear 
about the quarrel between a lord and a lady. what did it matter to me 
if she hate the sound of hi voice, or if he put everi indign upon 
her in the hope of break her spirit, and spoke to her as he would 
never have dare to speak to one of hi servants? the landlord told me 
of these things, and of mani more like them, but they pass out of my 
mind, for they were no concern of mine. but what I did want to hear wa 
the form in which lord manner kept hi riches. title-de and stock 
certif are but paper, and more danger than profit to the man who 
take them. but metal and stone are worth a risk. and then, as if he 
were answer my veri thoughts, the landlord told me of lord 
mannering’ great collect of gold medals, that it wa the most 
valuabl in the world, and that it wa reckon that if they were put 
into a sack the strongest man in the parish would not be abl to rais 
them. then hi wife call him, and he and I went to our beds. 

I am not argu to make out a case for myself, but I beg you, sir, to 
bear all the fact in your mind, and to ask yourself whether a man could 
be more sore tempt than I was. I make bold to say that there are few 
who could have held out against it. there I lay on my bed that night, a 
desper man without hope or work, and with my last shill in my 
pocket. I had tri to be honest, and honest folk had turn their back 
upon me. they taunt me for theft; and yet they push me toward it. I 
wa caught in the stream and could not get out. and then it wa such a 
chance: the great hous all line with windows, the golden medal which 
could so easili be melt down. It wa like put a loaf befor a 
starv man and expect him not to eat it. I fought against it for a 
time, but it wa no use. At last I sat up on the side of my bed, and I 
swore that that night I should either be a rich man and abl to give up 
crime for ever, or that the iron should be on my wrist onc more. then 
I slip on my clothes, and, have put a shill on the table—for the 
landlord had treat me well, and I did not wish to cheat him—i pass 
out through the window into the garden of the inn. 

there wa a high wall round thi garden, and I had a job to get over it, 
but onc on the other side it wa all plain sailing. I did not meet a 
soul upon the road, and the iron gate of the avenu wa open. No one wa 
move at the lodge. the moon wa shining, and I could see the great 
hous glimmer white through an archway of trees. I walk up it for a 
quarter of a mile or so, until I wa at the edg of the drive, where it 
end in a broad, gravel space befor the main door. there I stood in 
the shadow and look at the long building, with a full moon shine in 
everi window and silver the high stone front. I crouch there for 
some time, and I wonder where I should find the easiest entrance. the 
corner window of the side seem to be the one which wa least 
overlooked, and a screen of ivi hung heavili over it. My best chanc wa 
evid there. I work my way under the tree to the back of the 
house, and then crept along in the black shadow of the building. A dog 
bark and rattl hi chain, but I stood wait until he wa quiet, 
and then I stole on onc more until I came to the window which I had 
chosen. 

It is astonish how careless they are in the country, in place far 
remov from larg towns, where the thought of burglar never enter 
their heads. I call it set temptat in a poor man’ way when he 
put hi hand, mean no harm, upon a door, and find it swing open 
befor him. In thi case it wa not so bad as that, but the window wa 
mere fasten with the ordinari catch, which I open with a push from 
the blade of my knife. I pull up the window as quickli as possible, 
and then I thrust the knife through the slit in the shutter and prize 
it open. they were fold shutters, and I shove them befor me and 
walk into the room. 

“good evening, sir! you are veri welcome!” said a voice. 

i’v had some start in my life, but never one to come up to that one. 
there, in the open of the shutters, within reach of my arm, wa 
stand a woman with a small coil of wax taper burn in her hand. she 
wa tall and straight and slender, with a beauti white face that 
might have been cut out of clear marble, but her hair and eye were as 
black as night. she wa dress in some sort of white dressing-gown 
which flow down to her feet, and what with thi robe and what with her 
face, it seem as if a spirit from abov wa stand in front of me. 
My knee knock together, and I held on to the shutter with one hand to 
give me support. I should have turn and run away if I had had the 
strength, but I could onli just stand and stare at her. 

she soon brought me back to myself onc more. 

“don’t be frightened!” said she, and they were strang word for the 
mistress of a hous to have to use to a burglar. “I saw you out of my 
bedroom window when you were hide under those trees, so I slip 
downstairs, and then I heard you at the window. I should have open it 
for you if you had waited, but you manag it yourself just as I came 
up.” 

I still held in my hand the long clasp-knif with which I had open the 
shutter. I wa unshaven and grime from a week on the roads. altogether, 
there are few peopl who would have care to face me alon at one in the 
morning; but thi woman, if I had been her lover meet her by 
appointment, could not have look upon me with a more welcom eye. 
she laid her hand upon my sleev and drew me into the room. 

“what’ the mean of this, ma’am? don’t get tri ani littl game 
upon me,” said I, in my roughest way—and I can put it on rough when I 
like. “it’ll be the wors for you if you play me ani trick,” I added, 
show her my knife. 

“I will play you no trick,” said she. “on the contrary, I am your 
friend, and I wish to help you.” 

“excus me, ma’am, but I find it hard to believ that,” said I. “whi 
should you wish to help me?” 

“I have my own reasons,” said she; and then suddenly, with those black 
eye blaze out of her white face: “it’ becaus I hate him, hate him, 
hate him! now you understand.” 

I rememb what the landlord had told me, and I did understand. I 
look at her ladyship’ face, and I knew that I could trust her. she 
want to reveng herself upon her husband. she want to hit him where 
it would hurt him most—upon the pocket. she hate him so that she would 
even lower her pride to take such a man as me into her confid if she 
could gain her end by do so. i’v hate some folk in my time, but I 
don’t think I ever understood what hate wa until I saw that woman’ 
face in the light of the taper. 

“you’ll trust me now?” said she, with anoth coax touch upon my 
sleeve. 

“yes, your ladyship.” 

“you know me, then?” 

“I can guess who you are.” 

“I daresay my wrong are the talk of the county. but what doe he care 
for that? He onli care for one thing in the whole world, and that you 
can take from him thi night. have you a bag?” 

“no, your ladyship.” 

“shut the shutter behind you. then no one can see the light. you are 
quit safe. the servant all sleep in the other wing. I can show you 
where all the most valuabl thing are. you cannot carri them all, so we 
must pick the best.” 

the room in which I found myself wa long and low, with mani rug and 
skin scatter about on a polish wood floor. small case stood here 
and there, and the wall were decor with spear and sword and 
paddles, and other thing which find their way into museums. there were 
some queer clothes, too, which had been brought from savag countries, 
and the ladi took down a larg leather sack-bag from among them. 

“thi sleeping-sack will do,” said she. “now come with me and I will 
show you where the medal are.” 

It wa like a dream to me to think that thi tall, white woman wa the 
ladi of the house, and that she wa lend me a hand to rob her own 
home. I could have burst out laugh at the thought of it, and yet 
there wa someth in that pale face of her which stop my laughter 
and turn me cold and serious. she swept on in front of me like a 
spirit, with the green taper in her hand, and I walk behind with my 
sack until we came to a door at the end of thi museum. It wa locked, 
but the key wa in it, and she led me through. 

the room beyond wa a small one, hung all round with curtain which had 
pictur on them. It wa the hunt of a deer that wa paint on it, 
as I remember, and in the flicker of that light you’d have sworn that 
the dog and the hors were stream round the walls. the onli other 
thing in the room wa a row of case made of walnut, with brass 
ornaments. they had glass tops, and beneath thi glass I saw the long 
line of those gold medals, some of them as big as a plate and half an 
inch thick, all rest upon red velvet and glow and gleam in the 
darkness. My finger were just itch to be at them, and I slip my 
knife under the lock of one of the case to wrench it open. 

“wait a moment,” said she, lay her hand upon my arm. “you might do 
better than this.” 

“I am veri well satisfied, ma’am,” said I, “and much oblig to your 
ladyship for kind assistance.” 

“you can do better,” she repeated. “would not golden sovereign be worth 
more to you than these things?” 

“why, yes,” said I. “that’ best of all.” 

“well,” said she. “he sleep just abov our head. It is but one short 
staircase. there is a tin box with money enough to fill thi bag under 
hi bed.” 

“how can I get it without wake him?” 

“what matter if he doe wake?” she look veri hard at me as she spoke. 
“you could keep him from call out.” 

“no, no, ma’am, i’ll have none of that.” 

“just as you like,” said she. “I thought that you were a stout-heart 
sort of man by your appearance, but I see that I made a mistake. If you 
are afraid to run the risk of one old man, then of cours you cannot 
have the gold which is under hi bed. you are the best judg of your own 
business, but I should think that you would do better at some other 
trade.” 

“i’ll not have murder on my conscience.” 

“you could overpow him without harm him. I never said anyth of 
murder. the money lie under the bed. but if you are faint-hearted, it 
is better that you should not attempt it.” 

she work upon me so, partli with her scorn and partli with thi money 
that she held befor my eyes, that I believ I should have yield and 
taken my chanc upstairs, had it not been that I saw her eye follow 
the struggl within me in such a crafty, malign fashion, that it wa 
evid she wa bent upon make me the tool of her revenge, and that 
she would leav me no choic but to do the old man an injuri or to be 
captur by him. she felt suddenli that she wa give herself away, and 
she chang her face to a kindly, friendli smile, but it wa too late, 
for I had had my warning. 

“I will not go upstairs,” said I. “I have all I want here.” 

she look her contempt at me, and there never wa a face which could 
look it plainer. 

“veri good. you can take these medals. I should be glad if you would 
begin at thi end. I suppos they will all be the same valu when melt 
down, but these are the one which are the rarest, and, therefore, the 
most preciou to him. It is not necessari to break the locks. If you 
press that brass knob you will find that there is a secret spring. so! 
take that small one first—it is the veri appl of hi eye.” 

she had open one of the cases, and the beauti thing all lay 
expos befor me. I had my hand upon the one which she had point out, 
when suddenli a chang came over her face, and she held up one finger as 
a warning. “hist!” she whispered. “what is that?” 

far away in the silenc of the hous we heard a low, dragging, shuffl 
sound, and the distant tread of feet. she close and fasten the case 
in an instant. 

“it’ my husband!” she whispered. “all right. don’t be alarmed. i’ll 
arrang it. here! quick, behind the tapestry!” 

she push me behind the paint curtain upon the wall, my empti 
leather bag still in my hand. then she took her taper and walk quickli 
into the room from which we had come. from where I stood I could see her 
through the open door. 

“i that you, robert?” she cried. 

the light of a candl shone through the door of the museum, and the 
shuffl step came nearer and nearer. then I saw a face in the 
doorway, a great, heavi face, all line and creases, with a huge curv 
nose, and a pair of gold glass fix across it. He had to throw hi 
head back to see through the glasses, and that great nose thrust out in 
front of him like the beak of some sort of fowl. He wa a big man, veri 
tall and burly, so that in hi loos dressing-gown hi figur seem to 
fill up the whole doorway. He had a pile of grey, curl hair all round 
hi head, but hi face wa clean-shaven. hi mouth wa thin and small 
and prim, hidden away under hi long, master nose. He stood there, 
hold the candl in front of him, and look at hi wife with a 
queer, malici gleam in hi eyes. It onli need that one look to tell 
me that he wa as fond of her as she wa of him. 

“how’ this?” he asked. “some new tantrum? what do you mean by wander 
about the house? whi don’t you go to bed?” 

“I could not sleep,” she answered. she spoke languidli and wearily. If 
she wa an actress once, she had not forgotten her calling. 

“might I suggest,” said he, in the same mock kind of voice, “that a 
good conscienc is an excel aid to sleep?” 

“that cannot be true,” she answered, “for you sleep veri well.” 

“I have onli one thing in my life to be asham of,” said he, and hi 
hair bristl up with anger until he look like an old cockatoo. “you 
know best what that is. It is a mistak which ha brought it own 
punish with it.” 

“to me as well as to you. rememb that!” 

“you have veri littl to whine about. It wa I who stoop and you who 
rose.” 

“rose!” 

“yes, rose. I suppos you do not deni that it is promot to exchang 
the music-hal for manner hall. fool that I wa ever to take you out 
of your true sphere!” 

“if you think so, whi do you not separate?” 

“becaus privat miseri is better than public humiliation. becaus it is 
easier to suffer for a mistak than to own to it. becaus also I like to 
keep you in my sight, and to know that you cannot go back to him.” 

“you villain! you cowardli villain!” 

“yes, yes, my lady. I know your secret ambition, but it shall never be 
while I live, and if it happen after my death I will at least take care 
that you go to him as a beggar. you and dear edward will never have the 
satisfact of squander my savings, and you may make up your mind to 
that, my lady. whi are those shutter and the window open?” 

“I found the night veri close.” 

“it is not safe. how do you know that some tramp may not be outside? are 
you awar that my collect of medal is worth more than ani similar 
collect in the world? you have left the door open also. what is there 
to prevent ani one from rifl the cases?” 

“I wa here.” 

“I know you were. I heard you move about in the medal room, and that 
wa whi I came down. what were you doing?” 

“look at the medals. what els should I be doing?” 

“thi curios is someth new.” He look suspici at her and 
move on toward the inner room, she walk besid him. 

It wa at thi moment that I saw someth which startl me. I had laid 
my clasp-knif open upon the top of one of the cases, and there it lay 
in full view. she saw it befor he did, and with a woman’ cun she 
held her taper out so that the light of it came between lord mannering’ 
eye and the knife. then she took it in her left hand and held it 
against her gown out of hi sight. He look about from case to case—i 
could have put my hand at one time upon hi long nose—but there wa 
noth to show that the medal had been tamper with, and so, still 
snarl and grumbling, he shuffl off into the other room onc more. 

and now I have to speak of what I heard rather than of what I saw, but I 
swear to you, as I shall stand some day befor my maker, that what I say 
is the truth. 

when they pass into the outer room I saw him lay hi candl upon the 
corner of one of the tables, and he sat himself down, but in such a 
posit that he wa just out of my sight. she move behind him, as I 
could tell from the fact that the light of her taper threw hi long, 
lumpi shadow upon the floor in front of him. then he began talk about 
thi man whom he call edward, and everi word that he said wa like a 
blister drop of vitriol. He spoke low, so that I could not hear it 
all, but from what I heard I should guess that she would as soon have 
been lash with a whip. At first she said some hot word in reply, but 
then she wa silent, and he went on and on in that cold, mock voic 
of his, nag and insult and tormenting, until I wonder that she 
could bear to stand there in silenc and listen to it. then suddenli I 
heard him say in a sharp voice, “come from behind me! leav go of my 
collar! what! would you dare to strike me?” there wa a sound like a 
blow, just a soft sort of thud, and then I heard him cri out, “mi god, 
it’ blood!” He shuffl with hi feet as if he wa get up, and then 
I heard anoth blow, and he cri out, “oh, you she-devil!” and wa 
quiet, except for a drip and splash upon the floor. 

I ran out from behind my curtain at that, and rush into the other 
room, shake all over with the horror of it. the old man had slip 
down in the chair, and hi dressing-gown had ruck up until he look 
as if he had a monstrou hump to hi back. hi head, with the gold 
glass still fix on hi nose, wa loll over upon one side, and hi 
littl mouth wa open just like a dead fish. I could not see where the 
blood wa come from, but I could still hear it drum upon the 
floor. she stood behind him with the candl shine full upon her face. 
her lip were press togeth and her eye shining, and a touch of 
colour had come into each of her cheeks. It just want that to make her 
the most beauti woman I had ever seen in my life. 

“you’v done it now!” said I. 

“yes,” said she, in her quiet way, “i’v done it now.” 

“what are you go to do?” I asked. “they’ll have you for murder as 
sure as fate.” 

“never fear about me. I have noth to live for, and it doe not 
matter. give me a hand to set him straight in the chair. It is horribl 
to see him like this!” 

I did so, though it turn me cold all over to touch him. some of hi 
blood came on my hand and sicken me. 

“now,” said she, “you may as well have the medal as ani one else. take 
them and go.” 

“I don’t want them. I onli want to get away. I wa never mix up with a 
busi like thi before.” 

“nonsense!” said she. “you came for the medals, and here they are at 
your mercy. whi should you not have them? there is no one to prevent 
you.” 

I held the bag still in my hand. she open the case, and between us we 
threw a hundr or so of the medal into it. they were all from the one 
case, but I could not bring myself to wait for ani more. then I made for 
the window, for the veri air of thi hous seem to poison me after 
what I had seen and heard. As I look back, I saw her stand there, 
tall and graceful, with the light in her hand, just as I had seen her 
first. she wave good-bye, and I wave back at her and sprang out into 
the gravel drive. 

I thank god that I can lay my hand upon my heart and say that I have 
never done a murder, but perhap it would be differ if I had been 
abl to read that woman’ mind and thoughts. there might have been two 
bodi in the room instead of one if I could have seen behind that last 
smile of hers. but I thought of noth but of get safe away, and 
it never enter my head how she might be fix the rope round my neck. 
I had not taken five step out from the window skirt down the shadow 
of the hous in the way that I had come, when I heard a scream that 
might have rais the parish, and then anoth and another. 

“murder!” she cried. “murder! murder! help!” and her voic rang out in 
the quiet of the night-tim and sound over the whole country-side. It 
went through my head, that dread cry. In an instant light began to 
move and window to fli up, not onli in the hous behind me, but at the 
lodg and in the stabl in front. like a frighten rabbit I bolt 
down the drive, but I heard the clang of the gate be shut befor I 
could reach it. then I hid my bag of medal under some dri fagots, and I 
tri to get away across the park, but some one saw me in the moonlight, 
and present I had half a dozen of them with dog upon my heels. I 
crouch down among the brambles, but those dog were too mani for me, 
and I wa glad enough when the men came up and prevent me from be 
torn into pieces. they seiz me, and drag me back to the room from 
which I had come. 

“i thi the man, your ladyship?” ask the oldest of them—th same whom 
I found out afterward to be the butler. 

she had been bend over the body, with her handkerchief to her eyes, 
and now she turn upon me with the face of a fury. oh, what an actress 
that woman was! 

“yes, yes, it is the veri man,” she cried. “oh, you villain, you cruel 
villain, to treat an old man so!” 

there wa a man there who seem to be a villag constable. He laid hi 
hand upon my shoulder. 

“what do you say to that?” said he. 

“it wa she who did it,” I cried, point at the woman, whose eye 
never flinch befor mine. 

“come! come! tri another!” said the constable, and one of the 
men-serv struck at me with hi fist. 

“I tell you that I saw her do it. she stab him twice with a knife. 
she first help me to rob him, and then she murder him.” 

the footman tri to strike me again, but she held up her hand. 

“do not hurt him,” said she. “I think that hi punish may safe be 
left to the law.” 

“i’ll see to that, your ladyship,” said the constable. “your ladyship 
actual saw the crime committed, did you not?” 

“yes, yes, I saw it with my own eyes. It wa horrible. We heard the 
nois and we came down. My poor husband wa in front. the man had one of 
the case open, and wa fill a black leather bag which he held in hi 
hand. He rush past us, and my husband seiz him. there wa a 
struggle, and he stab him twice. there you can see the blood upon hi 
hands. If I am not mistaken, hi knife is still in lord mannering’ 
body.” 

“look at the blood upon her hands!” I cried. 

“she ha been hold up hi lordship’ head, you lie rascal,” said 
the butler. 

“and here’ the veri sack her ladyship spoke of,” said the constable, as 
a groom came in with the one which I had drop in my flight. “and here 
are the medal insid it. that’ good enough for me. We will keep him 
safe here to-night, and to-morrow the inspector and I can take him into 
salisbury.” 

“poor creature,” said the woman. “for my own part, I forgiv him ani 
injuri which he ha done me. who know what temptat may have driven 
him to crime? hi conscienc and the law will give him punish enough 
without ani reproach of mine render it more bitter.” 

I could not answer—i tell you, sir, I could not answer, so taken aback 
wa I by the assur of the woman. and so, seem by my silenc to 
agre to all that she had said, I wa drag away by the butler and the 
constabl into the cellar, in which they lock me for the night. 

there, sir, I have told you the whole stori of the event which led up 
to the murder of lord manner by hi wife upon the night of septemb 
the 14th, in the year 1894. perhap you will put my statement on one 
side as the constabl did at manner towers, or the judg afterward 
at the counti assizes. Or perhap you will see that there is the ring of 
truth in what I say, and you will follow it up, and so make your name 
for ever as a man who doe not grudg person troubl where justic is 
to be done. I have onli you to look to, sir, and if you will clear my 
name of thi fals accusation, then I will worship you as one man never 
yet worship another. but if you fail me, then I give you my solemn 
promis that I will rope myself up, thi day month, to the bar of my 
window, and from that time on I will come to plagu you in your dream 
if ever yet one man wa abl to come back and to haunt another. what I 
ask you to do is veri simple. make inquiri about thi woman, watch 
her, learn her past history, find out what use she is make of the 
money which ha come to her, and whether there is not a man edward as I 
have stated. If from all thi you learn anyth which show you her 
real character, or which seem to you to corrobor the stori which I 
have told you, then I am sure that I can reli upon your good of 
heart to come to the rescu of an innoc man. 


the end 


print BY william clow and sons, limited, london and beccles. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




sir A. conan doyle’ works. 


=sir nigel.= with illustr by arthur twidle. third impression. 
crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

=the tragedi OF the ‘korosko.’= new edit with 40 full-pag 
illustrations. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=uncl bernac=: a memori of the empire. with 12 full-pag 
illustrations. third and cheaper edition. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=rodney stone.= new and cheaper illustr edition. with 8 
full-pag illustrations. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the white company.= new and cheaper edit (the 28th edition. 
revised). with 8 full-pag illustrations. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the green flag=, and other stori of war and sport. with a 
frontispiece. new edition. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the adventur OF gerard.= with 16 illustr by W. B. wollen. 
crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the return OF sherlock holmes.= illustr by sidney paget. crown 
8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the hound OF the baskervilles.= with illustr by sidney paget. 
crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the adventur OF sherlock holmes.= with 25 illustr by sidney 
paget. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the exploit OF brigadi gerard.= with 24 illustr by W. B. 
wollen. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the sign OF four.= illustrated. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the memoir OF sherlock holmes.= with illustr by sidney 
paget. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=through the magic door.= illustrated. crown 8vo. 5_s._ 

=song OF action.= fifth impression. fcp. 8vo. 5_s._ 

=the great boer war, 1899–1902.= thoroughli revised, enlarged, and 
complet edition. with map and plans. 19th impression, 
complet over 67,000 copi printed. larg post 8vo. 10_s._ 
6_d._ 

=the war IN south africa=: it caus and conduct. demi 8vo. 
sixpence. 


also the =collect edit OF sir A. conan doyle’ novels= in 12 
volumes. with an introductori prefac and 2 photogravur 
illustr to each volume. larg crown 8vo. 6_s._ each net. 

⁂ _thi edit of sir A. conan doyle’ novel is limit to 1,000 
sets, the first volum of each set be sign and numbered; and 
the volum are not sold separately. the author’ futur work 
will, in due course, be ad to the edition._ 


content OF the volumes. 

1. the white company.—2. micah clarke.—3. the refugees.—4. rodney 
stone.—5. the adventur OF sherlock holmes.—6. memoir OF sherlock 
holmes.—7. A studi IN scarlet; the sign OF four.—8. the great shadow; 
uncl bernac.—9. A duet.—10. the tragedi OF the ‘korosko’; the green 
flag, and other tale OF war and sport.—11. the stark-munro letters; 
round the red lamp.—12. the exploit OF brigadi gerard; the crime OF 
the brigadier. 

london: smith, elder, & co., 15 waterloo place, s.w. 




work BY frank T. bullen, f.r.g.s. 


=our heritag the sea.= with a frontispiec by arthur twidle. crown 
8vo. 6_s._ 

_daili telegraph._—‘th first step to win the peopl to the 
read a good book is to produc the good book for them to read, and 
that mr. bullen ha done.’ 


=back to sunni seas.= with 8 full-pag illustr in colour by A. 
S. forrest, r.i. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_daili telegraph._—‘a bright, interest and chatti record of a 
pleasant cruis to the west indies.’ 


=sea-wrack.= second impression. with 8 illustr by arthur 
twidle. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_spectator._—‘characterist of mr. bullen’ best work.’ 

_vaniti fair._—‘a delight volume.... the seafar man is an open 
book to mr. bullen.’ 


=deep sea plunderings.= third impression. with 8 full-pag 
illustr by arthur twidle. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_spectator._—‘ther is someth in the book to pleas almost everi 
taste.’ 


=the men of the merchant service=: be the politi of the 
mercantil marin for ‘longshor readers. second impression. larg 
post 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._ 

_spectator._—‘th book is of great value, and of great interest to all 
the innumer peopl who are curiou about the most romant and 
separ of lives. but it is of importance, secondli and chiefly, as 
mr. bullen’ appeal to the polit sens of hi country.’ 


=the cruis of the ‘cachalot’ round the world= after sperm whales. 
By frank T. bullen, first mate. the volum includ a letter to 
the author from rudyard kipling. twelfth impression. with 8 
illustr and a chart. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

_the_ rev. dr. horton, _in hi sermon on behalf of the british and 
foreign bibl society, refer to mr. bullen’ ‘cruis of the 
“cachalot”’ in the follow terms_: 

‘it is a veri remark book in everi way; it seem to me worthi to 
rank with some of the write of defoe. It ha absolut taken the 
shine out of some of the romant literatur of such writer as even 
stevenson and rudyard kipling. By the strang law that truth is more 
wonder than fiction, thi book is more wonder than the wildest 
dream of the creator of imagination.’ 


=the log of a sea-waif=: be the recollect of first four year 
of my sea life. fifth impression. with 8 full page illustr 
special drawn by arthur twidle. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

_world._—‘w have read mani stori of sea life, but do not rememb 
to have been so fascin and enthral by ani of them as by thi 
masterli present of the humours, hardships, and minor tragedi 
of life in the forecastle.’ 


=the way they have In the navy=: be a day-to-day record of a 
cruis In h.m. battleship ‘mars’ dure the manœuvr of 1899. 
third impression. crown 8vo. paper covers, 1_s._; cloth, 1_s._ 
6_d._ 

_spectator._—‘w recommend it most heartili and without ani 
misgiving.’ 

london: smith, elder, & co., 15 waterloo place, s.w. 




work BY W. H. fitchett, b.a, ll.d. 


=wesley and hi century: a studi in spiritu forces.= with a 
photogravur frontispiec from the portrait of john wesley by 
georg romney and four facsimil of letters, &c. second 
impression. 6_s._ net. 

_bookman._—‘a deepli interest volume.... the stori is good as 
biographi and rich in material. 


=the command of the ‘hirondelle.’= with 16 full-pag 
illustrations. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_athenæum._—‘an admir sea story.... It is good literature, too, 
and written with histor and technic knowledge.’ 


=nelson and hi captains; sketch of famou seamen.= with 11 
portrait and a facsimil letter. third impression. crown 8vo. 
6_s._ 

_punch._—‘mi baronit have read all dr. fitchett’ tale of battl 
on land, think hi best piec is hi sea piece.... saxon and celt 
read the glow narr will feel proud to know it’ all true.’ 


=the tale of the great mutiny.= seventh and consider enlarg 
impression. with 8 portrait and 4 plans. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_guardian._—‘it is almost imposs to lay the book down. the stori 
of those summer month of 1857 must ever appeal to english readers.’ 

_bookman._—‘written with all the swing and dash, with all the care 
accuraci and brilliant descript power which have made dr. 
fitchett’ book so deservedli popular.’ 


=how england save europe: the stori of the great war (1793–1815).= 
second impression. In 4 vols. crown 8vo. with portraits. 
facsimiles, and plans, 6_s._ each. 

_times._—‘it is not without signific that thi excel “stori of 
the great war,” at onc popular in the best sense, well informed, full 
of instruction, and veri attract written, should be the work of a 
coloni writer.’ 

_guardian._—‘mr. fitchett ha achiev a real success, and the boy who 
cannot read these volum with pleasur (and profit) is hopeless. they 
are, if boyhood would but see it, more enthral than half the 
novel published.’ 


=fight for the flag.= fourth edition. with 16 portraits, 13 plans, 
and a facsimil letter of the duke of marlborough. crown 8vo. 
6_s._ 

_spectator._—‘“fight for the flag” is as good as “deed that won the 
empire.” To say more than thi in prais of the book befor us is 
unnecessary, for “deed that won the empire” wa one of the best 
collect of popular battl studi ever given to the public.’ 

_review OF reviews._—‘a a gift-book, or as a book to take up and read 
at odd moments, or to devour at a prolong sitting, thi book ha few 
equals, and will probabl equal or eclips the popular of it 
predecessors.’ 


=deed that won the empire.= twenty-third edition. with 16 portrait 
and 11 plans. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_spectator._—‘not sinc macaulay ceas to write ha english 
literatur produc a writer capabl of infus such life and vigour 
into histor scenes. the wholesom and manli tone of mr. fitchett’ 
book is special satisfactory.... the book cannot but take the reader 
by storm wherev it find him.’ 


=wellington’ men: some soldier-autobiographies.= edit by W. H. 
fitchett, b.a., ll.d. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_spectator._—‘mr. fitchett ha ere thi sound the clarion and fill 
the fife to good purpose, but he ha never done better work than in 
rescu from oblivion the narr which appear in thi volume.... 
We feel veri grate to mr. fitchett for hi skil edit of four 
stori which ought not to be allow to die.’ 

london: smith, elder, & co., 15 waterloo place, s.w. 




novel BY H. S. merriman. 


the last hope. fourth impress (second edition). crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_daili telegraph._—‘“th last hope” illustr all mr. merriman’ 
good qualities.... it interest is unflag and it brillianc 
undeniable.’ 


tomaso’ fortune, and other stories. second impression. crown 8vo, 
6_s._ 

_saturday review._—‘engrossing, fascinating, picturesqu tales, full 
of colour, adventure, and emotion.’ 


flotsam. seventh impression. with a frontispiece. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_vaniti fair._—‘a capit book, that will repay ani reader, old or 
young, for the reading.’ 


barlasch OF the guard. eighth impress (second edition). crown 
8vo, 6_s._ 

_world._—‘without doubt, the finest thing of it kind that mr. 
merriman ha yet accomplish in fiction. barlasch is a masterpiece.’ 

the vultures. seventh impression. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_daili news._—‘it is a notabl book, stirring, fresh, and of a high 
interest; it fascin and hold us to the end.... A fine book, a 
worthi successor of “the sowers.”’ 


the velvet glove. fifth impression. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_sketch._—‘equ to, if not better than, the best he ha ever written. 
“the velvet glove” is the veri essenc of good romance.’ 


the isl OF unrest. seventh impression. with illustrations. crown 
8vo, 6_s._ 

_the times._—‘capit reading, absorb reading.... An excit 
story, with “thrills” at everi third page.’ 

roden’ corner. fifth edition. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_truth._—‘a novel I defi you to lay down when onc you have got well 
into it.’ 

IN kedar’ tents. tenth edition. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_pall mall gazette._—‘aft the few first page one ceas to 
criticize, one can onli enjoy.... In a word—th use of which, 
unqualified, is such a rare and delici luxury—th book is good.’ 

the sowers. twenty-eighth edition. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_graphic._—‘hi absorbingli interest stori will be found veri 
difficult inde to lay down until it last page ha been turned.’ 


with edg tools. crown 8vo, 6_s._; and fcap. 8vo, boards, pictori 
cover, 2_s._; or limp red cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._ 

_westminst gazette._—‘admir conceiv as a whole, and most 
skil in it details. the stori never flag or loiters.’ 


from one gener TO another. crown 8vo, 6_s._; and fcap. 8vo, 
boards, pictori cover, 2_s._; or limp red cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._ 

_illustr london news._—‘th book is a good book. the charact of 
michael seymour and of jame agar are admir contrasted.’ 


the slave OF the lamp. crown 8vo, 6_s._; and fcap. 8vo, boards, 
pictori cover, 2_s._; or limp red cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._ 

_manchest guardian._—‘a masterli stori ... so like real life, and so 
entir unconventional.’ 


the grey lady. with 12 full-pag illustr by arthur rackham. 
sixth impression. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_british weekly._—‘an interesting, thoughtful, care written 
story, with a charm touch of pensiveness.’ 


note.—mr. merriman’ 14 novel are publish uniform in style, 
binding, and price, and thu form a collect edit of hi 
works. 

london: smith, elder & co., 15 waterloo place, s.w. 




------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




transcriber’ note: 

1. chang ‘suppling’ to ‘supplying’ on p. 53. 

2. use an ⁂ in place of an invert asterism. 

3. silent correct typograph errors. 

4. retain anachronist and non-standard spell as printed. 



***end OF the project gutenberg ebook round the fire stories*** 


******* thi file should be name 54109-0.txt or 54109-0.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/4/1/0/54109 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org 

section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

