the project gutenberg ebook of the damned, by algernon blackwood 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the damn 

author: algernon blackwood 

releas date: februari 13, 2004 [ebook #11074] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the damn *** 




produc by suzann shell, david cortesi and PG distribut proofread 




the damn 

algernon blackwood 

1914 



chapter I 


"i'm over forty, frances, and rather set in my ways," I said 
good-naturedly, readi to yield if she insist that our go togeth 
on the visit involv her happiness. "mi work is rather heavi just now 
too, as you know. the question is, could I work there--with a lot of 
unassort peopl in the house?" 

"mabel doesn't mention ani other people, bill," wa my sister' 
rejoinder. "I gather she' alone--a well as lonely." 

By the way she look sideway out of the window at nothing, it wa 
obviou she wa disappointed, but to my surpris she did not urg the 
point; and as I glanc at mrs. franklyn' invit lie upon her 
slope lap, the neat, childish handwrit conjur up a mental pictur 
of the banker' widow, with her timid, insignific personality, her 
pale grey eye and her express as of a backward child. I thought, 
too, of the roomi countri mansion her late husband had alter to suit 
hi particular needs, and of my visit to it a few year ago when it 
barren spacious suggest a wing of kensington museum fit up 
temporarili as a place to eat and sleep in. compar it mental with 
the poki chelsea flat where I and my sister kept impecuni house, I 
realiz other point as well. unworthi detail flash across me to 
entice: the fine library, the organ, the quiet work-room I should have, 
perfect service, the delici cup of earli tea, and hot bath at ani 
moment of the day--without a geyser! 

"it' a longish visit, a month--isn't it?" I hedged, smile at the 
detail that seduc me, and asham of my man' selfishness, yet 
know that franc expect it of me. "there are point about it, I 
admit. If you'r set on my go with you, I could manag it all right." 

I spoke at length in thi way becaus my sister made no answer. I saw 
her tire eye gaze into the dreari of oakley street and felt a 
pang strike through me. after a pause, in which again she said no word, 
I added: "so, when you write the letter, you might hint, perhaps, that I 
usual work all the morning, and--er--am not a veri live visitor! 
then she'll understand, you see." and I half-ros to return to my 
diminut study, where I wa slaving, just then, at an absorb 
articl on compar aesthet valu in the blind and deaf. 

but franc did not move. she kept her grey eye upon oakley street 
where the even mist from the river drew mourn perspect into 
view. It wa late october. We heard the omnibus thunder across the 
bridge. the monotoni of that broad, characterless street seem more 
than usual depressing. even in june sunshin it wa dead, but with 
autumn it melancholi soak into everi hous between king' road and 
the embankment. It wash thought into the past, instead of invit it 
hope toward the future. for me, it easi width wa an avenu 
through which nameless slum across the river sent creep messag of 
depression, and I alway regard it as winter' main entranc into 
london--fog, slush, gloom troop down it everi november, wave their 
forbid banner till march came to rout them. 

it one claim upon my love wa that the south wind swept sometim 
unobstruct up it, soft with suggest of the sea. these lugubri 
thought I natur kept to myself, though I never ceas to regret the 
littl flat whose cheap had seduc us. now, as I watch my 
sister' impass face, I realiz that perhap she, too, felt as I 
felt, yet, brave woman, without betray it. 

"and, look here, fanny," I said, put a hand upon her shoulder as I 
cross the room, "it would be the veri thing for you. you'r worn out 
with cater and housekeeping. mabel is your oldest friend, besides, 
and you'v hardli seen her sinc he died--" 

"she' been abroad for a year, bill, and onli just came back," my sister 
interposed. "she came back rather unexpectedly, though I never thought 
she would go there to live--" she stop abruptly. clearly, she wa 
onli speak half her mind. "probably," she went on, "mabel want to 
pick up old link again." 

"naturally," I put in, "yourself chief among them." the veil refer 
to the hous I let pass. 

It involv discuss the dead man for one thing. 

"I feel I ought to go anyhow," she resumed, "and of cours it would be 
jollier if you came too. you'd get in such a muddl here by yourself, 
and eat wrong things, and forget to air the rooms, and--oh, everything!" 
she look up laughing. "only," she added, "there' the british 
museum--?" 

"but there' a big librari there," I answered, "and all the book of 
refer I could possibl want. It wa of you I wa thinking. you could 
take up your paint again; you alway sell half of what you paint. It 
would be a splendid rest too, and sussex is a jolli countri to walk in. 
By all means, fanny, I advise--" 

our eye met, as I stammer in my attempt to avoid express the 
thought that hid in both our minds. My sister had a weak for 
dabbl in the variou "new" theori of the day, and mabel, who befor 
her marriag had belong to foolish societi for investig the 
futur life to the neglect of the present one, had foster thi 
undesir tendency. her amiable, impression tempera wa open 
to everi psychic wind that blew. I deplored, detest the whole 
business. but even more than thi I abhor the later influenc that 
mr. franklyn had steep hi wife in, captur her bodi and soul in hi 
somber doctrines. I had dread lest my sister also might be caught. 

"now that she is alon again--" 

I stop short. our eye now made pretenc impossible, for the truth 
had slip out inevitably, stupidly, although unexpress in definit 
language. We laughed, turn our face a moment to look at other thing 
in the room. franc pick up a book and examin it cover as though 
she had made an import discovery, while I took my case out and lit a 
cigarett I did not want to smoke. We left the matter there. I went out 
of the room befor further explan could caus tension. 
disagr grow into discord from such tini things--wrong adjectives, 
or a chanc inflect of the voice. franc had a right to her view of 
life as much as I had. At least, I reflect comfortably, we had 
separ upon an agreement thi time, recogn mutually, though not 
actual stated. 

and thi point of meet was, oddli enough, our way of regard some 
one who wa dead. 

for we had both dislik the husband with a great dislike, and dure 
hi three years' marri life had onli been to the hous once--for a 
weekend visit; arriv late on saturday, we had left after an earli 
breakfast on monday morning. ascrib my sister' dislik to a natur 
jealousi at lose her old friend, I said mere that he displeas me. 
yet we both knew that the real emot lay much deeper. frances, loyal, 
honor creature, had kept silence; and beyond say that hous and 
grounds--h alter one and laid out the other--distress her as an 
express of hi person somehow ('distressed' wa the word she 
used), no further explan had pass her lips. 

our dislik of hi person wa easili account for--up to a point, 
sinc both of us share the artist' point of view that a creed, cut to 
measur and care dried, wa an ugli thing, and that a dogma to 
which believ must subscrib or perish everlastingli wa a barbar 
rest upon cruelty. but while my own dislik wa pure due to an 
abstract worship of beauty, my sister' had anoth twist in it, for 
with her "new" tendencies, she believ that all religion were an 
aspect of truth and that no one, even the lowest wretch, could escap 
"heaven" in the long run. 

samuel franklyn, the rich banker, wa a man univers respect and 
admired, and the marriage, though mabel wa fifteen year hi junior, 
won gener applause; hi bride wa an heiress in her own right-- 
breweries--and the stori of her convers at a revivalist meet where 
samuel franklyn had spoken fervidli of heaven, and terrifyingli of sin, 
hell and damnation, even contain a touch of genuin romance. she wa a 
brand snatch from the burning; hi detail eloqu had frighten 
her into heaven; salvat came in the nick of time; hi word had 
pluck her from the edg of that lake of fire and brimston where their 
worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched. she regard him as a hero, 
sigh her relief upon hi saintli shoulder, and accept the peac he 
offer her with a grate resignation. 

for her husband wa a "religi man" who success combin great 
rich with the glamour of win souls. He wa a portli figure, though 
tall, with masterful, big hands, hi finger rather thick and red; and 
hi dignity, that just escap be pompous, held in it someth that 
wa implacable. A convinc assurance, almost remorseless, gleam in 
hi eye when he preach especially, and hi threat of hell fire must 
have scare soul stronger than the timid, recept mabel whom he 
married. He clad himself in long frock-coat hat button unevenly, big 
squar boots, and trouser that invari bag at the knee and were a 
littl short; he wore low collars, spat occasionally, and a tall black 
hat that wa not of silk. hi voic wa altern hard and unctuous; 
and he regard theaters, ballrooms, and racecours as the vestibul of 
that brimston lake of whose geographi he wa as posit as of hi 
great bank offic in the city. A philanthropist up to the hilt, 
however, no one ever doubt hi complet sincerity; hi convict 
were ingrained, hi faith born out by hi life--a wit hi name 
upon so mani admir societies, as treasurer, patron, or head the 
donat list. He bulk larg in the world of do good, a broad and 
state stone in the rampart against evil. and hi heart wa genuin 
kind and soft for others--who believ as he did. 

yet, in spite of thi true sympathi with suffer and hi desir to 
help, he wa narrow as a telegraph wire and unbend as a church 
pillar; he wa intens selfish; intoler as an offic of the 
inquisition, hi bourgeoi soul construct a revolt scheme of heaven 
that wa reproduc in miniatur in all he did and planned. faith wa 
the sine qua non of salvation, and by "faith" he meant belief in hi own 
particular view of things--"which faith, except everi one do keep whole 
and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly." all the 
world but hi own small, exclus sect must be damn eternally--a 
pity, but alas, inevitable. He wa right. 

yet he pray without ceasing, and gave heavili to the poor--th onli 
thing he could not give be big idea to hi provinci and suburban 
deity. pettier than an insect, and more obstin than a mule, he had 
also the superior, sleek humil of a "chosen one." He wa churchwarden 
too. He read the lesson in a "place of worship," either chilli or 
overheated, where neither organ, vestments, nor light candl were 
permitted, but where the odor of hair-wash on the boys' head in the 
back row pervad the entir building. 

thi portrait of the banker, who accumul rich both on earth and in 
heaven, may possibl be overdrawn, however, becaus franc and I were 
"artist temperaments" that view the type with a dislik and distrust 
amount to contempt. the major consid samuel franklyn a worthi 
man and a good citizen. the majority, doubtless, held the saner view. A 
few year more, and he certainli would have been made a baronet. He 
reliev much suffer in the world, as assuredli as he caus mani 
soul the agoni of tortur fear by hi emphasi upon damnation. 

had there been one point of beauti in him, we might have been more 
lenient; onli we found it not, and, I admit, took littl pain to 
search. I shall never forget the look of dour forgiv with which he 
heard our excus for miss morn prayer that sunday morn of our 
singl visit to the towers. My sister learn that a chang wa made 
soon afterwards, prayer be "conducted" after breakfast instead of 
before. 

the tower stood solemnli upon a sussex hill amid park-lik modern 
grounds, but the hous cannot better be described--it would be so 
wearisom for one thing--than by say that it wa a cross between an 
overgrown, pretenti norwood villa and one of those saturnin 
institut for crippl the train pass as it slink asham through 
south london into surrey. It wa "wealthily" furnish and at first 
sight imposing, but on closer acquaint reveal a meager 
personality, barren and austere. one look for rule and regul on 
the walls, all sign By order. the place wa a prison that shut out 
"the world." there was, of course, no billiard-room, no smoking-room, no 
room for play of ani kind, and the great hall at the back, onc a 
chapel, which might have been use for dancing, theatricals, or other 
innoc amusements, wa consecr in hi day to meet of variou 
kinds, chiefli brigades, temper or missionari societies. there wa a 
harmonium at one end--on the level floor--a rais dai or platform at 
the other, and a galleri abov for the servants, gardeners, and 
coachmen. It wa heat with hot-wat pipes, and hung with doré' 
pictures, though these latter were soon remov and store out of sight 
in the attic as be too unspiritual. In polished, shini wood, it wa 
a represent in miniatur of that poki exclus heaven he took 
about with him, extern it in all he did and planned, even in the 
ground about the house. 

chang in the towers, franc told me, had been made dure mabel' 
year of widowhood abroad--an organ put into the big hall, the librari 
made livabl and re-catalogued--when it wa permiss to suppos she 
had found her soul again and return to her normal, healthi view of 
life, which includ enjoy and play, literature, music and the arts, 
without, however, a touch of that trivial thoughtless usual term 
worldliness. mrs. franklyn, as I rememb her, wa a quiet littl 
woman, shallow, perhaps, and easili influenced, but sincer as a dog and 
thorough in her faith friendship. her tast at heart were catholic, 
and that heart wa simpl and unimaginative. that she took up with the 
variou movement of the day wa sign mere that she wa search in 
her limit way for a belief that should bring her peace. she was, in 
fact, a veri ordinari woman, her calib a littl less than that of 
frances. I knew they use to discuss all kind of theori together, but 
as these discuss never result in action, I had come to regard her 
as harmless. still, I wa not sorri when she married, and I did not 
welcom now a renew of the former intimacy. the philanthropist she had 
given no children, or she would have made a good and sensibl mother. No 
doubt she would marri again. 

"mabel mention that she' been alon at the tower sinc the end of 
august," franc told me at teatime; "and i'm sure she feel out of it 
and lonely. It would be a kind to go. besides, I alway like her." 

I agreed. I had recov from my attack of selfishness. I express my 
pleasure. 

"you'v written to accept," I said, half statement and half question. 

franc nodded. "I thank for you," she ad quietly, "explain that 
you were not free at the moment, but that later, if not inconvenient, 
you might come down for a bit and join me." 

I stared. franc sometim had thi independ way of decid things. 
I wa convicted, and punish into the bargain. 

Of cours there follow argument and explanation, as between brother 
and sister who were affectionate, but the record of our talk could be 
of littl interest. It wa arrang thus, franc and I both satisfied. 
two day later she depart for the towers, leav me alon in the flat 
with everyth plan for my comfort and good behavior--sh wa rather 
a tyrant in her quiet way--and her last word as I saw her off from 
chare cross rang in my head for a long time after she wa gone: 

"i'll write and let you know, bill. eat properly, mind, and let me know 
if anyth goe wrong." 

she wave her small glove hand, nod her head till the feather 
brush the window, and wa gone. 




chapter II 


after the note announc her safe arriv a week of silenc passed, and 
then a letter came; there were variou suggest for my welfare, and 
the rest wa the usual rambl inform and descript franc 
loved, gener italicized. 

" ...and we are quit alone," she went on in her enorm handwrit 
that seem such a wast of space and labor, "though some other are 
come presently, I believe. you could work here to your heart' 
content. mabel quit understands, and say she would love to have you 
when you feel free to come. she ha chang a bit--back to her old 
natur self: she never mention him. the place ha chang too in 
certain ways: it ha more cheerfulness, I think. she ha put it in, thi 
cheerfulness, spade it in, if you know what I mean; but it lie about 
uneasili and is not natural--quite. the organ is a beauty. she must be 
veri rich now, but she' as gentl and sweet as ever. Do you know, bill, 
I think he must have frighten her into marri him. I get the 
impress she wa afraid of him." thi last sentenc wa ink out, I 
but I read it through the scratching; the letter be too big to hide. 
"he had an inflex will beneath all that oili kind which pass 
for spiritual. He wa a real personality, I mean. i'm sure he'd have 
sent you and me cheer to the stake in anoth century--for our own 
good. isn't it odd she never speak of him, even to me?" this, again, 
wa stroke through, though without the intent to obliterate--mer 
becaus it wa repetition, probably. "the onli remind of him in the 
hous now is a big copi of the present portrait that stand on the 
stair of the multitechn institut at peckham--y know--that 
life-s one with hi fat hand sprinkl with ring rest on a thick 
bibl and the other slip between the button of a tight frock-coat. 
It hang in the dine room and rather domin our meals. I wish mabel 
would take it down. I think she'd like to, if she dared. there' not a 
singl photograph of him anywhere, even in her own room. mrs. marsh is 
here--y rememb her, hi housekeeper, the wife of the man who got 
penal servitud for kill a babi or something--y said she rob him 
and justifi her steal becaus the stori of the unjust steward wa 
in the bible! how we laugh over that! she' just the same too, glide 
about all over the hous and turn up when least expected." 

other reminisc fill the next two side of the letter, and ran, 
without a trace of punctuation, into instruct about a salamand 
stove for heat my work-room in the flat; these were follow by 
thing I wa to tell the cook, and by request for sever articl she 
had forgotten and would like sent after her, two of them blouses, with 
descript so lengthi and contradictori that I sigh as I read them-- 
"unless you come down soon, in which case perhap you wouldn't mind 
bring them; not the mauv one I wear in the even sometimes, but 
the pale blue one with lace round the collar and the crinkli front. 
they'r in the cupboard--or the drawer, i'm not sure which--of my 
bedroom. ask anni if you'r in doubt. thank most awfully. send a 
telegram, remember, and we'll meet you in the motor ani time. I don't 
quit know if I shall stay the whole month--alone. It all depends...." 
and she close the letter, the italic word increas recklessli 
toward the end, with a repetit that mabel would love to have me "for 
myself," as also to have a "man in the house," and that I onli had to 
telegraph the day and the train.... thi letter, come by the second 
post, interrupt me in a moment of absorb work, and, have read it 
through to make sure there wa noth requir instant attention, I 
threw it asid and went on with my note and reading. within five 
minutes, however, it wa back at me again. that restless thing call 
"between the lines" flutter about my mind. My interest in the balkan 
states--polit articl that had been "ordered"--faded. somewhere, 
somehow I felt disquieted, disturbed. At first I persist in my work, 
forc myself to concentrate, but soon found that a layer of new 
impress float between the articl and my attention. It wa like a 
shadow, though a shadow that dissolv upon inspection. onc or twice I 
glanc up, expect to find some one in the room, that the door had 
open unobserv and anni wa wait for instructions. I heard the 
buse thunder across the bridge. I wa awar of oakley street. 

montenegro and the blue adriat melt into the octob haze along that 
depress embank that ape a riverbank, and sentenc from the 
letter flash befor my eye and stung me. pick it up and read it 
through more carefully, I rang the bell and told anni to find the 
blous and pack them for the post, show her final the written 
description, and resent the superior smile with which she at onc 
interrupted. "I know them, sir," and disappeared. 

but it wa not the blouses: it wa that exasper thing "between the 
lines" that put an end to my work with it elus teas nuisance. the 
first sharp impress is alon of valu in such a case, for onc 
analysi begin the imagin construct all kind of fals 
interpretation. the more I thought, the more I grew fuddled. the letter, 
it seem to me, want to say anoth thing; instead the eight sheet 
convey it merely. It came to the edg of disclosure, then halted. 

there wa someth on the writer' mind, and I felt uneasy. studi 
the sentenc brought, however, no revelation, but increas confus 
only; for while the uneasi remained, the first clear hint had 
vanished. In the end I close my book and went out to look up anoth 
matter at the british museum library. perhap I should discov it that 
way--bi turn the mind in a total new direction. I lunch at the 
express dairi in oxford street close by, and telephon to anni that I 
would be home to tea at five. 

and at tea, tire physic and mental after breath the exhaust 
air of the rotunda for five hours, my mind suddenli deliv up it 
origin impression, vivid and clear-cut; no proof accompani the 
revelation; it wa mere presentiment, but convincing. franc wa 
disturb in her mind, her orderly, sensible, housekeep mind; she wa 
uneasy, even perhap afraid; someth in the hous distress her, and 
she had need of me. unless I went down, her time of rest and change, her 
quit necessari holiday, in fact, would be spoilt. she wa too unselfish 
to say this, but it ran everywher between the lines. I saw it clearli 
now. mrs. franklyn, moreover--and that meant franc too--would like a 
"man in the house." It wa a disagre phrase, a suggest way of 
hint someth she dare not state definitely. the two women in that 
great, lone barrack of a hous were afraid. 

My sens of duty, affection, unselfishness, whatev the composit 
emot may be termed, wa stirred; also my vanity. I act quickly, 
lest reflect should warp clear, decent judgment. 

"annie," I said, when she answer the bell, "you need not send those 
blous by the post. i'll take them down tomorrow when I go. I shall be 
away a week or two, possibl longer." and, have look up a train, I 
hasten out to telegraph befor I could chang my fickl mind. 

but no desir came that night to chang my mind. I wa do the right, 
the necessari thing. I wa even in someth of a hurri to get down to 
the tower as soon as possible. I chose an earli afternoon train. 




chapter iii 


A telegram had told me to come to a town ten mile from the house, so I 
wa save the crawl train to the local station, and travel down by 
an express. As soon as we left london the fog clear off, and an autumn 
sun, though without heat in it, paint the landscap with golden brown 
and yellows. My spirit rose as I lay back in the luxuri motor and 
sped between the wood and hedges. oddli enough, my anxieti of overnight 
had disappeared. It wa due, no doubt, to that exagger of detail 
which reflect in loneli brings. franc and I had not been 
separ for over a year, and her letter from the tower told so 
little. It had seem unnatur to be depriv of those intim 
particular of mood and feel I wa accustom to. We had such 
confid in one another, and our affect wa so deep. though she wa 
but five year younger than myself, I regard her as a child. My 
attitud wa fatherly. 

In return, she certainli mother me with a solicitud that never 
cloyed. I felt no desir to marri while she wa still alive. she paint 
in watercolor with a reason success, and kept hous for me; I 
wrote, review book and lectur on aesthetics; we were a humdrum 
coupl of quasi-artists, well satisfi with life, and all I fear for 
her wa that she might becom a suffragett or be taken captiv by one 
of these wild theori that caught her imagin sometimes, and that 
mabel, for one, had fostered. As for myself, no doubt she deem me a 
trifl solid or stolid--i forget which word she preferred--but on the 
whole there wa just suffici differ of opinion to make 
intercours suggest without monotony, and certainli without 
quarrelling. 

draw in deep draught of the sting autumn air, I felt happi and 
exhilarated. It wa like go for a holiday, with comfort at the end of 
the journey instead of bargain for centimes. 

but my heart sank notic the moment the hous came into view. the 
long drive, line with hostil monkey tree and formal wellingtonia 
that were solemn and sedate, wa mere extens of the miniatur 
approach to a thousand semidetach suburban "residences"; and the 
appear of the towers, as we turn the corner with a rush, suggest 
a commonplac climax to a stori that had begun interestingly, almost 
thrillingly. A villa had escap from the shadow of the crystal palace, 
thump it way down by night, grown suddenli monstrou in a shower of 
rich rain, and settl itself insol to stay. ivi climb about the 
opul red-brick walls, but climb neatli and with disfigur effect, 
sham as on a prison or--th simil made me smile--an orphan asylum. 
there wa no hint of the come rough of untidi ivi on a ruin. 
clipped, trained, and precis it was, as on a brand-new protest 
church. I swear there wa not a bird' nest nor a singl earwig in it 
anywhere. about the porch it wa particularli thick, smother a 
seventeenth-centuri lamp with a contrast that wa quit horrible. 
extens glass-hous spread away on the farther side of the house; the 
numer tower to which the build owe it name seem made to hold 
school bells; and the windowsills, thick with pot flowers, made me 
think of the desol suburb of brighton or bexhill. In a command 
posit upon the crest of a hill, it overlook mile of undulating, 
wood countri southward to the downs, but behind it, to the north, 
thick bank of ilex, holly, and privet protect it from the cleaner and 
more stimul winds. hence, though highli placed, it wa shut in. 
three year had pass sinc I last set eye upon, it, but the unsightli 
memori I had retain wa justifi by the reality. the place wa 
deplorable. 

It is my habit to express my opinion audibl sometimes, when 
impress are strong enough to warrant it; but now I onli sigh "oh, 
dear," as I extric my leg from mani rug and went into the house. A 
tall parlor-maid, with the bear of a grenadier, receiv me, and 
stand behind her wa mrs. marsh, the housekeeper, whom I rememb 
becaus her untidi back hair had suggest to me that it had been burnt. 
I went at onc to my room, my hostess alreadi dress for dinner, but 
franc came in to see me just as I wa struggl with my black tie 
that had got tangl like a bootlace. she fasten it for me in a neat, 
effect bow, and while I held my chin up for the operation, stare 
blankli at the ceiling, the impress came--i wondered, wa it her 
touch that caus it?--that someth in her trembled. shrink perhap 
is the truer word. noth in her face or manner betray it, nor in her 
pleasant, easi talk while she tidi my thing and scold my slovenli 
packing, as her habit was, question me about the servant at the 
flat. the blouses, though right, were crumpled, and my scold wa 
deserved. there wa no impati even. yet somehow or other the 
suggest of a shrink reserv and hold back reach my mind. she 
had been lonely, of course, but it wa more than that; she wa glad that 
I had come, yet for some reason unstat she could have wish that I 
had stay away. We discuss the news that had accumul dure our 
brief separation, and in do so the impression, at best exceedingli 
slight, wa forgotten. My chamber wa larg and beauti furnished; 
the hall and dine room of our flat would have gone into it with a good 
remainder; yet it wa not a place I could settl down in for work. It 
convey the idea of impermanence, make me feel transient as in a 
hotel bedroom. this, of course, wa the fact. but some room convey a 
settled, last hospit even in a hotel; thi one did not; and as I 
wa accustom to work in the room I slept in, at least when visiting, a 
slight frown must have crept between my eyes. 

"mabel ha fit a work-room for you just out of the library," said the 
clairvoy frances. 

"no one will disturb you there, and you'll have fifteen thousand book 
all catalogu within easi reach. there' a privat staircas too. you 
can breakfast in your room and slip down in your dress gown if you 
want to." she laughed. My spirit took a turn upward as absurdli as 
they had gone down. 

"and how are you?" I asked, give her a belat kiss. "it' jolli to be 
togeth again. I did feel rather lost without you, i'll admit." 

"that' natural," she laughed. "i'm so glad." 

she look well and had countri color in her cheeks. she inform me 
that she wa eat and sleep well, go out for littl walk with 
mabel, paint bit of sceneri again, and enjoy a complet chang 
and rest; and yet, for all her brave description, the word somehow did 
not quit ring true. those last word in particular did not ring true. 
there lay in her manner, just out of sight, I felt, thi suggest of 
the exact reverse--of unrest, shrinking, almost of anxiety. certain 
small string in her seem over-tight. "keyed-up" wa the slang 
express that cross my mind. I look rather searchingli into her 
face as she wa tell me this. 

"only--th evenings," she added, notic my query, yet rather avoid 
my eyes, "the even are--well, rather heavi sometimes, and I find it 
difficult to keep awake." 

"the strong air after london make you drowsy," I suggested, "and you 
like to get earli to bed." 

franc turn and look at me for a moment steadily. "on the contrary, 
bill, I dislik go to bed--here. and mabel goe so early." she said 
it lightli enough, finger the disord upon my dress tabl in such 
a stupid way that I saw her mind wa work in anoth direct 
altogether. she look up suddenli with a kind of nervous from the 
brush and scissors. 

"billy," she said abruptly, lower her voice, "isn't it odd, but I 
hate sleep alon here? I can't make it out quite; i'v never felt 
such a thing befor in my life. Do you--think it' all nonsense?" 

and she laughed, with her lip but not with her eyes; there wa a note 
of defianc in her I fail to understand. 

"noth a natur like your feel strongli is nonsense, frances," I 
repli soothingly. 

but I, too, answer with my lip only, for anoth part of my mind wa 
work elsewhere, and among uncomfort things. A touch of 
bewilder pass over me. I wa not certain how best to continue. If 
I laugh she would tell me no more, yet if I took her too serious the 
string would tighten further. instinctively, then, thi flash rapidli 
across me: that someth of what she felt, I had also felt, though 
interpret it differently. vagu it was, as the come of rain or 
storm that announc themselv hour in advanc with their hint of 
faint, unsettl excit in the air. I had been but a short hour in 
the house--big, comfortable, luxuri house--but had experienc thi 
sens of be unsettled, unfixed, fluctuating--a kind of imperman 
that transient lodger in hotel must feel, but that a guest in a 
friend' home ought not to feel, be the visit short or long. To frances, 
an impression woman, the feel had come in the term of alarm. she 
dislik sleep alone, while yet she long to sleep. the precis idea 
in my mind evad capture, mere brush through me, three-quart 
out of sight; I realiz onli that we both felt the same thing, and that 
neither of us could get at it clearly. 

degre of unrest we felt, but the actual thing did not disclos itself. 
It did not happen. 

I felt strang at sea for a moment. franc would interpret hesit 
as endorsement, and encourag might be the last thing that could 
help her. 

"sleep in a strang house," I answer at length, "i often difficult 
at first, and one feel lonely. after fifteen month in our tini flat 
one feel lost and uncared-for in a big house. it' an uncomfort 
feeling--i know it well. and thi is a barrack, isn't it? the mass of 
furnitur onli make it worse. one feel in storag somewher 
underground--th furnitur doesn't furnish. one must never yield to 
fancies, though--" 

franc look away toward the windows; she seem disappoint a 
little. 

"after our thickly-popul chelsea," I went on quickly, "it seem 
isol here." 

but she did not turn back, and clearli I wa say the wrong thing. A 
wave of piti rush suddenli over me. wa she realli frightened, 
perhaps? she wa imaginative, I knew, but never moody; common sens wa 
strong in her, though she had her time of hypersensitiveness. I caught 
the echo of some unreasoning, big alarm in her. she stood there, gaze 
across my balconi toward the sea of wood countri that spread dim and 
vagu in the obscur of the dusk. the deepen shadow enter the 
room, I fancied, from the ground below. follow her abstract gaze a 
moment, I experienc a curiou sharp desir to leave, to escape. out 
yonder wa wind and space and freedom. thi enorm build wa 
oppressive, silent, still. 

great catacomb occur to me, thing beneath the ground, imprison 
and capture. I believ I even shudder a little. 

I touch her shoulder. she turn round slowly, and we look with a 
certain deliber into each other' eyes. 

"fanny," I asked, more grave than I intended, "you are not frightened, 
are you? noth ha happened, ha it?" 

she repli with emphasis, "of cours not! how could it--i mean, whi 
should i?" she stammered, as though the wrong sentenc fluster her a 
second. "it' simply--that I have thi ter--thi dislik of sleep 
alone." 

naturally, my first thought wa how easi it would be to cut our visit 
short. but I did not say this. had it been a true solution, franc 
would have said it for me long ago. 

"wouldn't mabel double-up with you?" I said instead, "or give you an 
adjoin room, so that you could leav the door between you open? 
there' space enough, heaven knows." 

and then, as the gong sound in the hall below for dinner, she said, as 
with an effort, thi thing: 

"mabel did ask me--on the third night--aft I had told her. but I 
declined." 

"you'd rather be alon than with her?" I asked, with a certain relief. 

her repli wa so grave given, a child would have known there wa more 
behind it: "not that; but that she did not realli want it." 

I had a moment' intuit and act on it impulsively. "she feel it 
too, perhaps, but wish to face it by herself--and get over it?" 

My sister bow her head, and the gestur made me realiz of a sudden 
how grave and solemn our talk had grown, as though some portent thing 
were under discussion. It had come of itself--indefinit as a gradual 
chang of temperature. yet neither of us knew it nature, for appar 
neither of us could state it plainly. noth happened, even in our 
words. 

"that wa my impression," she said, "--that if she yield to it she 
encourag it. and a habit form so easily. just think," she ad with 
a faint smile that wa the first sign of light she had yet betrayed, 
"what a nuisanc it would be--everywhere--if everybodi wa afraid of 
be alone--lik that." 

I snatch readili at the chance. We laugh a little, though it wa a 
quiet kind of laughter that seem wrong. I took her arm and led her 
toward the door. 

"disastrous, in fact," I agreed. 

she rais her voic to it normal pitch again, as I had done. "no doubt 
it will pass," she said, "now that you have come. Of course, it' 
chiefli my imagination." her tone wa lighter, though noth could 
convinc me that the matter itself wa light--just then. "and in ani 
case," tighten her grip on my arm as we pass into the bright 
enorm corridor and caught sight of mrs. franklyn wait in the 
cheerless hall below, "i'm veri glad you'r here, bill, and mabel, I 
know, is too." 

"if it doesn't pass," I just had time to whisper with a feebl attempt 
at jollity, "i'll come at night and snore outsid your door. after that 
you'll be so glad to get rid of me that you won't mind be alone." 

"that' a bargain," said frances. 

I shook my hostess by the hand, made a banal remark about the long 
interv sinc last we met, and walk behind them into the great dine 
room, dimli lit by candles, wonder in my heart how long my sister and 
I should stay, and whi in the world we had ever left our cozi littl 
flat to enter thi desol of rich and fals luxuri at all. the 
unsightli pictur of the late samuel franklyn, esq., stare down upon me 
from the farther end of the room abov the mighti mantelpiece. 

He looked, I thought, like some pompou heavenli butler who deni to 
all the world, and to us in particular, the right of entri without 
present card sign by hi hand as proof that we belong to hi 
own exclus set. the majority, to hi deep grief, and in spite of all 
hi prayer on their behalf, must burn and "perish everlastingly." 




chapter IV 


with the instinct of the healthi bachelor I alway tri to make myself a 
nest in the place I live in, be it for long or short. whether visiting, 
in lodging-house, or in hotel, the first essenti is thi nest--one' 
own thing built into the wall as a bird build in it feathers. It may 
look desol and uncomfort enough to others, becaus the central 
detail is neither bed nor wardrobe, sofa nor armchair, but a good solid 
writing-t that doe not wriggle, and that ha wide elbowroom. 

and the tower is vividli describ for me by the singl fact that I 
could not "nest" there. 

I took sever day to discov this, but the first impress of 
imperman wa truer than I knew. the feather of the mind refus 
here to lie one way. they ruffled, pointed, and grew wild. 

luxuri furnitur doe not mean comfort; I might as well have tri to 
settl down in the sofa and armchair depart of a big shop. My 
bedroom wa easili managed; it wa the privat workroom, prepar 
especi for my reception, that made me feel alien and outcast. 

externally, it wa all one could desire: an antechamb to the great 
library, with not one, but two gener oak tables, to say noth of 
smaller one against the wall with capaci drawers. 

there were read desks, mechan devic for hold books, perfect 
light, quiet as in a church, and no approach but across the huge 
adjoin room. yet it did not invite. 

"I hope you'll be abl to work here," said my littl hostess the next 
morning, as she took me in--her onli visit to it while I stay in the 
house--and show me the ten-volum catalogue. 

"it' absolut quiet and no one will disturb you." 

"if you can't, bill, you'r not much good," laugh frances, who wa on 
her arm. "even I could write in a studi like this!" 

I glanc with pleasur at the ampl tables, the sheet of thick 
blot paper, the rulers, seal wax, paper knives, and all the other 
immacul paraphernalia. "it' perfect," I answer with a secret 
thrill, yet feel a littl foolish. thi wa for gibbon or carlyle, 
rather than for my potboil insignificancies. "if I can't write 
masterpiec here, it' certainli not your fault," and I turn with 
gratitud to mrs. franklyn. she wa look straight at me, and there 
wa a question in her small pale eye I did not understand. wa she 
note the effect upon me, I wondered? 

"you'll write here--perhap a stori about the house," she said, 
"thompson will bring you anyth you want; you onli have to ring." she 
point to the electr bell on the central table, the wire run 
neatli down the leg. "no one ha ever work here before, and the 
librari ha been hardli use sinc it wa put in. So there' no previou 
atmospher to affect your imagination--er--adversely." 

We laughed. "bill isn't that sort," said my sister; while I wish they 
would go out and leav me to arrang my littl nest and set to work. 

I thought, of course, it wa the huge listen librari that made me 
feel so inconsiderable--th fifteen thousand silent, stare books, the 
solemn aisles, the deep, eloqu shelves. but when the women had gone 
and I wa alone, the begin of the truth crept over me, and I felt 
that first hint of disconsol which later becam an imper no. 
the mind shut down, imag ceas to rise and flow. I read, made copiou 
notes, but I wrote no singl line at the towers. 

noth complet itself there. noth happened. 

the morn sunshin pour into the librari through ten long narrow 
windows; bird were singing; the autumn air, rich with a faint aroma of 
novemb melancholi that stung the imagin pleasantly, fill my 
antechamber. I look out upon the undul wood landscape, hem 
in by the sweep of distant downs, and I tast a whiff of the sea. rook 
caw as they float abov the elms, and there were lazi cow in the 
nearer meadows. A dozen time I tri to make my nest and settl down to 
work, and a dozen times, like a turn fastidi dog upon a hearth 
rug, I rearrang my chair and book and papers. the temptat of the 
catalogu and shelves, of course, wa account for much, yet not, I 
felt, for all. that wa a manag seduction. My work, moreover, wa 
not of the creativ kind that requir absolut absorption; it wa the 
mere readabl present of data I had accumulated. My notebook were 
charg with fact readi to tabulate--facts, too, that interest me 
keenly. A mere effort of the will wa necessary, and concentr of no 
difficult kind. yet, somehow, it seem beyond me: someth forev 
push the fact into disord ... and in the end I sat in the sunshine, 
dip into a dozen book select from the shelv outside, vex with 
myself and onli half-enjoy it. I felt restless. I want to be 
elsewhere. 

and even while I read, attent wandered. frances, mabel, her late 
husband, the hous and grounds, each in turn and sometim all together, 
rose uninvit into the stream of thought, hinder ani consecut 
flow of work. In disconnect fashion came these pictur that 
interrupt concentration, yet present themselv as broken fragment 
of a bigger thing my mind alreadi grope for unconsciously. they 
flutter round thi hidden thing of which they were aspects, fugit 
interpretations, no one of them bring complet revelation. there wa 
no adjective, such as pleasant or unpleasant, that I could attach to 
what I felt, beyond that the result wa unsettling. vagu as the 
atmospher of a dream, it yet persisted, and I could not dissip it. 

isol word or phrase in the line I read sent question scour 
across my mind, sure sign that the deeper part of me wa restless and 
ill at ease. 

rather trivial question too--half-foolish interrogations, as of a 
puzzl or curiou child: whi wa my sister afraid to sleep alone, and 
whi did her friend feel a similar repugnance, yet seek to conquer it? 
whi wa the solid luxuri of the hous without comfort, it shelter 
without the sens of permanence? whi had mrs. franklyn ask us to come, 
artists, unbeliev vagabonds, type at the farthest possibl remov 
from the save sheep of her husband' household? had a reaction set in 
against the hysteria of her conversion? I had seen no sign of religi 
fervor in her; her atmospher wa that of an ordinary, high-mind 
woman, yet a woman of the world. lifeless, though, a little, perhaps, 
now that I came to think about it: she had made no definit impress 
upon me of ani kind. and my thought ran vagu after thi fragil 
clue. 

close my book, I let them run. for, with thi chanc reflect came 
the discoveri that I could not see her clearly--could not feel her soul, 
her personality. her face, her small pale eyes, her dress and bodi and 
walk, all these stood befor me like a photograph; but her self evad 
me. she seem not there, lifeless, empty, a shadow--nothing. the 
pictur wa disagreeable, and I put it by. instantli she melt out, as 
though light thought had conjur up a phantom that had no real 
existence. and at that veri moment, singularli enough, my eye caught 
sight of her move past the window, go silent along the gravel 
path. I watch her, a sudden new sensat grip me. "there goe a 
prisoner," my thought instantli ran, "one who wish to escape, but 
cannot." 

what brought the outlandish notion, heaven onli knows. the hous wa of 
her own choice, she wa twice an heiress, and the world lay open at her 
feet. yet she stayed--unhappy, frightened, caught. all thi flash over 
me, and made a sharp impress even befor I had time to dismiss it as 
absurd. but a moment later explan offer itself, though it seem 
as far-fetch as the origin impression. My mind, be logical, wa 
oblig to provid something, apparently. for mrs. franklyn, while 
dress to go out, with thick walking-boots, a point stick, and a 
motor-cap tie on with a veil as for the windi lanes, wa obvious 
content to go no farther than the littl garden paths. the costum wa a 
sham and a pretence. It wa this, and her lithe, quick movement that 
suggest a cage creature--a creatur tame by fear and cruelti that 
cloak themselv in kindness--pac up and down, unabl to realiz 
whi it got no farther, but alway met the same bar in exactli the same 
place. the mind in her wa barred. 

I watch her go along the path and down the step from one terrac to 
another, until the laurel hid her altogether; and into thi mere 
imagin of a moment came a hint of someth slightli disagreeable, 
for which my mind, search as it would, found no explan at all. I 
rememb then certain other littl things. they drop into the 
pictur of their own accord. In a mind not deliber hunt for 
clues, piec of a puzzl sometim come togeth in thi way, bring 
revelation, so that for a second there flash across me, vanish 
instantli again befor I could consid it, a large, distress 
thought. I can onli describ vagu as a shadow. 

dark and ugly, oppress certainli it might be described, with 
someth torn and dread about the edg that suggest pain and 
strife and terror. the interior of a prison with two row of occupi 
condemn cells, seen year ago in new york, sprang to memori after it-- 
the connect between the two imposs to surmis even. but the 
"certain other littl things" mention abov were these: that mrs. 
franklyn, in last night' dinner talk, had alway refer to "thi 
house," but never call it "home"; and had emphas unnecessarily, 
for a well-br woman, our "great kindness" in come down to stay so 
long with her. anoth time, in answer to my futil compliment about the 
"state rooms," she said quietly, "it is an enorm hous for so small 
a party; but I stay here veri little, and onli till I get it straight 
again." the three of us were go up the great staircas to bed as thi 
wa said, and, not know quit her meaning, I drop the subject. It 
edg delic ground, I felt. franc ad no word of her own. It now 
occur to me abruptli that "stay" wa the word made use of, when 
"live" would have been more natural. how insignific to recall! yet 
whi did they suggest themselv just at thi moment ...? 

and, on go to frances' room to make sure she wa not nervou or 
lonely, I realiz abruptly, that mrs. franklyn, of course, had talk 
with her in a confidenti sens that I, as a mere visit brother, 
could not share. franc had told me nothing. I might easili have worm 
it out of her, had I not felt that for us to discuss further our hostess 
and her hous mere becaus we were under the roof together, wa not 
quit nice or loyal. 

"i'll call you, bill, if i'm scared," she had laugh as we parted, my 
room be just across the big corridor from her own. I had fallen 
asleep, think what in the world wa meant by "get it straight 
again." 

and now in my antechamb to the library, on the second morning, sit 
among pile of foolscap and sheet of spotless blotting-paper, all 
useless to me, these slight hint came back and help to frame the big, 
vagu shadow I have mentioned. Up to the neck in thi shadow, almost 
drowned, yet just tread water, stood the figur of my hostess in her 
walk costume. franc and I seem swim to her aid. the shadow 
wa larg enough to includ both hous and grounds, but farther than 
that I could not see.... dismiss it, I fell to read my purloin 
book again. befor I turn anoth page, however, anoth startl 
detail leap out at me: the figur of mrs. franklyn in the shadow wa 
not living. It float helplessly, like a doll or puppet that ha no 
life in it. It wa both pathet and dreadful. 

ani one who sit in reveri thus, of course, may see similar ridicul 
pictur when the will no longer guid construction. the incongru 
of dream are thu explained. I mere record the pictur as it came. 
that it remain by me for sever days, just as vivid dream do, is 
neither here nor there. I did not allow myself to dwell upon it. the 
curiou thing, perhaps, is that from thi moment I date my inclination, 
though not yet my desire, to leave. I purpos say "to leave." 

I cannot quit rememb when the word chang to that aggressive, 
frantic thing which is escape. 




chapter V 


We were left delight to ourselv in thi pretenti countri 
mansion with the soul of a villa. franc took up her paint again, 
and, the weather be propitious, spent hour out of doors, sketch 
flowers, tree and nook of woodland, garden, even the hous itself 
where bit of it peer suggest across the orchards. mrs. franklyn 
seem alway busi about someth or other, and never interf with 
us except to propos motoring, tea in anoth part of the lawn, and so 
forth. she flit everywhere, preoccupied, yet appar do 
nothing. the hous engulf her rather. No visitor called. for one 
thing, she wa not suppos to be back from abroad yet; and for another, 
I think, the neighborhood--h husband' neighborhood--wa puzzl by 
her sudden cessat from good works. brigad and temper societi 
did not ask to hold their meet in the big hall, and the vicar 
arrang the school-treat in another' field without explanation. the 
full-length portrait in the dine room, and the presenc of the 
housekeep with the "burnt" back hair, indeed, were the onli remind 
of the man who onc had live here. mrs. marsh retain her place in 
silence, well-paid sinecur as it doubtless was, yet with no hint of 
that suppress disapprov one might have expect from her. inde 
there wa noth posit to disapprove, sinc noth "worldly" 
enter ground or building. In her master' lifetim she had been 
anoth "brand snatch from the burning," and it had then been her 
custom to give vocifer "testimony" at the reviv meet where he 
adorn the platform and led in stream of prayer. I saw her sometim 
on the stairs, hovering, wandering, half-watch and half-listening, 
and the idea came to me onc that thi woman somehow form a link with 
the depart influenc of her bigot employer. she, alon among us, 
belong to the house, and look at home there. when I saw her talk 
--oh, with such correct and respect mien--to mrs. franklyn, I had the 
feel that for all her unaggress attitude, she yet exert some 
influenc that sought to make her mistress stay in the build forev 
--live there. she would prevent her escape, prevent "get it straight 
again," thwart somehow her will to freedom, if she could. the idea in me 
wa of the most fleet kind. but anoth time, when I came down late 
at night to get a book from the librari antechamber, and found her 
sit in the hall--alone--th impress left upon me wa the revers 
of fleeting. I can never forget the vivid, disagre effect it 
produc upon me. what wa she do there at half-past eleven at night, 
all alon in the darkness? she wa sit upright, stiff, in a big 
chair below the clock. It gave me a turn. It wa so incongru and odd. 
she rose quietli as I turn the corner of the stairs, and ask me 
respectfully, her eye cast down as usual, whether I had finish with 
the library, so that she might lock up. there wa no more to it than 
that; but the pictur stay with me--unpleasantly. 

these variou impress came to me at odd moments, of course, and not 
in a singl sequenc as I now relat them. I wa hard at work befor 
three day were past, not writing, as explained, but reading, make 
notes, and gather materi from the librari for futur use. It wa in 
chanc moment that these curiou flash came, catch me unawar 
with a touch of surpris that sometim made me start. for they prove 
that my under-mind wa still consciou of the shadow, and that far away 
out of sight lay the caus of it that left me with a vagu unrest, 
unsettled, seek to "nest" in a place that did not want me. onli when 
thi deeper part know harmony, perhaps, can good brainwork result, and 
my inabl to write wa thu explained. 

certainly, I wa alway seek for someth here I could not find--an 
explan that continu evad me. noth but these trivial hint 
offer themselves. lump together, however, they had the effect of 
defin the shadow a little. I becam more and more awar of it veri 
real existence. and, if I have made littl mention of franc and my 
hostess in thi connection, it is becaus they contribut at first 
littl or noth toward the discoveri of what thi stori tri to 
tell. our life wa wholli external, normal, quiet, and uneventful; 
convers banal--mrs. franklyn' convers in particular. they 
said noth that suggest revelation. 

both were in thi shadow, and both knew that they were in it, but 
neither betray by word or act a hint of interpretation. they talk 
privately, no doubt, but of that I can report no details. 

and so it wa that, after ten day of a veri commonplac visit, I found 
myself look straight into the face of a strang that defi 
captur at close quarters. "there' someth here that never happens," 
were the word that rose in my mind, "and that' whi none of us can 
speak of it." 

and as I look out of the window and watch the vulgar blackbirds, 
with toe turn in, bore out their worms, I realiz sharpli that 
even they, as inde everyth larg and small in the hous and 
grounds, share thi strangeness, and were twist out of normal 
appear becaus of it. life, as express in the entir place, wa 
crumpled, dwarfed, emasculated. god' mean here were crippled, hi 
love of joy wa stunted. noth in the garden danc or sang. 

there wa hate in it. "the shadow," my thought hurri on to completion, 
"i a manifest of hate; and hate is the devil." and then I sat back 
frighten in my chair, for I knew that I had partli found the truth. 

leav my book I went out into the open. the sky wa overcast, yet the 
day by no mean gloomy, for a soft, diffus light ooz through the 
cloud and turn all thing warm and almost summery. but I saw the 
ground now in their naked becaus I understood. hate mean strife, 
and the two togeth weav the robe that terror wears. have no 
so-cal religi belief myself, nor belong to ani set of dogma 
call a creed, I could stand outsid these feel and observe. yet 
they soak into me suffici for me to grasp sympathet what 
others, with more cabin soul (I flatter myself), might feel. that 
pictur in the dine room stalk everywhere, hid behind everi tree, 
peer down upon me from the peak ugli of the bourgeoi towers, 
and left the impress of it power hand upon everi bed of flowers. 
"you must not do this, you must not do that," went past me through the 
air. "you must not leav these narrow paths," said the rigid iron 
rail of black. "you shall not walk here," wa written on the lawns. 
"keep to the steps," "don't pick the flowers; make no nois of laughter, 
singing, dancing," wa placard all over the rose-garden, and 
"trespass will be--not prosecut but--destroyed" hung from the crest 
of monkey tree and holly. guard the end of each artifici terrac 
stood gaunt, implac policemen, warders, jailers. "come with us," 
they chanted, "or be damn eternally." 

I rememb feel quit pleas with myself that I had discov thi 
obviou explan of the prison feel the place breath out. that 
the posthum influenc of heavi old samuel franklyn might be an 
inadequ solut did not occur to me. By "get the place straight 
again," hi widow, of course, meant forget the glamour of fear and 
forebod hi depress creed had temporarili forc upon her; and 
frances, delic mind being, did not speak of it becaus it wa the 
influenc of the man her friend had loved. I felt lighter; a load wa 
lift from me. "to trace the unfamiliar to the familiar," came back a 
sentenc I had read somewhere, "i to understand." It wa a real relief. 
I could talk with franc now, even with my hostess, no danger of 
tread clumsily. for the key wa in my hands. I might even help to 
dissip the shadow, "to get it straight again." It seemed, perhaps, 
our long invit wa explained! 

I went into the hous laughing--at myself a little. "perhap after all 
the artist' outlook, with no hard and fast dogmas, is as narrow as the 
others! how small human is! and whi is there no possibl and true 
combin of all outlooks?" 

the feel of "unsettling" wa veri strong in me just then, in spite of 
my big discoveri which wa to clear everyth up. and at the moment I 
ran into franc on the stairs, with a portfolio of sketch under her 
arm. 

It came across me then abruptli that, although she had work a great 
deal sinc we came, she had shown me nothing. It struck me suddenli as 
odd, unnatural. the way she tri to pass me now confirm my newborn 
suspicion that--well, that her result were hardli what they ought to 
be. 

"stand and deliver!" I laughed, step in front of her. "i'v seen 
noth you'v done sinc you'v been here, and as a rule you show me 
all your things. I believ they are atroci and degrading!" then my 
laughter froze. 

she made a sli gestur to slip past me, and I almost decid to let her 
go, for the express that flash across her face shock me. she 
look uncomfort and ashamed; the color came and went a moment in he 
cheeks, make me think of a child detect in some secret naughtiness. 
It wa almost fear. 

"it' becaus they'r not finish then?" I said, drop the tone of 
banter, "or becaus they'r too good for me to understand?" for my 
critic of painting, she told me, wa crude and ignor sometimes. 
"but you'll let me see them later, won't you?" 

frances, however, did not take the way of escap I offered. she chang 
her mind. she drew the portfolio from beneath her arm instead. "you can 
see them if you realli want to, bill," she said quietly, and her tone 
remind me of a nurs who say to a boy just grown out of childhood, 
"you are old enough now to look upon horror and ugliness--onli I don't 
advis it." 

"I do want to," I said, and made to go downstair with her. but, 
instead, she said in the same low voic as before, "come up to my room, 
we shall be undisturb there." So I guess that she had been on her 
way to show the paint to our hostess, but did not care for us all 
three to see them together. My mind work furiously. 

"mabel ask me to do them," she explain in a tone of submiss 
horror, onc the door wa shut, "in fact, she beg it of me. you know 
how persist she is in her quiet way. i--er--had to." 

she flush and open the portfolio on the littl tabl by the window, 
stand behind me as I turn the sketch over--sketch of the 
ground and tree and garden. In the first moment of inspection, 
however, I did not take in clearli whi my sister' sens of modesti had 
been offended. for my attent flash a second elsewhere. anoth bit 
of the puzzl had drop into place, defin still further the natur 
of what I call "the shadow." mrs. franklyn, I now remembered, had 
suggest to me in the librari that I might perhap write someth 
about the place, and I had taken it for one of her banal sentenc and 
paid no further attention. I realiz now that it wa said in earnest. 
she want our interpretations, as express in our respect 
"talents," paint and writing. her invit wa explained. she left 
us to ourselv on purpose. 

"I should like to tear them up," franc wa whisper behind me with a 
shudder, "onli I promised--" she hesit a moment. 

"promis not to?" I ask with a queer feel of distress, my eye 
glu to the papers. 

"promis alway to show them to her first," she finish so low I 
bare caught it. 

I have no intuitive, immedi grasp of the valu of paintings; result 
come to me slowly, and though everi one believ hi own judgment to be 
good, I dare not claim that mine is worth more than that of ani other 
layman, franc had too often convict me of gross ignor and error. 
I can onli say that I examin these sketch with a feel of 
amaz that contain revulsion, if not actual horror and disgust. 
they were outrageous. I felt hot for my sister, and it wa a relief to 
know she had move across the room on some pretenc or other, and did 
not examin them with me. her talent, of course, is mediocre, yet she 
ha her moment of inspiration--moments, that is to say, when a view of 
beauti not normal her own flame divin through her. and these 
interpret struck me forcibl as be thu "inspired"--not her 
own. they were uncommonli well done; they were also atrocious. the 
mean in them, however, wa never more than hinted. there the unholi 
skill and power came in: they suggest so abominably, leav most to 
the imagination. To find such signific in a bourgeoi villa garden, 
and to interpret it with such delic yet legibl certainty, wa a kind 
of symbol that wa sinister, even diabolical. the delicaci wa her 
own, but the point of view wa another's. 

and the word that rose in my mind wa not the gross descript of 
"impure," but the more fundament qualification--"un-pure." 

In silenc I turn the sketch over one by one, as a boy hurri 
through the page of an evil book lest he be caught. 

"what doe mabel do with them?" I ask present in a low tone, as I 
near the end. "doe she keep them?" 

"she make note about them in a book and then destroy them," wa the 
repli from the end of the room. I heard a sigh of relief. "i'm glad 
you'v seen them, bill. I want you to--but wa afraid to show them. 
you understand?" 

"I understand," wa my reply, though it wa not a question intend to 
be answered. all I understood realli wa that mabel' mind wa as sweet 
and pure as my sister's, and that she had some good reason for what she 
did. she destroy the sketches, but first made notes! It wa an 
interpret of the place she sought. brother-like, I felt resentment, 
though, that franc should wast her time and talent, when she might be 
do work that she could sell. naturally, I felt other thing as 
well.... 

"mabel pay me five guinea for each one," I heard. "absolut 
insists." 

I stare at her stupidli a moment, bereft of speech or wit. "I must 
either accept, or go away," she went on calmly, but a littl white. 
"i'v tri everything. there wa a scene the third day I wa here--when 
I show her my first result. I want to write to you, but hesitated--" 

"it' unintentional, then, on your part--forg my ask it, frances, 
dear?" I blundered, hardli know what to think or say. "between the 
lines" of her letter came back to me. "I mean, you make the sketch in 
your ordinari way and--th result come out of itself, so to speak?" 

she nodded, throw her hand out like a frenchman. "we needn't keep 
the money for ourselves, bill. We can give it away, but--i must either 
accept or leave," and she repeat the shrug gesture. she sat down 
on the chair face me, stare helplessli at the carpet. 

"you say there wa a scene?" I went on presently, "she insisted?" 

"she beg me to continue," my sister repli veri quietly. "she 
thinks--that is, she ha an idea or theori that there' someth about 
the place--someth she can't get at quite." franc stammer badly. 
she knew I did not encourag her wild theories. 

"someth she feels--yes," I help her, more than curious. 

"oh, you know what I mean, bill," she said desperately. "that the place 
is satur with some influenc that she is herself too posit or too 
stupid to interpret. she' tri to make herself neg and 
receptive, as she call it, but can't, of course, succeed. haven't you 
notic how dull and imperson and insipid she seems, as though she had 
no personality? she think impress will come to her that way. but 
they don't--" 

"naturally." 

"so she' tri me--us--what she call the sensit and impression 
artist temperament. she say that until she is sure exactli what thi 
influenc is, she can't fight it, turn it out, 'get the hous straight', 
as she phrase it." 

rememb my own singular impressions, I felt more lenient than I 
might otherwis have done. I tri to keep impati out of my voice. 

"and thi influence, what--whos is it?" 

We use the pronoun that follow in the same breath, for I answer my 
own question at the same moment as she did: 

"his." our head nod involuntarili toward the floor, the dine room 
be directli underneath. 

and my heart sank, my curios die away on the instant; I felt bored. 
A commonplac haunt hous wa the last thing in the world to amus or 
interest me. the mere thought exasperated, with it suggest of 
imagination, overwrought nerves, hysteria, and the rest. 

mingl with my other feel wa certainli disappointment. To see a 
figur or feel a "presence," and report from day to day strang 
incid to each other would be a form of weari I could never 
tolerate. 

"but really, frances," I said firmly, after a moment' pause, "it' too 
far-fetched, thi explanation. A curse, you know, belong to the ghost 
stori of earli victorian days." and onli my posit convict that 
there wa someth after all worth discovering, and that it most 
certainli wa not this, prevent my suggest that we termin our 
visit forthwith, or as soon as we decent could. "thi is not a haunt 
house, whatev it is," I conclud somewhat vehemently, bring my 
hand down upon her odiou portfolio. 

My sister' repli reviv my curios sharply. 

"I wa wait for you to say that. mabel say exactli the same. He is 
in it--but it' someth more than that alone, someth far bigger and 
more complicated." her sentenc seem to indic the sketches, and 
though I caught the infer I did not take it up, have no desir to 
discuss them with her just them indeed, if ever. 

I mere stare at her and listened. questions, I felt sure, would be of 
littl use. It wa better she should say her thought in her own way. 

"he is one influence, the most recent," she went on slowly, and alway 
veri calmly, "but there are others--deep layers, as it were-- 
underneath. If hi were the onli one, someth would happen. but 
noth ever doe happen. the other hinder and prevent--a though each 
were struggl to predominate." 

I had felt it alreadi myself. the idea wa rather horrible. I shivered. 

"that' what is so ugli about it--that noth ever happens," she said. 
"there is thi endless anticipation--alway on the dri edg of a result 
that never materializes. It is torture. mabel is at her wits' end, you 
see. and when she beg me--what I felt about my sketches--i mean--" 

she stammer badli as before. 

I stop her. I had judg too hastily. that queer symbol in her 
paintings, pagan and yet not innocent, was, I understood, the result of 
mixture. I did not pretend to understand, but at least I could be 
patient. I consequ held my peace. We did talk on a littl longer, 
but it wa more gener talk that avoid success our hostess, the 
paintings, wild theories, and him--until at length the emot franc 
had hitherto so success kept under burst vehement forth again. 

It had hidden between her calm sentences, as it had hidden between the 
line of her letter. It swept her now from head to foot, pack tight in 
the thing she then said. 

"then, bill, if it is not an ordinari haunt house," she asked, "what 
is it?" 

the word were commonplac enough. the emot wa in the tone of her 
voic that trembled; in the gestur she made, lean forward and 
clasp both hand upon her knees, and in the slight blanch of her 
cheek as her brave eye ask the question and search my own with 
anxieti that border upon panic. In that moment she put herself under 
my protection. I winced. 

"and why," she added, lower her voic to a still and furtiv whisper, 
"doe noth ever happen? If only,"--thi with great emphasis-- 
"someth would happen--break thi aw tension--br relief. it' 
the wait I cannot stand." and she shiver all over as she said it, a 
touch of wild in her eyes. 

I would have given much to have made a true and satisfactori answer. My 
mind search frantic for a moment, but in vain. there lay no 
suffici answer in me. I felt what she felt, though with differences. 
No conclus explan lay within reach. noth happened. eager as I 
wa to shoot the entir busi into the rubbish heap where ignor 
and superstit discharg their poison weeds, I could not honestli 
accomplish this. To treat franc as a child, and mere "explain away" 
would be to strain her confid in my protection, so affection 
claimed. It would further be dishonest to myself--weak, besides--to deni 
that I had also felt the strain and tension even as she did. while my 
mind continu searching, I return her stare in silence; and franc 
then, with more honesti and insight than my own, gave suddenli the 
answer herself--an answer whose truth and adequacy, so far as they went, 
I could not readili gainsay: 

"I think, bill, becaus it is too big to happen here--to happen 
anywhere, indeed, all at once--and too awful!" 

To have toss the sentenc asid as nonsense, argu it away, prove 
that it wa realli meaningless, would have been easy--at ani other time 
or in ani other place; and, had the past week brought me none of the 
vivid impress it had brought me, thi is doubtless what I should 
have done. My narrow again wa proved. We understand in other onli 
what we have in ourselves. but her explanation, in a measure, I knew wa 
true. It hint at the strife and struggl that my notion of a shadow 
had seem to cover thinly. 

"perhaps," I murmur lamely, wait in vain for her to say more. "but 
you said just now that you felt the thing wa 'in layers', as it were. 
Do you mean each one--each influence--fight for the upper hand?" 

I use her phraseolog to conceal my own poverty. terminology, after 
all, wa nothing, provid we could reach the idea itself. 

her eye said yes. she had her clear conception, arriv at 
independently, as wa her way. 

and, unlik her sex, she kept it clear, unsmoth by too mani words. 

"one set of influenc get at me, anoth get at you. it' accord 
to our temperaments, I think." she glanc significantli at the vile 
portfolio. "sometim they are mixed--and therefor false. there ha 
alway been in me, more than in you, the pagan thing, perhaps, though 
never, thank god, like that." 

the frank confess of cours invit my own, as it wa meant to do. 
yet it wa difficult to find the words. 

"what I have felt in thi place, frances, I honestli can hardli tell 
you, because--er--mi impress have not arrang themselv in ani 
definit form I can describe. the strife, the agoni of vainly-sought 
escape, and the unrest--a sort of prison atmosphere--thi I have felt at 
differ time and with vari degre of strength. but I find, as 
yet, no final label to attach. I couldn't say pagan, christian, or 
anyth like that, I mean, as you do. As with the blind and deaf, you 
may have an intensif of certain sens deni to me, or even 
anoth sens altogeth in embryo--" 

"perhaps," she stop me, anxiou to keep to the point, "you feel it as 
mabel does. she feel the whole thing complete." 

"that also is possible," I said veri slowly. I wa think behind my 
words. her odd remark that it wa "big and awful" came back upon me as 
true. A vast sensat of distress and discomfort swept me suddenly. 
piti wa in it, and a fierc contempt, a savage, bitter anger as well. 
furi against some sham author wa part of it. 

"frances," I said, caught unawares, and drop all pretence, "what in 
the world can it be?" I look hard at her. for some minut neither of 
us spoke. 

"have you felt no desir to interpret it?" she ask presently, "mabel 
did suggest my write someth about the house," wa my reply, "but 
i'v felt noth imperative. that sort of write is not my line, you 
know. My onli feeling," I added, notic that she wait for more, "i 
the impuls to explain, discover, get it out of me somehow, and so get 
rid of it. not by writing, though--a yet." and again I repeat my 
former question: 

"what in the world do you think it is?" My voic had becom 
involuntarili hushed. there wa awe in it. her answer, given with slow 
emphasis, brought back all my reserve: the phraseolog provok me 
rather:--"whatev it is, bill, it is not of god." 

I got up to go downstairs. I believ I shrug my shoulders. "would you 
like to leave, frances? shall we go back to town?" I suggest thi at 
the door, and hear no immedi reply, I turn back to look. franc 
wa sit with her head bow over and buri in her hands. the 
attitud horribl suggest tears. No woman, I realized, can keep back 
the pressur of strong emot as long as franc had done, without 
end in a fluid collapse. I wait a moment uneasily, long to 
comfort, yet afraid to act--and in thi way discov the exist of 
the appal emot in myself, hitherto but half guessed. At all cost 
a scene must be prevented: it would involv such exagger and 
overstatement. brutally, such is the weak of the ordinari man, I 
turn the handl to go out, but my sister then rais her head. the 
sunlight caught her face, frame untidili in it auburn hair, and I saw 
her wonder express with a start. pity, tenderness, and sympathi 
shone in it like a flame. It wa undeniable. there shone through all her 
featur the imperish love and yearn to sacrific self for other 
which I have seen in onli one type of human being. It wa the great 
mother look. 

"we must stay by mabel and help her get it straight," she whispered, 
make the decis for us both. 

I murmur agreement. abash and half ashamed, I stole softli from the 
room and went out into the grounds. and the first thing clearli realiz 
when alon wa this: that the long scene between us wa without definit 
result. the exchang of confid wa realli noth but hint and 
vagu suggestion. We had decid to stay, but it wa a neg decis 
not to leav rather than a posit action. all our word and questions, 
our guesses, inferences, explanations, our most subtl allus and 
insinuations, even the odiou paint themselves, were without 
definit result. noth had happened. 




chapter VI 


and instinctively, onc alone, I made for the place where she had 
paint her extraordinari pictures; I tri to see what she had seen. 
perhaps, now that she had open my mind to anoth view, I should be 
sensit to some similar interpretation--and possibl by way of 
literari expression. If I were to write about the place, I ask myself, 
how should I treat it? I deliber invit an interpret in the 
way that came easiest to me--writing. 

but in thi case there came no such revelation. look close at the 
tree and flowers, the bit of lawn and terrace, the rose-garden and 
corner of the hous where the flame creeper hung so thickly, I 
discov noth of the odious, unpur thing her color and group 
had unconsci revealed. At first, that is, I discov nothing. the 
realiti stood there, commonplac and ugly, side by side with her 
distort version of it that lay in my mind. It seem incredible. I 
tri to forc it, but in vain. My imagination, plough less deepli 
than hers, or to anoth pattern, grew differ seed. where I saw the 
gross soul of an overgrown suburban garden, inspir by the spirit of a 
vulgar, rich revivalist who love to preach damnation, she saw thi rush 
of pagan liberti and joy, thi strang licens of primit flesh which, 
taint by the other, produc the adulterated, vile result. 

certain things, however, gradual then becam apparent, forc 
themselv upon me, willy-nilly. they came slowly, but overwhelmingly. 
not that fact had changed, or natur detail alter in the grounds-- 
thi wa impossible--but that I notic for the first time variou 
aspect I had not notic before--trivi enough, yet for me, just then, 
significant. some I rememb from previou days; other I saw now as I 
wander to and fro, uneasy, uncomfortable,--almost, it seemed, watch 
by some one who took note of my impressions. the detail were so 
foolish, the total result so formidable. I wa half awar that other 
tri hard to make me see. It wa deliberate. 

My sister' phrase, "one layer got at me, anoth get at you," flashed, 
undesired, upon me. 

for I saw, as with the eye of a child, what I can onli call a goblin 
garden--house, grounds, trees, and flower belong to a goblin world 
that children enter through the page of their fairi tales. and what 
made me first awar of it wa the whisper of the wind behind me, so that 
I turn with a sudden start, feel that someth had move closer. 
An old ash tree, ugli and ungainly, had been artifici train to 
form an arbor at one end of the terrac that wa a tenni lawn, and the 
leav of it now went rustl together, swish as they rose and fell. 
I look at the ash tree, and felt as though I had pass that moment 
between door into thi goblin garden that crouch behind the real one. 
below, at a deeper layer perhaps, lay hidden the one my sister had 
entered. 

To deal with my own, however, I call it goblin, becaus an odd aspect of 
the quaint in it yet never quit achiev the picturesque. grotesque, 
probably, is the truer word, for everywher I noticed, and for the first 
time, thi slight alter of the natur due either to the 
exagger of some detail, or to it suppression, generally, I think, 
to the latter. life everywher appear to me as block from the full 
deliveri of it sweet and love message. some counter influenc stop 
it--suppression; or sent it awry--exaggeration. the hous itself, mere 
expression, of course, of a narrow, limit mind, wa sheer ugliness; it 
requir no further explanation. with the ground and garden, so far as 
shape and gener plan were concerned, thi wa also true; but that 
tree and flower and other natur detail should share the same 
defici perplex my logic soul, and even dismay it. I stood and 
stared, then move about, and stood and stare again. everywher wa 
thi mockeri of a sinister, unfinish aspect. I sought in vain to 
recov my normal point of view. My mind had found thi goblin garden 
and wander to and fro in it, unabl to escape. 

the chang wa in myself, of course, and so trivial were the detail 
which illustr it, that they sound absurd, thu mention one by one. 
for me, they prove it, is all I can affirm. the goblin touch lay 
plainli everywhere: in the form of the trees, plant at neat interv 
along the lawns; in thi twist ash that rustl just behind me; in the 
shadow of the gloomi wellingtonias, whose sweep skirt obscur the 
grass; but especially, I noticed, in the top and crest of them. for 
here, the delicate, grace curv of last year' growth seem to 
shrink back into themselves. none of them point upwards. their life 
had fail and turn asid just when it should have becom triumphant. 
the charact of a tree reveal itself chiefli at the extremities, and 
it wa precis here that they all droop and achiev thi hint of 
goblin distortion--in the growth, that is, of the last few years. what 
ought to have been fairy, joyful, natural, wa instead uncom to the 
verg of the grotesque. spontan express wa arrested. My mind 
perceiv a goblin garden, and wa caught in it. the place grimac at 
me. 

with the flower it wa similar, though far more difficult to detect in 
detail for description. I saw the smaller veget growth as impish, 
half-malicious. even the terrac slope ill, as though their end had 
sag sinc they had been so lavishli constructed; their vari angl 
gave a queerli bewild aspect to their sequenc that wa unpleas 
to the eye. one might wander among their decept length and get lost 
--lost among open terraces!--with the hous quit close at hand. unhom 
seem the entir garden, unabl to give repose, restless in it 
everywhere, almost strife, and discord certainly. 

moreover, the garden grew into the house, the hous into the garden, and 
in both wa thi idea of resist to the natural--th spirit that say 
No to joy. all over it I wa awar of the effort to achiev anoth end, 
the struggl to burst forth and escap into free, spontan express 
that should be happi and natural, yet the effort forev frustrat by 
the weight of thi dark shadow that render it abortive. life crawl 
asid into a channel that wa a cul-de-sac, then turn horribl upon 
itself. instead of blossom and fruit, there were weeds. thi approach of 
life I wa consciou of--then dismal failure. there wa no fulfillment. 
noth happened. 

and so, through thi singular mood, I came a littl nearer to understand 
the unpur thing that had stammer out into express through my 
sister' talent. for the unpur is mere negative; it ha no existence; 
it is but the cramp express of what is true, stammer it way 
brokenli over fals boundari that seek to limit and confine. great, 
full express of anyth is pure, wherea here wa onli the 
incomplete, unfinished, and therefor ugly. there wa a strife and pain 
and desir to escape. I found myself shrink from hous and ground as 
one shrink from the touch of the mental arrested, those in whom life 
ha turn awry. there wa almost mutil in it. 

past items, too, now flock to confirm thi feel that I walked, 
liberti captur and half-maimed, in a monstrou garden. I rememb 
day of rain that refresh the countryside, but left these grounds, 
crack with the summer heat, unsatisfi and thirsty; and how the big 
winds, that clean the wood and field elsewhere, crawl here with 
difficulti through the dens foliag that protect the tower from the 
north and west and east. they were ineffective, sluggish currents. there 
wa no real wind. noth happened. I began to realize--far more clearli 
than in my sister' fanci explan about "layers"--that here were 
mani contrari influenc at work, mutual destruct of one another. 
hous and ground were not haunt merely; they were the arena of past 
think and feeling, perhap of terrible, impur beliefs, each strive 
to suppress the others, yet no one of them achiev supremaci becaus 
no one of them wa strong enough, no one of them wa true. each, 
moreover, tri to win me over, though onli one wa abl to reach my 
mind at all. for some obscur reason--poss becaus my tempera 
had a natur bia toward the grotesque--it wa the goblin layer. with 
me, it wa the line of least resistance.... 

In my own thought thi "goblin garden" revealed, of course, mere my 
person interpretation. I felt now object what long ago my mind 
had felt subjectively. My work, essenti sign of spontan life with 
me, had stop dead; product had becom impossible. 

I stood now consider closer to the caus of thi sterility. the 
cause, rather, turn bolder, had step insol nearer. noth 
happen anywhere; house, garden, mind alik were barren, abortive, torn 
by the strife of frustrat impulse, ugly, hateful, sinful. yet behind it 
all wa still the desir of life--desir to escape--accomplish. hope--an 
intoler hope--i becam startlingli aware--crown torture. 

and, realiz this, though in some part of me where reason lost her 
hold, there rose upon me then anoth and a darker thing that caught me 
by the throat and made me shrink with a sens of revuls that touch 
actual loathing. I knew instantli whenc it came, thi wave of 
abhorr and disgust, for even while I saw red and felt revolt rise in 
me, it seem that I grew partial awar of the layer next below the 
goblin. I perceiv the exist of thi deeper stratum. one open the 
way for the other, as it were. there were so many, yet all 
inter-related; to admit one wa to clear the way for all. If I linger 
I should be caught--horribly. they struggl with such violenc for 
supremaci among themselves, however, that thi latest upris wa 
instantli smother and crush back, though not befor a glimps had 
been reveal to me, and the red in my thought transfer itself 
to color my surround thickli and appallingly--with blood. thi lurid 
aspect drench the garden, smear the terraces, lent to the veri soil 
a ting as of sacrifici rites, that choke the breath in me, while it 
seem to fix me to the earth my feet so long to leave. It wa so 
revolt that at the same time I felt a dread curios as of 
fascination--i wish to stay. between these contrari impuls I think I 
actual reel a moment, transfix by a fascin of the awful. 
through the lighter goblin veil I felt myself sink down, down, down 
into thi turgid layer that wa so much more violent and so much more 
ancient. the upper layer, indeed, seem fairi by comparison with thi 
terror born of the lust for blood, thick with the anguish of human 
sacrifici victims. 

upper! then I wa alreadi sinking; my feet were caught; I wa actual 
in it! what atavist strain, hidden deep within me, had been touch 
into vile response, give thi flash of intuit comprehension, I 
cannot say. the coat laid on by civil are probabl thin 
enough in all of us. I made a suprem effort. the sun and wind came 
back. I could almost swear I open my eyes. someth veri atroci 
surg back into the depths, carri with it a thought of tangl 
woods, of big stone stand in a circle, motionless, white figures, 
the one form bound with ropes, and the ghastli gleam of the knife. like 
smoke upon a battlefield, it roll away.... 

I wa stand on the gravel path below the second terrac when the 
familiar goblin garden danc back again, doubli grotesqu now, doubli 
mocking, yet, by way of contrast, almost welcome. My glimps into the 
depth wa momentary, it seems, and had pass utterli away. 

the common world rush back with a sens of glad relief, yet omin 
now forever, I felt, for the knowledg of what it past had built upon. 
In street, in theater, in the festiv of friends, in music-room or 
play field, even inde in church--how could the memori of what I had 
seen and felt leav it hideou trace? the veri structur of my thought, 
it seem to me, wa stained. 

what ha been thought by other can never be obliter until.... 

with a start my reveri broke and fled, scatter by a violent sound 
that I recogn for the first time in my life as wholli desirable. the 
return motor meant that my hostess wa back. 

yet, so urgent had been my temporari obsession, that my first 
present of her was--well, not as I knew her now. float along 
with a face of anguish tortur I saw mabel, a mere effigi captur by 
others' thinking, pass down into those depth of fire and blood that 
onli just had close beneath my feet. she dip away. she vanished, her 
fade eye turn to the last toward some savior who had fail her. 
and that strang intoler hope wa in her face. 

the mysteri of the place wa pretti thick about me just then. It wa the 
fall of dusk, and the ghost of slant sunshin wa as unreal as though 
badli painted. the garden stood at attent all about me. I cannot 
explain it, but I can tell it, I think, exactli as it happened, for it 
remain vivid in me forever--that, for the first time, someth almost 
happened, myself appar the combin link through which it press 
toward delivery: 

I had alreadi turn toward the house. In my mind were pictures--not 
actual thoughts--of the motor, tea on the verandah, my sister, mabel-- 
when there came behind me thi tumultuous, aw rush--a I left the 
garden. the ugliness, the pain, the strive to escape, the whole 
neg and suppress agoni that wa the place, focus that second 
into a concentr effort to produc a result. It wa a blind 
tempest of long-frustr desir that heav at me, surg appallingli 
behind me like an anguish mob. I wa in the act of cross the 
frontier into my normal self again, when it came, catch fear at 
my skirts. I might use an entir dictionari of descript adject 
yet come no nearer to it than this--th concept of a huge assemblag 
determin to escap with me, or to snatch me back among themselves. My 
leg trembl for an instant, and I caught my breath--then turn and 
ran as fast as possibl up the ugli terraces. 

At the same instant, as though the clang of an iron gate cut short 
the unfinish phrase, I thought the begin of an aw thing: 

"the damn ..." 

like thi it rush after me from that goblin garden that had sought to 
keep me: 

"the damned!" 

for there wa sound in it. I know full well it wa subjective, not 
actual heard at all; yet somehow sound wa in it--a great volume, 
roar and boom thunderously, far away, and below me. the sentenc 
dip back into the depth that gave it birth, unfinished. it 
complet wa prevented. As usual, noth happened. but it drove 
behind me like a hurrican as I ran toward the house, and the sound of 
it I can onli liken to those terribl underton you may hear stand 
besid niagara. they lie behind the mere crash of the fall flood, 
within it somehow, not audibl to all--felt rather than definit 
heard. 

It seem to echo back from the surfac of those sag terrac as I 
flew across their slope ends, for it wa somehow underneath them. It 
wa in the rustl of the wind that stir the skirt of the droop 
wellingtonias. the bed of formal flower pass it on to the creepers, 
red as blood, that crept over the unsightli building. into the structur 
of the vulgar and forbid hous it sank away; the tower took it 
home. the uncom door and window seem almost like mouth that had 
utter the word themselves, and on the upper floor at that veri 
moment I saw two maid in the act of close them again. 

and on the verandah, as I arriv breathless, and shaken in my soul, 
franc and mabel, stand by the tea table, look up to greet me. In 
the face of both were clearli legibl the sign of shock. they watch 
me coming, yet so full of their own distress that they hardli notic 
the state in which I came. In the face of my hostess, however, I read 
anoth and a bigger thing than in the face of frances. mabel knew. she 
had experienc what I had experienced. she had heard that aw 
sentenc I had heard but heard it not for the first time; heard it, 
moreover, I verili believe, complet and to it dread end. 

"bill, did you hear that curiou nois just now?" franc ask it 
sharpli befor I could say a word. her manner wa confused; she look 
straight at me; and there wa a tremor in her voic she could not hide. 

"there' wind about," I said, "wind in the tree and sweep round the 
walls. it' risen rather suddenly." My voic falter rather. 

"no. It wasn't wind," she insisted, with a signific meant for me 
alone, but badli hidden. "it wa more like distant thunder, we thought. 
how you ran too!" she added. "what a pace you came across the terraces!" 

I knew instantli from the way she said it that they both had alreadi 
heard the sound befor and were anxiou to know if I had heard it, and 
how. My interpret wa what they sought. 

"it wa a curious deep sound, I admit. It may have been big gun at 
sea," I suggested, "fort or cruiser practicing. the coast isn't so 
veri far, and with the wind in the right direction--" 

the express on mabel' face stop me dead. 

"like huge door closing," she said softli in her colorless voice, 
"enorm metal door shut against a mass of peopl clamor to get 
out." the gravity, the note of hopeless in her tones, wa shocking. 

franc had gone into the hous the instant mabel began to speak. "i'm 
cold," she had said; "I think i'll get a shawl." mabel and I were alone. 
I believ it wa the first time we had been realli alon sinc I 
arrived. she look up from the teacups, fix her pallid eye on mine. 
she had made a question of the sentence. 

"you hear it like that?" I ask innocently. I purpos use the 
present tense. 

she chang her stare from one eye to the other; it wa absolut 
expressionless. My sister' step sound on the floor of the room behind 
us. 

"if only--" mabel began, then stopped, and my own feel leap out 
instinct complet the sentenc I felt wa in her mind: 

"--someth would happen." 

she instantli correct me. I had caught her thought, yet somehow 
phrase it wrongly. 

"we could escape!" she lower her tone a little, say it hurriedly. 
the "we" amaz and horrifi me; but someth in her voic and manner 
struck me utterli dumb. there wa ice and terror in it. It wa a die 
woman speaking--a lost and hopeless soul. 

In that atroci moment I hardli notic what wa said exactly, but I 
rememb that my sister return with a grey shawl about her shoulders, 
and that mabel said, in her ordinari voic again, "it is chilly, yes; 
let' have tea inside," and that two maids, one of them the grenadier, 
speedili carri the load tray into the morning-room and put a match 
to the log in the great open fireplace. It was, after all, foolish to 
risk the sharp even air, for dusk wa fall steadily, and even the 
sunshin of the day just fade could not turn autumn into summer. I wa 
the last to come in. just as I left the verandah a larg black bird 
swoop down in front of me past the pillars; it drop from overhead, 
swerv abruptli to one side as it caught sight of me, and flap 
heavili toward the shrubberi on the left of the terraces, where it 
disappear into the gloom. It flew veri low, veri close. and it 
startl me, I think becaus in some way it seem like my shadow 
materialized--a though the dark horror that wa rise everywher from 
hous and garden, then settl back so thickli yet so impercept 
upon us all, were incarn in that whir creatur that pass 
between the daylight and the come night. 

I stood a moment, wonder if it would appear again, befor I follow 
the other indoors, and as I wa in the act of close the window after 
me, I caught a glimps of a figur on the lawn. It wa some distanc 
away, on the other side of the shrubberies, in fact where the bird had 
vanished. but in spite of the twilight that half magnified, half 
obscur it, the ident wa unmistakable. I knew the housekeeper' 
stiff walk too well to be deceived. "mrs. marsh take the air," I said 
to myself. I felt the necess of say it, and I wonder whi she wa 
do so at thi particular hour. If I had other thought they were so 
vague, and so quickli and utterli suppressed, that I cannot recal them 
suffici to relat them here. 

and, onc indoors, it wa to be expect that there would come 
explanation, discussion, conversation, at ani rate, regard the 
singular nois and it cause, some utter evid of the mood that had 
been strong enough to drive us all inside. yet there wa none. each of 
us purposely, and with variou skill, ignor it. We talk little, and 
when we did it wa of anyth in the world but that. personally, I 
experienc a touch of that same bewilder which had come over me 
dure my first talk with franc on the even of my arrival, for I 
recal now the acut tension, and the hope, yet dread, that one or other 
of us must sooner or later introduc the subject. It did not happen, 
however; no refer wa made to it even remotely. It wa the presenc 
of mabel, I felt positive, that prohibited. As soon might we have 
discuss death in the bedroom of a die woman. 

the onli scrap of convers I remember, where all wa ordinari and 
commonplace, wa when mabel spoke casual to the grenadi ask whi 
mrs. marsh had omit to do someth or other--what it wa I forget-- 
and that the maid repli respect that "mrs. marsh wa veri sorry, 
but her 'and still pain her." I enquired, though so casual that I 
scarc know what prompt the words, whether she had injur herself 
severely, and the reply, "she upset a lamp and burnt herself," wa said 
in a tone that made me feel my curios wa indiscreet, "but she alway 
ha an excus for not do thing she ought to do." the littl bit of 
convers remain with me, and I rememb particularli the quick way 
franc interrupt and turn the talk upon the delinqu of 
servant in general, tell incid of her own at our flat with a 
volubl that perhap seem forced, and that certainli did not 
encourag gener talk as it may have been intend to do. We laps 
into silenc immedi she finished. 

but for all our care and all our calcul silence, each knew that 
someth had, in these last moments, come veri close; it had brush us 
in passing; it had retired; and I am inclin to think now that the 
larg dark thing I saw, ride the dusk, probabl bird of prey, wa in 
some sens a symbol of it in my mind--that actual there had been no 
bird at all, I mean, but that my mood of apprehens and dismay had 
form the vivid pictur in my thoughts. It had swept past us, it had 
retreated, but it wa now, at thi moment, in hide veri close. and it 
wa watch us. 

perhaps, too, it wa mere coincid that I encount mrs. marsh, hi 
housekeeper, sever time that even in the short interv between 
tea and dinner, and that on each occas the sight of thi gaunt, 
half-saturnin woman fed my prejudic against her. once, on my way to the 
telephone, I ran into her just where the passag is somewhat jam by a 
squar tabl carri the chines gong, a grandfather' clock and a box 
of croquet mallets. We both gave way, then both advanced, then again 
gave way--simultaneously. It seemed, imposs to pass. We step with 
decis to the same side, final collid in the middle, while say 
those futil littl things, half apology, half excuse, that are 
inevit at such times. In the end she stood upright against the wall 
for me to pass, take her place against the veri door I wish to open. 
It wa ludicrous. 

"excus me--i wa just go in--to telephone," I explained. and she 
sidl off, murmur apologies, but open the door for me while she 
did so. our hand met a moment on the handle. 

there wa a second' awkwardness--it wa too stupid. I rememb her 
injury, and by way of someth to say, I enquir after it. she thank 
me; it wa entir heal now, but it might have been much worse; and 
there wa someth about the "merci of the lord" that I didn't quit 
catch. while telephoning, however--london call, and my attent focus 
on it--real sharpli that thi wa the first time I had spoken with 
her; also, that I had--touch her. 

It happen to be a sunday, and the line were clear. I got my 
connect quickly, and the incid wa forgotten while my thought 
went up to london. On my way upstairs, then, the woman came back into my 
mind, so that I recal other thing about her--how she seem all over 
the house, in unlik place often; how I had caught her sit in the 
hall alon that night; how she wa forev come and go with her 
lugubri visag and that untidi hair at the back that had made me 
laugh three year ago with the idea that it look sing or burnt; and 
how the impress on my first arriv at the tower wa that thi woman 
somehow kept alive, though it evid wa outwardli suppressed, the 
influenc of her late employ and of hi somber teachings. somewher 
with her wa associ the idea of punishment, vindictiveness, revenge. 
I rememb again suddenli my odd notion that she sought to keep her 
present mistress here, a prison in thi bleak and comfortless house, 
and that really, in spite of her obsequi silence, she wa intens 
oppos to the chang of thought that had reclaim mabel to a happier 
view of life. 

all thi in a pass second flash in review befor me, and I 
discovered, or at ani rate reconstructed, the real mrs. marsh. she wa 
decidedli in the shadow. more, she stood in the forefront of it, 
stealthili lead an assault, as it were, against the tower and it 
occupants, as though, conscious or unconsciously, she labor 
incessantli to thi hate end. 

I can onli judg that some state of nervous in me permit the 
seri of insignific thought to assum thi dramat shape, and that 
what had gone befor prepar the way and led her up at the head of so 
formid a procession. I relat it exactli as it came to me. My nerv 
were doubtless somewhat on edg by now. otherwis I should hardli have 
been a prey to the exagger at all. I seem open to so mani 
strange, impressions. 

noth else, perhaps, can explain my ridicul convers with her, 
when, for the third time that evening, I came suddenli upon the woman 
half-way down the stairs, stand by an open window as if in the act of 
listening. she wa dress in black, a black shawl over her squar 
shoulder and black glove on her big, broad hands. two black objects, 
prayer book apparently, she clasped, and on her head she wore a bonnet 
with shake bead of jet. At first I did not know her, as I came 
run down upon her from the landing; it wa onli when she stood asid 
to let me pass that I saw her profil against the tapestri and 
recogn mrs. marsh. and to catch her on the front stairs, dress 
like this, struck me as incongruous--impertinent. I paus in my 
danger descent. through the open window came the sound of bells-- 
church bells--a sound more depress to me than superstition, and as 
nauseating. though the action wa ill judged, I obey the sudden 
prompting--wa it a secret desir to attack, perhaps?--and spoke to her. 

"been to church, I suppose, mrs. marsh?" I said. "or just going, 
perhaps?" 

her face, as she look up a second to reply, wa like an iron doll that 
move it lip and turn it eyes, but made no other imit of life 
at all. 

"some of us still goes, sir," she said unctuously. 

It wa respect enough, yet the impli judgment of the rest of the 
world made me almost angry. A deferenti insol lay behind the 
affect meekness. 

"for those who believ no doubt it is helpful," I smiled. "true religion 
bring peac and happiness, i'm sure--joy, mrs. marsh, joy!" I found 
keen satisfact in the emphasis. 

she look at me like a knife. I cannot describ the implac thing 
that shone in her fixed, stern eyes, nor the shadow of felt dark 
that stole across her face. she glittered. I felt hate in her. I knew-- 
she knew too--who wa in the thought of us both at that moment. 

she repli softly, never forget her place for an instant: 

"there is joy, sir--in 'eaven--ov one sinner that repenteth, and in 
church there goe up prayer to gawd for those 'oo--well, for the others, 
sir, 'oo--" 

she cut short her sentenc thus. the gloom about her as she said it wa 
like the gloom about a hearse, a tomb, a dark of great hopeless 
dungeons. My tongu ran on of itself with a kind of bitter satisfaction: 

"we must believ there are no others, mrs. marsh. salvation, you know, 
would be such a failur if there were. No merciful, all-forese god 
could ever have devis such a fear plan--" 

her voice, interrupt me, seem to rise out of the bowel of the 
earth: 

"they reject the salvat when it wa offer to them, sir, on 
earth." 

"but you wouldn't have them tortur forev becaus of one mistak in 
ignorance," I said, fix her with my eye. "come now, would you, mrs. 
marsh? No god worth worship could permit such cruelty. think a 
moment what it means." 

she stare at me, a curiou express in her stupid eyes. It seem to 
me as though the "woman" in her revolted, while yet she dare not suffer 
her grim belief to trip. that is, she would willingli have had it 
otherwis but for a terror that prevented. 

"we may pray for them, sir, and we do--w may 'ope." she drop her 
eye to the carpet. 

"good, good!" I put in cheerfully, sorri now that I had spoken at all. 
"that' more hopeful, at ani rate isn't it?" 

she murmur someth about abraham' bosom, and the "time of salvat 
not be forever," as I tri to pass her. then a half gestur that she 
made stop me. there wa someth more she wish to say--to ask. she 
look up furtively. In her eye I saw the "woman" peer out through 
fear. 

"per'aps, sir." she faltered, as though lightn must strike her dead, 
"per'aps, would you think, a drop of cold water, given in hi name, 
might moisten--?" 

but I stop her, for the foolish talk had last long enough. "of 
course," I exclaimed, "of course. for god is love, remember, and love 
mean charity, tolerance, sympathy, and spare other pain," and I 
hurri past her, determin to end the outrag convers for 
which yet I knew myself entir to blame. behind me, she stood 
stock-stil for sever minutes, half bewildered, half alarmed, as I 
suspected. I caught the fragment of anoth sentence, one word of it, 
rather--"punishment"--but the rest escap me. her arrog and 
condescend toler exasper me, while I wa at the same time 
secretli pleas that I might have touch some string of remors or 
sympathi in her after all. her belief wa iron; she dare not let it go; 
yet somewher underneath there lurk the germ of a wholesom revulsion. 
she would help "them"--if she dared. her question prove it. 

half asham of myself, I turn and cross the hall quickli lest I 
should be tempt to say more, and in me wa a disagre sensat as 
though I had just left the incur ward of some great hospital. A 
reaction caught me as of nausea. ugh! I want such peopl cleans by 
fire. they seem to me as center of contamin whose viciou 
thought flow out to stain god' gloriou world. I saw myself, 
frances, mabel too especially, on the rack, while that odiou figur of 
cruelti and dark stood over us and order the aw handl turn 
in order that we might be "saved"--forced, that is, to think and believ 
exactli as she thought and believed. 

I found relief for my somewhat childish indign by let myself 
loos upon the organ then. the flood of bach and beethoven brought back 
the sens of proportion. It proved, however, at the same time that there 
had been thi growth of distort in me, and that it had been provid 
appar by my closer contact--for the first time--with that funer 
personality, the woman who, like her master, believ that all hold 
view of god that differ from her own, must be damn eternally. It 
gave me, moreover, some faint clue perhaps, though a clue I wa unequ 
of follow up, to the natur of the strife and terror and frustrat 
influenc in the house. that housekeep had to do with it. she kept it 
alive. her thought wa like a spell she wave abov her mistress' head. 




chapter vii 


that night I wa waken by a hurri tap at my door, and befor I 
could answer, franc stood besid my bed. she had switch on the light 
as she came in. her hair fell straggl over her dress gown. her 
face wa deathli pale, it express so distraught it wa almost 
haggard. 

the eye were veri wide. she look almost like anoth woman. 

she wa whisper at a great pace: "bill, bill, wake up, quick!" 

"I am awake. what is it?" I whisper too. I wa startled. 

"listen!" wa all she said. her eye stare into vacancy. 

there wa not a sound in the great house. the wind had dropped, and all 
wa still. onli the tap seem to continu endlessli in my brain. 
the clock on the mantelpiec point to half-past two. 

"I heard nothing, frances. what is it?" I rub my eyes; I had been 
veri deepli asleep. 

"listen!" she repeat veri softly, hold up one finger and turn 
her eye toward the door she had left ajar. her usual calm had 
desert her. she wa in the grip of some distress terror. 

for a full minut we held our breath and listened. then her eye roll 
round again and met my own, and her skin went even whiter than before. 

"it woke me," she said beneath her breath, and move a step nearer to 
my bed. "it wa the noise." even her whisper trembled. 

"the noise!" the word repeat itself dulli of it own accord. I would 
rather it had been anyth in the world but that--earthquake, foreign 
cannon, collaps of the hous abov our heads! "the noise, frances! are 
you sure?" I wa play realli for a littl time. 

"it wa like thunder. At first I thought it wa thunder. but a minut 
later it came again--from underground. it' appalling." she mutter the 
words, her voic not properli under control. 

there wa a paus of perhap a minute, and then we both spoke at once. 
We said foolish, obviou thing that neither of us believ in for a 
second. the roof had fallen in, there were burglar downstairs, the 
safe had been blown open. It wa to comfort each other as children do 
that we said these things; also it wa to gain further time. 

"there' some one in the house, of course," I heard my voic say 
finally, as I sprang out of bed and hurri into dress gown and 
slippers. "don't be alarmed. i'll go down and see," and from the drawer 
I took a pistol it wa my habit to carri everywher with me. I load it 
care while franc stood stock-stil besid the bed and watched. I 
move toward the open door. 

"you stay here, frances," I whispered, the beat of my heart make 
the word uneven, "while I go down and make a search. lock yourself in, 
girl. noth can happen to you. It wa downstairs, you said?" 

"underneath," she answer faintly, point through the floor. 

she move suddenli between me and the door. 

"listen! hark!" she said, the eye in her face quit fixed; "it' come 
again," and she turn her head to catch the slightest sound. I stood 
there watch her, and while I watch her, shook. 

but noth stirred. from the hall below rose onli the whirr and quiet 
tick of the numer clocks. the blind by the open window behind us 
flap out a littl into the room as the draught caught it. 

"i'll come with you, bill--to the next floor," she broke the silence. 
"then i'll stay with mabel--til you come up again." the blind sank down 
with a long sigh as she said it. 

the question jump to my lip befor I could repress it: 

"mabel is awake. she heard it too?" 

I hardli know whi horror caught me at her answer. all wa so vagu and 
terribl as we stood there play the great game of thi sinist hous 
where noth ever happened. 

"we met in the passage. she wa on her way to me." 

what shook in me, shook inwardly. frances, I mean, did not see it. I had 
the feel just that the nois wa upon us, that ani second it would 
boom and roar about our ears. but the deep silenc held. I onli heard my 
sister' littl whisper come across the room in answer to my question: 

"then what is mabel do now?" 

and her repli prove that she wa yield at last beneath the dread 
tension, for she spoke at once, unabl longer to keep up the pretence. 
with a kind of relief, as it were, she said it out, look helplessli 
at me like a child: 

"she is weep and gna--" 

My express must have stop her. I believ I clap both hand upon 
her mouth, though when I realiz thing clearli again, I found they 
were cover my own ear instead. It wa a moment of unutter 
horror. the revuls I felt wa actual physical. It would have given 
me pleasur to fire off all the five chamber of my pistol into the air 
abov my head; the sound--a definite, wholesom sound that explain 
itself--would have been a posit relief. other feelings, though, were 
in me too, all over me, rush to and fro. It wa vain to seek their 
disentanglement; it wa impossible. I confess that I experienced, among 
them, a touch of paralyz fear--though for a moment only; it pass as 
sharpli as it came, leav me with a violent flush of blood to the face 
such as burst of anger bring, follow abruptli by an ici perspir 
over the entir body. yet I may honestli avow that it wa not ordinari 
person fear I felt, nor ani common dread of physic injury. It was, 
rather, a vast, imperson shrinking--a sympathet shrinking--from the 
agoni and terror that countless others, somewhere, somehow, felt for 
themselves. the first sensat of a prison overwhelm me in that 
instant, of bitter strife and frenzi suffering, and the fieri tortur 
of the yearn to escap that wa yet hopelessli uttered.... It wa of 
incred power. It wa real. the vain, intoler hope swept over me. 

I master myself, though hardli know how, and took my sister' hand. 
It wa as cold as ice, as I led her firmli to the door and out into the 
passage. appar she notic noth of my so near collapse, for I 
caught her whisper as we went. "you are brave, bill; splendidli brave." 

the upper corridor of the great sleep hous were brightli lit; on 
her way to me she had turn on everi electr switch her hand could 
reach; and as we pass the final flight of stair to the floor below, I 
heard a door shut softli and knew that mabel had been listening--wait 
for us. I led my sister up to it. she knocked, and the door wa open 
cautious an inch or so. the room wa pitch black. I caught no glimps 
of mabel stand there. franc turn to me with a hurri whisper, 
"billy, you will be careful, won't you?" and went in. I just had time to 
answer that I would not be long, and franc to reply, "you'll find us 
here" when the door close and cut her sentenc short befor it end. 

but it wa not alon the close door that took the final words. 
frances--bi the way she disappear I knew it--had made a swift and 
violent movement into the dark that wa as though she sprang. she 
leap upon that other woman who stood back among the shadows, for, 
simultan with the clip of the sentence, anoth sound wa also 
stopped--stifled, smothered, choke back lest I should also hear it. yet 
not in time. I heard it--a hard and horribl sound that explain both 
the leap and the abrupt cessat of the whisper words. 

I stood irresolut a moment. It wa as though all the bone had been 
withdrawn from my body, so that I must sink and fall. that sound pluck 
them out, and pluck out my self-possess with them. I am not sure 
that it wa a sound I had ever heard before, though children, I half 
remembered, made it sometim in blind rage when they knew not what 
they did. In a grown-up person certainli I had never known it. I 
associ it with anim rather--horribly. In the histori of the 
world, no doubt, it ha been common enough, alas, but fortun today 
there can be but few who know it, or would recogn it even when heard. 
the bone shot back into my bodi the same instant, but red-hot and 
burning; the brief instant of irresolut passed; I wa torn between 
the desir to break down the door and enter, and to run--run for my life 
from a thing I dare not face. 

out of the horrid tumult, then, I adopt neither course. without 
reflection, certainli without analysi of what wa best to do for my 
sister, myself or mabel, I took up my action where it had been 
interrupted. I turn from the aw door and move slowli toward the 
head of the stairs. 

but that dread littl sound came with me. I believ my own teeth 
chattered. It seem all over the house--in the empti hall that open 
into the long passag toward the music-room, and even in the ground 
outsid the building. from the lawn and barren garden, from the ugli 
terrac themselves, it rose into the night, and behind it came a 
curiou drive sound, incomplete, unfinished, as of wail for 
deliverance, the wail of desper soul in anguish, the dull and dri 
beseech of hopeless spirit in prison. 

that I could have taken the littl sound from the bedroom where I 
actual heard it, and spread it thu over the entir hous and grounds, 
is evidence, perhaps, of the state my nerv were in. 

the wail assuredli wa in my mind alone. but the longer I hesitated, 
the more difficult becam my task, and, gather up my dress gown, 
lest I should trip in the darkness, I pass slowli down the staircas 
into the hail below. I carri neither candl nor matches; everi switch 
in room and corridor wa known to me. the cover of dark wa 
inde rather comfort than otherwise, for if it prevent seeing, it 
also prevent be seen. the heavi pistol, knock against my thigh 
as I moved, made me feel I wa carri a child' toy, foolishly. I 
experienc in everi nerv that primit vast dread which is the thrill 
of darkness. mere the child in me wa comfort by that pistol. 

the night wa not entir black; the iron bar across the glass front 
door were visible, and, equally, I discern the big, stiff wooden 
chair in the hall, the gape fireplace, the upright pillar support 
the staircase, the round tabl in the center with it book and 
flower-vases, and the basket that held visitors' cards. there, too, wa 
the stick and umbrella stand and the shelf with railway guides, 
directory, and telegraph forms. clock tick everywher with sound 
like quiet footfalls. light fell here and there in patch from the 
floor above. I stood a moment in the hall, let my eye grow more 
accustom to the gloom, while decid on a plan of search. I made out 
the ivi trail outsid over one of the big window ... and then the 
tall clock by the front door made a grate nois deep down insid it 
body--it wa the present clock, larg and hideous, given by the 
congreg of hi church--and, dread the boom strike it seem 
to threaten, I made a quick decision. If other besid myself were about 
in the night, the sound of that strike might cover their approach. 

So I tipto to the right, where the passag led toward the dine 
room. In the other direct were the morning- and draw rooms, both 
littl used, and variou other room beyond that had been his, gener 
now kept locked. I thought of my sister, wait upstair with that 
frighten woman for my return. I went quickly, yet stealthily. 

and, to my surprise, the door of the dine room wa open. It had been 
opened. I paus on the threshold, stare about me. I think I fulli 
expect to see a figur block in the shadow against the heavi 
sideboard, or loom on the other side beneath hi portrait. but the 
room wa empty; I felt it empty. through the wide bow-window that gave 
on to the verandah came an uncertain glimmer that even shone reflect 
in the polish surfac of the dinner-table, and again I perceiv the 
stiff outlin of chairs, wait tenantless all round it, two larger 
one with high carv back at either end. the monkey tree on the upper 
terrace, too, were visibl outsid against the sky, and the solemn 
crest of the wellingtonia on the terrac below. the enorm clock on 
the mantelpiec tick veri slowly, as though it machineri were run 
down, and I made out the pale round patch that wa it face. resist 
my first inclin to turn the light up--mi hand had gone so far as 
to finger the friendli knob--i cross the room so care that no 
singl board creaked, nor a singl chair, as I rest a hand upon it 
back, move on the parquet flooring. I turn neither to the right nor 
left, nor did I onc look back. 

I went toward the long corridor fill with priceless _objet d'art_, 
that led through variou antechamb into the spaciou music-room, and 
onli at the mouth of thi corridor did I next halt a moment in 
uncertainty. for thi long corridor, lit faintli by high window on the 
left from the verandah, wa veri narrow, owe to the mass of shelv 
and fanci tabl it contained. It wa not that I fear to knock over 
preciou thing as I went, but, that, becaus of it ungener width, 
there would be no room to pass anoth person--if I met one. and the 
certainti had suddenli come upon me that somewher in thi corridor 
anoth person at thi actual moment stood. here, somehow, amid all thi 
dead atmospher of furnitur and imperson emptiness, lay the hint of a 
live human presence; and with such convict did it come upon me, 
that my hand instinct grip the pistol in my pocket befor I 
could even think. either some one had pass along thi corridor just 
befor me, or some one lay wait at it farther end--withdrawn or 
flatten into one of the littl recesses, to let me pass. It wa the 
person who had open the door. and the blood ran from my heart as I 
realiz it. 

It wa not courag that sent me on, but rather a strong impuls from 
behind that made it imposs to retreat: the feel that a throng 
press at my back, draw nearer and nearer; that I wa alreadi half 
surrounded, swept, dragged, coax into a vast prison-hous where there 
wa wail and gnash of teeth, where their worm dieth not and their 
fire is not quenched. I can neither explain nor justifi the storm of 
irrat emot that swept me as I stood in that moment, stare down 
the length of the silent corridor toward the music-room at the far end, 
I can onli repeat that no person braveri sent me down it, but that the 
neg emot of fear wa swamp in thi vast sea of piti and 
commiser for other that surg upon me. 

My senses, at least, were no whit confused; if anything, my brain 
regist impress with keener accuraci than usual. I noticed, for 
instance, that the two swing door of baiz that cut the corridor 
into definit lengths, make littl room of the space between them, 
were both wide-open--in the dim light no mean achievement. also that the 
frond of a palm plant, some ten feet in front of me, still stir 
gentli from the air of someon who had recent gone past them. the long 
green leav wave to and fro like hands. then I went stealthili forward 
down the narrow space, proud even that I had thi command of myself, and 
so care that my feet made no sound upon the japanes mat on the 
floor. 

It wa a journey that seem timeless. I have no idea how fast or slow I 
went, but I rememb that I deliber examin articl on each side 
of me, peer with particular close into the recess of wall and 
window. I pass the first baiz doors, and the passag beyond them 
widen out to hold shelv of books; there were sofa and small 
reading-t against the wall. 

It narrow again presently, as I enter the second stretch. the 
window here were higher and smaller, and marbl statuett of classic 
subject line the walls, watch me like figur of the dead. their 
white and shine face saw me, yet made no sign. I pass next between 
the second baiz doors. they, too, had been fasten back with hook 
against the wall. thu all door were open--had been recent opened. 

and so, at length, I found myself in the final widen of the corridor 
which form an antechamb to the music-room itself. It had been use 
formerli to hold the overflow of meetings. No door separ it from the 
great hall beyond, but heavi curtain hung usual to close it off, and 
these curtain were invari drawn. they now stood wide. and here--i 
can mere state the impress that came upon me--i knew myself at last 
surrounded. the throng that press behind me, also surg in front: 
face me in the big room, and wait for my entry, stood a multitude; 
on either side of me, in the veri air abov my head, the vast assemblag 
paus upon my coming. the pause, however, wa momentary, for instantli 
the deep, tumultu movement wa resum that yet wa silent as a 
cavern underground. I felt the agoni that wa in it, the passion 
striving, the aw struggl to escape. the semi-dark held 
beseech face that fought to press themselv upon my vision, 
yearn yet hopeless eyes, lip scorch and dry, mouth that open to 
implor but found no crave deliveri in actual words, and a furi of 
miseri and hate that made the life in me stop dead, frozen by the horror 
of vain pity. that intolerable, vain hope wa everywhere. 

and the multitude, it came to me, wa not a singl multitude, but many; 
for, as soon as one huge divis press too close upon the edg of 
escape, it wa drag back by anoth and prevented. the wild host wa 
divid against itself. here dwelt the shadow I had "imagined" week 
ago, and in it struggl armi of lost soul as in the depth of some 
bottomless pit whenc there is no escape. the layer mingled, fight 
against themselv in endless torture. It wa in thi great shadow I had 
clairvoyantli seen mabel, but about it fear mouth, I now wa 
certain, hover anoth figur of darkness, a figur who sought to keep 
it in existence, sinc to her thought were due those lampless depth of 
woe without escape.... toward me the multitud now surged. 

It wa a sound and a movement that brought me back into myself. the 
great dock at the farther end of the room just then struck the hour of 
three. that wa the sound. and the movement--? I wa awar that a figur 
wa pass across the distant center of the floor. instantli I drop 
back into the arena of my littl human terror. My hand again clutch 
stupidli at the pistol butt. I drew back into the fold of the heavi 
curtain. and the figur advanced. 

I rememb everi detail. At first it seem to me enormous--thi 
advanc shadow--far beyond human scale; but as it came nearer, I 
measur it, though not consciously, by the organ pipe that gleam in 
faint colors, just abov it gradual soft approach. It pass them, 
alreadi halfway across the great room. I saw then that it statur wa 
that of ordinari men. the prolong boom of the clock die away. I 
heard the footfall, shuffl upon the polish boards. I heard anoth 
sound--a voice, low and monotonous, drone as in prayer. the figur wa 
speaking. It wa a woman. and she carri in both hand befor her a 
small object that faintli shimmered--a glass of water. and then I 
recogn her. 

there wa still an instant' time befor she reach me, and I made use 
of it. I shrank back, flatten myself against the wall. her voic 
ceas a moment, as she turn and care drew the curtain togeth 
behind her, dose them with one hand. oblivi of my presence, though 
she actual touch my dress gown with the hand that pull the 
cords, she resum her dreadful, solemn march, disappear at length 
down the long vista of the corridor like a shadow. 

but as she pass me, her voic began again, so that I heard each word 
distinctli as she utter it, her head aloft, her figur upright, as 
though she move at the head of a procession: 

"A drop of cold water, given in hi name, shall moisten their burn 
tongues." 

It wa repeat monoton over and over again, drone down into the 
distanc as she went, until at length both voic and figur fade into 
the shadow at the farther end. 

for a time, I have no mean of measur precisely, I stood in that dark 
corner, press my back against the wall, and would have drawn the 
curtain down to hide me had I dare to stretch an arm out. the dread 
that present the woman would return pass gradual away. I realiz 
that the air had emptied, the crowd her presenc had stir into 
activ had retreated; I wa alon in the gloomi under-spac of the 
odiou building.... then I rememb suddenli again the terrifi women 
wait for me on that upper landing; and realiz that my skin wa wet 
and freez cold after a profus perspiration. I prepar to retrac my 
steps. I rememb the effort it cost me to leav the support of the wall 
and cover dark of my corner, and step out into the grey light of 
the corridor. At first I sidled, then, find thi mode of walk 
impossible, turn my face boldli and walk quickly, regardless that my 
dress gown set the preciou object shake as I passed. A wind that 
sigh mourn against the high, small window seem to have got 
insid the corridor as well; it felt so cold; and everi moment I dread 
to see the outlin of the woman' figur as she wait in recess or 
angl against the wall for me to pass. 

wa there anoth thing I dread even more? I cannot say. I onli know 
that the first baiz door had swung to behind me, and the second one 
were close at hand, when the great dim thunder caught me, pour up 
with prodigi volum so that it, seem to roll out from anoth 
world. It shook the veri bowel of the building. I wa closer to it than 
that other time, when it had follow me from the goblin garden. there 
wa strength and hard in it, as of metal reverberation. some touch 
of numbness, almost of paralysis, must sure have been upon me that I 
felt no actual terror, for I rememb even turn and stand still to 
hear it better. "that is the noise," my thought ran stupidly, and I 
think I whisper it aloud; "the door are closing." the wind outsid 
against the window wa audible, so it cannot have been realli loud, yet 
to me it wa the biggest, deepest sound I have ever heard, but so far 
away, with such aw remot in it, that I had to doubt my own ear 
at the same time. It seem underground--th rumbl of earthquak 
gate that shut remorselessli within the rocki earth--stupend 
ultim thunder. they were shut off from help again. the door had 
closed. 

I felt a storm of pity, an agoni of bitter, futil hate sweep through 
me. My memori of the figur chang then. the woman with the glass of 
cool water had step down from heaven; but the man--or wa it men? 
--who smear thi terribl layer of belief and thought upon the 
world!... 

I cross the dine room--it wa fancy, of course, that held my eye 
from glanc at the portrait for fear I should see it smile approv 
--and so final reach the hall, where the light from the floor abov 
seem now quit bright in comparison. all the door I close care 
behind me; but first I had to open them. the woman had close everi one. 
Up the stairs, then, I actual ran, two step at a time. My sister wa 
stand outsid mabel' door. By her face I knew that she had also 
heard. there wa no need to ask. I quickli made my mind up. 

"there' nothing," I said, and detail briefli my tour of search. "all 
is quiet and undisturb downstairs." may god forgiv me! 

she beckon to me, close the door softli behind her. My heart beat 
violent a moment, then stood still. 

"mabel," she said aloud. 

It wa like the sentenc of a judge, that one short word. 

I tri to push past her and go in, but she stop me with her arm. she 
wa wholli mistress of herself, I saw. 

"hush!" she said in a lower voice. "i'v got her round again with 
brandy. she' sleep quietli now. We won't disturb her." 

she drew me farther out into the landing, and as she did so, the clock 
in the hall below struck half-past three. I had stood, then, thirti 
minut in the corridor below. "you'v been such a long time." she said 
simply. "I fear for you," and she took my hand in her own that wa 
cold and clammy. 




chapter viii 


and then, while that dread hous stood listen about us in the 
earli hour of thi chill morn upon the edg of winter, she told me, 
with lacon brevity, thing about mabel that I heard as from a 
distance. there wa noth so unusu or tremend in the short 
recital, noth inde I might not have alreadi guess for myself. It 
wa the time and scene, the inference, too, that made it so afflicting: 
the idea that mabel believ herself so utterli and hopelessli lost-- 
beyond recoveri damned. 

that she had love him with so passion a devot that she had given 
her soul into hi keeping, thi certainli I had not divined--prob 
becaus I had never thought about it one way or the other. He had 
"converted" her, I knew, but that she had subscrib whole-heartedli to 
that most cruel and ugli of hi dogmas--thi wa new to me, and came 
with a certain shock as I heard it. In love, of course, the weaker 
natur is recept to all manner of suggestion. thi man had 
"suggested" hi pet brimston lake so vividli that she had listen and 
believed. He had frighten her into heaven; and hi heaven, a definit 
local in the skies, had it foretast here on earth in miniature--th 
towers, house, and garden. into hi dolor scheme of a hand save 
and million damned, hi enclosure, as it were, of sheep and goats, he 
had swept her befor she wa awar of it. her mind no longer wa her 
own. and it wa mrs. marsh who kept the thought-stream open, though 
tempered, as she deemed, with that touch of craven, superstiti mercy. 

but what I found it difficult to understand, and still more difficult to 
accept, wa that, dure her year abroad, she had been so haunt with a 
secret dread of that hideou after-death that she had final revolt 
and tri to recov that clearer state of mind she had enjoy befor 
the religi bulli had stun her--yet had tri in vain. she had 
return to the tower to find her soul again, onli to realiz that it 
wa lost eternally. the cleaner state of mind lay then beyond recovery. 
In the reaction that follow the remov of hi terribl "suggestion," 
she felt the crumbl of all that he had taught her, but search in 
vain for the peac and beauti hi teach had destroyed. noth came 
to replac these. she wa empty, desolate, hopeless; crave her former 
joy and carelessness, she found onli hate and diabol calculation. 
thi man, whom she had love to the point of lose her soul for him, 
had bequeath to her one black and fieri thing--th terror of the 
damned. hi think wrap her in thi iron garment that held her 
fast. 

all thi franc told me, far more briefli than I have here repeat it. 
In her eye and gestur and lacon sentenc lay the convict of 
great beat issu and of menac drama my own descript fail to 
recapture. It wa all so incongru and remot from the world I live 
in that more than onc a smile, though a smile of pity, flutter to my 
lips; but a glimps of my face in the mirror show rather the leer of a 
grimace. there wa no real laughter anywher that night. 

the entir adventur seem so incredible, here, in thi twentieth 
century--but yet delusion, that feebl word, did not occur onc in the 
comment my mind suggest though did not utter. I rememb that 
forbid shadow too; my sister' watercolors; the vanish person 
of our hostess; the inexplicable, thunder noise, and the figur of 
mrs. marsh in her midnight ritual that wa so childish yet so horrible. 
I shiver in spite of my own "emancipated" cast of mind. 

"there is no mabel," were the word with which my sister sent anoth 
shower of ice down my spine. "he ha kill her in hi lake of fire and 
brimstone." 

I stare at her blankly, as in a nightmar where noth true or 
possibl ever happened. 

"he kill her in hi lake of fire and brimstone," she repeat more 
faintly. 

A desper effort wa in me to say the strong, sensibl thing which 
should destroy the oppress horror that grew so stiflingli about us 
both, but again the mirror drew the attempt smile into the merest 
grin, betray the distort that wa everywher in the place. 

"you mean," I stammer beneath my breath, "that her faith ha gone, but 
that the terror ha remained?" I ask it, dulli groping. I move out of 
the line of the reflect in the glass. 

she bow her head as though beneath a weight; her skin wa the pallor 
of grey ashes. 

"you mean," I said louder, "that she ha lost her--mind?" 

"she is terror incarnate," wa the whisper answer. "mabel ha lost her 
soul. her soul is--there!" she point horribl below. "she is seek 
it ...?" 

the word "soul" stung me into someth of my normal self again. 

"but her terror, poor thing, is not--cannot be--transfer to us!" I 
exclaim more vehemently. "it certainli is not convert into 
feelings, sight and--even sounds!" 

she interrupt me quickly, almost impatiently, speak with that 
convict by which she conquer me so easili that night. 

"it is her terror that reviv 'the others.' It ha brought her into 
touch with them. they are loos and drive after her. her effort at 
resist have given them also hope--that escape, after all, is 
possible. day and night they strive. 

"escape! others!" the anger fast rise in me drop of it own accord 
at the moment of birth. It shrank into a shudder beyond my control. 
In that moment, I think, I would have believ in the possibl of 
anyth and everyth she might tell me. To argu or contradict seem 
equal futile. 

"hi strong belief, as also the belief of other who have preced 
him," she replied, so sure of herself that I actual turn to look 
over my shoulder, "have left their shadow like a thick deposit over the 
hous and grounds. To them, poor soul imprison by thought, it wa 
hopeless as granit walls--until her resistance, her effort to dissip 
it--let in light. now, in their thousands, they are flock to thi 
littl light, seek escape. her own escape, don't you see, may releas 
them all!" 

It took my breath away. had hi predecessors, former occup of thi 
house, also preach damnat of all the world but their own exclus 
sect? wa thi the explan of her obscur talk of "layers," each 
strive against the other for domination? and if men are spirits, and 
these spirit survive, could strong thought thu determin their 
condit even afterwards? 

So mani question flood into me that I select no one of them, but 
stare in uncomfort silence, bewildered, out of my depth, and 
acutely, pain distressed. there wa so odd a mixtur of possibl 
truth and incredible, unaccept explan in it all; so much 
confirmed, yet so much left darker than before. what she said did, 
indeed, offer a quasi-interpret of my own seri of abomin 
sensations--strife, agony, pity, hate, escape--but so far-fetch that 
onli the deep convict in her voic and attitud made it toler for 
a second even. I found myself in a curiou state of mind. I could 
neither think clearli nor say a word to refut her amaz statements, 
whisper there besid me in the shiver hour of the earli morn 
with onli a wall between ourselv and--mabel. close behind her word I 
rememb thi singular thing, however--that an atmospher as of the 
inquisit seem to rise and stir about the room, beat aw wing 
of black abov my head. 

abruptly, then, a moment' common sens return to me. I face her. 

"and the noise?" I said aloud, more firmly, "the roar of the close 
doors? We have all heard that! Is that subject too?" 

franc look sideway about her in a queer fashion that made my flesh 
creep again. I spoke brusquely, almost angrily. I repeat the question, 
and wait with anxieti for her reply. 

"what noise?" she asked, with the frank express of an innoc child. 
"what close doors?" 

but her face turn from grey to white, and I saw that drop of 
perspir glisten on her forehead. she caught at the back of a 
chair to steadi herself, then glanc about her again with that sidelong 
look that made my blood run cold. I understood suddenli then. she did 
not take in what I said. I knew now. she wa listening--for someth 
else. 

and the discoveri reviv in me a far stronger emot than ani mere 
desir for immedi explanation. not onli did I not insist upon an 
answer, but I wa actual terrifi lest she would answer. more, I felt 
in me a terror lest I should be move to describ my own experi 
below-stairs, thu increas their realiti and so the realiti of all. 
she might even explain them too! 

still listen intently, she rais her head and look me in the eyes. 
her lip open to speak. the word came to me from a great distance, it 
seemed, and her voic had a sound like a stone that drop into a deep 
well, it fate though hidden, known. 

"we are in it with her, too, bill. We are in it with her. our 
interpret vary--becaus we are--in part of it only. mabel is in 
it--all." 

the desir for violenc came over me. If onli she would say a definit 
thing in plain king' english! If onli I could find it in me to give 
utter to what shout so loud within me! If only--th same old cry-- 
someth would happen! for all thi ellipt talk that daze my mind 
left obscur everywhere. her atroci meaning, nonetheless, flash 
through me, though vanish befor it wholli divulg itself. 

It brought a certain reaction with it. I found my tongue. whether I 
actual believ what I said is more than I can swear to; that it 
seem to me wise at the moment is all I remember. My mind wa in a 
state of obscur percept less than that of normal consciousness. 

"yes, frances, I believ that what you say is the truth, and that we are 
in it with her"--i meant to say I with loud, hostil emphasis, but 
instead I whisper it lest she should hear the trembl of my voice-- 
"and for that reason, my dear sister, we leav tomorrow, you and i-- 
today, rather, sinc it is long past midnight--w leav thi hous of 
the damned. We go back to london." 

franc look up, her face distraught almost beyond recognition. but it 
wa not my word that caus the tumult in her heart. It wa a sound-- 
the sound she had been listen for--so faint I bare caught it 
myself, and had she not point I could never have known the direct 
whenc it came. small and terribl it rose again in the still of the 
night, the sound of gnash teeth. and behind it came another--th 
tread of stealthi footsteps. both were just outsid the door. 

the room swung round me for a second. My first instinct to prevent my 
sister go out--sh had dash past me frantic to the door--gav 
place to anoth when I saw the express in her eyes. I follow her 
lead instead; it wa surer than my own. the pistol in my pocket swung 
uselessli against my thigh. I wa fluster beyond belief and asham 
that I wa so. 

"keep close to me, frances," I said huskily, as the door swung wide and 
a shaft of light fell upon a figur move rapidly. mabel wa go down 
the corridor. beyond her, in the shadow on the staircase, a second 
figur stood beckoning, scarc visible. 

"befor they get her! quick!" wa scream into my ears, and our arm 
were about her in the same moment. It wa a horribl scene. not that 
mabel struggl in the least, but that she collaps as we caught her 
and fell with her dead weight, as of a corpse, limp, against us. and her 
teeth began again. they continued, even beneath the hand that franc 
clap upon her lips.... 

We carri her back into her own bedroom, where she lay down peac 
enough. It wa so soon over.... the rapid of the whole thing rob 
it of realiti almost. It had the swift of someth rememb 
rather than of someth witnessed. she slept again so quickli that it 
wa almost as if we had caught her sleepwalking. I cannot say. I ask 
no question at the time; I have ask none since; and my help wa 
need as littl as the protect of my pistol. franc wa strang 
compet and collected.... I linger for some time uselessli by the 
door, till at length, look up with a sigh, she made a sign for me to 
go. 

"I shall wait in your room next door," I whispered, "till you come." 
but, though go out, I wait in the corridor instead, so as to hear 
the faintest call for help. In that dark corridor upstair I waited, but 
not long. It may have been fifteen minut when franc reappeared, 
lock the door softli behind her. lean over the banisters, I saw 
her. 

"i'll go in again about six o'clock," she whispered, "a soon as it get 
light. she is sound asleep now. pleas don't wait. If anyth happen 
i'll call--you might leav your door ajar, perhaps." 

and she came up, look like a ghost. 

but I saw her first safe into bed, and the rest of the night I spent 
in an armchair close to my open door, listen for the slightest 
sound. soon after five o'clock I heard franc fumbl with the key, 
and, peer over the rail again, I wait till she reappear and 
went back into her own room. she close her door. evid she wa 
satisfi that all wa well. 

then, and then only, did I go to bed myself, but not to sleep. I could 
not get the scene out of my mind, especi that odiou detail of it 
which I hope and believ my sister had not seen--th still, dark 
figur of the housekeep wait on the stair below--waiting, of 
course, for mabel. 




chapter IX 


It seem I becam a mere spectat after that; my sister' lead wa so 
assur for one thing, and, for another, the respons of leav 
mabel alone--fr laid it bodili upon my shoulders--wa a littl more 
than I care about. moreover, when we all three met later in the day, 
thing went on so exactli as before, so absolut without friction or 
distress, that to present a sudden, obviou excus for cut our visit 
short seem ill-judged. and on the lowest ground it would have been 
desertion. At ani rate, it wa beyond my powers, and franc wa quit 
firm that she must stay. We therefor did stay. thing that happen in 
the night alway seem exagger and distort when the sun shine 
brightli next morning; no one can reconstruct the terror of a nightmar 
afterwards, nor comprehend whi it seem so overwhelm at the time. 

I slept till ten o'clock, and when I rang for breakfast, a note from my 
sister lay upon the tray, it messag of counsel couch in a calm and 
comfort strain. mabel, she assur me, wa herself again and 
rememb noth of what had happened; there wa no need of ani 
violent measures; I wa to treat her exactli as if I knew nothing. "and, 
if you don't mind, bill, let us leav the matter unment between 
ourselv as well. discuss exaggerates; such thing are best not 
talk about. i'm sorri I disturb you so unnecessarily; I wa stupidli 
excited. pleas forget all the thing I said at the moment." she had 
written "nonsense" first instead of "things," then scratch it out. she 
wish to convey that hysteria had been abroad in the night, and I 
readili gulp the explan down, though it could not satisfi me in 
the smallest degree. 

there wa anoth week of our visit still, and we stay it out to the 
end without disaster. My desir to leav at time becam that frantic 
thing, desir to escape; but I control it, kept silent, watch and 
wondered. noth happened. As before, and everywhere, there wa no 
sequenc of development, no connect between caus and effect; and 
climax, none whatever. the thing sway up and down, backward and 
forward like a great loos curtain in the wind, and I could onli 
vagu surmis what caus the draught or whi there wa a curtain at 
all. A novelist might mold the queer materi into coher sequenc 
that would be interest but could not be true. 

It remains, therefore, not a stori but a history. noth happened. 

perhap my intens dislik of the fall of dark wa due wholli to my 
stir imagination, and perhap my anger when I learn that franc 
now occupi a bed in our hostess' room wa unreasonable. nerv were 
unquestion on edge. I wa forev on the lookout for some event that 
should make escap imperative, but yet that never present itself. I 
slept lightly, left my door ajar to catch the slightest sound, even made 
stealthi tour of the hous below-stair while everybodi dream in 
their beds. but I discov nothing; the door were alway locked; I 
neither saw the housekeep again in unreason time and places, nor 
heard a footstep in the passag and halls. the nois wa never onc 
repeated. that horrible, ultim thunder, my intensest dread of all, 
lay withdrawn into the abyss whenc it had twice arisen. and though in 
my thought it wa sternli deni existence, the great black reason for 
the fact afflict me unbelievably. sinc mabel' fruitless effort to 
escape, the door kept close remorselessly. she had failed; they gave 
up hope. for thi wa the explan that haunt the region of my mind 
where feel stir and hint befor they cloth themselv in actual 
language. onli I firmli kept it there; it never knew expression. 

but, if my ear were open, my eye were open too, and it were idl to 
pretend that I did not notic a hundr detail that were capabl of 
sinist interpret had I been weak enough to yield. some protect 
barrier had fallen into ruin round me, so that terror stalk behind 
the gener collapse, feel for me through all the gape fissures. 
much of this, I admit, must have been mere the elabor of those 
sensat I had first vagu felt, befor subsequ event and my 
talk with franc had dramat them into live thoughts. I therefor 
leav them unment in thi history, just as my mind left them 
unment in that intermin final week. our life went on precis 
as before--mabel unreal and outwardli so still; frances, secretive, 
anxious, tact to the point of slyness, and keen to save to the point 
of self-forgetfulness. 

there were the same stupid meals, the same wearisom long evenings, the 
stifl ugli of hous and grounds, the shadow settl in so 
thickli that it seem almost a visible, tangibl thing. I came to feel 
the onli friendli thing in all thi hostile, cruel place were the 
robin that hop boldli over the monstrou terrac and even up to the 
window of the unsightli hous itself. the robin alon knew joy; they 
danced, believ no evil thing wa possibl in all god' radiant world. 
they believ in everybody; their god' plan of life had no room in it 
for hell, damnation, and lake of brimstone. I came to love the littl 
birds. had samuel franklyn known them, he might have preach a 
differ sermon, bequeath love in place of terror! 

most of my time I spent writing; but it wa a pretenc at best, and 
rather a danger one besides. for it stir the mind to production, 
with the result that other thing came pour in as well. with read 
it wa the same. In the end I found an aggressive, deliber resist 
to be the onli way of feasibl defense. To walk far afield wa out of 
the question, for it meant leav my sister too long alone, so that my 
exercis wa confin to nearer home. My saunter in the grounds, 
however, never surpris the goblin garden again. It wa close at hand, 
but I seem unabl to get wholli into it. too mani thing assail my 
mind for ani one to hold exclus possession, perhaps. 

indeed, all the interpretations, all the "layers," to use my sister' 
phrase, slip in by turn and lodg there for a time. they came day 
and night, and though my reason deni them entranc they held their own 
as by a kind of squatter' right. they stir mood alreadi in me, that 
is, and did not introduc entir new ones; for everi mind conceal 
ancestr deposit that have been cultiv in turn along the whole 
line of it descent. ani day a chanc shower may caus thi one or that 
to blossom. thu it came to me, at ani rate. after dark the 
inquisit pace the empti corridor and set up ghastli apparatu in 
the dismal halls; and once, in the library, there swept over me that 
easi and delici convict that by confess my wicked I could 
resum it later, sinc confess is expression, and express bring 
relief and leav one readi to accumul again. and in such mood I felt 
bitter and unforgiv toward all other who thought differently. 
anoth time it wa a pagan thing that assault me--so trivial yet oh, 
so signific at the time--when I dream that a herd of centaur 
roll up with a great stamp of hoof round the hous to destroy it, 
and then woke to hear the hors tramp across the field below the 
lawns; they neigh omin and their noisi pant wa audibl as if 
it were just outsid my windows. 

but the tree episode, I think, wa the most curiou of all--except, 
perhaps, the incid with the children which I shall mention in a 
moment--for it close to realiti wa so unforgettable. 

outsid the east window of my room stood a giant wellingtonia on the 
lawn, it head rise level with the upper sash. It grew some twenti 
feet away, plant on the highest terrace, and I often saw it when 
close my curtain for the night, notic how it drew it heavi skirt 
about it, and how the light from other window threw glimmer streak 
and patch that turn it into the semblanc of a towering, solemn 
image. It stood there then so strikingly, somehow like a great old-world 
idol, that it claim attention. it appear wa curious 
formidable. it branch rustl without visibl move and it had a 
certain portentous, forbid air, so grand and dark and monstrou in 
the night that I wa alway glad when my curtain shut it out. yet, onc 
in bed, I had never thought about it one way or the other, and by day 
had certainli never sought it out. 

one night, then, as I went to bed and close thi window against a 
cut easterli wind, I saw--that there were two of these trees. A 
brother wellingtonia rose mysteri besid it, equal huge, equal 
towering, equal monstrous. the menac pair of them face me there 
upon the lawn. but in thi new arriv lay a strang suggest that 
frighten me befor I could argu it away. exact counterpart of it 
giant companion, it reveal also that gross, odiou qualiti that all my 
sister' paint held. I got the odd impress that the rest of these 
trees, stretch away dimli in a troop over the farther lawns, were 
similar, and that, led by thi enorm pair, they had all move boldli 
closer to my windows. At the same moment a blind wa drawn down over an 
upper room; the second tree disappear into the surround darkness. 

It was, of course, thi chanc light that had brought it into the field 
of vision, but when the black shutter drop over it, hide it from 
view, the manner of it vanish produc the queer effect that it had 
slip into it companion--almost that it had been an eman of the 
one I so disliked, and not realli a tree at all! In thi way the garden 
turn vehicl for express what lay behind it all ...! 

the behavior of the doors, the little, ordinari doors, seem scarc 
worth mention at all, their queer way of open and shut of their 
own accord; for thi wa account in a hundr natur ways, and to 
tell the truth, I never caught one in the act of moving. indeed, onli 
after frequent repetit did the detail forc itself upon me, when, 
have notic one, I notic all. It produced, however, the unpleas 
impress of a continu come and go in the house, as though, 
screen cleverli and purpos from actual sight, some one in the 
build held constant invis intercours with--others. 

upon detail descript of these uncertain incid I do not 
venture, individu so trivial, but taken all togeth so impress 
and so insolent. but the episod of the children, mention above, wa 
different. and I give it becaus it show how vividli the intuit 
child-mind receiv the impression--on impression, at ani rate--of what 
wa in the air. It may be told in a veri few words. I believ they were 
the coachman' children, and that the man had been in mr. franklyn' 
service; but of neither point am I quit positive. 

I heard scream in the rose-garden that run along the stabl walls-- 
it wa one afternoon not far from the tea-hour--and on hurri up I 
found a littl girl of nine or ten fasten with rope to a rustic seat, 
and two other children--boys, one about twelv and one much younger-- 
gather stick beneath the climb rose trees. the girl wa white and 
frightened, but the other were laugh and talk among themselv so 
busili while they pick that they did not notic my abrupt arrival. 
some game, I understood, wa in progress, but a game that had becom too 
seriou for the happi of the prisoner, for there wa a fear in the 
girl' eye that wa a veri genuin fear indeed. I unfasten her at 
once; the rope were so loos and clumsili knot that they had not 
hurt her skin; it wa not that which made her pale. she collaps a 
moment upon the bench, then pick up her tini skirt and dive away at 
full speed into the safeti of the stable-yard. 

there wa no respons to my brief comforting, but she ran as though for 
her life, and I divin that some horrid boys' cruelti had been afoot. 
It wa probabl mere thoughtlessness, as cruelti with children usual 
is, but someth in me decid to discov exactli what it was. 

and the boys, not one whit alarm at my intervention, mere laugh 
shyli when I explain that their prison had escaped, and told me 
frankli what their "gime" had been. there wa no vestig of shame in 
them, nor ani idea, of course, that they ape a monstrou reality. 

that it wa mere pretenc wa neither here nor there. To them, though 
make-believe, it wa a make-believ of someth that wa right and 
natur and in no sens cruel. grown-up did it too. It wa necessari 
for her good. 

"we wa go to burn her up, sir," the older one inform me, answer 
my "why?" with the explanation, "becaus she wouldn't believ what we 
want 'er to believe." 

and, game though it was, the feel of realiti about the littl episod 
wa so arresting, so terrif in some way, that onli with difficulti did 
I confin my admonit on thi occas to mere words. the boy slunk 
off, frighten in their turn, yet not, I felt, convinc that they had 
er in principle. It wa their inheritance. they had breath it in 
with the atmospher of their bringing-up. they would renew the salutari 
tortur when they could--til she "believed" as they did. 

I went back into the house, afflict with a passion of mingl piti and 
distress imposs to describe, yet on my short way across the garden 
wa attack by other mood in turn, each more real and bitter than it 
predecessor. I receiv the whole series, as it were, at once. I felt 
like a diver rise to the surfac through layer of water at differ 
temperatures, though here the natur order wa reversed, and the cooler 
strata were uppermost, the heat one below. thus, I wa caught by the 
goblin touch of the willow that fring the field; by the sensuou 
curv of the twist ash that form a gateway to the littl grove of 
sapl oak where faun and satyr lurk to play in the moonlight 
befor pagan altars; and by the cloak darkness, next, of the cops of 
stunt pines, close gather each to each, where hood figur stalk 
behind an aw cross. the episod with the children seem to have 
open me like a knife. the whole place rush at me. 

I suspect thi synthesi of mani mood produc in me that climax of 
loath and disgust which made me feel the limit of bearabl emot 
had been reached, so that I made straight to find franc in order to 
convinc her that at ani rate I must leave. for, although thi wa our 
last day in the house, and we had arrang to go next day, the dread wa 
in me that she would still find some persuas reason for stay on. 
and an unexpect incid then made my dread unnecessary. the front 
door wa open and a cab stood in the drive; a tall, elderli man wa 
grave talk in the hall with the parlor maid we call the 
grenadier. He held a piec of paper in hi hand. "I have call to see 
the house," I heard him say, as I ran up the stair to frances, who wa 
peer like an inquisit child over the banisters.... 

"yes," she told me with a sigh, I know not whether of resign or 
relief, "the hous is to be let or sold. mabel ha decided. some societi 
or other, I believe--" 

I wa overjoyed: thi made our leav right and possible. "you never 
told me, frances!" 

"mabel onli heard of it a few day ago. she told me herself thi 
morning. It is a chance, she says. alon she cannot get it 'straight'. 

"defeat?" I asked, watch her closely. 

"she think she ha found a way out. it' not a family, you see, it' a 
society, a sort of community--they go in for thought--" 

"A community!" I gasped. "you mean religious?" 

she shook her head. "not exactly," she said smiling, "but some kind of 
associ of men and women who want a headquart in the country--a 
place where they can write and meditate--think--matur their plan and 
all the rest--i don't know exactli what." 

"utopian dreamers?" I asked, yet feel an immens relief come over me 
as I heard. but I ask in ignorance, not cynically. franc would know. 
she knew all thi kind of thing. 

"no, not that exactly," she smiled. "their teach are grand and 
simple--old as the world too, really--th basi of everi religion befor 
men' mind pervert them with their manufactur creeds--" 

footstep on the stairs, and the sound of voices, interrupt our odd 
impromptu conversation, as the grenadi came up, follow by the tall, 
grave gentleman who wa be shown over the house. My sister drew me 
along the corridor toward her room, where she went in and close the 
door behind me, yet not befor I had stolen a good look at the caller-- 
long enough, at least, for hi face and gener appear to have made 
a definit impress on me. for someth strong and peac eman 
from hi presence; he move with such quiet dignity; the glanc of hi 
eye wa so steadi and reassuring, that my mind label him instantli as 
a type of man one would turn to in an emerg and not be disappointed. 
I had seen him but for a pass moment, but I had seen him twice, and 
the way he walk down the passage, look compet about him, 
convey the same impress as when I saw him stand at the door-- 
fearless, tolerant, wise. "A sincer and kindli character," I judg 
instantly, "a man whom some big kind of love ha train in sweet 
toward the world; no hate in him anywhere." A great deal, no doubt, to 
read in so brief a glance! yet hi voic confirm my intuition, a deep 
and veri gentl voice, great firm in it too. 

"have I becom suddenli sensit to people' atmospher in thi 
extraordinari fashion?" I ask myself, smiling, as I stood in the room 
and heard the door close behind me. "have I develop some clairvoy 
faculti here?" At ani other time I should have mocked. 

and I sat down and face my sister, feel strang comfort and at 
peac for the first time sinc I had step beneath the towers' roof a 
month ago. frances, I then saw, wa smile a littl as she watch me. 

"you know him?" I asked. 

"you felt it too?" wa her question in reply. "no," she added, "I don't 
know him--beyond the fact that he is a leader in the movement and ha 
devot year and money to it objects. mabel felt the same thing in him 
that you have felt--and jump at it." 

"but you'v seen him before?" I urged, for the certainti wa in me that 
he wa no stranger to her. 

she shook her head. "he call one day earli thi week, when you were 
out. mabel saw him. I believe--" she hesit a moment, as though 
expect me to stop her with my usual impati of such subjects--"i 
believ he ha explain everyth to her--th belief he embodies, she 
declares, are her salvation--might be, rather, if she could adopt them." 

"convers again!" for I rememb her riches, and how gladli a 
societi would gobbl them. 

"the layer I told you about," she continu calmly, shrug her 
shoulder slightly--"th deposit that are left behind by strong 
think and real belief--but especi by ugly, hate belief, 
because, you see--unfortun there' more vital passion in that 
sort--" 

"frances, I don't understand a bit," I said out loud, but said it a 
littl humbly, for the impress the man had left wa still strong upon 
me and I wa grate for the steadi sens of peac and comfort he had 
somehow introduced. the horror had been so dreadful. My nerves, 
doubtless, were more than a littl overstrained. absurd as it must 
sound, I class him in my mind with the robins, the happy, confid 
robin who believ in everybodi and thought no evil! I laugh a moment 
at my ridicul idea, and my sister, encourag by thi sign of 
patienc in me, continu more fluently. 

"of cours you don't understand, bill? whi should you? you'v never 
thought about such things. need no creed yourself, you think all 
creed are rubbish." 

"i'm open to conviction--i'm tolerant," I interrupted. 

"you'r as narrow as sam franklyn, and as cram with prejudice," she 
answered, know that she had me at her mercy. 

"then, pray, what may be his, or hi society' beliefs?" I asked, 
feel no desir to argue, "and how are they go to prove your 
mabel' salvation? can they bring beauti into all thi aggress hate 
and ugliness?" 

"certain hope and peace," she said, "that peac which is understanding, 
and that understand which explain all creed and therefor toler 
them." 

"toleration! the one word a religi man loath abov all others! hi 
pet word is damnation--" 

"toler them," she repeat patiently, unperturb by my explosion, 
"becaus it includ them all." 

"fine, if true" I admitted, "veri fine. but how, pray, doe it includ 
them all?" 

"becaus the key-word, the motto, of their societi is, 'there is no 
religion higher than truth,' and it ha no singl dogma of ani kind. 
abov all," she went on, "becaus it claim that no individu can be 
'lost.' It teach univers salvation. To damn outsid is 
uncivilized, childish, impure. some take longer than others--it' 
accord to the way they think and live--but all find peace, through 
development, in the end. what the creed call a hopeless soul, it 
regard as a soul have further to go. there is no damnation--" 

"well, well," I exclaimed, feel that she rode her hobbi hors too 
wildly, too roughli over me, "but what is the bear of all thi upon 
thi dread place, and upon mabel? i'll admit that there is thi 
atmosphere--this--er--inexplic horror in the hous and grounds, and 
that if not of damnat exactly, it is certainli damnable. i'm not too 
prejud to deni that, for i'v felt it myself." 

To my relief she wa brief. she made her statement, leav me to take 
it or reject it as I would. 

"the thought and belief it former occupants--hav left behind. for 
there ha been coincid here, a coincid that must be rare. the 
site on which thi modern hous now stand wa roman, befor that earli 
britain, with burial mounds, befor that again, druid--th druid stone 
still lie in that cops below the field, the tumuli among the ilex 
behind the drive. the older build sam franklyn alter and 
practic pull down wa a monastery; he chang the chapel into a 
meet hall, which is now the music room; but, befor he came here, the 
hous wa occupi by manetti, a violent cathol without toler or 
vision; and in the interv between these two, juliu weinbaum had it, 
hebrew of most rigid orthodox type imaginable--so they all have left 
their--" 

"even so," I repeated, yet interest to hear the rest, "what of it?" 

"simpli this," said franc with conviction, "that each in turn ha left 
hi layer of concentr think and belief behind him; becaus each 
believ intensely, absolutely, beyond the least weaken of ani doubt 
--the kind of strong belief and think that is rare anywher today, the 
kind that wills, impregn objects, satur the atmosphere, haunts, 
in a word. and each, believ he wa utterli and final right, damn 
with equal posit convict the rest of the world. one and all 
preach that implicitli if not explicitly. it' the root of everi 
creed. last of the bigoted, grim seri came samuel franklyn." 

I listen in amaz that increas as she went on. Up to thi point 
her explan wa so admirable. It was, indeed, a pretti studi in 
psycholog if it were true. 

"then whi doe noth ever happen?" I enquir mildly. "A place so 
thickli haunt ought to produc a crop of no ordinari results!" 

"there lie the proof," she went on in a lower voice, "the proof of 
the horror and the ugli reality. the thought and belief of each occup 
in turn kept all the other under. they gave no sign of life at the 
time. but the result of think never die. they crop out again the 
moment there' an opening. and, with the return of mabel in her neg 
state, believ noth posit herself the place for the first time 
found itself free to reproduc it buri stores. 

"damnation, hell-fire, and the rest--th most perman and vital 
thought of all those creeds, sinc it wa appli to the major of the 
world--brok loos again, for there wa no restraint to hold it back. 
each sought to obtain it former supremacy. none conquered. there 
result a pandemonium of hate and fear, of strive to escape, of 
agonized, bitter war to find safety, peace--salvation. the place is 
satur by that appal stream of thinking--th terror of the 
damned. It concentr upon mabel, whose neg attitud furnish 
the channel of deliverance. you and I, accord to our sympathi with 
her, were similarli involved. noth happened, becaus no one layer 
could ever gain the supremacy." 

I wa so interested--i dare not say amused--that I stare in silenc 
while she paus a moment, afraid that she would draw rein and end the 
fairi tale too soon. 

"the belief of thi man, of hi societi rather, vigor thought and 
therefor vigor given out here, will put the whole place straight. 
It will act as a solvent. these vitriol layer activ denied, will 
fuse and disappear in the stream of gentle, toler sympathi which is 
love. for each member, worthi of the name, love the world, and all 
creed go into the melting-pot; mabel, too, if she join them out of 
real conviction, will find salvation--" 

"thinking, I know, is of the first importance," I objected, "but don't 
you, perhaps, exagger the power of feel and emot which in 
religion are au fond alway hysterical?" 

"what is the world," she told me, "but think and feeling? An 
individual' world is entir what that individu think and believ 
--interpretation. there is no other. and unless he realli think and 
realli believes, he ha no perman world at all. I grant that few 
peopl think, and still fewer believe, and that most take ready-mad 
suit and make them do. onli the strong make their own things; the 
lesser fry, mabel among them, are mere swept up into what ha been 
manufactur for them. they get along somehow. you and I have made for 
ourselves, mabel ha not. she is a nonentity, and when her belief is 
taken from her, she goe with it." 

It wa not in me just then to critic the evasion, or pick out the 
sophistri from the truth. I mere wait for her to continue. 

"none of us have truth, my dear frances," I ventur presently, see 
that she kept silent. 

"precisely," she answered, "but most of us have beliefs. and what one 
believ and think affect the world at large. consid the legaci of 
hatr and cruelti involv in the doctrin men have built into their 
creed where the sine qua non of salvat is absolut accept of one 
particular set of view or els perish everlastingly--for onli by 
repudi histori can they disavow it--" 

"you'r not quit accurate," I put in. "not all the creed teach 
damnation, do they? franklyn did, of course, but the other are a bit 
modern now surely?" 

"tri to get out of it," she admitted, "perhap they are, but 
damnat of unbelievers--of most of the world, that is--i their rather 
favorit idea if you talk with them." 

"I never have." 

she smiled. "but I have," she said significantly, "so, if you consid 
what the variou occup of thi hous have so strongli held and 
thought and believed, you need not be surpris that the influenc they 
have left behind them should be a dark and dread legacy. for thought, 
you know, doe leave--" 

the open of the door, to my great relief, interrupt her, as the 
grenadi led in the visitor to see the room. He bow to both of us 
with a brief word of apology, look round him, and withdrew, and with 
hi departur the convers between us came natur to an end. I 
follow him out. neither of us in ani case, I think, care to argu 
further. 

and, so far as I am aware, the curiou histori of the tower end here 
too. there wa no climax in the stori sense. noth ever realli 
happened. We left next morn for london. I onli know that the societi 
in question took the hous and have sinc occupi it to their entir 
satisfaction, and that mabel, who becam a member shortli afterwards, 
now stay there frequent when in need of repos from the arduou and 
unselfish labor she took upon herself under it aegis. she dine with 
us onli the other night, here in our tini chelsea flat, and a jollier, 
saner, more interest and happi guest I could hardli wish for. she wa 
vital--in the best sense; the lay figur had come to life. I found it 
difficult to believ she wa the same woman whose fear effigi had 
float down those dreari corridor and almost disappear in the depth 
of that atroci shadow. 

what her belief were now I wa wise enough to leav unquestioned, and 
frances, to my great relief, kept the convers well away from such 
inappropri topics. It wa clear, however, that the woman had in 
herself some secret sourc of joy, that she wa now an aggressive, 
posit force, sure of herself, and appar afraid of noth in 
heaven or hell. she radiat someth veri like hope and courag about 
her, and talk as though the world were a gloriou place and everybodi 
in it kind and beautiful. her optim wa certainli infectious. 

the tower were mention onli in passing. the name of marsh came up-- 
not the marsh, it so happened, but a name in some book that wa be 
discussed--and I wa unabl to restrain myself. curios wa too 
strong. I threw out a casual enquiri mabel could leav unansw if she 
wished. but there wa no desir to avoid it. her repli wa frank and 
smiling. 

"would you believ it? she married," mabel told me, though obvious 
surpris that I rememb the housekeep at all; "and is happi as the 
day is long. she' found her right nich in life. A sergeant--" 

"the army!" I ejaculated. 

"salvat army," she explain merrily. 

franc exchang a glanc with me. I laugh too, for the inform 
took me by surprise. I cannot say whi exactly, but I expect at least 
to hear that the woman had met some dread end, not imposs by 
burning. 

"and the towers, now call the rest house," mabel chatter on, "seem 
to me the most peac and delight spot in england--" 

"really," I said politely. 

"when I live there in the old days--whil you were there, perhaps, 
though I won't be sure." 

mabel went on, "the stori got abroad that it wa haunted. wasn't it odd? 
A less like place for a ghost i'v never seen. why, it had no 
atmospher at all." she said thi to frances, glanc up at me with a 
smile that appar had no hidden meaning. "did you notic anyth 
queer about it when you were there?" 

thi wa plainli address to me. 

"I found it--er--difficult to settl down to anything," I said, after an 
instant' hesitation. "I couldn't work there--" 

"but I thought you wrote that wonder book on the deaf and blind while 
you stay with me," she ask innocently. 

I stammer a little. "oh no, not then. I onli made a few notes--er--at 
the towers. My mind, oddli enough, refus to produc at all down there. 
but--whi do you ask? did anything--wa anyth suppos to happen 
there?" 

she look searchingli into my eye a moment befor she answered: 

"not that I know of," she said simply. 








end of the project gutenberg ebook of the damned, by algernon blackwood 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the damn *** 

***** thi file should be name 11074.txt or 11074.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/0/7/11074/ 

produc by suzann shell, david cortesi and PG distribut proofread 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectori of the same number as the ebook' 
ebook number, often in sever format includ plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edit of our ebook replac the old file and take over 
the old filenam and etext number. the replac older file is renamed. 
version base on separ sourc are treat as new ebook receiv 
new filenam and etext numbers. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to novemb 2003, with ebook number below #10000, 
are file in directori base on their releas date. If you want to 
download ani of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may util the follow address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post sinc novemb 2003, with etext number over #10000, are 
file in a differ way. the year of a releas date is no longer part 
of the directori path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
ident to the filename). the path to the file is made up of singl 
digit correspond to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
exampl an ebook of filenam 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filenam 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

An altern method of locat ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.al 

