project gutenberg' carnacki, the ghost finder, by william hope hodgson 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: carnacki, the ghost finder 

author: william hope hodgson 

releas date: januari 25, 2004 [ebook #10832] 
last updated: octob 5, 2012 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook carnacki, the ghost finder *** 




produc by suzann shell, project gutenberg beginn projects, 







carnacki, the ghost finder 

By william hope hodgson 

1910, 1912 







no. 1--the gateway OF the monster 


In respons to carnacki' usual card of invit to have dinner and 
listen to a story, I arriv promptli at 427, cheyn walk, to find the 
three other who were alway invit to these happi littl times, there 
befor me. five minut later, carnacki, arkright, jessop, taylor, and I 
were all engag in the "pleasant occupation" of dining. 

"you'v not been long away, thi time," I remarked, as I finish my 
soup; forget momentarili carnacki' dislik of be ask even to 
skirt the border of hi stori until such time as he wa ready. then he 
would not stint words. 

"that' all," he replied, with brevity; and I chang the subject, 
remark that I had been buy a new gun, to which piec of news he 
gave an intellig nod, and a smile which I think show a genuin 
good-humor appreci of my intent chang of the conversation. 

later, when dinner wa finished, carnacki snug himself comfort 
down in hi big chair, along with hi pipe, and began hi story, with 
veri littl circumlocution:-- 

"a dodgson wa remark just now, i'v onli been away a short time, and 
for a veri good reason too--i'v onli been away a short distance. the 
exact local I am afraid I must not tell you; but it is less than 
twenti mile from here; though, except for chang a name, that won't 
spoil the story. and it is a stori too! one of the most extraordinari 
thing ever I have run against. 

"I receiv a letter a fortnight ago from a man I must call anderson, 
ask for an appointment. I arrang a time, and when he came, I found 
that he wish me to investig and see whether I could not clear up a 
long-stand and well--too well--authent case of what he term 
'haunting.' He gave me veri full particulars, and, finally, as the case 
seem to present someth unique, I decid to take it up. 

"two day later, I drove to the hous late in the afternoon. I found it a 
veri old place, stand quit alon in it own grounds. anderson had 
left a letter with the butler, I found, plead excus for hi absence, 
and leav the whole hous at my dispos for my investigations. the 
butler evid knew the object of my visit, and I question him pretti 
thoroughli dure dinner, which I had in rather lone state. He is an 
old and privileg servant, and had the histori of the grey room exact in 
detail. from him I learn more particular regard two thing that 
anderson had mention in but a casual manner. the first wa that the 
door of the grey room would be heard in the dead of night to open, and 
slam heavily, and thi even though the butler knew it wa locked, and the 
key on the bunch in hi pantry. the second wa that the bedcloth would 
alway be found torn off the bed, and hurl in a heap into a corner. 

"but it wa the door slam that chiefli bother the old butler. mani 
and mani a time, he told me, had he lain awak and just got shiver 
with fright, listening; for sometim the door would be slam time 
after time--thud! thud! thud!--so that sleep wa impossible. 

"from anderson, I knew alreadi that the room had a histori extend back 
over a hundr and fifti years. three peopl had been strangl in it--an 
ancestor of hi and hi wife and child. thi is authentic, as I had taken 
veri great pain to discover; so that you can imagin it wa with a 
feel I had a strike case to investig that I went upstair after 
dinner to have a look at the grey room. 

"peter, the old butler, wa in rather a state about my going, and assur 
me with much solemn that in all the twenti year of hi service, no 
one had ever enter that room after nightfall. He beg me, in quit a 
fatherli way, to wait till the morning, when there would be no danger, 
and then he could accompani me himself. 

"of course, I smile a littl at him, and told him not to bother. I 
explain that I should do no more than look 'round a bit, and, perhaps, 
affix a few seals. He need not fear; I wa use to that sort of thing. 
but he shook hi head when I said that. 

"'there isn't mani ghost like ours, sir,' he assur me, with mourn 
pride. and, by jove! he wa right, as you will see. 

"I took a coupl of candles, and peter follow with hi bunch of keys. 
He unlock the door; but would not come insid with me. He wa evid 
in a fright, and he renew hi request that I would put off my 
examin until daylight. Of course, I laugh at him again, and told 
him he could stand sentri at the door, and catch anyth that came out. 

"'it never come outside, sir,' he said, in hi funny, old, solemn 
manner. somehow, he manag to make me feel as if I were go to have 
the 'creeps' right away. anyway, it wa one to him, you know. 

"I left him there, and examin the room. It is a big apartment, and well 
furnish in the grand style, with a huge four-poster, which stand with 
it head to the end wall. there were two candl on the mantelpiece, and 
two on each of the three tabl that were in the room. I lit the lot, and 
after that, the room felt a littl less inhumanli dreary; though, mind 
you, it wa quit fresh, and well kept in everi way. 

"after I had taken a good look 'round, I seal length of babi ribbon 
across the windows, along the walls, over the pictures, and over the 
fireplac and the wall closets. all the time, as I worked, the butler 
stood just without the door, and I could not persuad him to enter; 
though I jest him a little, as I stretch the ribbons, and went here 
and there about my work. everi now and again, he would say:--'you'l 
excus me, i'm sure, sir; but I do wish you would come out, sir. i'm fair 
in a quak for you.' 

"I told him he need not wait; but he wa loyal enough in hi way to what 
he consid hi duty. He said he could not go away and leav me all 
alon there. He apologized; but made it veri clear that I did not realiz 
the danger of the room; and I could see, generally, that he wa in a 
pretti frighten state. all the same, I had to make the room so that I 
should know if anyth materi enter it; so I ask him not to bother 
me, unless he realli heard or saw something. He wa begin to get on 
my nerves, and the 'feel' of the room wa bad enough, without make it 
ani nastier. 

"for a time further, I worked, stretch ribbon across the floor, and 
seal them, so that the merest touch would have broken them, were 
anyon to ventur into the room in the dark with the intent of 
play the fool. all thi had taken me far longer than I had 
anticipated; and, suddenly, I heard a clock strike eleven. I had taken 
off my coat soon after commenc work; now, however, as I had 
practic made an end of all that I intend to do, I walk across to 
the settee, and pick it up. I wa in the act of get into it, when 
the old butler' voic (he had not said a word for the last hour) came 
sharp and frightened:--'com out, sir, quick! there' someth go to 
happen!' jove! but I jumped, and then, in the same moment, one of the 
candl on the tabl to the left went out. now whether it wa the wind, 
or what, I do not know; but, just for a moment, I wa enough startl to 
make a run for the door; though I am glad to say that I pull up, befor 
I reach it. I simpli could not bunk out, with the butler stand 
there, after having, as it were, read him a sort of lesson on 'bein' 
brave, y'know.' So I just turn right 'round, pick up the two candl 
off the mantelpiece, and walk across to the tabl near the bed. well, I 
saw nothing. I blew out the candl that wa still alight; then I went to 
those on the two tables, and blew them out. then, outsid of the door, 
the old man call again:--'oh! sir, do be told! Do be told!' 

"'all right, peter,' I said, and by jove, my voic wa not as steadi as 
I should have liked! I made for the door, and had a bit of work not to 
start running. I took some thunder long strides, as you can imagine. 
near the door, I had a sudden feel that there wa a cold wind in the 
room. It wa almost as if the window had been suddenli open a little. 
I got to the door, and the old butler gave back a step, in a sort of 
instinct way. 'collar the candles, peter!' I said, pretti sharply, 
and shove them into hi hands. I turned, and caught the handle, and 
slam the door shut, with a crash. somehow, do you know, as I did so, 
I thought I felt someth pull back on it; but it must have been onli 
fancy. I turn the key in the lock, and then again, double-lock the 
door. I felt easier then, and set-to and seal the door. In addition, I 
put my card over the keyhole, and seal it there; after which I 
pocket the key, and went downstairs--with peter; who wa nervou and 
silent, lead the way. poor old beggar! It had not struck me until 
that moment that he had been endur a consider strain dure the 
last two or three hours. 

"about midnight, I went to bed. My room lay at the end of the corridor 
upon which open the door of the grey room. I count the door between 
it and mine, and found that five room lay between. and I am sure you can 
understand that I wa not sorry. then, just as I wa begin to 
undress, an idea came to me, and I took my candl and seal wax, and 
seal the door of all five rooms. If ani door slam in the night, I 
should know just which one. 

"I return to my room, lock the door, and went to bed. I wa wake 
suddenli from a deep sleep by a loud crash somewher out in the passage. 
I sat up in bed, and listened, but heard nothing. then I lit my candle. I 
wa in the veri act of light it when there came the bang of a door 
be violent slammed, along the corridor. I jump out of bed, and got 
my revolver. I unlock the door, and went out into the passage, hold 
my candl high, and keep the pistol ready. then a queer thing 
happened. I could not go a step toward the grey room. you all know I am 
not realli a cowardli chap. i'v gone into too mani case connect with 
ghostli things, to be accus of that; but I tell you I funk it; simpli 
funk it, just like ani bless kid. there wa someth preciou unholi 
in the air that night. I ran back into my bedroom, and shut and lock 
the door. then I sat on the bed all night, and listen to the dismal 
thud of a door up the corridor. the sound seem to echo through all 
the house. 

"daylight came at last, and I wash and dressed. the door had not 
slam for about an hour, and I wa get back my nerv again. I felt 
asham of myself; though, in some way it wa silly; for when you'r 
meddl with that sort of thing, your nerv is bound to go, sometimes. 
and you just have to sit quiet and call yourself a coward until daylight. 
sometim it is more than just cowardice, I fancy. I believ at time it 
is someth warn you, and fight _for_ you. but, all the same, I 
alway feel mean and miserable, after a time like that. 

"when the day came properly, I open my door, and, keep my revolv 
handy, went quietli along the passage. I had to pass the head of the 
stairs, along the way, and who should I see come up, but the old 
butler, carri a cup of coffee. He had mere tuck hi nightshirt 
into hi trousers, and he had an old pair of carpet slipper on. 

"'hullo, peter!' I said, feel suddenli cheerful; for I wa as glad as 
ani lost child to have a live human be close to me. 'where are you off 
to with the refreshments?' 

"the old man gave a start, and slop some of the coffee. He stare up 
at me, and I could see that he look white and done-up. He came on up 
the stairs, and held out the littl tray to me. 'i'm veri thank 
indeed, sir, to see you safe and well,' he said. 'I feared, one time, you 
might risk go into the grey room, sir. i'v lain awak all night, with 
the sound of the door. and when it came light, I thought i'd make you a 
cup of coffee. I knew you would want to look at the seals, and somehow it 
seem safer if there' two, sir.' 

"'peter,' I said, 'you'r a brick. thi is veri thought of you.' and I 
drank the coffee. 'come along,' I told him, and hand him back the tray. 
'i'm go to have a look at what the brute have been up to. I simpli 
hadn't the pluck to in the night.' 

"'i'm veri thankful, sir,' he replied. 'flesh and blood can do nothing, 
sir, against devils; and that' what' in the grey room after dark.' 

"I examin the seal on all the doors, as I went along, and found them 
right; but when I got to the grey room, the seal wa broken; though the 
card, over the keyhole, wa untouched. I rip it off, and unlock the 
door, and went in, rather cautiously, as you can imagine; but the whole 
room wa empti of anyth to frighten one, and there wa heap of light. 
I examin all my seals, and not a singl one wa disturbed. the old 
butler had follow me in, and, suddenly, he call out:--'th 
bedclothes, sir!' 

"I ran up to the bed, and look over; and, surely, they were lie in 
the corner to the left of the bed. jove! you can imagin how queer I 
felt. someth _had_ been in the room. I stare for a while, from the 
bed, to the cloth on the floor. I had a feel that I did not want to 
touch either. old peter, though, did not seem to be affect that way. He 
went over to the bed coverings, and wa go to pick them up, as, 
doubtless, he had done everi day these twenti year back; but I stop 
him. I want noth touched, until I had finish my examination. this, 
I must have spent a full hour over, and then I let peter straighten up 
the bed; after which we went out, and I lock the door; for the room wa 
get on my nerves. 

"I had a short walk, and then breakfast; after which I felt more my own 
man, and so return to the grey room, and, with peter' help, and one of 
the maids, I had everyth taken out of the room, except the bed--even 
the veri pictures. I examin the walls, floor and ceil then, with 
probe, hammer and magnifi glass; but found noth suspicious. and I 
can assur you, I began to realize, in veri truth, that some incred 
thing had been loos in the room dure the past night. I seal up 
everyth again, and went out, lock and seal the door, as before. 

"after dinner, peter and I unpack some of my stuff, and I fix up my 
camera and flashlight opposit to the door of the grey room, with a 
string from the trigger of the flashlight to the door. then, you see, if 
the door were realli opened, the flashlight would blare out, and there 
would be, possibly, a veri queer pictur to examin in the morning. the 
last thing I did, befor leaving, wa to uncap the lens; and after that I 
went off to my bedroom, and to bed; for I intend to be up at midnight; 
and to ensur this, I set my littl alarm to call me; also I left my 
candl burning. 

"the clock woke me at twelve, and I got up and into my dress gown and 
slippers. I shove my revolv into my right side-pocket, and open my 
door. then, I lit my darkroom lamp, and withdrew the slide, so that it 
would give a clear light. I carri it up the corridor, about thirti 
feet, and put it down on the floor, with the open side away from me, so 
that it would show me anyth that might approach along the dark 
passage. then I went back, and sat in the doorway of my room, with my 
revolv handy, stare up the passag toward the place where I knew my 
camera stood outsid the door of the grey room. 

"I should think I had watch for about an hour and a half, when, 
suddenly, I heard a faint noise, away up the corridor. I wa immedi 
consciou of a queer prickl sensat about the back of my head, and 
my hand began to sweat a little. the follow instant, the whole end of 
the passag flick into sight in the abrupt glare of the flashlight. 
there came the succeed darkness, and I peer nervous up the 
corridor, listen tensely, and tri to find what lay beyond the faint 
glow of my dark-lamp, which now seem ridicul dim by contrast with 
the tremend blaze of the flash-power.... and then, as I stoop 
forward, stare and listening, there came the crash thud of the door 
of the grey room. the sound seem to fill the whole of the larg 
corridor, and go echo hollowli through the house. I tell you, I felt 
horrible--a if my bone were water. simpli beastly. jove! how I did 
stare, and how I listened. and then it came again--thud, thud, thud, and 
then a silenc that wa almost wors than the nois of the door; for I 
kept fanci that some aw thing wa steal upon me along the 
corridor. and then, suddenly, my lamp wa put out, and I could not see a 
yard befor me. I realiz all at onc that I wa do a veri silli 
thing, sit there, and I jump up. even as I did so, I _thought_ I 
heard a sound in the passage, and quit _near_ me. I made one backward 
spring into my room, and slam and lock the door. I sat on my bed, 
and stare at the door. I had my revolv in my hand; but it seem an 
abomin useless thing. I felt that there wa someth the other side 
of that door. for some unknown reason I _knew_ it wa press up against 
the door, and it wa soft. that wa just what I thought. most 
extraordinari thing to think. 

"present I got hold of myself a bit, and mark out a pentacl 
hurriedli with chalk on the polish floor; and there I sat in it 
almost until dawn. and all the time, away up the corridor, the door of 
the grey room thud at solemn and horrid intervals. It wa a 
miserable, brutal night. 

"when the day began to break, the thud of the door came gradual to 
an end, and, at last, I got hold of my courage, and went along the 
corridor in the half light to cap the len of my camera. I can tell you, 
it took some doing; but if I had not done so my photograph would have 
been spoilt, and I wa tremend keen to save it. I got back to my 
room, and then set-to and rub out the five-point star in which I had 
been sitting. 

"half an hour later there wa a tap at my door. It wa peter with my 
coffee. when I had drunk it, we both went along to the grey room. As we 
went, I had a look at the seal on the other doors; but they were 
untouched. the seal on the door of the grey room wa broken, as also wa 
the string from the trigger of the flashlight; but the card over the 
keyhol wa still there. I rip it off, and open the door. noth 
unusu wa to be seen until we came to the bed; then I saw that, as on 
the previou day, the bedcloth had been torn off, and hurl into the 
left-hand corner, exactli where I had seen them before. I felt veri 
queer; but I did not forget to look at all the seals, onli to find that 
not one had been broken. 

"then I turn and look at old peter, and he look at me, 
nod hi head. 

"'let' get out of here!' I said. 'it' no place for ani live human to 
enter, without proper protection.' 

"we went out then, and I lock and seal the door, again. 

"after breakfast, I develop the negative; but it show onli the door 
of the grey room, half opened. then I left the house, as I want to get 
certain matter and implement that might be necessari to life; perhap 
to the spirit; for I intend to spend the come night in the grey room. 

"I got back in a cab, about half-past five, with my apparatus, and this, 
peter and I carri up to the grey room, where I pile it care in 
the center of the floor. when everyth wa in the room, includ a cat 
which I had brought, I lock and seal the door, and went toward the 
bedroom, tell peter I should not be down for dinner. He said, 'yes, 
sir,' and went downstairs, think that I wa go to turn in, which 
wa what I want him to believe, as I knew he would have worri both me 
and himself, if he had known what I intended. 

"but I mere got my camera and flashlight from my bedroom, and hurri 
back to the grey room. I lock and seal myself in, and set to work, 
for I had a lot to do befor it got dark. 

"first, I clear away all the ribbon across the floor; then I carri 
the cat--stil fasten in it basket--ov toward the far wall, and left 
it. I return then to the center of the room, and measur out a space 
twenty-on feet in diameter, which I swept with a 'broom of hyssop.' 
about this, I drew a circl of chalk, take care never to step over the 
circle. beyond thi I smudged, with a bunch of garlic, a broad belt right 
around the chalk circle, and when thi wa complete, I took from among 
my store in the center a small jar of a certain water. I broke away the 
parchment, and withdrew the stopper. then, dip my left forefing in 
the littl jar, I went 'round the circl again, make upon the floor, 
just within the line of chalk, the second sign of the saaamaaa ritual, 
and join each sign most care with the left-hand crescent. I can 
tell you, I felt easier when thi wa done, and the 'water circle' 
complete. then, I unpack some more of the stuff that I had brought, and 
place a light candl in the 'valley' of each crescent. after that, I 
drew a pentacle, so that each of the five point of the defens star 
touch the chalk circle. In the five point of the star I place five 
portion of the bread, each wrap in linen, and in the five 'vales,' 
five open jar of the water I had use to make the 'water circle.' and 
now I had my first protect barrier complete. 

"now, anyone, except you who know someth of my method of 
investigation, might consid all thi a piec of useless and foolish 
superstition; but you all rememb the black veil case, in which I 
believ my life wa save by a veri similar form of protection, whilst 
aster, who sneer at it, and would not come inside, died. I got the idea 
from the sigsand ms., written, so far as I can make out, in the 14th 
century. At first, naturally, I imagin it wa just an express of 
the superstit of hi time; and it wa not until a year later that it 
occur to me to test hi 'defense,' which I did, as i'v just said, in 
that horribl black veil business. you know how _that_ turn out. later, 
I use it sever times, and alway I came through safe, until that 
move fur case. It wa onli a partial 'defense' therefore, and I nearli 
die in the pentacle. after that I came across professor garder' 
'experi with a medium.' when they surround the medium with a 
current, in vacuum, he lost hi power--almost as if it cut him off from 
the immaterial. that made me think a lot; and that is how I came to make 
the electr pentacle, which is a most marvel 'defense' against 
certain manifestations. I use the shape of the defens star for thi 
protection, becaus I have, personally, no doubt at all but that there is 
some extraordinari virtu in the old magic figure. curiou thing for a 
twentieth centuri man to admit, is it not? but, then, as you all know, I 
never did, and never will, allow myself to be blind by the littl cheap 
laughter. I ask questions, and keep my eye open. 

"in thi last case I had littl doubt that I had run up against a 
supernatur monster, and I meant to take everi possibl care; for the 
danger is abominable. 

"I turned-to now to fit the electr pentacle, set it so that each of 
it 'points' and 'vales' coincid exactli with the 'points' and 'vales' 
of the drawn pentagram upon the floor. then I connect up the battery, 
and the next instant the pale blue glare from the intertwin vacuum 
tube shone out. 

"I glanc about me then, with someth of a sigh of relief, and 
realiz suddenli that the dusk wa upon me, for the window wa grey and 
unfriendly. then 'round at the big, empti room, over the doubl barrier 
of electr and candl light. I had an abrupt, extraordinari sens of 
weird thrust upon me--in the air, you know; as it were, a sens of 
someth inhuman impending. the room wa full of the stench of bruis 
garlic, a smell I hate. 

"I turn now to the camera, and saw that it and the flashlight were in 
order. then I test my revolver, carefully, though I had littl thought 
that it would be needed. yet, to what extent materi of an 
ab-natur creatur is possible, given favor conditions, no one can 
say; and I had no idea what horribl thing I wa go to see, or feel 
the presenc of. I might, in the end, have to fight with a materi 
monster. I did not know, and could onli be prepared. you see, I never 
forgot that three other peopl had been strangl in the bed close to me, 
and the fierc slam of the door I had heard myself. I had no doubt 
that I wa investig a danger and ugli case. 

"bi thi time, the night had come; though the room wa veri light with 
the burn candles; and I found myself glanc behind me, constantly, 
and then all 'round the room. It wa nervi work wait for that thing to 
come. then, suddenly, I wa awar of a little, cold wind sweep over 
me, come from behind. I gave one great nerve-thrill, and a prickli 
feel went all over the back of my head. then I hove myself 'round with 
a sort of stiff jerk, and stare straight against that queer wind. It 
seem to come from the corner of the room to the left of the bed--th 
place where both time I had found the heap of toss bedclothes. yet, I 
could see noth unusual; no opening--nothing!... 

"abruptly, I wa awar that the candl were all a-flick in that 
unnatur wind.... I believ I just squat there and stare in a 
horribl frightened, wooden way for some minutes. I shall never be abl 
to let you know how disgustingli horribl it wa sit in that vile, 
cold wind! and then, flick! flick! flick! all the candl 'round the 
outer barrier went out; and there wa I, lock and seal in that room, 
and with no light beyond the weakish blue glare of the electr pentacle. 

"A time of abomin tens passed, and still that wind blew upon me; 
and then, suddenly, I knew that someth stir in the corner to the 
left of the bed. I wa made consciou of it, rather by some inward, 
unus sens than by either sight or sound; for the pale, short-radiu 
glare of the pentacl gave but a veri poor light for see by. yet, as I 
stared, someth began slowli to grow upon my sight--a move shadow, a 
littl darker than the surround shadows. I lost the thing amid the 
vagueness, and for a moment or two I glanc swiftli from side to side, 
with a fresh, new sens of impend danger. then my attent wa 
direct to the bed. all the covering' were be drawn steadili off, 
with a hateful, stealthi sort of motion. I heard the slow, drag 
slither of the clothes; but I could see noth of the thing that pulled. 
I wa awar in a funny, subconscious, introspect fashion that the 
'creep' had come upon me; yet that I wa cooler mental than I had been 
for some minutes; suffici so to feel that my hand were sweat 
coldly, and to shift my revolver, half-consciously, whilst I rub my 
right hand dri upon my knee; though never, for an instant, take my gaze 
or my attent from those move clothes. 

"the faint nois from the bed ceas once, and there wa a most intens 
silence, with onli the sound of the blood beat in my head. yet, 
immedi afterward, I heard again the slur of the bedcloth be 
drag off the bed. In the midst of my nervou tension I rememb the 
camera, and reach 'round for it; but without look away from the bed. 
and then, you know, all in a moment, the whole of the bed cover were 
torn off with extraordinari violence, and I heard the flump they made as 
they were hurl into the corner. 

"there wa a time of absolut quiet then for perhap a coupl of 
minutes; and you can imagin how horribl I felt. the bedcloth had been 
thrown with such savageness! and, then again, the brutal unnatur of 
the thing that had just been done befor me! 

"abruptly, over by the door, I heard a faint noise--a sort of crickl 
sound, and then a pitter or two upon the floor. A great nervou thrill 
swept over me, seem to run up my spine and over the back of my head; 
for the seal that secur the door had just been broken. someth wa 
there. I could not see the door; at least, I mean to say that it wa 
imposs to say how much I actual saw, and how much my imagin 
supplied. I made it out, onli as a continu of the grey walls.... and 
then it seem to me that someth dark and indistinct move and waver 
there among the shadows. 

"abruptly, I wa awar that the door wa opening, and with an effort I 
reach again for my camera; but befor I could aim it the door wa 
slam with a terrif crash that fill the whole room with a sort of 
hollow thunder. I jumped, like a frighten child. there seem such a 
power behind the noise; as though a vast, wanton forc were 'out.' can 
you understand? 

"the door wa not touch again; but, directli afterward, I heard the 
basket, in which the cat lay, creak. I tell you, I fairli pringl all 
along my back. I knew that I wa go to learn definit whether 
whatev wa abroad wa danger to life. from the cat there rose 
suddenli a hideou caterwaul, that ceas abruptly; and then--too late--i 
snap off the flashlight. In the great glare, I saw that the basket had 
been overturned, and the lid wa wrench open, with the cat lie half 
in, and half out upon the floor. I saw noth else, but I wa full of 
the knowledg that I wa in the presenc of some be or thing that had 
power to destroy. 

"dure the next two or three minutes, there wa an odd, notic 
quiet in the room, and you much rememb I wa half-blinded, for the 
time, becaus of the flashlight; so that the whole place seem to be 
pitchi dark just beyond the shine of the pentacle. I tell you it wa most 
horrible. I just knelt there in the star, and whirl 'round, tri to 
see whether anyth wa come at me. 

"mi power of sight came gradually, and I got a littl hold of myself; and 
abruptli I saw the thing I wa look for, close to the 'water circle.' 
It wa big and indistinct, and waver curiously, as though the shadow of 
a vast spider hung suspend in the air, just beyond the barrier. It 
pass swiftli 'round the circle, and seem to probe ever toward me; but 
onli to draw back with extraordinari jerki movements, as might a live 
person if they touch the hot bar of a grate. 

"'round and 'round it moved, and 'round and 'round I turned. then, just 
opposit to one of the vales' in the pentacles, it seem to pause, as 
though preliminari to a tremend effort. It retir almost beyond the 
glow of the vacuum light, and then came straight toward me, appear to 
gather form and solid as it came. there seem a vast, malign 
determin behind the movement, that must succeed. I wa on my knees, 
and I jerk back, fall on to my left hand, and hip, in a wild 
endeavor to get back from the advanc thing. with my right hand I wa 
grab madli for my revolver, which I had let slip. the brutal thing 
came with one great sweep straight over the garlic and the 'water 
circle,' almost to the vale of the pentacle. I believ I yelled. then, 
just as suddenli as it had swept over, it seem to be hurl back by 
some mighty, invis force. 

"it must have been some moment befor I realiz that I wa safe; and 
then I got myself togeth in the middl of the pentacles, feel 
horribl gone and shaken, and glanc 'round and 'round the barrier; but 
the thing had vanished. yet, I had learnt something, for I knew now that 
the grey room wa haunt by a monstrou hand. 

"suddenly, as I crouch there, I saw what had so nearli given the 
monster an open through the barrier. In my movement within the 
pentacl I must have touch one of the jar of water; for just where the 
thing had made it attack the jar that guard the 'deep' of the 'vale' 
had been move to one side, and thi had left one of the 'five doorways' 
unguarded. I put it back, quickly, and felt almost safe again, for I had 
found the cause, and the 'defense' wa still good. and I began to hope 
again that I should see the morn come in. when I saw that thing so 
nearli succeed, I had an awful, weak, overwhelm feel that the 
'barriers' could never bring me safe through the night against such a 
force. you can understand? 

"for a long time I could not see the hand; but, presently, I thought I 
saw, onc or twice, an odd wavering, over among the shadow near the 
door. A littl later, as though in a sudden fit of malign rage, the 
dead bodi of the cat wa pick up, and beaten with dull, sicken blow 
against the solid floor. that made me feel rather queer. 

"A minut afterward, the door wa open and slam twice with 
tremend force. the next instant the thing made one swift, viciou dart 
at me, from out of the shadows. instinctively, I start sideway from 
it, and so pluck my hand from upon the electr pentacle, where--for a 
wickedli careless moment--i had place it. the monster wa hurl off 
from the neighborhood of the pentacles; though--ow to my inconceiv 
foolishness--it had been enabl for a second time to pass the outer 
barriers. I can tell you, I shook for a time, with sheer funk. I move 
right to the center of the pentacl again, and knelt there, make 
myself as small and compact as possible. 

"a I knelt, there came to me presently, a vagu wonder at the two 
'accidents' which had so nearli allow the brute to get at me. wa I 
be _influenced_ to unconsci voluntari action that endang me? 
the thought took hold of me, and I watch my everi movement. abruptly, I 
stretch a tire leg, and knock over one of the jar of water. some 
wa spilled; but, becaus of my suspici watchfulness, I had it upright 
and back within the vale while yet some of the water remained. even as I 
did so, the vast, black, half-materi hand beat up at me out of the 
shadows, and seem to leap almost into my face; so nearli did it 
approach; but for the third time it wa thrown back by some altogeth 
enormous, overmast force. yet, apart from the daze fright in which 
it left me, I had for a moment that feel of spiritu sickness, as if 
some delicate, beautiful, inward grace had suffered, which is felt onli 
upon the too near approach of the ab-human, and is more dreadful, in a 
strang way, than ani physic pain that can be suffered. I knew by thi 
more of the extent and close of the danger; and for a long time I wa 
simpli cow by the butt-head brutal of that forc upon my spirit. I 
can put it no other way. 

"I knelt again in the center of the pentacles, watch myself with more 
fear, almost, than the monster; for I knew now that, unless I guard 
myself from everi sudden impuls that came to me, I might simpli work my 
own destruction. Do you see how horribl it all was? 

"I spent the rest of the night in a haze of sick fright, and so tens 
that I could not make a singl movement naturally. I wa in such fear 
that ani desir for action that came to me might be prompt by the 
influenc that I knew wa at work on me. and outsid of the barrier that 
ghastli thing went 'round and 'round, grab and grab in the air at 
me. twice more wa the bodi of the dead cat molested. the second time, I 
heard everi bone in it bodi scrunch and crack. and all the time the 
horribl wind wa blow upon me from the corner of the room to the left 
of the bed. 

"then, just as the first touch of dawn came into the sky, that unnatur 
wind ceased, in a singl moment; and I could see no sign of the hand. the 
dawn came slowly, and present the wan light fill all the room, and 
made the pale glare of the electr pentacl look more unearthly. yet, it 
wa not until the day had fulli come, that I made ani attempt to leav 
the barrier, for I did not know but that there wa some method abroad, in 
the sudden stop of that wind, to entic me from the pentacles. 

"at last, when the dawn wa strong and bright, I took one last look 
'round, and ran for the door. I got it unlocked, in a nervou and clumsi 
fashion, then lock it hurriedly, and went to my bedroom, where I lay on 
the bed, and tri to steadi my nerves. peter came, presently, with the 
coffee, and when I had drunk it, I told him I meant to have a sleep, as I 
had been up all night. He took the tray, and went out quietly, and after 
I had lock my door I turn in properly, and at last got to sleep. 

"I woke about midday, and after some lunch, went up to the grey room. I 
switch off the current from the pentacle, which I had left on in my 
hurry; also, I remov the bodi of the cat. you can understand I did not 
want anyon to see the poor brute. after that, I made a veri care 
search of the corner where the bedcloth had been thrown. I made sever 
holes, and probed, and found nothing. then it occur to me to tri with 
my instrument under the skirting. I did so, and heard my wire ring on 
metal. I turn the hook end that way, and fish for the thing. At the 
second go, I got it. It wa a small object, and I took it to the window. 
I found it to be a curiou ring, made of some grey material. the 
curiou thing about it wa that it wa made in the form of a pentagon; 
that is, the same shape as the insid of the magic pentacle, but without 
the 'mounts,' which form the point of the defens star. It wa free 
from all chase or engraving. 

"you will understand that I wa excited, when I tell you that I felt sure 
I held in my hand the famou luck ring of the anderson family; which, 
indeed, wa of all thing the one most intim connect with the 
histori of the haunting. thi ring wa hand on from father to son 
through generations, and always--in obedi to some ancient famili 
tradition--each son had to promis never to wear the ring. the ring, I 
may say, wa brought home by one of the crusaders, under veri peculiar 
circumstances; but the stori is too long to go into here. 

"it appear that young sir hulbert, an ancestor of anderson's, made a 
bet, in drink, you know, that he would wear the ring that night. He did 
so, and in the morn hi wife and child were found strangl in the 
bed, in the veri room in which I stood. mani people, it would seem, 
thought young sir hulbert wa guilti of have done the thing in drunken 
anger; and he, in an attempt to prove hi innocence, slept a second night 
in the room. He also wa strangled. sinc then, as you may imagine, no 
one ha ever spent a night in the grey room, until I did so. the ring had 
been lost so long, that it had becom almost a myth; and it wa most 
extraordinari to stand there, with the actual thing in my hand, as you 
can understand. 

"it wa whilst I stood there, look at the ring, that I got an idea. 
suppos that it were, in a way, a doorway--y see what I mean? A sort 
of gap in the world-hedge. It wa a queer idea, I know, and probabl wa 
not my own, but came to me from the outside. you see, the wind had come 
from that part of the room where the ring lay. I thought a lot about it. 
then the shape--th insid of a pentacle. It had no 'mounts,' and without 
mounts, as the sigsand ms. ha it:--'the mownt wych are thee five hill 
of safetie. To lack is to gyve pow'r to thee daemon; and sureli to 
fayvor the evil thynge.' you see, the veri shape of the ring wa 
significant; and I determin to test it. 

"I unmad the pentacle, for it must be made afresh _and around_ the one 
to be protected. then I went out and lock the door; after which I left 
the house, to get certain matters, for neither 'yarb nor fyre nor waier' 
must be use a second time. I return about seven thirty, and as soon as 
the thing I had brought had been carri up to the grey room, I 
dismiss peter for the night, just as I had done the even before. 
when he had gone downstairs, I let myself into the room, and lock and 
seal the door. I went to the place in the center of the room where all 
the stuff had been packed, and set to work with all my speed to construct 
a barrier about me and the ring. 

"I do not rememb whether I explain it to you. but I had reason 
that, if the ring were in ani way a 'medium of admission,' and it were 
enclos with me in the electr pentacle, it would be, to express it 
loosely, insulated. Do you see? the force, which had visibl express 
as a hand, would have to stay beyond the barrier which separ the Ab 
from the normal; for the 'gateway' would be remov from accessibility. 

"a I wa saying, I work with all my speed to get the barrier complet 
about me and the ring, for it wa alreadi later than I care to be in 
that room 'unprotected.' also, I had a feel that there would be a vast 
effort made that night to regain the use of the ring. for I had the 
strongest convict that the ring wa a necess to materialization. 
you will see whether I wa right. 

"I complet the barrier in about an hour, and you can imagin someth 
of the relief I felt when I felt the pale glare of the electr pentacl 
onc more all about me. from then, onward, for about two hours, I sat 
quietly, face the corner from which the wind came. about eleven o'clock 
a queer knowledg came that someth wa near to me; yet noth 
happen for a whole hour after that. then, suddenly, I felt the cold, 
queer wind begin to blow upon me. To my astonishment, it seem now to 
come from behind me, and I whip 'round, with a hideou quak of fear. 
the wind met me in the face. It wa blow up from the floor close to 
me. I stare down, in a sicken maze of new frights. what on earth had 
I done now! the ring wa there, close besid me, where I had put it. 
suddenly, as I stared, bewildered, I wa awar that there wa someth 
queer about the ring--funni shadowi movement and convolutions. I look 
at them, stupidly. and then, abruptly, I knew that the wind wa blow 
up at me from the ring. A queer indistinct smoke becam visibl to me, 
seem to pour upward through the ring, and mix with the move shadows. 
suddenly, I realiz that I wa in more than ani mortal danger; for the 
convolut shadow about the ring were take shape, and the death-hand 
wa form _within_ the pentacle. My goodness! do you realiz it! I had 
brought the 'gateway' into the pentacles, and the brute wa come 
through--pour into the materi world, as ga might pour out from the 
mouth of a pipe. 

"I should think that I knelt for a moment in a sort of stun fright. 
then, with a mad, awkward movement, I snatch at the ring, intend to 
hurl it out of the pentacle. yet it elud me, as though some invisible, 
live thing jerk it hither and thither. At last, I grip it; yet, 
in the same instant, it wa torn from my grasp with incred and brutal 
force. A great, black shadow cover it, and rose into the air, and came 
at me. I saw that it wa the hand, vast and nearli perfect in form. I 
gave one crazi yell, and jump over the pentacl and the ring of burn 
candles, and ran despairingli for the door. I fumbl idiot and 
ineffectu with the key, and all the time I stared, with a fear that 
wa like insanity, toward the barriers. the hand wa plung toward me; 
yet, even as it had been unabl to pass into the pentacl when the ring 
wa without, so, now that the ring wa within, it had no power to pass 
out. the monster wa chained, as sure as ani beast would be, were 
chain rivet upon it. 

"even then, I got a flash of thi knowledge; but I wa too utterli shaken 
with fright, to reason; and the instant I manag to get the key turned, 
I sprang into the passage, and slam the door with a crash. I lock 
it, and got to my room somehow; for I wa trembl so that I could 
hardli stand, as you can imagine. I lock myself in, and manag to get 
the candl lit; then I lay down on my bed, and kept quiet for an hour or 
two, and so I got steadied. 

"I got a littl sleep, later; but woke when peter brought my coffee. 
when I had drunk it I felt altogeth better, and took the old man along 
with me whilst I had a look into the grey room. I open the door, and 
peep in. the candl were still burning, wan against the daylight; and 
behind them wa the pale, glow star of the electr pentacle. and 
there, in the middle, wa the ring ... the gateway of the monster, lie 
demur and ordinary. 

"noth in the room wa touched, and I knew that the brute had never 
manag to cross the pentacles. then I went out, and lock the door. 

"after a sleep of some hours, I left the house. I return in the 
afternoon in a cab. I had with me an oxy-hydrogen jet, and two 
cylinders, contain the gases. I carri the thing into the grey 
room, and there, in the center of the electr pentacle, I erect the 
littl furnace. five minut later the luck ring, onc the 'luck,' but 
now the 'bane,' of the anderson family, wa no more than a littl solid 
splash of hot metal." 

carnacki felt in hi pocket, and pull out someth wrap in tissu 
paper. He pass it to me. I open it, and found a small circl of 
greyish metal, someth like lead, onli harder and rather brighter. 

"well?" I asked, at length, after examin it and hand it 'round to 
the others. "did that stop the haunting?" 

carnacki nodded. "yes," he said. "I slept three night in the grey room, 
befor I left. old peter nearli faint when he knew that I meant to; but 
by the third night he seem to realiz that the hous wa just safe and 
ordinary. and, you know, I believe, in hi heart, he hardli approved." 

carnacki stood up and began to shake hands. "out you go!" he said, 
genially. and present we went, pondering, to our variou homes. 




no. 2--the hous among the laurel 


"thi is a curiou yarn that I am go to tell you," said carnacki, as 
after a quiet littl dinner we made ourselv comfort in hi cozi 
dine room. 

"I have just got back from the west of ireland," he continued. 
"wentworth, a friend of mine, ha late had rather an unexpect legacy, 
in the shape of a larg estat and manor, about a mile and a half outsid 
of the villag of korunton. thi place is name gannington manor, and ha 
been empti a great number of years; as you will find is almost alway the 
case with hous reput to be haunted, as it is usual termed. 

"it seem that when wentworth went over to take possession, he found the 
place in veri poor repair, and the estat total uncar for, and, as I 
know, look veri desol and lonesom generally. He went through the 
big hous by himself, and he admit to me that it had an uncomfort 
feel about it; but, of course, that might be noth more than the 
natur dismal of a big, empti house, which ha been long 
uninhabited, and through which you are wander alone. 

"when he had finish hi look 'round, he went down to the village, 
mean to see the one-tim agent of the estate, and arrang for someon 
to go in as caretaker. the agent, who prove by the way to be a 
scotchman, wa veri will to take up the manag of the estat onc 
more; but he assur wentworth that they would get no one to go in as 
caretaker; and that his--th agent's--advic wa to have the hous pull 
down, and a new one built. 

"this, naturally, astonish my friend, and, as they went down to the 
village, he manag to get a sort of explan from the man. It seem 
that there had been alway curiou stori told about the place, which in 
the earli day wa call landru castle, and that within the last seven 
year there had been two extraordinari death there. In each case they 
had been tramps, who were ignor of the reput of the house, and 
had probabl thought the big empti place suitabl for a night' free 
lodging. there had been absolut no sign of violenc to indic the 
method by which death wa caused, and on each occas the bodi had been 
found in the great entranc hall. 

"bi thi time they had reach the inn where wentworth had put up, and he 
told the agent that he would prove that it wa all rubbish about the 
haunting, by stay a night or two in the manor himself. the death of 
the tramp wa certainli curious; but did not prove that ani supernatur 
agenc had been at work. they were but isol accidents, spread over a 
larg number of year by the memori of the villagers, which wa natur 
enough in a littl place like korunton. tramp had to die some time, and 
in some place, and it prove noth that two, out of possibl hundr 
who had slept in the empti house, had happen to take the opportun 
to die under shelter. 

"but the agent took hi remark veri seriously, and both he and denni the 
landlord of the inn, tri their best to persuad him not to go. for hi 
'sowl' sake,' irish denni beg him to do no such thing; and becaus 
of hi 'life' sake,' the scotchman wa equal in earnest. 

"it wa late afternoon at the time, and as wentworth told me, it wa warm 
and bright, and it seem such utter rot to hear those two talk 
serious about the impossible. He felt full of pluck, and he made up hi 
mind he would smash the stori of the haunting, at onc by stay that 
veri night, in the manor. He made thi quit clear to them, and told them 
that it would be more to the point and to their credit, if they offer 
to come up along with him, and keep him company. but poor old denni wa 
quit shocked, I believe, at the suggestion; and though tabbit, the 
agent, took it more quietly, he wa veri solemn about it. 

"it seem that wentworth did go; and though, as he said to me, when 
the even began to come on, it seem a veri differ sort of thing 
to tackle. 

"A whole crowd of the villag assembl to see him off; for by thi 
time they all knew of hi intention. wentworth had hi gun with him, and 
a big packet of candles; and he made it clear to them all that it would 
not be wise for anyon to play ani tricks; as he intend to shoot 'at 
sight.' and then, you know, he got a hint of how seriou they consid 
the whole thing; for one of them came up to him, lead a great 
bullmastiff, and offer it to him, to take to keep him company. 
wentworth pat hi gun; but the old man who own the dog shook hi 
head and explain that the brute might warn him in suffici time for 
him to get away from the castle. for it wa obviou that he did not 
consid the gun would prove of ani use. 

"wentworth took the dog, and thank the man. He told me that, already, 
he wa begin to wish that he had not said definit that he would 
go; but, as it was, he wa simpli forc to. He went through the crowd of 
men, and found suddenli that they had all turn in a bodi and were 
keep him company. they stay with him all the way to the manor, and 
then went right over the whole place with him. 

"it wa still daylight when thi wa finished; though turn to dusk; 
and, for a while, the men stood about, hesitating, as if they felt 
asham to go away and leav wentworth there all alone. He told me that, 
by thi time, he would gladli have given fifti pound to be go back 
with them. and then, abruptly, an idea came to him. He suggest that 
they should stay with him, and keep him compani through the night. for a 
time they refused, and tri to persuad him to go back with them; but 
final he made a proposit that got home to them all. He plan that 
they should all go back to the inn, and there get a coupl of dozen 
bottl of whisky, a donkey-load of turf and wood, and some more candles. 
then they would come back, and make a great fire in the big fire-place, 
light all the candles, and put them 'round the place, open the whiski and 
make a night of it. and, by jove! he got them to agree. 

"they set off back, and were soon at the inn, and here, whilst the donkey 
wa be loaded, and the candl and whiski distributed, denni wa 
do hi best to keep wentworth from go back; but he wa a sensibl 
man in hi way, for when he found that it wa no use, he stopped. you 
see, he did not want to frighten the other from accompani wentworth. 

"'i tell ye, sorr,' he told him, ''ti of no use at all, thryin' ter 
reclaim ther castle. 'ti curst with innoc blood, an' ye'll be betther 
pullin' it down, an' buildin' a fine new wan. but if ye be intendin' to 
shtay thi night, kape the big dhoor open whide, an' watch for the 
bhlood-dhrip. If so much as a singl dhrip falls, don't shtay though all 
the gold in the worrld wa offer ye.' 

"wentworth ask him what he meant by the blood-drip. 

"'shure,' he said, ''ti the bhlood av thim as ould black mick 'way back 
in the ould day kilt in their shlape. 'twa a feud as he pretendid to 
patch up, an' he invit thim--th o'hara they was--siventi av thim. an' 
he fed thim, an' shpoke soft to thim, an' thim thrustin' him, sthay to 
shlape with him. thin, he an' thim with him, sthart in an' mhurder 
thim wan an' all as they slep'. 'ti from me father' grandfath ye have 
the sthory. an' senc thin 'ti death to any, so they say, to pass the 
night in the castl whin the bhlood-dhrip comes. 'twill put out candl 
an' fire, an' thin in the dark the virgin herself would be powerless 
to protect ye.' 

"wentworth told me he laugh at this; chiefli because, as he put 
it:--'on alway must laugh at that sort of yarn, howev it make you 
feel inside.' He ask old denni whether he expect him to believ it. 

"'yes, sorr,' said dennis, 'I do mane ye to b'liev it; an' pleas god, 
if ye'll b'lieve, ye may be back safe befor' mornin'.' the man' seriou 
simplic took hold of wentworth, and he held out hi hand. but, for all 
that, he went; and I must admir hi pluck. 

"there were now about forti men, and when they got back to the manor--or 
castl as the villag alway call it--they were not long in get a 
big fire going, and light candl all 'round the great hall. they had 
all brought sticks; so that they would have been a pretti formid lot 
to tackl by anyth simpli physical; and, of course, wentworth had hi 
gun. He kept the whiski in hi own charge; for he intend to keep them 
sober; but he gave them a good strong tot all 'round first, so as to 
make thing seem cheerful; and to get them yearning. If you onc let a 
crowd of men like that grow silent, they begin to think, and then to 
fanci things. 

"the big entranc door had been left wide open, by hi orders; which 
show that he had taken some notic of dennis. It wa a quiet night, so 
thi did not matter, for the light kept steady, and all went on in a 
jolli sort of fashion for about three hours. He had open a second lot 
of bottles, and everyon wa feel cheerful; so much so that one of the 
men call out aloud to the ghost to come out and show themselves. and 
then, you know a veri extraordinari thing happened; for the ponder 
main door swung quietli and steadili to, as though push by an invis 
hand, and shut with a sharp click. 

"wentworth stared, feel suddenli rather chilly. then he rememb the 
men, and look 'round at them. sever had ceas their talk, and were 
stare in a frighten way at the big door; but the great number had 
never noticed, and were talk and yarning. He reach for hi gun, and 
the follow instant the great bullmastiff set up a tremend barking, 
which drew the attent of the whole company. 

"the hall I should tell you is oblong. the south wall is all windows; but 
the north and east have row of doors, lead into the house, whilst the 
west wall is occupi by the great entrance. the row of door lead 
into the hous were all closed, and it wa toward one of these in the 
north wall that the big dog ran; yet he would not go veri close; and 
suddenli the door began to move slowli open, until the black of the 
passag beyond wa shown. the dog came back among the men, whimpering, 
and for a minut there wa an absolut silence. 

"then wentworth went out from the men a little, and aim hi gun at 
the doorway. 

"'whoever is there, come out, or I shall fire,' he shouted; but noth 
came, and he blaze forth both barrel into the dark. As though the 
report had been a signal, all the door along the north and east wall 
move slowli open, and wentworth and hi men were staring, frighten 
into the black shape of the empti doorways. 

"wentworth load hi gun quickly, and call to the dog; but the brute 
wa burrow away in among the men; and thi fear on the dog' part 
frighten wentworth more, he told me, than anything. then someth els 
happened. three of the candl over in the corner of the hall went out; 
and immedi about half a dozen in differ part of the place. more 
candl were put out, and the hall had becom quit dark in the corners. 

"the men were all stand now, hold their clubs, and crowd 
together. and no one said a word. wentworth told me he felt posit 
ill with fright. I know the feeling. then, suddenly, someth splash 
on to the back of hi left hand. He lift it, and looked. It wa cover 
with a great splash of red that drip from hi fingers. An old irishman 
near to him, saw it, and croak out in a quaver voice:--'th 
bhlood-dhrip!' when the old man call out, they all looked, and in the 
same instant other felt it upon them. there were frighten cri 
of:--'th bhlood-dhrip! the bhlood-dhrip!' and then, about a dozen 
candl went out simultaneously, and the hall wa suddenli dark. the dog 
let out a great, mourn howl, and there wa a horribl littl silence, 
with everyon stand rigid. then the tension broke, and there wa a mad 
rush for the main door. they wrench it open, and tumbl out into the 
dark; but someth slam it with a crash after them, and shut the dog 
in; for wentworth heard it howl as they race down the drive. yet no 
one had the pluck to go back to let it out, which doe not surpris me. 

"wentworth sent for me the follow day. He had heard of me in 
connect with that steepl monster case. I arriv by the night mail, 
and put up with wentworth at the inn. the next day we went up to the old 
manor, which certainli lie in rather a wilderness; though what struck 
me most wa the extraordinari number of laurel bush about the house. 
the place wa smother with them; so that the hous seem to be 
grow up out of a sea of green laurel. these, and the grim, ancient 
look of the old building, made the place look a bit dank and ghostly, 
even by daylight. 

"the hall wa a big place, and well lit by daylight; for which I wa not 
sorry. you see, I had been rather wound-up by wentworth' yarn. We found 
one rather funni thing, and that wa the great bullmastiff, lie stiff 
with it neck broken. thi made me feel veri serious; for it show that 
whether the caus wa supernatur or not, there wa present in the hous 
some forc exceedingli danger to life. 

"later, whilst wentworth stood guard with hi shotgun, I made an 
examin of the hall. the bottl and mug from which the men had 
drunk their whiski were scatter about; and all over the place were the 
candles, stuck upright in their own grease. but in the somewhat brief and 
gener search, I found nothing; and decid to begin my usual exact 
examin of everi squar foot of the place--not onli of the hall, in 
thi case, but of the whole interior of the castle. 

"I spent three uncomfort weeks, searching; but without result of ani 
kind. and, you know, the care I take at thi period is extreme; for I 
have solv hundr of case of so-cal 'hauntings' at thi earli 
stage, simpli by the most minut investigation, and the keep of a 
perfectli open mind. but, as I have said, I found nothing. dure the 
whole of the examination, I got wentworth to stand guard with hi load 
shotgun; and I wa veri particular that we were never caught there 
after dusk. 

"I decid now to make the experi of stay a night in the great 
hall, of cours 'protected.' I spoke about it to wentworth; but hi own 
attempt had made him so nervou that he beg me to do no such thing. 
however, I thought it well worth the risk, and I manag in the end to 
persuad him to be present. 

"with thi in view, I went to the neighbor town of gaunt, and by an 
arrang with the chief constabl I obtain the servic of six 
policemen with their rifles. the arrang wa unofficial, of course, 
and the men were allow to volunteer, with a promis of payment. 

"when the constabl arriv earli that even at the inn, I gave them a 
good feed; and after that we all set out for the manor. We had four 
donkey with us, load with fuel and other matters; also two great 
boarhounds, which one of the polic led. when we reach the house, I set 
the men to unload the donkeys; whilst wentworth and I set-to and seal 
all the doors, except the main entrance, with tape and wax; for if the 
door were realli opened, I wa go to be sure of the fact. I wa go 
to run no risk of be deceiv by ghostli hallucination, or mesmer 
influence. 

"bi the time that thi wa done, the policemen had unload the donkeys, 
and were waiting, look about them, curiously. I set two of them to 
lay a fire in the big grate, and the other I use as I requir them. I 
took one of the boarhound to the end of the hall furthest from the 
entrance, and there I drove a stapl into the floor, to which I tie the 
dog with a short tether. then, 'round him, I drew upon the floor the 
figur of a pentacle, in chalk. outsid of the pentacle, I made a circl 
with garlic. I did exactli the same thing with the other hound; but over 
more in the northeast corner of the big hall, where the two row of 
door make the angle. 

"when thi wa done, I clear the whole center of the hall, and put one 
of the policemen to sweep it; after which I had all my apparatu carri 
into the clear space. then I went over to the main door and hook it 
open, so that the hook would have to be lift out of the hasp, befor 
the door could be closed. after that, I place light candl befor 
each of the seal doors, and one in each corner of the big room; and 
then I lit the fire. when I saw that it wa properli alight, I got all 
the men together, by the pile of thing in the center of the room, and 
took their pipe from them; for, as the sigsand ms. ha it:--'theyr must 
noe lyght come from wythin the barryier.' and I wa go to make sure. 

"I got my tape measur then, and measur out a circl thirty-thre feet 
in diameter, and immedi chalk it out. the polic and wentworth 
were tremend interested, and I took the opportun to warn them 
that thi wa no piec of silli mum on my part; but done with a 
definit intent of erect a barrier between us and ani ab-human 
thing that the night might show to us. I warn them that, as they 
valu their lives, and more than their live it might be, no one must 
on ani account whatsoev pass beyond the limit of the barrier that I 
wa making. 

"after I had drawn the circle, I took a bunch of the garlic, and smudg 
it right 'round the chalk circle, a littl outsid of it. when thi wa 
complete, I call for candl from my stock of material. I set the 
polic to light them, and as they were lit, I took them, and seal 
them down on the floor, just within the chalk circle, five inch apart. 
As each candl measur approxim one inch in diameter, it took 
sixty-six candl to complet the circle; and I need hardli say that 
everi number and measur ha a significance. 

"then, from candl to candl I took a 'gayrd' of human hair, entwin it 
altern to the left and to the right, until the circl wa 
completed, and the end of the hair shod with silver, and press into 
the wax of the sixty-sixth candle. 

"it had now been dark some time, and I made hast to get the 'defense' 
complete. To thi end, I got the men well together, and began to fit the 
electr pentacl right around us, so that the five point of the 
defens star came just within the hair circle. thi did not take me 
long, and a minut later I had connect up the batteries, and the weak 
blue glare of the intertwin vacuum tube shone all around us. I felt 
happier then; for thi pentacl is, as you all know, a wonder 
'defense.' I have told you before, how the idea came to me, after read 
professor garder' 'experi with a medium.' He found that a current, 
of a certain number of vibrations, _in vacuo,_ 'insulated' the medium. It 
is difficult to suggest an explan non-technically, and if you are 
realli interest you should read carder' lectur on 'astral vibrat 
compar with matero-involut vibrat below the six-billion limit.' 

"a I stood up from my work, I could hear outsid in the night a constant 
drip from the laurels, which as I have said, come right up around the 
house, veri thick. By the sound, I knew that a 'soft' rain had set in; 
and there wa absolut no wind, as I could tell by the steadi flame of 
the candles. 

"I stood a moment or two, listening, and then one of the men touch my 
arm, and ask me in a low voice, what they should do. By hi tone, I 
could tell that he wa feel someth of the strang of it all; 
and the other men, includ wentworth, were so quiet that I wa afraid 
they were begin to get shaky. 

"I set-to, then, and arrang them with their back to one common center; 
so that they were sit flat upon the floor, with their feet radiat 
outward. then, by compass, I laid their leg to the eight chief points, 
and afterward I drew a circl with chalk around them; and opposit to 
their feet, I made the eight sign of the saaamaaa ritual. the eighth 
place was, of course, empty; but readi for me to occupi at ani moment; 
for I had omit to make the seal sign to that point, until I had 
finish all my preparations, and could enter the inner star. 

"I took a last look 'round the great hall, and saw that the two big 
hound were lie quietly, with their nose between their paws. the fire 
wa big and cheerful, and the candl befor the two row of doors, burnt 
steadily, as well as the solitari one in the corners. then I went 'round 
the littl star of men, and warn them not to be frighten whatev 
happened; but to trust to the 'defense'; and to let noth tempt or 
drive them to cross the barriers. also, I told them to watch their 
movements, and to keep their feet strictli to their places. for the rest, 
there wa to be no shooting, unless I gave the word. 

"and now at last, I went to my place, and, sit down, made the eighth 
sign just beyond my feet. then I arrang my camera and flashlight handy, 
and examin my revolver. 

"wentworth sat behind the first sign, and as the number went 'round 
reversed, that put him next to me on my left. I ask him, in a low 
voice, how he felt; and he told me, rather nervous; but that he felt 
confid in my knowledg and wa resolv to go through with the 
matter, whatev happened. 

"we settl down to wait. there wa no talking, except that, onc or 
twice, the polic bent toward one another, and whisper odd remark 
concern the hall, that appear queerli audibl in the intens 
silence. but in a while there wa not even a whisper from anyone, and 
onli the monoton drip, drip of the quiet rain without the great 
entrance, and the low, dull sound of the fire in the big fireplace. 

"it wa a queer group that we made sit there, back to back, with our 
leg star outward; and all around us the strang blue glow of the 
pentacle, and beyond that the brilliant shine of the great ring of 
light candles. outsid of the glare of the candles, the larg empti 
hall look a littl gloomy, by contrast, except where the light shone 
befor the seal doors, and the blaze of the big fire made a good honest 
mass of flame. and the feel of mystery! can you pictur it all? 

"it might have been an hour later that it came to me suddenli that I wa 
awar of an extraordinari sens of dreeness, as it were, come into the 
air of the place. not the nervou feel of mysteri that had been with 
us all the time; but a new feeling, as if there were someth go to 
happen ani moment. 

"abruptly, there came a slight nois from the east end of the hall, and I 
felt the star of men move suddenly. 'steady! keep steady!' I shouted, and 
they quietened. I look up the hall, and saw that the dog were upon 
their feet, and stare in an extraordinari fashion toward the great 
entrance. I turn and stared, also, and felt the men move as they crane 
their head to look. suddenly, the dog set up a tremend barking, and 
I glanc across to them, and found they were still 'pointing' for the 
big doorway. they ceas their nois just as quickly, and seem to be 
listening. In the same instant, I heard a faint chink of metal to my 
left, that set me stare at the hook which held the great door wide. It 
moved, even as I looked. some invis thing wa meddl with it. A 
queer, sicken thrill went through me, and I felt all the men about me, 
stiffen and go rigid with intensity. I had a certainti of someth 
impending: as it might be the impress of an invisible, but 
overwhelming, presence. the hall wa full of a queer silence, and not a 
sound came from the dogs. _then I saw the hook slowli rais from out of 
it hasp, without ani visibl thing touch it._ then a sudden power of 
movement came to me. I rais my camera, with the flashlight fixed, and 
snap it at the door. there came the great blare of the flashlight, and 
a simultan roar of bark from the two dogs. 

"the intens of the flash made all the place seem dark for some 
moments, and in that time of darkness, I heard a jingl in the direct 
of the door, and strain to look. the effect of the bright light passed, 
and I could see clearli again. the great entranc door wa be slowli 
closed. It shut with a sharp snick, and there follow a long silence, 
broken onli by the whimper of the dogs. 

"I turn suddenly, and look at wentworth. He wa look at me. 

"'just as it did before,' he whispered. 

"'most extraordinary,' I said, and he nod and look 'round, 
nervously. 

"the policemen were pretti quiet, and I judg that they were feel 
rather wors than wentworth; though, for that matter, you must not think 
that I wa altogeth natural; yet I have seen so much that is 
extraordinary, that I daresay I can keep my nerv steadi longer than 
most people. 

"I look over my shoulder at the men, and caution them, in a low 
voice, not to move outsid of the barriers, _whatev happened_; not even 
though the hous should seem to be rock and about to tumbl on to 
them; for well I knew what some of the great forc are capabl of doing. 
yet, unless it should prove to be one of the case of the more terribl 
saiitii manifestation, we were almost certain of safety, so long as we 
kept to our order within the pentacle. 

"perhap an hour and a half passed, quietly, except when, onc in a way, 
the dog would whine distressfully. presently, however, they ceas even 
from this, and I could see them lie on the floor with their paw over 
their noses, in a most peculiar fashion, and shiver visibly. the 
sight made me feel more serious, as you can understand. 

"suddenly, the candl in the corner furthest from the main door, went 
out. An instant later, wentworth jerk my arm, and I saw that the candl 
befor one of the seal door had been put out. I held my camera ready. 
then, one after another, everi candl about the hall wa put out, and 
with such speed and irregularity, that I could never catch one in the 
actual act of be extinguished. yet, for all that, I took a flashlight 
of the hall in general. 

"there wa a time in which I sat half-blind by the great glare of the 
flash, and I blame myself for not have rememb to bring a pair of 
smoke goggles, which I have sometim use at these times. I had felt 
the men jump, at the sudden light, and I call out loud to them to sit 
quiet, and to keep their feet exactli to their proper places. My voice, 
as you can imagine, sound rather horrid and frighten in the great 
room, and altogeth it wa a beastli moment. 

"then, I wa abl to see again, and I stare here and there about the 
hall; but there wa noth show unusual; only, of course, it wa dark 
now over in the corners. 

"suddenly, I saw that the great fire wa blackening. It wa go out 
visibly, as I looked. If I said that some monstrous, invisible, 
imposs creatur suck the life from it, I could best explain the 
way the light and flame went out of it. It wa most extraordinari to 
watch. In the time that I watch it, everi vestig of fire wa gone 
from it, and there wa no light outsid of the ring of candl around 
the pentacle. 

"the deliber of the thing troubl me more than I can make clear 
to you. It convey to me such a sens of a calm deliber forc present 
in the hall: the steadfast intent to 'make a darkness' wa horrible. 
the _extent_ of the power to affect the materi wa horrible. the 
extent of the power to affect the materi wa now the one constant, 
anxiou question in my brain. you can understand? 

"behind me, I heard the policemen move again, and I knew that they were 
get thoroughli frightened. I turn half 'round, and told them, 
quietli but plainly, that they were safe onli so long as they stay 
within the pentacle, in the posit in which I had put them. If they 
onc broke, and went outsid of the barrier, no knowledg of mine could 
state the full extent of the dread of the danger. 

"I steadi them up, by thi quiet, straight reminder; but if they had 
known, as I knew, that there is no certainti in ani 'protection,' they 
would have suffer a great deal more, and probabl have broken the 
'defense,' and made a mad, foolish run for an imposs safety. 

"anoth hour passed, after this, in an absolut quietness. I had a sens 
of aw strain and oppression, as though I were a littl spirit in the 
compani of some invisible, brood monster of the unseen world, who, as 
yet, wa scarc consciou of us. I leant across to wentworth, and ask 
him in a whisper whether he had a feel as if someth were in the 
room. He look veri pale, and hi eye kept alway on the move. He 
glanc just onc at me, and nodded; then stare away 'round the hall 
again. and when I came to think, I wa do the same thing. 

"abruptly, as though a hundr unseen hand had snuf them, everi 
candl in the barrier went dead out, and we were left in a dark that 
seemed, for a little, absolute; for the light from the pentacl wa too 
weak and pale to penetr far across the great hall. 

"I tell you, for a moment, I just sat there as though I had been frozen 
solid. I felt the 'creep' go all over me, and seem to stop in my brain. I 
felt all at onc to be given a power of hear that wa far beyond the 
normal. I could hear my own heart thud most extraordinarili loud. I 
began, however, to feel better, after a while; but I simpli had not the 
pluck to move. you can understand? 

"presently, I began to get my courag back. I grip at my camera and 
flashlight, and waited. My hand were simpli soak with sweat. I glanc 
onc at wentworth. I could see him onli dimly. hi shoulder were hunch 
a little, hi head forward; but though it wa motionless, I knew that hi 
eye were not. It is queer how one know that sort of thing at times. the 
polic were just as silent. and thu a while passed. 

"A sudden sound broke across the silence. from two side of the room 
there came faint noises. I recogn them at once, as the break of 
the sealing-wax. _the seal door were opening._ I rais the camera and 
flashlight, and it wa a peculiar mixtur of fear and courag that help 
me to press the button. As the great flare of light lit up the hall I 
felt the men all about me jump. the dark fell like a clap of thunder, 
if you can understand, and seem tenfold. yet, in the moment of 
brightness, I had seen that all the seal door were wide open. 

"suddenly, all around us, there sound a drip, drip, drip, upon the 
floor of the great hall. I thrill with a queer, realiz emotion, and 
a sens of a veri real and present danger--_imminent._ the 'blood-drip' 
had commenced. and the grim question wa now whether the barrier could 
save us from whatev had come into the huge room. 

"through some aw minut the 'blood-drip' continu to fall in an 
increas rain; and present some began to fall within the barriers. I 
saw sever great drop splash and star upon the pale glow 
intertwin tube of the electr pentacle; but, strang enough, I 
could not trace that ani fell among us. beyond the strang horribl nois 
of the 'drip,' there wa no other sound. and then, abruptly, from the 
boarhound over in the far corner, there came a terribl yell howl of 
agony, follow instantli by a sickening, break noise, and an 
immedi silence. If you have ever, when out shooting, broken a rabbit' 
neck, you will know the sound--in miniature! like lightning, the thought 
sprang into my brain:--_it ha cross the pentacle._ for you will 
rememb that I had made one about each of the dogs. I thought instantly, 
with a sick apprehension, of our own barriers. there wa someth in the 
hall with us that had pass the barrier of the pentacl about one of the 
dogs. In the aw succeed silence, I posit quivered. and 
suddenly, one of the men behind me, gave out a scream, like ani woman, 
and bolt for the door. He fumbled, and had it open in a moment. I 
yell to the other not to move; but they follow like sheep, and I 
heard them kick the candl flying, in their panic. one of them step 
on the electr pentacle, and smash it, and there wa an utter 
darkness. In an instant, I realiz that I wa defenseless against the 
power of the unknown world, and with one savag leap I wa out of the 
useless barriers, and instantli through the great doorway, and into the 
night. I believ I yell with sheer funk. 

"the men were a littl ahead of me, and I never ceas running, and 
neither did they. sometimes, I glanc back over my shoulder; and I kept 
glanc into the laurel which grew all along the drive. the beastli 
thing kept rustling, rustl in a hollow sort of way, as though 
someth were keep parallel with me, among them. the rain had 
stopped, and a dismal littl wind kept moan through the grounds. It 
wa disgusting. 

"I caught wentworth and the polic at the lodg gate. We got outside, and 
ran all the way to the village. We found old denni up, wait for us, 
and half the villag to keep him company. He told us that he had known 
in hi 'sowl' that we should come back, that is, if we came back at all; 
which is not a bad render of hi remark. 

"fortunately, I had brought my camera away from the house--poss 
becaus the strap had happen to be over my head. yet, I did not go 
straight away to develop; but sat with the rest of the bar, where we 
talk for some hours, tri to be coher about the whole 
horribl business. 

"later, however, I went up to my room, and proceed with my photography. 
I wa steadier now, and it wa just possible, so I hoped, that the 
neg might show something. 

"on two of the plates, I found noth unusual: but on the third, which 
wa the first one that I snapped, I saw someth that made me quit 
excited. I examin it veri care with a magnifi glass; then I put 
it to wash, and slip a pair of rubber oversho over my boots. 

"the neg had show me someth veri extraordinary, and I had made 
up my mind to test the truth of what it seem to indicate, without 
lose anoth moment. It wa no use tell anyth to wentworth and 
the police, until I wa certain; and, also, I believ that I stood a 
greater chanc to succeed by myself; though, for that matter, I do not 
suppos anyth would have taken them up to the manor again that night. 

"I took my revolver, and went quietli downstairs, and into the dark. the 
rain had commenc again; but that did not bother me. I walk hard. when 
I came to the lodg gates, a sudden, queer instinct stop me from go 
through, and I climb the wall into the park. I kept away from the 
drive, and approach the build through the dismal, drip laurels. 
you can imagin how beastli it was. everi time a leaf rustled, I jumped. 

"I made my way 'round to the back of the big house, and got in through a 
littl window which I had taken note of dure my search; for, of course, 
I knew the whole place from roof to cellars. I went silent up the 
kitchen stairs, fairli quiver with funk; and at the top, I went to the 
left, and then into a long corridor that opened, through one of the 
doorway we had sealed, into the big hall. I look up it, and saw a 
faint flicker of light away at the end; and I tipto silent toward it, 
hold my revolv ready. As I came near to the open door, I heard men' 
voices, and then a burst of laughing. I went on, until I could see into 
the hall. there were sever men there, all in a group. they were well 
dressed, and one, at least, I saw wa armed. they were examin my 
'barriers' against the supernatural, with a good deal of unkind laughter. 
I never felt such a fool in my life. 

"it wa plain to me that they were a gang of men who had made use of the 
empti manor, perhap for years, for some purpos of their own; and now 
that wentworth wa attempt to take possession, they were act up the 
tradit of the place, with the view of drive him away, and keep 
so use a place still at their disposal. but what they were, I mean 
whether coiners, thieves, inventors, or what, I could not imagine. 

"presently, they left the pentacle, and gather 'round the live 
boarhound, which seem curious quiet, as though it were half-drugged. 
there wa some talk as to whether to let the poor brute live, or not; but 
final they decid it would be good polici to kill it. I saw two of 
them forc a twist loop of rope into it mouth, and the two bight of 
the loop were brought togeth at the back of the hound' neck. then a 
third man thrust a thick walking-stick through the two loops. the two men 
with the rope, stoop to hold the dog, so that I could not see what wa 
done; but the poor beast gave a sudden aw howl, and immedi there 
wa a repetit of the uncomfort break sound, I had heard earlier 
in the night, as you will remember. 

"the men stood up, and left the dog lie there, quiet enough now, as you 
may suppose. for my part, I fulli appreci the calcul 
remorseless which had decid upon the animal' death, and the cold 
determin with which it had been afterward execut so neatly. I 
guess that a man who might get into the 'light' of those particular 
men, would be like to come to quit as uncomfort an ending. 

"A minut later, one of the men call out to the rest that they should 
'shift the wires.' one of the men came toward the doorway of the corridor 
in which I stood, and I ran quickli back into the dark of the upper 
end. I saw the man reach up, and take someth from the top of the door, 
and I heard the slight, ring jangl of steel wire. 

"when he had gone, I ran back again, and saw the men passing, one after 
another, through an open in the stairs, form by one of the marbl 
step be raised. when the last man had vanished, the slab that made 
the step wa shut down, and there wa not a sign of the secret door. It 
wa the seventh step from the bottom, as I took care to count: and a 
splendid idea; for it wa so solid that it did not ring hollow, even to a 
fairli heavi hammer, as I found later. 

"there is littl more to tell. I got out of the hous as quickli and 
quietli as possible, and back to the inn. the polic came without ani 
coaxing, when they knew the 'ghosts' were normal flesh and blood. We 
enter the park and the manor in the same way that I had done. yet, when 
we tri to open the step, we failed, and had final to smash it. thi 
must have warn the haunters; for when we descend to a secret room 
which we found at the end of a long and narrow passag in the thick 
of the walls, we found no one. 

"the polic were horribl disgusted, as you can imagine; but for my 
part, I did not care either way. I had 'laid the ghost,' as you might 
say, and that wa what I set out to do. I wa not particularli afraid of 
be laugh at by the others; for they had all been thoroughli 'taken 
in'; and in the end, I had scored, without their help. 

"we search right through the secret ways, and found that there wa an 
exit, at the end of a long tunnel, which open in the side of a well, 
out in the grounds. the ceil of the hall wa hollow, and reach by a 
littl secret stairway insid of the big staircase. the 'blood-drip' wa 
mere color water, drop through the minut crevic of the 
ornament ceiling. how the candl and the fire were put out, I do not 
know; for the haunter certainli did not act quit up to tradition, which 
held that the light were put out by the 'blood-drip.' perhap it wa too 
difficult to direct the fluid, without posit squirt it, which 
might have given the whole thing away. the candl and the fire may 
possibl have been extinguish by the agenc of carbon acid gas; but 
how suspended, I have no idea. 

"the secret hide pace were, of course, ancient. there wa also, did I 
tell you? a bell which they had rig up to ring, when anyon enter 
the gate at the end of the drive. If I had not climb the wall, I 
should have found noth for my pains; for the bell would have warn 
them had I gone in through the gateway." 

"what wa on the negative?" I asked, with much curiosity. 

"A pictur of the fine wire with which they were grappl for the hook 
that held the entranc door open. they were do it from one of the 
crevic in the ceiling. they had evid made no prepar for 
lift the hook. I suppos they never thought that anyon would make 
use of it, and so they had to improvis a grapple. the wire wa too fine 
to be seen by the amount of light we had in the hall; but the flashlight 
'pick it out.' Do you see? 

"the open of the inner door wa manag by wires, as you will have 
guessed, which they unship after use, or els I should soon have found 
them, when I made my search. 

"I think I have now explain everything. the hound wa killed, of 
course, by the men direct. you see, they made the place as dark as 
possible, first. Of course, if I had manag to take a flashlight just at 
that instant, the whole secret of the haunt would have been exposed. 
but fate just order it the other way." 

"and the tramps?" I asked. 

"oh, you mean the two tramp who were found dead in the manor," said 
carnacki. "well, of cours it is imposs to be sure, one way or the 
other. perhap they happen to find out something, and were given a 
hypodermic. Or it is just as probabl that they had come to the time of 
their dying, and just die naturally. It is conceiv that a great mani 
tramp had slept in the old house, at one time or another." 

carnacki stood up, and knock out hi pipe. We rose also, and went for 
our coat and hats. 

"out you go!" said carnacki, genially, use the recogn formula. and 
we went out on to the embankment, and present through the dark to 
our variou homes. 




no. 3--the whistl room 


carnacki shook a friendli fist at me as I entered, late. then he open 
the door into the dine room, and usher the four of us--jessop, 
arkright, taylor and myself--in to dinner. 

We dine well, as usual, and, equal as usual, carnacki wa pretti 
silent dure the meal. At the end, we took our wine and cigar to our 
usual positions, and carnacki--hav got himself comfort in hi big 
chair--began without ani preliminary:-- 

"I have just got back from ireland, again," he said. "and I thought you 
chap would be interest to hear my news. besides, I fanci I shall see 
the thing clearer, after I have told it all out straight. I must tell you 
this, though, at the beginning--up to the present moment, I have been 
utterli and complet 'stumped.' I have tumbl upon one of the most 
peculiar case of 'haunting'--or devil of some sort--that I have come 
against. now listen. 

"I have been spend the last few week at iastra castle, about twenti 
mile northeast of galway. I got a letter about a month ago from a mr. 
sid K. tassoc, who it seem had bought the place lately, and move in, 
onli to find that he had bought a veri peculiar piec of property. 

"when I got there, he met me at the station, drive a jaunt car, and 
drove me up to the castle, which, by the way, he call a 'hous shanty.' 
I found that he wa 'pig it' there with hi boy brother and anoth 
american, who seem to be half-serv and half-companion. It seem that 
all the servant had left the place, in a body, as you might say, and now 
they were manag among themselves, assist by some day-help. 

"the three of them got togeth a scratch feed, and tassoc told me all 
about the troubl whilst we were at table. It is most extraordinary, and 
differ from anyth that I have had to do with; though that buzz 
case wa veri queer, too. 

"tassoc began right in the middl of hi story. 'we'v got a room in thi 
shanty,' he said, 'which ha got a most infern whistl in it; sort of 
haunt it. the thing start ani time; you never know when, and it goe 
on until it frighten you. all the servant have gone, as you know. it' 
not ordinari whistling, and it isn't the wind. wait till you hear it.' 

"'we'r all carri guns,' said the boy; and slap hi coat pocket. 

"'a bad as that?' I said; and the older boy nodded. 'it may be soft,' he 
replied; 'but wait till you'v heard it. sometim I think it' some 
infern thing, and the next moment, i'm just as sure that someone' 
play a trick on me.' 

"'why?' I asked. 'what is to be gained?' 

"'you mean,' he said, 'that peopl usual have some good reason for 
play trick as elabor as this. well, i'll tell you. there' a ladi 
in thi province, by the name of miss donnehue, who' go to be my 
wife, thi day two months. she' more beauti than they make them, and 
so far as I can see, i'v just stuck my head into an irish hornet' nest. 
there' about a score of hot young irishmen been court her these two 
year gone, and now that i'm come along and cut them out, they feel raw 
against me. Do you begin to understand the possibilities?' 

"'yes,' I said. 'perhap I do in a vagu sort of way; but I don't see how 
all thi affect the room?' 

"'like this,' he said. 'when i'd fix it up with miss donnehue, I look 
out for a place, and bought thi littl hous shanty. afterward, I told 
her--on even dure dinner, that i'd decid to tie up here. and then 
she ask me whether I wasn't afraid of the whistl room. I told her it 
must have been thrown in gratis, as i'd heard noth about it. there 
were some of her men friend present, and I saw a smile go 'round. I 
found out, after a bit of questioning, that sever peopl have bought 
thi place dure the last twenty-odd years. and it wa alway on the 
market again, after a trial. 

"'well, the chap start to bait me a bit, and offer to take bet 
after dinner that i'd not stay six month in the place. I look onc or 
twice to miss donnehue, so as to be sure I wa "get the note" of the 
talkee-talkee; but I could see that she didn't take it as a joke, at all. 
partly, I think, becaus there wa a bit of a sneer in the way the men 
were tackl me, and partli becaus she realli believ there is 
someth in thi yarn of the whistl room. 

"'however, after dinner, I did what I could to even thing up with the 
others. I nail all their bets, and screw them down hard and safe. I 
guess some of them are go to be hard hit, unless I lose; which I don't 
mean to. well, there you have practic the whole yarn.' 

"'not quite,' I told him. 'all that I know, is that you have bought a 
castl with a room in it that is in some way "queer," and that you'v 
been do some betting. also, I know that your servant have got 
frighten and run away. tell me someth about the whistling?' 

"'oh, that!' said tassoc; 'that start the second night we were in. i'd 
had a good look 'round the room, in the daytime, as you can understand; 
for the talk up at arlestrae--miss donnehue' place--had made me wonder a 
bit. but it seem just as usual as some of the other room in the old 
wing, onli perhap a bit more lonesome. but that may be onli becaus of 
the talk about it, you know. 

"'the whistl start about ten o'clock, on the second night, as I 
said. tom and I were in the library, when we heard an aw queer 
whistling, come along the east corridor--th room is in the east 
wing, you know. 

"'that' that bless ghost!' I said to tom, and we collar the lamp 
off the table, and went up to have a look. I tell you, even as we dug 
along the corridor, it took me a bit in the throat, it wa so beastli 
queer. It wa a sort of tune, in a way; but more as if a devil or some 
rotten thing were laugh at you, and go to get 'round at your back. 
that' how it make you feel. 

"'when we got to the door, we didn't wait; but rush it open; and 
then I tell you the sound of the thing fairli hit me in the face. tom 
said he got it the same way--sort of felt stun and bewildered. We 
look all 'round, and soon got so nervous, we just clear out, and I 
lock the door. 

"'we came down here, and had a stiff peg each. then we got fit again, and 
began to think we'd been nice had. So we took sticks, and went out into 
the grounds, think after all it must be some of these confound 
irishmen work the ghost-trick on us. but there wa not a leg stirring. 

"'we went back into the house, and walk over it, and then paid anoth 
visit to the room. but we simpli couldn't stand it. We fairli ran out, 
and lock the door again. I don't know how to put it into words; but I 
had a feel of be up against someth that wa rottenli dangerous. 
you know! we'v carri our gun ever since. 

"'of course, we had a real turn out of the room next day, and the whole 
hous place; and we even hunt 'round the grounds; but there wa noth 
queer. and now I don't know what to think; except that the sensibl part 
of me tell me that it' some plan of these wild irishmen to tri to take 
a rise out of me.' 

"'done anyth since?' I ask him. 

"'yes,' he said--'watch outsid of the door of the room at nights, and 
chase 'round the grounds, and sound the wall and floor of the room. 
we'v done everyth we could think of; and it' begin to get on our 
nerves; so we sent for you.' 

"bi this, we had finish eating. As we rose from the table, tassoc 
suddenli call out:--'ssh! hark!' 

"we were instantli silent, listening. then I heard it, an extraordinari 
hoon whistle, monstrou and inhuman, come from far away through 
corridor to my right. 

"'bi g--d!' said tassoc; 'and it' scarc dark yet! collar those 
candles, both of you, and come along.' 

"in a few moments, we were all out of the door and race up the stairs. 
tassoc turn into a long corridor, and we followed, shield our 
candl as we ran. the sound seem to fill all the passag as we drew 
near, until I had the feel that the whole air throb under the power 
of some wanton immens force--a sens of an actual taint, as you might 
say, of monstros all about us. 

"tassoc unlock the door; then, give it a push with hi foot, jump 
back, and drew hi revolver. As the door flew open, the sound beat out at 
us, with an effect imposs to explain to one who ha not heard 
it--with a certain, horribl person note in it; as if in there in the 
dark you could pictur the room rock and creak in a mad, vile 
glee to it own filthi pipe and whistl and hooning. To stand there 
and listen, wa to be stun by realization. It wa as if someon show 
you the mouth of a vast pit suddenly, and said:--that' hell. and you 
knew that they had spoken the truth. Do you get it, even a littl bit? 

"I step back a pace into the room, and held the candl over my head, 
and look quickli 'round. tassoc and hi brother join me, and the man 
came up at the back, and we all held our candl high. I wa deafen 
with the shrill, pipe hoon of the whistling; and then, clear in my 
ear, someth seem to be say to me:--'get out of here--quick! 
quick! quick!' 

"a you chap know, I never neglect that sort of thing. sometim it may 
be noth but nerves; but as you will remember, it wa just such a 
warn that save me in the 'grey dog' case, and in the 'yellow finger' 
experiments; as well as other times. well, I turn sharp 'round to the 
others: 'out!' I said. 'for god' sake, _out_ quick.' and in an instant I 
had them into the passage. 

"there came an extraordinari yell scream into the hideou whistling, 
and then, like a clap of thunder, an utter silence. I slam the door, 
and lock it. then, take the key, I look 'round at the others. they 
were pretti white, and I imagin I must have look that way too. and 
there we stood a moment, silent. 

"'come down out of this, and have some whisky,' said tassoc, at last, in 
a voic he tri to make ordinary; and he led the way. I wa the back 
man, and I know we all kept look over our shoulders. when we got 
downstairs, tassoc pass the bottl 'round. He took a drink, himself, 
and slap hi glass down on to the table. then sat down with a thud. 

"'that' a love thing to have in the hous with you, isn't it!' he 
said. and directli afterward:--'what on earth made you hustl us all out 
like that, carnacki?' 

"'someth seem to be tell me to get out, quick,' I said. 'sound a 
bit silly, superstitious, I know; but when you are meddl with thi 
sort of thing, you'v got to take notic of queer fancies, and risk be 
laugh at.' 

"I told him then about the 'grey dog' business, and he nod a lot to 
that. 'of course,' I said, 'thi may be noth more than those would-b 
rival of your play some funni game; but, personally, though i'm 
go to keep an open mind, I feel that there is someth beastli and 
danger about thi thing.' 

"we talk for a while longer, and then tassoc suggest billiards, which 
we play in a pretti half-heart fashion, and all the time cock an 
ear to the door, as you might say, for sounds; but none came, and later, 
after coffee, he suggest earli bed, and a thorough overhaul of the room 
on the morrow. 

"mi bedroom wa in the newer part of the castle, and the door open into 
the pictur gallery. At the east end of the galleri wa the entranc to 
the corridor of the east wing; thi wa shut off from the galleri by two 
old and heavi oak doors, which look rather odd and quaint besid the 
more modern door of the variou rooms. 

"when I reach my room, I did not go to bed; but began to unpack my 
instrument trunk, of which I had retain the key. I intend to take one 
or two preliminari step at once, in my investig of the 
extraordinari whistling. 

"presently, when the castl had settl into quietness, I slip out of 
my room, and across to the entranc of the great corridor. I open one 
of the low, squat doors, and threw the beam of my pocket searchlight 
down the passage. It wa empty, and I went through the doorway, and 
pushed-to the oak behind me. then along the great passageway, throw my 
light befor and behind, and keep my revolv handy. 

"I had hung a 'protect belt' of garlic 'round my neck, and the smell 
of it seem to fill the corridor and give me assurance; for, as you all 
know, it is a wonder 'protection' against the more usual aeiirii form 
of semi-materialization, by which I suppos the whistl might be 
produced; though, at that period of my investigation, I wa quit 
prepar to find it due to some perfectli natur cause; for it is 
astonish the enorm number of case that prove to have noth 
abnorm in them. 

"in addit to wear the necklet, I had plug my ear loos with 
garlic, and as I did not intend to stay more than a few minut in the 
room, I hope to be safe. 

"when I reach the door, and put my hand into my pocket for the key, I 
had a sudden feel of sicken funk. but I wa not go to back out, 
if I could help it. I unlock the door and turn the handle. then I 
gave the door a sharp push with my foot, as tassoc had done, and drew my 
revolver, though I did not expect to have ani use for it, really. 

"I shone the searchlight all 'round the room, and then step inside, 
with a disgustingli horribl feel of walk slap into a wait 
danger. I stood a few seconds, waiting, and noth happened, and the 
empti room show bare from corner to corner. and then, you know, I 
realiz that the room wa full of an abomin silence; can you 
understand that? A sort of purpos silence, just as sicken as ani 
of the filthi nois the thing have power to make. Do you rememb what 
I told you about that 'silent garden' business? well, thi room had just 
that same _malevolent_ silence--th beastli quiet of a thing that is 
look at you and not seeabl itself, and think that it ha got you. 
oh, I recogn it instantly, and I whip the top off my lantern, so 
as to have light over the _whole_ room. 

"then I set-to, work like fury, and keep my glanc all about me. I 
seal the two window with length of human hair, right across, and 
seal them at everi frame. As I worked, a queer, scarc percept 
tens stole into the air of the place, and the silenc seemed, if you 
can understand me, to grow more solid. I knew then that I had no busi 
there without 'full protection'; for I wa practic certain that thi 
wa no mere aeiirii development; but one of the worst forms, as the 
saiitii; like that 'grunt man' case--y know. 

"I finish the window, and hurri over to the great fireplace. thi is 
a huge affair, and ha a queer gallows-iron, I think they are called, 
project from the back of the arch. I seal the open with seven 
human hairs--th seventh cross the six others. 

"then, just as I wa make an end, a low, mock whistl grew in the 
room. A cold, nervou prick went up my spine, and 'round my forehead 
from the back. the hideou sound fill all the room with an 
extraordinary, grotesqu parodi of human whistling, too gigant to be 
human--a if someth gargantuan and monstrou made the sound softly. 
As I stood there a last moment, press down the final seal, I had no 
doubt but that I had come across one of those rare and horribl case of 
the _inanimate_ reproduc the function of the _animate_, I made a 
grab for my lamp, and went quickli to the door, look over my 
shoulder, and listen for the thing that I expected. It came, just as 
I got my hand upon the handle--a squeal of incredible, malevol anger, 
pierc through the low hoon of the whistling. I dash out, 
slam the door and lock it. I leant a littl against the opposit 
wall of the corridor, feel rather funny; for it had been a narrow 
squeak.... 'theyr be noe sayfeti to be gain bye gayrd of holi 
when the monyst hath pow'r to speak throe wood and stoene.' So run 
the passag in the sigsand ms., and I prove it in that 'nod door' 
business. there is no protect against thi particular form of 
monster, except, possibly, for a fraction period of time; for it can 
reproduc itself in, or take to it purpose, the veri protect 
materi which you may use, and ha the power to '_forme_ wythin the 
pentycle'; though not immediately. there is, of course, the possibl 
of the unknown last line of the saaamaaa ritual be uttered; but it is 
too uncertain to count upon, and the danger is too hideous; and even 
then it ha no power to protect for more than 'maybe fyve beat of the 
harte,' as the sigsand ha it. 

"insid of the room, there wa now a constant, meditative, hoon 
whistling; but present thi ceased, and the silenc seem worse; for 
there is such a sens of hidden mischief in a silence. 

"after a little, I seal the door with cross hairs, and then clear 
off down the great passage, and so to bed. 

"for a long time I lay awake; but manag eventu to get some sleep. 
yet, about two o'clock I wa wake by the hoon whistl of the room 
come to me, even through the close doors. the sound wa tremendous, 
and seem to beat through the whole hous with a presid sens of 
terror. As if (I rememb thinking) some monstrou giant had been hold 
mad carniv with itself at the end of that great passage. 

"I got up and sat on the edg of the bed, wonder whether to go along 
and have a look at the seal; and suddenli there came a thump on my door, 
and tassoc walk in, with hi dress gown over hi pajamas. 

"'i thought it would have wake you, so I came along to have a talk,' he 
said. '_i_ can't sleep. beautiful! isn't it!' 

"'extraordinary!' I said, and toss him my case. 

"he lit a cigarette, and we sat and talk for about an hour; and all the 
time that nois went on, down at the end of the big corridor. 

"suddenly, tassoc stood up:-- 

"'let' take our guns, and go and examin the brute,' he said, and turn 
toward the door. 

"'no!' I said. 'bi jove--_no!_ I can't say anyth definite, yet; but I 
believ that room is about as danger as it well can be.' 

"'haunted--_really_ haunted?' he asked, keenli and without ani of hi 
frequent banter. 

"I told him, of course, that I could not say a definit _yes_ or _no_ to 
such a question; but that I hope to be abl to make a statement, soon. 
then I gave him a littl lectur on the fals re-materi of the 
animate-forc through the inanimate-inert. He began then to see the 
particular way in the room might be dangerous, if it were realli the 
subject of a manifestation. 

"about an hour later, the whistl ceas quit suddenly, and tassoc 
went off again to bed. I went back to mine, also, and eventu got 
anoth spell of sleep. 

"in the morning, I went along to the room. I found the seal on the door 
intact. then I went in. the window seal and the hair were all right; but 
the seventh hair across the great fireplac wa broken. thi set me 
thinking. I knew that it might, veri possibly, have snapped, through my 
have tension it too highly; but then, again, it might have been 
broken by someth else. yet, it wa scarc possibl that a man, for 
instance, could have pass between the six unbroken hairs; for no one 
would ever have notic them, enter the room that way, you see; but 
just walk through them, ignor of their veri existence. 

"I remov the other hairs, and the seals. then I look up the chimney. 
It went up straight, and I could see blue sky at the top. It wa a big, 
open flue, and free from ani suggest of hide places, or corners. 
yet, of course, I did not trust to ani such casual examination, and after 
breakfast, I put on my overalls, and climb to the veri top, sound 
all the way; but I found nothing. 

"then I came down, and went over the whole of the room--floor, ceiling, 
and walls, map them out in six-inch squares, and sound with both 
hammer and probe. but there wa noth abnormal. 

"afterward, I made a three-week search of the whole castle, in the same 
thorough way; but found nothing. I went even further, then; for at night, 
when the whistl commenced, I made a microphon test. you see, if the 
whistl were mechan produced, thi test would have made evid 
to me the work of the machinery, if there were ani such conceal 
within the walls. It certainli wa an up-to-d method of examination, 
as you must allow. 

"of course, I did not think that ani of tassoc' rival had fix up ani 
mechan contrivance; but I thought it just possibl that there had 
been some such thing for produc the whistling, made away back in the 
years, perhap with the intent of give the room a reput that 
would ensur it be free of inquisit folk. you see what I mean? 
well, of course, it wa just possible, if thi were the case, that 
someon knew the secret of the machinery, and wa util the knowledg 
to play thi devil of a prank on tassoc. the microphon test of the wall 
would certainli have made thi known to me, as I have said; but there wa 
noth of the sort in the castle; so that I had practic no doubt at 
all now, but that it wa a genuin case of what is popularli term 
'haunting.' 

"all thi time, everi night, and sometim most of each night, the 
hoon whistl of the room wa intolerable. It wa as if an 
intellig there knew that step were be taken against it, and pipe 
and hoon in a sort of mad, mock contempt. I tell you, it wa as 
extraordinari as it wa horrible. time after time, I went 
along--tipto noiselessli on stocking feet--to the seal door (for 
I alway kept the room sealed). I went at all hour of the night, and 
often the whistling, inside, would seem to chang to a brutal malign 
note, as though the half-anim monster saw me plainli through the shut 
door. and all the time the shrieking, hoon whistl would fill the 
whole corridor, so that I use to feel a preciou lone chap, mess 
about there with one of hell' mysteries. 

"and everi morning, I would enter the room, and examin the differ 
hair and seals. you see, after the first week, I had stretch parallel 
hair all along the wall of the room, and along the ceiling; but over 
the floor, which wa of polish stone, I had set out little, colorless 
wafers, tacky-sid uppermost. each wafer wa numbered, and they were 
arrang after a definit plan, so that I should be abl to trace the 
exact movement of ani live thing that went across the floor. 

"you will see that no materi be or creatur could possibl have 
enter that room, without leav mani sign to tell me about it. but 
noth wa ever disturbed, and I began to think that I should have to 
risk an attempt to stay the night in the room, in the electr pentacle. 
yet, mind you, I knew that it would be a crazi thing to do; but I wa 
get stumped, and readi to do anything. 

"once, about midnight, I did break the seal on the door, and have a quick 
look in; but, I tell you, the whole room gave one mad yell, and seem to 
come toward me in a great belli of shadows, as if the wall had belli 
in toward me. Of course, that must have been fancy. anyway, the yell wa 
sufficient, and I slam the door, and lock it, feel a bit weak 
down my spine. you know the feeling. 

"and then, when I had got to that state of readi for anything, I made 
someth of a discovery. It wa about one in the morning, and I wa 
walk slowli 'round the castle, keep in the soft grass. I had come 
under the shadow of the east front, and far abov me, I could hear the 
vile, hoon whistl of the room, up in the dark of the unlit wing. 
then, suddenly, a littl in front of me, I heard a man' voice, speak 
low, but evid in glee:-- 

"'bi george! you chaps; but I wouldn't care to bring a wife home in 
that!' it said, in the tone of the cultur irish. 

"someon start to reply; but there came a sharp exclamation, and then a 
rush, and I heard footstep run in all directions. evidently, the men 
had spot me. 

"for a few seconds, I stood there, feel an aw ass. after all, 
_they_ were at the bottom of the haunting! Do you see what a big fool it 
made me seem? I had no doubt but that they were some of tassoc' rivals; 
and here I had been feel in everi bone that I had hit a real, bad, 
genuin case! and then, you know, there came the memori of hundr of 
details, that made me just as much in doubt again. anyway, whether it wa 
natural, or ab-natural, there wa a great deal yet to be clear up. 

"I told tassoc, next morning, what I had discovered, and through the 
whole of everi night, for five nights, we kept a close watch 'round the 
east wing; but there wa never a sign of anyon prowl about; and all 
the time, almost from even to dawn, that grotesqu whistl would 
hoon incredibly, far abov us in the darkness. 

"on the morn after the fifth night, I receiv a wire from here, 
which brought me home by the next boat. I explain to tassoc that I wa 
simpli bound to come away for a few days; but told him to keep up the 
watch 'round the castle. one thing I wa veri care to do, and that 
wa to make him absolut promis never to go into the room, between 
sunset and sunrise. I made it clear to him that we knew noth definit 
yet, one way or the other; and if the room were what I had first thought 
it to be, it might be a lot better for him to die first, than enter it 
after dark. 

"when I got here, and had finish my business, I thought you chap would 
be interested; and also I want to get it all spread out clear in my 
mind; so I rung you up. I am go over again to-morrow, and when I get 
back, I ought to have someth pretti extraordinari to tell you. By the 
way, there is a curiou thing I forgot to tell you. I tri to get a 
phonograph record of the whistling; but it simpli produc no 
impress on the wax at all. that is one of the thing that ha made me 
feel queer, I can tell you. anoth extraordinari thing is that the 
microphon will not magnifi the sound--wil not even transmit it; seem 
to take no account of it, and act as if it were nonexistent. I am 
absolut and utterli stumped, up to the present. I am a wee bit curiou 
to see whether ani of your dear clever head can make daylight of it. _i_ 
cannot--not yet." 

He rose to hi feet. 

"good night, all," he said, and began to usher us out abruptly, but 
without offence, into the night. 

A fortnight later, he drop each of us a card, and you can imagin that 
I wa not late thi time. when we arrived, carnacki took us straight into 
dinner, and when we had finished, and all made ourselv comfortable, he 
began again, where he had left off:-- 

"now just listen quietly; for I have got someth pretti queer to tell 
you. I got back late at night, and I had to walk up to the castle, as I 
had not warn them that I wa coming. It wa bright moonlight; so that 
the walk wa rather a pleasure, than otherwise. when I got there, the 
whole place wa in darkness, and I thought I would take a walk 'round 
outside, to see whether tassoc or hi brother wa keep watch. but I 
could not find them anywhere, and conclud that they had got tire of 
it, and gone off to bed. 

"a I return across the front of the east wing, I caught the hoon 
whistl of the room, come down strang through the still of the 
night. It had a queer note in it, I remember--low and constant, queerli 
meditative. I look up at the window, bright in the moonlight, and got a 
sudden thought to bring a ladder from the stabl yard, and tri to get a 
look into the room, through the window. 

"with thi notion, I hunt 'round at the back of the castle, among the 
straggl of offices, and present found a long, fairli light ladder; 
though it wa heavi enough for one, good knows! and I thought at 
first that I should never get it reared. I manag at last, and let the 
end rest veri quietli against the wall, a littl below the sill of the 
larger window. then, go silently, I went up the ladder. presently, I 
had my face abov the sill and wa look in alon with the moonlight. 

"of course, the queer whistl sound louder up there; but it still 
convey that peculiar sens of someth whistl quietli to 
itself--can you understand? though, for all the medit low of the 
note, the horrible, gargantuan qualiti wa distinct--a mighti parodi of 
the human, as if I stood there and listen to the whistl from the 
lip of a monster with a man' soul. 

"and then, you know, I saw something. the floor in the middl of the 
huge, empti room, wa pucker upward in the center into a strang 
soft-look mound, part at the top into an ever chang hole, that 
pulsat to that great, gentl hooning. At times, as I watched, I saw the 
heav of the indent mound, gap across with a queer, inward suction, 
as with the draw of an enorm breath; then the thing would dilat 
and pout onc more to the incred melody. and suddenly, as I stared, 
dumb, it came to me that the thing wa living. I wa look at two 
enormous, blacken lips, blister and brutal, there in the pale 
moonlight.... 

"abruptly, they bulg out to a vast, pout mound of forc and sound, 
stiffen and swollen, and huge massiv and clean-cut in the 
moon-beams. and a great sweat lay heavi on the vast upper-lip. In the 
same moment of time, the whistl had burst into a mad scream note, 
that seem to stun me, even where I stood, outsid of the window. and 
then, the follow moment, I wa stare blankli at the solid, 
undisturb floor of the room--smooth, polish stone flooring, from wall 
to wall; and there wa an absolut silence. 

"you can pictur me stare into the quiet room, and know what I knew. 
I felt like a sick, frighten kid, and want to slide _quietly_ down 
the ladder, and run away. but in that veri instant, I heard tassoc' 
voic call to me from within the room, for help, _help_. My god! but I 
got such an aw daze feeling; and I had a vague, bewild notion 
that, after all, it wa the irishmen who had got him in there, and were 
take it out of him. and then the call came again, and I burst the 
window, and jump in to help him. I had a confus idea that the call 
had come from within the shadow of the great fireplace, and I race 
across to it; but there wa no one there. 

"'tassoc!' I shouted, and my voic went empty-sound 'round the great 
apartment; and then, in a flash, _I knew that tassoc had never called_. I 
whirl 'round, sick with fear, toward the window, and as I did so, a 
frightful, exult whistl scream burst through the room. On my left, 
the end wall had bellied-in toward me, in a pair of gargantuan lips, 
black and utterli monstrous, to within a yard of my face. I fumbl for a 
mad instant at my revolver; not for _it_, but myself; for the danger wa 
a thousand time wors than death. and then, suddenly, the unknown last 
line of the saaamaaa ritual wa whisper quit audibl in the room. 
instantly, the thing happen that I have known onc before. there came a 
sens as of dust fall continu and monotonously, and I knew that my 
life hung uncertain and suspend for a flash, in a brief, reel 
vertigo of unseeabl things. then _that_ ended, and I knew that I might 
live. My soul and bodi blend again, and life and power came to me. I 
dash furious at the window, and hurl myself out head-foremost; for 
I can tell you that I had stop be afraid of death. I crash down 
on to the ladder, and slithered, grab and grabbing; and so came some 
way or other aliv to the bottom. and there I sat in the soft, wet grass, 
with the moonlight all about me; and far above, through the broken window 
of the room, there wa a low whistling. 

"that is the chief of it. I wa not hurt, and I went 'round to the front, 
and knock tassoc up. when they let me in, we had a long yarn, over some 
good whisky--for I wa shaken to pieces--and I explain thing as much 
as I could, I told tassoc that the room would have to come down, and 
everi fragment of it burn in a blast-furnace, erect within a 
pentacle. He nodded. there wa noth to say. then I went to bed. 

"we turn a small armi on to the work, and within ten days, that love 
thing had gone up in smoke, and what wa left wa calcined, and clean. 

"it wa when the workmen were strip the paneling, that I got hold of 
a sound notion of the begin of that beastli development. over the 
great fireplace, after the great oak panel had been torn down, I found 
that there wa let into the masonri a scrollwork of stone, with on it an 
old inscription, in ancient celtic, that here in thi room wa burn 
dian tiansay, jester of king alzof, who made the song of foolish upon 
king ernor of the seventh castle. 

"when I got the translat clear, I gave it to tassoc. He wa 
tremend excited; for he knew the old tale, and took me down to the 
librari to look at an old parchment that gave the stori in detail. 
afterward, I found that the incid wa well-known about the 
countryside; but alway regard more as a legend than as history. and no 
one seem ever to have dreamt that the old east wing of iastra castl 
wa the remain of the ancient seventh castle. 

"from the old parchment, I gather that there had been a pretti dirti 
job done, away back in the years. It seem that king alzof and king 
ernor had been enemi by birthright, as you might say truly; but that 
noth more than a littl raid had occur on either side for years, 
until dian tiansay made the song of foolish upon king ernore, and 
sang it befor king alzof; and so greatli wa it appreci that king 
alzof gave the jester one of hi ladies, to wife. 

"presently, all the peopl of the land had come to know the song, and so 
it came at last to king ernore, who wa so anger that he made war upon 
hi old enemy, and took and burn him and hi castle; but dian tiansay, 
the jester, he brought with him to hi own place, and have torn hi 
tongu out becaus of the song which he had made and sung, he imprison 
him in the room in the east wing (which wa evid use for unpleas 
purposes), and the jester' wife, he kept for himself, have a fanci for 
her prettiness. 

"but one night, dian tiansay' wife wa not to be found, and in the 
morn they discov her lie dead in her husband' arms, and he 
sitting, whistl the song of foolishness, for he had no longer the 
power to sing it. 

"then they roast dian tiansay, in the great fireplace--prob from 
that selfsam 'galley-iron' which I have alreadi mentioned. and until he 
died, dian tiansay ceas not to whistl the song of foolishness, which 
he could no longer sing. but afterward, 'in that room' there wa often 
heard at night the sound of someth whistling; and there 'grew a power 
in that room,' so that none dare to sleep in it. and presently, it would 
seem, the king went to anoth castle; for the whistl troubl him. 

"there you have it all. Of course, that is onli a rough render of the 
translat of the parchment. but it sound extraordinarili quaint. don't 
you think so?" 

"yes," I said, answer for the lot. "but how did the thing grow to such 
a tremend manifestation?" 

"one of those case of continu of thought produc a posit action 
upon the immedi surround material," repli carnacki. "the 
develop must have been go forward through centuries, to have 
produc such a monstrosity. It wa a true instanc of saiitii 
manifestation, which I can best explain by liken it to a live 
spiritu fungus, which involv the veri structur of the aether-fib 
itself, and, of course, in so doing, acquir an essenti control over 
the 'materi substance' involv in it. It is imposs to make it 
plainer in a few words." 

"what broke the seventh hair?" ask taylor. 

but carnacki did not know. He thought it wa probabl noth but be 
too sever tensioned. He also explain that they found out that the 
men who had run away, had not been up to mischief; but had come over 
secretly, mere to hear the whistling, which, indeed, had suddenli 
becom the talk of the whole countryside. 

"one other thing," said arkright, "have you ani idea what govern the 
use of the unknown last line of the saaamaaa ritual? I know, of course, 
that it wa use by the ab-human priest in the incant of raaaee; 
but what use it on your behalf, and what made it?" 

"you had better read harzan' monograph, and my addenda to it, on astral 
and astral co-ordin and interference," said carnacki. "it is an 
extraordinari subject, and I can onli say here that the human vibrat 
may not be insul from the astral (a is alway believ to be the 
case, in interfer by the ab-human), without immedi action be 
taken by those forc which govern the spin of the outer circle. In 
other words, it is be proved, time after time, that there is some 
inscrut protect forc constantli interven between the human 
soul (not the body, mind you,) and the outer monstrosities. Am I clear?" 

"yes, I think so," I replied. "and you believ that the room had becom 
the materi express of the ancient jester--that hi soul, rotten with 
hatred, had bred into a monster--eh?" I asked. 

"yes," said carnacki, nodding, "I think you'v put my thought rather 
neatly. It is a queer coincid that miss donnehu is suppos to be 
descend (so I have heard since) from the same king ernore. It make one 
think some curiou thoughts, doesn't it? the marriag come on, and the 
room wake to fresh life. If she had gone into that room, ever ... eh? 
_it_ had wait a long time. sin of the fathers. yes, i'v thought of 
that. they'r to be marri next week, and I am to be best man, which is 
a thing I hate. and he won hi bets, rather! just think, _if_ ever she 
had gone into that room. pretti horrible, eh?" 

He nod hi head, grimly, and we four nod back. then he rose and 
took us collect to the door, and present thrust us forth in 
friendli fashion on the embank and into the fresh night air. 

"good night," we all call back, and went to our variou homes. If she 
had, eh? If she had? that is what I kept thinking. 




no. 4--the hors OF the invis 


I had that afternoon receiv an invit from carnacki. when I reach 
hi place I found him sit alone. As I came into the room he rose with 
a percept stiff movement and extend hi left hand. hi face seem 
to be badli scar and bruis and hi right hand wa bandaged. He shook 
hand and offer me hi paper, which I refused. then he pass me a 
hand of photograph and return to hi reading. 

now, that is just carnacki. not a word had come from him and not a 
question from me. He would tell us all about it later. I spent about half 
an hour look at the photograph which were chiefli "snaps" (some by 
flashlight) of an extraordinarili pretti girl; though in some of the 
photograph it wa wonder that her pretti wa so evid for so 
frighten and startl wa her express that it wa difficult not to 
believ that she had been photograph in the presenc of some immin 
and overwhelm danger. 

the bulk of the photograph were of interior of differ room and 
passag and in everi one the girl might be seen, either full length in 
the distanc or closer, with perhap littl more than a hand or arm or 
portion of the head or dress includ in the photograph. all of these had 
evid been taken with some definit aim that did not have for it 
first purpos the pictur of the girl, but obvious of her 
surround and they made me veri curious, as you can imagine. 

near the bottom of the pile, however, I came upon someth _definitely_ 
extraordinary. It wa a photograph of the girl stand abrupt and clear 
in the great blaze of a flashlight, as wa plain to be seen. her face wa 
turn a littl upward as if she had been frighten suddenli by some 
noise. directli abov her, as though half-form and come down out of 
the shadows, wa the shape of a singl enorm hoof. 

I examin thi photograph for a long time without understand it more 
than that it had probabl to do with some queer case in which carnacki 
wa interested. when jessop, arkright and taylor came in carnacki quietli 
held out hi hand for the photograph which I return in the same spirit 
and afterward we all went in to dinner. when we had spent a quiet hour at 
the tabl we pull our chair 'round and made ourselv snug and 
carnacki began: 

"i'v been north," he said, speak slowli and pain between puff 
at hi pipe. "up to hisgin of east lancashire. It ha been a pretti 
strang busi all 'round, as I fanci you chap will think, when I have 
finished. I knew befor I went, someth about the 'hors story,' as I 
have heard it called; but I never thought of it come my way, somehow. 
also I know _now_ that I never consid it seriously--in spite of my 
rule alway to keep an open mind. funni creatures, we humans! 

"well, I got a wire ask for an appointment, which of cours told me 
that there wa some trouble. On the date I fix old captain hisgin 
himself came up to see me. He told me a great mani new detail about the 
hors story; though natur I had alway known the main point and 
understood that if the first child were a girl, that girl would be 
haunt by the hors dure her courtship. 

"it is, as you can see already, an extraordinari stori and though I have 
alway known about it, I have never thought it to be anyth more than 
an old-tim legend, as I have alreadi hinted. you see, for seven 
gener the hisgin famili have had men children for their first-born 
and even the hisgins themselv have long consid the tale to be 
littl more than a myth. 

"to come to the present, the eldest child of the reign famili is 
a girl and she ha been often teas and warn in jest by her 
friend and relat that she is the first girl to be the eldest 
for seven gener and that she would have to keep her men 
friend at arm' length or go into a nunneri if she hope to escap 
the haunting. and this, I think, show us how thoroughli the tale 
had grown to be consid as noth worthi of the least seriou 
thought. don't you think so? 

"two month ago miss hisgin becam engag to beaumont, a young naval 
officer, and on the even of the veri day of the engagement, befor it 
wa even formal announced, a most extraordinari thing happen which 
result in captain hisgin make the appoint and my ultim 
go down to their place to look into the thing. 

"from the old famili record and paper that were entrust to me I 
found that there could be no possibl doubt that prior to someth like 
a hundr and fifti year ago there were some veri extraordinari and 
disagre coincidences, to put the thing in the least emot way. 
In the whole of the two centuri prior to that date there were five 
first-born girl out of a total of seven gener of the family. each 
of these girl grew up to maidenhood and each becam engaged, and each 
one die dure the period of engagement, two by suicide, one by fall 
from a window, one from a 'broken heart' (presum heart failure, 
owe to sudden shock through fright). the fifth girl wa kill one 
even in the park 'round the house; but just how, there seem to be 
no _exact_ knowledge; onli that there wa an impress that she had 
been kick by a horse. she wa dead when found. now, you see, all of 
these death might be attribut in a way--even the suicides--to natur 
causes, I mean as distinct from supernatural. you see? yet, in everi 
case the maiden had undoubtedli suffer some extraordinari and 
terrifi experi dure their variou courtship for in all of the 
record there wa mention either of the neigh of an unseen hors or 
of the sound of an invis hors galloping, as well as mani other 
peculiar and quit inexplic manifestations. you begin to understand 
now, I think, just how extraordinari a busi it wa that I wa ask 
to look into. 

"I gather from one account that the haunt of the girl wa so 
constant and horribl that two of the girls' lover fairli ran away from 
their ladyloves. and I think it wa this, more than anyth else, that 
made me feel that there had been someth more in it than a mere 
success of uncomfort coincidences. 

"I got hold of these fact befor I had been mani hour in the hous and 
after thi I went pretti care into the detail of the thing that 
happen on the night of miss hisgins' engag to beaumont. It seem 
that as the two of them were go through the big lower corridor, just 
after dusk and befor the lamp had been lighted, there had been a 
sudden, horribl neigh in the corridor, close to them. immedi 
afterward beaumont receiv a tremend blow or kick which broke hi 
right forearm. then the rest of the famili and the servant came run 
to know what wa wrong. light were brought and the corridor and, 
afterward, the whole hous searched, but noth unusu wa found. 

"you can imagin the excit in the hous and the half incredulous, 
half believ talk about the old legend. then, later, in the middl of 
the night the old captain wa wake by the sound of a great hors 
gallop 'round and 'round the house. 

"sever time after thi both beaumont and the girl said that they had 
heard the sound of hoof near to them after dusk, in sever of the 
room and corridors. 

"three night later beaumont wa wake by a strang neigh in the 
nighttim seem to come from the direct of hi sweetheart' bedroom. 
He ran hurriedli for her father and the two of them race to her room. 
they found her awak and ill with sheer terror, have been awaken by 
the neighing, seemingli close to her bed. 

"the night befor I arrived, there had been a fresh happen and they 
were all in a fright nervi state, as you can imagine. 

"I spent most of the first day, as I have hinted, in get hold of 
details; but after dinner I slack off and play billiard all the 
even with beaumont and miss hisgins. We stop about ten o'clock and 
had coffe and I got beaumont to give me full particular about the thing 
that had happen the even before. 

"he and miss hisgin had been sit quietli in her aunt' boudoir 
whilst the old ladi chaperon them, behind a book. It wa grow dusk 
and the lamp wa at her end of the table. the rest of the hous wa not 
yet lit as the even had come earlier than usual. 

"well, it seem that the door into the hall wa open and suddenli the 
girl said: 'h'sh! what' that?' 

"they both listen and then beaumont heard it--th sound of a hors 
outsid of the front door. 

"'your father?' he suggested, but she remind him that her father wa 
not riding. 

"of cours they were both readi to feel queer, as you can suppose, but 
beaumont made an effort to shake thi off and went into the hall to see 
whether anyon wa at the entrance. It wa pretti dark in the hall and he 
could see the glass panel of the inner draft door, clear-cut in the 
dark of the hall. He walk over to the glass and look through into 
the drive beyond, but there noth in sight. 

"he felt nervou and puzzl and open the inner door and went out on to 
the carriage-circle. almost directli afterward the great hall door swung 
to with a crash behind him. He told me that he had a sudden aw feel 
of have been trap in some way--that is how he put it. He whirl 
'round and grip the door handle, but someth seem to be hold it 
with a vast grip on the other side. then, befor he could be fix in hi 
mind that thi wa so, he wa abl to turn the handl and open the door. 

"he paus a moment in the doorway and peer into the hall, for he had 
hardli steadi hi mind suffici to know whether he wa realli 
frighten or not. then he heard hi sweetheart blow him a kiss out of 
the grey of the big, unlit hall and he knew that she had follow him 
from the boudoir. He blew her a kiss back and step insid the doorway, 
mean to go to her. and then, suddenly, in a flash of sicken 
knowledg he knew that it wa not hi sweetheart who had blown him that 
kiss. He knew that someth wa tri to tempt him alon into the 
dark and that the girl had never left the boudoir. He jump back and 
in the same instant of time he heard the kiss again, nearer to him. He 
call out at the top of hi voice: 'mary, stay in the boudoir. don't 
move out of the boudoir until I come to you.' He heard her call someth 
in repli from the boudoir and then he had struck a clump of a dozen or 
so match and wa hold them abov hi head and look 'round the 
hall. there wa no one in it, but even as the match burn out there 
came the sound of a great hors gallop down the empti drive. 

"now you see, both he and the girl had heard the sound of the hors 
galloping; but when I question more close I found that the aunt had 
heard nothing, though it is true she is a bit deaf, and she wa further 
back in the room. Of course, both he and miss hisgin had been in an 
extrem nervou state and readi to hear anything. the door might have 
been slam by a sudden puff of wind owe to some inner door be 
opened; and as for the grip on the handle, that may have been noth 
more than the snick catching. 

"with regard to the kiss and the sound of the hors galloping, I 
point out that these might have seem ordinari enough sounds, if they 
had been onli cool enough to reason. As I told him, and as he knew, the 
sound of a hors gallop carri a long way on the wind so that what he 
had heard might have been noth more than a hors be ridden some 
distanc away. and as for the kiss, plenti of quiet noises--th rustl of 
a paper or a leaf--hav a somewhat similar sound, especi if one is in 
an overstrung condit and imagin things. 

"I finish preach thi littl sermon on commonsens versu hysteria 
as we put out the light and left the billiard room. but neither 
beaumont nor miss hisgin would agre that there had been ani fanci on 
their parts. 

"we had come out of the billiard room by thi time and were go along 
the passag and I wa still do my best to make both of them see the 
ordinary, commonplac possibl of the happening, when what kill my 
pig, as the say goes, wa the sound of a hoof in the dark billiard 
room we had just left. 

"I felt the 'creep' come on me in a flash, up my spine and over the back 
of my head. miss hisgin whoop like a child with the whoop cough and 
ran up the passage, give littl gasp screams. beaumont, however, 
rip 'round on hi heel and jump back a coupl of yards. I gave back 
too, a bit, as you can understand. 

"'there it is,' he said in a low, breathless voice. 'perhap you'll 
believ now.' 

"'there' certainli something,' I whispered, never take my gaze off the 
close door of the billiard room. 

"'h'sh!' he muttered. 'there it is again.' 

"there wa a sound like a great hors pace 'round and 'round the 
billiard room with slow, deliber steps. A horribl cold fright took me 
so that it seem imposs to take a full breath, you know the feeling, 
and then I saw we must have been walk backward for we found ourselv 
suddenli at the open of the long passage. 

"we stop there and listened. the sound went on steadili with a 
horribl sort of deliberateness, as if the brute were take a sort of 
malici gusto in walk about all over the room which we had just 
occupied. Do you understand just what I mean? 

"then there wa a paus and a long time of absolut quiet except for an 
excit whisper from some of the peopl down in the big hall. the 
sound came plainli up the wide stairway. I fanci they were gather 
'round miss hisgins, with some notion of protect her. 

"I should think beaumont and I stood there, at the end of the passag for 
about five minutes, listen for ani nois in the billiard room. then I 
realiz what a horribl funk I wa in and I said to him: 'i'm go to 
see what' there.' 

"'so'm i,' he answered. He wa pretti white, but he had heap of pluck. 
I told him to wait one instant and I made a dash into my bedroom and got 
my camera and flashlight. I slip my revolv into my right-hand pocket 
and a knuckle-dust over my left fist, where it wa readi and yet would 
not stop me from be abl to work my flashlight. 

"then I ran back to beaumont. He held out hi hand to show me that he had 
hi pistol and I nodded, but whisper to him not to be too quick to 
shoot, as there might be some silli practic joke at work, after all. 
He had got a lamp from a bracket in the upper hall which he wa hold 
in the crook of hi damag arm, so that we had a good light. then we 
went down the passag toward the billiard room and you can imagin that 
we were a pretti nervou couple. 

"all thi time there had not been a sound, but abruptli when we were 
within perhap a coupl of yard of the door we heard the sudden clump 
of a hoof on the solid _parquet_ floor of the billiard room. In the 
instant afterward it seem to me that the whole place shook beneath the 
ponder hoof fall of some huge thing, _come toward the door_. both 
beaumont and I gave back a pace or two, and then realiz and hung on to 
our courage, as you might say, and waited. the great tread came right up 
to the door and then stop and there wa an instant of absolut 
silence, except that so far as I wa concerned, the puls in my throat 
and templ almost deafen me. 

"I dare say we wait quit half a minut and then came the further 
restless clump of a great hoof. immedi afterward the sound came 
right on as if some invis thing pass through the close door and 
the ponder tread wa upon us. We jumped, each of us, to our side of 
the passag and I know that I spread myself stiff against the wall. the 
clungk clunck, clungk clunck, of the great hoof fall pass right 
between us and slowli and with deadli deliberateness, down the passage. 
I heard them through a haze of blood beat in my ear and templ and my 
bodi wa extraordinarili rigid and pringl and I wa horribl 
breathless. I stood for a littl time like this, my head turn so that I 
could see up the passage. I wa consciou onli that there wa a hideou 
danger abroad. Do you understand? 

"and then, suddenly, my pluck came back to me. I wa awar that the nois 
of the hoof beat sound near the other end of the passage. I twist 
quickli and got my camera to bear and snap off the flashlight. 
immedi afterward, beaumont let fli a storm of shot down the passag 
and began to run, shouting: 'it' after mary. run! run!' 

"he rush down the passag and I after him. We came out on the main 
land and heard the sound of a hoof on the stair and after that, 
nothing. and from thenc onward, nothing. 

"down below us in the big hall I could see a number of the household 
'round miss hisgins, who seem to have faint and there were sever of 
the servant clump togeth a littl way off, stare up at the main 
land and no one say a singl word. and about some twenti step up 
the stair wa the old captain hisgin with a drawn sword in hi hand 
where he had halted, just below the last hoof sound. I think I never saw 
anyth finer than the old man stand there between hi daughter and 
that infern thing. 

"I daresay you can understand the queer feel of horror I had at 
pass that place on the stair where the sound had ceased. It wa as 
if the monster were still stand there, invisible. and the peculiar 
thing wa that we never heard anoth sound of the hoof, either up or 
down the stairs. 

"after they had taken miss hisgin to her room I sent word that I should 
follow, so soon as they were readi for me. and presently, when a messag 
came to tell me that I could come ani time, I ask her father to give 
me a hand with my instrument box and between us we carri it into the 
girl' bedroom. I had the bed pull well out into the middl of the 
room, after which I erect the electr pentacl 'round the bed. 

"then I direct that lamp should be place 'round the room, but that on 
no account must ani light be made within the pentacle; neither must 
anyon pass in or out. the girl' mother I had place within the pentacl 
and direct that her maid should sit without, readi to carri ani messag 
so as to make sure that mrs. hisgin did not have to leav the pentacle. 
I suggest also that the girl' father should stay the night in the room 
and that he had better be armed. 

"when I left the bedroom I found beaumont wait outsid the door in a 
miser state of anxiety. I told him what I had done and explain to 
him that miss hisgin wa probabl perfectli safe within the 
'protection'; but that in addit to her father remain the night in 
the room, I intend to stand guard at the door. I told him that I should 
like him to keep me company, for I knew that he could never sleep, 
feel as he did, and I should not be sorri to have a companion. also, I 
want to have him under my own observation, for there wa no doubt but 
that he wa actual in greater danger in some way than the girl. At 
least, that wa my opinion and is still, as I think you will agre later. 

"I ask him whether he would object to my draw a pentacl 'round him 
for the night and got him to agree, but I saw that he did not know 
whether to be superstiti about it or to regard it more as a piec of 
foolish mumming; but he took it serious enough when I gave him some 
particular about the black veil case, when young aster died. you 
remember, he said it wa a piec of silli superstit and stay 
outside. poor devil! 

"the night pass quietli enough until a littl while befor dawn when 
we both heard the sound of a great hors gallop 'round and 'round the 
hous just as old captain hisgin had describ it. you can imagin how 
queer it made me feel and directli afterward, I heard someon stir within 
the bedroom. I knock at the door, for I wa uneasy, and the captain 
came. I ask whether everyth wa right; to which he repli yes, and 
immedi ask me whether I had heard the galloping, so that I knew he 
had heard them also. I suggest that it might be well to leav the 
bedroom door open a littl until the dawn came in, as there wa certainli 
someth abroad. thi wa done and he went back into the room, to be 
near hi wife and daughter. 

"I had better say here that I wa doubt whether there wa ani valu in 
the 'defense' about miss hisgins, for what I term the 'person sounds' 
of the manifest were so extraordinarili materi that I wa inclin 
to parallel the case with that one of harford' where the hand of the 
child kept materi within the pentacl and pat the floor. As 
you will remember, that wa a hideou business. 

"yet, as it chanced, noth further happen and so soon as daylight had 
fulli come we all went off to bed. 

"beaumont knock me up about midday and I went down and made breakfast 
into lunch. miss hisgin wa there and seem in veri fair spirits, 
considering. she told me that I had made her feel almost safe for the 
first time for days. she told me also that her cousin, harri parsket, wa 
come down from london and she knew that he would do anyth to help 
fight the ghost. and after that she and beaumont went out into the 
ground to have a littl time together. 

"I had a walk in the ground myself and went 'round the house, but saw no 
trace of hoof mark and after that I spent the rest of the day make an 
examin of the house, but found nothing. 

"I made an end of my search befor dark and went to my room to dress for 
dinner. when I got down the cousin had just arriv and I found him one 
of the nicest men I have met for a long time. A chap with a tremend 
amount of pluck, and the particular kind of man I like to have with me in 
a bad case like the one I wa on. I could see that what puzzl him most 
wa our belief in the genuin of the haunt and I found myself 
almost want someth to happen, just to show him how true it was. As 
it chanced, someth did happen, with a vengeance. 

"beaumont and miss hisgin had gone out for a stroll just befor the dusk 
and captain hisgin ask me to come into hi studi for a short chat 
whilst parsket went upstair with hi traps, for he had no man with him. 

"I had a long convers with the old captain in which I point out 
that the 'haunting' had evid no particular connect with the 
house, but onli with the girl herself and that the sooner she wa 
married, the better as it would give beaumont a right to be with her at 
all time and further than this, it might be that the manifest 
would ceas if the marriag were actual performed. 

"the old man nod agreement to this, especi to the first part and 
remind me that three of the girl who were said to have been 'haunted' 
had been sent away from home and met their death whilst away. and then 
in the midst of our talk there came a pretti frighten interruption, 
for all at onc the old butler rush into the room, most 
extraordinarili pale: 

"'miss mary, sir! miss mary, sir!' he gasped. 'she' scream ... out in 
the park, sir! and they say they can hear the horse--' 

"the captain made one dive for a rack of arm and snatch down hi old 
sword and ran out, draw it as he ran. I dash out and up the stairs, 
snatch my camera-flashlight and a heavi revolver, gave one yell at 
parsket' door: 'the horse!' and wa down and into the grounds. 

"away in the dark there wa a confus shout and I caught the 
sound of shooting, out among the scatter trees. and then, from a patch 
of black to my left, there burst suddenli an infern gobbl sort 
of neighing. instantli I whip 'round and snap off the flashlight. 
the great light blaze out momentarily, show me the leav of a big 
tree close at hand, quiver in the night breeze, but I saw noth els 
and then the ten-fold black came down upon me and I heard parsket 
shout a littl way back to know whether I had seen anything. 

"the next instant he wa besid me and I felt safer for hi company, 
for there wa some incred thing near to us and I wa momentarili 
blind becaus of the bright of the flashlight. 'what wa it? what 
wa it?' he kept repeat in an excit voice. and all the time I wa 
stare into the dark and answering, mechanically, 'I don't know. I 
don't know.' 

"there wa a burst of shout somewher ahead and then a shot. We ran 
toward the sounds, yell to the peopl not to shoot; for in the 
dark and panic there wa thi danger also. then there came two of the 
game-keep race hard up the drive with their lantern and guns; and 
immedi afterward a row of light danc toward us from the house, 
carri by some of the men-servants. 

"a the light came up I saw we had come close to beaumont. He wa 
stand over miss hisgin and he had hi revolv in hi hand. then I 
saw hi face and there wa a great wound across hi forehead. By him wa 
the captain, turn hi nake sword thi way and that, and peer into 
the darkness; a littl behind him stood the old butler, a battle-ax from 
one of the arm stand in the hall in hi hands. yet there wa noth 
strang to be seen anywhere. 

"we got the girl into the hous and left her with her mother and 
beaumont, whilst a groom rode for a doctor. and then the rest of us, with 
four other keepers, all arm with gun and carri lanterns, search 
'round the home park. but we found nothing. 

"when we got back we found that the doctor had been. He had bound up 
beaumont' wound, which luckili wa not deep, and order miss hisgin 
straight to bed. I went upstair with the captain and found beaumont on 
guard outsid of the girl' door. I ask him how he felt and then, so 
soon as the girl and her mother were readi for us, captain hisgin and 
I went into the bedroom and fix the pentacl again 'round the bed. 
they had alreadi got lamp about the room and after I had set the same 
order of watch as on the previou night, I join beaumont outsid 
of the door. 

"parsket had come up while I had been in the bedroom and between us we 
got some idea from beaumont as to what had happen out in the park. It 
seem that they were come home after their stroll from the direct of 
the west lodge. It had got quit dark and suddenli miss hisgin said: 
'hush!' and came to a standstill. He stop and listened, but heard 
noth for a little. then he caught it--th sound of a horse, seemingli 
a long way off, gallop toward them over the grass. He told the girl 
that it wa noth and start to hurri her toward the house, but she 
wa not deceived, of course. In less than a minut they heard it quit 
close to them in the dark and they start running. then miss hisgin 
caught her foot and fell. she began to scream and that is what the butler 
heard. As beaumont lift the girl he heard the hoof come thud right 
at him. He stood over her and fire all five chamber of hi revolv 
right at the sounds. He told us that he wa sure he saw someth that 
look like an enorm horse' head, right upon him in the light of the 
last flash of hi pistol. immedi afterward he wa struck a 
tremend blow which knock him down and then the captain and the 
butler came run up, shouting. the rest, of course, we knew. 

"about ten o'clock the butler brought us up a tray, for which I wa veri 
glad, as the night befor I had got rather hungry. I warn beaumont, 
however, to be veri particular not to drink ani spirit and I also made 
him give me hi pipe and matches. At midnight I drew a pentacl 'round 
him and parsket and I sat one on each side of him, outsid the pentacle, 
for I had no fear that there would be ani manifest made against 
anyon except beaumont or miss hisgins. 

"after that we kept pretti quiet. the passag wa lit by a big lamp at 
each end so that we had plenti of light and we were all armed, beaumont 
and I with revolv and parsket with a shotgun. In addit to my weapon 
I had my camera and flashlight. 

"now and again we talk in whisper and twice the captain came out of 
the bedroom to have a word with us. about half-past one we had all grown 
veri silent and suddenly, about twenti minut later, I held up my hand, 
silently, for there seem to be a sound of gallop out in the night. I 
knock on the bedroom door for the captain to open it and when he came I 
whisper to him that we thought we heard the horse. for some time we 
stay listening, and both parsket and the captain thought they heard it; 
but now I wa not so sure, neither wa beaumont. yet afterward, I thought 
I heard it again. 

"I told captain hisgin I thought he had better go into the bedroom and 
leav the door a littl open and thi he did. but from that time onward 
we heard noth and present the dawn came in and we all went veri 
thank to bed. 

"when I wa call at lunchtim I had a littl surprise, for captain 
hisgin told me that they had held a famili council and had decid to 
take my advic and have the marriag without a day' more delay than 
possible. beaumont wa alreadi on hi way to london to get a special 
licens and they hope to have the wed next day. 

"thi pleas me, for it seem the sanest thing to be done in the 
extraordinari circumst and meanwhil I should continu my 
investigations; but until the marriag wa accomplished, my chief thought 
wa to keep miss hisgin near to me. 

"after lunch I thought I would take a few experiment photograph of 
miss hisgin and her _surroundings_. sometim the camera see thing 
that would seem veri strang to normal human eyesight. 

"with thi intent and partli to make an excus to keep her in my 
compani as much as possible, I ask miss hisgin to join me in my 
experiments. she seem glad to do thi and I spent sever hour with 
her, wander all over the house, from room to room and whenev the 
impuls came I took a flashlight of her and the room or corridor in which 
we chanc to be at the moment. 

"after we had gone right through the hous in thi fashion, I ask her 
whether she felt suffici brave to repeat the experi in the 
cellars. she said yes, and so I root out captain hisgin and parsket, 
for I wa not go to take her even into what you might call artifici 
dark without help and companionship at hand. 

"when we were readi we went down into the wine cellar, captain hisgin 
carri a shotgun and parsket a special prepar background and a 
lantern. I got the girl to stand in the middl of the cellar whilst 
parsket and the captain held out the background behind her. then I fire 
off the flashlight, and we went into the next cellar where we repeat 
the experiment. 

"then in the third cellar, a tremendous, pitch-dark place, someth 
extraordinari and horribl manifest itself. I had station miss 
hisgin in the center of the place, with her father and parsket hold 
the background as before. when all wa readi and just as I press the 
trigger of the 'flash,' there came in the cellar that dreadful, gobbl 
neigh that I had heard out in the park. It seem to come from 
somewher abov the girl and in the glare of the sudden light I saw that 
she wa stare tens upward, but at no visibl thing. and then in the 
succeed compar darkness, I wa shout to the captain and 
parsket to run miss hisgin out into the daylight. 

"thi wa done instantli and I shut and lock the door afterward make 
the first and eighth sign of the saaamaaa ritual opposit to each post 
and connect them across the threshold with a tripl line. 

"in the meanwhil parsket and captain hisgin carri the girl to her 
mother and left her there, in a half faint condit whilst I stay 
on guard outsid of the cellar door, feel pretti horribl for I knew 
that there wa some disgust thing inside, and along with thi feel 
there wa a sens of half ashamedness, rather miserable, you know, 
becaus I had expos miss hisgin to the danger. 

"I had got the captain' shotgun and when he and parsket came down again 
they were each carri gun and lanterns. I could not possibl tell you 
the utter relief of spirit and bodi that came to me when I heard them 
coming, but just tri to imagin what it wa like, stand outsid of 
that cellar. can you? 

"I rememb noticing, just befor I went to unlock the door, how white 
and ghastli parsket look and the old captain wa grey-look and I 
wonder whether my face wa like theirs. and this, you know, had it own 
distinct effect upon my nerves, for it seem to bring the beastli 
of the thing crash down on to me in a fresh way. I know it wa onli sheer 
will power that carri me up to the door and made me turn the key. 

"I paus one littl moment and then with a nervi jerk sent the door wide 
open and held my lantern over my head. parsket and the captain came one 
on each side of me and held up their lanterns, but the place wa 
absolut empty. Of course, I did not trust to a casual look of thi 
kind, but spent sever hour with the help of the two other in sound 
everi squar foot of the floor, ceil and walls. 

"yet, in the end I had to admit that the place itself wa absolut 
normal and so we came away. but I seal the door and outside, opposit 
each doorpost I made the first and last sign of the saaamaaa ritual, 
join them as before, with a tripl line. can you imagin what it wa 
like, search that cellar? 

"when we got upstair I inquir veri anxious how miss hisgin wa 
and the girl came out herself to tell me that she wa all right and 
that I wa not to troubl about her, or blame myself, as I told her I 
had been doing. 

"I felt happier then and went off to dress for dinner and after that wa 
done, parsket and I took one of the bathroom to develop the neg 
that I had been taking. yet none of the plate had anyth to tell us 
until we came to the one that wa taken in the cellar. parsket wa 
develop and I had taken a batch of the fix plate out into the 
lamplight to examin them. 

"I had just gone care through the lot when I heard a shout from 
parsket and when I ran to him he wa look at a partly-develop 
neg which he wa hold up to the red lamp. It show the girl 
plainly, look upward as I had seen her, but the thing that astonish 
me wa the shadow of an enorm hoof, right abov her, as if it were 
come down upon her out of the shadows. and you know, I had run her 
bang into that danger. that wa the thought that wa chief in my mind. 

"a soon as the develop wa complet I fix the plate and examin it 
care in a good light. there wa no doubt about it at all, the thing 
abov miss hisgin wa an enormous, shadowi hoof. yet I wa no nearer to 
come to ani definit knowledg and the onli thing I could do wa to 
warn parsket to say noth about it to the girl for it would onli 
increas her fright, but I show the thing to her father for I 
consid it right that he should know. 

"that night we took the same precaut for miss hisgins' safeti as on 
the two previou night and parsket kept me company; yet the dawn came in 
without anyth unusu have happen and I went off to bed. 

"when I got down to lunch I learnt that beaumont had wire to say that he 
would be in soon after four; also that a messag had been sent to the 
rector. and it wa gener plain that the ladi of the hous were in a 
tremend fluster. 

"beaumont' train wa late and he did not get home until five, but even 
then the rector had not put in an appear and the butler came in to 
say that the coachman had return without him as he had been call away 
unexpectedly. twice more dure the even the carriag wa sent down, 
but the clergyman had not return and we had to delay the marriag until 
the next day. 

"that night I arrang the 'defense' 'round the girl' bed and the 
captain and hi wife sat up with her as before. beaumont, as I expected, 
insist on keep watch with me and he seem in a curious frighten 
mood; not for himself, you know, but for miss hisgins. He had a horribl 
feel he told me, that there would be a final, dread attempt on hi 
sweetheart that night. 

"this, of course, I told him wa noth but nerves; yet really, it made 
me feel veri anxious; for I have seen too much not to know that under 
such circumst a premonitori _conviction_ of impend danger is not 
necessarili to be put down entir to nerves. In fact, beaumont wa so 
simpli and earnestli convinc that the night would bring some 
extraordinari manifest that I got parsket to rig up a long cord from 
the wire of the butler' bell, to come along the passag handy. 

"to the butler himself I gave direct not to undress and to give the 
same order to two of the footmen. If I rang he wa to come instantly, 
with the footmen, carri lantern and the lantern were to be kept 
readi lit all night. If for ani reason the bell did not ring and I blew 
my whistle, he wa to take that as a signal in the place of the bell. 

"after I had arrang all these minor detail I drew a pentacl about 
beaumont and warn him veri particularli to stay within it, whatev 
happened. and when thi wa done, there wa noth to do but wait and 
pray that the night would go as quietli as the night before. 

"we scarc talk at all and by about one a.m. we were all veri tens 
and nervou so that at last parsket got up and began to walk up and 
down the corridor to steadi himself a bit. present I slip off my 
pump and join him and we walk up and down, whisper occasion 
for someth over an hour, until in turn I caught my foot in the 
bell cord and went down on my face; but without hurt myself or 
make a noise. 

"when I got up parsket nudg me. 

"'did you notic that the bell never rang?' he whispered. 

"'jove!' I said, 'you'r right.' 

"'wait a minute,' he answered. 'i'll bet it' onli a kink somewher in 
the cord.' He left hi gun and slip along the passag and take the 
top lamp, tipto away into the house, carri beaumont' revolv readi 
in hi right hand. He wa a plucki chap, I rememb think then, and 
again, later. 

"just then beaumont motion to me for absolut quiet. directli afterward 
I heard the thing for which he listened--th sound of a hors galloping, 
out in the night. I think that I may say I fairli shivered. the sound 
die away and left a horrible, desolate, eeri feel in the air, you 
know. I put my hand out to the bell cord, hope parsket had got it 
clear. then I waited, glanc befor and behind. 

"perhap two minut passed, full of what seem like an almost unearthli 
quiet. and then, suddenly, down the corridor at the light end there 
sound the clump of a great hoof and instantli the lamp wa thrown 
with a tremend crash and we were in the dark. I tug hard on the 
cord and blew the whistle; then I rais my snapshot and fire the 
flashlight. the corridor blaze into brilliant light, but there wa 
nothing, and then the dark fell like thunder. I heard the captain at 
the bedroom door and shout to him to bring out a lamp, _quick_; but 
instead someth start to kick the door and I heard the captain 
shout within the bedroom and then the scream of the women. I had a 
sudden horribl fear that the monster had got into the bedroom, but in 
the same instant from up the corridor there came abruptli the vile, 
gobbl neigh that we had heard in the park and the cellar. I blew 
the whistl again and grope blindli for the bell cord, shout to 
beaumont to stay in the pentacle, whatev happened. I yell again to 
the captain to bring out a lamp and there came a smash sound against 
the bedroom door. then I had my match in my hand, to get some light 
befor that incredible, unseen monster wa upon us. 

"the match scrape on the box and flare up dulli and in the same instant 
I heard a faint sound behind me. I whip 'round in a kind of mad terror 
and saw someth in the light of the match--a monstrou horse-head close 
to beaumont. 

"'look out, beaumont!' I shout in a sort of scream. 'it' behind you!' 

"the match went out abruptli and instantli there came the huge bang of 
parsket' double-barrel (both barrel at once), fire evid 
single-hand by beaumont close to my ear, as it seemed. I caught a 
momentari glimps of the great head in the flash and of an enorm hoof 
amid the belch of fire and smoke seem to be descend upon beaumont. 
In the same instant I fire three chamber of my revolver. there wa the 
sound of a dull blow and then that horrible, gobbl neigh broke out 
close to me. I fire twice at the sound. immedi afterward someth 
struck me and I wa knock backward. I got on to my knee and shout 
for help at the top of my voice. I heard the women scream behind the 
close door of the bedroom and wa dulli awar that the door wa be 
smash from the inside, and directli afterward I knew that beaumont wa 
struggl with some hideou thing near to me. for an instant I held 
back, stupidly, paralyz with funk and then, blindli and in a sort of 
rigid chill of goos flesh I went to help him, shout hi name. I can 
tell you, I wa nearli sick with the nake fear I had on me. there came a 
little, choke scream out of the darkness, and at that I jump forward 
into the dark. I grip a vast, furri ear. then someth struck me 
anoth great blow knock me sick. I hit back, weak and blind and 
grip with my other hand at the incred thing. abruptli I wa dimli 
awar of a tremend crash behind me and a great burst of light. there 
were other light in the passag and a nois of feet and shouting. My 
hand-grip were torn from the thing they held; I shut my eye stupidli 
and heard a loud yell abov me and then a heavi blow, like a butcher 
chop meat and then someth fell upon me. 

"I wa help to my knee by the captain and the butler. On the floor lay 
an enorm horse-head out of which protrud a man' trunk and legs. On 
the wrist were fix great hoofs. It wa the monster. the captain cut 
someth with the sword that he held in hi hand and stoop and lift 
off the mask, for that is what it was. I saw the face then of the man who 
had worn it. It wa parsket. He had a bad wound across the forehead where 
the captain' sword had bit through the mask. I look bewilderedli from 
him to beaumont, who wa sit up, lean against the wall of the 
corridor. then I stare at parsket again. 

"'bi jove!' I said at last, and then I wa quiet for I wa so asham for 
the man. you can understand, can't you? and he wa open hi eyes. and 
you know, I had grown so to like him. 

"and then, you know, just as parsket wa get back hi wit and 
look from one to the other of us and begin to remember, there 
happen a strang and incred thing. for from the end of the 
corridor there sound suddenly, the clump of a great hoof. I look 
that way and then instantli at parsket and saw a horribl fear in hi 
face and eyes. He wrench himself 'round, weakly, and stare in mad 
terror up the corridor to where the sound had been, and the rest of us 
stared, in a frozen group. I rememb vagu half sob and whisper 
from miss hisgins' bedroom, all the while that I stare frightenedli up 
the corridor. 

"the silenc last sever second and then, abruptli there came again 
the clump of the great hoof, away at the end of the corridor. and 
immedi afterward the clungk, clunk--clungk, clunk of mighti hoof 
come down the passag toward us. 

"even then, you know, most of us thought it wa some mechan of 
parsket' still at work and we were in the queerest mixtur of fright and 
doubt. I think everyon look at parsket. and suddenli the captain 
shout out: 

"'stop thi damn fool at once. haven't you done enough?' 

"for my part, I wa now frighten for I had a _sense_ that there wa 
someth horribl and wrong. and then parsket manag to gasp out: 

"'it' not me! My god! it' not me! My god! it' not me.' 

"and then, you know, it seem to come home to everyon in an instant 
that there wa realli some dread thing come down the passage. there 
wa a mad rush to get away and even old captain hisgin gave back with 
the butler and the footmen. beaumont faint outright, as I found 
afterward, for he had been badli mauled. I just flatten back against 
the wall, kneel as I was, too stupid and daze even to run. and almost 
in the same instant the ponder hoof fall sound close to me and 
seem to shake the solid floor as they passed. abruptli the great 
sound ceas and I knew in a sort of sick fashion that the thing had 
halt opposit to the door of the girl' bedroom. and then I wa awar 
that parsket wa stand rock in the doorway with hi arm spread 
across, so as to fill the doorway with hi body. parsket wa 
extraordinarili pale and the blood wa run down hi face from the 
wound in hi forehead; and then I notic that he seem to be look at 
someth in the passag with a peculiar, desperate, fixed, incred 
master gaze. but there wa realli noth to be seen. and suddenli the 
clungk, clunk--clungk, clunk recommenc and pass onward down the 
passage. In the same moment parsket pitch forward out of the doorway 
on to hi face. 

"there were shout from the huddl of men down the passag and the two 
footmen and the butler simpli ran, carri their lanterns, but the 
captain went against the side-wal with hi back and put the lamp he wa 
carri over hi head. the dull tread of the hors went past him, and 
left him unharm and I heard the monstrou hoof fall go away and 
away through the quiet hous and after that a dead silence. 

"then the captain move and came toward us, veri slow and shaki and with 
an extraordinarili grey face. 

"I crept toward parsket and the captain came to help me. We turn him 
over and, you know, I knew in a moment that he wa dead; but you can 
imagin what a feel it sent through me. 

"I look at the captain and suddenli he said: 

"'that--that--that--' and I know that he wa tri to tell me that 
parsket had stood between hi daughter and whatev it wa that had gone 
down the passage. I stood up and steadi him, though I wa not veri 
steadi myself. and suddenli hi face began to work and he went down on to 
hi knee by parsket and cri like some shaken child. then the women 
came out of the doorway of the bedroom and I turn away and left him to 
them, whilst I over to beaumont. 

"that is practic the whole stori and the onli thing that is left to 
me is to tri to explain some of the puzzl parts, here and there. 

"perhap you have seen that parsket wa in love with miss hisgin and 
thi fact is the key to a good deal that wa extraordinary. He wa 
doubtless respons for some portion of the 'haunting'; in fact I 
think for nearli everything, but, you know, I can prove noth and what 
I have to tell you is chiefli the result of deduction. 

"in the first place, it is obviou that parsket' intent wa to 
frighten beaumont away and when he found that he could not do this, I 
think he grew so desper that he realli intend to kill him. I hate to 
say this, but the fact forc me to think so. 

"I am quit certain that it wa parsket who broke beaumont' arm. He knew 
all the detail of the so-cal 'hors legend,' and got the idea to work 
upon the old stori for hi own end. He evid had some method of 
slip in and out of the house, probabl through one of the mani french 
windows, or possibl he had a key to one or two of the garden doors, and 
when he wa suppos to be away, he wa realli come down on the quiet 
and hide somewher in the neighborhood. 

"the incid of the kiss in the dark hall I put down to sheer nervou 
imagin on the part of beaumont and miss hisgins, yet I must say that 
the sound of the hors outsid of the front door is a littl difficult to 
explain away. but I am still inclin to keep to my first idea on thi 
point, that there wa noth realli unnatur about it. 

"the hoof sound in the billiard room and down the passag were done by 
parsket from the floor below by bump up against the panel ceil 
with a block of wood tie to one of the window hooks. I prove thi by an 
examin which show the dent in the woodwork. 

"the sound of the hors gallop 'round the hous were possibl made 
also by parsket, who must have had a hors tie up in the plantat 
nearby, unless, indeed, he made the sound himself, but I do not see how 
he could have gone fast enough to produc the illusion. In ani case, I 
don't feel perfect certainti on thi point. I fail to find ani hoof 
marks, as you remember. 

"the gobbl neigh in the park wa a ventriloqui achiev on 
the part of parsket and the attack out there on beaumont wa also by 
him, so that when I thought he wa in hi bedroom, he must have been 
outsid all the time and join me after I ran out of the front door. 
thi is almost probable. I mean that parsket wa the cause, for if it 
had been someth more seriou he would certainli have given up hi 
foolishness, know that there wa no longer ani need for it. I cannot 
imagin how he escap be shot, both then and in the last mad action 
of which I have just told you. He wa enorm without fear of ani 
kind for himself as you can see. 

"the time when parsket wa with us, when we thought we heard the hors 
gallop 'round the house, we must have been deceived. No one wa 
veri sure, except, of course, parsket, who would natur encourag 
the belief. 

"the neigh in the cellar is where I consid there came the first 
suspicion into parsket' mind that there wa someth more at work than 
hi sham haunting. the neigh wa done by him in the same way that he 
did it in the park; but when I rememb how ghastli he look I feel sure 
that the sound must have had some infern qualiti ad to them which 
frighten the man himself. yet, later, he would persuad himself that he 
had been get fanciful. Of course, I must not forget that the effect 
upon miss hisgin must have made him feel pretti miserable. 

"then, about the clergyman be call away, we found afterward that it 
wa a bogu errand, or, rather, call and it is appar that parsket wa 
at the bottom of this, so as to get a few more hour in which to achiev 
hi end and what that was, a veri littl imagin will show you; for 
he had found that beaumont would not be frighten away. I hate to think 
this, but i'm bound to. anyway, it is obviou that the man wa 
temporarili a bit off hi normal balance. love' a queer disease! 

"then, there is no doubt at all but that parsket left the cord to the 
butler' bell hitch somewher so as to give him an excus to slip away 
natur to clear it. thi also gave him the opportun to remov one 
of the passag lamps. then he had onli to smash the other and the passag 
wa in utter dark for him to make the attempt on beaumont. 

"in the same way, it wa he who lock the door of the bedroom and took 
the key (it wa in hi pocket). thi prevent the captain from bring 
a light and come to the rescue. but captain hisgin broke down the door 
with the heavi fender curb and it wa hi smash the door that sound 
so confus and frighten in the dark of the passage. 

"the photograph of the monstrou hoof abov miss hisgin in the cellar is 
one of the thing that I am less sure about. It might have been fake by 
parsket, whilst I wa out of the room, and thi would have been easi 
enough, to anyon who knew how. but, you know, it doe not look like a 
fake. yet, there is as much evid of probabl that it wa faked, as 
against; and the thing is too vagu for an examin to help to a 
definit decis so that I will express no opinion, one way or the 
other. It is certainli a horribl photograph. 

"and now I come to that last, dread thing. there ha been no further 
manifest of anyth abnorm so that there is an extraordinari 
uncertainti in my conclusions. If we had not heard those last sound and 
if parsket had not shown that enorm sens of fear the whole of thi 
case could be explain in the way in which I have shown. and, in fact, 
as you have seen, I am of the opinion that almost all of it can be 
clear up, but I see no way of go past the thing we heard at the last 
and the fear that parsket showed. 

"hi death--no, that prove nothing. At the inquest it wa describ 
somewhat untechn as due to heart spasm. that is normal enough and 
leav us quit in the dark as to whether he die becaus he stood 
between the girl and some incred thing of monstrosity. 

"the look on parsket' face and the thing he call out when he heard the 
great hoof sound come down the passag seem to show that he had the 
sudden realiz of what befor then may have been noth more than a 
horribl suspicion. and hi fear and appreci of some tremend 
danger approach wa probabl more keenli real even than mine. and then 
he did the one fine, great thing!" 

"and the cause?" I said. "what caus it?" 

carnacki shook hi head. 

"god knows," he answered, with a peculiar, sincer reverence. "if that 
thing wa what it seem to be one might suggest an explan which 
would not offend one' reason, but which may be utterli wrong. yet I have 
thought, though it would take a long lectur on thought induct to get 
you to appreci my reasons, that parsket had produc what I might term 
a kind of 'induc haunting,' a kind of induc simul of hi mental 
concept to hi desper thought and broodings. It is imposs to 
make it clearer in a few words." 

"but the old story!" I said. "whi may not there have been someth 
in _that_?" 

"there may have been someth in it," said carnacki. "but I do not think 
it had anyth to do with this. I have not clearli thought out my 
reasons, yet; but later I may be abl to tell you whi I think so." 

"and the marriage? and the cellar--wa there anyth found there?" 
ask taylor. 

"yes, the marriag wa perform that day in spite of the tragedy," 
carnacki told us. "it wa the wisest thing to do consid the thing 
that I cannot explain. yes, I had the floor of that big cellar up, for I 
had a feel I might find someth there to give me some light. but 
there wa nothing. 

"you know, the whole thing is tremend and extraordinary. I shall 
never forget the look on parsket' face. and afterward the disgust 
sound of those great hoof go away through the quiet house." 

carnacki stood up. 

"out you go!" he said in friendli fashion, use the recogn formula. 

and we went present out into the quiet of the embankment, and so to 
our homes. 




no. 5--the searcher OF the end hous 


It wa still evening, as I remember, and the four of us, jessop, 
arkright, taylor and I, look disappointedli at carnacki, where he sat 
silent in hi great chair. 

We had come in respons to the usual card of invitation, which--a you 
know--w have come to consid as a sure prelud to a good story; and 
now, after tell us the short incid of the three straw platters, he 
had laps into a content silence, and the night not half gone, as I 
have hinted. 

however, as it chanced, some piti fate jog carnacki' elbow, or hi 
memory, and he began again, in hi queer level way:-- 

"the 'straw platters' busi remind me of the 'searcher' case, which I 
have sometim thought might interest you. It wa some time ago, in fact 
a deuc of a long time ago, that the thing happened; and my experi of 
what I might term 'curious' thing wa veri small at that time. 

"I wa live with my mother when it occurred, in a small hous just 
outsid of appledorn, on the south coast. the hous wa the last of a 
row of detach cottag villas, each hous stand in it own garden; 
and veri dainti littl place they were, veri old, and most of them 
smother in roses; and all with those quaint old lead windows, and 
door of genuin oak. you must tri to pictur them for the sake of their 
complet niceness. 

"now I must remind you at the begin that my mother and I had live in 
that littl hous for two years; and in the whole of that time there had 
not been a singl peculiar happen to worri us. 

"and then, someth happened. 

"it wa about two o'clock one morning, as I wa finish some letters, 
that I heard the door of my mother' bedroom open, and she came to the 
top of the stairs, and knock on the banisters. 

"'all right, dear,' I called; for I suppos she wa mere remind me 
that I should have been in bed long ago; then I heard her go back to her 
room, and I hurri my work, for fear she should lie awake, until she 
heard me safe up to my room. 

"when I wa finished, I lit my candle, put out the lamp, and went 
upstairs. As I came opposit the door of my mother' room, I saw that it 
wa open, call good night to her, veri softly, and ask whether I 
should close the door. As there wa no answer, I knew that she had 
drop off to sleep again, and I close the door veri gently, and turn 
into my room, just across the passage. As I did so, I experienc a 
momentary, half-awar sens of a faint, peculiar, disagre odor in 
the passage; but it wa not until the follow night that I _realized_ I 
had notic a smell that offend me. you follow me? It is so often like 
that--on suddenli know a thing that realli record itself on one' 
consciousness, perhap a year before. 

"the next morn at breakfast, I mention casual to my mother that 
she had 'drop off,' and I had shut the door for her. To my surprise, 
she assur me she had never been out of her room. I remind her about 
the two rap she had given upon the banister; but she still wa certain I 
must be mistaken; and in the end I teas her, say she had grown so 
accustom to my bad habit of sit up late, that she had come to call 
me in her sleep. Of course, she deni this, and I let the matter drop; 
but I wa more than a littl puzzled, and did not know whether to believ 
my own explanation, or to take the mater's, which wa to put the nois 
down to the mice, and the open door to the fact that she couldn't have 
properli latch it, when she went to bed. I suppose, away in the 
subconsci part of me, I had a stir of less reason thoughts; 
but certainly, I had no real uneasi at that time. 

"the next night there came a further development. about two thirti a.m., 
I heard my mother' door open, just as on the previou night, and 
immedi afterward she rap sharply, on the banister, as it seem 
to me. I stop my work and call up that I would not be long. As she 
made no reply, and I did not hear her go back to bed, I had a quick sens 
of wonder whether she might not be do it in her sleep, after all, just 
as I had said. 

"with the thought, I stood up, and take the lamp from the table, began 
to go toward the door, which wa open into the passage. It wa then I got 
a sudden nasti sort of thrill; for it came to me, all at once, that my 
mother never knocked, when I sat up too late; she alway called. you will 
understand I wa not realli frighten in ani way; onli vagu uneasy, 
and pretti sure she must realli be do the thing in her sleep. 

"I went quickli up the stairs, and when I came to the top, my mother wa 
not there; but her door wa open. I had a bewild sens though 
believ she must have gone quietli back to bed, without my hear 
her. I enter her room and found her sleep quietli and naturally; for 
the vagu sens of troubl in me wa suffici strong to make me go 
over to look at her. 

"when I wa sure that she wa perfectli right in everi way, I wa still 
a littl bothered; but much more inclin to think my suspicion correct 
and that she had gone quietli back to bed in her sleep, without know 
what she had been doing. thi wa the most reason thing to think, as 
you must see. 

"and then it came to me, suddenly, that vague, queer, mildewi smell in 
the room; and it wa in that instant I becam awar I had smelt the same 
strange, uncertain smell the night befor in the passage. 

"I wa definit uneasi now, and began to search my mother' room; 
though with no aim or clear thought of anything, except to assur myself 
that there wa noth in the room. all the time, you know, I never 
_expect really_ to find anything; onli my uneasi had to be assured. 

"in the middl of my search my mother woke up, and of cours I had to 
explain. I told her about her door opening, and the knock on the 
banister, and that I had come up and found her asleep. I said noth 
about the smell, which wa not veri distinct; but told her that the thing 
happen twice had made me a bit nervous, and possibl fanciful, and I 
thought I would take a look 'round, just to feel satisfied. 

"I have thought sinc that the reason I made no mention of the smell, wa 
not onli that I did not want to frighten my mother, for I wa scarc 
that myself; but becaus I had onli a vagu half-knowledg that I 
associ the smell with fanci too indefinit and peculiar to bear 
talk about. you will understand that I am abl _now_ to analyz and 
put the thing into words; but _then_ I did not even know my chief reason 
for say nothing; let alon appreci it possibl significance. 

"it wa my mother, after all, who put part of my vagu sensat 
into words:-- 

"'what a disagre smell!' she exclaimed, and wa silent a moment, 
look at me. then:--'you feel there' someth wrong?' still look 
at me, veri quietli but with a little, nervou note of question 
expectancy. 

"'i don't know,' I said. 'I can't understand it, unless you'v realli 
been walk about in your sleep.' 

"'the smell,' she said. 

"'yes,' I replied. 'that' what puzzl me too. i'll take a walk through 
the house; but I don't suppos it' anything.' 

"I lit her candle, and take the lamp, I went through the other 
bedrooms, and afterward all over the house, includ the three 
underground cellars, which wa a littl tri to the nerves, see that 
I wa more nervou than I would admit. 

"then I went back to my mother, and told her there wa realli noth to 
bother about; and, you know, in the end, we talk ourselv into 
believ it wa nothing. My mother would not agre that she might have 
been sleepwalking; but she wa readi to put the door open down to the 
fault of the latch, which certainli snick veri lightly. As for the 
knocks, they might be the old warp woodwork of the hous crack a 
bit, or a mous rattl a piec of loos plaster. the smell wa more 
difficult to explain; but final we agre that it might easili be the 
queer night smell of the moist earth, come in through the open window 
of my mother' room, from the back garden, or--for that matter--from the 
littl churchyard beyond the big wall at the bottom of the garden. 

"and so we quieten down, and final I went to bed, and to sleep. 

"I think thi is certainli a lesson on the way we human can delud 
ourselves; for there wa not one of these explan that my reason 
could realli accept. tri to imagin yourself in the same circumstances, 
and you will see how absurd our attempt to explain the happen 
realli were. 

"in the morning, when I came down to breakfast, we talk it all over 
again, and whilst we agre that it wa strange, we also agre that we 
had begun to imagin funni thing in the back of our minds, which now we 
felt half asham to admit. thi is veri strang when you come to look 
into it; but veri human. 

"and then that night again my mother' door wa slam onc more just 
after midnight. I caught up the lamp, and when I reach her door, I 
found it shut. I open it quickly, and went in, to find my mother lie 
with her eye open, and rather nervous; have been wake by the bang of 
the door. but what upset me more than anything, wa the fact that there 
wa a disgust smell in the passag and in her room. 

"whilst I wa ask her whether she wa all right, a door slam 
twice downstairs; and you can imagin how it made me feel. My mother 
and I look at one another; and then I lit her candle, and take the 
poker from the fender, went downstair with the lamp, begin to feel 
realli nervous. the cumul effect of so mani queer happen wa 
get hold of me; and all the _apparently_ reason explan 
seem futile. 

"the horribl smell seem to be veri strong in the downstair passage; 
also in the front room and the cellars; but chiefli in the passage. I 
made a veri thorough search of the house, and when I had finished, I knew 
that all the lower window and door were properli shut and fastened, and 
that there wa no live thing in the house, beyond our two selves. then 
I went up to my mother' room again, and we talk the thing over for an 
hour or more, and in the end came to the conclus that we might, after 
all, be read too much into a number of littl things; but, you know, 
insid of us, we did not believ this. 

"later, when we had talk ourselv into a more comfort state of 
mind, I said good night, and went off to bed; and present manag to 
get to sleep. 

"in the earli hour of the morning, whilst it wa still dark, I wa wake 
by a loud noise. I sat up in bed, and listened. and from downstairs, I 
heard:--bang, bang, bang, one door after anoth be slammed; at least, 
that is the impress the sound gave to me. 

"I jump out of bed, with the tingl and shiver of sudden fright on me; 
and at the same moment, as I lit my candle, my door wa push slowli 
open; I had left it unlatched, so as not to feel that my mother wa quit 
shut off from me. 

"'who' there?' I shout out, in a voic twice as deep as my natur 
one, and with a queer breathlessness, that sudden fright so often give 
one. 'who' there?' 

"then I heard my mother saying:-- 

"'it' me, thomas. whatev is happen downstairs?' 

"she wa in the room by this, and I saw she had her bedroom poker in one 
hand, and her candl in the other. I could have smile at her, had it not 
been for the extraordinari sound downstairs. 

"I got into my slippers, and reach down an old sword bayonet from the 
wall; then I pick up my candle, and beg my mother not to come; but I 
knew it would be littl use, if she had made up her mind; and she had, 
with the result that she act as a sort of rearguard for me, dure our 
search. I know, in some ways, I wa veri glad to have her with me, as you 
will understand. 

"bi thi time, the door slam had ceased, and there seemed, probabl 
becaus of the contrast, to be an appal silenc in the house. 
however, I led the way, hold my candl high, and keep the sword 
bayonet veri handy. downstair we found all the door wide open; although 
the outer door and the window were close all right. I began to wonder 
whether the nois had been made by the door after all. Of one thing 
onli were we sure, and that was, there wa no live thing in the house, 
besid ourselves, while everywher throughout the house, there wa the 
taint of that disgust odor. 

"of cours it wa absurd to tri to make believ ani longer. there wa 
someth strang about the house; and as soon as it wa daylight, I set 
my mother to packing; and soon after breakfast, I saw her off by train. 

"then I set to work to tri to clear up the mystery. I went first to the 
landlord, and told him all the circumstances. from him, I found that 
twelv or fifteen year back, the hous had got rather a curiou name 
from three or four tenants; with the result that it had remain empti a 
long while; in the end he had let it at a low rent to a captain tobias, 
on the one condit that he should hold hi tongue, if he saw anyth 
peculiar. the landlord' idea--a he told me frankly--wa to free the 
hous from these tale of 'someth queer,' by keep a tenant in it, 
and then to sell it for the best price he could get. 

"however, when captain tobia left, after a ten years' tenancy, there wa 
no longer ani talk about the house; so when I offer to take it on a 
five years' lease, he had jump at the offer. thi wa the whole story; 
so he gave me to understand. when I press him for detail of the 
suppos peculiar happen in the house, all those year back, he said 
the tenant had talk about a woman who alway move about the hous at 
night. some tenant never saw anything; but other would not stay out the 
first month' tenancy. 

"one thing the landlord wa particular to point out, that no tenant had 
ever complain about knockings, or door slamming. As for the smell, he 
seem posit indign about it; but why, I don't suppos he knew 
himself, except that he probabl had some vagu feel that it wa an 
indirect accus on my part that the drain were not right. 

"in the end, I suggest that he should come down and spend the night 
with me. He agre at once, especi as I told him I intend to keep 
the whole busi quiet, and tri to get to the bottom of the curiou 
affair; for he wa anxiou to keep the rumor of the haunt from 
get about. 

"about three o'clock that afternoon, he came down, and we made a 
thorough search of the house, which, however, reveal noth unusual. 
afterward, the landlord made one or two tests, which show him the 
drainag wa in perfect order; after that we made our prepar for 
sit up all night. 

"first, we borrow two policemen' dark lantern from the station 
nearby, and where the superintend and I were friendly, and as soon as 
it wa realli dusk, the landlord went up to hi hous for hi gun. I had 
the sword bayonet I have told you about; and when the landlord got back, 
we sat talk in my studi until nearli midnight. 

"then we lit the lantern and went upstairs. We place the lanterns, gun 
and bayonet handi on the table; then I shut and seal the bedroom doors; 
afterward we took our seats, and turn off the lights. 

"from then until two o'clock, noth happened; but a littl after two, 
as I found by hold my watch near the faint glow of the close 
lanterns, I had a time of extraordinari nervousness; and I bent toward 
the landlord, and whisper to him that I had a queer feel someth 
wa about to happen, and to be readi with hi lantern; at the same time I 
reach out toward mine. In the veri instant I made thi movement, the 
dark which fill the passag seem to becom suddenli of a dull 
violet color; not, as if a light had been shone; but as if the natur 
black of the night had chang color. and then, come through thi 
violet night, through thi violet-color gloom, came a littl nake 
child, running. In an extraordinari way, the child seem not to be 
distinct from the surround gloom; but almost as if it were a 
concentr of that extraordinari atmosphere; as if that gloomi color 
which had chang the night, came from the child. It seem imposs to 
make clear to you; but tri to understand it. 

"the child went past me, running, with the natur movement of the leg 
of a chubbi human child, but in an absolut and inconceiv silence. It 
wa a veri small child, and must have pass under the table; but I saw 
the child through the table, as if it had been onli a slightli darker 
shadow than the color gloom. In the same instant, I saw that a 
fluctuat glimmer of violet light outlin the metal of the gun-barrel 
and the blade of the sword bayonet, make them seem like faint shape of 
glimmer light, float unsupport where the tabletop should have 
shown solid. 

"now, curiously, as I saw these things, I wa subconsci awar that I 
heard the anxiou breath of the landlord, quit clear and labored, 
close to my elbow, where he wait nervous with hi hand on the 
lantern. I realiz in that moment that he saw nothing; but wait in the 
darkness, for my warn to come true. 

"even as I took heed of these minor things, I saw the child jump to one 
side, and hide behind some half-seen object that wa certainli noth 
belong to the passage. I stared, intently, with a most extraordinari 
thrill of expect wonder, with fright make goos flesh of my back. 
and even as I stared, I solv for myself the less import problem of 
what the two black cloud were that hung over a part of the table. I 
think it veri curiou and interesting, the doubl work of the mind, 
often so much more appar dure time of stress. the two cloud came 
from two faintli shine shapes, which I knew must be the metal of the 
lanterns; and the thing that look black to the sight with which I wa 
then seeing, could be noth els but what to normal human sight is 
known as light. thi phenomenon I have alway remembered. I have twice 
seen a somewhat similar thing; in the dark light case and in that troubl 
of maetheson's, which you know about. 

"even as I understood thi matter of the lights, I wa look to my 
left, to understand whi the child wa hiding. and suddenly, I heard the 
landlord shout out:--'th woman!' but I saw nothing. I had a 
disagre sens that someth repugn wa near to me, and I wa 
awar in the same moment that the landlord wa grip my arm in a hard, 
frighten grip. then I wa look back to where the child had hidden. I 
saw the child peep out from behind it hide place, seem to be 
look up the passage; but whether in fear I could not tell. then it 
came out, and ran headlong away, through the place where should have been 
the wall of my mother' bedroom; but the sens with which I wa see 
these things, show me the wall onli as a vague, upright shadow, 
unsubstantial. and immedi the child wa lost to me, in the dull 
violet gloom. At the same time, I felt the landlord press back against 
me, as if someth had pass close to him; and he call out again, a 
hoars sort of cry:--'th woman! the woman!' and turn the shade 
clumsili from off hi lantern. but I had seen no woman; and the passag 
show empty, as he shone the beam of hi light jerkili to and fro; but 
chiefli in the direct of the doorway of my mother' room. 

"he wa still clutch my arm, and had risen to hi feet; and now, 
mechan and almost slowly, I pick up my lantern and turn on 
the light. I shone it, a littl dazedly, at the seal upon the doors; 
but none were broken; then I sent the light to and fro, up and down the 
passage; but there wa nothing; and I turn to the landlord, who wa 
say someth in a rather incoher fashion. As my light pass 
over hi face, I noted, in a dull sort of way, that he wa drench 
with sweat. 

"then my wit becam more handleable, and I began to catch the drift of 
hi words:--'did you see her? did you see her?' he wa saying, over and 
over again; and then I found myself tell him, in quit a level 
voice, that I had not seen ani woman. He becam more coher then, and 
I found that he had seen a woman come from the end of the passage, and 
go past us; but he could not describ her, except that she kept 
stop and look about her, and had even peer at the wall, close 
besid him, as if look for something. but what seem to troubl him 
most, wa that she had not seem to see him at all. He repeat thi 
so often, that in the end I told him, in an absurd sort of way, that he 
ought to be veri glad she had not. what did it all mean? wa the 
question; somehow I wa not so frightened, as utterli bewildered. I had 
seen less then, than since; but what I had seen, had made me feel 
adrift from my anchorag of reason. 

"what did it mean? He had seen a woman, search for something. _i_ had 
not seen thi woman. _i_ had seen a child, run away, and hide from 
someth or someone. _he_ had not seen the child, or the other 
things--onli the woman. and _i_ had not seen her. what did it all mean? 

"I had said noth to the landlord about the child. I had been too 
bewildered, and I realiz that it would be futil to attempt an 
explanation. He wa alreadi stupid with the thing he had seen; and not 
the kind of man to understand. all thi went through my mind as we stood 
there, shine the lantern to and fro. all the time, intermingl with a 
streak of practic reasoning, I wa question myself, what did it all 
mean? what wa the woman search for; what wa the child run from? 

"suddenly, as I stood there, bewild and nervous, make random 
answer to the landlord, a door below wa violent slammed, and directli 
I caught the horribl reek of which I have told you. 

"'there!' I said to the landlord, and caught hi arm, in my turn. 'the 
smell! Do _you_ smell it?' 

"he look at me so stupidli that in a sort of nervou anger, I shook 
him. 

"'yes,' he said, in a queer voice, tri to shine the light from hi 
shake lantern at the stair head. 

"'come on!' I said, and pick up my bayonet; and he came, carri hi 
gun awkwardly. I think he came, more becaus he wa afraid to be left 
alone, than becaus he had ani pluck left, poor beggar. I never sneer at 
that kind of funk, at least veri seldom; for when it take hold of you, 
it make rag of your courage. 

"I led the way downstairs, shine my light into the lower passage, and 
afterward at the door to see whether they were shut; for I had close 
and latch them, place a corner of a mat against each door, so I 
should know which had been opened. 

"I saw at onc that none of the door had been opened; then I threw the 
beam of my light down alongsid the stairway, in order to see the mat I 
had place against the door at the top of the cellar stairs. I got a 
horrid thrill; for the mat wa flat! I paus a coupl of seconds, 
shine my light to and fro in the passage, and hold fast to my 
courage, I went down the stairs. 

"a I came to the bottom step, I saw patch of wet all up and down the 
passage. I shone my lantern on them. It wa the imprint of a wet foot 
on the oilcloth of the passage; not an ordinari footprint, but a queer, 
soft, flabby, spread imprint, that gave me a feel of 
extraordinari horror. 

"backward and forward I flash the light over the imposs mark and 
saw them everywhere. suddenli I notic that they led to each of the 
close doors. I felt someth touch my back, and glanc 'round 
swiftly, to find the landlord had come close to me, almost press 
against me, in hi fear. 

"'it' all right,' I said, but in a rather breathless whisper, mean to 
put a littl courag into him; for I could feel that he wa shake 
through all hi body. even then as I tri to get him steadi enough to 
be of some use, hi gun went off with a tremend bang. He jumped, and 
yell with sheer terror; and I swore becaus of the shock. 

"'give it to me, for god' sake!' I said, and slip the gun from hi 
hand; and in the same instant there wa a sound of run step up the 
garden path, and immedi the flash of a bull's-ey lantern upon the 
fan light over the front door. then the door wa tried, and directli 
afterward there came a thunder knocking, which told me a policeman had 
heard the shot. 

"I went to the door, and open it. fortun the constabl knew me, 
and when I had beckon him in, I wa abl to explain matter in a 
veri short time. while do this, inspector johnston came up the 
path, have miss the officer, and see light and the open door. 
I told him as briefli as possibl what had occurred, and did not 
mention the child or the woman; for it would have seem too fantast 
for him to notice. I show him the queer, wet footprint and how they 
went toward the close doors. I explain quickli about the mats, and 
how that the one against the cellar door wa flat, which show the 
door had been opened. 

"the inspector nodded, and told the constabl to guard the door at the 
top of the cellar stairs. He then ask the hall lamp to be lit, after 
which he took the policeman' lantern, and led the way into the front 
room. He paus with the door wide open, and threw the light all 'round; 
then he jump into the room, and look behind the door; there wa no 
one there; but all over the polish oak floor, between the scatter 
rugs, went the mark of those horribl spread footprints; and the room 
permeat with the horribl odor. 

"the inspector search the room carefully, and then went into the middl 
room, use the same precautions. there wa noth in the middl room, 
or in the kitchen or pantry; but everywher went the wet footmark 
through all the rooms, show plainli wherev there were woodwork or 
oilcloth; and alway there wa the smell. 

"the inspector ceas from hi search of the rooms, and spent a minut in 
tri whether the mat would realli fall flat when the door were open, 
or mere ruckl up in a way as to appear they had been untouched; but in 
each case, the mat fell flat, and remain so. 

"'extraordinary!' I heard johnston mutter to himself. and then he went 
toward the cellar door. He had inquir at first whether there were 
window to the cellar, and when he learn there wa no way out, except 
by the door, he had left thi part of the search to the last. 

"a johnston came up to the door, the policeman made a motion of salute, 
and said someth in a low voice; and someth in the tone made me 
flick my light across him. I saw then that the man wa veri white, and he 
look strang and bewildered. 

"'what?' said johnston impatiently. 'speak up!' 

"'a woman come along 'ere, sir, and went through thi 'ere door,' said 
the constable, clearly, but with a curiou monoton inton that is 
sometim heard from an unintellig man. 

"'speak up!' shout the inspector. 

"'a woman come along and went through thi 'ere door,' repeat the man, 
monotonously. 

"the inspector caught the man by the shoulder, and deliber snif 
hi breath. 

"'no!' he said. and then sarcastically:--'i hope you held the door open 
polit for the lady.' 

"'the door weren't opened, sir,' said the man, simply. 

"'are you mad--' began johnstone. 

"'no,' broke in the landlord' voic from the back. speak steadili 
enough. 'I saw the woman upstairs.' It wa evid that he had got back 
hi control again. 

"'i'm afraid, inspector johnstone,' I said, 'that there' more in thi 
than you think. I certainli saw some veri extraordinari thing upstairs.' 

"the inspector seem about to say something; but instead, he turn 
again to the door, and flash hi light down and 'round about the mat. I 
saw then that the strange, horribl footmark came straight up to the 
cellar door; and the last print show _under_ the door; yet the 
policeman said the door had not been opened. 

"and suddenly, without ani intention, or realiz of what I wa 
saying, I ask the landlord:-- 

"'what were the feet like?' 

"I receiv no answer; for the inspector wa order the constabl to 
open the cellar door, and the man wa not obeying. johnston repeat the 
order, and at last, in a queer automat way, the man obeyed, and push 
the door open. the loathsom smell beat up at us, in a great wave of 
horror, and the inspector came backward a step. 

"'mi god!' he said, and went forward again, and shone hi light down the 
steps; but there wa noth visible, onli that on each step show the 
unnatur footprints. 

"the inspector brought the beam of the light vividli on the top step; and 
there, clear in the light, there wa someth small, moving. the 
inspector bent to look, and the policeman and I with him. I don't want to 
disgust you; but the thing we look at wa a maggot. the policeman 
back suddenli out of the doorway: 

"'the churchyard,' he said, '... at the back of the 'ouse.' 

"'silence!' said johnstone, with a queer break in the word, and I knew 
that at last he wa frightened. He put hi lantern into the doorway, and 
shone it from step to step, follow the footprint down into the 
darkness; then he step back from the open doorway, and we all gave 
back with him. He look 'round, and I had a feel that he wa look 
for a weapon of some kind. 

"'your gun,' I said to the landlord, and he brought it from the front 
hall, and pass it over to the inspector, who took it and eject the 
empti shell from the right barrel. He held out hi hand for a live 
cartridge, which the landlord brought from hi pocket. He load the gun 
and snap the breech. He turn to the constable:-- 

"'come on,' he said, and move toward the cellar doorway. 

"'i ain't comin', sir,' said the policeman, veri white in the face. 

"with a sudden blaze of passion, the inspector took the man by the scruff 
and hove him bodili down into the darkness, and he went downward, 
screaming. the inspector follow him instantly, with hi lantern and the 
gun; and I after the inspector, with the bayonet ready. behind me, I 
heard the landlord. 

"at the bottom of the stairs, the inspector wa help the policeman to 
hi feet, where he stood sway a moment, in a bewild fashion; then 
the inspector went into the front cellar, and hi man follow him in 
stupid fashion; but evid no longer with ani thought of run away 
from the horror. 

"we all crowd into the front cellar, flash our light to and fro. 
inspector johnston wa examin the floor, and I saw that the footmark 
went all 'round the cellar, into all the corners, and across the floor. I 
thought suddenli of the child that wa run away from something. Do 
you see the thing that I wa see vaguely? 

"we went out of the cellar in a body, for there wa noth to be 
found. In the next cellar, the footprint went everywher in that queer 
errat fashion, as of someon search for something, or follow 
some blind scent. 

"in the third cellar the print end at the shallow well that had been 
the old water suppli of the house. the well wa full to the brim, and the 
water so clear that the pebbl bottom wa plainli to be seen, as we shone 
the light into the water. the search came to an abrupt end, and we stood 
about the well, look at one another, in an absolute, horribl silence. 

"johnston made anoth examin of the footprints; then he shone hi 
light again into the clear shallow water, search each inch of the 
plainli seen bottom; but there wa noth there. the cellar wa full of 
the dread smell; and everyon stood silent, except for the constant 
turn of the lamp to and fro around the cellar. 

"the inspector look up from hi search of the well, and nod quietli 
across at me, with hi sudden acknowledg that our belief wa now hi 
belief, the smell in the cellar seem to grow more dreadful, and to be, 
as it were, a menace--th materi express that some monstrou thing 
wa there with us, invisible. 

"'i think--' began the inspector, and shone hi light toward the 
stairway; and at thi the constable' restraint went utterly, and he ran 
for the stairs, make a queer sound in hi throat. 

"the landlord followed, at a quick walk, and then the inspector and I. He 
wait a singl instant for me, and we went up together, tread on the 
same steps, and with our light held backward. At the top, I slam and 
lock the stair door, and wipe my forehead, and my hand were shaking. 

"the inspector ask me to give hi man a glass of whisky, and then he 
sent him on hi beat. He stay a short while with the landlord and me, 
and it wa arrang that he would join us again the follow night and 
watch the well with us from midnight until daylight. then he left us, 
just as the dawn wa come in. the landlord and I lock up the house, 
and went over to hi place for a sleep. 

"in the afternoon, the landlord and I return to the house, to make 
arrang for the night. He wa veri quiet, and I felt he wa to be 
reli on, now that he had been 'salted,' as it were, with hi fright of 
the previou night. 

"we open all the door and windows, and blew the hous through veri 
thoroughly; and in the meanwhile, we lit the lamp in the house, and took 
them into the cellars, where we set them all about, so as to have light 
everywhere. then we carri down three chair and a table, and set them 
in the cellar where the well wa sunk. after that, we stretch thin 
piano wire across the cellar, about nine inch from the floor, at such a 
height that it should catch anyth move about in the dark. 

"when thi wa done, I went through the hous with the landlord, and 
seal everi window and door in the place, except onli the front door 
and the door at the top of the cellar stairs. 

"meanwhile, a local wire-smith wa make someth to my order; and 
when the landlord and I had finish tea at hi house, we went down to 
see how the smith wa get on. We found the thing complete. It look 
rather like a huge parrot' cage, without ani bottom, of veri heavi gage 
wire, and stood about seven feet high and wa four feet in diameter. 
fortunately, I rememb to have it made longitudin in two halves, 
or els we should never have got it through the doorway and down the 
cellar stairs. 

"I told the wire-smith to bring the cage up to the hous so he could fit 
the two halv rigidli together. As we returned, I call in at an 
ironmonger's, where I bought some thin hemp rope and an iron rack pulley, 
like those use in lancashir for haul up the ceil cloth racks, 
which you will find in everi cottage. I bought also a coupl of 
pitchforks. 

"'we shan't want to touch it," I said to the landlord; and he nodded, 
rather white all at once. 

"a soon as the cage arriv and had been fit togeth in the cellar, 
I sent away the smith; and the landlord and I suspend it over the well, 
into which it fit easily. after a lot of trouble, we manag to hang 
it so perfectli central from the rope over the iron pulley, that when 
hoist to the ceil and dropped, it went everi time plunk into the 
well, like a candle-extinguisher. when we had it final arranged, I 
hoist it up onc more, to the readi position, and made the rope fast to 
a heavi wooden pillar, which stood in the middl of the cellar. 

"bi ten o'clock, I had everyth arranged, with the two pitchfork and 
the two polic lanterns; also some whiski and sandwiches. underneath the 
tabl I had sever bucket full of disinfectant. 

"A littl after eleven o'clock, there wa a knock at the front door, and 
when I went, I found inspector johnston had arrived, and brought with 
him one of hi plaincloth men. you will understand how pleas I wa 
to see there would be thi addit to our watch; for he look a tough, 
nerveless man, braini and collected; and one I should have pick to 
help us with the horribl job I felt pretti sure we should have to do 
that night. 

"when the inspector and the detect had entered, I shut and lock the 
front door; then, while the inspector held the light, I seal the door 
carefully, with tape and wax. At the head of the cellar stairs, I shut 
and lock that door also, and seal it in the same way. 

"a we enter the cellar, I warn johnston and hi man to be care 
not to fall over the wires; and then, as I saw hi surpris at my 
arrangements, I began to explain my idea and intentions, to all of which 
he listen with strong approval. I wa pleas to see also that the 
detect wa nod hi head, as I talked, in a way that show he 
appreci all my precautions. 

"a he put hi lantern down, the inspector pick up one of the 
pitchforks, and balanc it in hi hand; he look at me, and nodded. 

"'the best thing,' he said. 'I onli wish you'd got two more.' 

"then we all took our seats, the detect get a wash stool from 
the corner of the cellar. from then, until a quarter to twelve, we talk 
quietly, whilst we made a light supper of whiski and sandwiches; after 
which, we clear everyth off the table, except the lantern and 
the pitchforks. one of the latter, I hand to the inspector; the other I 
took myself, and then, have set my chair so as to be handi to the rope 
which lower the cage into the well, I went 'round the cellar and put 
out everi lamp. 

"I grope my way to my chair, and arrang the pitchfork and the dark 
lantern readi to my hand; after which I suggest that everyon should 
keep an absolut silenc throughout the watch. I asked, also, that no 
lantern should be turn on, until I gave the word. 

"I put my watch on the table, where a faint glow from my lantern made me 
abl to see the time. for an hour noth happened, and everyon kept an 
absolut silence, except for an occasion uneasi movement. 

"about half-past one, however, I wa consciou again of the same 
extraordinari and peculiar nervousness, which I had felt on the previou 
night. I put my hand out quickly, and eas the hitch rope from around 
the pillar. the inspector seem awar of the movement; for I saw the 
faint light from hi lantern, move a little, as if he had suddenli taken 
hold of it, in readiness. 

"A minut later, I notic there wa a chang in the color of the night 
in the cellar, and it grew slowli violet tint upon my eyes. I glanc 
to and fro, quickly, in the new darkness, and even as I looked, I wa 
consciou that the violet color deepened. In the direct of the well, 
but seem to be at a great distance, there was, as it were, a nucleu 
to the change; and the nucleu came swiftli toward us, appear to come 
from a great space, almost in a singl moment. It came near, and I saw 
again that it wa a littl nake child, running, and seem to be of the 
violet night in which it ran. 

"the child came with a natur run movement, exactli as I describ 
it before; but in a silenc so peculiarli intense, that it wa as if it 
brought the silenc with it. about half-way between the well and the 
table, the child turn swiftly, and look back at someth invis 
to me; and suddenli it went down into a crouch attitude, and seem 
to be hide behind someth that show vaguely; but there wa 
noth there, except the bare floor of the cellar; nothing, I mean, of 
our world. 

"I could hear the breath of the three other men, with a wonder 
distinctness; and also the tick of my watch upon the tabl seem to 
sound as loud and as slow as the tick of an old grandfather' clock. 
someway I knew that none of the other saw what I wa seeing. 

"abruptly, the landlord, who wa next to me, let out hi breath with a 
littl hiss sound; I knew then that someth wa visibl to him. 
there came a creak from the table, and I had a feel that the inspector 
wa lean forward, look at someth that I could not see. the 
landlord reach out hi hand through the darkness, and fumbl a moment 
to catch my arm:-- 

"'the woman!' he whispered, close to my ear. 'over by the well.' 

"I stare hard in that direction; but saw nothing, except that the violet 
color of the cellar seem a littl duller just there. 

"I look back quickli to the vagu place where the child wa hiding. I 
saw it wa peer back from it hide place. suddenli it rose and ran 
straight for the middl of the table, which show onli as vagu shadow 
half-way between my eye and the unseen floor. As the child ran under the 
table, the steel prong of my pitchfork glimmer with a violet, 
fluctuat light. A littl way off, there show high up in the gloom, 
the vagu shine outlin of the other fork, so I knew the inspector 
had it rais in hi hand, ready. there wa no doubt but that he saw 
something. On the table, the metal of the five lantern shone with the 
same strang glow; and about each lantern there wa a littl cloud of 
absolut blackness, where the phenomenon that is light to our natur 
eyes, came through the fittings; and in thi complet darkness, the metal 
of each lantern show plain, as might a cat's-ey in a nest of black 
cotton wool. 

"just beyond the table, the child paus again, and stood, seem to 
oscil a littl upon it feet, which gave the impress that it wa 
lighter and vaguer than a thistle-down; and yet, in the same moment, 
anoth part of me seem to know that it wa to me, as someth that 
might be beyond thick, invis glass, and subject to condit and 
forc that I wa unabl to comprehend. 

"the child wa look back again, and my gaze went the same way. I 
stare across the cellar, and saw the cage hang clear in the violet 
light, everi wire and tie outlin with it glimmering; abov it there 
wa a littl space of gloom, and then the dull shine of the iron pulley 
which I had screw into the ceiling. 

"I stare in a bewild way 'round the cellar; there were thin line of 
vagu fire cross the floor in all directions; and suddenli I 
rememb the piano wire that the landlord and I had stretched. but 
there wa noth els to be seen, except that near the tabl there were 
indistinct glimmer of light, and at the far end the outlin of a dull 
glow revolver, evid in the detective' pocket. I rememb a sort 
of subconsci satisfaction, as I settl the point in a queer automat 
fashion. On the table, near to me, there wa a littl shapeless 
collect of the light; and thi I knew, after an instant' 
consideration, to be the steel portion of my watch. 

"I had look sever time at the child, and 'round at the cellar, 
whilst I wa decid these trifles; and had found it still in that 
attitud of hide from something. but now, suddenly, it ran clear away 
into the distance, and wa noth more than a slightli deeper color 
nucleu far away in the strang color atmosphere. 

"the landlord gave out a queer littl cry, and twist over against me, 
as if to avoid something. from the inspector there came a sharp breath 
sound, as if he had been suddenli drench with cold water. then suddenli 
the violet color went out of the night, and I wa consciou of the 
near of someth monstrou and repugnant. 

"there wa a tens silence, and the black of the cellar seem 
absolute, with onli the faint glow about each of the lantern on the 
table. then, in the dark and the silence, there came a faint tinkl 
of water from the well, as if someth were rise noiselessli out of 
it, and the water run back with a gentl tinkling. In the same 
instant, there came to me a sudden waft of the aw smell. 

"I gave a sharp cri of warn to the inspector, and loos the rope. 
there came instantli the sharp splash of the cage enter the water; 
and then, with a stiff, frighten movement, I open the shutter of 
my lantern, and shone the light at the cage, shout to the other to 
do the same. 

"a my light struck the cage, I saw that about two feet of it project 
from the top of the well, and there wa someth protrud up out of 
the water, into the cage. I stared, with a feel that I recogn the 
thing; and then, as the other lantern were opened, I saw that it wa a 
leg of mutton. the thing wa held by a brawni fist and arm, that rose out 
of the water. I stood utterli bewildered, watch to see what wa 
coming. In a moment there rose into view a great beard face, that I 
felt for one quick instant wa the face of a drown man, long dead. then 
the face open at the mouth part, and splutter and coughed. anoth 
big hand came into view, and wipe the water from the eyes, which blink 
rapidly, and then fix themselv into a stare at the lights. 

"from the detect there came a sudden shout:-- 

"'captain tobias!' he shouted, and the inspector echo him; and 
instantli burst into loud roar of laughter. 

"the inspector and the detect ran across the cellar to the cage; and I 
followed, still bewildered. the man in the cage wa hold the leg of 
mutton as far away from him, as possible, and hold hi nose. 

"'lift thig dam trap, quig!' he shout in a stifl voice; but the 
inspector and the detect simpli doubl befor him, and tri to hold 
their noses, whilst they laughed, and the light from their lantern went 
danc all over the place. 

"'quig! quig!' said the man in the cage, still hold hi nose, and 
tri to speak plainly. 

"then johnston and the detect stop laughing, and lift the cage. 
the man in the well threw the leg across the cellar, and turn swiftli 
to go down into the well; but the offic were too quick for him, and 
had him out in a twinkling. whilst they held him, drip upon the 
floor, the inspector jerk hi thumb in the direct of the offend 
leg, and the landlord, have harpoon it with one of the pitchforks, 
ran with it upstair and so into the open air. 

"meanwhile, I had given the man from the well a stiff tot of whisky; for 
which he thank me with a cheer nod, and have empti the glass at 
a draft, held hi hand for the bottle, which he finished, as if it had 
been so much water. 

"a you will remember, it wa a captain tobia who had been the previou 
tenant; and thi wa the veri man, who had appear from the well. In 
the cours of the talk that followed, I learn the reason for captain 
tobia leav the house; he had been want by the polic for 
smuggling. He had undergon imprisonment; and had been releas onli a 
coupl of week earlier. 

"he had return to find new tenant in hi old home. He had enter the 
hous through the well, the wall of which were not continu to the 
bottom (thi I will deal with later); and gone up by a littl stairway in 
the cellar wall, which open at the top through a panel besid my 
mother' bedroom. thi panel wa opened, by revolv the left doorpost 
of the bedroom door, with the result that the bedroom door alway becam 
unlatched, in the process of open the panel. 

"the captain complained, without ani bitterness, that the panel had 
warped, and that each time he open it, it made a crack noise. thi 
had been evid what I mistook for raps. He would not give hi reason 
for enter the house; but it wa pretti obviou that he had hidden 
something, which he want to get. however, as he found it imposs to 
get into the hous without the risk of be caught, he decid to tri to 
drive us out, reli on the bad reput of the house, and hi own 
artist effort as a ghost. I must say he succeeded. He intend then to 
rent the hous again, as before; and would then, of cours have plenti of 
time to get whatev he had hidden. the hous suit him admirably; for 
there wa a passage--a he show me afterward--connect the dummi well 
with the crypt of the church beyond the garden wall; and these, in turn, 
were connect with certain cave in the cliffs, which went down to the 
beach beyond the church. 

"in the cours of hi talk, captain tobia offer to take the hous off 
my hands; and as thi suit me perfectly, for I wa about stall with 
it, and the plan also suit the landlord, it wa decid that no step 
should be taken against him; and that the whole busi should be 
hush up. 

"I ask the captain whether there wa realli anyth queer about the 
house; whether he had ever seen anything. He said yes, that he had twice 
seen a woman go about the house. We all look at one another, when 
the captain said that. He told us she never bother him, and that he had 
onli seen her twice, and on each occas it had follow a narrow escap 
from the revenu people. 

"captain tobia wa an observ man; he had seen how I had place the 
mat against the doors; and after enter the rooms, and walk all 
about them, so as to leav the foot-mark of an old pair of wet 
woollen slipper everywhere, he had deliber put the mat back as 
he found them. 

"the maggot which had drop from hi disgust leg of mutton had been 
an accident, and beyond even hi horribl planning. He wa huge 
delight to learn how it had affect us. 

"the moldi smell I had notic wa from the littl close stairway, when 
the captain open the panel. the door slam wa also anoth of hi 
contributions. 

"I come now to the end of the captain' ghost play; and to the difficulti 
of tri to explain the other peculiar things. In the first place, it 
wa obviou there wa someth genuin strang in the house; which 
made itself manifest as a woman. mani differ peopl had seen thi 
woman, under differ circumstances, so it is imposs to put the 
thing down to fancy; at the same time it must seem extraordinari that I 
should have live two year in the house, and seen nothing; whilst the 
policeman saw the woman, befor he had been there twenti minutes; the 
landlord, the detective, and the inspector all saw her. 

"I can onli surmis that _fear_ wa in everi case the key, as I might 
say, which open the sens to the presenc of the woman. the policeman 
wa a highly-strung man, and when he becam frightened, wa abl to see 
the woman. the same reason appli all 'round. _i_ saw nothing, until 
I becam realli frightened; then I saw, not the woman; but a child, 
run away from someth or someone. however, I will touch on that 
later. In short, until a veri strong degre of fear wa present, no one 
wa affect by the forc which made itself evident, as a woman. My 
theori explain whi some tenant were never awar of anyth strang in 
the house, whilst other left immediately. the more sensit they were, 
the less would be the degre of fear necessari to make them awar of the 
forc present in the house. 

"the peculiar shine of all the metal object in the cellar, had been 
visibl onli to me. the cause, natur I do not know; neither do I know 
whi I, alone, wa abl to see the shining." 

"the child," I asked. "can you explain that part at all? whi _you_ didn't 
see the woman, and whi _they_ didn't see the child. wa it mere the 
same force, appear differ to differ people?" 

"no," said carnacki, "I can't explain that. but I am quit sure that the 
woman and the child were not onli two complet and differ entities; 
but even they were each not in quit the same plane of existence. 

"to give you a root idea, however, it is held in the sigsand ms. that a 
child '_still_born' is 'snatych back bye thee haggs.' thi is crude; 
but may yet contain an element truth. yet, befor I make thi clearer, 
let me tell you a thought that ha often been made. It may be that 
physic birth is but a secondari process; and that prior to the 
possibility, the mother spirit search for, until it finds, the small 
element--th primal ego or child' soul. It may be that a certain 
wayward would caus such to strive to evad captur by the mother 
spirit. It may have been such a thing as this, that I saw. I have alway 
tri to think so; but it is imposs to ignor the sens of repuls 
that I felt when the unseen woman went past me. thi repuls carri 
forward the idea suggest in the sigsand ms., that a stillborn child is 
thus, becaus it ego or spirit ha been snatch back by the 'hags.' In 
other words, by certain of the monstros of the outer circle. the 
thought is inconceiv terrible, and probabl the more so becaus it is 
so fragmentary. It leav us with the concept of a child' soul adrift 
half-way between two lives, and run through etern from someth 
incred and inconceiv (becaus not understood) to our senses. 

"the thing is beyond further discussion; for it is futil to attempt to 
discuss a thing, to ani purpose, of which one ha a knowledg so 
fragmentari as this. there is one thought, which is often mine. perhap 
there is a mother spirit--" 

"and the well?" said arkwright. "how did the captain get in from the 
other side?" 

"a I said before," answer carnacki. "the side wall of the well did 
not reach to the bottom; so that you had onli to dip down into the water, 
and come up again on the other side of the wall, under the cellar floor, 
and so climb into the passage. Of course, the water wa the same height 
on both side of the walls. don't ask me who made the well entranc or 
the littl stairway; for I don't know. the hous wa veri old, as I have 
told you; and that sort of thing wa use in the old days." 

"and the child," I said, come back to the thing which chiefli 
interest me. "you would say that the birth must have occur in that 
house; and in thi way, one might suppos that the hous to have becom 
_en rapport_, if I can use the word in that way, with the forc that 
produc the tragedy?" 

"yes," repli carnacki. "thi is, suppos we take the suggest of 
the sigsand ms., to account for the phenomenon." 

"there may be other houses--" I began. 

"there are," said carnacki; and stood up. 

"out you go," he said, genially, use the recogn formula. and in 
five minut we were on the embankment, go thought to our 
variou homes. 




no. 6--the thing invis 


carnacki had just return to cheyn walk, chelsea. I wa awar of thi 
interest fact by reason of the curt and quaintli word postcard 
which I wa rereading, and by which I wa request to present myself 
at hi hous not later than seven o'clock on that evening. mr. carnacki 
had, as I and the other of hi strictli limit circl of friend 
knew, been away in kent for the past three weeks; but beyond that, we 
had no knowledge. carnacki wa genial secret and curt, and spoke 
onli when he wa readi to speak. when thi stage arrived, I and hi 
three other friends--jessop, arkright, and taylor--would receiv a card 
or a wire, ask us to call. not one of us ever willingli missed, for 
after a thoroughli sensibl littl dinner carnacki would snuggl down 
into hi big armchair, light hi pipe, and wait whilst we arrang 
ourselv comfort in our accustom seat and nooks. then he would 
begin to talk. 

upon thi particular night I wa the first to arriv and found 
carnacki sitting, quietli smoke over a paper. He stood up, shook me 
firmli by the hand, point to a chair, and sat down again, never 
have utter a word. 

for my part, I said noth either. I knew the man too well to bother him 
with question or the weather, and so took a seat and a cigarette. 
present the three other turn up and after that we spent a 
comfort and busi hour at dinner. 

dinner over, carnacki snug himself down into hi great chair, as I 
have said wa hi habit, fill hi pipe and puf for awhile, hi gaze 
direct thought at the fire. the rest of us, if I may so express 
it, made ourselv cozy, each after hi own particular manner. A minut 
or so later carnacki began to speak, ignor ani preliminari remarks, 
and go straight to the subject of the stori we knew he had to tell: 

"I have just come back from sir alfr jarnock' place at burtontree, in 
south kent," he began, without remov hi gaze from the fire. "most 
extraordinari thing have been happen down there late and mr. georg 
jarnock, the eldest son, wire to ask me to run over and see whether I 
could help to clear matter up a bit. I went. 

"when I got there, I found that they have an old chapel attach to the 
castl which ha had quit a distinguish reput for be what is 
popularli term 'haunted.' they have been rather proud of this, as I 
manag to discover, until quit late when someth veri disagre 
occurred, which serv to remind them that famili ghost are not alway 
content, as I might say, to remain pure ornamental. 

"it sound almost laughable, I know, to hear of a long-respect 
supernatur phenomenon grow unexpectedli dangerous; and in thi case, 
the tale of the haunt wa consid as littl more than an old myth, 
except after nightfall, when possibl it becam more plausibl seeming. 

"but howev thi may be, there is no doubt at all but that what I might 
term the haunt essenc which live in the place, had becom suddenli 
dangerous--deadli danger too, the old butler be nearli stab to 
death one night in the chapel, with a peculiar old dagger. 

"it is, in fact, thi dagger which is popularli suppos to 'haunt' the 
chapel. At least, there ha been alway a stori hand down in the famili 
that thi dagger would attack ani enemi who should dare to ventur into 
the chapel, after nightfall. but, of course, thi had been taken with 
just about the same amount of serious that peopl take most ghost 
tales, and that is not usual of a worryingli _real_ nature. I mean that 
most peopl never quit know how much or how littl they believ of 
matter ab-human or ab-normal, and gener they never have an 
opportun to learn. and, indeed, as you are all aware, I am as big a 
skeptic concern the truth of ghost tale as ani man you are like to 
meet; onli I am what I might term an unprejud skeptic. I am not given 
to either believ or disbeliev thing 'on principle,' as I have 
found mani idiot prone to be, and what is more, some of them not asham 
to boast of the insan fact. I view all report 'hauntings' as unproven 
until I have examin into them, and I am bound to admit that ninety-nin 
case in a hundr turn out to be sheer bosh and fancy. but the 
hundredth! well, if it were not for the hundredth, I should have few 
stori to tell you--eh? 

"of course, after the attack on the butler, it becam evid that there 
wa at least 'something' in the old stori concern the dagger, and I 
found everyon in a half belief that the queer old weapon did realli 
strike the butler, either by the aid of some inher force, which I 
found them peculiarli unabl to explain, or els in the hand of some 
invis thing or monster of the outer world! 

"from consider experience, I knew that it wa much more like that 
the butler had been 'knifed' by some viciou and quit materi human! 

"naturally, the first thing to do, wa to test thi probabl of human 
agency, and I set to work to make a pretti drastic examin of the 
peopl who knew most about the tragedy. 

"the result of thi examination, both pleas and surpris me, for 
it left me with veri good reason for belief that I had come upon one 
of those extraordinari rare 'true manifestations' of the extrus of 
a forc from the outside. In more popular phraseology--a genuin case 
of haunting. 

"these are the facts: On the previou sunday even but one, sir alfr 
jarnock' household had attend famili service, as usual, in the chapel. 
you see, the rector goe over to offici twice each sunday, after 
conclud hi duti at the public church about three mile away. 

"at the end of the servic in the chapel, sir alfr jarnock, hi 
son mr. georg jarnock, and the rector had stood for a coupl of 
minutes, talking, whilst old bellett the butler went 'round, put 
out the candles. 

"suddenly, the rector rememb that he had left hi small prayer book 
on the communion tabl in the morning; he turned, and ask the butler to 
get it for him befor he blew out the chancel candles. 

"now I have particularli call your attent to thi becaus it is 
import in that it provid wit in a most fortun manner at an 
extraordinari moment. you see, the rector' turn to speak to bellett 
had natur caus both sir alfr jarnock and hi son to glanc in the 
direct of the butler, and it wa at thi ident instant and whilst 
all three were look at him, that the old butler wa stabbed--there, 
full in the candlelight, befor their eyes. 

"I took the opportun to call earli upon the rector, after I had 
question mr. georg jarnock, who repli to my queri in place of sir 
alfr jarnock, for the older man wa in a nervou and shaken condit 
as a result of the happening, and hi son wish him to avoid dwell 
upon the scene as much as possible. 

"the rector' version wa clear and vivid, and he had evid receiv 
the astonish of hi life. He pictur to me the whole 
affair--bellett, up at the chancel gate, go for the prayer book, and 
absolut alone; and then the _blow_, out of the void, he describ it; 
and the _force_ prodigious--th old man be driven headlong into the 
bodi of the chapel. like the kick of a great horse, the rector said, hi 
benevol old eye bright and intens with the effort he had actual 
witnessed, in defianc of all that he had hitherto believed. 

"when I left him, he went back to the write which he had put asid when 
I appeared. I feel sure that he wa develop the first unorthodox 
sermon that he had ever evolved. He wa a dear old chap, and I should 
certainli like to have heard it. 

"the last man I visit wa the butler. He was, of course, in a 
fright weak and shaken condition, but he could tell me noth that 
did not point to there be a power abroad in the chapel. He told the 
same tale, in everi minut particle, that I had learn from the others. 
He had been just go up to put out the altar candl and fetch the 
rector' book, when someth struck him an enorm blow high up on the 
left breast and he wa driven headlong into the aisle. 

"examin had shown that he had been stab by the dagger--of which I 
will tell you more in a moment--that hung alway abov the altar. the 
weapon had entered, fortun some inch abov the heart, just under 
the collarbone, which had been broken by the stupend forc of the 
blow, the dagger itself be driven clean through the body, and out 
through the scapula behind. 

"the poor old fellow could not talk much, and I soon left him; but what 
he had told me wa suffici to make it unmistak that no live 
person had been within yard of him when he wa attacked; and, as I knew, 
thi fact wa verifi by three capabl and respons witnesses, 
independ of bellett himself. 

"the thing now wa to search the chapel, which is small and extrem 
old. It is veri massiv built, and enter through onli one door, which 
lead out of the castl itself, and the key of which is kept by sir 
alfr jarnock, the butler have no duplicate. 

"the shape of the chapel is oblong, and the altar is rail off after the 
usual fashion. there are two tomb in the bodi of the place; but none in 
the chancel, which is bare, except for the tall candlesticks, and the 
chancel rail, beyond which is the undrap altar of solid marble, upon 
which stand four small candlesticks, two at each end. 

"abov the altar hang the 'waeful dagger,' as I had learn it wa 
named. I fanci the term ha been taken from an old vellum, which 
describ the dagger and it suppos abnorm properties. I took the 
dagger down, and examin it minut and with method. the blade is ten 
inch long, two inch broad at the base, and taper to a round but 
sharp point, rather peculiar. It is double-edged. 

"the metal sheath is curiou for have a crosspiece, which, taken with 
the fact that the sheath itself is continu three part up the hilt of 
the dagger (in a most inconveni fashion), give it the appear of a 
cross. that thi is not unintent is shown by an engrav of the 
christ crucifi upon one side, whilst upon the other, in latin, is the 
inscription: 'vengeanc is mine, I will repay.' A quaint and rather 
terribl conjunct of ideas. upon the blade of the dagger is graven in 
old english capitals: I watch. I strike. On the butt of the hilt there is 
carv deepli a pentacle. 

"thi is a pretti accur descript of the peculiar old weapon that 
ha had the curiou and uncomfort reput of be abl (either of 
it own accord or in the hand of someth invisible) to strike 
murder ani enemi of the jarnock famili who may chanc to enter the 
chapel after nightfall. I may tell you here and now, that befor I left, 
I had veri good reason to put certain doubt behind me; for I test the 
deadli of the thing myself. 

"a you know, however, at thi point of my investigation, I wa still at 
that stage where I consid the exist of a supernatur forc 
unproven. In the meanwhile, I treat the chapel drastically, sound 
and scrutin the wall and floor, deal with them almost foot by 
foot, and particularli examin the two tombs. 

"at the end of thi search, I had in a ladder, and made a close survey of 
the groin roof. I pass three day in thi fashion, and by the even 
of the third day I had prove to my entir satisfact that there is no 
place in the whole of that chapel where ani live be could have 
hidden, and also that the onli way of ingress and egress to and from the 
chapel is through the doorway which lead into the castle, the door of 
which wa alway kept locked, and the key kept by sir alfr jarnock 
himself, as I have told you. I mean, of course, that thi doorway is the 
onli entranc practic to materi people. 

"yes, as you will see, even had I discov some other opening, secret 
or otherwise, it would not have help at all to explain the mysteri of 
the incred attack, in a normal fashion. for the butler, as you know, 
wa struck in full sight of the rector, sir jarnock and hi son. and old 
bellett himself knew that no live person had touch him.... _'out of 
the void,'_ the rector had describ the inhumanli brutal attack. 'out of 
the void!' A strang feel it give one--eh? 

"and thi is the thing that I had been call in to bottom! 

"after consider thought, I decid on a plan of action. I propos to 
sir alfr jarnock that I should spend a night in the chapel, and keep a 
constant watch upon the dagger. but to this, the old knight--a little, 
wizened, nervou man--would not listen for a moment. he, at least, I felt 
assur had no doubt of the realiti of some danger supernatur forc 
a roam at night in the chapel. He inform me that it had been hi habit 
everi even to lock the chapel door, so that no one might foolishli or 
heedlessli run the risk of ani peril that it might hold at night, and 
that he could not allow me to attempt such a thing after what had 
happen to the butler. 

"I could see that sir alfr jarnock wa veri much in earnest, and would 
evid have held himself to blame had he allow me to make the 
experi and ani harm come to me; so I said noth in argument; and 
presently, plead the fatigu of hi year and health, he said 
goodnight, and left me; have given me the impress of be a polit 
but rather superstitious, old gentleman. 

"that night, however, whilst I wa undressing, I saw how I might achiev 
the thing I wished, and be abl to enter the chapel after dark, without 
make sir alfr jarnock nervous. On the morrow, when I borrow the 
key, I would take an impression, and have a duplic made. then, with my 
privat key, I could do just what I liked. 

"in the morn I carri out my idea. I borrow the key, as I want to 
take a photograph of the chancel by daylight. when I had done thi I 
lock up the chapel and hand the key to sir alfr jarnock, have 
first taken an impress in soap. I had brought out the expos 
plate--in it slide--with me; but the camera I had left exactli as it 
was, as I want to take a second photograph of the chancel that night, 
from the same position. 

"I took the dark slide into burtontree, also the cake of soap with the 
impress. the soap I left with the local ironmonger, who wa someth of 
a locksmith and promis to let me have my duplicate, finished, if I 
would call in two hours. thi I did, have in the meanwhil found out a 
photograph where I develop the plate, and left it to dry, tell him 
I would call next day. At the end of the two hour I went for my key and 
found it ready, much to my satisfaction. then I return to the castle. 

"after dinner that evening, I play billiard with young jarnock for 
a coupl of hours. then I had a cup of coffe and went off to my 
room, tell him I wa feel aw tired. He nod and told me 
he felt the same way. I wa glad, for I want the hous to settl as 
soon as possible. 

"I lock the door of my room, then from under the bed--wher I had 
hidden them earlier in the evening--i drew out sever fine piec of 
plate armor, which I had remov from the armory. there wa also a shirt 
of chain mail, with a sort of quilt hood of mail to go over the head. 

"I buckl on the plate armor, and found it extraordinarili 
uncomfortable, and over all I drew on the chain mail. I know noth 
about armor, but from what I have learn since, I must have put on part 
of two suits. anyway, I felt beastly, clamp and clumsi and unabl to 
move my arm and leg naturally. but I knew that the thing I wa think 
of do call for some sort of protect for my body. over the armor I 
pull on my dress gown and shove my revolv into one of the side 
pockets--and my repeat flash-light into the other. My dark lantern I 
carri in my hand. 

"a soon as I wa readi I went out into the passag and listened. I had 
been some consider time make my prepar and I found that now 
the big hall and staircas were in dark and all the hous seem 
quiet. I step back and close and lock my door. then, veri slowli 
and silent I went downstair to the hall and turn into the passag 
that led to the chapel. 

"I reach the door and tri my key. It fit perfectli and a moment 
later I wa in the chapel, with the door lock behind me, and all about 
me the utter dree silenc of the place, with just the faint show of 
the outlin of the stained, lead windows, make the dark and 
lonesom almost the more apparent. 

"now it would be silli to say I did not feel queer. I felt veri queer 
indeed. you just try, ani of you, to imagin yourself stand there in 
the dark silenc and rememb not onli the legend that wa attach to 
the place, but what had realli happen to the old butler onli a littl 
while gone, I can tell you, as I stood there, I could believ that 
someth invis wa come toward me in the air of the chapel. yet, I 
had got to go through with the business, and I just took hold of my 
littl bit of courag and set to work. 

"first of all I switch on my light, then I began a care tour of the 
place; examin everi corner and nook. I found noth unusual. At the 
chancel gate I held up my lamp and flash the light at the dagger. It 
hung there, right enough, abov the altar, but I rememb think of the 
word 'demure,' as I look at it. however, I push the thought away, for 
what I wa do need no addit of uncomfort thoughts. 

"I complet the tour of the place, with a constantli grow awar 
of it utter chill and unkind desolation--an atmospher of cold 
dismal seem to be everywhere, and the quiet wa abominable. 

"at the conclus of my search I walk across to where I had left my 
camera focus upon the chancel. from the satchel that I had put beneath 
the tripod I took out a dark slide and insert it in the camera, draw 
the shutter. after that I uncap the lens, pull out my flashlight 
apparatus, and press the trigger. there wa an intense, brilliant 
flash, that made the whole of the interior of the chapel jump into sight, 
and disappear as quickly. then, in the light from my lantern, I insert 
the shutter into the slide, and revers the slide, so as to have a fresh 
plate readi to expos at ani time. 

"after I had done thi I shut off my lantern and sat down in one of the 
pew near to my camera. I cannot say what I expect to happen, but I had 
an extraordinari feeling, almost a conviction, that someth peculiar or 
horribl would soon occur. It was, you know, as if I knew. 

"an hour passed, of absolut silence. the time I knew by the far-off, 
faint chime of a clock that had been erect over the stables. I wa 
beastli cold, for the whole place is without ani kind of heat pipe or 
furnace, as I had notic dure my search, so that the temperatur wa 
suffici uncomfort to suit my frame of mind. I felt like a kind 
of human periwinkl encas in boilerpl and frozen with cold and funk. 
and, you know, somehow the dark about me seem to press coldli against 
my face. I cannot say whether ani of you have ever had the feeling, but 
if you have, you will know just how disgustingli unnerv it is. and 
then, all at once, I had a horribl sens that someth wa move in 
the place. It wa not that I could hear anyth but I had a kind of 
intuit knowledg that someth had stir in the darkness. can you 
imagin how I felt? 

"suddenli my courag went. I put up my mail arm over my face. I 
want to protect it. I had got a sudden sicken feel that someth 
wa hover over me in the dark. talk about fright! I could have shout 
if I had not been afraid of the noise.... and then, abruptly, I heard 
something. away up the aisle, there sound a dull clang of metal, as it 
might be the tread of a mail heel upon the stone of the aisle. I sat 
immovable. I wa fight with all my strength to get back my courage. I 
could not take my arm down from over my face, but I knew that I wa 
get hold of the gritti part of me again. and suddenli I made a mighti 
effort and lower my arms. I held my face up in the darkness. and, I 
tell you, I respect myself for the act, becaus I thought truli at that 
moment that I wa go to die. but I think, just then, by the slow 
revuls of feel which had assist my effort, I wa less sick, in 
that instant, at the thought of have to die, than at the knowledg of 
the utter weak cowardic that had so unexpectedli shaken me all to bits, 
for a time. 

"do I make myself clear? you understand, I feel sure, that the sens of 
respect, which I spoke of, is not realli unhealthi egotism; because, you 
see, I am not blind to the state of mind which help me. I mean that if 
I had uncov my face by a sheer effort of will, unhelp by ani 
revuls of feeling, I should have done a thing much more worthi of 
mention. but, even as it was, there were element in the act, worthi of 
respect. you follow me, don't you? 

"and, you know, noth touch me, after all! So that, in a littl 
while, I had got back a bit to my normal, and felt steadi enough to go 
through with the busi without ani more funking. 

"I daresay a coupl of minut passed, and then, away up near the 
chancel, there came again that clang, as though an armor foot step 
cautiously. By jove! but it made me stiffen. and suddenli the thought 
came that the sound I heard might be the rattl of the dagger abov the 
altar. It wa not a particularli sensibl notion, for the sound wa far 
too heavi and reson for such a cause. yet, as can be easili 
understood, my reason wa bound to submit somewhat to my fanci at such a 
time. I rememb now, that the idea of that insens thing becom 
animate, and attack me, did not occur to me with ani sens of 
possibl or reality. I thought rather, in a vagu way, of some 
invis monster of outer space fumbl at the dagger. I rememb 
the old rector' descript of the attack on the butler.... _of the 
void_. and he had describ the stupend forc of the blow as be 
'like the kick of a great horse.' you can see how uncomfort my 
thought were running. 

"I felt 'round swiftli and cautious for my lantern. I found it close to 
me, on the pew seat, and with a sudden, jerki movement, I switch on the 
light. I flash it up the aisle, to and fro across the chancel, but I 
could see noth to frighten me. I turn quickly, and sent the jet of 
light dart across and across the rear end of the chapel; then on each 
side of me, befor and behind, up at the roof and down at the marbl 
floor, but nowher wa there ani visibl thing to put me in fear, not a 
thing that need have set my flesh thrilling; just the quiet chapel, cold, 
and etern silent. you know the feeling. 

"I had been standing, whilst I sent the light about the chapel, but now I 
pull out my revolver, and then, with a tremend effort of will, 
switch off the light, and sat down again in the darkness, to continu 
my constant watch. 

"it seem to me that quit half an hour, or even more, must have passed, 
after this, dure which no sound had broken the intens stillness. I had 
grown less nervous tense, for the flash of the light 'round the 
place had made me feel less out of all bound of the normal--it had 
given me someth of that unreason sens of safeti that a nervou 
child obtain at night, by cover it head up with the bedclothes. thi 
just about illustr the complet human illogic of the work 
of my feelings; for, as you know, whatev creature, thing, or be it 
wa that had made that extraordinari and horribl attack on the old 
butler, it had certainli not been visible. 

"and so you must pictur me sit there in the dark; clumsi with armor, 
and with my revolv in one hand, and nurs my lantern, ready, with the 
other. and then it was, after thi littl time of partial relief from 
intens nervousness, that there came a fresh strain on me; for somewher 
in the utter quiet of the chapel, I thought I heard something. I 
listened, tens and rigid, my heart boom just a littl in my ear for 
a moment; then I thought I heard it again. I felt sure that someth had 
move at the top of the aisle. I strain in the darkness, to hark; and 
my eye show me black within blackness, wherev I glanced, so that 
I took no heed of what they told me; for even if I look at the dim loom 
of the stain window at the top of the chancel, my sight gave me the 
shape of vagu shadow pass noiseless and ghostli across, constantly. 
there wa a time of almost peculiar silence, horribl to me, as I felt 
just then. and suddenli I seem to hear a sound again, nearer to me, and 
repeated, infinit stealthy. It wa as if a vast, soft tread were 
come slowli down the aisle. 

"can you imagin how I felt? I do not think you can. I did not move, ani 
more than the stone effigi on the two tombs; but sat there, 
_stiffened_. I fanci now, that I heard the tread all about the chapel. 
and then, you know, I wa just as sure in a moment that I could not hear 
it--that I had never heard it. 

"some particularli long minut passed, about thi time; but I think my 
nerv must have quiet a bit; for I rememb be suffici awar 
of my feelings, to realiz that the muscl of my shoulder _ached_, with 
the way that they must have been contracted, as I sat there, hunch 
myself, rigid. mind you, I wa still in a disgust funk; but what I 
might call the 'immin sens of danger' seem to have eas from 
around me; at ani rate, I felt, in some curiou fashion, that there wa a 
respite--a temporari cessat of malign from about me. It is 
imposs to word my feel more clearli to you, for I cannot see them 
more clearli than this, myself. 

"yet, you must not pictur me as sit there, free from strain; for the 
nerv tension wa so great that my heart action wa a littl out of 
normal control, the blood beat make a dull boom at time in my ears, 
with the result that I had the sensat that I could not hear acutely. 
thi is a simpli beastli feeling, especi under such circumstances. 

"I wa sit like this, listening, as I might say with bodi and soul, 
when suddenli I got that hideou convict again that someth wa 
move in the air of the place. the feel seem to stiffen me, as I 
sat, and my head appear to tighten, as if all the scalp had grown 
_tense_. thi wa so real, that I suffer an actual pain, most peculiar 
and at the same time intense; the whole head pained. I had a fierc 
desir to cover my face again with my mail arms, but I fought it off. 
If I had given way then to that, I should simpli have bunk straight out 
of the place. I sat and sweat coldli (that' the bald truth), with the 
'creep' busi at my spine.... 

"and then, abruptly, onc more I thought I heard the sound of that huge, 
soft tread on the aisle, and thi time closer to me. there wa an aw 
littl silence, dure which I had the feel that someth enorm 
wa bend over toward me, from the aisle.... and then, through the 
boom of the blood in my ears, there came a slight sound from the 
place where my camera stood--a disagre sort of slither sound, and 
then a sharp tap. I had the lantern readi in my left hand, and now I 
snap it on, desperately, and shone it straight abov me, for I had a 
convict that there wa someth there. but I saw nothing. immedi 
I flash the light at the camera, and along the aisle, but again there 
wa noth visible. I wheel 'round, shoot the beam of light in a 
great circl about the place; to and fro I shone it, jerk it here and 
there, but it show me nothing. 

"I had stood up the instant that I had seen that there wa noth in 
sight over me, and now I determin to visit the chancel, and see whether 
the dagger had been touched. I step out of the pew into the aisle, and 
here I came to an abrupt pause, for an almost invincible, sick repugn 
wa fight me back from the upper part of the chapel. A constant, queer 
prickl went up and down my spine, and a dull ach took me in the small 
of the back, as I fought with myself to conquer thi sudden new feel 
of terror and horror. I tell you, that no one who ha not been through 
these kind of experiences, ha ani idea of the sheer, actual physic 
pain attend upon, and result from, the intens nerv strain that 
ghostli fright set up in the human system. I stood there feel 
posit ill. but I got myself in hand, as it were, in about half a 
minute, and then I went, walking, I expect, as jerki as a mechan tin 
man, and switch the light from side to side, befor and behind, and 
over my head continually. and the hand that held my revolv sweat so 
much, that the thing fairli slip in my fist. doe not sound veri 
heroic, doe it? 

"I pass through the short chancel, and reach the step that led up to 
the small gate in the chancel rail. I threw the beam from my lantern 
upon the dagger. yes, I thought, it' all right. abruptly, it seem to 
me that there wa someth wanting, and I lean forward over the 
chancel gate to peer, hold the light high. My suspicion wa hideous 
correct. _the dagger had gone._ onli the cross-shap sheath hung there 
abov the altar. 

"in a sudden, frighten flash of imagination, I pictur the thing 
adrift in the chapel, move here and there, as though of it own 
volition; for whatev forc wield it, wa certainli beyond 
visibility. I turn my head stiffli over to the left, glanc 
frightenedli behind me, and flash the light to help my eyes. In the 
same instant I wa struck a tremend blow over the left breast, and 
hurl backward from the chancel rail, into the aisle, my armor clang 
loudli in the horribl silence. I land on my back, and slither along 
on the polish marble. My shoulder struck the corner of a pew front, 
and brought me up, half stunned. I scrambl to my feet, horribl sick 
and shaken; but the fear that wa on me, make littl of that at the 
moment. I wa minu both revolv and lantern, and utterli bewild as 
to just where I wa standing. I bow my head, and made a scrambl run 
in the complet dark and dash into a pew. I jump back, 
staggering, got my bear a little, and race down the center of the 
aisle, put my mail arm over my face. I plung into my camera, 
hurl it among the pews. I crash into the font, and reel back. 
then I wa at the exit. I fumbl madli in my dress gown pocket for 
the key. I found it and scrape at the door, feverishly, for the 
keyhole. I found the keyhole, turn the key, burst the door open, and 
wa into the passage. I slam the door and leant hard against it, 
gasping, whilst I felt crazili again for the keyhole, thi time to lock 
the door upon what wa in the chapel. I succeeded, and began to feel my 
way stupidli along the wall of the corridor. present I had come to the 
big hall, and so in a littl to my room. 

"in my room, I sat for a while, until I had steadi down someth 
to the normal. after a time I commenc to strip off the armor. I saw 
then that both the chain mail and the plate armor had been pierc 
over the breast. and, suddenly, it came home to me that the thing had 
struck for my heart. 

"strip rapidly, I found that the skin of the breast over the heart 
had just been cut suffici to allow a littl blood to stain my shirt, 
noth more. only, the whole breast wa badli bruis and intens 
painful. you can imagin what would have happen if I had not worn the 
armor. In ani case, it is a marvel that I wa not knock senseless. 

"I did not go to bed at all that night, but sat upon the edge, thinking, 
and wait for the dawn; for I had to remov my litter befor sir alfr 
jarnock should enter, if I were to hide from him the fact that I had 
manag a duplic key. 

"so soon as the pale light of the morn had strengthen suffici 
to show me the variou detail of my room, I made my way quietli down to 
the chapel. veri silently, and with tens nerves, I open the door. the 
chill light of the dawn made distinct the whole place--everyth seem 
instinct with a ghostly, unearthli quiet. can you get the feeling? I 
wait sever minut at the door, allow the morn to grow, and 
likewis my courage, I suppose. present the rise sun threw an odd 
beam right in through the big, east window, make color sunshin all 
the length of the chapel. and then, with a tremend effort, I forc 
myself to enter. 

"I went up the aisl to where I had overthrown my camera in the darkness. 
the leg of the tripod were stick up from the interior of a pew, and I 
expect to find the machin smash to pieces; yet, beyond that the 
ground glass wa broken, there wa no real damag done. 

"I replac the camera in the posit from which I had taken the 
previou photography; but the slide contain the plate I had expos by 
flashlight I remov and put into one of my side pockets, regret that 
I had not taken a second flash pictur at the instant when I heard those 
strang sound up in the chancel. 

"have tidi my photograph apparatus, I went to the chancel to 
recov my lantern and revolver, which had both--a you know--been 
knock from my hand when I wa stabbed. I found the lantern lying, 
hopelessli bent, with smash lens, just under the pulpit. My revolv I 
must have held until my shoulder struck the pew, for it wa lie there 
in the aisle, just about where I believ I cannon into the pew corner. 
It wa quit undamaged. 

"have secur these two articles, I walk up to the chancel rail to 
see whether the dagger had returned, or been returned, to it sheath 
abov the altar. before, however, I reach the chancel rail, I had a 
slight shock; for there on the floor of the chancel, about a yard away 
from where I had been struck, lay the dagger, quiet and demur upon the 
polish marbl pavement. I wonder whether you will, ani of you, 
understand the nervous that took me at the sight of the thing. with a 
sudden, unreason action, I jump forward and put my foot on it, to 
hold it there. can you understand? Do you? and, you know, I could not 
stoop down and pick it up with my hand for quit a minute, I should 
think. afterward, when I had done so, however, and handl it a little, 
thi feel pass away and my reason (and also, I expect, the daylight) 
made me feel that I had been a littl bit of an ass. quit natural, 
though, I assur you! yet it wa a new kind of fear to me. i'm take no 
notic of the cheap joke about the ass! I am talk about the 
curious of learn in that moment a new shade or qualiti of fear 
that had hitherto been outsid of my knowledg or imagination. doe it 
interest you? 

"I examin the dagger, minutely, turn it over and over in my hand 
and never--a I suddenli discovered--hold it loosely. It wa as if I 
were subconsci surpris that it lay quiet in my hands. yet even 
thi feel passed, largely, after a short while. the curiou weapon 
show no sign of the blow, except that the dull color--of the blade wa 
slightli brighter on the round point that had cut through the armor. 

"presently, when I had made an end of stare at the dagger, I went up 
the chancel step and in through the littl gate. then, kneel upon the 
altar, I replac the dagger in it sheath, and came outsid of the rail 
again, close the gate after me and feel awar uncomfort 
becaus the horribl old weapon wa back again in it accustom place. I 
suppose, without analyz my feel veri deeply, I had an unreason 
and onli half-consci belief that there wa a greater probabl of 
danger when the dagger hung in it five centuri rest place than when 
it wa out of it! yet, somehow I don't think thi is a veri good 
explanation, when I rememb the _demure_ look the thing seem to have 
when I saw it lie on the floor of the chancel. onli I know this, that 
when I had replac the dagger I had quit a touch of nerv and I 
stop onli to pick up my lantern from where I had place it whilst I 
examin the weapon, after which I went down the quiet aisl at a pretti 
quick walk, and so got out of the place. 

"that the nerv tension had been considerable, I realized, when I had 
lock the door behind me. I felt no inclin now to think of old sir 
alfr as a hypochondriac becaus he had taken such hyperseem 
precaut regard the chapel. I had a sudden wonder as to whether he 
might not have some knowledg of a long prior tragedi in which the 
dagger had been concerned. 

"I return to my room, washed, shave and dressed, after which I read 
awhile. then I went downstair and got the act butler to give me some 
sandwich and a cup of coffee. 

"half an hour later I wa head for burtontree, as hard as I could 
walk; for a sudden idea had come to me, which I wa anxiou to test. I 
reach the town a littl befor eight thirty, and found the local 
photograph with hi shutter still up. I did not wait, but knock 
until he appear with hi coat off, evid in the act of deal with 
hi breakfast. In a few word I made clear that I want the use of hi 
dark room immediately, and thi he at onc place at my disposal. 

"I had brought with me the slide which contain the plate that I had 
use with the flashlight, and as soon as I wa readi I set to work to 
develop. yet, it wa not the plate which I had exposed, that I first put 
into the solution, but the second plate, which had been readi in the 
camera dure all the time of my wait in the darkness. you see, the 
len had been uncap all that while, so that the whole chancel had 
been, as it were, under observation. 

"you all know someth of my experi in 'lightless photography,' 
that is, appreci light. It wa x-ray work that start me in that 
direction. yet, you must understand, though I wa attempt to develop 
thi 'unexposed' plate, I had no definit idea of results--noth more 
than a vagu hope that it might show me something. 

"yet, becaus of the possibilities, it wa with the most intens and 
absorb interest that I watch the plate under the action of the 
developer. present I saw a faint smudg of black appear in the upper 
part, and after that others, indistinct and waver of outline. I held 
the neg up to the light. the mark were rather small, and were 
almost entir confin to one end of the plate, but as I have said, 
lack definiteness. yet, such as they were, they were suffici to make 
me veri excit and I shove the thing quickli back into the solution. 

"for some minut further I watch it, lift it out onc or twice to 
make a more exact scrutiny, but could not imagin what the mark might 
represent, until suddenli it occur to me that in one of two place 
they certainli had shape suggest of a cross hilt dagger. yet, the 
shape were suffici indefinit to make me care not to let myself 
be overimpress by the uncomfort resemblance, though I must confess, 
the veri thought wa suffici to set some odd thrill adrift in me. 

"I carri develop a littl further, then put the neg into the 
hypo, and commenc work upon the other plate. thi came up nicely, and 
veri soon I had a realli decent neg that appear similar in everi 
respect (except for the differ of lighting) to the neg I had 
taken dure the previou day. I fix the plate, then have wash both 
it and the 'unexposed' one for a few minut under the tap, I put them 
into methyl spirit for fifteen minutes, after which I carri them 
into the photographer' kitchen and dri them in the oven. 

"whilst the two plate were dri the photograph and I made an 
enlarg from the neg I had taken by daylight. then we did the 
same with the two that I had just developed, wash them as quickli as 
possible, for I wa not troubl about the perman of the prints, and 
dri them with spirits. 

"when thi wa done I took them to the window and made a thorough 
examination, commenc with the one that appear to show shadowi 
dagger in sever places. yet, though it wa now enlarged, I wa still 
unabl to feel convinc that the mark truli repres anyth 
abnormal; and becaus of this, I put it on one side, determin not to 
let my imagin play too larg a part in construct weapon out of 
the indefinit outlines. 

"I took up the two other enlargements, both of the chancel, as you will 
remember, and commenc to compar them. for some minut I examin them 
without be abl to distinguish ani differ in the scene they 
portrayed, and then abruptly, I saw someth in which they varied. In 
the second enlargement--th one made from the flashlight negative--th 
dagger wa not in it sheath. yet, I had felt sure it wa there but a few 
minut befor I took the photograph. 

"after thi discoveri I began to compar the two enlarg in a veri 
differ manner from my previou scrutiny. I borrow a pair of calip 
from the photograph and with these I carri out a most method and 
exact comparison of the detail shown in the two photographs. 

"suddenli I came upon someth that set me all tingl with excitement. 
I threw the calip down, paid the photographer, and walk out through 
the shop into the street. the three enlarg I took with me, make 
them into a roll as I went. At the corner of the street I had the luck to 
get a cab and wa soon back at the castle. 

"I hurri up to my room and put the photograph away; then I went down to 
see whether I could find sir alfr jarnock; but mr. georg jarnock, who 
met me, told me that hi father wa too unwel to rise and would prefer 
that no one enter the chapel unless he were about. 

"young jarnock made a half apologet excus for hi father; remark 
that sir alfr jarnock wa perhap inclin to be a littl over careful; 
but that, consid what had happened, we must agre that the need for 
hi care had been justified. He added, also, that even befor the 
horribl attack on the butler hi father had been just as particular, 
alway keep the key and never allow the door to be unlock except 
when the place wa in use for divin service, and for an hour each 
forenoon when the cleaner were in. 

"to all thi I nod understandingly; but when, presently, the young 
man left me I took my duplic key and made for the door of the chapel. 
I went in and lock it behind me, after which I carri out some 
intens interest and rather weird experiments. these prove 
success to such an extent that I came out of the place in a perfect 
fever of excitement. I inquir for mr. georg jarnock and wa told that 
he wa in the morn room. 

"'come along,' I said, when I had found him. 'pleas give me a lift. i'v 
someth exceedingli strang to show you.' 

"he wa palpabl veri much puzzled, but came quickly. As we strode along 
he ask me a score of questions, to all of which I just shook my head, 
ask him to wait a little. 

"I led the way to the armory. here I suggest that he should take one 
side of a dummy, dress in half plate armor, whilst I took the other. 
He nodded, though obvious vastli bewildered, and togeth we carri 
the thing to the chapel door. when he saw me take out my key and open 
the way for us he appear even more astonished, but held himself in, 
evid wait for me to explain. We enter the chapel and I lock 
the door behind us, after which we cart the armor dummi up the aisl 
to the gate of the chancel rail where we put it down upon it round, 
wooden stand. 

"'stand back!' I shout suddenli as young jarnock made a movement to 
open the gate. 'mi god, man! you mustn't do that!' 

"do what?" he asked, half-startl and half-irrit by my word 
and manner. 

"one minute," I said. "just stand to the side a moment, and watch." 

He step to the left whilst I took the dummi in my arm and turn it 
to face the altar, so that it stood close to the gate. then, stand 
well away on the right side, I press the back of the thing so that it 
leant forward a littl upon the gate, which flew open. In the same 
instant, the dummi wa struck a tremend blow that hurl it into the 
aisle, the armor rattl and clang upon the polish marbl floor. 

"good god!" shout young jarnock, and ran back from the chancel rail, 
hi face veri white. 

"come and look at the thing," I said, and led the way to where the dummi 
lay, it armor upper limb all splay adrift in queer contortions. I 
stoop over it and pointed. there, driven right through the thick steel 
breastplate, wa the 'waeful dagger.' 

"good god!" said young jarnock again. "good god! it' the dagger! the 
thing' been stabbed, same as bellett!" 

"yes," I replied, and saw him glanc swiftli toward the entranc of 
the chapel. but I will do him the justic to say that he never 
budg an inch. 

"come and see how it wa done," I said, and led the way back to the 
chancel rail. from the wall to the left of the altar I took down a long, 
curious ornamented, iron instrument, not unlik a short spear. the 
sharp end of thi I insert in a hole in the left-hand gatepost of the 
chancel gateway. I lift hard, and a section of the post, from the floor 
upward, bent inward toward the altar, as though hing at the bottom. 
down it went, leav the remain part of the post standing. As I bent 
the movabl portion lower there came a quick click and a section of the 
floor slid to one side, show a long, shallow cavity, suffici to 
enclos the post. I put my weight to the lever and hove the post down 
into the niche. immedi there wa a sharp clang, as some catch 
snick in, and held it against the power oper spring. 

I went over now to the dummy, and after a few minute' work manag to 
wrench the dagger loos out of the armor. I brought the old weapon and 
place it hilt in a hole near the top of the post where it fit 
loosely, the point upward. after that I went again to the lever and gave 
anoth strong heave, and the post descend about a foot, to the bottom 
of the cavity, catch there with anoth clang. I withdrew the lever 
and the narrow strip of floor slid back, cover post and dagger, and 
look no differ from the surround surface. 

then I shut the chancel gate, and we both stood well to one side. I 
took the spear-lik lever, and gave the gate a littl push, so that it 
opened. instantli there wa a loud thud, and someth sang through the 
air, strike the bottom wall of the chapel. It wa the dagger. I 
show jarnock then that the other half of the post had sprung back 
into place, make the whole post as thick as the one upon the 
right-hand side of the gate. 

"there!" I said, turn to the young man and tap the divid post. 
"there' the 'invisible' thing that use the dagger, but who the deuc is 
the person who set the trap?" I look at him keenli as I spoke. 

"mi father is the onli one who ha a key," he said. "so it' practic 
imposs for anyon to get in and meddle." 

I look at him again, but it wa obviou that he had not yet reach out 
to ani conclusion. 

"see here, mr. jarnock," I said, perhap rather curter than I should have 
done, consid what I had to say. "are you quit sure that sir alfr 
is quit balanced--mentally?" 

"he look at me, half frightenedli and flush a little. I realiz 
then how badli I put it. 

"'i--i don't know,' he replied, after a slight paus and wa then silent, 
except for one or two incoher half remarks. 

"'tell the truth,' I said. 'haven't you suspect something, now and 
again? you needn't be afraid to tell me.' 

"'well,' he answer slowly, 'i'll admit i'v thought father a little--a 
littl strange, perhaps, at times. but i'v alway tri to think I wa 
mistaken. i'v alway hope no one els would see it. you see, i'm veri 
fond of the old guvnor.' 

"I nodded. 

"'quit right, too,' I said. 'there' not the least need to make ani kind 
of scandal about this. We must do something, though, but in a quiet way. 
No fuss, you know. I should go and have a chat with your father, and tell 
him we'v found out about thi thing.' I touch the divid post. 

"young jarnock seem veri grate for my advic and after shake my 
hand pretti hard, took my key, and let himself out of the chapel. He came 
back in about an hour, look rather upset. He told me that my 
conclus were perfectli correct. It wa sir alfr jarnock who had set 
the trap, both on the night that the butler wa nearli killed, and on the 
past night. indeed, it seem that the old gentleman had set it everi 
night for mani years. He had learnt of it exist from an old 
manuscript book in the castl library. It had been plan and use in an 
earlier age as a protect for the gold vessel of the ritual, which 
were, it seemed, kept in a hidden recess at the back of the altar. 

"thi recess sir alfr jarnock had utilized, secretly, to store hi 
wife' jewelry. she had die some twelv year back, and the young man 
told me that hi father had never seem quit himself since. 

"I mention to young jarnock how puzzl I wa that the trap had been 
set _before_ the service, on the night that the butler wa struck; for, 
if I understood him aright, hi father had been in the habit of set 
the trap late everi night and unset it each morn befor anyon 
enter the chapel. He repli that hi father, in a fit of temporari 
forget (natur enough in hi neurot condition), must have set 
it too earli and henc what had so nearli prove a tragedy. 

"that is about all there is to tell. the old man is not (so far as I 
could learn), realli insan in the popularli accept sens of the word. 
He is extrem neurot and ha develop into a hypochondriac, the 
whole condit probabl brought about by the shock and sorrow result 
on the death of hi wife, lead to year of sad brood and to 
overmuch of hi own compani and thoughts. indeed, young jarnock told me 
that hi father would sometim pray for hour together, alon in the 
chapel." carnacki made an end of speak and leant forward for a spill. 

"but you'v never told us just _how_ you discov the secret of the 
divid post and all that," I said, speak for the four of us. 

"oh, that!" repli carnacki, puf vigor at hi pipe. "I 
found--on compar the--photos, that the one--taken in the--daytime, 
show a thicker left-hand gatepost, than the one taken at night by the 
flashlight. that put me on to the track. I saw at onc that there might 
be some mechan dodg at the back of the whole queer busi and 
noth at all of an abnorm nature. I examin the post and the rest 
wa simpl enough, you know. 

"bi the way," he continued, rise and go to the mantelpiece, "you may 
be interest to have a look at the so-cal 'waeful dagger.' young 
jarnock wa kind enough to present it to me, as a littl memento of my 
adventure." 

He hand it 'round to us and whilst we examin it, stood silent befor 
the fire, puf medit at hi pipe. 

"jarnock and I made the trap so that it won't work," he remark after a 
few moments. "i'v got the dagger, as you see, and old bellett' get 
about again, so that the whole busi can be hush up, decently. all 
the same I fanci the chapel will never lose it reput as a danger 
place. should be pretti safe now to keep valuabl in." 

"there' two thing you haven't explain yet," I said. "what do you 
think caus the two clangey sound when you were in the chapel in the 
dark? and do you believ the soft treadi sound were real, or onli a 
fancy, with your be so work up and tense?" 

"don't know for certain about the clangs," repli carnacki. 

"i'v puzzl quit a bit about them. I can onli think that the spring 
which work the post must have 'given' a trifle, slip you know, in 
the catch. If it did, under such a tension, it would make a bit of a 
ring noise. and a littl sound goe a long way in the middl of the 
night when you'r think of 'ghostesses.' you can understand that--eh?" 

"yes," I agreed. "and the other sounds?" 

"well, the same thing--i mean the extraordinari quietness--may help to 
explain these a bit. they may have been some usual enough sound that 
would never have been notic under ordinari conditions, or they may have 
been onli fancy. It is just imposs to say. they were disgustingli 
real to me. As for the slitheri noise, I am pretti sure that one of the 
tripod leg of my camera must have slip a few inches: if it did so, it 
may easili have jolt the len cap off the baseboard, which would 
account for that queer littl tap which I heard directli after." 

"how do you account for the dagger be in it place abov the altar 
when you first examin it that night?" I asked. "how could it be there, 
when at that veri moment it wa set in the trap?" 

"that wa my mistake," repli carnacki. "the dagger could not possibl 
have been in it sheath at the time, though I thought it was. you see, 
the curiou cross-hilt sheath gave the appear of the complet 
weapon, as you can understand. the hilt of the dagger protrud veri 
littl abov the continu portion of the sheath--a most inconveni 
arrang for draw quickly!" He nod sage at the lot of us and 
yawned, then glanc at the clock. 

"out you go!" he said, in friendli fashion, use the recogn formula. 
"I want a sleep." 

We rose, shook him by the hand, and went out present into the night and 
the quiet of the embankment, and so to our homes. 







end of project gutenberg' carnacki, the ghost finder, by william hope hodgson 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook carnacki, the ghost finder *** 

***** thi file should be name 10832.txt or 10832.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/8/3/10832/ 

produc by suzann shell, project gutenberg beginn projects, 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat inform page at www.gutenberg.org 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 
north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email 
contact link and up to date contact inform can be found at the 
foundation' web site and offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for forti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
