the project gutenberg ebook, visibl and invisible, by E. F. (edward 
frederic) benson 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and most 
other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 
whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term of 
the project gutenberg licens includ with thi ebook or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the unit states, you'll have 
to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use thi ebook. 




title: visibl and invis 


author: E. F. (edward frederic) benson 



releas date: septemb 22, 2019 [ebook #60339] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook visibl and invisible*** 


e-text prepar by tim lindell, david E. brown, and the onlin distribut 
proofread team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page imag digit by the 
googl book librari project (http://books.google.com) and gener made 
avail by hathitrust digit librari (https://www.hathitrust.org/) 



note: imag of the origin page are avail through 
hathitrust digit library. see 
https://catalog.hathitrust.org/record/008921437 


transcriber’ note: 

italic text is surround by underscores: _italics_. 





visibl and invis 

by 

E. F. benson . . author of 

“dodo wonders,” “miss mapp,” “colin,” etc. :: :: 






london: hutchinson and co. 
paternost row, e.c. 

print in great britain 
at the pitman press, bath 




content 


page 

“and the dead spake----” 7 

the outcast 37 

the horror-horn 63 

machaon 83 

negotium perambulan 107 

AT the farmhous 131 

inscrut decre 155 

the garden 177 

mr. tilly’ séanc 199 

mrs. amworth 223 

IN the tube 247 

roderick’ stori 269 




“and the dead spake----” 




“and the dead spake----” 


there is not in all london a quieter spot, or one, apparently, more 
withdrawn from the heat and bustl of life than newsom terrace. It is 
a cul-de-sac, for at the upper end the roadway between it two line 
of square, compact littl resid is brought to an end by a high 
brick wall, while at the lower end, the onli access to it is through 
newsom square, that small discreet oblong of georgian houses, a relic 
of the time when kensington wa a suburban villag sunder from the 
metropoli by a stretch of pastur stretch to the river. both 
squar and terrac are most inconveni situat for those whose 
ideal environ includ a rank of taxicab immedi opposit 
their door, a spate of ’buse roar down the street, and a process 
of underground trains, access by a station a few yard away, 
shake and rattl the cutleri and silver on their dine tables. In 
consequ newsom terrac had come, two year ago, to be inhabit 
by leisur and retir folk or by those who wish to pursu their 
work in quiet and tranquillity. children with hoop and scooter are 
phenomena rare encount in the terrac and dog are equal 
uncommon. 

In front of each of the coupl of dozen hous of which the terrac 
is compos lie a littl squar of railing garden, in which you 
may often see the middle-ag or elderli mistress of the resid 
horticultur employed. By five o’clock of a winter’ even 
the pavement will gener be empti of all passeng except the 
policeman, who with felt step, at interv throughout the night, 
peer with hi bull’s-ey into these small front gardens, and never 
find anyth more suspici there than an earli crocu or an 
aconite. for by the time it is dark the inhabit of the terrac have 
got themselv home, where behind drawn curtain and bolt shutter 
they will pass a domest and uninterrupt evening. No funer (up to 
the time I speak of) had I ever seen leav the terrace, no marriag 
parti had strew it pavement with confetti, and perambul were 
unknown. It and it inhabit seem to be quietli mellow like 
bottl of sound wine. No doubt there wa store within them the 
sunshin and summer of youth long past, and now, doze in a cool 
place, they wait for the turn of the key in the cellar door, and the 
entri of one who would draw them forth and see what they were worth. 

yet, after the time of which I shall now speak, I have never 
pass down it pavement without wonder whether each house, so 
seemingly-tranquil, is not, like some dynamo, softli and smoothli 
bring into be vast and terribl forces, such as those I onc 
saw at work in the last hous at the upper end of the terrace, the 
quietest, you would have said, of all the row. had you observ it with 
continu scrutiny, for all the length of a summer day, it is quit 
possibl that you might have onli seen issu from it in the morn 
an elderli woman whom you would have rightli conjectur to be the 
housekeeper, with her basket for market on her arm, who return 
an hour later. except for her the entir day might often pass without 
there be either ingress or egress from the door. occasion a 
middle-ag man, lean and wiry, came swiftli down the pavement, but 
hi exit wa by no mean a daili occurrence, and inde when he did 
emerge, he broke the almost univers usag of the terrace, for hi 
appear took place, when such there were, between nine and ten in 
the evening. At that hour sometim he would come round to my hous 
in newsom squar to see if I wa at home and inclin for a talk a 
littl later on. for the sake of air and exercis he would then have an 
hour’ tramp through the lit and noisi streets, and return about ten, 
still pale and unflushed, for one of those talk which grew to have 
an absorb fascin for me. more rare through the telephon I 
propos that I should drop in on him: thi I did not often do, sinc I 
found that if he did not come out himself, it impli that he wa busi 
with some investigation, and though he made me welcome, I could easili 
see that he burn for my departure, so that he might get busi with hi 
batteri and piec of tissue, hot on the track of discoveri that 
never yet had present themselv to the mind of man as come within 
the horizon of possibility. 

My last sentenc may have led the reader to guess that I am inde 
speak of none other than that reclus and mysteri physicist sir 
jame horton, with whose death a hundr half-hewn avenu into the 
dark forest from which life come must wait complet till anoth 
pioneer as bold as he take up the axe which hitherto none but 
himself ha been abl to wield. probabl there wa never a man to whom 
human owe more, and of whom human knew less. He seem utterli 
independ of the race to whom (though inde with no servic of love) 
he devot himself: for year he live aloof and apart in hi hous 
at the end of the terrace. men and women were to him like fossil to 
the geologist, thing to be tap and hammer and dissect and 
studi with a view not onli to the reconstruct of past ages, but 
to construct in the future. It is known, for instance, that he made 
an artifici be form of the tissue, still living, of anim 
late killed, with the brain of an ape and the heart of a bullock, 
and a sheep’ thyroid, and so forth. Of that I can give no first-hand 
account; horton, it is true, told me someth about it, and in hi 
will direct that certain memoranda on the subject should on hi death 
be sent to me. but on the bulki envelop there is the direction, “not 
to be open till january, 1925.” He spoke with some reserv and, so I 
think, with slight horror at the strang thing which had happen on 
the complet of thi creature. It evid made him uncomfort 
to talk about it, and for that reason I fanci he put what wa then a 
rather remot date to the day when hi record should reach my eye. 
finally, in these preliminaries, for the last five year befor the 
war, he had scarc entered, for the sake of companionship, ani 
hous other than hi own and mine. our wa a friendship date from 
school-days, which he had never suffer to drop entirely, but I doubt 
if in those year he spoke except on matter of busi to half a 
dozen other people. He had alreadi retir from surgic practic in 
which hi skill wa unapproached, and most complet now did he avoid 
the slightest intercours with hi colleagues, whom he regard as 
ignor pedant without courag or the rudiment of knowledge. now 
and then he would write an epoch-mak littl monograph, which he 
flung to them like a bone to a starv dog, but for the most part, 
utterli absorb in hi own investigations, he left them to grope along 
unaided. He frankli told me that he enjoy talk to me about such 
subjects, sinc I wa utterli unacquaint with them. It clarifi hi 
mind to be oblig to put hi theori and guess and confirm 
with such simplic that anyon could understand them. 

I well rememb hi come in to see me on the even of the 4th of 
august, 1914. 

“so the war ha broken out,” he said, “and the street are impass 
with excit crowds. odd, isn’t it? just as if each of us alreadi wa 
not a far more murder battlefield than ani which can be conceiv 
between war nations.” 

“how’ that?” said I. 

“let me tri to put it plainly, though it isn’t that I want to talk 
about. your blood is one etern battlefield. It is full of armi 
etern march and counter-marching. As long as the armi friendli 
to you are in a superior position, you remain in good health; if a 
detach of microb that, if suffer to establish themselves, 
would give you a cold in the head, entrench themselv in your mucou 
membrane, the commander-in-chief send a regiment down and drive them 
out. He doesn’t give hi order from your brain, mind you--thos aren’t 
hi headquarters, for your brain know noth about the land of the 
enemi till they have made good their posit and given you a cold.” 

He paus a moment. 

“there isn’t one headquart insid you,” he said, “there are many. 
for instance, I kill a frog thi morning; at least most peopl would 
say I kill it. but had I kill it, though it head lay in one place 
and it sever bodi in another? not a bit: I had onli kill a piec 
of it. for I open the bodi afterward and took out the heart, which 
I put in a sterilis chamber of suitabl temperature, so that it 
wouldn’t get cold or be infect by ani microbe. that wa about twelv 
o’clock to-day. and when I came out just now, the heart wa beat 
still. It wa alive, in fact. that’ full of suggestions, you know. 
come and see it.” 

the terrac had been stir into volcan activ by the news of war: 
the vendor of some late edit had penetr into it quietude, and 
there were half a dozen parlour-maid flutter about like black and 
white moths. but onc insid horton’ door isol as of an arctic 
night seem to close round me. He had forgotten hi latch-key, but 
hi housekeeper, then newli come to him, who becam so regular and 
familiar a figur in the terrace, must have heard hi step, for befor 
he rang the bell she had open the door, and stood with hi forgotten 
latch-key in her hand. 

“thanks, mrs. gabriel,” said he, and without a sound the door shut 
behind us. both her name and face, as reproduc in some illustr 
daili paper, seem familiar, rather terribl familiar, but befor I 
had time to grope for the association, horton suppli it. 

“tri for the murder of her husband six month ago,” he said. “odd 
case. the point is that she is the one and perfect housekeeper. I onc 
had four servants, and everyth wa all mucky, as we use to say 
at school. now I live in amaz comfort and proprieti with one. she 
doe everything. she is cook, valet, housemaid, butler, and won’t have 
anyon to help her. No doubt she kill her husband, but she plan it 
so well that she could not be convicted. she told me quit frankli who 
she wa when I engag her.” 

Of cours I rememb the whole trial vividli now. her husband, a 
morose, quarrelsom fellow, tipsi as often as sober, had, accord 
to the defenc cut hi own throat while shaving; accord to the 
prosecution, she had done that for him. there wa the usual discrep 
of evid as to whether the wound could have been self-inflicted, 
and the prosecut tri to prove that the face had been lather 
after hi throat had been cut. So singular an exhibit of forethought 
and nerv had hurt rather than help their case, and after prolong 
deliber on the part of the jury, she had been acquitted. yet not 
less singular wa horton’ select of a probabl murderess, howev 
efficient, as housekeeper. 

He anticip thi reflection. 

“apart from the wonder comfort of have a perfectli appoint and 
absolut silent house,” he said, “I regard mrs. gabriel as a sort 
of insur against my be murdered. If you had been tri for 
your life, you would take veri especi care not to find yourself in 
suspici proxim to a murder bodi again: no more death in your 
house, if you could help it. come through to my laboratory, and look at 
my littl instanc of life after death.” 

certainli it wa amaz to see that littl piec of tissu still 
pulsat with what must be call life; it contract and expand 
faintli inde but perceptibly, though for nine hour now it had been 
sever from the rest of the organisation. all by itself it went on 
living, and if the heart could go on live with nothing, you would 
say, to feed and stimul it energy, there must also, so reason 
horton, resid in all the other vital organ of the bodi other 
independ focus of life. 

“of cours a sever organ like that,” he said, “will run down quicker 
than if it had the co-oper of the others, and present I shall 
appli a gentl electr stimulu to it. If I can keep that glass bowl 
under which it beat at the temperatur of a frog’ body, in sterilis 
air, I don’t see whi it should not go on living. food--of cours 
there’ the question of feed it. Do you see what that open up in 
the way of surgery? imagin a shop with glass case contain healthi 
organ taken from the dead. say a man die of pneumonia. He should, as 
soon as ever the breath is out of hi body, be dissected, and though 
they would, of course, destroy hi lungs, as they will be full of 
pneumococci, hi liver and digest organ are probabl healthy. take 
them out, keep them in a sterilis atmospher with the temperatur 
at 98·4, and sell the liver, let us say, to anoth poor devil who ha 
cancer there. fit him with a new healthi liver, eh?” 

“and insert the brain of someon who ha die of heart diseas into the 
skull of a congenit idiot?” I asked. 

“yes, perhaps; but the brain’ tiresom complic in it 
connect and the join up of the nerves, you know. surgeri will 
have to learn a lot befor it fit new brain in. and the brain ha got 
such a lot of functions. all thinking, all invent seem to belong to 
it, though, as you have seen, the heart can get on quit well without 
it. but there are other function of the brain I want to studi first. 
i’v been tri some experi already.” 

He made some littl readjust to the flame of the spirit lamp which 
kept at the right temperatur the water that surround the sterilis 
receptacl in which the frog’ heart wa beating. 

“start with the more simpl and mechan use of the brain,” he said. 
“primarili it is a sort of record office, a diary. say that I rap your 
knuckl with that ruler. what happens? the nerv there send a messag 
to the brain, of course, saying--how can I put it most simply--saying, 
‘somebodi is hurt me.’ and the eye send another, say ‘I perceiv 
a ruler hit my knuckles,’ and the ear send another, say ‘I hear 
the rap of it.’ but leav all that alone, what els happens? why, the 
brain record it. It make a note of your knuckl have been hit.” 

He had been move about the room as he spoke, take off hi coat and 
waistcoat and put on in their place a thin black dressing-gown, 
and by now he wa seat in hi favourit attitud cross-leg on the 
hearthrug, look like some magician or perhap the afrit which a 
magician of black art had caus to appear. He wa think intent 
now, pass through hi finger hi string of amber beads, and talk 
more to himself than to me. 

“and how doe it make that note?” he went on. “why, in the manner in 
which phonograph record are made. there are million of minut dots, 
depressions, pockmark on your brain which certainli record what you 
remember, what you have enjoy or disliked, or done or said. the 
surfac of the brain anyhow is larg enough to furnish writing-pap 
for the record of all these things, of all your memories. If the 
impress of an experi ha not been acute, the dot is not sharpli 
impressed, and the record fades: in other words, you come to forget it. 
but if it ha been vividli impressed, the record is never obliterated. 
mrs. gabriel, for instance, won’t lose the impress of how she 
lather her husband’ face after she had cut hi throat. that’ to 
say, if she did it.” 

“now do you see what i’m drive at? Of cours you do. there is store 
within a man’ head the complet record of all the memor thing 
he ha done and said: there are all hi thought there, and all hi 
speeches, and, most well-mark of all, hi habitu thought and the 
thing he ha often said; for habit, there is reason to believe, wear 
a sort of rut in the brain, so that the life-principle, whatev it is, 
as it grope and steal about the brain, is continu stumbl into 
it. there’ your record, your gramophon plate all ready. what we want, 
and what i’m tri to arriv at, is a needl which, as it trace it 
minut way over these dots, will come across word or sentenc which 
the dead have uttered, and will reproduc them. My word, what judgment 
books! what a resurrection!” 

here in thi withdrawn situat no remotest echo of the excit 
which wa seeth through the street penetrated; through the open 
window there came in onli the tide of the midnight silence. but from 
somewher closer at hand, through the wall sure of the laboratory, 
there came a low, somewhat persist murmur. 

“perhap our needle--unhappili not yet invented--a it pass over the 
record of speech in the brain, might induc even facial expression,” he 
said. “enjoy or horror might even pass over dead features. there 
might be gestur and movement even, as the word were reproduc 
in our gramophon of the dead. some peopl when they want to think 
intens walk about: some, there’ an instanc of it audibl now, talk 
to themselv aloud.” 

He held up hi finger for silence. 

“yes, that’ mrs. gabriel,” he said. “she talk to herself by the hour 
together. she’ alway done that, she tell me. I shouldn’t wonder if 
she ha plenti to talk about.” 

It wa that night when, first of all, the notion of intens activ 
go on below the placid house-front of the terrac occur to me. 
none look more quiet than this, and yet there wa seeth here 
a volcan activ and intens of living, both in the man who 
sat cross-leg on the floor and behind that voic just audibl 
through the partit wall. but I thought of that no more, for horton 
began speak of the brain-gramophon again.... were it possibl to 
trace those infinitesim dot and pockmark in the brain by some 
needl exquisit fine, it might follow that by the aid of some such 
contriv as translat the pockmark on a gramophon record into 
sound, some audibl render of speech might be recov from the 
brain of a dead man. It wa necessary, so he point out to me, that 
thi strang gramophon record should be new; it must be that of one 
late dead, for corrupt and decay would soon obliter these 
infinitesim markings. He wa not of opinion that unspoken thought 
could be thu recovered: the utmost he hope for from hi pioneer 
work wa to be abl to recaptur actual speech, especi when such 
speech had habitu dwelt on one subject, and thu had worn a rut on 
that part of the brain known as the speech-centre. 

“let me get, for instance,” he said, “the brain of a railway porter, 
newli dead, who ha been accustom for year to call out the name 
of a station, and I do not despair of hear hi voic through my 
gramophon trumpet. Or again, given that mrs. gabriel, in all her 
intermin convers with herself, talk about one subject, I 
might, in similar circumstances, recaptur what she had been constantli 
saying. Of cours my instrument must be of a power and delicaci still 
unknown, one of which the needl can trace the minutest irregular 
of surface, and of which the trumpet must be of immens magnifi 
power, abl to translat the smallest whisper into a shout. but just as 
a microscop will show you the detail of an object invis to the 
eye, so there are instrument which act in the same way on sound. here, 
for instance, is one of remark magnifi power. tri it if you 
like.” 

He took me over to a tabl on which wa stand an electr batteri 
connect with a round steel globe, out of the side of which sprang a 
gramophon trumpet of curiou construction. He adjust the battery, 
and direct me to click my finger quit gentli opposit an apertur 
in the globe, and the noise, ordinarili scarc audible, resound 
through the room like a thunderclap. 

“someth of that sort might permit us to hear the record on a brain,” 
he said. 

* * * * * 

after thi night my visit to horton becam far more common than they 
had hitherto been. have onc admit me into the region of hi 
strang explorations, he seem to welcom me there. partly, as he had 
said, it clarifi hi own thought to put it into simpl language, 
partly, as he subsequ admitted, he wa begin to penetr 
into such lone field of knowledg by path so utterli untrodden, 
that even he, the most aloof and independ of mankind, want some 
human presenc near him. despit hi utter indiffer to the issu 
of the war--for, in hi regard, issu far more crucial demand hi 
energies--h offer himself as surgeon to a london hospit for 
oper on the brain, and hi services, naturally, were welcomed, 
for none brought knowledg or skill like hi to such work. occupi 
all day, he perform miracl of healing, with bold and dexter 
excis which none but he would have dare to attempt. He would 
operate, often successfully, for lesion that seem certainli fatal, 
and all the time he wa learning. He refus to accept ani salary; 
he onli asked, in case where he had remov piec of brain matter, 
to take these away, in order by further examin and dissection, 
to add to the knowledg and manipul skill which he devot to 
the wounded. He wrap these morsel in sterilis lint, and took 
them back to the terrac in a box, electr heat to maintain 
the normal temperatur of a man’ blood. hi fragment might then, so 
he reasoned, keep some sort of independ life of it own, even as 
the sever heart of a frog had continu to beat for hour without 
connect with the rest of the body. then for half the night he would 
continu to work on these sunder piec of tissu scarc dead, 
which hi oper dure the day had given him. simultaneously, he 
wa busi over the needl that must be of such infinit delicacy. 

one evening, fatigu with a long day’ work, I had just heard with a 
certain tremor of uneasi anticip the whistl of warn which 
herald an air-raid, when my telephon bell rang. My servants, 
accord to custom, had alreadi betaken themselv to the cellar, 
and I went to see what the summon was, determin in ani case not to 
go out into the streets. I recognis horton’ voice. “I want you at 
once,” he said. 

“but the warn whistl have gone,” said I, “and I don’t like 
shower of shrapnel.” 

“oh, never mind that,” said he. “you must come. i’m so excit that I 
distrust the evid of my own ears. I want a witness. just come.” 

He did not paus for my reply, for I heard the click of hi receiv 
go back into it place. clearli he assum that I wa coming, and 
that I suppos had the effect of suggest on my mind. I told myself 
that I would not go, but in a coupl of minut hi certainti that I 
wa coming, coupl with the prospect of be interest in someth 
els than air-raids, made me fidget in my chair and eventu go to 
the street door and look out. the moon wa brilliantli bright, the 
squar quit empty, and far away the cough of veri distant guns. 
next moment, almost against my will, I wa run down the desert 
pavement of newsom terrace. My ring at hi bell wa answer by 
horton, befor mrs. gabriel could come to the door, and he posit 
drag me in. 

“I shan’t tell you a word of what I am doing,” he said. “I want you to 
tell me what you hear. come into the laboratory.” 

the remot gun were silent again as I sat myself, as directed, in a 
chair close to the gramophon trumpet, but suddenli through the wall I 
heard the familiar mutter of mrs. gabriel’ voice. horton, alreadi busi 
with hi battery, sprang to hi feet. 

“that won’t do,” he said. “I want absolut silence.” 

He went out of the room, and I heard him call to her. while he wa 
gone I observ more close what wa on the table. battery, round 
steel globe, and gramophon trumpet were there, and some sort of a 
needl on a spiral steel spring link up with the batteri and the 
glass vessel, in which I had seen the frog’ heart beat. In it now 
there lay a fragment of grey matter. 

horton came back in a minut or two, and stood in the middl of the 
room listening. 

“that’ better,” he said. “now I want you to listen at the mouth of the 
trumpet. i’ll answer ani question afterwards.” 

with my ear turn to the trumpet, I could see noth of what he wa 
doing, and I listen till the silenc becam a rustl in my ears. 
then suddenli that rustl ceased, for it wa overscor by a whisper 
which undoubtedli came from the apertur on which my aural attent 
wa fixed. It wa no more than the faintest murmur, and though no word 
were audible, it had the timbr of a human voice. 

“well, do you hear anything?” ask horton. 

“yes, someth veri faint, scarc audible.” 

“describ it,” said he. 

“somebodi whispering.” 

“i’ll tri a fresh place,” said he. 

the silenc descend again; the mutter of the distant gun wa still 
mute, and some slight creak from my shirt front, as I breathed, 
alon broke it. and then the whisper from the gramophon trumpet 
began again, thi time much louder than it had been before--it wa 
as if the speaker (still whispering) had advanc a dozen yards--but 
still blur and indistinct. more unmistakable, too, wa it that the 
whisper wa that of a human voice, and everi now and then, whether 
fanci or not, I thought I caught a word or two. for a moment it 
wa silent altogether, and then with a sudden inkl of what I wa 
listen to I heard someth begin to sing. though the word were 
still inaud there wa melody, and the tune wa “tipperary.” from 
that convolvulus-shap trumpet there came two bar of it. 

“and what do you hear now?” cri horton with a crack of exult in 
hi voice. “singing, singing! that’ the tune they all sang. fine music 
that from a dead man. encore! you say? yes, wait a second, and he’ll 
sing it again for you. confound it, I can’t get on to the place. ah! 
i’v got it: listen again.” 

sure that wa the strangest manner of song ever yet heard on the 
earth, thi melodi from the brain of the dead. horror and fascin 
strove within me, and I suppos the first for the moment prevailed, for 
with a shudder I jump up. 

“stop it!” I said. “it’ terrible.” 

hi face, thin and eager, gleam in the strong ray of the lamp which 
he had place close to him. hi hand wa on the metal rod from which 
depend the spiral spring and the needle, which just rest on that 
fragment of grey stuff which I had seen in the glass vessel. 

“yes, i’m go to stop it now,” he said, “or the germ will be get 
at my gramophon record, or the record will get cold. see, I spray it 
with carbol vapour, I put it back into it nice warm bed. It will 
sing to us again. but terrible? what do you mean by terrible?” 

indeed, when he ask that I scarc knew myself what I meant. I had 
been wit to a new marvel of scienc as wonder perhap as ani 
that had ever astound the beholder, and my nerves--thes childish 
whimperers--had cri out at the dark and the profundity. but 
the horror diminished, the fascin increas as he quit shortli 
told me the histori of thi phenomenon. He had attend that day and 
oper upon a young soldier in whose brain wa embed a piec of 
shrapnel. the boy wa _in extremis_, but horton had hope for the 
possibl of save him. To extract the shrapnel wa the onli chance, 
and thi involv the cut away of a piec of brain known as the 
speech-centre, and take from it what wa embed there. but the hope 
wa not realised, and two hour later the boy died. It wa to thi 
fragment of brain that, when horton return home, he had appli the 
needl of hi gramophone, and had obtain the faint whisper which 
had caus him to ring me up, so that he might have a wit of thi 
wonder. wit I had been, not to these whisper alone, but to the 
fragment of singing. 

“and thi is but the first step on the new road,” said he. “who know 
where it may lead, or to what new templ of knowledg it may not be the 
avenue? well, it is late: I shall do no more to-night. what about the 
raid, by the way?” 

To my amaz I saw that the time wa verg on midnight. two hour 
had elaps sinc he let me in at hi door; they had pass like a 
coupl of minutes. next morn some neighbour spoke of the prolong 
fire that had gone on, of which I had been wholli unconscious. 

week after week horton work on thi new road of research, perfect 
the sensit and subtleti of the needle, and, by vastli increas 
the power of hi batteries, enlarg the magnifi power of hi 
trumpet. mani and mani an even dure the next year did I listen to 
voic that were dumb in death, and the sound which had been blur 
and unintellig mutter in the earlier experiments, developed, 
as the delicaci of hi mechan devic increased, into coher 
and clear articulation. It wa no longer necessari to impos silenc 
on mrs. gabriel when the gramophon wa at work, for now the voic we 
listen to had risen to the pitch of ordinari human utterance, while 
as for the faith and individu of these records, strike 
testimoni wa given more than onc by some live friend of the dead, 
who, without know what he wa about to hear, recognis the tone 
of the speaker. more than onc also, mrs. gabriel, bring in syphon 
and whisky, provid us with three glasses, for she had heard, so she 
told us, three differ voic in talk. but for the present no fresh 
phenomenon occurred: horton wa but perfect the mechan of hi 
previou discoveri and, rather grudg the time, wa scribbl at a 
monograph, which present he would toss to hi colleagues, concern 
the result he had alreadi obtained. and then, even while horton wa on 
the threshold of new wonders, which he had alreadi foreseen and spoken 
of as theoret possible, there came an even of marvel and of 
swift catastrophe. 

I had dine with him that day, mrs. gabriel deftli serv the meal 
that she had so daintili prepared, and toward the end, as she wa 
clear the tabl for our dessert, she stumbled, I supposed, on a 
loos edg of carpet, quickli recov herself. but instantli horton 
check some half-finish sentence, and turn to her. 

“you’r all right, mrs. gabriel?” he ask quickly. 

“yes, sir, thank you,” said she, and went on with her serving. 

“a I wa saying,” began horton again, but hi attent clearli 
wandered, and without conclud hi narrative, he relaps into 
silence, till mrs. gabriel had given us our coffe and left the room. 

“i’m sadli afraid my domest felic may be disturbed,” he said. 
“mrs. gabriel had an epilept fit yesterday, and she confess when 
she recov that she had been subject to them when a child, and sinc 
then had occasion experienc them.” 

“dangerous, then?” I asked. 

“in themselv not in the least,” said he. “if she wa sit in 
her chair or lie in bed when one occurred, there would be noth 
to troubl about. but if one occur while she wa cook my dinner 
or begin to come downstairs, she might fall into the fire or 
tumbl down the whole flight. we’ll hope no such deplor calam 
will happen. now, if you’v finish your coffee, let us go into the 
laboratory. not that i’v got anyth veri interest in the way of 
new records. but i’v introduc a second batteri with a veri strong 
induct coil into my apparatus. I find that if I link it up with my 
record, given that the record is a--a fresh one, it stimul certain 
nerv centres. it’ odd, isn’t it, that the same forc which so 
encourag the dead to live would certainli encourag the live to die, 
if a man receiv the full current. one ha to be care in handl 
it. yes, and what then? you ask.” 

the night wa veri hot, and he threw the window wide befor he settl 
himself cross-leg on the floor. 

“i’ll answer your question for you,” he said, “though I believ we’v 
talk of it before. suppos I had not a fragment of brain-tissu 
only, but a whole head, let us say, or best of all, a complet corpse, 
I think I could expect to produc more than mere speech through the 
gramophone. the dead lip themselv perhap might utter--god! what’ 
that?” 

from close outside, at the bottom of the stair lead from the dine 
room which we had just quit to the laboratori where we now sat, 
there came a crash of glass follow by the fall as of someth heavi 
which bump from step to step, and wa final flung on the threshold 
against the door with the sound as of knuckl rap at it, and 
demand admittance. horton sprang up and threw the door open, and 
there lay, half insid the room and half on the land outside, the 
bodi of mrs. gabriel. round her were splinter of broken bottl and 
glasses, and from a cut in her forehead, as she lay ghastli with face 
upturned, the blood trickl into her thick grey hair. 

horton wa on hi knee besid her, dab hi handkerchief on her 
forehead. 

“ah! that’ not serious,” he said; “there’ neither vein nor arteri 
cut. i’ll just bind that up first.” 

He tore hi handkerchief into strip which he tie together, and made a 
dexter bandag cover the lower part of her forehead, but leav 
her eye unobscured. they stare with a fix meaningless steadiness, 
and he scrutinis them closely. 

“but there’ wors yet,” he said. “there’ been some sever blow on the 
head. help me to carri her into the laboratory. get round to her feet 
and lift underneath the knee when I am ready. there! now put your arm 
right under her and carri her.” 

her head swung limpli back as he lift her shoulders, and he prop 
it up against hi knee, where it mute nod and bowed, as hi leg 
moved, as if in silent assent to what we were doing, and the mouth, at 
the extrem of which there had gather a littl lather, loll open. 
He still support her shoulder as I fetch a cushion on which to 
place her head, and present she wa lie close to the low tabl on 
which stood the gramophon of the dead. then with light deft finger he 
pass hi hand over her skull, paus as he came to the spot just 
abov and behind her right ear. twice and again hi finger grope and 
lightli pressed, while with shut eye and concentr attent he 
interpret what hi train touch revealed. 

“her skull is broken to fragment just here,” he said. “in the middl 
there is a piec complet sever from the rest, and the edg of the 
crack piec must be press on her brain.” 

her right arm wa lie palm upward on the floor, and with one hand he 
felt her wrist with finger-tips. 

“not a sign of pulse,” he said. “she’ dead in the ordinari sens 
of the word. but life persist in an extraordinari manner, you may 
remember. she can’t be wholli dead: no one is wholli dead in a moment, 
unless everi organ is blown to bits. but she soon will be dead, if we 
don’t reliev the pressur on the brain. that’ the first thing to 
be done. while i’m busi at that, shut the window, will you, and make 
up the fire. In thi sort of case the vital heat, whatev that is, 
leav the bodi veri quickly. make the room as hot as you can--fetch an 
oil-stove, and turn on the electr radiator, and stoke up a roar 
fire. the hotter the room is the more slowli will the heat of life 
leav her.” 

alreadi he had open hi cabinet of surgic instruments, and taken 
out of it two drawer full of bright steel which he laid on the floor 
besid her. I heard the grate chink of scissor sever her long 
grey hair, and as I busi myself with lay and light the fire 
in the hearth, and kindl the oil-stove, which I found, by horton’ 
directions, in the pantry, I saw that hi lancet wa busi on the 
expos skin. He had place some vaporis spray, heat by a spirit 
lamp close to her head, and as he work it fizz nozzl fill the 
air with some clean and aromat odour. now and then he threw out an 
order. 

“bring me that electr lamp on the long cord,” he said. “I haven’t 
got enough light. don’t look at what i’m do if you’r squeamish, for 
if it make you feel faint, I shan’t be abl to attend to you.” 

I suppos that violent interest in what he wa do overcam ani qualm 
that I might have had, for I look quit unflinch over hi shoulder 
as I move the lamp about till it wa in such a place that it threw it 
beam directli into a dark hole at the edg of which depend a flap 
of skin. into thi he put hi forceps, and as he withdrew them they 
grasp a piec of blood-stain bone. 

“that’ better,” he said, “and the room’ warm up well. but there’ 
no sign of puls yet. Go on stoking, will you, till the thermomet on 
the wall there regist a hundr degrees.” 

when next, on my journey from the coal-cellar, I looked, two more 
piec of bone lay besid the one I had seen extracted, and present 
refer to the thermometer, I saw that between the oil-stov and 
the roar fire and the electr radiator, I had rais the room to 
the temperatur he wanted. soon, peer fixedli at the seat of hi 
operation, he felt for her puls again. 

“not a sign of return vitality,” he said, “and i’v done all I can. 
there’ noth more possibl that can be devis to restor her.” 

As he spoke the zeal of the unrival surgeon relaxed, and with a sigh 
and a shrug he rose to hi feet and mop hi face. then suddenli the 
fire and eager blaze there again. “the gramophone!” he said. “the 
speech centr is close to where i’v been working, and it is quit 
uninjured. good heavens, what a wonder opportunity. she serv me 
well living, and she shall serv me dead. and I can stimul the motor 
nerve-centre, too, with the second battery. We may see a new wonder 
to-night.” 

some qualm of horror shook me. 

“no, don’t!” I said. “it’ terrible: she’ just dead. I shall go if you 
do.” 

“but i’v got exactli all the condit I have long been wanting,” 
said he. “and I simpli can’t spare you. you must be witness: I must 
have a witness. why, man, there’ not a surgeon or a physiologist in 
the kingdom who would not give an eye or an ear to be in your place 
now. she’ dead. I pledg you my honour on that, and it’ grand to be 
dead if you can help the living.” 

onc again, in a far fiercer struggle, horror and the intensest 
curios strove togeth in me. 

“be quick, then,” said I. 

“ha! that’ right,” exclaim horton. “help me to lift her on to the 
tabl by the gramophone. the cushion too; I can get at the place more 
easili with her head a littl raised.” 

He turn on the batteri and with the movabl light close besid him, 
brilliantli illumin what he sought, he insert the needl of the 
gramophon into the jag apertur in her skull. for a few minutes, 
as he grope and explor there, there wa silence, and then quit 
suddenli mrs. gabriel’ voice, clear and unmistak and of the normal 
loud of human speech, issu from the trumpet. 

“yes, I alway said that i’d be even with him,” came the articul 
syllables. “he use to knock me about, he did, when he came home 
drunk, and often I wa black and blue with bruises. but i’ll give him a 
red for the black and blue.” 

the record grew blurred; instead of articul word there came from 
it a gobbl noise. By degre that cleared, and we were listen to 
some dread suppress sort of laughter, hideou to hear. On and on 
it went. 

“i’v got into some sort of rut,” said horton. “she must have laugh a 
lot to herself.” 

for a long time we got noth more except the repetit of the word 
we had alreadi heard and the sound of that suppress laughter. then 
horton drew toward him the second battery. 

“i’ll tri a stimul of the motor nerve-centres,” he said. “watch 
her face.” 

He prop the gramophon needl in position, and insert into the 
fractur skull the two pole of the second battery, move them about 
there veri carefully. and as I watch her face, I saw with a freez 
horror that her lip were begin to move. 

“her mouth’ moving,” I cried. “she can’t be dead.” 

He peer into her face. 

“nonsense,” he said. “that’ onli the stimulu from the current. she’ 
been dead half an hour. ah! what’ come now?” 

the lip lengthen into a smile, the lower jaw dropped, and from her 
mouth came the laughter we had heard just now through the gramophone. 
and then the dead mouth spoke, with a mumbl of unintellig words, a 
bubbl torrent of incoher syllables. 

“i’ll turn the full current on,” he said. 

the head jerk and rais itself, the lip struggl for utterance, 
and suddenli she spoke swiftli and distinctly. 

“just when he’d got hi razor out,” she said, “I came up behind him, 
and put my hand over hi face, and bent hi neck back over hi chair 
with all my strength. and I pick up hi razor and with one slit--ha, 
ha, that wa the way to pay him out. and I didn’t lose my head, but I 
lather hi chin well, and put the razor in hi hand, and left him 
there, and went downstair and cook hi dinner for him, and then an 
hour afterwards, as he didn’t come down, up I went to see what kept 
him. It wa a nasti cut in hi neck that had kept him----” 

horton suddenli withdrew the two pole of the batteri from her head, 
and even in the middl of her word the mouth ceas working, and lay 
rigid and open. 

“bi god!” he said. “there’ a tale for dead lip to tell. but we’ll get 
more yet.” 

exactli what happen then I never knew. It appear to me that as he 
still lean over the tabl with the two pole of the batteri in hi 
hand, hi foot slipped, and he fell forward across it. there came a 
sharp crack, and a flash of blue dazzl light, and there he lay face 
downwards, with arm that just stir and quivered. with hi fall the 
two pole that must momentarili have come into contact with hi hand 
were jerk away again, and I lift him and laid him on the floor. but 
hi lip as well as those of the dead woman had spoken for the last 
time. 




the outcast 




the outcast 


when mrs. acr bought the gate-hous at tarleton, which had stood so 
long without a tenant, and appear in that veri agreeabl and live 
littl town as a resident, suffici wa alreadi known about her past 
histori to entitl her to friendli and sympathy. her had been a 
tragic story, and the account of the inquest held on her husband’ 
body, when, within a month of their marriage, he had shot himself 
befor her eyes, wa recent enough, and of as full a report in the 
paper as to enabl our littl commun of tarleton to rememb and 
run over the salient grim of the case without the need of invent 
ani further details--which, otherwise, it would have been quit capabl 
of doing. 

briefly, then, the fact had been as follows. horac acr appear to 
have been a heartless fortune-hunter--a handsome, plausibl wretch, 
ten year younger than hi wife. He had made no secret to hi friend 
of not be in love with her but of have a consider regard for 
her more than consider fortune. but hardli had he marri her than 
hi indiffer develop into violent dislike, accompani by some 
mysterious, inexplic dread of her. He hate and fear her, and on 
the morn of the veri day when he had put an end to himself he had 
beg her to divorc him; the case he promis would be undefended, 
and he would make it indefensible. she, poor soul, had refus to grant 
this; for, as corrobor by the evid of friend and servants, 
she wa utterli devot to him, and state with that quiet digniti 
which distinguish her throughout thi ordeal, that she hope that he 
wa the victim of some miser but temporari derangement, and would 
come to hi right mind again. He had dine that night at hi club, 
leav hi month-old bride to pass the even alone, and had return 
between eleven and twelv that night in a state of vile intoxication. 
He had gone up to her bedroom, pistol in hand, had lock the door, 
and hi voic wa heard scream and yell at her. then follow 
the sound of one shot. On the tabl in hi dressing-room wa found a 
half-sheet of paper, date that day, and thi wa read out in court. 
“the horror of my position,” he had written, “i beyond descript 
and endurance. I can bear it no longer: my soul sickens....” the 
jury, without leav the court, return the verdict that he had 
commit suicid while temporarili insane, and the coroner, at their 
request, express their sympathi and hi own with the poor lady, who, 
as testifi on all hands, had treat her husband with the utmost 
tender and affection. 

for six month bertha acr had travel abroad, and then in the 
autumn she had bought gate-hous at tarleton, and settl down to the 
absorb trifl which make life in a small countri town so busi and 
strenuous. 

* * * * * 

our modest littl dwell is within a stone’ throw of the gate-house; 
and when, on the return of my wife and myself from two month in 
scotland, we found that mrs. acr wa instal as a neighbour, madg 
lost no time in go to call on her. she return with a seri of 
pleasant impressions. mrs. acres, still on the sunni slope that lead 
up to the table-land of life which begin at forti years, wa extrem 
handsome, cordial, and charm in manner, witti and agreeable, and 
wonder well dressed. befor the conclus of her call madge, 
in countri fashion, had beg her to dispos with formalities, and, 
instead of a frigid return of the call, to dine with us quietli next 
day. did she play bridge? that be so, we would just be a parti of 
four; for her brother, charl alington, had propos himself for a 
visit.... 

I listen to thi with suffici attent to grasp what madg wa 
saying, but what I wa realli think about wa a chess-problem which 
I wa attempt to solve. but at thi point I becam acut awar 
that her stream of pleasant impress dri up suddenly, and she 
becam stonili silent. she shut speech off as by the turn of a tap, and 
glower at the fire, rub the back of one hand with the finger of 
another, as is her habit in perplexity. 

“go on,” I said. 

she got up, suddenli restless. 

“all I have been tell you is liter and soberli true,” she said. 
“I thought mrs. acr charm and witti and good-look and friendly. 
what more could you ask from a new acquaintance? and then, after I had 
ask her to dinner, I suddenli found for no earthli reason that I veri 
much dislik her; I couldn’t bear her.” 

“you said she wa wonder well dressed,” I permit myself to 
remark.... If the queen took the knight---- 

“don’t be silly!” said madge. “I am wonder well dress too. 
but behind all her agreeabl and charm and good look I suddenli 
felt there wa someth els which I detest and dreaded. it’ no 
use ask me what it was, becaus I haven’t the slightest idea. If 
I knew what it was, the thing would explain itself. but I felt a 
horror--noth vivid, noth close, you understand, but somewher in 
the background. can the mind have a ‘turn,’ do you think, just as the 
bodi can, when for a second or two you suddenli feel giddy? I think it 
must have been that--oh! i’m sure it wa that. but i’m glad I ask her 
to dine. I mean to like her. I shan’t have a ‘turn’ again, shall i?” 

“no, certainli not,” I said.... If the queen refrain from take the 
tempt knight---- 

“oh, do stop your silli chess-problem!” said madge. “bite him, fungus!” 

fungus, so call becaus he is the son of humour and gustavu 
adolphus, rose from hi place on the hearthrug, and with a hors laugh 
nuzzl against my leg, which is hi way of bite those he loves. then 
the most amiabl of bull-dogs, who ha a passion for the human race, 
lay down on my foot and sigh heavily. but madg evid want to 
talk, and I push the chessboard away. 

“tell me more about the horror,” I said. 

“it wa just horror,” she said--“a sort of sick of the soul.”... 

I found my brain puzzl over some vagu reminiscence, sure 
connect with mrs. acres, which those word mistili evoked. but next 
moment that train of thought wa cut short, for the old and sinist 
legend about the gate-hous came into my mind as account for the 
horror of which madg spoke. In the day of elizabethan religi 
persecut it had, then newli built, been inhabit by two brothers, 
of whom the elder, to whom it belonged, had mass said there everi 
sunday. betray by the younger, he wa arrest and rack to death. 
subsequ the younger, in a fit of remorse, hang himself in the 
panel parlour. certainli there wa a stori that the hous wa 
haunt by hi strangl apparit dangl from the beams, and the 
late tenant of the hous (which now had stood vacant for over three 
years) had quit it after a month’ occupation, in consequence, so it 
wa commonli said, of unaccount and horribl sights. what wa more 
likely, then, than that madge, who from childhood ha been intens 
sensit to occult and psychic phenomena, should have caught, on that 
strang wireless receiv which is characterist of “sensitives,” some 
whisper message? 

“but you know the stori of the house,” I said. “isn’t it quit possibl 
that someth of that may have reach you? where did you sit, for 
instance? In the panel parlour?” 

she brighten at that. 

“ah, you wise man!” she said. “I never thought of that. that may 
account for it all. I hope it does. you shall be left in peac with 
your chess for be so brilliant.” 

* * * * * 

I had occas half an hour later to go to the post-office, a hundr 
yard up the high street, on the matter of a regist letter which 
I want to despatch that evening. dusk wa gathering, but the red 
glow of sunset still smoulder in the west, suffici to enabl me 
to recognis familiar form and featur of passers-by. just as I came 
opposit the post-offic there approach from the other direct a 
tall, fine built woman, whom, I felt sure, I had never seen before. 
her destin wa the same as mine, and I hung on my step a moment 
to let her pass in first. simultan I felt that I knew, in some 
vague, faint manner, what madg had meant when she talk about a 
“sick of the soul.” It wa no nearer realis to me than is the 
run of a tune in the head to the audibl extern hear of it, 
and I attribut my sudden recognit of her feel to the fact that 
in all probabl my mind had subconsci been dwell on what 
she had said, and not for a moment did I connect it with ani extern 
cause. and then it occur to me who, possibly, thi woman was.... 

she finish the transact of her errand a few second befor me, and 
when I got out into the street again she wa a dozen yard down the 
pavement, walk in the direct of my hous and of the gate-house. 
opposit my own door I deliber lingered, and saw her pass down the 
step that led from the road to the entranc of the gate-house. even as 
I turn into my own door the unbidden reminisc which had elud 
me befor came out into the open, and I cast my net over it. It wa 
her husband, who, in the inexplic commun he had left on hi 
dressing-room table, just befor he shot himself, had written “mi soul 
sickens.” It wa odd, though scarc more than that, for madg to have 
use those ident words. 

* * * * * 

charl alington, my wife’ brother, who arriv next afternoon, is 
quit the happiest man whom I have ever come across. the materi 
world, that perenni spring of thwart ambition, physic desire, 
and perpetu disappointment, is practic unknown to him. envy, 
malice, and all uncharit are equal alien, becaus he doe 
not want to obtain what anybodi els ha got, and ha no sens of 
possession, which is queer, sinc he is enorm rich. He fear 
nothing, he hope for nothing, he ha no abhorr or affections, 
for all physic and nervou function are in him in the servic of an 
intens inquisitiveness. He never pass a moral judgment in hi life, 
he onli want to explor and to know. knowledge, in fact, is hi entir 
preoccupation, and sinc chemist and medic scientist probe and mine 
in the world of tinctur and microb far more effici than he 
could do, as he ha so littl care for anyth that can be weigh or 
propagated, he devot himself, absorbedli and ecstatically, to that 
world that lie about the confin of consciou existence. anyth not 
yet certainli determin appeal to him with the call of a trumpet: he 
ceas to take an interest in a subject as soon as it show sign of 
assum a practic and definit status. He wa intens concerned, 
for instance, in wireless transmission, until signor marconi prove 
that it came within the scope of practic science, and then charl 
abandon it as dull. I had seen him last two month before, when he 
wa in a great perturbation, sinc he wa speak at a meet of 
anglo-israelit in the morning, to show that the scone stone, which 
is now in the coron chair at westminster, wa for certain the 
pillow on which jacob’ head had rest when he saw the vision at 
bethel; wa address the psychic research societi in the afternoon 
on the subject of messag receiv from the dead through automat 
script, and in the even was, by way of a holiday, onli listen 
to a lectur on reincarnation. none of these thing could, as yet, be 
definit proved, and that wa whi he love them. dure the interv 
when the occult and the fantast do not occupi him, he is, in spite of 
hi fifti year and wizen mien, exactli like a schoolboy of eighteen 
back on hi holiday and brim with superflu energy. 

I found charl alreadi arriv when I got home next afternoon, after a 
round of golf. He wa betwixt and between the seriou and the holiday 
mood, for he had evid been read to madg from a journal 
concern reincarnation, and wa rather sever to me.... 

“golf!” he said, with insult scorn. “what is there to know about 
golf? you hit a ball into the air----” 

I wa a littl sore over the event of the afternoon. 

“that’ just what I don’t do,” I said. “I hit it along the ground!” 

“well, it doesn’t matter where you hit it,” said he. “it’ all subject 
to known laws. but the guess, the conjecture: there’ the thrill and 
the excit of life. the charlatan with hi new cure for cancer, the 
automat writer with hi messag from the dead, the reincarnationist 
with hi posit assert that he wa napoleon or a christian 
slave--they are the peopl who advanc knowledge. you have to guess 
befor you know. even darwin saw that when he said you could not 
investig without a hypothesis!” 

“so what’ your hypothesi thi minute?” I asked. 

“why, that we’v all live before, and that we’r go to live again 
here on thi same old earth. ani other concept of a futur life 
is impossible. are all the peopl who have been born and have die 
sinc the world emerg from chao go to becom inhabit of some 
futur world? what a squash, you know, my dear madge! now, I know 
what you’r go to ask me. If we’v all live before, whi can’t we 
rememb it? but that’ so simple! If you rememb be cleopatra, 
you would go on behav like cleopatra; and what would tarleton say? 
juda iscariot, too! fanci know you had been juda iscariot! you 
couldn’t get over it! you would commit suicide, or caus everybodi who 
wa connect with you to commit suicid from their horror of you. Or 
imagin be a grocer’ boy who knew he had been juliu cæsar.... 
Of course, sex doesn’t matter: souls, as far as I understand, are 
sexless--just spark of life, which are put into physic envelopes, 
some male, some female. you might have been king david, madg and poor 
toni here one of hi wives.” 

“that would be wonder neat,” said I. 

charl broke out into a shout of laughter. 

“it would indeed,” he said. “but I won’t talk sens ani more to you 
scoffers. i’m absolut tire out, I will confess, with thinking. 
I want to have a pretti ladi to come to dinner, and talk to her as 
if she wa just herself and I myself, and nobodi else. I want to win 
two-and-sixp at bridg with the expenditur of enorm thought. 
I want to have a larg breakfast to-morrow and read _the times_ 
afterwards, and go to tony’ club and talk about crop and golf and 
irish affair and peac conferences, and all the thing that don’t 
matter one straw!” 

“you’r go to begin your programm to-night, dear,” said madge. “A 
veri pretti ladi is come to dinner, and we’r go to play bridg 
afterwards.” 

madg and I were readi for mrs. acr when she arrived, but charl 
wa not yet down. fungus, who ha a wild ador for charles, quit 
unaccountable, sinc charl ha no feel for dogs, wa help him 
to dress, and madge, mrs. acres, and I wait for hi appearance. It 
wa certainli mrs. acr whom I had met last night at the door of the 
post-office, but the dim light of sunset had not enabl me to see 
how wonder handsom she was. there wa someth slightli jewish 
about her profile: the high forehead, the veri full-lip mouth, the 
bridg nose, the promin chin, all suggest rather than exemplifi 
an eastern origin. and when she spoke she had that rich soft 
of utterance, not quit hoarseness, but not quit of the clear-cut 
distinct of tone which characteris northern nations. someth 
southern, someth eastern.... 

“I am bound to ask one thing,” she said, when, after the usual 
greetings, we stood round the fireplace, wait for charles--“but have 
you got a dog?” 

madg move toward the bell. 

“yes, but he shan’t come down if you dislik dogs,” she said. “he’ 
wonder kind, but I know----” 

“ah, it’ not that,” said mrs. acres. “I ador dogs. but I onli wish 
to spare your dog’ feelings. though I ador them, they hate me, and 
they’r terribl frighten of me. there’ someth anti-canin about 
me.” 

It wa too late to say more. charles’ step clatter in the littl 
hall outside, and fungu wa hoars and amused. next moment the door 
opened, and the two came in. 

fungu came in first. He lollop in a festiv manner into the middl 
of the room, snif and snore in greeting, and then turn tail. He 
slip and skid on the parquet outside, and we heard him bundl 
down the kitchen stairs. 

“rude dog,” said madge. “charles, let me introduc you to mrs. acres. 
My brother, mrs. acres: sir charl alington.” 

* * * * * 

our littl dinner-t of four would not permit of separ 
conversations, and gener topics, spring up like mushrooms, wilt 
and die at their veri inception. what mood possess the other I 
did not at that time know, but for myself I wa onli consciou of 
some fundament distast of the handsome, clever woman who sat on 
my right, and seem quit unaffect by the wither atmosphere. 
she wa charm to the eye, she wa witti to the ear, she had grace 
and gracefulness, and all the time she wa someth terrible. but 
by degrees, as I found my own distast increasing, I saw that my 
brother-in-law’ interest wa grow correspondingli keen. the 
“pretti lady” whose presenc at dinner he had desir and obtain 
wa enchain him--not, so I began to guess, for her charm and her 
prettiness, but for some purpos of study, and I wonder whether it 
wa her beauti jewish profil that wa confirm to hi mind some 
anglo-israelitish theory, whether he saw in her fine brown eye the 
glanc of the seer and the clairvoyante, or whether he divin in her 
some reincarn of one of the famou or the infam dead. certainli 
she had for him some fascin beyond that of the legitim charm of 
a veri handsom woman; he wa studi her with intens curiosity. 

“and you are comfort in the gate-house?” he suddenli rap out at 
her, as if ask some question of which the answer wa crucial. 

“ah! but so comfortable,” she said--“such a delight atmosphere. 
I have never known a hous that ‘felt’ so peac and homelike. Or 
is it mere fanci to imagin that some hous have a sens of 
tranquil about them and other are uneasi and even terrible?” 

charl stare at her a moment in silenc befor he recollect hi 
manners. 

“no, there may easili be someth in it, I should say,” he answered. 
“one can imagin long centuri of tranquil actual invest a 
home with some sort of psychic aura percept to those who are 
sensitive.” 

she turn to madge. 

“and yet I have heard a ridicul stori that the hous is suppos to 
be haunted,” she said. “if it is, it is sure haunt by delightful, 
content spirits.” 

dinner wa over. madg rose. 

“come in veri soon, tony,” she said to me, “and let’ get to our 
bridge.” 

but her eye said, “don’t leav me long alon with her.” 

charl turn briskli round when the door had shut. 

“an extrem interest woman,” he said. 

“veri handsome,” said I. 

“i she? I didn’t notice. her mind, her spirit--that’ what intrigu 
me. what is she? what’ behind? whi did fungu turn tail like that? 
queer, too, about her find the atmospher of the gate-hous so 
tranquil. the late tenants, I remember, didn’t find that sooth touch 
about it!” 

“how do you account for that?” I asked. 

“there might be sever explanations. you might say that the late 
tenant were fanciful, imagin people, and that the present tenant 
is a sensible, matter-of-fact woman. certainli she seem to be.” 

“or----” I suggested. 

He laughed. 

“well, you might say--mind, I don’t say so--but you might say that 
the--th spiritu tenant of the hous find mrs. acr a congeni 
companion, and want to retain her. So they keep quiet, and don’t upset 
the cook’ nerves!” 

somehow thi answer exasper and jar on me. 

“what do you mean?” I said. “the spiritu tenant of the house, I 
suppose, is the man who betray hi brother and hang himself. whi 
should he find a charm woman like mrs. acr a congeni companion?” 

charl got up briskly. usual he is more than readi to discuss such 
topics, but to-night it seem that he had no such inclination. 

“didn’t madg tell us not to be long?” he asked. “you know how I run on 
if I onc get on that subject, tony, so don’t give me the opportunity.” 

“but whi did you say that?” I persisted. 

“becaus I wa talk nonsense. you know me well enough to be awar 
that I am an habitu crimin in that respect.” 

* * * * * 

It wa inde strang to find how complet both the first impress 
that madg had form of mrs. acr and the feel that follow so 
quickli on it heel were endors by those who, dure the next week 
or two, did a neighbour’ duti to the newcomer. all were loud in prais 
of her charm, her pleasant, kindli wit, her good looks, her beauti 
clothes, but even while thi _lob-gesang_ wa in full choru it would 
suddenli die away, and an uneasi silenc descended, which somehow wa 
more eloqu than all the appreci speech. odd, unaccount 
littl incid had occurred, which were whisper from mouth to 
mouth till they becam common property. the same fear that fungu had 
shown of her wa exhibit by anoth dog. A parallel case occur 
when she return the call of our parson’ wife. mrs. dowlett had a 
cage of canari in the window of her drawing-room. these bird had 
manifest symptom of extrem terror when mrs. acr enter the room, 
beat themselv against the wire of their cage, and utter the 
alarm-note.... she inspir some sort of inexplic fear, over which 
we, as train and civilis human beings, had control, so that we 
behav ourselves. but animals, without that check, gave way altogeth 
to it, even as fungu had done. 

mrs. acr entertained; she gave charm littl dinner-parti of 
eight, with a coupl of tabl at bridg to follow, but over these 
even there hung a blight and a blackness. No doubt the sinist 
stori of the panel parlour contribut to this. 

thi curiou secret dread of her, of which as on that first even 
at my house, she appear to be complet unconsci differ veri 
wide in degree. most people, like myself, were consciou of it, 
but onli veri remot so, and we found ourselv at the gate-hous 
behav quit as usual, though with thi uneas in the background. 
but with a few, and most of all with madge, it grew into a sort of 
obsession. she made everi effort to combat it; her will wa entir 
set against it, but her struggl seem onli to establish it power 
over her. the pathet and piti part wa that mrs. acr from 
the first had taken a tremend like to her, and use to drop in 
continually, call first to madg at the window, in that pleasant, 
seren voic of hers, to tell fungu that the hate one wa imminent. 

then came a day when madg and I were bidden to a parti at the 
gate-hous on christma evening. thi wa to be the last of mrs. 
acres’ hospit for the present, sinc she wa leav 
immedi afterward for a coupl of month in egypt. so, with thi 
remiss ahead, madg almost gleefulli accept the bidding. but when 
the even came she wa seiz with so violent an attack of sick 
and shiver that she wa utterli unabl to fulfil her engagement. her 
doctor could find no physic troubl to account for this: it seem 
that the anticip of her even alon caus it, and here wa the 
culmin of her shrink from our kindli and pleasant neighbour. 
she could onli tell me that her sensations, as she began to dress for 
the party, were like those of that moment in sleep when somewher in 
the drowsi brain nightmar is ripening. someth independ of her 
will revolt at what lay befor her.... 

* * * * * 

spring had begun to stretch herself in the lap of winter when next the 
curtain rose on thi veil drama of forc but dimli comprehend and 
shudderingli conjectured; but then, indeed, nightmar ripen swiftli 
in broad noon. and thi wa the way of it. 

charl alington had again come to stay with us five day befor 
easter, and express himself as humor disappoint to find that 
the subject of hi curios wa still absent from the gate-house. On 
the saturday morn befor easter he appear veri late for breakfast, 
and madg had alreadi gone her ways. I rang for a fresh teapot, and 
while thi wa on it way he took up _the times_. 

“I onli read the outsid page of it,” he said. “the rest is too full of 
mere materialist dullnesses--politics, sports, money-market----” 

He stopped, and pass the paper over to me. 

“there, where i’m pointing,” he said--“among the deaths. the first one.” 

what I read wa this: 

“acres, bertha. die at sea, thursday night, 30th march, and by her 
own request buri at sea. (receiv by wireless from P. & O. steamer 
_peshawar_.)” 

He held out hi hand for the paper again, and turn over the leaves. 

“lloyd’s,” he said. “the _peshawar_ arriv at tilburi yesterday 
afternoon. the burial must have taken place somewher in the english 
channel.” 

* * * * * 

On the afternoon of easter sunday madg and I motor out to the golf 
link three mile away. she propos to walk along the beach just 
outsid the dune while I had my round, and return to the club-hous 
for tea in two hours’ time. the day wa one of most lucid spring: a 
warm south-west wind bowl white cloud along the sky, and their 
shadow jovial scud over the sandhills. We had told her of mrs. 
acres’ death, and from that moment someth dark and vagu which had 
been lie over her mind sinc the autumn seem to join thi fleet of 
the shadow of cloud and leav her in sunlight. We part at the door 
of the club-house, and she set out on her walk. 

half an hour later, as my oppon and I were wait on the fifth tee, 
where the road cross the links, for the coupl in front of us to move 
on, a servant from the club-house, scud along the road, caught 
sight of us, and, jump from hi bicycle, came to where we stood. 

“you’r want at the club-house, sir,” he said to me. “mrs. carford 
wa walk along the shore, and she found someth left by the tide. 
A body, sir. ’twa in a sack, but the sack wa torn, and she saw---- 
it’ upset her veri much, sir. We thought it best to come for you.” 

I took the boy’ bicycl and went back to the club-hous as fast as I 
could turn the wheel. I felt sure I knew what madg had found, and, 
know that, realis the shock.... five minut later she wa tell 
me her stori in gasp and whispers. 

“the tide wa go down,” she said, “and I walk along the high-wat 
mark.... there were pretti shells; I wa pick them up.... and then I 
saw it in front of me--just shapeless, just a sack ... and then, as I 
came nearer, it took shape; there were knee and elbows. It moved, it 
roll over, and where the head wa the sack wa torn, and I saw her 
face. her eye were open, tony, and I fled.... all the time I felt it 
wa roll along after me. oh, tony! she’ dead, isn’t she? she won’t 
come back to the gate-house? Do you promis me?... there’ someth 
awful! I wonder if I guess. the sea give her up. the sea won’t suffer 
her to rest in it.”... 

the news of the find had alreadi been telephon to tarleton, and 
soon a parti of four men with a stretcher arrived. there wa no doubt 
as to the ident of the body, for though it had been in the water 
for three day no corrupt had come to it. the weight with which at 
burial it had been laden must by some strang chanc have been detach 
from it, and by a chanc stranger yet it had drift to the shore 
closest to her home. that night it lay in the mortuary, and the inquest 
wa held on it next day, though that wa a bank-holiday. from there it 
wa taken to the gate-hous and coffined, and it lay in the panel 
parlour for the funer on the morrow. 

madge, after that one hyster outburst, had complet recov 
herself, and on the monday even she made a littl wreath of the 
spring-flow which the earli warmth had call into blossom in the 
garden, and I went across with it to the gate-house. though the news 
of mrs. acres’ death and the subsequ find of the bodi had 
been wide advertised, there had been no respons from relat or 
friends, and as I laid the solitari wreath on the coffin a sens of the 
utter loneli of what lay within seiz and encompass me. and then 
a portent, no less, took place befor my eyes. hardli had the freshli 
gather flower been laid on the coffin than they droop and wilted. 
the stalk of the daffodil bent, and their bright chalic closed; the 
odour of the wallflow died, and they wither as I watched.... what 
did it mean, that even the petal of spring shrank and were moribund? 

* * * * * 

I told madg noth of this; and she, as if through some pang of 
remorse, wa determin to be present next day at the funeral. 
No arriv of friend or relat had taken place, and from the 
gate-hous there came none of the servants. they stood in the porch as 
the coffin wa brought out of the house, and even befor it wa put 
into the hears had gone back again and close the door. so, at the 
cemeteri on the hill abov tarleton, madg and her brother and I were 
the onli mourners. 

the afternoon wa dens overcast, though we got no rainfall, and 
it wa with thick cloud abov and a sea-mist drift between the 
grave-ston that we came, after the servic in the cemetery-chapel, to 
the place of interment. and then--i can hardli write of it now--when it 
came for the coffin to be lower into the grave, it wa found that by 
some faulti measur it could not descend, for the excav wa 
not long enough to hold it. 

madg wa stand close to us, and at thi moment I heard her sob. 

“and the kindli earth will not receiv her,” she whispered. 

there wa aw delay: the digger must be sent for again, and meantim 
the rain had begun to fall thick and tepid. for some reason--perhap 
some outli feeler of madge’ obsess had wound a tentacl round 
me--i felt that I must know that earth had gone to earth, but I could 
not suffer madg to wait. so, in thi miser pause, I got charl to 
take her home, and then returned. 

pick and shovel were busy, and soon the resting-plac wa ready. the 
interrupt servic continued, the hand of wet earth splash on the 
coffin-lid, and when all wa over I left the cemetery, still feeling, 
I knew not why, that all wa _not_ over. some restless and want of 
certainti possess me, and instead of go home I fare forth into 
the roll wood countri inland, with the intent of walk off 
these bat-lik terror that flap around me. the rain had ceased, and 
a blur sunlight penetr the sea-mist which still blanket the 
field and woods, and for half an hour, move briskly, I endeavour 
to fight down some fantast convict that had grip my mind in it 
claws. I refus to look straight at that conviction, tell myself 
how fantastic, how unreason it was; but as often as I put out a 
hand to throttl it there came the echo of madge’ words: “the sea will 
not suffer her; the kindli earth will not receiv her.” and if I could 
shut my eye to that there came some remembr of the day she died, 
and of half-forgotten fragment of charles’ superstiti belief in 
reincarnation. the whole thing, incred though it compon part 
were, hung togeth with a terribl tenacity. 

* * * * * 

befor long the rain began again, and I turned, mean to go by the 
main-road into tarleton, which pass in a wide-flung curv some 
half-mil outsid the cemetery. but as I approach the path through 
the fields, which, leav the less direct route, pass close to the 
cemeteri and bring you by a steeper and shorter descent into the 
town, I felt myself irresist impel to take it. I told myself, 
of course, that I wish to make my wet walk as short as possible; 
but at the back of my mind wa the half-conscious, but none the less 
imper need to know by ocular evid that the grave by which I 
had stood that afternoon had been fill in, and that the bodi of mrs. 
acr now lay tranquil beneath the soil. My path would be even shorter 
if I pass through the graveyard, and so present I wa fumbl in 
the gloom for the latch of the gate, and close it again behind me. 
rain wa fall now thick and sullenly, and in the blear twilight I 
pick my way among the mound and slip on the drip grass, and 
there in front of me wa the newli turn earth. all wa finished: the 
grave-digg had done their work and departed, and earth had gone back 
again into the keep of the earth. 

It brought me some great lighten of the spirit to know that, and I 
wa on the point of turn away when a sound of stir from the heap 
soil caught my ear, and I saw a littl stream of pebbl mix with 
clay trickl down the side of the mound abov the grave: the heavi 
rain, no doubt, had loosen the earth. and then came anoth and yet 
another, and with terror grip at my heart I perceiv that thi wa 
no loosen from without, but from within, for to right and left the 
pile soil wa fall away with the press of someth from below. 
faster and faster it pour off the grave, and ever higher at the head 
of it rose a mound of earth push upward from beneath. somewher out 
of sight there came the sound as of creak and break wood, and 
then through that mound of earth there protrud the end of the coffin. 
the lid wa shattered: loos piec of the board fell off it, and from 
within the caviti there face me white featur and wide eyes. all thi 
I saw, while sheer terror held me motionless; then, I suppose, came the 
breaking-point, and with such panic as sure man never felt befor I 
wa stumbl away among the grave and race toward the kindli human 
light of the town below. 

I went to the parson who had conduct the servic that afternoon with 
my incred tale, and an hour later he, charl alington, and two 
or three men from the undertaker’ were on the spot. they found the 
coffin, complet disinterred, lie on the ground by the grave, which 
wa now three-quart full of the earth which had fallen back into it. 
after what had happen it wa decid to make no further attempt to 
buri it; and next day the bodi wa cremated. 

* * * * * 

now, it is open to anyon who may read thi tale to reject the incid 
of thi emerg of the coffin altogether, and account for the other 
strang happen by the comfort theori of coincidence. He can 
certainli satisfi himself that one bertha acr did die at sea on thi 
particular thursday befor easter, and wa buri at sea: there is 
noth extraordinari about that. nor is it the least imposs that 
the weight should have slip from the canva shroud, and that the 
bodi should have been wash ashor on the coast by tarleton (whi not 
tarleton, as well as ani other littl town near the coast?); nor is 
there anyth inher signific in the fact that the grave, as 
origin dug, wa not of suffici dimens to receiv the coffin. 
that all these incid should have happen to the bodi of a singl 
individu is odd, but then the natur of coincid is to be odd. 
they form a startl series, but unless coincid are startl 
they escap observ altogether. so, if you reject the last incid 
here recorded, or account for it by some local disturbance, an 
earthquake, or the break of a spring just below the grave, you can 
comfort reclin on the cushion of coincidence.... 

* * * * * 

for myself, I give no explan of these events, though my 
brother-in-law brought forward one with which he himself is perfectli 
satisfied. onli the other day he sent me, with consider jubilation, 
a copi of some extract from a mediæv treatis on the subject of 
reincarn which suffici indic hi theory. the origin 
work wa in latin, which, mistrust my scholarship, he kindli 
translat for me. I transcrib hi quotat exactli as he sent them 
to me. 

“we have these certain instanc of hi reincarnation. In one hi 
spirit wa incarn in the bodi of a man; in the other, in that of 
a woman, fair of outward aspect, and of a pleasant conversation, but 
held in dread and in horror by those who came into more than casual 
intercours with her.... she, it is said, die on the anniversari of 
the day on which he hang himself, after the betrayal, but of thi I 
have no certain information. what is sure is that, when the time came 
for her burial, the kindli earth would receiv her not, but though the 
grave wa dug deep and well it spew her forth again.... Of the man 
in whom hi curs spirit wa reincarn it is said that, be on a 
voyag when he died, he wa cast overboard with weight to sink him; 
but the sea would not suffer him to rest in her bosom, but slip the 
weight from him, and cast him forth again on to the coast.... howbeit, 
when the full time of hi expiat shall have come and hi deadli 
sin forgiven, the corpor bodi which is the curs receptacl of hi 
spirit shall at length be purg with fire, and so he shall, in the 
infinit merci of the almighty, have rest, and shall wander no more.” 




the horror-horn 




the horror-horn 


for the past ten day alhubel had bask in the radiant midwint 
weather proper to it emin of over 6,000 feet. from rise to 
set the sun (so surpris to those who have hitherto associ 
it with a pale, tepid plate indistinctli shine through the murki air 
of england) had blaze it way across the sparkl blue, and everi 
night the seren and windless frost had made the star sparkl like 
illumin diamond dust. suffici snow had fallen befor christma 
to content the skiers, and the big rink, sprinkl everi evening, had 
given the skater each morn a fresh surfac on which to perform 
their slipperi antics. bridg and danc serv to while away the 
greater part of the night, and to me, now for the first time tast 
the joy of a winter in the engadine, it seem that a new heaven and 
a new earth had been lighted, warmed, and refriger for the special 
benefit of those who like myself had been wise enough to save up their 
day of holiday for the winter. 

but a break came in these ideal conditions: one afternoon the sun grew 
vapour-veil and up the valley from the north-west a wind frozen with 
mile of travel over ice-bound hill-sid began scout through the 
calm hall of the heavens. soon it grew dust with snow, first in 
small flake driven almost horizont befor it congeal breath 
and then in larger tuft as of swansdown. and though all day for a 
fortnight befor the fate of nation and life and death had seem 
to me of far less import than to get certain trace of the 
skate-blad on the ice of proper shape and size, it now seem that 
the one paramount consider wa to hurri back to the hotel for 
shelter: it wa wiser to leav rocking-turn alon than to be frozen in 
their quest. 

I had come out here with my cousin, professor ingram, the celebr 
physiologist and alpin climber. dure the seren of the last 
fortnight he had made a coupl of notabl winter ascents, but thi 
morn hi weather-wisdom had mistrust the sign of the heavens, and 
instead of attempt the ascent of the piz passug he had wait to see 
whether hi misgiv justifi themselves. So there he sat now in the 
hall of the admir hotel with hi feet on the hot-wat pipe and 
the latest deliveri of the english post in hi hands. thi contain 
a pamphlet concern the result of the mount everest expedition, of 
which he had just finish the perus when I entered. 

“A veri interest report,” he said, pass it to me, “and they 
certainli deserv to succeed next year. but who can tell, what that 
final six thousand feet may entail? six thousand feet more when you 
have alreadi accomplish twenty-thre thousand doe not seem much, 
but at present no one know whether the human frame can stand exert 
at such a height. It may affect not the lung and heart only, but 
possibl the brain. deliri hallucin may occur. In fact, if I 
did not know better, I should have said that one such hallucin had 
occur to the climber already.” 

“and what wa that?” I asked. 

“you will find that they thought they came across the track of some 
nake human foot at a great altitude. that look at first sight like 
an hallucination. what more natur than that a brain excit and 
exhilar by the extrem height should have interpret certain mark 
in the snow as the footprint of a human being? everi bodili organ 
at these altitud is exert itself to the utmost to do it work, 
and the brain seiz on those mark in the snow and say ‘yes, i’m 
all right, i’m do my job, and I perceiv mark in the snow which 
I affirm are human footprints.’ you know, even at thi altitude, how 
restless and eager the brain is, how vividly, as you told me, you dream 
at night. multipli that stimulu and that consequ eager and 
restless by three, and how natur that the brain should harbour 
illusions! what after all is the delirium which often accompani high 
fever but the effort of the brain to do it work under the pressur 
of feverish conditions? It is so eager to continu perceiv that it 
perceiv thing which have no existence!” 

“and yet you don’t think that these nake human footprint were 
illusions,” said I. “you told me you would have thought so, if you had 
not known better.” 

He shift in hi chair and look out of the window a moment. the air 
wa thick now with the densiti of the big snow-flak that were driven 
along by the squeal north-west gale. 

“quit so,” he said. “in all probabl the human footprint were 
real human footprints. I expect that they were the footprints, anyhow, 
of a be more nearli a man than anyth else. My reason for say 
so is that I know such be exist. I have even seen quit near at 
hand--and I assur you I did not wish to be nearer in spite of my 
intens curiosity--th creature, shall we say, which would make such 
footprints. and if the snow wa not so dense, I could show you the 
place where I saw him.” 

He point straight out of the window, where across the valley lie 
the huge tower of the ungeheuerhorn with the carv pinnacl of rock 
at the top like some gigant rhinoceros-horn. On one side only, as I 
knew, wa the mountain practicable, and that for none but the finest 
climbers; on the other three a success of ledg and precipic 
render it unscalable. two thousand feet of sheer rock form the tower; 
below are five hundr feet of fallen boulders, up to the edg of which 
grow dens wood of larch and pine. 

“upon the ungeheuerhorn?” I asked. 

“yes. Up till twenti year ago it had never been ascended, and I, like 
sever others, spent a lot of time in tri to find a rout up it. 
My guid and I sometim spent three night togeth at the hut besid 
the blumen glacier, prowl round it, and it wa by luck realli that 
we found the route, for the mountain look even more impractic 
from the far side than it doe from this. but one day we found a long, 
transvers fissur in the side which led to a negoti ledge; then 
there came a slant ice couloir which you could not see till you got 
to the foot of it. however, I need not go into that.” 

the big room where we sat wa fill up with cheer group driven 
indoor by thi sudden gale and snowfall, and the cackl of merri 
tongu grew loud. the band, too, that invari appanag of tea-tim 
at swiss resorts, had begun to tune up for the usual potpourri from the 
work of puccini. next moment the sugary, sentiment melodi began. 

“strang contrast!” said ingram. “here are we sit warm and cosy, 
our ear pleasantli tickl with these littl babi tune and outsid is 
the great storm grow more violent everi moment, and swirl round 
the auster cliff of the ungeheuerhorn: the horror-horn, as inde it 
wa to me.” 

“I want to hear all about it,” I said. “everi detail: make a short 
stori long, if it’ short. I want to know whi it’ _your_ horror-horn?” 

“well, chanton and I (he wa my guide) use to spend day prowl 
about the cliffs, make a littl progress on one side and then be 
stopped, and gain perhap five hundr feet on anoth side and then 
be confront by some insuper obstacle, till the day when by 
luck we found the route. chanton never like the job, for some reason 
that I could not fathom. It wa not becaus of the difficulti or danger 
of the climbing, for he wa the most fearless man I have ever met 
when deal with rock and ice, but he wa alway insist that we 
should get off the mountain and back to the blumen hut befor sunset. 
He wa scarc easi even when we had got back to shelter and lock 
and bar the door, and I well rememb one night when, as we ate our 
supper, we heard some animal, a wolf probably, howl somewher out in 
the night. A posit panic seiz him, and I don’t think he close hi 
eye till morning. It struck me then that there might be some grisli 
legend about the mountain, connect possibl with it name, and next 
day I ask him whi the peak wa call the horror-horn. He put the 
question off at first, and said that, like the schreckhorn, it name 
wa due to it precipic and fall stones; but when I press him 
further he acknowledg that there wa a legend about it, which hi 
father had told him. there were creatures, so it wa supposed, that 
live in it caves, thing human in shape, and covered, except for 
the face and hands, with long black hair. they were dwarf in size, 
four feet high or thereabouts, but of prodigi strength and agility, 
remnant of some wild primev race. It seem that they were still 
in an upward stage of evolution, or so I guessed, for the stori ran 
that sometim girl had been carri off by them, not as prey, and 
not for ani such fate as for those captur by cannibals, but to be 
bred from. young men also had been rape by them, to be mate with 
the femal of their tribe. all thi look as if the creatures, as I 
said, were tend toward humanity. but natur I did not believ a 
word of it, as appli to the condit of the present day. centuri 
ago, conceivably, there may have been such beings, and, with the 
extraordinari tenac of tradition, the news of thi had been hand 
down and wa still current round the hearth of the peasants. As for 
their numbers, chanton told me that three had been onc seen togeth 
by a man who owe to hi swift on ski had escap to tell the 
tale. thi man, he averred, wa no other than hi grandfather, who 
had been benight one winter even as he pass through the dens 
wood below the ungeheuerhorn, and chanton suppos that they had 
been driven down to these lower altitud in search of food dure 
sever winter weather, for otherwis the record sight of them 
had alway taken place among the rock of the peak itself. they had 
pursu hi grandfather, then a young man, at an extraordinarili swift 
canter, run sometim upright as men run, sometim on all-four 
in the manner of beasts, and their howl were just such as that we had 
heard that night in the blumen hut. such at ani rate wa the stori 
chanton told me, and, like you, I regard it as the veri moonshin 
of superstition. but the veri next day I had reason to reconsid my 
judgment about it. 

“it wa on that day that after a week of explor we hit on the 
onli rout at present known to the top of our peak. We start as soon 
as there wa light enough to climb by, for, as you may guess, on veri 
difficult rock it is imposs to climb by lantern or moonlight. 
We hit on the long fissur I have spoken of, we explor the ledg 
which from below seem to end in nothingness, and with an hour’ 
step-cut ascend the couloir which led upward from it. from there 
onward it wa a rock-climb, certainli of consider difficulty, but 
with no heart-break discoveri ahead, and it wa about nine in the 
morn that we stood on the top. We did not wait there long, for that 
side of the mountain is rake by fall stone loosened, when the sun 
grow hot, from the ice that hold them, and we made hast to pass the 
ledg where the fall are most frequent. after that there wa the long 
fissur to descend, a matter of no great difficulty, and we were at 
the end of our work by midday, both of us, as you may imagine, in the 
state of the highest elation. 

“A long and tiresom scrambl among the huge boulder at the foot of 
the cliff then lay befor us. here the hill-sid is veri porou and 
great cave extend far into the mountain. We had unrop at the base of 
the fissure, and were pick our way as seem good to either of us 
among these fallen rocks, mani of them bigger than an ordinari house, 
when, on come round the corner of one of these, I saw that which 
made it clear that the stori chanton had told me were no figment of 
tradit superstition. 

“not twenti yard in front of me lay one of the be of which he 
had spoken. there it sprawl nake and bask on it back with face 
turn up to the sun, which it narrow eye regard unwinking. In form 
it wa complet human, but the growth of hair that cover limb and 
trunk alik almost complet hid the sun-tan skin beneath. but it 
face, save for the down on it cheek and chin, wa hairless, and I 
look on a counten the sensual and malevol bestial of which 
froze me with horror. had the creatur been an animal, one would have 
felt scarc a shudder at the gross anim of it; the horror lay in 
the fact that it wa a man. there lay by it a coupl of gnaw bones, 
and, it meal finished, it wa lazili lick it protuber lips, 
from which came a pur murmur of content. with one hand it scratch 
the thick hair on it belly, in the other it held one of these bones, 
which present split in half beneath the pressur of it finger and 
thumb. but my horror wa not base on the inform of what happen 
to those men whom these creatur caught, it wa due onli to my 
proxim to a thing so human and so infernal. the peak, of which the 
ascent had a moment ago fill us with such elat satisfaction, becam 
to me an ungeheuerhorn indeed, for it wa the home of be more aw 
than the delirium of nightmar could ever have conceived. 

“chanton wa a dozen pace behind me, and with a backward wave of 
my hand I caus him to halt. then withdraw myself with infinit 
precaution, so as not to attract the gaze of that bask creature, 
I slip back round the rock, whisper to him what I had seen, and 
with blanch face we made a long detour, peer round everi corner, 
and crouch low, not know that at ani step we might not come upon 
anoth of these beings, or that from the mouth of one of these cave 
in the mountain-sid there might not appear anoth of those hairless 
and dread faces, with perhap thi time the breast and insignia of 
womanhood. that would have been the worst of all. 

“luck favour us, for we made our way among the boulder and shift 
stones, the rattl of which might at ani moment have betray us, 
without a repetit of my experience, and onc among the tree we ran 
as if the furi themselv were in pursuit. well now did I understand, 
though I dare say I cannot convey, the qualm of chanton’ mind when he 
spoke to me of these creatures. their veri human wa what made them 
so terrible, the fact that they were of the same race as ourselves, but 
of a type so abysm degrad that the most brutal and inhuman of men 
would have seem angel in comparison.” 

the music of the small band wa over befor he had finish the 
narrative, and the chatter group round the tea-tabl had dispersed. 
He paus a moment. 

“there wa a horror of the spirit,” he said, “which I experienc 
then, from which, I verili believe, I have never entir recovered. 
I saw then how terribl a live thing could be, and how terrible, in 
consequence, wa life itself. In us all I suppos lurk some inherit 
germ of that ineff bestiality, and who know whether, steril as it 
ha appar becom in the cours of centuries, it might not fructifi 
again. when I saw that creatur sun itself, I look into the abyss 
out of which we have crawled. and these creatur are tri to crawl 
out of it now, if they exist ani longer. certainli for the last twenti 
year there ha been no record of their be seen, until we come to 
thi stori of the footprint seen by the climber on everest. If that 
is authentic, if the parti did not mistak the footprint of some bear, 
or what not, for a human tread, it seem as if still thi bestrand 
remnant of mankind is in existence.” 

now, ingram, had told hi stori well; but sit in thi warm 
and civilis room, the horror which he had clearli felt had not 
commun itself to me in ani veri vivid manner. intellectually, I 
agreed, I could appreci hi horror, but certainli my spirit felt no 
shudder of interior comprehension. 

“but it is odd,” I said, “that your keen interest in physiolog did 
not dispers your qualms. you were looking, so I take it, at some form 
of man more remot probabl than the earliest human remains. did not 
someth insid you say ‘thi is of absorb significance’?” 

He shook hi head. 

“no: I onli want to get away,” said he. “it wa not, as I have told 
you, the terror of what accord to chanton’ story, might await us if 
we were captured; it wa sheer horror at the creatur itself. I quak 
at it.” 

* * * * * 

the snowstorm and the gale increas in violenc that night, and I 
slept uneasily, pluck again and again from slumber by the fierc 
battl of the wind that shook my window as if with an imperi 
demand for admittance. It came in billowi gusts, with strang nois 
intermingl with it as for a moment it abated, with flute and 
moan that rose to shriek as the furi of it returned. these noises, 
no doubt, mingl themselv with my drows and sleepi consciousness, 
and onc I tore myself out of nightmare, imagin that the creatur 
of the horror-horn had gain foot on my balconi and were rattl 
at the window-bolts. but befor morn the gale had die away, and I 
awok to see the snow fall dens and fast in a windless air. for 
three day it continued, without intermission, and with it cessat 
there came a frost such as I have never felt before. fifti degre were 
regist one night, and more the next, and what the cold must have 
been on the cliff of the ungeheuerhorn I cannot imagine. sufficient, 
so I thought, to have made an end altogeth of it secret inhabitants: 
my cousin, on that day twenti year ago, had miss an opportun for 
studi which would probabl never fall again either to him or another. 

I receiv one morn a letter from a friend say that he had 
arriv at the neighbour winter resort of st. luigi, and propos 
that I should come over for a morning’ skate and lunch afterwards. 
the place wa not more than a coupl of mile off, if one took the path 
over the low, pine-clad foot-hil abov which lay the steep wood 
below the first rocki slope of the ungeheuerhorn; and accordingly, 
with a knapsack contain skate on my back, I went on ski over the 
wood slope and down by an easi descent again on to st. luigi. the 
day wa overcast, cloud entir obscur the higher peak though the 
sun wa visible, pale and unluminous, through the mists. but as the 
morn went on, it gain the upper hand, and I slid down into st. 
luigi beneath a sparkl firmament. We skate and lunched, and then, 
sinc it look as if thick weather wa come up again, I set out 
earli about three o’clock for my return journey. 

hardli had I got into the wood when the cloud gather thick above, 
and streamer and skein of them began to descend among the pine 
through which my path thread it way. In ten minut more their 
opac had so increas that I could hardli see a coupl of yard in 
front of me. veri soon I becam awar that I must have got off the 
path, for snow-cowl shrub lay directli in my way, and, cast 
back to find it again, I got altogeth confus as to direction. 
but, though progress wa difficult, I knew I had onli to keep on 
the ascent, and present I should come to the brow of these low 
foot-hills, and descend into the open valley where alhubel stood. So 
on I went, stumbl and slide over obstacles, and unable, owe to 
the thick of the snow, to take off my skis, for I should have sunk 
over the knee at each step. still the ascent continued, and look at 
my watch I saw that I had alreadi been near an hour on my way from st. 
luigi, a period more than suffici to complet my whole journey. but 
still I stuck to my idea that though I had certainli stray far from 
my proper rout a few minut more must sure see me over the top of 
the upward way, and I should find the ground declin into the next 
valley. about now, too, I notic that the mist were grow suffus 
with rose-colour, and, though the infer wa that it must be close 
on sunset, there wa consol in the fact that they were there and 
might lift at ani moment and disclos to me my whereabouts. but the 
fact that night would soon be on me made it need to bar my mind 
against that despair of loneli which so eat out the heart of a man 
who is lost in wood or on mountain-side, that, though still there is 
plenti of vigour in hi limbs, hi nervou forc is sapped, and he can 
do no more than lie down and abandon himself to whatev fate may await 
him.... and then I heard that which made the thought of loneli seem 
bliss indeed, for there wa a wors fate than loneliness. what I heard 
resembl the howl of a wolf, and it came from not far in front of me 
where the ridge--wa it a ridge?--stil rose higher in vestment of 
pines. 

from behind me came a sudden puff of wind, which shook the frozen snow 
from the droop pine-branches, and swept away the mist as a broom 
sweep the dust from the floor. radiant abov me were the uncloud 
skies, alreadi charg with the red of the sunset, and in front I 
saw that I had come to the veri edg of the wood through which I had 
wander so long. but it wa no valley into which I had penetrated, 
for there right ahead of me rose the steep slope of boulder and rock 
soar upward to the foot of the ungeheuerhorn. what, then, wa that 
cri of a wolf which had made my heart stand still? I saw. 

not twenti yard from me wa a fallen tree, and lean against the 
trunk of it wa one of the denizen of the horror-horn, and it wa a 
woman. she wa envelop in a thick growth of hair grey and tufted, 
and from her head it stream down over her shoulder and her bosom, 
from which hung wither and pendul breasts. and look on her 
face I comprehend not with my mind alone, but with a shudder of my 
spirit, what ingram had felt. never had nightmar fashion so terribl 
a countenance; the beauti of sun and star and of the beast of the 
field and the kindli race of men could not aton for so hellish an 
incarn of the spirit of life. A fathomless bestial model the 
slaver mouth and the narrow eyes; I look into the abyss itself 
and knew that out of that abyss on the edg of which I lean the 
gener of men had climbed. what if that ledg crumbl in front of 
me and pitch me headlong into it nethermost depths?... 

In one hand she held by the horn a chamoi that kick and struggled. 
A blow from it hindleg caught her wither thigh, and with a grunt 
of anger she seiz the leg in her other hand, and, as a man may pull 
from it sheath a stem of meadow-grass, she pluck it off the body, 
leav the torn skin hang round the gape wound. then put the 
red, bleed member to her mouth she suck at it as a child suck a 
stick of sweetmeat. through flesh and gristl her short, brown teeth 
penetrated, and she lick her lip with a sound of purring. then 
drop the leg by her side, she look again at the bodi of the prey 
now quiver in it death-convulsion, and with finger and thumb goug 
out one of it eyes. she snap her teeth on it, and it crack like a 
soft-shel nut. 

It must have been but a few second that I stood watch her, in 
some indescrib catalepsi of terror, while through my brain there 
peal the panic-command of my mind to my stricken limb “begone, 
begone, while there is time.” then, recov the power of my joint 
and muscles, I tri to slip behind a tree and hide myself from thi 
apparition. but the woman--shal I say?--must have caught my stir of 
movement, for she rais her eye from her live feast and saw me. she 
crane forward her neck, she drop her prey, and half rise began to 
move toward me. As she did this, she open her mouth, and gave forth 
a howl such as I had heard a moment before. It wa answer by another, 
but faintli and distantly. 

slide and slipping, with the toe of my ski trip in the 
obstacl below the snow, I plung forward down the hill between 
the pine-trunks. the low sun alreadi sink behind some rampart of 
mountain in the west redden the snow and the pine with it ultim 
rays. My knapsack with the skate in it swung to and fro on my back, 
one ski-stick had alreadi been twitch out of my hand by a fallen 
branch of pine, but not a second’ paus could I allow myself to 
recov it. I gave no glanc behind, and I knew not at what pace my 
pursuer wa on my track, or inde whether ani pursu at all, for my 
whole mind and energy, now work at full power again under the stress 
of my panic, wa devot to get away down the hill and out of the 
wood as swiftli as my limb could bear me. for a littl while I heard 
noth but the hiss snow of my headlong passage, and the rustl of 
the cover undergrowth beneath my feet, and then, from close at hand 
behind me, onc more the wolf-howl sound and I heard the plung of 
footstep other than my own. 

the strap of my knapsack had shifted, and as my skate swung to and fro 
on my back it chafe and press on my throat, hinder free passag 
of air, of which, god knew, my labour lung were in dire need, and 
without paus I slip it free from my neck, and held it in the hand 
from which my ski-stick had been jerked. I seem to go a littl more 
easili for thi adjustment, and now, not so far distant, I could see 
below me the path from which I had strayed. If onli I could reach that, 
the smoother go would sure enabl me to out-dist my pursuer, 
who even on the rougher ground wa but slowli overhaul me, and at 
the sight of that riband stretch unimped downhill, a ray of hope 
pierc the black panic of my soul. with that came the desire, keen 
and insistent, to see who or what it wa that wa on my tracks, and 
I spare a backward glance. It wa she, the hag whom I had seen at 
her gruesom meal; her long grey hair flew out behind her, her mouth 
chatter and gibbered, her finger made grab movements, as if 
alreadi they close on me. 

but the path wa now at hand, and the near of it I suppos made me 
incautious. A hump of snow-cov bush lay in my path, and, think 
I could jump over it, I trip and fell, smother myself in snow. I 
heard a maniac noise, half scream, half laugh, from close behind, and 
befor I could recov myself the grab finger were at my neck, as 
if a steel vice had close there. but my right hand in which I held my 
knapsack of skate wa free, and with a blind back-hand movement I 
whirl it behind me at the full length of it strap, and knew that my 
desper blow had found it billet somewhere. even befor I could look 
round I felt the grip on my neck relax, and someth subsid into the 
veri bush which had entangl me. I recov my feet and turned. 

there she lay, twitch and quivering. the heel of one of my skate 
pierc the thin alpaca of the knapsack had hit her full on the 
temple, from which the blood wa pouring, but a hundr yard away I 
could see anoth such figur come downward on my tracks, leap 
and bounding. At that panic rose again within me, and I sped off down 
the white smooth path that led to the light of the villag alreadi 
beckoning. never onc did I paus in my headlong going: there wa no 
safeti until I wa back among the haunt of men. I flung myself against 
the door of the hotel, and scream for admittance, though I had but to 
turn the handl and enter; and onc more as when ingram had told hi 
tale, there wa the sound of the band, and the chatter of voices, and 
there, too, wa he himself, who look up and then rose swiftli to hi 
feet as I made my clatter entrance. 

“I have seen them too,” I cried. “look at my knapsack. Is there not 
blood on it? It is the blood of one of them, a woman, a hag, who tore 
off the leg of a chamoi as I looked, and pursu me through the 
accurs wood. i----” 

whether it wa I who spun round, or the room which seem to spin 
round me, I knew not, but I heard myself falling, collaps on the 
floor, and the next time that I wa consciou at all I wa in bed. 
there wa ingram there, who told me that I wa quit safe, and anoth 
man, a stranger, who prick my arm with the nozzl of a syringe, and 
reassur me.... 

A day or two later I gave a coher account of my adventure, and three 
or four men, arm with guns, went over my traces. they found the bush 
in which I had stumbled, with a pool of blood which had soak into 
the snow, and, still follow my ski-tracks, they came on the bodi 
of a chamois, from which had been torn one of it hindleg and one 
eye-socket wa empty. that is all the corrobor of my stori that I 
can give the reader, and for myself I imagin that the creatur which 
pursu me wa either not kill by my blow or that her fellow remov 
her body.... anyhow, it is open to the incredul to prowl about 
the cave of the ungeheuerhorn, and see if anyth occur that may 
convinc them. 




machaon 




machaon 


I wa return at the close of the short winter day from my visit to 
st. james’ hospital, where my old servant parkes, who had been in my 
servic for twenti years, wa lying. I had sent him there three day 
before, not for treatment, but for observation, and thi afternoon I 
had gone up to london, to hear the doctor’ report on the case. He told 
me that park wa suffer from an intern tumour, the natur of 
which could not be diagnos for certain, but all the symptom point 
directli to it be cancerous. that, however, must not be regard 
as proved; it could onli be prove by an exploratori oper to 
reveal the natur and the extent of the growth, which must then, if 
possible, be excised. It might involve, so my old friend godfrey syme 
told me, certain tissu and would be found to be inoperable, but he 
hope thi would not be the case, and that it would be possibl to 
remov it: remov gave the onli chanc of recovery. It wa fortun 
that the patient had been sent for examin in an earli stage, for 
thu the chanc of success were much greater than if the growth had 
been one of long standing. park wa not, however, in a fit state to 
stand the oper at once; a recup week or ten day in bed wa 
advisable. In these circumst syme recommend that he should not 
be told at onc what lay in front of him. 

“I can see that he is a nervou fellow,” he said, “and to lie in bed 
think of what he ha got to face will probabl undo all the good 
that lie in bed will bring to him. you don’t get use to the idea of 
be cut open; the more you think about it, the more intoler it 
becomes. If that sort of adventur face me, I should infinit prefer 
not to be told about it until they came to give me the anæsthetic. 
naturally, he will have to consent to the operation, but I shouldn’t 
tell him anyth about it till the day before. he’ not married, I 
think, is he?” 

“no: he’ alon in the world,” said I. “he’ been with me twenti years.” 

“yes, I rememb park almost as long as I rememb you. but that’ 
all I can recommend. Of course, if the pain becam severe, it might be 
better to oper sooner, but at present he suffer hardli at all, and 
he sleep well, so the nurs tell me.” 

“and there’ noth els that you can tri for it?” I asked. 

“i’ll tri anyth you like, but it will be perfectli useless. i’ll 
let him have ani quack nostrum you and he wish, as long as it doesn’t 
injur hi health, or make you put off the operation. there are x-ray 
and ultra-violet rays, and violet leav and radium; there are fresh 
cure for cancer discov everi day, and what’ the result? they 
onli make peopl put off the oper till it’ no longer possibl to 
operate. naturally, I will welcom ani further opinion you want.” 

now godfrey syme is easili the first author on thi subject, and 
ha a far higher percentag of cure to hi credit than anyon else. 

“no, I don’t want ani fresh opinion,” said I. 

“veri well, i’ll have him care watched. By the way, can’t you stop 
in town and dine with me? there are one or two peopl coming, and among 
them a perfectli mad spiritualist who ha more messag from the other 
world than I ever get on my telephone. trunk-calls, eh? I wonder where 
the exchang is. Do come! you like cranks, I know!” 

“I can’t, i’m afraid,” said I. “i’v a coupl of guest come to stay 
with me to-day down in the country. they are both cranks: one’ a 
medium.” 

He laughed. 

“well, I can onli offer you one crank, and you’v got two,” he said. “I 
must get back to the wards. i’ll write to you in about a week’ time 
or so, unless there’ ani urgenc which I don’t foresee, and I should 
suggest your come up to tell parkes. good-bye.” 

I caught my train at chare cross with about three second to spare, 
and we slid clank out over the bridg through the cold, dens air. 
snow had been fall intermitt sinc morning, and when we got 
out of the grime and fog of london, it wa lie thickli on field 
and hedgerow, retard by it reflect of such light as linger 
the oncom of darkness, and give to the landscap an aloof and 
lone austerity. all day I had felt that drowsi which accompani 
snowfall, and sometimes, half lose myself in a doze, my mind crept, 
like a thing crawl about in the dark, over what godfrey syme had 
told me. for all these year parkes, as much friend as servant, had 
given me hi faith and devotion, and now, in return for that, 
all that appar I could do wa to tell him of hi plight. It wa 
clear, from what the surgeon had said, that he expect a seriou 
disclosure, and I knew from the experi of two friend of mine who 
had been in hi condit what might be expect of thi “exploratori 
operation.” exactli similar had been these cases; there wa clear 
evid of an intern growth possibl not malignant, and in each case 
the same dismal sequenc had followed. the growth had been removed, and 
within a coupl of month there had been a recrudesc of it. indeed, 
surgeri had prove no more than a pruning-knife, which had stimul 
that which the surgeon had hope to extirp into swifter activity. 
and that appar wa the best chanc that syme held out: the rest 
of the treatment were but rubbish or quackery.... 

My mind crawl away toward anoth subject: probabl the two visitor 
whom I expected, charl hope and the medium whom he wa bring with 
him, were in the same train as I, and I ran over in my mind all that 
he had told me of mrs. forrest. It wa certainli an odd stori he had 
brought me two day before. mrs. forrest wa a medium of consider 
reput in psychic circles, and had produc some veri 
extraordinari book-test which, by all accounts, seem inexplicable, 
except on a spiritualist hypothesis, and no imput of trickeri 
had, at ani rate as yet, come near her. when in trance, she spoke and 
wrote, as is invari the case with mediums, under the direct 
of a certain “control”--that is to say, a spiritu and discarn 
intellig which for the time wa in possess of her. but late 
there had been sign that a fresh control had inspir her, the natur 
of whom, hi name, and hi ident wa at present unknown. and then 
came the follow queer incident. 

last week onli when in trance, and appar under the direct 
of thi new control, she began describ in consider detail a 
certain hous where the control said that he had work to do. At first 
the descript arous no associ in charl hope’ mind, but as 
it went on, it suddenli struck him that mrs. forrest wa speak of 
my hous in tilling. she gave it gener features, it posit in a 
small town on a hill, it walled-in garden, and then went on to speak 
with great minut of a rather peculiar featur in the house. she 
describ a big room built out in the garden a few yard away from 
the hous itself at right-angl to it front, and approach by half 
a dozen stone steps. there wa a railing, so she said, on each side 
of them, and into the rail were twisted, like snake coils, the 
stem of a tree which bore pale mauv flowers. thi wa all a correct 
descript of my garden room and the wistaria which writh in and out 
of the rail which line the steps. she then went on to speak of the 
interior of the room. At one end wa a fireplace, at the other a big 
bow-window look out on to the street and the front of the house, and 
there were two other window opposit each other, in one of which wa a 
table, while the other, look out on to the garden, wa shadow by 
the tree that twist itself about the railings. book-cas line the 
walls, and there wa a big sofa at right-angl to the fire.... 

now all this, though it wa a perfectli accur descript of a place 
that, as far as could be ascertained, mrs. forrest had never seen, 
might conceiv have been deriv from charl hope’ mind, sinc he 
knew the room well, have often stay with me. but the medium ad a 
detail which could not conceiv have been thu derived, for charl 
believ it to be incorrect. she said that there wa a big piano near 
the bow-window, while he wa sure that there wa not. but oddli enough 
I had hire a piano onli a week or so ago, and it stood in the place 
that she mentioned. the “control” then repeat that there wa work 
for him to do in that house. there wa some situat or complic 
there in which he could help, and he could “get through” better (that 
is, make a clearer communication) if the medium could hold a séanc 
there. charl hope then told the control that he believ he knew 
the hous that he had been speak of, and promis to do hi best. 
shortli afterward mrs. forrest came out of trance, and, as usual, had 
no recollect of what had passed. 

So charl came to me with the stori exactli as I have given it here, 
and though I could not think of ani situat or complic in which 
an unknown control of a medium I had never seen could be of assistance, 
the whole thing (and in especi that detail about the piano) wa so 
odd that I ask him to bring the medium down for a sit or a seri 
of sittings. the day of their arriv wa arranged, but when three day 
ago park had to go into hospital, I wa inclin to put them off. but 
a neighbour away for a week obligingli lent me a parlour-maid, and I 
let the engag stand. with regard to the situat in which the 
control would be of assistance, I can but assur the reader that as far 
as I thought about it at all, I onli wonder whether it wa concern 
with a book on which I wa engaged, which dealt (if I could ever 
succeed in write it) with psychic affairs. but at present I could 
not get on with it at all. I had made half a dozen begin which had 
all gone into the waste-pap basket. 

My guest prove not to have come by the same train as I, but arriv 
shortli befor dinner-time, and after mrs. forrest had gone to her 
room, I had a few word with charles, who told me exactli how the 
situat now stood. 

“I know your caution and your captious in these affairs,” he said, 
“so I have told mrs. forrest noth about the descript she gave 
of thi house, or of the reason whi I ask her to come here. I said 
only, as we settled, that you were a great friend of mine and immens 
interest in psychic affairs, but a country-mous whom it wa 
difficult to get up to town. but you would be delight if she would 
come down for a few day and give some sit here.” 

“and doe she recognis the house, do you think?” I asked. 

“no sign of it. As I told you, when she come out of tranc she never 
seem to have the faintest recollect of what she ha said or 
written. We shall have a séance, I hope, to-night after dinner.” 

“certainly, if she will,” said I. “I thought we had better hold it in 
the garden-room, for that wa the place that wa so minut described. 
it’ quit warm there, central-h and a fire, and it’ onli half a 
dozen yard from the house. i’v had the snow swept from the steps.” 

mrs. forrest turn out to be a veri intellig woman, well spice 
with humour, gift with a sane appreci of the comfort of life, 
and most agreeabl furnish with the small chang of talk. she 
wa inclin to be stout, but carri herself with briskness, and 
neither in bodi nor mind did she suggest that she wa one who held 
commun with the unseen: there wa noth wan or occult about 
her. her gener outlook on life appear to be rather materialist 
than otherwise, and she wa veri interest on the topic when, about 
half-way through dinner, the subject of her mediumship came on the 
convers board. 

“mi gifts, such as they are,” she said, “have noth to do with thi 
person who sit eat and drink and talk to you. she, as mr. 
hope may have told you, is quit expung befor the subconsci part 
of me--that is the latest notion, is it not?--get into touch with 
discarn intelligences. until that happens, the door is shut, and 
when it is over, the door is shut again, and I have no recollect of 
what I have said or written. the control use my hand and my voice, but 
that is all. I know no more about it than a piano on which a tune ha 
been played.” 

“and there is a new control who ha late been use you?” I asked. 

she laughed. 

“you must ask mr. hope about that,” she said. “I know noth 
whatev of it. He tell me it is so, and he tell me--don’t you, mr. 
hope?--that he hasn’t ani idea who or what the new control is. I look 
forward to it development; my idea is that the control ha to get use 
to me, as in learn a new instrument. I assur you I am as eager as 
anyon that he should gain facil in commun through me. I 
hope, indeed, that we are to have a séanc to-night.” 

the talk veer again, and I learn that mrs. forrest had never been 
in till before, and wa enchant with the snowi moonlit glanc she 
had had of it narrow street and ancient residences. she liked, too, 
the atmospher of the house: it seem tranquil and kindly; especi 
so wa the littl drawing-room where we had assembl befor dinner. 

I glanc at charles. 

“I had thought of propos that we should sit in the garden-room,” I 
said, “if you don’t mind half a dozen step in the open. It adjoin the 
house.” 

“just as you wish,” she said, “though I think we have excel 
condit in here without go there.” 

thi confirm her statement that she had no idea after she had come 
out of tranc what she had said, for otherwis she must have recognis 
at the mention of the garden-room her own descript of it, and when 
soon after dinner we adjourn there, it wa clear that, unless she 
wa act an inexplic part, the sight of it twang no chord of 
memory. there we made the veri simpl arrang to which she wa 
accustomed. 

As the procedur in such sit is possibl unfamiliar to the reader, 
I will describ quit shortli what our arrang were. We had no 
idea what form these manifestations--if there were any--might take, 
and therefor we, charl and I, were prepar to record them on the 
spot. We three sat round a small tabl about a coupl of yard from 
the fire, which wa burn brightly; mrs. forrest seat herself in 
a big armchair. exactli in front of her on the tabl were a pencil 
and a block of paper in case, as often happened, the manifest 
took the form of automat script--writing, that is, while in a state 
of trance. charl and I sat on each side of her, also provid with 
pencil and paper in order to take down what she said if and when (a 
lawyer say) the control took possess of her. In case materialis 
spirit appeared, a phenomenon not as yet seen at her séances, our idea 
wa to jot down as quickli as possibl whatev we saw or thought we 
saw. should there be rap or movement of furniture, we were to 
make similar note of our impressions. the lamp wa then turn down, 
so that just a ring of flame encircl the wick, but the firelight wa 
of suffici brightness, as we test befor the séanc began, to 
enabl us to write and to see what we had written. the red glow of it 
illumin the room, and it wa settl that charl should note by 
hi watch the time at which anyth occurred. occasionally, throughout 
the séanc a bubbl of coal-ga caught fire, and then the whole room 
start into strong light. I had given order that my servant should 
not interrupt the sit at all, unless somebodi rang the bell from 
the garden-room. In that case it wa to be answered. finally, befor 
the séanc began, we bolt all the window on the insid and lock 
the door. We took no other precaut against trickery, though, as a 
matter of fact, mrs. forrest suggest that she should be tie into her 
chair. but in the firelight ani movement of her would be so visibl 
that we did not adopt thi precaution. charl and I had settl to 
read to each other the note we made dure the sitting, and cut out 
anyth that both of us had not recorded. the accounts, therefore, of 
thi sit and of that which follow next day are found on our 
joint evidence. the sit began. 

mrs. forrest wa lean back at eas with her eye open and her hand 
on the arm of her chair. then her eye close and a violent trembl 
seiz her. that passed, and shortli afterward her head fell forward 
and her breath becam veri rapid. present that quiet to normal 
pace again, and she began to speak at first in a scarc audibl 
whisper and then in a high shrill voice, quit unlik her usual tones. 

I do not think that in all england there wa a more disappoint man 
than I dure the next half-hour. “starlight,” it appeared, wa in 
control, and starlight wa a personag of platitudes. she had been a 
nun in the time of henri vii, and her work wa to help those who had 
late pass over. she wa veri busi and veri happy, and wa in the 
third sphere where they had a great deal of beauti music. We must 
all be good, said starlight, and it didn’t matter much whether we were 
clever or not. love wa the great thing; we had to love each other 
and help each other, and death wa no more than the gate of life, and 
everyth would be tremend jolly.... starlight, in fact, might be 
better describ as clap-trap, and I began think about parkes.... 

and then I ceas to think about parkes, for the shrill moral 
of starlight ceased, and mrs. forrest’ voic chang again. the 
stale facil of her utter stop and she began to speak, quit 
unintelligibly, in a voic of low bariton range. charl lean across 
the tabl and whisper to me. 

“that’ the new control,” he said. 

the voic that wa speak stumbl and hesitated: it wa like that 
of a man tri to express himself in some languag which he knew veri 
imperfectly. sometim it stop altogether, and in one of these 
paus I asked: 

“can you tell us your name?” 

there wa no reply, but present I saw mrs. forrest’ hand reach 
out for the pencil. charl put it into her finger and place the 
writing-pad more handili for her. I watch the letters, in capitals, 
be traced. they were made hesitatingly, but were perfectli legible. 
“swallow,” she wrote, and again “swallow,” and stopped. 

“the bird?” I asked. 

the voic spoke in answer; now I could hear the words, utter in that 
low bariton voice. 

“no, not a bird,” it said. “not a bird, but it flies.” 

I wa utterli at sea; my mind could form no conjectur whatev 
as to what wa meant. and then the pencil began write again. 
“swallow, swallow,” and then with a sudden brisk of movement, as 
if the guid intellig had got over some difficulty, it wrote 
“swallow-tail.” 

thi seem more abstrus senseless than ever. the onli connect 
with swallow-tail in my mind wa a swallow-tail coat, but whoever 
heard of a swallow-tail coat flying? 

“i’v got it,” said charles. “swallow-tail butterfly. Is it that?” 

there came three sudden rap on the table, loud and startling. these 
raps, I may explain, in the usual code mean “yes.” As if to confirm 
it the pencil began to write again, and spell out “swallow-tail 
butterfly.” 

“i that your name?” I asked. 

there wa one rap, which signifi “no,” follow by three, which 
mean “yes.” I had not the slightest idea of what it all signifi 
(inde it seem to signifi noth at all), but the sit had 
becom extraordinarili interest if onli for it veri unexpectedness. 
the control wa tri to establish himself by three method 
simultaneously--bi the voice, by the automat writing, and by rapping. 
but how a swallow-tail butterfli could assist in some situat which 
wa now exist in my hous wa utterli beyond me.... then an idea 
struck me: the swallow-tail butterfli no doubt had a scientif name, 
and that we could easili ascertain, for I knew that there wa on my 
shelv a copi of newman’ _butterfli and moth of great britain_, a 
sumptuou volum bound in morocco, which I had won as an entomolog 
prize at school. A moment’ search gave me the book, and by the 
firelight I turn up the descript of thi butterfli in the index. 
it scientif name wa _papilio machaon_. 

“i machaon your name?” I asked. 

the voic came clear now. 

“yes, I am machaon,” it said. 

with that came the end of the séance, which had last not more than 
an hour. whatev the power wa that had made mrs. forrest speak 
in that male voic and struggle, through that roundabout method of 
“swallow, swallow-tail, machaon,” to establish it identity, it now 
began to fail. mrs. forrest’ pencil made a few illeg scribbles, 
she whisper a few inaud words, and present with a stretch and a 
sigh she came out of trance. We told her that the name of the control 
wa established, but appar machaon meant noth to her. she wa 
much exhausted, and veri soon I took her across to the hous to go to 
bed, and present rejoin charles. 

“who wa machaon, anyhow?” he asked. “he sound classical: more in your 
line than mine.” 

I rememb enough greek mytholog to suppli elementari facts, while I 
hunt for a particular book about athens. 

“machaon wa the son of asclepios,” I said, “and asclepio wa the 
greek god of healing. He had precincts, hydropath establishments, 
where peopl went to be cured. the roman call him aesculapius.” 

“what can he do for you then?” ask charles. “you’r fairli fit, 
aren’t you?” 

not till he spoke did a light dawn on me. though I had been think so 
much of park that day, I had not conscious made the connection. 

“but park isn’t,” said I. “i that possible?” 

“bi jove!” said he. 

I found my book, and turn to the account of the precinct of 
asclepio in athens. 

“yes, asclepio had two sons,” I said--“machaon and podaleirios. In 
homer time he wasn’t a god, but onli a physician, and hi son were 
physician too. the myth of hi godhead is rather a late one----” 

I shut the book. 

“best not to read ani more,” I said. “if we know all about asclepios, 
we shall possibl be suggest thing to the medium’ mind. let’ 
see what machaon can tell us about himself, and we can verifi it 
afterwards.” 

It wa therefor with no further knowledg than thi on the subject 
of machaon that we propos to hold anoth séanc the next day. all 
morn the bitter air had been laden with snow, and now the street 
in front of my house, a by-way at the best in the slender traffic of 
the town, lay white and untrodden, save on the pavement where a few 
passeng had gone by. mrs. forrest had not appear at breakfast, and 
from then till lunch-tim I sat in the bow-window of the garden-room, 
for the warmth of the central heating, of which a stack of pipe wa 
there installed, and for secur the utmost benefit of light that 
penetr thi cowl of snow-laden sky, busi with belat letters. the 
drowsi that accompani snowfal weigh heavili on my faculties, 
but as far as I can assert anything, I can assert that I did not 
sleep. from one letter I went on to another, and then for the sixth 
or seventh time I tri to open my story. It promis better now 
than before, and search for a word that would not come to my pen, 
I happen to look up along the street which lay in front of me. I 
expect nothing: I wa think of noth but my work; probabl I 
had look up like that a dozen time before, and had seen the empti 
street, with snow lie thickli on the roadway. 

but now the roadway wa not untenanted. someon wa walk down the 
middl of it, and hi aspect, incred though it seemed, wa not 
startling. whi I wa not startl I have no idea: I can onli say that 
the vision appear perfectli natural. the figur wa that of a young 
man, whose hair, black and curly, lay crispli over hi forehead. A 
larg white cloak reach down to hi knee envelop him, and he 
had thrown the end of it over hi shoulder. below hi knee hi leg 
and feet were bare, so too wa the arm up to the elbow, with which he 
press hi cloak to him, and there he wa walk briskli down the 
snowi street. As he came directli below the window where I sat, he 
rais hi head and look at me directly, and smiled. and now I saw 
hi face: there wa the low brow, the straight nose, the curv and 
sunni mouth, the short chin, and I thought to myself that thi wa none 
other than the herm of praxiteles, he whose statu at olympia make 
all those who look on it grow young again. there, anyhow, wa a boyish 
greek god, step blith and with gay, incompar grace along 
the street, and rais hi face to smile at thi stolid, middle-ag 
man who blankli regard him. then with the certainti of one return 
home, he mount the step outsid the front door, and seem to pass 
into and through it. certainli he wa no longer in the street, and, so 
real and solid-seem had he been to my vision, that I jump up, ran 
across the few step of garden, and went into the house, and I should 
not have been amaz if I had found him stand in the hall. but there 
wa no one there, and I open the front door: the snow lay smooth 
and untrodden down the centr of the road where he had walk and on 
my doorstep. and at that moment the memori of the séanc the even 
before, about which up till now I had somehow felt distrust and 
suspicious, pass into the realm of sober fact, for had not machaon 
just now enter my house, with a smile as of recognit on some 
friendli mission? 

We sat again that afternoon by daylight, and now, I must suppose, the 
control wa more activ and power present, for hardli had mrs. 
forrest pass into tranc than the voic began, louder than it had 
been the night before, and far more distinct. he--machaon I must call 
him--seem to be anxiou to establish hi ident beyond all doubt, 
like some newcom present hi credentials, and he began to speak of 
the precinct of asclepio in athens. often he hesit for a word in 
english, often he put in a word in greek, and as he spoke, fragment of 
thing I had learn when an archæolog student in athen came back 
into my mind, and I knew that he wa accur describ the portico 
and the templ and the well. all thi I toss to the sceptic to growl 
and worri over and tear to bits; for certainli it seem possibl that 
my mind, hold these fact in it subconsciousness, wa suggest 
them to the medium’ mind, who thereupon spoke of them and, convey 
them back to me, made me awar that I had known them.... My forgotten 
knowledg of these thing and of the greek languag came flood back 
on me, as he told us, now half in greek, and half in english, of the 
patient who came to consult the god, how they wash in the sacr 
well for purification, and lay down to sleep in the portico. they often 
dreamed, and in the interpret of their dreams, which they told to 
the priest next day, lay the indic of the cure. Or sometim the 
god heal more directly, and accompani by the sacr snake walk 
among the sleeper and by hi touch made them whole. hi templ wa 
hung with _ex-votos_, the gift of those whom he had cured. and at 
epidaurus, where wa anoth shrine of his, there were great mural 
tablet record the same.... 

then the voic stopped, and as if to prove ident by anoth means, 
the medium drew the pencil and paper to her, and in greek characters, 
unknown appar to her, she trace the word “machaon, son of 
asclepios....” 

there wa a pause, and I ask a direct question, which now had been 
long simmer in my mind. 

“have you come to help me about parkes?” I asked. “can you tell me what 
will cure him?” 

the pencil began to move again, trace out charact in greek. It 
wrote [greek: phengo x], and repeat it. I did not at onc guess 
what it meant, and ask for an explanation. there wa no answer, and 
present the medium stirred, stretch herself and sighed, and came 
out of trance. she took up the paper on which she had written. 

“did that come through?” she asked. “and what doe it mean? I don’t 
even know the characters....” 

then suddenli the possibl signific of [greek: phengo x] flash 
on me, and I marvel at my slowness. [greek: phengos], a beam of 
light, a ray, and the letter [greek: x], the equival of the english 
_x_. that had come in direct answer to my question as to what would 
cure parkes, and it wa without hesit or delay that I wrote to 
symes. I remind him that he had said that he had no object to 
ani possibl remedy, provid it wa not harmful, be tri on hi 
patient, and I ask him to treat him with x-rays. the whole sequenc 
of event had been so frankli amazing, that I believ the veriest 
sceptic would not have done otherwis than I did. 

our sit continued, but after thi day we had no further evid 
of thi second control. It look as if the intellig (even the 
most incredul will allow me, for the sake of convenience, to call 
that intellig machaon) that had describ thi room, and told mrs. 
forrest that he had work to do here, had finish hi task. machaon had 
said, or so my interpret was, that x-ray would cure parkes. In 
justif of thi view it is proper to quot from a letter which I 
got from syme a week later. 

“there is no need for you to come up to break to park that an 
oper lie in front of him. In answer to your request, and 
without a grain of faith in it success, I treat him with x-rays, 
which I assur you were useless. to-day, to speak quit frankly, 
I don’t know what to think, for the growth ha been steadili 
diminish in size and hardness, and it is perfectli evid that it 
is be absorb and is disappearing. 

“the treatment through which I put park is that of ----. here in 
thi hospit we have had patient to whom it brought no shadow of 
benefit. often it had been continu on these delud wretch till 
ani oper which might possibl have been success wa out of 
the question owe to the encroach of the growth. but from the 
first dose of the x-rays, park began to get better, the growth wa 
first arrested, and then diminished. 

“I am tri to put the whole thing befor you with as much 
imparti as I can command. so, on the other side, you must 
rememb that parkes’ wa never a prove case of cancer. I told 
you that it could not be prove till the exploratori oper took 
place. all the symptom point to cancer--y see, I am tri to 
save my own face--but my diagnosis, though confirm by ----, may 
have been wrong. If he onli had what we call a benign tumour, the 
case is not so extraordinary; there have been plenti of case when 
a benign tumour ha disappear by absorpt or what not. It is 
unusual, but by no mean unknown. for instance.... 

“but parkes’ case wa quit different. I certainli believ he had 
a cancer growth, and thought that an oper wa inevit if 
hi life wa to be saved. even then, the most I hope for wa an 
allevi of pain, as the diseas progressed, and a year or two 
more, at the most, of life. instead, I appli anoth remedy, at 
your suggestion, and if he goe on as he ha been doing, the growth 
will be a nodul in anoth week or two, and I should expect it to 
disappear altogether. take everyth into consideration, if you 
ask me the question whether thi x-ray treatment wa the caus of 
the cure, I should be oblig to say ‘yes.’ I don’t believ in such 
a treatment, but I believ it is cure him. I suppos that it wa 
suggest to you by a fraudulent, spiritualist medium in a feign 
trance, who wa inspir by aesculapiu or some explod heathen 
deity, for I rememb you said you were go down into the countri 
for some spiritu business.... 

“well, park is get better, and I am so old-fashion a fellow 
that I would sooner a patient of mine got better by incred 
methods, than die under my skil knife.... Of course, we train 
peopl know nothing, but we have to act accord to the best chanc 
of our ignorance. I entir believ that the knife wa the onli 
mean of save the man, and now, when I stand confuted, the onli 
thing that I can save is my honesty, which I herebi have done. let me 
know, at your leisure, whether you just thought you would, on your 
own idea, like me to tri x-rays, or whether some fake voic from the 
grave suggest it. 
“ever yours, 
“godfrey symes. 

“p.s.--if it wa some beastli voic from the grave, you might tell me 
in confid who the medium was. I want to be fair....” 

that is the story; the reader will explain it accord to hi 
temperament. and as I have told parkes, who is now back with me again, 
to look into the garden-room befor post-tim and take a regist 
packet to the office, it is time that I got it readi for him. So here 
is the complet packet in manuscript, to be sent to the printer’s. 
from my window I shall see him go briskli along the street down which 
machaon walk on a snowi morning. 




negotium perambulans.... 




negotium perambulans.... 


the casual tourist in west cornwal may just possibl have noticed, 
as he bowl along over the bare high plateau between penzanc and 
the land’ end, a dilapid signpost point down a steep lane 
and bear on it batter finger the fade inscript “polearn 
2 miles,” but probabl veri few have had the curios to travers 
those two mile in order to see a place to which their guide-book 
award so cursori a notice. It is describ there, in a coupl of 
unattract lines, as a small fish villag with a church of no 
particular interest except for certain carv and paint wooden panel 
(origin belong to an earlier edifice) which form an altar-rail. 
but the church at st. creed (the tourist is reminded) ha a similar 
decor far superior in point of preserv and interest, and thu 
even the ecclesiast dispos are not lure to polearn. So meagr 
a bait is scarc worth swallowing, and a glanc at the veri steep lane 
which in dri weather present a carpet of sharp-point stones, and 
after rain a muddi watercourse, will almost certainli decid him not 
to expos hi motor or hi bicycl to risk like these in so spars 
popul a district. hardli a hous ha met hi eye sinc he left 
penzance, and the possibl trundl of a punctur bicycl for half 
a dozen weari mile seem a high price to pay for the sight of a few 
paint panels. 

polearn, therefore, even in the high noon of the tourist season, is 
littl liabl to invasion, and for the rest of the year I do not 
suppos that a coupl of folk a day travers those two mile (long one 
at that) of steep and stoni gradient. I am not forget the postman 
in thi exigu estimate, for the day are few when, leav hi 
poni and cart at the top of the hill, he goe as far as the village, 
sinc but a few hundr yard down the lane there stand a larg 
white box, like a sea-trunk, by the side of the road, with a slit for 
letter and a lock door. should he have in hi wallet a regist 
letter or be the bearer of a parcel too larg for insert in the 
squar lip of the sea-trunk, he must need trudg down the hill and 
deliv the troublesom missive, leav it in person on the owner, and 
receiv some small reward of coin or refresh for hi kindness. 
but such occas are rare, and hi gener routin is to take out 
of the box such letter as may have been deposit there, and insert 
in their place such letter as he ha brought. these will be call 
for, perhap that day or perhap the next, by an emissari from the 
polearn post-office. As for the fishermen of the place, who, in their 
export trade, constitut the chief link of movement between polearn and 
the outsid world, they would not dream of take their catch up the 
steep lane and so, with six mile farther of travel, to the market at 
penzance. the sea rout is shorter and easier, and they deliv their 
ware to the pier-head. thus, though the sole industri of polearn is 
sea-fishing, you will get no fish there unless you have bespoken your 
requir to one of the fishermen. back come the trawler as empti 
as a haunt house, while their spoil are in the fish-train that is 
speed to london. 

such isol of a littl community, continued, as it ha been, for 
centuries, produc isol in the individu as well, and nowher 
will you find greater independ of charact than among the peopl 
of polearn. but they are link together, so it ha alway seem 
to me, by some mysteri comprehension: it is as if they had all 
been initi into some ancient rite, inspir and frame by forc 
visibl and invisible. the winter storm that batter the coast, the 
vernal spell of the spring, the hot, still summers, the season of rain 
and autumn decay, have made a spell which, line by line, ha been 
commun to them, concern the powers, evil and good, that rule 
the world, and manifest themselv in way benign or terrible.... 

I came to polearn first at the age of ten, a small boy, weak and 
sickly, and threaten with pulmonari trouble. My father’ busi 
kept him in london, while for me abund of fresh air and a mild 
climat were consid essenti condit if I wa to grow to 
manhood. hi sister had marri the vicar of polearn, richard bolitho, 
himself nativ to the place, and so it came about that I spent three 
years, as a pay guest, with my relations. richard bolitho own 
a fine hous in the place, which he inhabit in prefer to the 
vicarage, which he let to a young artist, john evans, on whom the spell 
of polearn had fallen, for from year’ begin to year’ end he never 
left it. there wa a solid roof shelter, open on one side to the 
air, built for me in the garden, and here I live and slept, pass 
scarc one hour out of the twenty-four behind wall and windows. 
I wa out on the bay with the fisher-folk, or wander along the 
gorse-clad cliff that climb steepli to right and left of the deep 
comb where the villag lay, or potter about on the pier-head, or 
bird’s-nest in the bush with the boy of the village. except on 
sunday and for the few daili hour of my lessons, I might do what I 
pleas so long as I remain in the open air. about the lesson there 
wa noth formidable; my uncl conduct me through flower bypath 
among the thicket of arithmetic, and made pleasant excurs into the 
element of latin grammar, and abov all, he made me daili give him an 
account, in clear and grammat sentences, of what had been occupi 
my mind or my movements. should I select to tell him about a walk along 
the cliffs, my speech must be orderly, not vague, slip-shod note of 
what I had observed. In thi way, too, he train my observation, for 
he would bid me tell him what flower were in bloom, and what bird 
hover fish over the sea or were build in the bushes. for that 
I owe him a perenni gratitude, for to observ and to express my 
thought in the clear spoken word becam my life’ profession. 

but far more formid than my weekday task wa the prescrib 
routin for sunday. some dark ember compound of calvin and 
mystic smoulder in my uncle’ soul, and made it a day of terror. 
hi sermon in the morn scorch us with a foretast of the etern 
fire reserv for unrepent sinners, and he wa hardli less 
terrifi at the children’ servic in the afternoon. well do I 
rememb hi exposit of the doctrin of guardian angels. A child, 
he said, might think himself secur in such angel care, but let him 
bewar of commit ani of those numer offenc which would caus 
hi guardian to turn hi face from him, for as sure as there were 
angel to protect us, there were also evil and aw presenc which 
were readi to pounce; and on them he dwelt with peculiar gusto. well, 
too, do I rememb in the morn sermon hi commentari on the carv 
panel of the altar-rail to which I have alreadi alluded. there wa 
the angel of the annunci there, and the angel of the resurrection, 
but not less wa there the witch of endor, and, on the fourth panel, 
a scene that concern me most of all. thi fourth panel (he came 
down from hi pulpit to trace it time-worn features) repres 
the lych-gat of the church-yard at polearn itself, and inde the 
resembl when thu point out wa remarkable. In the entri stood 
the figur of a robe priest hold up a cross, with which he face 
a terribl creatur like a gigant slug, that rear itself up in 
front of him. that, so ran my uncle’ interpretation, wa some evil 
agency, such as he had spoken about to us children, of almost infinit 
malign and power, which could alon be combat by firm faith and a 
pure heart. below ran the legend “_negotium perambulan in tenebris_” 
from the ninety-first psalm. We should find it translat there, “the 
pestil that walketh in darkness,” which but feebli render the 
latin. It wa more deadli to the soul than ani pestil that can 
onli kill the body: it wa the thing, the creature, the busi that 
traffick in the outer darkness, a minist of god’ wrath on the 
unrighteous.... 

I could see, as he spoke, the look which the congreg exchang 
with each other, and knew that hi word were evok a surmise, a 
remembrance. nod and whisper pass between them, they understood 
to what he alluded, and with the inquisit of boyhood I could 
not rest till I had worm the stori out of my friend among the 
fisher-boys, as, next morning, we sat bask and nake in the sun 
after our bathe. one knew one bit of it, one another, but it piec 
togeth into a truli alarm legend. In bald outlin it wa as 
follows: 

A church far more ancient than that in which my uncl terrifi us 
everi sunday had onc stood not three hundr yard away, on the shelf 
of level ground below the quarri from which it stone were hewn. the 
owner of the land had pull thi down, and erect for himself a hous 
on the same site out of these materials, keeping, in a veri ecstasi of 
wickedness, the altar, and on thi he dine and play dice afterwards. 
but as he grew old some black melancholi seiz him, and he would have 
light burn there all night, for he had deadli fear of the darkness. 
On one winter even there sprang up such a gale as wa never befor 
known, which broke in the window of the room where he had supped, and 
extinguish the lamps. yell of terror brought in hi servants, who 
found him lie on the floor with the blood stream from hi throat. 
As they enter some huge black shadow seem to move away from him, 
crawl across the floor and up the wall and out of the broken window. 

“there he lay a-dying,” said the last of my informants, “and him 
that had been a great burli man wa wither to a bag o’ skin, for 
the critter had drain all the blood from him. hi last breath wa 
a scream, and he holler out the same word as parson read off the 
screen.” 

“_negotium perambulan in tenebris_,” I suggest eagerly. 

“thereabouts. latin anyhow.” 

“and after that?” I asked. 

“nobodi would go near the place, and the old hous rot and fell in 
ruin till three year ago, when along come mr. dooliss from penzance, 
and built the half of it up again. but he don’t care much about such 
critters, nor about latin neither. He take hi bottl of whiski a 
day and get drunk’ a lord in the evening. eh, i’m gwine home to my 
dinner.” 

whatev the authent of the legend, I had certainli heard the 
truth about mr. dooliss from penzance, who from that day becam 
an object of keen curios on my part, the more so becaus the 
quarry-hous adjoin my uncle’ garden. the thing that walk in 
the dark fail to stir my imagination, and alreadi I wa so use to 
sleep alon in my shelter that the night had no terror for me. but 
it would be intens excit to wake at some timeless hour and hear 
mr. dooliss yelling, and conjectur that the thing had got him. 

but by degre the whole stori fade from my mind, overscor by 
the more vivid interest of the day, and, for the last two year of 
my out-door life in the vicarag garden, I seldom thought about mr. 
dooliss and the possibl fate that might await him for hi temer in 
live in the place where that thing of dark had done business. 
occasion I saw him over the garden fence, a great yellow lump of 
a man, with slow and stagger gait, but never did I set eye on him 
outsid hi gate, either in the villag street or down on the beach. 
He interf with none, and no one interf with him. If he want 
to run the risk of be the prey of the legendari nocturn monster, 
or quietli drink himself to death, it wa hi affair. My uncle, so I 
gathered, had made sever attempt to see him when first he came to 
live at polearn, but mr. dooliss appear to have no use for parsons, 
but said he wa not at home and never return the call. 

* * * * * 

after three year of sun, wind, and rain, I had complet outgrown 
my earli symptom and had becom a tough, strap youngster of 
thirteen. I wa sent to eton and cambridge, and in due cours ate my 
dinner and becam a barrister. In twenti year from that time I wa 
earn a yearli incom of five figures, and had alreadi laid by in 
sound secur a sum that brought me dividend which would, for 
one of my simpl tast and frugal habits, suppli me with all the 
materi comfort I need on thi side of the grave. the great prize 
of my profess were alreadi within my reach, but I had no ambit 
beckon me on, nor did I want a wife and children, being, I must 
suppose, a natur celibate. In fact there wa onli one ambit which 
through these busi year had held the lure of blue and far-off hill to 
me, and that wa to get back to polearn, and live onc more isol 
from the world with the sea and the gorse-clad hill for play-fellows, 
and the secret that lurk there for exploration. the spell of it had 
been woven about my heart, and I can truli say that there had hardli 
pass a day in all those year in which the thought of it and the 
desir for it had been wholli absent from my mind. though I had been in 
frequent commun with my uncl there dure hi lifetime, and, 
after hi death, with hi widow who still live there, I had never 
been back to it sinc I embark on my profession, for I knew that if 
I went there, it would be a wrench beyond my power to tear myself away 
again. but I had made up my mind that when onc I had provid for my 
own independence, I would go back there not to leav it again. and yet 
I did leav it again, and now noth in the world would induc me to 
turn down the lane from the road that lead from penzanc to the land’ 
end, and see the side of the comb rise steep abov the roof of the 
villag and hear the gull chide as they fish in the bay. one of the 
thing invisible, of the dark powers, leap into light, and I saw it 
with my eyes. 

the hous where I had spent those three year of boyhood had been left 
for life to my aunt, and when I made known to her my intent of 
come back to polearn, she suggest that, till I found a suitabl 
hous or found her propos unsuitable, I should come to live with her. 

“the hous is too big for a lone old woman,” she wrote, “and I have 
often thought of quit and take a littl cottag suffici for me 
and my requirements. but come and share it, my dear, and if you find 
me troublesome, you or I can go. you may want solitude--most peopl in 
polearn do--and will leav me. Or els I will leav you: one of the 
main reason of my stop here all these year wa a feel that I 
must not let the old hous starve. hous starve, you know, if they 
are not live in. they die a linger death; the spirit in them grow 
weaker and weaker, and at last fade out of them. isn’t thi nonsens 
to your london notions?...” 

natur I accept with warmth thi tent arrangement, and on an 
even in june found myself at the head of the lane lead down to 
polearn, and onc more I descend into the steep valley between the 
hills. time had stood still appar for the combe, the dilapid 
signpost (or it successor) point a ricketi finger down the lane, 
and a few hundr yard farther on wa the white box for the exchang 
of letters. point after rememb point met my eye, and what I saw 
wa not shrunk, as is often the case with the revisit scene of 
childhood, into a smaller scale. there stood the post-office, and there 
the church and close besid it the vicarage, and beyond, the tall 
shrubberi which separ the hous for which I wa bound from the 
road, and beyond that again the grey roof of the quarry-hous damp and 
shine with the moist even wind from the sea. all wa exactli as I 
rememb it, and, abov all, that sens of seclus and isolation. 
somewher abov the tree-top climb the lane which join the main 
road to penzance, but all that had becom immeasur distant. the 
year that had pass sinc last I turn in at the well-known gate 
fade like a frosti breath, and vanish in thi warm, soft air. there 
were law-court somewher in memory’ dull book which, if I care to 
turn the pages, would tell me that I had made a name and a great incom 
there. but the dull book wa close now, for I wa back in polearn, and 
the spell wa woven around me again. 

and if polearn wa unchanged, so too wa aunt hester, who met me at the 
door. dainti and china-whit she had alway been, and the year had 
not age but onli refin her. As we sat and talk after dinner she 
spoke of all that had happen in polearn in that score of years, and 
yet somehow the chang of which she spoke seem but to confirm the 
immut of it all. As the recollect of name came back to me, I 
ask her about the quarry-hous and mr. dooliss, and her face gloom 
a littl as with the shadow of a cloud on a spring day. 

“yes, mr. dooliss,” she said, “poor mr. dooliss, how well I rememb 
him, though it must be ten year and more sinc he died. I never wrote 
to you about it, for it wa all veri dreadful, my dear, and I did not 
want to darken your memori of polearn. your uncl alway thought that 
someth of the sort might happen if he went on in hi wicked, drunken 
ways, and wors than that, and though nobodi knew exactli what took 
place, it wa the sort of thing that might have been anticipated.” 

“but what more or less happened, aunt hester?” I asked. 

“well, of cours I can’t tell you everything, for no one knew it. but 
he wa a veri sin man, and the scandal about him at newlyn wa 
shocking. and then he lived, too, in the quarry-house.... I wonder 
if by ani chanc you rememb a sermon of your uncle’ when he got 
out of the pulpit and explain that panel in the altar-rails, the 
one, I mean, with the horribl creatur rear itself up outsid the 
lych-gate?” 

“yes, I rememb perfectly,” said I. 

“ah. It made an impress on you, I suppose, and so it did on all who 
heard him, and that impress got stamp and brand on us all when 
the catastroph occurred. somehow mr. dooliss got to hear about your 
uncle’ sermon, and in some drunken fit he broke into the church and 
smash the panel to atoms. He seem to have thought that there wa 
some magic in it, and that if he destroy that he would get rid of 
the terribl fate that wa threaten him. for I must tell you that 
befor he commit that dread sacrileg he had been a haunt man: 
he hate and fear darkness, for he thought that the creatur on the 
panel wa on hi track, but that as long as he kept light burn 
it could not touch him. but the panel, to hi disord mind, wa 
the root of hi terror, and so, as I said, he broke into the church 
and attempted--y will see whi I said ‘attempted’--to destroy it. It 
certainli wa found in splinter next morning, when your uncl went 
into church for matins, and know mr. dooliss’ fear of the panel, 
he went across to the quarry-hous afterward and tax him with it 
destruction. the man never deni it; he boast of what he had done. 
there he sat, though it wa earli morning, drink hi whisky. 

“‘i’v settl your thing for you,’ he said, ‘and your sermon too. A 
fig for such superstitions.’ 

“your uncl left him without answer hi blasphemy, mean to go 
straight into penzanc and give inform to the polic about thi 
outrag to the church, but on hi way back from the quarry-hous he 
went into the church again, in order to be abl to give detail about 
the damage, and there in the screen wa the panel, untouch and 
uninjured. and yet he had himself seen it smashed, and mr. dooliss had 
confess that the destruct of it wa hi work. but there it was, 
and whether the power of god had mend it or some other power, who 
knows?” 

thi wa polearn indeed, and it wa the spirit of polearn that made me 
accept all aunt hester wa tell me as attest fact. It had happen 
like that. she went on in her quiet voice. 

“your uncl recognis that some power beyond polic wa at work, and 
he did not go to penzanc or give inform about the outrage, for 
the evid of it had vanished.” 

A sudden spate of sceptic swept over me. 

“there must have been some mistake,” I said. “it hadn’t been broken....” 

she smiled. 

“yes, my dear, but you have been in london so long,” she said. “let 
me, anyhow, tell you the rest of my story. that night, for some reason, 
I could not sleep. It wa veri hot and airless; I dare say you will 
think that the sultri condit account for my wakefulness. onc and 
again, as I went to the window to see if I could not admit more air, I 
could see from it the quarry-house, and I notic the first time that 
I left my bed that it wa blaze with lights. but the second time I 
saw that it wa all in darkness, and as I wonder at that, I heard a 
terribl scream, and the moment afterward the step of someon come 
at full speed down the road outsid the gate. He yell as he ran; 
‘light, light!’ he call out. ‘give me light, or it will catch me!’ It 
wa veri terribl to hear that, and I went to rous my husband, who wa 
sleep in the dressing-room across the passage. He wast no time, 
but by now the whole villag wa arous by the screams, and when he 
got down to the pier he found that all wa over. the tide wa low, and 
on the rock at it foot wa lie the bodi of mr. dooliss. He must 
have cut some arteri when he fell on those sharp edg of stone, for 
he had bled to death, they thought, and though he wa a big burli man, 
hi corps wa but skin and bones. yet there wa no pool of blood round 
him, such as you would have expected. just skin and bone as if everi 
drop of blood in hi bodi had been suck out of him!” 

she lean forward. 

“you and I, my dear, know what happened,” she said, “or at least 
can guess. god ha hi instrument of vengeanc on those who bring 
wicked into place that have been holy. dark and mysteri are hi 
ways.” 

now what I should have thought of such a stori if it had been told me 
in london I can easili imagine. there wa such an obviou explanation: 
the man in question had been a drunkard, what wonder if the demon of 
delirium pursu him? but here in polearn it wa different. 

“and who is in the quarry-hous now?” I asked. “year ago the 
fisher-boy told me the stori of the man who first built it and of hi 
horribl end. and now again it ha happened. sure no one ha ventur 
to inhabit it onc more?” 

I saw in her face, even befor I ask that question, that somebodi had 
done so. 

“yes, it is live in again,” said she, “for there is no end to the 
blindness.... I don’t know if you rememb him. He wa tenant of the 
vicarag mani year ago.” 

“john evans,” said I. 

“yes. such a nice fellow he wa too. your uncl wa pleas to get so 
good a tenant. and now----” 

she rose. 

“aunt hester, you shouldn’t leav your sentenc unfinished,” I said. 

she shook her head. 

“mi dear, that sentenc will finish itself,” she said. “but what a time 
of night! I must go to bed, and you too, or they will think we have to 
keep light burn here through the dark hours.” 

* * * * * 

befor get into bed I drew my curtain wide and open all the 
window to the warm tide of the sea air that flow softli in. look 
out into the garden I could see in the moonlight the roof of the 
shelter, in which for three year I had lived, gleam with dew. that, 
as much as anything, brought back the old day to which I had now 
returned, and they seem of one piec with the present, as if no gap 
of more than twenti year sunder them. the two flow into one like 
globul of mercuri unit into a softli shine globe, of mysteri 
light and reflections. then, rais my eye a little, I saw against 
the black hill-sid the window of the quarry-hous still alight. 

morning, as is so often the case, brought no shatter of my illusion. 
As I began to regain consciousness, I fanci that I wa a boy again 
wake up in the shelter in the garden, and though, as I grew more 
wide awake, I smile at the impression, that on which it wa base 
I found to be inde true. It wa suffici now as then to be here, 
to wander again on the cliffs, and hear the pop of the ripen 
seed-pod on the gorse-bushes; to stray along the shore to the 
bathing-cove, to float and drift and swim in the warm tide, and bask 
on the sand, and watch the gull fishing, to loung on the pier-head 
with the fisher-folk, to see in their eye and hear in their quiet 
speech the evid of secret thing not so much known to them as 
part of their instinct and their veri being. there were power and 
presenc about me; the white poplar that stood by the stream that 
babbl down the valley knew of them, and show a glimps of their 
knowledg sometimes, like the gleam of their white underleaves; the 
veri cobbl that pave the street were soak in it.... all that I 
want wa to lie there and grow soak in it too; unconsciously, as 
a boy, I had done that, but now the process must be conscious. I must 
know what stir of forces, fruit and mysterious, seeth along the 
hill-sid at noon, and sparkl at night on the sea. they could be 
known, they could even be control by those who were master of the 
spell, but never could they be spoken of, for they were dweller in the 
innermost, graft into the etern life of the world. there were dark 
secret as well as these clear, kindli powers, and to these no doubt 
belong the _negotium perambulan in tenebris_ which, though of deadli 
malignity, might be regard not onli as evil, but as the aveng of 
sacrilegi and impiou deeds.... all thi wa part of the spell of 
polearn, of which the seed had long lain dormant in me. but now they 
were sprouting, and who knew what strang flower would unfold on their 
stems? 

It wa not long befor I came across john evans. one morning, as I lay 
on the beach, there came shambl across the sand a man stout and 
middle-ag with the face of silenus. He paus as he drew near and 
regard me from narrow eyes. 

“why, you’r the littl chap that use to live in the parson’ garden,” 
he said. “don’t you recognis me?” 

I saw who it wa when he spoke: hi voice, I think, instruct me, and 
recognis it, I could see the featur of the strong, alert young man 
in thi gross caricature. 

“yes, you’r john evans,” I said. “you use to be veri kind to me: you 
use to draw pictur for me.” 

“so I did, and i’ll draw you some more. been bathing? that’ a riski 
performance. you never know what live in the sea, nor what live on 
the land for that matter. not that I heed them. I stick to work and 
whisky. god! i’v learn to paint sinc I saw you, and drink too for 
that matter. I live in the quarry-house, you know, and it’ a power 
thirsti place. come and have a look at my thing if you’r passing. 
stay with your aunt, are you? I could do a wonder portrait of 
her. interest face; she know a lot. peopl who live at polearn get 
to know a lot, though I don’t take much stock in that sort of knowledg 
myself.” 

I do not know when I have been at onc so repel and interested. 
behind the mere gross of hi face there lurk someth which, 
while it appalled, yet fascin me. hi thick lisp speech had the 
same quality. and hi paintings, what would they be like?... 

“I wa just go home,” I said. “i’ll gladli come in, if you’ll allow 
me.” 

He took me through the untend and overgrown garden into the hous 
which I had never yet entered. A great grey cat wa sun itself in 
the window, and an old woman wa lay lunch in a corner of the cool 
hall into which the door opened. It wa built of stone, and the carv 
mould let into the walls, the fragment of gargoyl and sculptur 
images, bore testimoni to the truth of it have been built out of 
the demolish church. In one corner wa an oblong and carv wooden 
tabl litter with a painter’ apparatu and stack of canvas lean 
against the walls. 

He jerk hi thumb toward a head of an angel that wa built into the 
mantelpiec and giggled. 

“quit a sanctifi air,” he said, “so we tone it down for the 
purpos of ordinari life by a differ sort of art. have a drink? no? 
well, turn over some of my pictur while I put myself to rights.” 

He wa justifi in hi own estim of hi skill: he could paint (and 
appar he could paint anything), but never have I seen pictur 
so inexplic hellish. there were exquisit studi of trees, and 
you knew that someth lurk in the flicker shadows. there wa a 
draw of hi cat sun itself in the window, even as I had just now 
seen it, and yet it wa no cat but some beast of aw malignity. there 
wa a boy stretch nake on the sands, not human, but some evil thing 
which had come out of the sea. abov all there were pictur of hi 
garden overgrown and jungle-like, and you knew that in the bush were 
presenc readi to spring out on you.... 

“well, do you like my style?” he said as he came up, glass in hand. 
(the tumbler of spirit that he held had not been diluted.) “I tri to 
paint the essenc of what I see, not the mere husk and skin of it, but 
it nature, where it come from and what gave it birth. there’ much 
in common between a cat and a fuchsia-bush if you look at them close 
enough. everyth came out of the slime of the pit, and it’ all go 
back there. I should like to do a pictur of you some day. i’d hold the 
mirror up to nature, as that old lunat said.” 

after thi first meet I saw him occasion throughout the month 
of that wonder summer. often he kept to hi hous and to hi 
paint for day together, and then perhap some even I would find 
him loung on the pier, alway alone, and everi time we met thu the 
repuls and interest grew, for everi time he seem to have gone 
farther along a path of secret knowledg toward some evil shrine 
where complet initi await him.... and then suddenli the end 
came. 

I had met him thu one even on the cliff while the octob sunset 
still burn in the sky, but over it with amaz rapid there spread 
from the west a great black of cloud such as I have never seen for 
denseness. the light wa suck from the sky, the dusk fell in ever 
thicker layers. He suddenli becam consciou of this. 

“I must get back as quick as I can,” he said. “it will be dark in a few 
minutes, and my servant is out. the lamp will not be lit.” 

He step out with extraordinari brisk for one who shambl and 
could scarc lift hi feet, and soon broke out into a stumbl run. 
In the gather dark I could see that hi face wa moist with the 
dew of some unspoken terror. 

“you must come with me,” he panted, “for so we shall get the light 
burn the sooner. I cannot do without light.” 

I had to exert myself to the full to keep up with him, for terror 
wing him, and even so I fell behind, so that when I came to the 
garden gate, he wa alreadi half-way up the path to the house. I saw 
him enter, leav the door wide, and found him fumbl with matches. 
but hi hand so trembl that he could not transfer the light to the 
wick of the lamp. 

“but what’ the hurri about?” I asked. 

suddenli hi eye focus themselv on the open door behind me, and he 
jump from hi seat besid the tabl which had onc been the altar of 
god, with a gasp and a scream. 

“no, no!” he cried. “keep it off!...” 

I turn and saw what he had seen. the thing had enter and now wa 
swiftli slide across the floor toward him, like some gigant 
caterpillar. A stale phosphoresc light came from it, for though the 
dusk had grown to black outside, I could see it quit distinctli in 
the aw light of it own presence. from it too there came an odour 
of corrupt and decay, as from slime that ha long lain below water. 
It seem to have no head, but on the front of it wa an orific of 
pucker skin which open and shut and slaver at the edges. It wa 
hairless, and slug-lik in shape and in texture. As it advanc it 
fore-part rear itself from the ground, like a snake about to strike, 
and it fasten on him.... 

At that sight, and with the yell of hi agoni in my ears, the panic 
which had struck me relax into a hopeless courage, and with palsied, 
impot hand I tri to lay hold of the thing. but I could not: 
though someth materi wa there, it wa imposs to grasp it; 
my hand sunk in it as in thick mud. It wa like wrestl with a 
nightmare. 

I think that but a few second elaps befor all wa over. the scream 
of the wretch man sank to moan and mutter as the thing fell 
on him: he pant onc or twice and wa still. for a moment longer 
there came gurgl and suck noises, and then it slid out even as 
it had entered. I lit the lamp which he had fumbl with, and there 
on the floor he lay, no more than a rind of skin in loos fold over 
project bones. 




At the farmhous 




At the farmhous 


the dusk of a novemb day wa fall fast when john aylsford came 
out of hi lodg in the cobbl street and start to walk briskli 
along the road which led eastward by the shore of the bay. He had been 
at work while the daylight serv him, and now, when the gather 
dark wean him from hi easel, he wa accustom to go out for air 
and exercis and cover half a dozen mile befor he return to hi 
solitari supper. 

to-night there were but few folk abroad, and those scud along befor 
the strong south-westerli gale which had roar and rage all day, or, 
lean forward, beat their way against it. No fishing-boat had put 
forth on that madden sea, but had lain moor behind the quay-wall, 
toss uneasili with the backwash of the great breaker that swept 
by the pier-head. the tide wa low now, and they rest on the sandi 
beach, black blot against the smooth wet surfac which sombr 
reflect the last flame in the west. the sun had gone down in a wrack 
of broken and fli clouds, angri and menac with promis of a wild 
night to come. 

for mani day past, at thi hour john aylsford had start eastward 
for hi tramp along the rough coast road by the bay. the last high 
tide had swept shingl and sand over section of it, and fragment of 
seaweed, driven by the wind, bowl along the ruts. the heavi boom of 
the breaker sound sullenli in the dusk, and white tower of foam 
appear and disappear show how high they leap over the reef 
of rock beyond the headland. for half a mile or so, slant himself 
against the gale he pursu thi road, then turn up a narrow muddi 
lane sunk deep between the bank on either side of it. It ran steepli 
uphill, dip down again, and join the main road inland. have 
arriv at the junction, john aylsford went eastward no more, but 
turn hi step to the west, arriving, half an hour after he had set 
out, on the top of the hill abov the villag he had quitted, though 
five minutes’ ascent would have taken him from hi lodg to the spot 
where he now stood look down on the scatter light below him. the 
wind had blown all wayfar indoors, and now in front of him the road 
that cross thi high and desol table-land, sprinkl here and 
there with lone cottag and solitari farms, lay empti and greyli 
glimmer in the wind-swept darkness, not more than faintli visible. 

mani time dure thi past month had john aylsford made thi long 
detour, start eastward from the villag and come back by a wide 
circuit, and now, as on these other occasions, he paus in the black 
shelter of the hedg through which the wind hiss and whistled, 
crouch there in the shadow as if to make sure that none had follow 
him, and that the road in front lay void of passengers, for he had no 
mind to be observ by ani on these journeyings. and as he paus he 
let hi hate blaze up, warm him for the work the accomplish of 
which alon could enabl him to recaptur ani peac or profit from 
life. to-night he wa determin to releas himself from the millston 
which for so mani year had hung round hi neck, drown him in bitter 
waters. from long brood over the idea of the deed, he had quit 
ceas to feel ani horror of it. the death of that drunken slut wa not 
a matter for qualm or uneasiness; the world would be well rid of her, 
and he more than well. 

No spark of tender for the handsom fisher-girl who onc had been 
hi model and for twenti year had been hi wife pierc the black 
of hi purpose. just here it wa that he had seen her first when on a 
summer holiday he had lodg with a coupl of friend in the farmhous 
toward which hi way now lay. she wa come up the hill with the 
late sunset gild her face, and, breath quickli from the ascent, 
had lean on the wall close by with a smile and a glanc for the 
young man. she had sat to him, and the autumn brought the sequel to 
the summer in hi marriage. He had bought from her uncl the littl 
farmhous where he had lodged, ad to it modest accommod a 
studio and a bedroom abov it, and there he had seen the flicker of 
what had never been love, die out, and over the cold ash of it 
ember the poison lichen of hatr spread fast. earli in their 
marri life she had taken to drink, and had sunk into a degrad of 
soul and bodi that seem bottomless, drag him with her, down and 
down, in the grip of a forc that wa hardli human in it malignity. 

often dure the wretch year that follow he had tri to leav 
her; he had offer to settl the farm on her and make adequ 
provis for her, but she had clung to the possess of him, not, 
it would seem, from ani affect for him, but for a reason exactli 
opposite, namely, that her hatr of him fed and glut itself on the 
sight of hi ruin. It wa as if, in obedi to some hellish power, 
she set herself to spoil hi life, hi powers, hi possibilities, by 
tie him to herself. and by the aid of that power, so sometim he had 
thought, she enforc her will on him, for, plan as he might to cut the 
whole dread busi and leav the wreck behind him, he had never 
been abl to consolid hi resolv into action. there, but a few 
mile away, wa the station from which ran the train that would bear 
him out of thi ancient western kingdom, where the belief in spell 
and superstit grew rank as the herbag in that soft enerv air, 
and set him in the dri hard light of cities. the way lay open, but he 
could not take it; someth unseen and potent, of grim inflexibility, 
held him back.... 

He had pass no one on hi way here, and satisfi now that in the 
dark he could proceed without fear of be recognis if a chanc 
wayfar came from the direct in which he wa going, he left the 
shelter of the hedge, and struck out into the stormi sea of that 
stupend gale. even as a man in the grip of immin death see hi 
past life spread itself out in front of him for hi final survey befor 
the book is closed, so now, on the brink of the new life from which the 
deed on which he wa determin alon separ him, john aylsford, as 
he battl hi advanc through thi great tempest, turn over page 
after page of hi own wretch chronicles, feel alreadi strang 
detach from them; it wa as if he read the sordid and enslav annal 
of another, wonder at them, half-pitying, half-despis him who had 
allow himself to be bound so long in thi ruinou noose. 

yes; it had been just that, a noos drawn ever tighter round hi neck, 
while he choke and struggl all unavailingly. but there wa anoth 
noos which should veri soon now be drawn rapidli and final tight, 
and the draw of that in hi own strong hand would free him. As he 
dwelt on that for a moment, hi finger stroke and pat the hank of 
whipcord that lay white and tough in hi pocket. A noose, a knot drawn 
quickli taut, and he would have paid her back with justic and swifter 
merci for the long strangl which he had suffered. 

voluntarili and eagerli at the begin had he allow her to slip the 
noos about him, for ellen trenair’ beauti in those days, so long past 
and so everlastingli regretted, had been enough to ensnar a man. He 
had been warn at the time, by hint and half-spoken suggestion, that 
it wa ill for a man to mate with a girl of that dark and ill-fam 
family, or for a woman to wed a boy in whose vein ran the blood of 
jona trenair, onc methodist preacher, who learn on one all-hallows’ 
eve a darker gospel than he had ever preach before. what had happen 
to the girl who had marri into that dwindl family, now all 
but extinct? one, befor her marriag wa a year old, had gone off 
her head, and now, a wither and ancient crone, mow and gibber 
about the street of the village, pick garbag from the gutter and 
munch it in her toothless jaws. another, ellen’ own mother, had 
been found hang from the banist of her stairs, stark and grim. 
then there wa young frank pencarris, who had wed ellen’ sister. 
He had sunk into an aw melancholy, and sat trace on sheet of 
paper the vision that beset hi eyes, headless shapes, and foam 
mouths, and the imag of the spawn of hell.... john aylsford, in those 
earli days, had laugh to scorn these old-wif tale of spell and 
sorceries: they belong to age long past, wherea fair ellen trenair 
wa of the love present, and had lit desir in hi heart which she 
alon could assuage. He had no use, in the bright of her eye, for 
such shadow and superstitions; her beam dispel them. 

bitter and black as midnight had hi enlighten been, darken 
through dubiou dusk till the mirk of the pit itself envelop him. 
hi laughter at the notion that in thi twentieth centuri spell and 
sorceri could survive, grew silent on hi lips. He had seen the 
cattl of a neighbour who had offend one whom it wa wiser not to 
cross, dwindl and pine, though there were rich pastur for their 
grazing, till the rib-bon stuck out like the timber of strand 
wrecks. He had seen the spring on anoth farm run dri at lambing-tim 
becaus the owner, sceptic like himself, had refus that bounty, which 
all prudent folk paid to the wizard of mareuth, who, like ellen, wa of 
the blood of jona trenair. from scorn and laughter he had waver to 
an uneasi wonder, and from wonder hi mind had pass to the convict 
that there were power occult and terribl which strove in dark and 
prevailed, secret and spell that could send diseas on man and beast, 
dark incantations, known to few, which could maim and cripple, and of 
these few hi wife wa one. hi reason revolted, but some conviction, 
deeper than reason, held it own. To such a view it seem that the 
deed he contempl wa no crime, but rather an act of obedi to 
the ordin “thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.” and the sens of 
detach wa over that, even as over the memori that ooz up in 
hi mind. somebody--not he--who had plan everyth veri care 
wa in the next hour go to put an end to hi bondage. 

So the year had passed, he flounder ever deeper in the slough into 
which he wa plunged, out of which while she live he could never 
emerge. for the last year, she, weari of hi perpetu presenc at 
the farm, had allow him to take a lodg in the village. she did 
not loos her hold over him, for the day were few on which she did 
not come with demand for a hand of shill to procur her the 
raw spirit which alon could slake her thirst. sometim as he sat 
at work there in the north room look on to the small garden-yard, 
she would come lurch up the path, with her bloat crimson face set 
on the wither neck, and tap at hi window with finger shrivel 
like bird’ claws. bodi and limb were no more than bone over which 
the wrinkl skin wa stretched, but her face bulg monstrous with 
layer of fat. He would give her whatev he had about him, and if 
it wa not enough, she would plant herself there, grin at him 
and wheedl him, or with scream and curs threaten him with 
such fate as he had known to overtak those who cross her will. but 
usual he gave her enough to satisfi her for that day and perhap the 
next, for thu she would the more quickli drink herself to death. yet 
death seem long in coming.... 

He rememb well how first the notion of kill her came into hi 
head, just a littl seed, small as that of mustard, which lay long 
in barrenness. onli the bare idea of it wa there, like an abstract 
proposition. then impercept in the fruit dark of hi mind, 
it must have begun to sprout, for present a tendril, still soft and 
white, prod out into the daylight. He almost push it back again, 
for fear that she, by some divin art, should probe hi purpose. 
but when next she came for supplies, he saw no gleam of surmis in 
her red-rim eyes, and she took her money and went her way, and 
hi purpos put forth anoth leaf, and the stem of it grew sappy. 
all autumn through it had flourished, and grown tree-like, and fresh 
ideas, fresh details, fresh precautions, flock there like build 
bird and made it gay with singing. He sat under the shadow of it and 
listen with brighten hope to their song; never had there been 
such peerless melody. they knew their tune now, there wa no need for 
ani further rehearsal. 

He began to wonder how soon he would be back on the road again, with 
face turn from thi buffet wind, and on hi way home. hi busi 
would not take him long; the central deed of it would be over in a 
coupl of minutes, and he did not anticip delay about the set 
to work on it, for by seven o’clock of the evening, as well he knew, 
she wa usual snore in the oblivion of complet drunkenness, 
and even if she wa not as far gone as that, she would certainli be 
incap of ani seriou resistance. after that, a quarter of an hour 
more would finish the job, and he would leav the hous secur alreadi 
from ani chanc of detection. night after night dure these last ten 
day he had been up here, peer from the dark into the light 
room where she sat, then listen for her step on the stair as 
she stumbl up to bed, or hear her snore as she slept in her 
chair below. the out-house, he knew, wa well stock with paraffin; 
he need no further apparatu than the whipcord and the match he 
carri with him. then back he would go along the exact rout by which 
he had come, re-ent the villag again from the eastwards, in which 
direct he had set out. 

thi walk of hi wa now a known and establish habit; half the 
villag dure the last week or two had seen him everi even set 
forth along the coast road, for a tramp in the dusk when the light 
fail for hi painting, and had seen him come back again as they hung 
about and smoke in the warm dusk, a coupl of hour later. none knew 
of hi detour to the main road which took him westward again abov 
the villag and so to the stretch of bleak upland along which now he 
fought hi way against the gale. alway round about the hour of eight 
he had enter the villag again from the other side, and had stop 
and chat with the loiterers. to-night, no later than wa usual, he 
would come up the cobbl road again, and give “good night” to ani who 
linger there outsid the public-house. In thi wild wind it wa not 
like that there would be such, and if so, no matter; he had been seen 
alreadi set forth on hi usual walk by the coast of the bay, and 
if none outsid saw him return, none could see the true chart of hi 
walk. By eight he should be back to hi supper, there would be a sous 
her for him, and a cut of cheese, and the kettl would be sing 
on the hob for hi hot whisky-toddy. He would have a keen edg for the 
enjoy of them to-night; he would drink long health to the damn 
and the dead. not till to-morrow, probably, would the news of what had 
happen reach him, for the farmhous lay lone and shelter by the 
wood of firs. howev high might mount the beacon of it blazing, it 
would scarcely, screen by the tall trees, light up the western sky, 
and be seen from the villag nestl below the steep hill-crest. 

By now john aylsford had come to the fir wood which border the road 
on the left, and, as he pass into it shelter, cut off from him the 
violenc of the gale. all it branch were astir with the sound of 
some vexed, overhead sea, and the trunk that upheld them creak and 
groan in the furi of the tempest. somewher behind the thick scud 
of fli cloud the moon must have risen, for the road glimmer more 
visibly, and the toss black of the branch wa clear enough 
against the grey tumult overhead. behind the tempest she rode in seren 
skies, and in the murder clariti of hi mind he liken himself to 
her. just for half an hour more he would still grope and scheme and 
achiev in thi hurly-burly, and then, like a balloon released, soar 
through the cloud and find serenity. A coupl of hundr yard now 
would take him round the corner of the wood; from there the miri lane 
led from the high-road to the farm. 

He hasten rather than retard hi go as he drew near, for the 
wood, though it roar with the gale, began to whisper to him of 
memories. often in that summer befor hi marriag had he stray 
out at dusk into it, certain that befor he had gone mani pace he 
would see a shadow flit toward him through the firs, or hear the 
crack of dri twig in the stillness. here wa their tryst; she would 
come up from the villag with the excus of bring fish to the 
farmhouse, after the boat had come in, and desert the high-road 
make a short cut through the wood. like some distant blink of lightn 
the memori of those even quiver distantli on hi mind, and he 
quicken hi step. the year that follow had kill and buri 
those recollections, but who knew what stir of corps and dri 
bone might not yet come to them if he linger there? He finger the 
whipcord in hi pocket, and launch out, beyond the trees, into the 
full furi of the gale. 

the farmhous wa near now and in full view, a black blot against 
the clouds. A beam of light shone from an uncurtain window on the 
ground-floor, and the rest wa dark. even thu had he seen it for mani 
night past, and well knew what sight would greet him as he stole up 
nearer. and even so it wa to-night, for there she sat in the studio he 
had built, betwixt tabl and fireplac with the bottl near her, and 
her wither hand stretch out to the blaze, and the huge bloat 
face sway on her shoulders. besid her to-night were the wreck 
remain of a chair, and the first sight that he caught of her wa to 
show her feed the fire with the broken piec of it. It had been too 
troublesom to bring fresh log from the store of wood; to break up a 
chair wa the easier task. 

she stir and sat more upright, then reach out for the bottl that 
stood besid her, and drank from the mouth of it. she drank and lick 
her lip and drank again, and stagger to her feet, trip on the 
edg of the hearthrug. for the moment that seem to anger her, and 
with clench teeth and point finger she mumbl at it; then onc 
more she drank, and lurch forward, took the lamp from the table. 
with it in her hand she shuffl to the door, and the room wa left to 
the flicker firelight. A moment afterwards, the bedroom window abov 
sprang into light, an oblong of bright illumination. 

As soon as that appear he crept round the hous to the door. He 
gentli turn the handl of it, and found it unlocked. insid wa a 
small passag entrance, on the left of which ascend the stair to 
the bedroom abov the studio. all wa silent there, but from where he 
stood he could see that the door into the bedroom wa open, for a shaft 
of light from the lamp she had carri up with her wa shed on to the 
land there.... everyth wa smooth itself out to render hi 
cours most easy. even the gale wa hi friend, for it would be bellow 
for the fire. He slip off hi shoes, leav them on the mat, and 
drew the whipcord from hi pocket. He made a noos in it, and began to 
ascend the stairs. they were well-built of season oak, and no creak 
betray hi advanc footfall. 

At the top he paused, listen for ani stir of movement within, but 
there wa noth to be heard but the sound of heavi breath from 
the bed that lay to the left of the door and out of sight. she had 
thrown herself down there, he guessed, without undressing, leav 
the lamp to burn itself out. He could see it through the open door 
alreadi begin to flicker; on the wall behind it were a coupl of 
water-colours, pictur of hi own, one of the littl wall garden by 
the farm, the other of the pinewood of their tryst. well he rememb 
paint them: she would sit by him as he work with prattl and 
singing. He look at them now quit detachedly; they seem to him 
wonder good, and he envi the artist that fresh, clean skill. 
perhap he would take them down present and carri them away with him. 

veri softli now he advanc into the room, and look round the corner 
of the door, he saw her, sprawl and fulli dress on the broad 
bed. she lay on her back, eye close and mouth open, her dull grey 
hair spread over the pillow. evid she had not made the bed that 
day, for she lay stretch on the crumpl back-turn blankets. A 
hair-brush wa on the floor besid her; it seem to have fallen from 
her hand. He move quickli toward her. 

* * * * * 

He put on hi shoe again when he came to the foot of the stairs, 
carri the lamp with him and the two pictur which he had taken down 
from the wall, and went into the studio. He set the lamp on the tabl 
and drew down the blinds, and hi eye fell on the half-empti whiski 
bottl from which he had seen her drinking. though hi hand wa quit 
steadi and hi mind compos and tranquil, there wa yet at the back 
of it some impress that wa slowli developing, and a good dose of 
spirit would no doubt expung that. He drank half a tumbler of it raw 
and undiluted, and though it seem no more than water in hi mouth, 
he soon felt that it wa do it work and spong away from hi 
mind the pictur that had been outlin itself there. In a coupl 
of minut he wa quit himself again, and could afford to wonder 
and laugh at the illusion, for it wa no less than that, which had 
been gain on him. for though he could distinctli rememb draw 
the noos tight, and see the face grow black, and struggl with 
the convuls movement of those wither limb that soon lay quiet 
again, there had sprung up in hi mind some unaccount impress 
that what he had left there huddl on the bed wa not just the bundl 
of wither limb and strangl neck, but the bodi of a young girl, 
smooth of skin and golden of hair, with mouth that smile drowsily. 
she had been asleep when he came in, and now wa half-awake, and wa 
stir and stretch herself. In what dim region of hi mind that 
imag had form itself, he had no idea; all he care about now wa 
that hi drink had shatter it again, and he could proceed with order 
and method to make all secure. just one drop more first: how lucki it 
wa that thi morn he had been liber with hi money when she came 
to the village, for he would have been sorri to have gone without that 
fillip to hi nerves. 

He look at hi watch, and saw to hi satisfact that it wa still 
onli a littl after seven o’clock. half an hour’ walking, with thi 
gale to speed hi steps, would easili carri him from door to door, 
round the detour which approach the villag from the east, and a 
quarter of an hour, so he reckoned, would be suffici to accomplish 
thoroughli what remain to be done here. He must not hurri and thu 
overlook some precaut need for hi safety, though, on the other 
hand, he would be glad to be gone from the hous as soon as might 
be, and he proceed to set about hi work without delay. there wa 
brushwood and fire-kindl to be brought in from the wood-sh in 
the yard, and he made three journeys, return each time with hi 
arm full, befor he had brought in what he judg to be sufficient. 
most of thi he pile in a loos heap in the studio; with the rest he 
ascend onc more to the bedroom abov and made a heap of it there in 
the middl of the floor. He took the curtain down from the windows, 
for they would make a fine wick for the paraffin, and stuf them into 
the pile. befor he left, he look onc more at what lay on the bed, 
and marvel at the illus which the whiski had dispelled, and as 
he looked, the sens that he wa free mount and bubbl in hi head. 
the thing seem scarc human at all; it wa a monster from which he 
had deliv himself, and now, with the thought of that to warm him, 
he wa no longer eager to get through with hi work and be gone, for 
it wa all part of that act of riddanc which he had accomplished, and 
he glori in it. soon, when all wa ready, he would come back onc 
more and soak the fuel and set light to it, and purg with fire the 
corrupt that lay hump on the bed. 

the furi of the gale had increas with nightfall, and as he went 
downstair again he heard the rattl of loosen tile on the roof, and 
the crash as they shatter themselv on the cobbl of the yard. At 
that a sudden misgiv made hi breath to catch in hi throat, as he 
pictur to himself some maniac blast fall on the hous and crash 
in the wall that now trembl and shuddered. suppos the whole 
hous fell, even if he escap with hi life from the toppl ruin, 
what would hi life be worth? there would be search made in the fallen 
débri to find the bodi of her who lay strangl with the whipcord 
round her neck, and he pictur to himself the slow, relentless march 
of justice. He had bought whipcord onli yesterday at a shop in the 
village, insist on it strength and tough ... would it be wiser 
now, thi moment, to unti the noos and take it back with him or add 
it to hi brushwood?... He paus on the staircase, ponder that; but 
hi flesh quak at the thought, and master of himself though he had 
been dure those few struggl minutes, he distrust hi power of 
make himself handl onc more that which could struggl no longer. 
but even as he tri to screw hi courag to the point, the violenc 
of the squall passed, and the shudder hous brace itself again. 
He need not fear that; the gale wa hi friend that would blow on the 
flames, not hi enemy. the blast that trumpet overhead were the 
voic of the alli who had come to aid him. 

all wa arrang then upstair for the pour of the paraffin and the 
light of the pyre; it remain but to make similar disposit in 
the studio. He would stay to feed the flame till they rage beyond all 
power of extinction; and now he began to plan the line of hi retreat. 
there were two door in the studio: one by the fireplac which open 
on to the littl garden; the other gave into the passag entranc from 
which mount the stair and so to the door through which he had come 
into the house. He decid to use the garden-door for hi exit; but 
when he came to open it, he found that the key wa stiff in the rusti 
lock, and did not yield to hi efforts. there wa no use in wast 
time over that; it made no differ through which door he final 
emerged, and he began pile up hi heap of wood at that end of the 
room. the lamp wa burn low; but the fire, which onli so few minut 
ago she had fed with a broken chair, shone brightly, and a flame 
ember from it would serv to set light to hi conflagration. there wa 
a straw mat in front of it, which would make fine kindling, and with 
these two fires, one in the bedroom upstair and the other here, there 
would be no mistak about the inciner of the hous and all that 
it contained. hi own crime, if crime it was, would perish, too, and 
all evid thereof, victim and whipcord, and the veri wall of the 
hous of sin and hate. It wa a great deed and a fine adventure, and 
as the liquor he had drunk began to circul more buoyantli through 
hi veins, he glori at the thought of the approach consummation. 
He would slip out of the sordid tragedi of hi past life, as from a 
discard garment that he threw into the bonfir he would soon kindle. 

all wa readi now for the soak of the fuel he had pile with the 
paraffin, and he went out to the shed in the yard where the barrel 
stood. A big tin ewer stood besid it, which he fill and carri 
indoors. that would be suffici for the soak of the pile upstairs, 
and fetch the smoki and flicker lamp from the studio, he went 
up again, and like a care garden water some bed of choic 
blossoms, he sprinkl and pour till hi ewer wa empty. He gave 
but one glanc to the bed behind him, where the huddl thing lay 
so quietly, and as he turned, lamp in hand, to go down again, the 
draught that came in through the window against which the gale blew, 
extinguish it. A littl blue flame of burn vapour rose in the 
chimney and went out; so, have no further use for it, he pitch it 
on to the pile of soak material. As he left the room he thought he 
heard some small stir of movement behind him, but he told himself that 
it wa but someth slip in the heap he had built there. 

again he went out into the storm. the cloud that scud overhead were 
thinner now, though the gale blew not less fiercely, and the blurred, 
wateri moonlight wa brighter. onc for a moment, as he approach 
the shed, he caught sight of the full orb plung madli among the 
stream vapours; then she wa hidden again behind the wrack. close in 
front of him were the fir tree of the wood where those sweet tryst 
had been held, and onc again the vision of her as she had been broke 
into hi mind and the queer convict that it wa no wither and 
bloat hag, who lay on the bed upstair but the fair, come limb 
and the golden head. It wa even more vivid now, and he made hast to 
get back to the studio, where he would find the trusti medicin that 
had dispel that vision before. He would have to make two journey 
at least with hi tin ewer befor he transport enough oil to feed 
the larger pyre below, and so, to save time, he took the barrel off 
it stand, and roll it along the path and into the house. He paus 
at the foot of the stairs, listen to hear if anyth stirred, but 
all wa silent. whatev had slip up there wa steadi again; from 
outsid onli came the squeal and bellow of the wind. 

the studio wa brightli but fit lit by the flame on the hearth; 
at one moment a noonday blaze there, the next but the last smoulder of 
some red sunset. It wa easier to decant from the barrel into hi ewer 
than carri the heavi keg and sprinkl from it, and onc and onc again 
he fill and empti it. one more applic would be sufficient, 
and after that he could let what remain trickl out on to the floor. 
but by some awkward movement he manag to spill a splash of it down 
the front of hi trousers: he must be sure, therefor (how quickli hi 
brain respond with counsel of precautions), to have some accid 
with hi lamp when he came in to hi supper, which should account for 
thi littl misadventure. or, probably, the wind through which he would 
present be walk would dri it befor he reach the village. 

so, for the last time with match readi in hi hand, he mount the 
stair to set light to the fuel pile in the room above. hi second 
dose of whiski sang in hi head, and he said to himself, smile at 
the humour of the notion, “she alway like a fire in her bedroom; she 
shall have it now.” that seem a veri comic idea, and it dwelt in 
hi head as he struck the match which should light it for her. then, 
still grinning, he gave one glanc to the bed, and the smile die on 
hi face, and the wild cymbal of panic crash in hi brain. the bed 
wa empty; no huddl shape lay there. 

distraught with terror, he thrust the match into the soak pile and 
the flame flare up. perhap the bodi had roll off the bed. It must, 
in ani case, be here somewhere, and when onc the room wa alight there 
would be noth more to fear. high rose the smoki flame, and bang 
the door, he leap down the stair to set light to the pile below and 
be gone from the house. yet, whatev monstrou miracl hi eye had 
assur him of, it could not be that she still live and had left the 
place where she lay, for she had ceas to breath when the noos wa 
tight round her neck, and her fight for life and air had long been 
stilled. but, if by some hideou witchcraft, she wa not dead, it would 
soon be over now with her in the stupefact of the smoke and the 
scorch flames. let be; the door wa shut and she within, for him it 
remain to be finish with the business, and flee from the hous of 
terror, lest he leav the saniti of hi soul behind him. 

the red glare from the hearth in the studio lit hi step down the 
passag from the stairway, and alreadi he could hear from abov the 
dri crack and snap from the fire that prosper there. As he shuffl 
in, he held hi hand to hi head, as if press the brain back into 
it cool case, from which it seem eager to fli out into the welter 
of storm and fire and hideou imagination. If he could onli control 
himself for a few moment more, all would be done and he would escap 
from thi disord haunt place into the night and the gale, leav 
behind him the blaze that would burn away all peril stuff. again 
the flame broke out in the ember on the hearth, brave burning, 
and he took from the heart of the glare a fragment on which the fire 
wa burst into yellow flowers. He heed not the scorch of hi 
hand, for it wa but for a moment that he held it, and then plung it 
into the pile that drip with the oil he had pour on it. A tower 
of flame mounted, lick the rafter of the low ceiling, then die 
away as if suffoc by it own smoke, but crept onwards, nose it 
way along till it reach the straw mat, which blaze fiercely. that 
blaze kindl the courag in him; whatev trick hi imagin had 
play on him just now, he had noth to fear except hi own terror, 
which now he master again, for noth real could ever escap from 
the conflagration, and it wa onli the real that he feared. spell and 
witchcraft and superstitions, such as for the last twenti year had 
batten on him, were all enclos in that tight-drawn noose. 

It wa time to be gone, for all wa safe now, and the room wa grow 
to oven-heat. but as he pick hi way across the floor over which 
runnel of flame from the split barrel were begin to spread thi 
way and that, he heard from abov the sound of a door unlatched, and 
footstep light and firm tap on the stairs. for one second the sheer 
catalepsi of panic seiz him, but he recov hi control, and with 
hand that grope through the thick smoke he found the door. At that 
moment the fire shot up in a blaze of blind flame, and there in the 
doorway stood ellen. It wa no wither bodi and bloat face that 
confront him, but she with whom he had tryst in the wood, with the 
bloom of etern youth upon her, and the smooth soft hand, on which 
wa her wedding-ring, point at him. 

It wa in vain that he call on himself to rush forward out of that 
torrid and suffoc air. the front door wa open, he had but to pass 
her and speed forth safe into the night. but no power from hi will 
reach hi limbs; hi will scream to him, “go, go! push by her: it 
is but a phantom which you fear!” but muscl and sinew were in mutiny, 
and step by step he retreat befor that point finger and the 
radiant shape that advanc on him. the flame that flicker over the 
floor had discov the paraffin he had spilt, and leap up hi leg. 

just one spot in hi brain retain lucid from the encompass 
terror. somewher behind that barrier of fire there wa the second 
door into the garden. He had but cursorili attempt to unlock it 
rusti wards; now, surely, the knowledg that there alon wa escap 
would give strength to hi hand. He leap backward through the 
flames, still with eye fix on her who ever advanc in time with 
hi retreat, and turning, wrestl and strove with the key. someth 
snap in hi hand, and there still in the keyhol wa the bare shaft. 

hold hi breath, for the heat scorch hi throat, he grope toward 
where he knew wa the window through which he had first seen her that 
night. the flame lick fierc round it, but there, beneath hi 
hand, wa the hasp, and he threw it open. At that the wind pour in as 
through the nozzl of a pli bellows, and death rose high and bright 
around him. through the flames, as he sank to the floor, a face radiant 
with reveng smile on him. 




inscrut decre 




inscrut decre 


I had found noth moment in the more august page of _the times_ 
that morning, and so, just becaus I wa lazi and unwil to embark 
on a host of busi that were wait for me, I turn to the first 
page and, begin with the seventh column, ponder profoundli over 
“situat vacant,” and hope that the “gentlewoman fond of games,” 
who desir the posit of governess, would find the veri thing to 
suit her. I glanc at the notic of lectur to be deliv under 
the auspic of variou learn societies, and wa thank that I had 
not got to give or to listen to ani of them. I debat over “busi 
opportunities”; I vainli tri to conjectur clue to mysteri 
“personal” paragraphs, and, still pursu my sideways, crab-fashion 
course, came to “death continued.” 

there, with a shock of arrest, I saw that sybil rorke, widow of the 
late sir ernest rorke, had die at torquay, suddenly, at the age of 
thirty-two. It seem strang that there should be onli thi bare 
announc concern a woman who at one time had been so well-known 
and dazzl a figure; and turn to the obituari notices, I found 
that my inattent skim had overlook a paragraph there of 
appreci and regret. she had die dure her sleep, and it wa 
announc that an inquest would be held. My lazi then had been 
of some use, for archi rorke, distant cousin but successor to sir 
ernest’ estat and title, wa arriv that even to spend a few 
countri day with me, and I wa glad to have known thi befor he came. 
how it would affect him, or whether, indeed, it would affect him at 
all, I had no idea. 

what a mysteri affair it had been! No one, I supposed, knew the 
histori of it except he, now that ladi rork wa dead. If anyon knew, 
it should have been myself, and yet archie, my oldest friend, whose 
best man I wa to have been, had never open hi lip to a syllabl of 
explanation. I knew, in fact, no whit more than the whole world knew, 
namely, that a year after sir ernest rorke’ death the engag of 
hi widow to the new baronet, sir archibald rorke, wa made public, 
and that within a fortnight of the date fix for the wed it wa 
lacon announc that the marriag would not take place. when, 
on see that, I rang archi up on the telephone, I wa told that 
he had alreadi left london, and he wrote to me a few day later from 
lincote--th place in hampshire, which he had inherit from hi 
cousin--say that he had noth to tell me about the break off 
of hi engag beyond the fact that it wa true. the whole--h had 
written a word and care eras it--episod wa now an excis leaf 
from hi life. He wa propos to stay down at lincot alon for a 
month or so, and would then turn on to the new page. 

ladi rorke, so I heard, had also left london immedi and pass 
the summer in italy. then she took a furnish hous in torquay, where 
she live for the remaind of the year which interven between 
the break off of her engag and her death. she cut herself 
complet off from all her friends--and no woman, surely, ever 
command a larger host of them--saw nobody, seldom went outsid her 
hous and garden, and observ the same unbroken silenc as did archi 
about what had happened. and now, with all her youth and charm and 
beauty, she had gone down dumb into the great silence. 

with the prospect of see archi that even it wa no wonder that 
the thought of ladi rork ran all day in my head like a tune heard 
long ago which now recal itself to my mind in scatter stave of 
melody. meet and talk with her, phrase by phrase, reconstruct 
themselves, and as these memori grew definit and complet I found 
that, even as before, when I wa actual experienc them, there 
lurk underneath the gay rhythm and joyous someth _macabre_ 
and mysterious. to-day that wa accentuated, wherea befor when I 
listen for it, tri to isol it from the rest and so perhap 
dispel it, it wa alway overscor by some triumphant crescendo: her 
presenc divert eye and ear alike. yet such a simil halts; perhaps, 
still in simile, I shall more accur defin thi underli 
“something” by say that her presenc wa like some gorgeou 
rose-bush, full of flowers, and sun, and sweetness; then, even as one 
admir and applaud and inhaled, one saw that among it bud and 
blossom there emerg the spike of some other plant, bitter and 
poisonous, but grow from the same soil as the rose, and intertwin 
with it. but immedi a fresh glori met your eye, a fresh fragranc 
enchant you. 

As I rummag among my memori of her, certain scene which 
significantli illustr thi curious vivid impress stir and 
made themselv manifest to me, and now they were not broken in upon 
by her presence. one such occur on the first even that I ever 
met her, which wa in the summer befor the death of her husband. the 
moment that she enter the room where we were wait befor dinner 
for her arrival, the stale, sultri air of a june even grew fresh 
and effervescent; never have I come across so radiant and infecti a 
vitality. she wa tall and big, with the splendour of the juno-type, 
and though she wa then close on thirty, the iridesc of girlhood 
wa still hers. without effort she pied-pip a rather stodgi parti 
to danc to her flutings, she caus everyon to becom silli and 
pleas and full of laughter. At her bid we indulg in ridicul 
games, dumb-crambo, and what not, and after that the carpet wa roll 
up and we caper to the strain of a gramophone. and then the incid 
occurred. 

I wa stand with her, for a breath of air, on the balconi outsid 
the drawing-room window which face the park. she had just made a 
great curtsey to a slip of the moon that rose abov the tree and had 
borrow a shill of me in order to turn it. 

“no, I can’t swear that I believ in moon-luck,” she said, “but after 
all it doe no harm, and, in case it’ true, you can’t afford to make 
an enemi of her. ah, what’ that?” 

A thrush, attract by the light inside, had flown between us, dash 
itself against the window, and now lay flutter on the ground at our 
feet. instantli she wa all piti and tenderness. she pick up the 
bird, examin it, and found that it wing wa broken. 

“ah, poor thing!” she said. “look, it wing-bon is snapped; the end 
protrudes. and how terrifi it is! what are we to do?” 

It wa clear that the kindest thing to do would be to put the bird 
out of it pain, but when I suggest that, she took a step back from 
me, and cover it with her other hand. her eye gleamed, her mouth 
smiled, and I saw the tip of her tongu swiftli pass over her lip as 
if lick them. 

“no, that would be a terribl thing to do,” she said. “I shall take it 
home with me ever so carefully, and watch over it. I am afraid it is 
badli hurt. but it may live.” 

suddenly--perhap it wa that swift lick of her lip that suggest 
the thought to me--i felt instinct that she wa not so much 
piti as pleased. she stood there with eye fix on it, as it feebli 
struggl in her hands. 

and then her face clouded; over it bright there came a look of 
displeasure, of annoyance. 

“i’m afraid it is dying,” she said. “it poor frighten eye are 
closing.” 

the bird flutter onc more, then it leg stretch themselv 
stiffli out, and it lay still. she toss it out of her hand on to the 
pave balcony, with a littl shrug of her shoulders. 

“what a fuss over a bird,” she said. “it wa silli of it to fli 
against the glass. but I have too soft a heart; I cannot bear that the 
poor creatur should die. let us go in and have one more romp. oh, 
here is your shilling; I hope it will have brought me good luck. and 
then I must get home. My husband--do you know him?--alway sit up till 
I get back, and he will scold me for be so late!” 

there, then, wa my first meet with her, and there, too, were the 
spike of the poison plant push up among the magnific of her 
roses. and yet, so I thought to myself then, and so I think to myself 
now, I perhap wa utterli wrong about it all, in thu attribut to 
her a secret glee of which she wa wholli incapable. so, with a certain 
effort I wipe the impress I had receiv off my mind, determin 
to consid myself quit mistaken. but, involuntarily, my mind as if 
to justifi itself in have delin such a picture, proceed to 
delin another. 

veri shortli after that first meet I receiv from her a charm 
note, ask me to dine with her on a date not far distant. I 
telephon a delight acceptance, for, indeed, I want then, even 
as I did thi morning, to convinc myself that I wa wholli in error 
concern my interpret of that incid concern the thrush. 
though I hold that no man ha the right to accept the hospit 
offer by one he doe not like, in all point except one I admir 
and like ladi rork immens and wish to get rid of that one. So 
I grate accepted, and then hurri out on a dismal and overdu 
visit to the dentist’s. In the waiting-room wa a girl of about twelve, 
with a hand nurs a rueful face, and from time to time she stifl 
a sob of pain or apprehension. I wa just wonder whether it would 
be a breach of waiting-room etiquett to attempt to administ comfort 
or suppli diversion, when the door open and in came ladi rorke. she 
laugh delight when she saw me. 

“hurrah! you’r anoth occup of the condemn cell,” she said, “and 
veri soon we shall both be sent for to the scaffold. I can’t describ 
to you what a coward I am about it. whi haven’t we got beak like 
birds?----” 

her glanc fell on the forlorn littl figur by the window, with the 
rueful face and the wet eyes. 

“why, here’ anoth of us,” she said. “and have they sent you to the 
dentist’ all alone, my dear?” 

“y--yes.” 

“how horrid of them!” said ladi rorke. “they’v sent me alone, too, 
and I think it’ most unfeeling. but you shan’t be alone, anyhow, i’ll 
come in with you, and sit by you, if you like that, and box the man’ 
ear for him if he hurt you. Or shall you and I set on him, as soon 
as we’v got him by himself, and take out all hi teeth one after the 
other? just to teach him to be a dentist.” 

A faint smile began the break through the clouds. 

“oh, will you come in with me?” she asked. “I shan’t mind nearli so 
much, then. it’s--it’ got to come out, you know, and I mayn’t have 
gas.” 

just the same gleam of a smile as I had seen on ladi rorke’ face onc 
befor quiver there now, a light not of pity, surely. 

“ah, but it won’t ach ani more after that,” she said, “and after all, 
it is so soon over. you’ll just open your mouth as if you were go to 
put the largest of all strawberri into it, and you’ll hold tight on 
to my hand, and the dentist take up someth which you needn’t look 
at----” 

there wa a want of tact in the vivid of thi picture, and the 
child began to sob again. 

“oh, don’t, don’t!” she cried. 

again the door opened, and she clung to ladi rorke. 

“oh, I know it’ for me!” she wailed. 

ladi rork bent over her, scan her terrifi face. 

“come along, my dear,” she said, “and it will be over in no time. 
you’ll be back here again befor thi gentleman can count a hundred, 
and he’ll have all hi troubl in front of him still.” 

again thi morn I tri to expung from that picture, so trivial and 
yet so vivid to me, the sinist someth which seem to connect it 
with the incid about the thrush, and, leav it, my mind stray 
on over other reminisc of ladi rorke. befor the season wa over 
I had got to know her well, and the better I knew her the more I 
marvel at that many-petal vitality, which never ceas unfold 
itself. she entertain largely, and had that crown gift of a good 
hostess, namely, that she enjoy her own parti quit enormously. she 
wa a veri fine horsewoman, and after be up till dawn at some dance, 
she would be in the row by half-past eight on a peculiarli viciou mare 
to whom she seem to pay onli the most cursori attention. she had a 
good knowledg of music, she dress amazingly, she wa charm to her 
meagr littl husband, play piquet with him by the hour (which wa 
the onli thing, apart from herself, that he care about), and if in 
thi modern democrat london there could be said to be a queen, there 
is no doubt who that season would have worn the crown. less publicly, 
she wa a great student of the psychic and occult, and I rememb 
hear that she wa herself possess of veri remark mediumist 
gifts. but to me that wa a matter of hearsay, for I never wa present 
at ani séanc of hers. 

yet through the triumphant music of her pageant, there sounded, to 
my ear at least, fragment of a veri ugli tune. It wa not onli in 
these two instanc of it emerg that I heard it, it wa chiefli 
and most persist audibl in her treatment of archi rorke, her 
husband’ cousin. everyon knew, for none could help knowing, that 
he wa desper in love with her, and it is imposs to imagin 
that she alon wa ignor of it. It is, no doubt, the instinct 
of mani women to fan a passion which they do not share, and which 
they have no intent of indulging, just as the male instinct is to 
gratifi a passion that he doe not realli feel, but there are limit 
to mercilessness. she wa not “cruel to be kind”; she wa kind to be 
demoniac cruel. she had him alway by her; she gave him those 
littl touch and comrade-lik licenc which meant noth to her, 
but craze him with thirst; she held the glass close to hi lip 
and then tilt it up and show it him empty. the more charit 
explan wa that she, perhaps, knew that her husband could not 
live long, and that she intend to marri archie, and such, so it 
subsequ appeared, her intent were. but when I saw her feed 
him with husk and put an empti glass to hi lips, nothing, to 
my mind, could account for her treatment of him except a raptur of 
cruelti at the sight of hi aching. and somehow, aw and aptly, 
that seem to fit in with the affair of the thrush, and the meet 
with the forlorn child in the dentist’ waiting-room. yet ever, through 
that gruesom twilight, there blaze forth her charm and her beauti and 
the beam of her joyou vitality, and I would cudgel myself for my nasti 
interpretations. 

It wa earli in the spring of next year that I wa spend a week-end 
with her and her husband at lincote. she had suggest my come down 
on saturday morn befor the parti assembl later in the day, and 
at lunch I wa alon with her husband and her. sir ernest wa veri 
silent; he look ill and haggard, and, in fact, hardli spoke a word 
except when suddenli he turn to the butler and said, “ha anyth 
been heard of the child yet?” He wa told that there wa no news, and 
subsid into silenc again. I thought that some queer shadow as of 
suspens or anxieti cross ladi rorke’ face at the question; but 
on the answer, it clear off again, and, as if to sweep the subject 
wholli away, she ask me if I could toler a saunter with her 
through the wood till her guest arrived. 

out she came like some splendid diana of the forests, and like the 
goddess’ wa the swift, swing pace of her saunter. spring all round 
wa riotou in blossom and bird-song; it wa just that ecstat moment 
of the year when the hound of spring have run winter to death, and as 
we gain the high ridg of down abov the wood she stop and threw 
her arm wide. 

“oh, the sens of spring!” she cried. “the daffodils, and the west 
wind, and the shadow of the clouds. how I wish I could take the 
whole lot into my arm and hug them. miracl are flower everi 
moment now in the country, while the onli miracl in london is the 
mud. what sunshine, what air! drink them in, for they are the one 
divin medicine. one want that medicin sometimes, for there are sad 
thing and terribl thing all round us, pain and anguish, and decay. 
yet I suppos that even those call out the splendour of fortitud 
or endurance. even when one look on a struggl which one know is 
hopeless, it warm the heart to see it.” 

the gleam that shone from her paled, her arm dropped, and she move 
on. then, soft of voic and soft of eye, she spoke again. 

“such a sad thing happen here two day ago,” she said. “A small 
girl--now what wa her name? yes--ellen davenport--brought a note from 
the villag up to the house. I wa out, so she left it, and started, it 
is supposed, to go back home. she ha not been seen since. descript 
of her were circul in all the villag for mile round; but, as 
you heard at lunch, there ha been no news of her, and the cops and 
covert in the park have been searched, but with no result. and yet out 
of that come splendour. I went to see her mother yesterday, bow down 
with grief, but she won’t give up hope. ‘if it is god’ will,’ she said 
to me, ‘we shall find my ellen alive; and if we find her dead, it will 
be god’ will, too.’” 

she paused. 

“but I didn’t ask you down here to moan over tragedies,” she said. 
“I want you after all your week in town to come and have a 
spring-cleaning. doesn’t the wind take the dust out of you, like one of 
those sucking-machin which you put on to carpets? and the sun! make a 
spong of yourself and soak it up till you’r drip with it.” 

for a coupl of miles, at the least, we kept along thi high ridg of 
down, and the lark were spring from the grass, vocal with song 
uncongealed, as they aspir and sank again, drop at last dumb 
and spent with rapture. then we descend steeply, through the wood 
and glade of the park, past thicket of catkin sallows, and of 
willow with soft moleskin buttons, and in the hollow the daffodil 
were dancing, and the herb of the springtim were push up through 
the brittl wither stuff of the winter. then, pass along the one 
street of the red-til village, in which my companion point me out 
the hous where the poor vanish girl had lived, we turn homeward 
across the grass and join the road again at the bottom of the great 
lake that lie below the terrac garden of the house. 

thi lake wa artificial, made a hundr year ago by the erect of a 
huge dam across the dip of the valley, so that the stream which flow 
down it wa therebi confin and must need form thi sheet of water 
befor it found outlet again through the sluices. At the centr the dam 
is some twenty-f feet in height, and by the side of the road which 
cross it clump of rhododendron lean out over the deep water. the 
margin on the side toward the lake is reinforc with concrete, now 
mossi and overgrown with herbage, and the face of it, burrow down 
to the level of the bottom of the dam through four fathom of duski 
water. the lake wa high and the overflow pour sonor through the 
sluices, and the sun in the west made broken rainbow in the foam of 
it outpouring. 

As we paus there a moment, my companion seem the incarn of the 
sight and sound that went to the spell of the spring; sing lark 
and danc daffodils, west wind and rain-bow foam and, no less, the 
dark, deep water, were all distil into her radiant vitality. 

“and now for the hous again,” she said, go briskli up the steep 
slope. “i it inhospit of me to wish that no one wa come except, 
of course, our delight archie? A hous bring london into the 
country, and we shall talk scandal and stir up mud instead of watch 
miracles.” 

anoth faint memori of her linger somewher in the dusk, and I 
grope for it, as one grope in slime for the root of a water-plant, 
and pull it out. A notori murder had been guillotin that 
morn in france, and in some sunday paper next day there wa a 
brutal, brilliant, inexcus littl sketch of hi be led out 
between guard for the final scene at dawn outsid the prison at 
versailles. and, as I wrote my name in ladi rorke’ visitors’ book 
on monday morning, I spilt a blot of ink on the page and hastili 
had recours to the blotting-pad on her writing-t in order to 
minim the disfigurement. insid it wa thi unpardon picture, 
cut out and put away, and I thought of the thrush and the dentist’ 
waiting-room---- 

A month afterward her husband died, after three week of intoler 
torment. the doctor insist on hi have two train nurses, but 
ladi rork never left him. she wa present at the pain dress 
of the wound from the oper that onli prolong the miseri of hi 
existence, and even slept on the sofa of the room where he lay. 

* * * * * 

archi rork arriv that evening. He let me know at onc that he had 
seen the announc of ladi rorke’ death, and said no more about 
it till later, when he and I were left alon over the fire in the 
smoking-room. He look round to see that the door wa shut behind the 
last bedgoer of my littl party, and then turn to me. 

“i’v got to tell you something,” he said. “it’ll take half an hour, so 
to-morrow will do if you want to be off.” 

“but I don’t,” said I. 

He pull himself togeth from hi sprawl sunken in hi chair. 

“veri well,” he said. “what I want to tell you is the stori of the 
breaking-off of my engag with sybil. I have often want to do so 
before, but while she wa alive, as you will present see, I could 
tell nobody. I shall ask you, when you know everything, whether you 
think I could have done otherwise. and pleas do not interrupt me till 
I have finished, unless there is someth you don’t understand, for it 
won’t be veri easi to get through with it. but I think I can make it 
intelligible.” 

He wa silent a moment, and I saw hi face work and twitching. 

“I must tell somebody,” he said, “and I choos you, unless you mind it 
awfully. but I simpli can’t bear it alon ani more.” 

“go on, then, old boy,” I said. “i’m glad you chose me, do you know. 
and I won’t interrupt.” 

archi spoke. 

“A week or two onli befor our marriag wa to have taken place,” he 
said, “I went down to lincot for a coupl of days. I had had the hous 
done up and re-decorated, and now the work wa finish and I want to 
see that all wa in order. noth could be worthi of sybil, but--well, 
you can guess, more or less, what my feel were. 

“for a week befor there had been veri heavi rains, and the lake--y 
know it--below the garden wa veri high, higher than I had ever seen 
it: the water pour over the road across the dam which lead to the 
village. under the weight and press of it a great crack had appear 
in the concret with which it is faced, and there wa danger of the 
dam be carri away. If that happen the whole lake would have 
been suddenli releas and no end of damag might have been done. It 
wa therefor necessari to draw off the water as fast as possibl to 
reliev the pressur and repair the crack. thi wa done by mean of 
big siphons. for two day we had them working, but the crack seem 
to extend right to the foundat of the dam, and befor it could be 
repair all the water in the lake would have to be drawn off. I wa 
just leav for town, when the foreman came up to the hous to tell me 
that they had found someth there. In the ooz and mud at the base 
of the dam, twenty-f feet below water-level, they had come upon the 
bodi of a young girl.” 

He grip the arm of hi chair tight. littl did he know that I wa 
horribl awar of what he wa go to tell me next. 

“about a month befor my cousin ernest’ death,” he said, “a mysteri 
affair happen in the village. A girl name ellen davenport had 
disappeared. she came up one afternoon to the hous with a note, 
and wa never seen again, dead or alive. her disappear wa now 
explained. A chain of bead round the neck and variou fragment of 
cloth established, beyond ani doubt, the ident of what they had 
found at the bottom of the lake. I wait for the inquest, telegraph 
to sybil that busi had detain me, and then return to town, not 
intend to tell her what that busi was, for our marriag wa 
close at hand and it wa not a topic one would choose. she wa veri 
superstitious, you know, and I thought that it would shock her. that 
she would feel it to be unlucki and ill-omened. So I said noth to 
her. 

“sybil had extraordinari mediumist powers. she did not often exercis 
them and she never would give a séanc to ani one she did not know 
extrem well, for she believ that peopl brought with them the 
spiritu influenc with which they were surrounded, and that there 
wa the possibl of veri evil intellig be set free. but she 
had sat sever time with me, and I had wit some veri remark 
manifestations. her procedur wa to put herself, by abstract of 
her mind, into a state of trance, and spirit of the dead who were 
connect with the sitter could then commun through her. On 
one occas my mother, whom she had never seen, and who die mani 
year ago, spoke through her and told me certain fact which sybil 
could not have known, and which I did not know. but an old friend of 
my mother’s, still alive, told me that they were correct. they were 
of an exceedingli privat nature. sybil also, so she told me, could 
produc materialisations, but up till now I had never seen any. A 
remark thing about her mediumship wa that she would sometim 
regain conscious from her tranc while still these commun 
were be made, and she knew what wa go on. she could hear herself 
speak and be mental awar of what she wa saying. On the occasion, 
for instance, of which I have told you, when my mother spoke to me she 
wa in thi state. the same thing occur at the sit of which I 
shall now speak. 

“that night, on my return to london, she and I dine alone. I felt a 
veri strong desire, for which I could not account, that she should 
hold a sitting--just herself and me--and she consented. We sat in her 
room, with a shade lamp, but there wa suffici illumin for me 
to see her quit distinctly, for her face wa toward the light. there 
wa a small tabl in front of us cover with a dark cloth. she sat 
close to it, in a high chair, compos herself, and almost immedi 
went into trance. her head fell forward and by her slow breath and 
her absolut immobl I knew she wa unconscious. for a long time 
we sat there in silence, and I began to think that we should get no 
manifest at all, and that the sitting, as sometim wa the case, 
would be a failure; but then I saw that someth wa happening.” 

hi hands, with which he grip the arm of hi chair, were trembling. 
twice he tri to speak, but it wa not till the third attempt that he 
master himself. 

“there wa form a mist abov the table,” he said. “it wa slightli 
lumin and it spread upwards, pillar-shaped, in height between 
two and three feet. then I saw that below the outli skein of it 
someth wa materialising. It mould itself into human shape, rise 
waist-high from the table, and present shoulder and arm and neck 
and head were visible, and featur began to outlin themselves. for 
some time it remain vagu and fluid, sway backward and forward a 
little; then veri quickli it solidified, and there, close in front of 
me, wa the half-figur of a young girl. the eye were still closed, 
but now they opened. round her neck wa a chain of bead just such as I 
had seen laid by the bodi that had been found in the lake. and then I 
spoke to her, ask her who she was, though I alreadi knew. 

“her answer wa no more than a whisper, but quit distinct. 

“‘ellen davenport,’ she said. 

“A disord terror seiz me. yet perhap thi littl white figure, 
with it wide-gaz eyes, wa some hallucination, someth that had 
no object exist at all. all day the thought of the poor kiddi 
whose remain I had seen taken out of the ooz at the bottom of the 
lake had been vivid in my mind, and I tri to think that what I saw 
wa no more than some strang project of my thought. and yet I 
felt it wa not so; it wa independ of myself. and whi wa it made 
manifest, and on what errand had it come? I had press sybil to give 
me thi séance, and god know what I would have given not to have done 
so! for one thing I wa thankful, namely, that she wa in unconsci 
trance. perhap the phantom would fade again befor she came out of it. 

“and then I heard a stir of movement from the chair where she sat, and, 
turning, I saw that she had rais her head. her eye were open and on 
her face such a mask of terror as I have never known human be could 
wear. recognit wa there, too; I saw that sybil knew who the phantom 
was. 

“the figur that pale gleam abov the tabl turn it head toward 
her, and onc more the white lip opened. 

“‘yes, I am ellen davenport,’ she said. 

“the whisper grew louder. 

“‘you might have save me,’ she said, ‘or you might have tri to save 
me; but you watch me struggl till I sank.’ 

“and then the apparit vanished. It did not die away; it wa there 
clear and distinct one moment, at the next it wa gone. sybil and I 
were sit alon in her room with the low-burn lamp, and the 
silenc sang in my ears. 

“I got up and turn on the switch that kindl the electr lights, 
and knew that someth within me had grown cold and that someth 
had snapped. she still sat where she was, not look at me at all, 
but blankli in front of her. she said no word of denial in answer to 
the terribl accus that had been uttered. and I think I wa glad 
of that, for there are time when it is not onli futil to deny, but 
blasphemy. for my part, I could neither look at her nor speak to her. I 
rememb hold out my hand to the empti grate, as if there had been 
a fire burn there. and stand there I heard her rise, and drearili 
wonder what she would say and knew how useless it would be. and then 
I heard the whisper of her dress on the carpet and the nois of the 
door open and shutting, and when I turn I found that I wa alon 
in the room. present I let myself out of the house.” 

there wa a long pause, but I did not break it, for I felt he had not 
quit finished. 

“I had love her with my whole heart,” he said, “and she knew it. 
perhap that wa whi I never attempt to see her again and whi she did 
not attempt to see me. that littl white figur would alway have been 
with us, for she could not deni the realiti of it and the truth of that 
which it had spoken. that’ my story, then. you needn’t even tell me if 
you think I could have done differently, for I knew I couldn’t. and she 
couldn’t.” 

He rose. 

“I see there is to be an inquest,” he said. “I hope they will find 
that she kill herself. It will mean, won’t it, that her remors wa 
unbearable. and that’ atonement.” 

He move toward the door. 

“inscrut decrees,” he said. 




the garden 




the garden 


two friend of mine, hugh grainger and hi wife, had taken for a 
month of christma holiday the hous in which we were to wit such 
strang manifestations, and when I receiv an invit from them to 
spend a fortnight there I return them an enthusiast affirmative. 
well alreadi did I know that pleasant heatheri country-side, and most 
intim wa my acquaint with the subtl hazard of it most 
charm golf-links. golf, I wa given to understand, wa to occupi the 
solid day for hugh and me, so that margaret should never be oblig to 
set her hand to the implement with which the game, so detest to 
her, wa conducted.... 

I arriv there while yet the daylight lingered, and as my host were 
out, I took a rambl round the place. the hous and garden stood on a 
plateau face south; below it were a coupl of acr of pastur that 
slope down to a vagrant stream cross by a foot-bridge, by the side 
of which stood a thatch cottag with a veget patch surround 
it. A path ran close past thi across the pastur from a wicket-g in 
the garden, conduct you over the foot-bridge, and, so my rememb 
sens of geographi told me, must constitut a short cut to the link 
that lay not half a mile beyond. the cottag itself wa clearli on 
the land of the littl estate, and I at onc suppos it to be the 
gardener’ house. what went against so obviou and simpl a theori wa 
that it appear to be untenanted. No wreath of smoke, though the 
even wa chilly, curl from it chimneys, and, come closer, I 
fanci it had that air of “waiting” about it which we so often conjur 
into unus habitations. there it stood, with no sign of life whatev 
about it, though ready, as it appar perfect state of repair 
seem to warrant, for fresh tenant to put the breath of life into it 
again. it littl garden, too, though the pale were neat and newli 
painted, told the same tale; the bed were untend and unweeded, and 
in the flower-bord by the front door wa a row of chrysanthemums, 
which had wither on their stems. but all thi wa but the impress 
of a moment, and I did not paus as I pass it, but cross the 
foot-bridg and went on up the heatheri slope that lay beyond. My 
geographi wa not at fault, for present I saw the club-hous just 
in front of me. hugh no doubt would be just about come in from hi 
afternoon round, and so we would walk back together. On reach the 
club-house, however, the steward told me that not five minut befor 
mrs. grainger had call in her car for her husband, and I therefor 
retrac my step by the path along which I had alreadi come. but 
I made a detour, as a golfer will, to walk up the fairway of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth hole just for the pleasur of recognition, 
and look respect at the yawn sandpit which so inexor 
guard the eighteenth green, wonder in what circumst I should 
visit it next, whether with a step complac and superior, know 
that my ball repos safe on the green beyond, or with the heavi 
footfal of one who know that labori delv lie befor him. 

the light of the winter even had fade fast, and when I cross 
the foot-bridg on my return the dusk had gathered. To my right, just 
besid the path, lay the cottage, the whitewash wall of which 
gleam white in the gloaming; and as I turn my glanc back from 
it to the rather narrow plank which bridg the stream I thought I 
caught out of the tail of my eye some light from one of it windows, 
which thu disprov my theori that it wa untenanted. but when I 
look directli at it again I saw that I wa mistaken: some reflect 
in the glass of the red line of sunset in the west must have deceiv 
me, for in the inclement twilight it look more desol than ever. 
yet I linger by the wicket gate in it low palings, for though all 
exterior evid bore wit to it emptiness, some inexplic 
feel assur me, quit irrationally, that thi wa not so, and that 
there wa somebodi there. certainli there wa nobodi visible, but, so 
thi absurd idea inform me, he might be at the back of the cottag 
conceal from me by the interven structure, and, still oddly, still 
unreasonably, it becam a matter of import to my mind to ascertain 
whether thi wa so or not, so clearli had my percept told me that 
the place wa empty, and so firmli had some convict assur me 
that it wa tenanted. To cover my inquisitiveness, in case there wa 
someon there, I could inquir whether thi path wa a short cut to 
the hous at which I wa staying, and, rather rebel at what I wa 
doing, I went through the small garden, and rap at the door. there 
wa no answer, and, after wait for a respons to a second summons, 
and have tri the door and found it locked, I made the circuit of 
the house. Of cours there wa no one there, and I told myself that I 
wa just like a man who look under hi bed for a burglar and would be 
beyond measur astonish if he found one. 

My host were at the hous when I arrived, and we spent a cheer two 
hour befor dinner in such desultori and eager convers as is 
proper between friend who have not met for some time. between hugh 
grainger and hi wife it is alway imposs to light on a subject 
which doe not vividli interest one or other of them, and golf, 
politics, the need of russia, cooking, ghosts, the possibl victori 
over mount everest, and the incom tax were among the topic which we 
passion discussed. with all these plate spinning, it wa easi 
to whip up ani one of them, and the subject of spook gener wa 
light upon again and again. 

“margaret is on the high road to madness,” remark hugh on one of 
these occasions, “for she ha begun use planchette. If you use 
planchett for six months, I am told, most care doctor will 
conscienti certifi you as insane. she’ got five month more 
befor she goe to bedlam.” 

“doe it work?” I asked. 

“yes, it say most interest things,” said margaret. “it say thing 
that never enter my head. we’ll tri it to-night.” 

“oh, not to-night,” said hugh. “let’ have an even off.” 

margaret disregard this. 

“it’ no use ask planchett questions,” she went on, “becaus there 
is in your mind some sort of answer to them. If I ask whether it will 
be fine to-morrow, for instance, it is probabl i--though inde I 
don’t mean to push--who make the pencil say ‘yes.’” 

“and then it usual rains,” remark hugh. 

“not always: don’t interrupt. the interest thing is to let the 
pencil write what it chooses. veri often it onli make loop and 
curves--though they may mean something--and everi now and then a word 
comes, of the signific of which I have no idea whatever, so I 
clearli couldn’t have suggest it. yesterday evening, for instance, 
it wrote ‘gardener’ over and over again. now what did that mean? the 
garden here is a methodist with a chin-beard. could it have meant 
him? oh, it’ time to dress. pleas don’t be late, my cook is so 
sensit about soup.” 

We rose, and some connect of idea about “gardener” link itself up 
in my mind. 

“bi the way, what’ that cottag in the field by the foot-bridge?” I 
asked. “i that the gardener’ cottage?” 

“it use to be,” said hugh. “but the chin-beard doesn’t live there: in 
fact nobodi live there. it’ empty. If I wa owner here, I should put 
the chin-beard into it, and take the rent off hi wages. some peopl 
have no idea of economy. whi did you ask?” 

I saw margaret wa look at me rather attentively. 

“curiosity,” I said. “idl curiosity.” 

“I don’t believ it was,” said she. 

“but it was,” I said. “it wa idl curios to know whether the 
hous wa inhabited. As I pass it, go down to the club-house, I 
felt sure it wa empty, but come back I felt so sure that there wa 
someon there that I rap at the door, and inde walk round it.” 

hugh had preced us upstairs, as she linger a little. 

“and there wa no one there?” she asked. “it’ odd: I had just the same 
feel as you about it.” 

“that explain planchett write ‘gardener’ over and over again,” said 
I. “you had the gardener’ cottag on your mind.” 

“how ingenious!” said margaret. “hurri up and dress.” 

A gleam of strong moonlight between my drawn curtain when I went up 
to bed that night led me to look out. My room face the garden and 
the field which I had travers that afternoon, and all wa vividli 
illumin by the full moon. the thatch cottag with it white wall 
close by the stream wa veri distinct, and onc more, I suppose, the 
reflect of the light on the glass of one of it window made it 
appear that the room wa lit within. It struck me as odd that twice 
that day thi illus should have been present to me, but now a yet 
odder thing happened. even as I look the light wa extinguished. 

the morn did not at all bear out the fine promis of the clear 
night, for when I woke the wind wa squealing, and sheet of rain from 
the south-west were dash against my panes. golf wa wholli out of the 
question, and, though the violenc of the storm abat a littl in the 
afternoon, the rain drip with a steadi sullenness. but I weari 
of indoors, and, sinc the two other entir refus to set foot 
outside, I went forth mackintosh to get a breath of air. By way of 
an object in my tramp, I took the road to the link in prefer to 
the muddi short cut through the fields, with the intent of engag 
a coupl of caddi for hugh and myself next morning, and linger 
awhil over illustr paper in the smoking-room. I must have read 
for longer than I knew, for a sudden beam of sunset light suddenli 
illumin my page, and look up, I saw that the rain had ceased, 
and that even wa fast come on. So instead of take the long 
detour by the road again, I set forth homeward by the path across 
the fields. that gleam of sunset wa the last of the day, and onc 
again, just as twenty-four hour ago, I cross the foot-bridg in the 
gloaming. till that moment, as far as I wa aware, I had not thought 
at all about the cottag there, but now in a flash the light I had 
seen there last night, suddenli extinguished, recal itself to my 
mind, and at the same moment I felt that invinc convict that 
the cottag wa tenanted. simultan in these swift process of 
thought I look toward it, and saw stand by the door the figur of 
a man. In the dusk I could distinguish noth of hi face, if inde 
it wa turn to me, and onli got the impress of a tallish fellow, 
thickli built. He open the door, from which there came a dim light as 
of a lamp, entered, and shut it after him. 

So then my convict wa right. yet I had been distinctli told that 
the cottag wa empty: who, then, wa he that enter as if return 
home? onc more, thi time with a certain qualm of fear, I rap on 
the door, intend to put some trivial question; and rap again, 
thi time more drastically, so that there could be no question that my 
summon wa unheard. but still I got no reply, and final I tri the 
handl of the door. It wa locked. then, with difficulti master an 
increas terror, I made the circuit of the cottage, peer into each 
unshutt window. all wa dark within, though but two minut ago I 
had seen the gleam of light escap from the open door. 

just becaus some chain of conjectur wa begin to form itself in 
my mind, I made no allus to thi odd adventure, and after dinner 
margaret, amid protest from hugh, got out the planchett which had 
persist in write “gardener.” My surmis was, of course, utterli 
fantastic, but I want to convey no suggest of ani sort to 
margaret.... for a long time the pencil skate over her paper make 
loop and curv and peak like a temperatur chart, and she had begun 
to yawn and weari over her experi befor ani coher word emerged. 
and then, in the oddest way, her head nod forward and she seem to 
have fallen asleep. 

hugh look up from hi book and spoke in a whisper to me. 

“she fell asleep the other night over it,” he said. 

margaret’ eye were closed, and she breath the long, quiet breath 
of slumber, and then her hand began to move with a curiou firmness. 
right across the big sheet of paper went a level line of writing, and 
at the end her hand stop with a jerk, and she woke. 

she look at the paper. 

“hullo,” she said. “ah, one of you ha been play a trick on me!” 

We assur her that thi wa not so, and she read what she had written. 

“gardener, gardener,” it ran. “I am the gardener. I want to come in. I 
can’t find her here.” 

“O lord, that garden again!” said hugh. 

look up from the paper, I saw margaret’ eye fix on mine, and 
even befor she spoke I knew what her thought was. 

“did you come home by the empti cottage?” she asked. 

“yes: why?” 

“still empty?” she said in a low voice. “or--or anyth else?” 

I did not want to tell her just what I had seen--or what, at ani rate, 
I thought I had seen. If there wa go to be anyth odd, anyth 
worth observation, it wa far better that our respect impress 
should not fortifi each other. 

“I tap again, and there wa no answer,” I said. 

present there wa a move to bed: margaret initi it, and after she 
had gone upstair hugh and I went to the front door to interrog the 
weather. onc more the moon shone in a clear sky, and we stroll out 
along the flag path that front the house. suddenli hugh turn 
quickli and point to the angl of the house. 

“who on earth is that?” he said. “look! there! He ha gone round the 
corner.” 

I had but the glimps of a tallish man of heavi build. 

“didn’t you see him?” ask hugh. “i’ll just go round the house, and 
find him; I don’t want anyon prowl round us at night. wait here, 
will you, and if he come round the other corner ask him what hi 
busi is.” 

hugh had left me, in our stroll, close by the front door which wa 
open, and there I wait until he should have made hi circuit. He had 
hardli disappear when I heard, quit distinctly, a rather quick but 
heavi footfal come along the pave walk toward me from the opposit 
direction. but there wa absolut no one to be seen who made thi 
sound of rapid walking. closer and closer to me came the step of the 
invis one, and then with a shudder of horror I felt somebodi unseen 
push by me as I stood on the threshold. that shudder wa not mere of 
the spirit, for the touch of him wa that of ice on my hand. I tri to 
seiz thi impalp intruder, but he slip from me, and next moment 
I heard hi step on the parquet of the floor inside. some door within 
open and shut, and I heard no more of him. next moment hugh came 
run round the corner of the hous from which the sound of step had 
approached. 

“but where is he?” he asked. “he wa not twenti yard in front of me--a 
big, tall fellow.” 

“I saw nobody,” I said. “I heard hi step along the walk, but there wa 
noth to be seen.” 

“and then?” ask hugh. 

“whatev it wa seem to brush by me, and go into the house,” said I. 

there had certainli been no sound of step on the bare oak stairs, and 
we search room after room through the ground floor of the house. the 
dining-room door and that of the smoking-room were locked, that into 
the drawing-room wa open, and the onli other door which could have 
furnish the impress of an open and a shut wa that into the 
kitchen and servants’ quarters. here again our quest wa fruitless; 
through pantri and sculleri and boot-room and servants’ hall we 
searched, but all wa empti and quiet. final we came to the kitchen, 
which too wa empty. but by the fire there wa set a rocking-chair, and 
thi wa oscil to and fro as if someone, late sit there, 
had just quit it. there it stood gentli rocking, and thi seem to 
convey the sens of a presence, invis now, more than even the sight 
of him who sure had been sit there could have done. I rememb 
want to steadi it and stop it, and yet my hand refus to go forth 
to it. 

what we had seen, and in especi what we had not seen, would have been 
suffici to furnish most peopl with a broken night, and assuredli I 
wa not among the strong-mind exceptions. long I lay wide-ey and 
open-eared, and when at last I doze I wa pluck from the borderland 
of sleep by the sound, muffl but unmistakable, of someon move 
about the house. It occur to me that the step might be those of 
hugh conduct a lone exploration, but even while I wonder a tap 
came at the door of commun between our rooms, and, in answer to 
my response, it appear that he had come to see whether it wa I thu 
uneasili wandering. even as we spoke the step pass my door, and the 
stair lead to the floor abov creak to it ascent. next moment 
it sound directli abov our head in some attic in the roof. 

“those are not the servants’ bedrooms,” said hugh. “no one sleep 
there. let us look onc more: it must be somebody.” 

with lit candl we made our stealthi way upstairs, and just when we 
were at the top of the flight, hugh, a step ahead of me, utter a 
sharp exclamation. 

“but someth is pass by me!” he said, and he clutch at the empti 
air. even as he spoke, I experienc the same sensation, and the moment 
afterward the stair below us creak again, as the unseen pass down. 

all night long that sound of step move about the passages, as if 
someon wa search the house, and as I lay and listen that messag 
which had come through the pencil of the planchett to margaret’ 
finger occur to me. “I want to come in. I cannot find her here.”... 
inde someon had come in, and wa sedul in hi search. He wa the 
gardener, it would seem. but what garden wa thi invis seeker, 
and for whom did he seek? 

even as when some bodili pain ceas it is difficult to recal with 
ani vivid what the pain wa like, so next morning, as I dressed, I 
found myself vainli tri to recaptur the horror of the spirit which 
had accompani these nocturn adventures. I rememb that someth 
within me had sicken as I watch the movement of the rocking-chair 
the night befor and as I heard the step along the pave way outside, 
and by that invis pressur against me knew that someon had enter 
the house. but now in the sane and tranquil morning, and all day 
under the seren winter sun, I could not realis what it had been. the 
presence, like the bodili pain, had to be there for the realis of 
it, and all day it wa absent. hugh felt the same; he wa even dispos 
to be humor on the subject. 

“well, he’ had a good look,” he said, “whoever he is, and whomev 
he wa look for. By the way, not a word to margaret, please. she 
heard noth of these perambulations, nor of the entri of--of whatev 
it was. not gardener, anyhow: who ever heard of a garden spend 
hi time walk about the house? If there were step all over the 
potato-patch, I might have been with you.” 

margaret had arrang to drive over to have tea with some friend of 
her that afternoon, and in consequ hugh and I refresh ourselv 
at the club-hous after our game, and it wa alreadi dusk when for the 
third day in success I pass homeward by the whitewash cottage. 
but to-night I had no sens of it be subtli occupied; it stood 
mourn desolate, as is the way of unten houses, and no light 
nor semblanc of such gleam from it windows. hugh, to whom I had 
told the odd impress I had receiv there, gave them a recept as 
flippant as that which he had accord to the memori of the night, 
and he wa still be humor about them when we came to the door of 
the house. 

“A psychic disturbance, old boy,” he said. “like a cold in the head. 
hullo, the door’ locked.” 

He rang and rapped, and from insid came the nois of a turn key and 
withdrawn bolts. 

“what’ the door lock for?” he ask hi servant who open it. 

the man shift from one foot to the other. 

“the bell rang half an hour ago, sir,” he said, “and when I came to 
answer it there wa a man stand outside, and----” 

“well?” ask hugh. 

“I didn’t like the look of him, sir,” he said, “and I ask him hi 
business. He didn’t say anything, and then he must have gone pretti 
smartli away, for I never saw him go.” 

“where did he seem to go?” ask hugh, glanc at me. 

“I can’t rightli say, sir. He didn’t seem to go at all. someth 
seem to brush by me.” 

“that’ll do,” said hugh rather sharply. 

* * * * * 

margaret had not come in from her visit, but when soon after the crunch 
of the motor wheel wa heard hugh reiter hi wish that noth 
should be said to her about the impress which now, apparently, a 
third person share with us. she came in with a flush of excit on 
her face. 

“never laugh at my planchett again,” she said. “i’v heard the most 
extraordinari stori from maud ashfield--horrible, but so fright 
interesting.” 

“out with it,” said hugh. 

“well, there wa a garden here,” she said. “he use to live at that 
littl cottag by the foot-bridge, and when the famili were up in 
london he and hi wife use to be caretak and live here.” 

hugh’ glanc and mine met: then he turn away. I knew, as certainli 
as if I wa in hi mind, that hi thought were ident with my own. 

“he marri a wife much younger than himself,” continu margaret, “and 
gradual he becam fright jealou of her. and one day in a fit 
of passion he strangl her with hi own hands. A littl while after 
someon came to the cottage, and found him sob over her, tri to 
restor her. they went for the police, but befor they came he had cut 
hi own throat. isn’t it all horrible? but sure it’ rather curiou 
that the planchett said gardener. ‘I am the gardener. I want to come 
in. I can’t find her here.’ you see I knew noth about it. I shall do 
planchett again to-night. Oh dear me, the post goe in half an hour, 
and I have a whole budget to send. but respect my planchett for the 
future, hughie.” 

We talk the situat out when she had gone, but hugh, unwillingli 
convinc and yet unwil to admit that someth more than 
coincid lay behind that “planchett nonsense,” still insist that 
margaret should be told noth of what we had heard and seen in the 
hous last night, and of the strang visitor who again thi evening, so 
we must conclude, had made hi entry. 

“she’ll be frightened,” he said, “and she’ll begin imagin things. As 
for the planchette, as like as not it will do noth but scribbl 
and make loops. what’ that? yes: come in!” 

there had come from somewher in the room one sharp, peremptori rap. I 
did not think it came from the door, but hugh, when no respons repli 
to hi word of admittance, jump up and open it. He took a few 
step into the hall outside, and returned. 

“didn’t you hear it?” he asked. 

“certainly. No one there?” 

“not a soul.” 

hugh came back to the fireplac and rather irrit threw a cigarett 
which he had just lit into the fender. 

“that wa rather a nasti jar,” he observed; “and if you ask me whether 
I feel comfortable, I can tell you I never felt less comfort in my 
life. i’m frightened, if you want to know, and I believ you are too.” 

I hadn’t the smallest intent of deni this, and he went on. 

“we’v got to keep a hand on ourselves,” he said. “there’ noth so 
infecti as fear, and margaret mustn’t catch it from us. but there’ 
someth more than our fear, you know. someth ha got into the 
hous and we’r up against it. I never believ in such thing before. 
let’ face it for a minute. _what_ is it anyhow?” 

“if you want to know what I think it is,” said I, “I believ it to be 
the spirit of the man who strangl hi wife and then cut hi throat. 
but I don’t see how it can hurt us. we’r afraid of our own fear 
really.” 

“but we’r up against it,” said hugh. “and what will it do? good 
lord, if I onli knew what it would do I shouldn’t mind. it’ the not 
knowing.... well, it’ time to dress.” 

* * * * * 

margaret wa in her highest spirit at dinner. know noth of 
the manifest of that presenc which had taken place in the 
last twenty-four hours, she thought it absorbingli interest that 
her planchett should have “guessed” (so ran her phrase) about the 
gardener, and from that topic she flit to an equal interest 
form of patienc for three which her friend had show her, promis 
to initi us into it after dinner. thi she did, and, not know 
that we both abov all thing want to keep planchett at a distance, 
she wa delight with the success of her game. but suddenli she 
observ that the even wa burn rapidli away, and swept the card 
togeth at the conclus of a hand. 

“now just half an hour of planchette,” she said. 

“oh, mayn’t we play one more hand?” ask hugh. “it’ the best game 
i’v seen for years. planchett will be dismal slow after this.” 

“darling, if the garden will onli commun again, it won’t be 
slow,” said she. 

“but it is such drivel,” said hugh. 

“how rude you are! read your book, then.” 

margaret had alreadi got out her machin and a sheet of paper, when 
hugh rose. 

“pleas don’t do it to-night, margaret,” he said. 

“but why? you needn’t attend.” 

“well, I ask you not to, anyhow,” said he. 

margaret look at him closely. 

“hughie, you’v got someth on your mind,” she said. “out with it. I 
believ you’r nervous. you think there is someth queer about. what 
is it?” 

I could see hugh hesit as to whether to tell her or not, and I 
gather that he chose the chanc of her planchett inan scribbling. 

“go on, then,” he said. 

margaret hesitated: she clearli did not want to vex hugh, but hi 
insist must have seem to her most unreasonable. 

“well, just ten minutes,” she said, “and I promis not to think of 
gardeners.” 

she had hardli laid her hand on the board when her head fell forward, 
and the machin began moving. I wa sit close to her, and as it 
roll steadili along the paper the write becam visible. 

“I have come in,” it ran, “but still I can’t find her. are you hide 
her? I will search the room where you are.” 

what els wa written but still conceal underneath the planchett I 
did not know, for at that moment a current of ici air swept round the 
room, and at the door, thi time unmistakably, came a loud, peremptori 
knock. hugh sprang to hi feet. 

“margaret, wake up,” he said, “someth is coming!” 

the door opened, and there move in the figur of a man. He stood just 
within the door, hi head bent forward, and he turn it from side to 
side, peering, it would seem, with eye stare and infinit sad, 
into everi corner of the room. 

“margaret, margaret,” cri hugh again. 

but margaret’ eye were open too; they were fix on thi dread 
visitor. 

“be quiet, hughie,” she said below her breath, rise as she spoke. the 
ghost wa now look directli at her. onc the lip abov the thick, 
rust-colour beard moved, but no sound came forth, the mouth onli 
move and slavered. He rais hi head, and, horror upon horror, I saw 
that one side of hi neck wa laid open in a red, glisten gash.... 

for how long that paus continued, when we all three stood stiff and 
frozen in some deadli inhibit to move or speak, I have no idea: I 
suppos that at the utmost it wa a dozen seconds. then the spectr 
turned, and went out as it had come. We heard hi step pass along the 
parquet floor; there wa the sound of bolt withdrawn from the front 
door, and with a crash that shook the hous it slam to. 

“it’ all over,” said margaret. “god have merci on him!” 

* * * * * 

now the reader may put precis what construct he pleas on 
thi visit from the dead. He need not, indeed, consid it to 
have been a visit from the dead at all, but say that there had 
been impress on the scene, where thi murder and suicid happened, 
some sort of emot record, which in certain circumst could 
translat itself into imag visibl and invisible. wave of ether, 
or what not, may conceiv retain the impress of such scenes; they 
may be held, so to speak, in solution, readi to be precipitated. 
Or he may hold that the spirit of the dead man inde made itself 
manifest, revisit in some sort of spiritu penanc and remors 
the place where hi crime wa committed. naturally, no materialist 
will entertain such an explan for an instant, but then there is 
no one so obstin unreason as the materialist. beyond doubt 
a dread deed wa done there, and margaret’ last utter is not 
inapplicable. 




mr. tilly’ séanc 




mr. tilly’ séanc 


mr. tilli had onli the briefest moment for reflection, when, as he 
slip and fell on the greasi wood pavement at hyde park corner, which 
he wa cross at a smart trot, he saw the huge traction-engin with 
it groov ponder wheel tower high abov him. 

“oh, dear! oh, dear!” he said petulantly, “it will certainli crush me 
quit flat, and I shan’t be abl to be at mrs. cumberbatch’ séance! 
most provoking! a-ow!” 

the word were hardli out of hi mouth, when the first half of hi 
horrid anticip wa thoroughli fulfilled. the heavi wheel pass 
over him from head to foot and flatten him complet out. then the 
driver (too late) revers hi engin and pass over him again, and 
final lost hi head, whistl loudli and stopped. the policeman on 
duti at the corner turn quit faint at the sight of the catastrophe, 
but present recov suffici to hold up the traffic, and ran to 
see what on earth could be done. It wa all so much “up” with mr. tilli 
that the onli thing possibl wa to get the hyster engine-driv 
to move clear. then the ambul from the hospit wa sent for, and 
mr. tilly’ remains, detach with great difficulti from the road (so 
firmli had they been press into it), were rever carri away 
into the mortuary.... 

mr. tilli dure thi had experienc one moment’ excruci pain, 
resembl the severest neuralgia as hi head wa ground beneath the 
wheel, but almost befor he realis it, the pain wa past, and he 
found himself, still rather dazed, float or stand (he did not 
know which) in the middl of the road. there had been no break in 
hi consciousness; he perfectli recollect slipping, and wonder 
how he had manag to save himself. He saw the arrest traffic, the 
policeman with white wan face make suggest to the gibber 
engine-driver, and he receiv the veri puzzl impress that the 
traction engin wa all mix up with him. He had a sensat of 
red-hot coal and boil water and rivet all around him, but yet no 
feel of scald or burn or confinement. He was, on the contrary, 
extrem comfortable, and had the most pleasant conscious of 
buoyanc and freedom. then the engin puf and the wheel went round, 
and immediately, to hi immens surprise, he perceiv hi own crush 
remains, flat as a biscuit, lie on the roadway. He identifi them 
for certain by hi clothes, which he had put on for the first time that 
morning, and one patent leather boot which had escap demolition. 

“but what on earth ha happened?” he said. “here am I, and yet that 
poor press flower of arm and leg is me--or rather i--also. and how 
terribl upset the driver looks. why, I do believ that i’v been run 
over! It did hurt for a moment, now I come to think of it.... My good 
man, where are you shove to? don’t you see me?” 

He address these two question to the policeman, who appear to walk 
right through him. but the man took no notice, and calmli came out 
on the other side: it wa quit evid that he did not see him, or 
apprehend him in ani way. 

mr. tilli wa still feel rather at sea amid these unusu 
occurrences, and there began to steal into hi mind a glimps of the 
fact which wa so obviou to the crowd which form an interest but 
respect ring round hi body. men stood with bare heads; women 
scream and look away and look back again. 

“I realli believ i’m dead,” said he. “that’ the onli hypothesi which 
will cover the facts. but I must feel more certain of it befor I do 
anything. ah! here they come with the ambul to look at me. I must 
be terribl hurt, and yet I don’t feel hurt. I should feel hurt sure 
if I wa hurt. I must be dead.” 

certainli it seem the onli thing for him to be, but he wa far from 
realis it yet. A lane had been made through the crowd for the 
stretcher-bearers, and he found himself winc when they began to 
detach him from the road. 

“oh, do take care!” he said. “that’ the sciatic nerv protrud there 
surely, isn’t it? a-ow! no, it didn’t hurt after all. My new clothes, 
too: I put them on to-day for the first time. what bad luck! now you’r 
hold my leg upsid down. Of cours all my money come out of my 
trouser pocket. and there’ my ticket for the séance; I must have that: 
I may use it after all.” 

He tweak it out of the finger of the man who had pick it up, and 
laugh to see the express of amaz on hi face as the card 
suddenli vanished. that gave him someth fresh to think about, and 
he ponder for a moment over some touch of associ set up by it. 

“I have it,” he thought. “it is clear that the moment I came into 
connect with that card, it becam invisible. i’m invis myself 
(of cours to the grosser sense), and everyth I hold becom 
invisible. most interesting! that account for the sudden appear 
of small object at a séance. the spirit ha been hold them, and as 
long as he hold them they are invisible. then he let go, and there’ 
the flower or the spirit-photograph on the table. It accounts, too, for 
the sudden disappear of such objects. the spirit ha taken them, 
though the scoffer say that the medium ha secret them about hi 
person. It is true that when search he sometim appear to have done 
so; but, after all, that may be a joke on the part of the spirit. now, 
what am I to do with myself.... let me see, there’ the clock. it’ 
just half-past ten. all thi ha happen in a few minutes, for it wa 
a quarter past when I left my house. half-past ten now: what doe that 
mean exactly? I use to know what it meant, but now it seem nonsense. 
ten what? hours, is it? what’ an hour?” 

thi wa veri puzzling. He felt that he use to know what an hour and a 
minut meant, but the percept of that, natur enough, had ceas 
with hi emerg from time and space into eternity. the concept 
of time wa like some memori which, refus to record itself on the 
consciousness, lie perdu in some dark corner of the brain, laugh at 
the effort of the owner to ferret it out. while he still interrog 
hi mind over thi laps perception, he found that space as well as 
time, had similarli grown obsolet for him, for he caught sight of hi 
friend miss ida soulsby, whom he knew wa to be present at the séanc 
for which he wa bound, hurri with bird-lik step down the pavement 
opposite. forget for the moment that he wa a disembodi spirit, 
he made the effort of will which in hi past human exist would have 
set hi leg in pursuit of her, and found that the effort of will alon 
wa enough to place him at her side. 

“mi dear miss soulsby,” he said, “I wa on my way to mrs. cumberbatch’ 
hous when I wa knock down and killed. It wa far from unpleasant, a 
moment’ headache----” 

So far hi natur volubl had carri him befor he recollect 
that he wa invis and inaud to those still close in by the 
muddi vestur of decay, and stop short. but though it wa clear 
that what he said wa inaud to miss soulsby’ rather larg 
intelligent-look ears, it seem that some conscious of hi 
presenc wa convey to her finer sense, for she look suddenli 
startled, a flush rose to her face, and he heard her murmur, “veri odd. 
I wonder whi I receiv so vivid an impress of dear teddy.” 

that gave mr. tilli a pleasant shock. He had long admir the lady, 
and here she wa allud to him in her suppos privaci as “dear 
teddy.” that wa follow by a momentari regret that he had been 
killed: he would have like to have been possess of thi inform 
before, and have pursu the primros path of dallianc down which it 
seem to lead. (hi intentions, of course, would, as always, have 
been strictli honourable: the path of dallianc would have conduct 
them both, if she consented, to the altar, where the primros would 
have been exchang for orang blossom.) but hi regret wa quit 
short-lived; though the altar seem inaccessible, the primros path 
might still be open, for mani of the spiritualist circl in which he 
live were on most affection term with their spiritu guid and 
friend who, like himself, had pass over. from a human point of view 
these innoc and even elev flirtat had alway seem to him 
rather bloodless; but now, look on them from the far side, he saw 
how charm they were, for they gave him the sens of still have 
a place and an ident in the world he had just quitted. He press 
miss ida’ hand (or rather put himself into the spiritu condit of 
so doing), and could vagu feel that it had some hint of warmth and 
solid about it. thi wa gratifying, for it show that though he 
had pass out of the materi plane, he could still be in touch with 
it. still more gratifi wa it to observ that a pleas and secret 
smile overspread miss ida’ fine featur as he gave thi token of hi 
presence: perhap she onli smile at her own thoughts, but in ani case 
it wa he who had inspir them. encourag by this, he indulg in 
a slightli more intim token of affection, and permit himself a 
respect salute, and saw that he had gone too far, for she said to 
herself, “hush, hush!” and quicken her pace, as if to leav these 
amor thought behind. 

He felt that he wa begin to adjust himself to the new condit 
in which he would now live, or, at ani rate, wa get some sort 
of inkl as to what they were. time exist no more for him, nor 
yet did space, sinc the wish to be at miss ida’ side had instantli 
transport him there, and with a view to test thi further he 
wish himself back in hi flat. As swiftli as the chang of scene in 
a cinematograph show he found himself there, and perceiv that the 
news of hi death must have reach hi servants, for hi cook and 
parlour-maid with excit faces, were talk over the event. 

“poor littl gentleman,” said hi cook. “it seem a shame it does. He 
never hurt a fly, and to think of one of those great engin lay him 
out flat. I hope they’ll take him to the cemeteri from the hospital: I 
never could bear a corps in the house.” 

the great strap parlour-maid toss her head. 

“well, i’m not sure that it doesn’t serv him right,” she observed. 
“alway mess about with spirit he was, and the knock and 
concertina wa aw sometim when i’v been lay out supper in 
the dining-room. now perhap he’ll come himself and visit the rest of 
the loonies. but i’m sorri all the same. A less troublesom littl 
gentleman never stepped. alway pleasant, too, and wage paid to the 
day.” 

these regret comment and encomium were someth of a shock to mr. 
tilly. He had imagin that hi excel servant regard him with a 
respect affection, as befit some sort of demigod, and the rôle of 
the poor littl gentleman wa not at all to hi mind. thi revel 
of their true estim of him, although what they thought of him could 
no longer have the smallest significance, irrit him profoundly. 

“I never heard such impertinence,” he said (so he thought) quit out 
loud, and still intens earth-bound, wa astonish to see that 
they had no percept whatev of hi presence. He rais hi voice, 
replet with extrem irony, and address hi cook. 

“you may reserv your critic on my charact for your saucepans,” he 
said. “they will no doubt appreci them. As regard the arrang 
for my funeral, I have alreadi provid for them in my will, and do not 
propos to consult your convenience. At present----” 

“lor’!” said mrs. inglis, “I declar I can almost hear hi voice, poor 
littl fellow. huski it was, as if he would do better by clear hi 
throat. I suppos i’d best be make a black bow to my cap. hi lawyer 
and what not will be here presently.” 

mr. tilli had no sympathi with thi suggestion. He wa immens 
consciou of be quit alive, and the idea of hi servant behav 
as if he were dead, especi after the way in which they had spoken 
about him, wa veri vexing. He want to give them some strike 
evid of hi presenc and hi activity, and he bang hi hand 
angrili on the dining-room table, from which the breakfast equipag 
had not yet been cleared. three tremend blow he gave it, and wa 
rejoic to see that hi parlour-maid look startled. mrs. inglis’ 
face remain perfectli placid. 

“why, if I didn’t hear a sort of rap sound,” said miss talton. 
“where did it come from?” 

“nonsense! you’v the jumps, dear,” said mrs. inglis, pick up a 
remain rasher of bacon on a fork, and put it into her capaci 
mouth. 

mr. tilli wa delight at make ani impress at all on either of 
these impercipi females. 

“talton!” he call at the top of hi voice. 

“why, what’ that?” said talton. “almost hear hi voice, do you say, 
mrs. inglis? I declar I did hear hi voic then.” 

“A pack o’ nonsense, dear,” said mrs. ingli placidly. “that’ a prime 
bit of bacon, and there’ a good cut of it left. why, you’r all of a 
tremble! it’ your imagination.” 

suddenli it struck mr. tilli that he might be employ himself much 
better than, with such extrem exertion, manag to convey so slight 
a hint of hi presenc to hi parlour-maid, and that the séanc at 
the hous of the medium, mrs. cumberbatch, would afford him much 
easier opportun of get through to the earth-plan again. He 
gave a coupl more thump to the tabl and, wish himself at mrs. 
cumberbatch’s, nearli a mile away, scarc heard the faint scream 
of talton at the sound of hi blow befor he found himself in west 
norfolk street. 

He knew the hous well, and went straight to the drawing-room, which 
wa the scene of the séanc he had so often and so eagerli attended. 
mrs. cumberbatch, who had a long spoon-shap face, had alreadi pull 
down the blinds, leav the room in total dark except for the 
glimmer of the night-light which, under a shade of ruby-glass, stood 
on the chimney-piec in front of the colour photograph of cardin 
newman. round the tabl were seat miss ida soulsby, mr. and mrs. 
meriott (who paid their guinea at least twice a week in order to 
consult their spiritu guid abibel and receiv mysteri advic 
about their indigest and investments), and sir john plaice, who wa 
much interest in learn the detail of hi previou incarn 
as a chaldean priest, complet the circle. hi guide, who reveal 
to him hi sacerdot career, wa play call mespot. natur 
mani other spirit visit them, for miss soulsbi had no less than 
three guid in her spiritu household, sapphire, semiramis, and sweet 
william, while napoleon and plato were not infrequ guests. cardin 
newman, too, wa a great favourite, and they encourag hi presenc 
by the sing in unison of “lead, kindli light”: he could hardli ever 
resist that.... 

mr. tilli observ with pleasur that there wa a vacant seat by the 
tabl which no doubt had been place there for him. As he entered, mrs. 
cumberbatch peer at her watch. 

“eleven o’clock already,” she said, “and mr. tilli is not here yet. I 
wonder what can have kept him. what shall we do, dear friends? abibel 
get veri impati sometim if we keep him waiting.” 

mr. and mrs. meriott were get impati too, for he terribl want 
to ask about mexican oils, and she had a veri vex heartburn. 

“and mespot doesn’t like wait either,” said sir john, jealou for 
the prestig of hi protector, “not to mention sweet william.” 

miss soulsbi gave a littl silveri laugh. 

“oh, but my sweet william’ so good and kind,” she said; “besides, I 
have a feeling, quit a psychic feeling, mrs. cumberbatch, that mr. 
tilli is veri close.” 

“so I am,” said mr. tilly. 

“indeed, as I walk here,” continu miss soulsby, “I felt that mr. 
tilli wa somewher quit close to me. dear me, what’ that?” 

mr. tilli wa so delight at be sensed, that he could not resist 
give a tremend rap on the table, in a sort of pleas applause. 
mrs. cumberbatch heard it too. 

“i’m sure that’ abibel come to tell us that he is ready,” she said. “I 
know abibel’ knock. A littl patience, abibel. let’ give mr. tilli 
three minut more and then begin. perhaps, if we put up the blinds, 
abibel will understand we haven’t begun.” 

thi wa done, and miss soulsbi glide to the window, in order 
to make known mr. tilly’ approach, for he alway came along the 
opposit pavement and cross over by the littl island in the river 
of traffic. there wa evid some late publish news, for the 
reader of earli edit were busy, and she caught sight of one of 
the advertisement-board bear in larg letter the announc 
of a terribl accid at hyde park corner. she drew in her breath 
with a hiss sound and turn away, unwil to have her psychic 
tranquil upset by the intrus of pain incidents. but mr. 
tilly, who had follow her to the window and saw what she had seen, 
could hardli restrain a spiritu whoop of exultation. 

“why, it’ all about me!” he said. “such larg letters, too. veri 
gratifying. subsequ edit will no doubt contain my name.” 

He gave anoth loud rap to call attent to himself, and mrs. 
cumberbatch, sit down in her antiqu chair which had onc belong 
to madam blavatsky, again heard. 

“well, if that isn’t abibel again,” she said. “be quiet, naughty. 
perhap we had better begin.” 

she recit the usual invoc to guid and angels, and lean 
back in her chair. present she began to twitch and mutter, and 
shortli afterward with sever loud snorts, relaps into catalept 
immobility. there she lay, stiff as a poker, a port of call, so to 
speak, for ani voyag intelligence. with pleas anticip mr. 
tilli await their coming. how gratifi if napoleon, with whom he 
had so often talked, recognis him and said, “pleas to see you, mr. 
tilly. I perceiv you have join us....” the room wa dark except for 
the ruby-shad lamp in front of cardin newman, but to mr. tilly’ 
emancip percept the withdraw of mere materi light made no 
difference, and he idli wonder whi it wa gener suppos that 
disembodi spirit like himself produc their most power effect 
in the dark. He could not imagin the reason for that, and, what 
puzzl him still more, there wa not to hi spiritu percept ani 
sign of those colleagu of hi (for so he might now call them) who 
usual attend mrs. cumberbatch’ séanc in such gratifi numbers. 
though she had been moan and mutter a long time now, mr. tilli 
wa in no way consciou of the presenc of abibel and sweet william 
and sapphir and napoleon. “they ought to be here by now,” he said to 
himself. 

but while he still wonder at their absence, he saw to hi amaz 
disgust that the medium’ hand, now cover with a black glove, and 
thu invis to ordinari human vision in the darkness, wa grope 
about the tabl and clearli search for the megaphone-trumpet which 
lay there. He found that he could read her mind with the same ease, 
though far less satisfaction, as he had read miss ida’ half an hour 
ago, and knew that she wa intend to appli the trumpet to her own 
mouth and pretend to be abibel or semirami or somebody, wherea she 
affirm that she never touch the trumpet herself. much shock at 
this, he snatch up the trumpet himself, and observ that she wa not 
in tranc at all, for she open her sharp black eyes, which alway 
remind him of button cover with american cloth, and gave a great 
gasp. 

“why, mr. tilly!” she said. “on the spiritu plane too!” 

the rest of the circl wa now sing “lead, kindli light” in order to 
encourag cardin newman, and thi convers wa conduct under 
cover of the hoars croon voices. but mr. tilli had the feel that 
though mrs. cumberbatch saw and heard him as clearli as he saw her, he 
wa quit impercept to the others. 

“yes, i’v been killed,” he said, “and I want to get into touch with 
the materi world. that’ whi I came here. but I want to get into 
touch with other spirit too, and sure abibel or mespot ought to be 
here by thi time.” 

He receiv no answer, and her eye fell befor hi like those of a 
detect charlatan. A terribl suspicion invad hi mind. 

“what? are you a fraud, mrs. cumberbatch?” he asked. “oh, for shame! 
think of all the guinea I have paid you.” 

“you shall have them all back,” said mrs. cumberbatch. “but don’t tell 
of me.” 

she began to whimper, and he rememb that she often made that sort 
of sniffl nois when abibel wa take possess of her. 

“that usual mean that abibel is coming,” he said, with wither 
sarcasm. “come along, abibel: we’r waiting.” 

“give me the trumpet,” whisper the miser medium. “oh, pleas give 
me the trumpet!” 

“I shall do noth of the kind,” said mr. tilli indignantly. “I would 
sooner use it myself.” 

she gave a sob of relief. 

“oh do, mr. tilly!” she said. “what a wonder idea! It will be 
most interest to everybodi to hear you talk just after you’v been 
kill and befor they know. It would be the make of me! and i’m 
not a fraud, at least not altogether. I do have spiritu percept 
sometimes; spirit do commun through me. and when they won’t come 
through it’ a dread temptat to a poor woman to--to supplement 
them by human agency. and how could I be see and hear you now, 
and be abl to talk to you--so pleasantly, i’m sure--if I hadn’t 
super-norm powers? you’v been killed, so you assur me, and yet I 
can see and hear you quit plainly. where did it happen, may I ask, if 
it’ not a pain subject?” 

“hyde park corner, half an hour ago,” said mr. tilly. “no, it onli hurt 
for a moment, thanks. but about your other suggestion----” 

while the third vers of “lead, kindli light” wa go on, mr. tilli 
appli hi mind to thi difficult situation. It wa quit true that 
if mrs. cumberbatch had no power of commun with the unseen 
she could not possibl have seen him. but she evid had, and had 
heard him too, for their convers had certainli been conduct 
on the spirit-plane, with perfect lucidity. naturally, now that he 
wa a genuin spirit, he did not want to be mix up in fraudul 
mediumship, for he felt that such a thing would serious compromis 
him on the other side, where, probably, it wa wide known that mrs. 
cumberbatch wa a person to be avoided. but, on the other hand, have 
so soon found a medium through whom he could commun with hi 
friends, it wa hard to take a high moral view, and say that he would 
have noth whatev to do with her. 

“I don’t know if I trust you,” he said. “I shouldn’t have a moment’ 
peac if I thought that you would be send all sort of bogu 
messag from me to the circle, which I wasn’t respons for at all. 
you’v done it with abibel and mespot. how can I know that when I don’t 
choos to commun through you, you won’t make up all sort of 
piffl on your own account?” 

she posit squirm in her chair. 

“oh, i’ll turn over a new leaf,” she said. “I will leav all that sort 
of thing behind me. and I am a medium. look at me! aren’t I more real 
to you than ani of the others? don’t I belong to your plane in a way 
that none of the other do? I may be occasion fraudulent, and I can 
no more get napoleon here than I can fly, but i’m genuin as well. oh, 
mr. tilly, be indulg to us poor human creatures! It isn’t so long 
sinc you were one of us yourself.” 

the mention of napoleon, with the inform that mrs. cumberbatch had 
never been control by that great creature, wound mr. tilli again. 
often in thi darken room he had held long colloqui with him, and 
napoleon had given him most interest detail of hi life on st. 
helena, which, so mr. tilli had found, were often born out by lord 
rosebery’ pleasant volum _the last phase_. but now the whole thing 
wore a more sinist aspect, and suspicion as solid as certainti bump 
against hi mind. 

“confess!” he said. “where did you get all that napoleon talk from? you 
told us you had never read lord rosebery’ book, and allow us to look 
through your librari to see that it wasn’t there. Be honest for once, 
mrs. cumberbatch.” 

she suppress a sob. 

“I will,” she said. “the book wa there all the time. I put it into 
an old cover call ‘eleg extracts....’ but i’m not wholli a fraud. 
we’r talk together, you a spirit and I a mortal female. they can’t 
hear us talk. but onli look at me, and you’ll see.... you can talk to 
them through me, if you’ll onli be so kind. I don’t often get in touch 
with a genuin spirit like yourself.” 

mr. tilli glanc at the other sitter and then back to the medium, 
who, to keep the other interested, wa make weird gurgl nois 
like an undervitalis siphon. certainli she wa far clearer to him 
than were the others, and her argument that she wa abl to see and 
hear him had great weight. and then a new and curiou percept came 
to him. her mind seem spread out befor him like a pool of slightli 
muddi water, and he figur himself as stand on a header-board 
abov it, perfectli able, if he chose, to immers himself in it. the 
object to so do wa it muddiness, it materiality; the reason 
for so do wa that he felt that then he would be abl to be heard by 
the others, possibl to be seen by them, certainli to come into touch 
with them. As it was, the loudest bang on the tabl were onli faintli 
perceptible. 

“i’m begin to understand,” he said. 

“oh, mr. tilly! just jump in like a kind good spirit,” she said. “make 
your own test-conditions. put your hand over my mouth to make sure that 
i’m not speaking, and keep hold of the trumpet.” 

“and you’ll promis not to cheat ani more?” he asked. 

“never!” 

He made up hi mind. 

“all right then,” he said, and, so to speak, dive into her mind. 

He experienc the oddest sensation. It wa like pass out of some 
fine, sunni air into the stuffiest of unventil rooms. space and 
time close over him again: hi head swam, hi eye were heavy. then, 
with the trumpet in one hand, he laid the other firmli over her mouth. 
look round, he saw that the room seem almost complet dark, but 
that the outlin of the figur sit round the tabl had vastli 
gain in solidity. 

“here I am!” he said briskly. 

miss soulsbi gave a startl exclamation. 

“that’ mr. tilly’ voice!” she whispered. 

“why, of cours it is,” said mr. tilly. “i’v just pass over at hyde 
park corner under a traction engine....” 

He felt the dead weight of the medium’ mind, her convent 
conceptions, her mild, unreal pieti press in on him from all sides, 
stifl and confus him. whatev he said had to pass through muddi 
water.... 

“there’ a wonder feel of joy and lightness,” he said. “I can’t 
tell you of the sunshin and happiness. we’r all veri busi and active, 
help others. and it’ such a pleasure, dear friends, to be abl to 
get into touch with you all again. death is not death: it is the gate 
of life....” 

He broke off suddenly. 

“oh, I can’t stand this,” he said to the medium. “you make me talk such 
twaddle. Do get your stupid mind out of the way. can’t we do anyth 
in which you won’t interfer with me so much?” 

“can you give us some spirit light round the room?” suggest mrs. 
cumberbatch in a sleepi voice. “you have come through beautifully, mr. 
tilly. it’ too dear of you!” 

“you’r sure you haven’t arrang some phosphoresc patch already?” 
ask mr. tilli suspiciously. 

“yes, there are one or two near the chimney-piece,” said mrs. 
cumberbatch, “but none anywher else. dear mr. tilly, I swear there are 
not. just give us a nice star with long ray on the ceiling!” 

mr. tilli wa the most good-natur of men, alway will to help 
an unattract femal in distress, and whisper to her, “I shall 
requir the phosphoresc patch to be given into my hand after the 
séance,” he proceeded, by the mere effort of hi imagination, to light 
a beauti big star with red and violet ray on the ceiling. Of cours 
it wa not nearli as brilliant as hi own concept of it, for it 
light had to pass through the opac of the medium’ mind, but it wa 
still a most strike object, and elicit gasp of applaus from the 
company. To enhanc the effect of it he inton a few veri pretti line 
about a star by adelaid ann procter, whose poem had alway seem to 
him to eman from the topmost peak of parnassus. 

“oh, thank you, mr. tilly!” whisper the medium. “it wa lovely! would 
a photograph of it be permit on some futur occasion, if you would 
be so kind as to reproduc it again?” 

“oh, I don’t know,” said mr. tilli irritably. “I want to get out. i’m 
veri hot and uncomfortable. and it’ all so cheap.” 

“cheap?” ejacul mrs. cumberbatch. “why, there’ not a medium in 
london whose futur wouldn’t be made by a real genuin star like that, 
say, twice a week.” 

“but I wasn’t run over in order that I might make the fortun of 
mediums,” said mr. tilly. “I want to go: it’ all rather degrading. 
and I want to see someth of my new world. I don’t know what it’ 
like yet.” 

“oh, but, mr. tilly,” said she. “you told us love thing about it, 
how busi and happi you were.” 

“no, I didn’t. It wa you who said that, at least it wa you who put it 
into my head.” 

even as he wished, he found himself emerg from the dull water of 
mrs. cumberbatch’ mind. 

“there’ the whole new world wait for me,” he said. “I must go and 
see it. i’ll come back and tell you, for it must be full of marvel 
revelations....” 

suddenli he felt the hopeless of it. there wa that thick fluid 
of materi to pierce, and, as it drip off him again, he began 
to see that noth of that fine rare qualiti of life which he had 
just begun to experience, could penetr these opacities. that wa 
why, perhaps, all that thu came across from the spirit-world, wa so 
stupid, so banal. they, of whom he now wa one, could tap on furniture, 
could light stars, could abound with commonplace, could read as in a 
book the mind of medium or sitters, but noth more. they had to pass 
into the region of gross perceptions, in order to be seen of blind eye 
and be heard of deaf ears. 

mrs. cumberbatch stirred. 

“the power is failing,” she said, in a deep voice, which mr. tilli felt 
wa meant to imit hi own. “I must leav you now, dear friends----” 

He felt much exasperated. 

“the power isn’t failing,” he shouted. “it wasn’t I who said that.” 

but he had emerg too far, and perceiv that nobodi except the medium 
heard him. 

“oh, don’t be vexed, mr. tilly,” she said. “that’ onli a formula. but 
you’r leav us veri soon. not time for just one materialisation? 
they are more convinc than anyth to most inquirers.” 

“not one,” said he. “you don’t understand how stifl it is even to 
speak through you and make stars. but i’ll come back as soon as I find 
there’ anyth new that I can get through to you. what’ the use of 
my repeat all that stale stuff about be busi and happy? they’v 
been told that often enough already. besides, I have got to see if it’ 
true. good-bye: don’t cheat ani more.” 

He drop hi card of admitt to the séanc on the tabl and heard 
murmur of excit as he float off. 

* * * * * 

the news of the wonder star, and the presenc of mr. tilli at 
the séanc within half an hour of hi death, which at the time wa 
unknown to ani of the sitters, spread swiftli through spiritualist 
circles. the psychic research societi sent investig to take 
independ evid from all those present, but were inclin to 
attribut the occurr to a subtl mixtur of thought-transfer 
and unconsci visual impression, when they heard that miss soulsbi 
had, a few minut previously, seen a news-board in the street outsid 
record the accid at hyde park corner. thi explan wa rather 
elaborate, for it postul that miss soulsby, think of mr. tilly’ 
non-arrival, had combin that with the accid at hyde park corner, 
and had probabl (though unconsciously) seen the name of the victim on 
anoth news-board and had transfer the whole by telepathi to the 
mind of the medium. As for the star on the ceiling, though they could 
not account for it, they certainli found remain of phosphoresc 
paint on the panel of the wall abov the chimney-piece, and came 
to the conclus that the star had been produc by some similar 
contrivance. So they reject the whole thing, which wa a pity, since, 
for once, the phenomena were absolut genuine. 

miss soulsbi continu to be a constant attend at mrs. cumberbatch’ 
séance, but never experienc the presenc of mr. tilli again. On 
that the reader may put ani interpret he pleases. It look to me 
somewhat as if he had found someth els to do. 




mrs. amworth 




mrs. amworth 


the villag of maxley, where, last summer and autumn, these strang 
event took place, lie on a heatheri and pine-clad upland of sussex. 
In all england you could not find a sweeter and saner situation. 
should the wind blow from the south, it come laden with the spice 
of the sea; to the east high down protect it from the inclem 
of march; and from the west and north the breez which reach it 
travel over mile of aromat forest and heather. the villag itself 
is insignific enough in point of population, but rich in amen 
and beauty. half-way down the singl street, with it broad road and 
spaciou area of grass on each side, stand the littl norman church 
and the antiqu graveyard long disused: for the rest there are a 
dozen small, sedat georgian houses, red-brick and long-windowed, 
each with a squar of flower-garden in front, and an ampler strip 
behind; a score of shops, and a coupl of score of thatch cottag 
belong to labour on neighbour estates, complet the entir 
cluster of it peac habitations. the gener peace, however, is 
sadli broken on saturday and sundays, for we lie on one of the main 
road between london and brighton and our quiet street becom a 
race-cours for fli motor-car and bicycles. A notic just outsid 
the villag beg them to go slowli onli seem to encourag them to 
acceler their speed, for the road lie open and straight, and there 
is realli no reason whi they should do otherwise. By way of protest, 
therefore, the ladi of maxley cover their nose and mouth with 
their handkerchief as they see a motor-car approaching, though, as 
the street is asphalted, they need not realli take these precaut 
against dust. but late on sunday night the hord of scorcher ha 
passed, and we settl down again to five day of cheer and leisur 
seclusion. railway strike which agit the countri so much leav us 
undisturb becaus most of the inhabit of maxley never leav it at 
all. 

I am the fortun possessor of one of these small georgian houses, 
and consid myself no less fortun in have so interest and 
stimul a neighbour as franci urcombe, who, the most confirm 
of maxleyites, ha not slept away from hi house, which stand just 
opposit to mine in the villag street, for nearli two years, at which 
date, though still in middl life, he resign hi physiolog 
professorship at cambridg univers and devot himself to the studi 
of those occult and curiou phenomena which seem equal to concern the 
physic and the psychic side of human nature. inde hi retir 
wa not unconnect with hi passion for the strang unchart place 
that lie on the confin and border of science, the exist of 
which is so stoutli deni by the more materialist minds, for he 
advoc that all medic student should be oblig to pass some sort 
of examin in mesmerism, and that one of the tripo paper should 
be design to test their knowledg in such subject as appear 
at time of death, haunt houses, vampirism, automat writing, and 
possession. 

“of cours they wouldn’t listen to me,” ran hi account of the matter, 
“for there is noth that these seat of learn are so frighten 
of as knowledge, and the road to knowledg lie in the studi of thing 
like these. the function of the human frame are, broadli speaking, 
known. they are a country, anyhow, that ha been chart and map 
out. but outsid that lie huge tract of undiscov country, which 
certainli exist, and the real pioneer of knowledg are those who, at 
the cost of be derid as credul and superstitious, want to push 
on into those misti and probabl peril places. I felt that I could 
be of more use by set out without compass or knapsack into the 
mist than by sit in a cage like a canari and chirp about what 
wa known. besides, teach is veri bad for a man who know himself 
onli to be a learner: you onli need to be a self-conceit ass to 
teach.” 

here, then, in franci urcombe, wa a delight neighbour to one 
who, like myself, ha an uneasi and burn curios about what he 
call the “misti and peril places”; and thi last spring we had a 
further and most welcom addit to our pleasant littl community, 
in the person of mrs. amworth, widow of an indian civil servant. 
her husband had been a judg in the north-west provinces, and after 
hi death at peshawar she came back to england, and after a year in 
london found herself starv for the ampler air and sunshin of the 
countri to take the place of the fog and grimi of town. she had, 
too, a special reason for settl in maxley, sinc her ancestor up 
till a hundr year ago had long been nativ to the place, and in 
the old church-yard, now disused, are mani grave-ston bear her 
maiden name of chaston. big and energetic, her vigor and genial 
person speedili woke maxley up to a higher degre of social 
than it had ever known. most of us were bachelor or spinster or 
elderli folk not much inclin to exert ourselv in the expens and 
effort of hospitality, and hitherto the gaieti of a small tea-party, 
with bridg afterward and golosh (when it wa wet) to trip home in 
again for a solitari dinner, wa about the climax of our festivities. 
but mrs. amworth show us a more gregari way, and set an exampl 
of luncheon-parti and littl dinners, which we began to follow. On 
other night when no such hospit wa on foot, a lone man like 
myself found it pleasant to know that a call on the telephon to mrs. 
amworth’ hous not a hundr yard off, and an inquiri as to whether 
I might come over after dinner for a game of piquet befor bed-time, 
would probabl evok a respons of welcome. there she would be, with a 
comrade-lik eager for companionship, and there wa a glass of port 
and a cup of coffe and a cigarett and a game of piquet. she play 
the piano, too, in a free and exuber manner, and had a charm 
voic and sang to her own accompaniment; and as the day grew long 
and the light linger late, we play our game in her garden, which 
in the cours of a few month she had turn from be a nurseri for 
slug and snail into a glow patch of luxuri blossoming. she 
wa alway cheeri and jolly; she wa interest in everything, and in 
music, in gardening, in game of all sort wa a compet performer. 
everybodi (with one exception) like her, everybodi felt her to bring 
with her the tonic of a sunni day. that one except wa franci 
urcombe; he, though he confess he did not like her, acknowledg that 
he wa vastli interest in her. thi alway seem strang to me, for 
pleasant and jovial as she was, I could see noth in her that could 
call forth conjectur or intrigu surmise, so healthi and unmysteri 
a figur did she present. but of the genuin of urcombe’ interest 
there could be no doubt; one could see him watch and scrutinis 
her. In matter of age, she frankli volunt the inform that she 
wa forty-five; but her briskness, her activity, her unravag skin, 
her coal-black hair, made it difficult to believ that she wa not 
adopt an unusu device, and ad ten year on to her age instead 
of subtract them. 

often, also, as our quit unsentiment friendship ripened, mrs. 
amworth would ring me up and propos her advent. If I wa busi writing, 
I wa to give her, so we definit bargained, a frank negative, and 
in answer I could hear her jolli laugh and her wish for a success 
even of work. sometimes, befor her propos arrived, urcomb would 
alreadi have step across from hi hous opposit for a smoke and a 
chat, and he, hear who my intend visitor was, alway urg me 
to beg her to come. she and I should play our piquet, said he, and 
he would look on, if we did not object, and learn someth of the 
game. but I doubt whether he paid much attent to it, for noth 
could be clearer than that, under that penthous of forehead and thick 
eyebrows, hi attent wa fix not on the cards, but on one of the 
players. but he seem to enjoy an hour spent thus, and often, until 
one particular even in july, he would watch her with the air of a 
man who ha some deep problem in front of him. she, enthusiast 
keen about our game, seem not to notic hi scrutiny. then came that 
evening, when, as I see in the light of subsequ events, began the 
first twitch of the veil that hid the secret horror from my eyes. I 
did not know it then, though I notic that thereafter, if she rang up 
to propos come round, she alway ask not onli if I wa at leisure, 
but whether mr. urcomb wa with me. If so, she said, she would not 
spoil the chat of two old bachelors, and laughingli wish me good 
night. 

urcombe, on thi occasion, had been with me for some half-hour 
befor mrs. amworth’ appearance, and had been talk to me about 
the mediæv belief concern vampirism, one of those borderland 
subject which he declar had not been suffici studi befor 
it had been consign by the medic profess to the dust-heap of 
explod superstitions. there he sat, grim and eager, tracing, with 
that pellucid clear which had made him in hi cambridg day so 
admir a lecturer, the histori of those mysteri visitations. In 
them all there were the same gener features: one of those ghoulish 
spirit took up it abod in a live man or woman, confer 
supernatur power of bat-lik flight and glut itself with 
nocturn blood-feasts. when it host die it continu to dwell in the 
corpse, which remain undecayed. By day it rested, by night it left 
the grave and went on it aw errands. No european countri in the 
middl age seem to have escap them; earlier yet, parallel were to 
be found, in roman and greek and in jewish history. 

“it’ a larg order to set all that evid asid as be moonshine,” 
he said. “hundr of total independ wit in mani age 
have testifi to the occurr of these phenomena, and there’ no 
explan known to me which cover all the facts. and if you feel 
inclin to say ‘why, then, if these are facts, do we not come across 
them now?’ there are two answer I can make you. one is that there 
were diseas known in the middl ages, such as the black death, which 
were certainli exist then and which have becom extinct since, but 
for that reason we do not assert that such diseas never existed. 
just as the black death visit england and decim the popul 
of norfolk, so here in thi veri district about three hundr year 
ago there wa certainli an outbreak of vampirism, and maxley wa the 
centr of it. My second answer is even more convincing, for I tell you 
that vampir is by no mean extinct now. An outbreak of it certainli 
occur in india a year or two ago.” 

At that moment I heard my knocker pli in the cheer and peremptori 
manner in which mrs. amworth is accustom to announc her arrival, and 
I went to the door to open it. 

“come in at once,” I said, “and save me from have my blood curdled. 
mr. urcomb ha been tri to alarm me.” 

instantli her vital, volumin presenc seem to fill the room. 

“ah, but how lovely!” she said. “I delight in have my blood curdled. 
Go on with your ghost-story, mr. urcombe. I ador ghost-stories.” 

I saw that, as hi habit was, he wa intent observ her. 

“it wasn’t a ghost-stori exactly,” said he. “I wa onli tell our 
host how vampir wa not extinct yet. I wa say that there wa an 
outbreak of it in india onli a few year ago.” 

there wa a more than percept pause, and I saw that, if urcomb wa 
observ her, she on her side wa observ him with fix eye and 
part mouth. then her jolli laugh invad that rather tens silence. 

“oh, what a shame!” she said. “you’r not go to curdl my blood 
at all. where did you pick up such a tale, mr. urcombe? I have live 
for year in india and never heard a rumour of such a thing. some 
story-tel in the bazaar must have invent it: they are famou at 
that.” 

I could see that urcomb wa on the point of say someth further, 
but check himself. 

“ah! veri like that wa it,” he said. 

but someth had disturb our usual peac sociabl that night, 
and someth had damp mrs. amworth’ usual high spirits. she had no 
gusto for her piquet, and left after a coupl of games. urcomb had 
been silent too, inde he hardli spoke again till she departed. 

“that wa unfortunate,” he said, “for the outbreak of--of a veri 
mysteri disease, let us call it, took place at peshawar, where she 
and her husband were. and----” 

“well?” I asked. 

“he wa one of the victim of it,” said he. “natur I had quit 
forgotten that when I spoke.” 

the summer wa unreason hot and rainless, and maxley suffer much 
from drought, and also from a plagu of big black night-fli gnats, 
the bite of which wa veri irrit and virulent. they came sail 
in of an evening, settl on one’ skin so quietli that one perceiv 
noth till the sharp stab announc that one had been bitten. they 
did not bite the hand or face, but chose alway the neck and throat 
for their feeding-ground, and most of us, as the poison spread, assum 
a temporari goitre. then about the middl of august appear the first 
of those mysteri case of ill which our local doctor attribut 
to the long-continu heat coupl with the bite of these venom 
insects. the patient wa a boy of sixteen or seventeen, the son of 
mrs. amworth’ gardener, and the symptom were an anæmic pallor and a 
languid prostration, accompani by great drowsi and an abnorm 
appetite. He had, too, on hi throat two small punctur where, so dr. 
ross conjectured, one of these great gnat had bitten him. but the odd 
thing wa that there wa no swell or inflamm round the place 
where he had been bitten. the heat at thi time had begun to abate, but 
the cooler weather fail to restor him, and the boy, in spite of the 
quantiti of good food which he so raven swallowed, wast away to 
a skin-clad skeleton. 

I met dr. ross in the street one afternoon about thi time, and in 
answer to my inquiri about hi patient he said that he wa afraid 
the boy wa dying. the case, he confessed, complet puzzl him: 
some obscur form of pernici anæmia wa all he could suggest. but 
he wonder whether mr. urcomb would consent to see the boy, on 
the chanc of hi be abl to throw some new light on the case, 
and sinc urcomb wa dine with me that night, I propos to dr. 
ross to join us. He could not do this, but said he would look in 
later. when he came, urcomb at onc consent to put hi skill at 
the other’ disposal, and togeth they went off at once. be thu 
shorn of my sociabl evening, I telephon to mrs. amworth to know if 
I might inflict myself on her for an hour. her answer wa a welcom 
affirmative, and between piquet and music the hour lengthen itself 
into two. she spoke of the boy who wa lie so desper and 
mysteri ill, and told me that she had often been to see him, 
take him nourish and delic food. but to-day--and her kind eye 
moisten as she spoke--sh wa afraid she had paid her last visit. 
know the antipathi between her and urcombe, I did not tell her that 
he had been call into consultation; and when I return home she 
accompani me to my door, for the sake of a breath of night air, and 
in order to borrow a magazin which contain an articl on garden 
which she wish to read. 

“ah, thi delici night air,” she said, luxuri snif in the 
coolness. “night air and garden are the great tonics. there is 
noth so stimul as bare contact with rich mother earth. you are 
never so fresh as when you have been grub in the soil--black hands, 
black nails, and boot cover with mud.” she gave her great jovial 
laugh. 

“i’m a glutton for air and earth,” she said. “posit I look forward 
to death, for then I shall be buri and have the kind earth all round 
me. No leaden casket for me--i have given explicit directions. but 
what shall I do about air? well, I suppos one can’t have everything. 
the magazine? A thousand thanks, I will faith return it. good 
night: garden and keep your window open, and you won’t have anæmia.” 

“I alway sleep with my window open,” said I. 

I went straight up to my bedroom, of which one of the window look 
out over the street, and as I undress I thought I heard voic 
talk outsid not far away. but I paid no particular attention, put 
out my lights, and fall asleep plung into the depth of a most 
horribl dream, distortedli suggest no doubt, by my last word with 
mrs. amworth. I dream that I woke, and found that both my bedroom 
window were shut. half-suffoc I dream that I sprang out of 
bed, and went across to open them. the blind over the first wa drawn 
down, and pull it up I saw, with the indescrib horror of 
incipi nightmare, mrs. amworth’ face suspend close to the pane 
in the dark outside, nod and smile at me. pull down the 
blind again to keep that terror out, I rush to the second window on 
the other side of the room, and there again wa mrs. amworth’ face. 
then the panic came upon me in full blast; here wa I suffoc in 
the airless room, and whichev window I open mrs. amworth’ face 
would float in, like those noiseless black gnat that bit befor one 
wa aware. the nightmar rose to scream point, and with strangl 
yell I awok to find my room cool and quiet with both window open 
and blind up and a half-moon high in it course, cast an oblong 
of tranquil light on the floor. but even when I wa awak the horror 
persisted, and I lay toss and turning. I must have slept long befor 
the nightmar seiz me, for now it wa nearli day, and soon in the 
east the drowsi eyelid of morn began to lift. 

I wa scarc downstair next morning--for after the dawn I slept 
late--when urcomb rang up to know if he might see me immediately. He 
came in, grim and preoccupied, and I notic that he wa pull on a 
pipe that wa not even filled. 

“I want your help,” he said, “and so I must tell you first of all 
what happen last night. I went round with the littl doctor to see 
hi patient, and found him just alive, but scarc more. I instantli 
diagnos in my own mind what thi anæmia, unaccount by ani other 
explanation, meant. the boy is the prey of a vampire.” 

He put hi empti pipe on the breakfast-table, by which I had just 
sat down, and fold hi arms, look at me steadili from under hi 
overhang brows. 

“now about last night,” he said. “I insist that he should be move 
from hi father’ cottag into my house. As we were carri him on a 
stretcher, whom should we meet but mrs. amworth? she express shock 
surpris that we were move him. now whi do you think she did that?” 

with a start of horror, as I rememb my dream that night before, I 
felt an idea come into my mind so preposter and unthink that I 
instantli turn it out again. 

“I haven’t the smallest idea,” I said. 

“then listen, while I tell you about what happen later. I put out 
all light in the room where the boy lay, and watched. one window wa 
a littl open, for I had forgotten to close it, and about midnight I 
heard someth outside, tri appar to push it farther open. I 
guess who it was--yes, it wa full twenti feet from the ground--and 
I peep round the corner of the blind. just outsid wa the face of 
mrs. amworth and her hand wa on the frame of the window. veri softli I 
crept close, and then bang the window down, and I think I just caught 
the tip of one of her fingers.” 

“but it’ impossible,” I cried. “how could she be float in the air 
like that? and what had she come for? don’t tell me such----” 

onc more, with closer grip, the remembr of my nightmar seiz me. 

“I am tell you what I saw,” said he. “and all night long, until it 
wa nearli day, she wa flutter outside, like some terribl bat, 
tri to gain admittance. now put togeth variou thing I have told 
you.” 

He began check them off on hi fingers. 

“number one,” he said: “there wa an outbreak of diseas similar to 
that which thi boy is suffer from at peshawar, and her husband 
die of it. number two: mrs. amworth protest against my move the 
boy to my house. number three: she, or the demon that inhabit her 
body, a creatur power and deadly, tri to gain admittance. and add 
this, too: in mediæv time there wa an epidem of vampir here 
at maxley. the vampire, so the account run, wa found to be elizabeth 
chaston ... I see you rememb mrs. amworth’ maiden name. finally, the 
boy is stronger thi morning. He would certainli not have been aliv if 
he had been visit again. and what do you make of it?” 

there wa a long silence, dure which I found thi incred horror 
assum the hue of reality. 

“I have someth to add,” I said, “which may or may not bear on it. 
you say that the--th spectr went away shortli befor dawn.” 

“yes.” 

I told him of my dream, and he smile grimly. 

“yes, you did well to awake,” he said. “that warn came from your 
subconsci self, which never wholli slumbers, and cri out to you 
of deadli danger. for two reasons, then, you must help me: one to save 
others, the second to save yourself.” 

“what do you want me to do?” I asked. 

“I want you first of all to help me in watch thi boy, and ensur 
that she doe not come near him. eventu I want you to help me in 
track the thing down, in expos and destroy it. It is not 
human: it is an incarn fiend. what step we shall have to take I 
don’t yet know.” 

It wa now eleven of the forenoon, and present I went across to hi 
hous for a twelve-hour vigil while he slept, to come on duti again 
that night, so that for the next twenty-four hour either urcomb or 
myself wa alway in the room where the boy, now get stronger 
everi hour, wa lying. the day follow wa saturday and a morn 
of brilliant, pellucid weather, and alreadi when I went across to hi 
hous to resum my duti the stream of motor down to brighton had 
begun. simultan I saw urcomb with a cheer face, which bode 
good news of hi patient, come out of hi house, and mrs. amworth, 
with a gestur of salut to me and a basket in her hand, walk up 
the broad strip of grass which border the road. there we all three 
met. I notic (and saw that urcomb notic it too) that one finger of 
her left hand wa bandaged. 

“good morn to you both,” said she. “and I hear your patient is do 
well, mr. urcombe. I have come to bring him a bowl of jelly, and to sit 
with him for an hour. He and I are great friends. I am overjoy at hi 
recovery.” 

urcomb paus a moment, as if make up hi mind, and then shot out a 
point finger at her. 

“I forbid that,” he said. “you shall not sit with him or see him. and 
you know the reason as well as I do.” 

I have never seen so horribl a chang pass over a human face as that 
which now blanch her to the colour of a grey mist. she put up her 
hand as if to shield herself from that point finger, which drew the 
sign of the cross in the air, and shrank back cower on to the road. 
there wa a wild hoot from a horn, a grind of brakes, a shout--too 
late--from a pass car, and one long scream suddenli cut short. her 
bodi rebound from the roadway after the first wheel had gone over it, 
and the second followed. It lay there, quiver and twitching, and wa 
still. 

she wa buri three day afterward in the cemeteri outsid maxley, 
in accord with the wish she had told me that she had devis 
about her interment, and the shock which her sudden and aw death 
had caus to the littl commun began by degre to pass off. To 
two peopl only, urcomb and myself, the horror of it wa mitig 
from the first by the natur of the relief that her death brought; 
but, natur enough, we kept our own counsel, and no hint of what 
greater horror had been thu avert wa ever let slip. but, oddli 
enough, so it seem to me, he wa still not satisfi about someth 
in connect with her, and would give no answer to my question on 
the subject. then as the day of a tranquil mellow septemb and 
the octob that follow began to drop away like the leav of the 
yellow trees, hi uneasi relaxed. but befor the entri of 
novemb the seem tranquil broke into hurricane. 

I had been dine one night at the far end of the village, and about 
eleven o’clock wa walk home again. the moon wa of an unusu 
brilliance, render all that it shone on as distinct as in some 
etching. I had just come opposit the hous which mrs. amworth had 
occupied, where there wa a board up tell that it wa to let, when I 
heard the click of her front gate, and next moment I saw, with a sudden 
chill and quak of my veri spirit, that she stood there. her profile, 
vividli illuminated, wa turn to me, and I could not be mistaken in 
my identif of her. she appear not to see me (inde the shadow 
of the yew hedg in front of her garden envelop me in it blackness) 
and she went swiftli across the road, and enter the gate of the 
hous directli opposite. there I lost sight of her completely. 

My breath wa come in short pant as if I had been running--and now 
inde I ran, with fear backward glances, along the hundr yard 
that separ me from my hous and urcombe’s. It wa to hi that my 
fli step took me, and next minut I wa within. 

“what have you come to tell me?” he asked. “or shall I guess?” 

“you can’t guess,” said I. 

“no; it’ no guess. she ha come back and you have seen her. tell me 
about it.” 

I gave him my story. 

“that’ major pearsall’ house,” he said. “come back with me there at 
once.” 

“but what can we do?” I asked. 

“i’v no idea. that’ what we have got to find out.” 

A minut later, we were opposit the house. when I had pass it 
before, it wa all dark; now light gleam from a coupl of window 
upstairs. even as we face it, the front door opened, and next moment 
major pearsal emerg from the gate. He saw us and stopped. 

“i’m on my way to dr. ross,” he said quickly. “mi wife ha been taken 
suddenli ill. she had been in bed an hour when I came upstairs, and 
I found her white as a ghost and utterli exhausted. she had been to 
sleep, it seemed---- but you will excus me.” 

“one moment, major,” said urcombe. “wa there ani mark on her throat?” 

“how did you guess that?” said he. “there was: one of those beastli 
gnat must have bitten her twice there. she wa stream with blood.” 

“and there’ someon with her?” ask urcombe. 

“yes, I rous her maid.” 

He went off, and urcomb turn to me. “I know now what we have to do,” 
he said. “chang your clothes, and i’ll join you at your house.” 

“what is it?” I asked. 

“i’ll tell you on our way. we’r go to the cemetery.” 

* * * * * 

He carri a pick, a shovel, and a screwdriv when he rejoin me, and 
wore round hi shoulder a long coil of rope. As we walked, he gave me 
the outlin of the ghastli hour that lay befor us. 

“what I have to tell you,” he said, “will seem to you now too fantast 
for credence, but befor dawn we shall see whether it outstrip 
reality. By a most fortun happening, you saw the spectre, the 
astral body, whatev you choos to call it, of mrs. amworth, go on 
it grisli business, and therefore, beyond doubt, the vampir spirit 
which abod in her dure life anim her again in death. that is 
not exceptional--indeed, all these week sinc her death I have been 
expect it. If I am right, we shall find her bodi undecay and 
untouch by corruption.” 

“but she ha been dead nearli two months,” said I. 

“if she had been dead two year it would still be so, if the vampir 
ha possess of her. So remember: whatev you see done, it will be 
done not to her, who in the natur cours would now be feed the 
grass abov her grave, but to a spirit of untold evil and malignancy, 
which give a phantom life to her body.” 

“but what shall I see done?” said I. 

“I will tell you. We know that now, at thi moment, the vampir clad in 
her mortal semblanc is out; dine out. but it must get back befor 
dawn, and it will pass into the materi form that lie in her grave. 
We must wait for that, and then with your help I shall dig up her 
body. If I am right, you will look on her as she wa in life, with the 
full vigour of the dread nutriment she ha receiv puls in her 
veins. and then, when dawn ha come, and the vampir cannot leav the 
lair of her body, I shall strike her with this”--and he point to hi 
pick--“through the heart, and she, who come to life again onli with 
the anim the fiend give her, she and her hellish partner will be 
dead indeed. then we must buri her again, deliv at last.” 

We had come to the cemetery, and in the bright of the moonshin 
there wa no difficulti in identifi her grave. It lay some twenti 
yard from the small chapel, in the porch of which, obscur by shadow, 
we conceal ourselves. from there we had a clear and open sight of 
the grave, and now we must wait till it infern visitor return 
home. the night wa warm and windless, yet even if a freez wind had 
been rage I think I should have felt noth of it, so intens wa 
my preoccup as to what the night and dawn would bring. there wa 
a bell in the turret of the chapel, that struck the quarter of the 
hour, and it amaz me to find how swiftli the chime succeed one 
another. 

the moon had long set, but a twilight of star shone in a clear sky, 
when five o’clock of the morn sound from the turret. A few minut 
more passed, and then I felt urcombe’ hand softli nudg me; and 
look out in the direct of hi point finger, I saw that the 
form of a woman, tall and larg in build, wa approach from the 
right. noiselessly, with a motion more of glide and float than 
walking, she move across the cemeteri to the grave which wa the 
centr of our observation. she move round it as if to be certain 
of it identity, and for a moment stood directli face us. In the 
grey to which now my eye had grown accustomed, I could easili see 
her face, and recognis it features. 

she drew her hand across her mouth as if wipe it, and broke into a 
chuckl of such laughter as made my hair stir on my head. then she 
leap on to the grave, hold her hand high abov her head, and inch 
by inch disappear into the earth. urcombe’ hand wa laid on my arm, 
in an injunct to keep still, but now he remov it. 

“come,” he said. 

with pick and shovel and rope we went to the grave. the earth wa light 
and sandy, and soon after six struck we had delv down to the coffin 
lid. with hi pick he loosen the earth round it, and, adjust the 
rope through the handl by which it had been lowered, we tri to 
rais it. thi wa a long and labori business, and the light had 
begun to herald day in the east befor we had it out, and lie by the 
side of the grave. with hi screwdriv he loos the fasten of 
the lid, and slid it aside, and stand there we look on the face 
of mrs. amworth. the eyes, onc close in death, were open, the cheek 
were flush with colour, the red, full-lip mouth seem to smile. 

“one blow and it is all over,” he said. “you need not look.” 

even as he spoke he took up the pick again, and, lay the point of it 
on her left breast, measur hi distance. and though I knew what wa 
come I could not look away.... 

He grasp the pick in both hands, rais it an inch or two for the 
take of hi aim, and then with full forc brought it down on her 
breast. A fountain of blood, though she had been dead so long, spout 
high in the air, fall with the thud of a heavi splash over the 
shroud, and simultan from those red lip came one long, appal 
cry, swell up like some hoot siren, and die away again. with 
that, instantan as a lightn flash, came the touch of corrupt 
on her face, the colour of it fade to ash, the plump cheek fell in, 
the mouth dropped. 

“thank god, that’ over,” said he, and without paus slip the coffin 
lid back into it place. 

day wa come fast now, and, work like men possessed, we lower 
the coffin into it place again, and shovel the earth over it.... 
the bird were busi with their earliest pipe as we went back to 
maxley. 




In the tube 




In the tube 


“it’ a convention,” said anthoni carl cheerfully, “and not a veri 
convinc one. time, indeed! there’ no such thing as time really; it 
ha no actual existence. time is noth more than an infinitesim 
point in eternity, just as space is an infinitesim point in infinity. 
At the most, time is a sort of tunnel through which we are accustom 
to believ that we are travelling. there’ a roar in our ear and a 
dark in our eye which make it seem real to us. but befor we came 
into the tunnel we exist for ever in an infinit sunlight, and after 
we have got through it we shall exist in an infinit sunlight again. 
So whi should we bother ourselv about the confus and nois and 
dark which onli encompass us for a moment?” 

for a firm-root believ in such immeasur idea as these, which 
he punctuat with brisk applic of the poker to the brave sparkl 
and glow of the fire, anthoni ha a veri pleasant appreci of the 
measur and the finite, and nobodi with whom I have acquaint ha 
so keen a zest for life and it enjoy as he. He had given us thi 
even an admir dinner, had pass round a port beyond praise, 
and had illumin the jolli hour with the light of hi infecti 
optimism. now the small compani had melt away, and I wa left with 
him over the fire in hi study. outsid the tattoo of wind-driven sleet 
wa audibl on the window-panes, over-scor now and again the flap 
of the flame on the open hearth, and the thought of the chilli blast 
and the snow-cov pavement in brompton square, across which, to 
skid taxicabs, the last of hi other guest had scurried, made my 
position, resid here till to-morrow morning, the more delic 
delightful. abov all there wa thi stimul and suggest 
companion, who, whether he talk of the great abstract which were 
so intens real and practic to him, or of the veri remark 
experi which he had encount among these convent of time 
and space, wa equal fascin to the listener. 

“I ador life,” he said. “I find it the most entranc plaything. it’ 
a delight game, and, as you know veri well, the onli conceiv 
way to play a game is to treat it extrem seriously. If you say to 
yourself, ‘it’ onli a game,’ you ceas to take the slightest interest 
in it. you have to know that it’ onli a game, and behav as if it 
wa the one object of existence. I should like it to go on for mani 
year yet. but all the time one ha to be live on the true plane as 
well, which is etern and infinity. If you come to think of it, the 
one thing which the human mind cannot grasp is the finite, not the 
infinite, the temporary, not the eternal.” 

“that sound rather paradoxical,” said I. 

“onli becaus you’v made a habit of think about thing that seem 
bound and limited. look it in the face for a minute. tri to imagin 
finit time and space, and you find you can’t. Go back a million 
years, and multipli that million of year by anoth million, and you 
find that you can’t conceiv of a beginning. what happen befor 
that beginning? anoth begin and anoth beginning? and befor 
that? look at it like that, and you find that the onli solut 
comprehens to you is the exist of an eternity, someth that 
never began and will never end. it’ the same about space. project 
yourself to the farthest star, and what come beyond that? emptiness? 
Go on through the emptiness, and you can’t imagin it be finit and 
have an end. It must need go on for ever: that’ the onli thing 
you can understand. there’ no such thing as befor or after, or 
begin or end, and what a comfort that is! I should fidget myself 
to death if there wasn’t the huge soft cushion of etern to lean 
one’ head against. some peopl say--i believ i’v heard you say it 
yourself--that the idea of etern is so tiring; you feel that you 
want to stop. but that’ becaus you are think of etern in term 
of time, and mumbl in your brain, ‘and after that, and after that?’ 
don’t you grasp the idea that in etern there isn’t ani ‘after,’ 
ani more than there is ani ‘before’? it’ all one. etern isn’t a 
quantity: it’ a quality.” 

sometimes, when anthoni talk in thi manner, I seem to get a glimps 
of that which to hi mind is so transpar clear and solidli 
real, at other time (not have a brain that readili envisag 
abstractions) I feel as though he wa push me over a precipice, 
and my intellectu faculti grasp wildli at anyth tangibl or 
comprehensible. thi wa the case now, and I hastili interrupted. 

“but there is a ‘before’ and ‘after,’” I said. “A few hour ago you 
gave us an admir dinner, and after that--yes, after--w play 
bridge. and now you are go to explain thing a littl more clearli 
to me, and after that I shall go to bed----” 

He laughed. 

“you shall do exactli as you like,” he said, “and you shan’t be a slave 
to time either to-night or to-morrow morning. We won’t even mention 
an hour for breakfast, but you shall have it in etern whenev you 
awake. and as I see it is not midnight yet, we’ll slip the bond of 
time, and talk quit infinitely. I will stop the clock, if that will 
assist you in get rid of your illusion, and then i’ll tell you a 
story, which to my mind, show how unreal so-cal realiti are; or, 
at ani rate, how fallaci are our sens as judg of what is real 
and what is not.” 

“someth occult, someth spookish?” I asked, prick up my ears, 
for anthoni ha the strangest clairvoy and vision of thing 
unseen by the normal eye. 

“I suppos you might call some of it occult,” he said, “though there’ 
a certain amount of rather grim realiti mix up in it.” 

“go on; excel mixture,” said I. 

He threw a fresh log on the fire. 

“it’ a longish story,” he said. “you may stop me as soon as you’v 
had enough. but there will come a point for which I claim your 
consideration. you, who cling to your ‘before’ and ‘after,’ ha it 
ever occur to you how difficult it is to say _when_ an incid 
take place? say that a man commit some crime of violence, can we 
not, with a good deal of truth, say that he realli commit that crime 
when he definit plan and determin upon it, dwell on it with 
gusto? the actual commiss of it, I think we can reason argue, 
is the mere materi sequel of hi resolve: he is guilti of it when he 
make that determination. when, therefore, in the term of ‘before’ and 
‘after,’ doe the crime truli take place? there is also in my stori a 
further point for your consideration. for it seem certain that the 
spirit of a man, after the death of hi body, is oblig to re-enact 
such a crime, with a view, I suppos we may guess, to hi remors and 
hi eventu redemption. those who have second sight have seen such 
re-enactments. perhap he may have done hi deed blindli in thi life; 
but then hi spirit re-commit it with it spiritu eye open, and 
abl to comprehend it enormity. so, shall we view the man’ origin 
determin and the materi commiss of hi crime onli as prelud 
to the real commiss of it, when with eye unseal he doe it and 
repent of it?... that all sound veri obscur when I speak in the 
abstract, but I think you will see what I mean, if you follow my tale. 
comfortable? got everyth you want? here goes, then.” 

He lean back in hi chair, concentr hi mind, and then spoke: 

“the stori that I am about to tell you,” he said, “had it begin 
a month ago, when you were away in switzerland. It reach it 
conclusion, so I imagine, last night. I do not, at ani rate, expect to 
experi ani more of it. well, a month ago I wa return late on 
a veri wet night from dine out. there wa not a taxi to be had, and 
I hurri through the pour rain to the tube-st at piccadilli 
circus, and thought myself veri lucki to catch the last train in thi 
direction. the carriag into which I step wa quit empti except 
for one other passenger, who sat next the door immedi opposit 
to me. I had never, to my knowledge, seen him before, but I found my 
attent vividli fix on him, as if he somehow concern me. He wa 
a man of middl age, in dress-clothes, and hi face wore an express 
of intens thought, as if in hi mind he wa ponder some veri 
signific matter, and hi hand which wa rest on hi knee clench 
and unclench itself. suddenli he look up and stare me in the face, 
and I saw there suspicion and fear, as if I had surpris him in some 
secret deed. 

“at that moment we stop at dover street, and the conductor threw 
open the doors, announc the station and added, ‘chang here for hyde 
park corner and gloucest road.’ that wa all right for me sinc 
it meant that the train would stop at brompton road, which wa my 
destination. It wa all right apparently, too, for my companion, for he 
certainli did not get out, and after a moment’ stop, dure which no 
one els got in, we went on. I saw him, I must insist, after the door 
were close and the train had started. but when I look again, as we 
rattl on, I saw that there wa no one there. I wa quit alon in the 
carriage. 

“now you may think that I had had one of those swift momentari dream 
which flash in and out of the mind in the space of a second, but I did 
not believ it wa so myself, for I felt that I had experienc some 
sort of premonit or clairvoy vision. A man, the semblanc of 
whom, astral bodi or whatev you may choos to call it, I had just 
seen, would sometim sit in that seat opposit to me, ponder and 
planning.” 

“but why?” I asked. “whi should it have been the astral bodi of a 
live man which you thought you had seen? whi not the ghost of a dead 
one?” 

“becaus of my own sensations. the sight of the spirit of someon dead, 
which ha occur to me two or three time in my life, ha alway been 
accompani by a physic shrink and fear, and by the sensat of 
cold and of loneliness. I believed, at ani rate, that I had seen a 
phantom of the living, and that impress wa confirmed, I might say 
proved, the next day. for I met the man himself. and the next night, as 
you shall hear, I met the phantom again. We will take them in order. 

“I wa lunching, then, the next day with my neighbour mrs. stanley: 
there wa a small party, and when I arriv we wait but for the final 
guest. He enter while I wa talk to some friend, and present at 
my elbow I heard mrs. stanley’ voice-- 

“‘let me introduc you to sir henri payle,’ she said. 

“I turn and saw my _vis-à-vis_ of the night before. It wa quit 
unmistak he, and as we shook hand he look at me I thought with 
vagu and puzzl recognition. 

“‘haven’t we met before, mr. carling?’ he said. ‘I seem to 
recollect----’ 

“for the moment I forgot the strang manner of hi disappear from 
the carriage, and thought that it had been the man himself whom I had 
seen last night. 

“‘surely, and not so long ago,’ I said. ‘for we sat opposit each other 
in the last tube-train from piccadilli circu yesterday night.’ 

“he still look at me, frowning, puzzled, and shook hi head. 

“‘that can hardli be,’ he said. ‘I onli came up from the countri thi 
morning.’ 

“now thi interest me profoundly, for the astral body, we are told, 
abid in some half-consci region of the mind or spirit, and ha 
recollect of what ha happen to it, which it can convey onli veri 
vagu and dimli to the consciou mind. all lunch-tim I could see hi 
eye again and again direct to me with the same puzzl and perplex 
air, and as I wa take my departur he came up to me. 

“‘i shall recollect some day,’ he said, ‘where we met before, and I 
hope we may meet again. wa it not----?’--and he stopped. ‘no: it ha 
gone from me,’ he added.” 

the log that anthoni had thrown on the fire wa burn brave now, 
and it high-flick flame lit up hi face. 

“now, I don’t know whether you believ in coincid as chanc 
things,” he said, “but if you do, get rid of the notion. Or if you 
can’t at once, call it a coincid that that veri night I again 
caught the last train on the tube go westwards. thi time, so far 
from my be a solitari passenger, there wa a consider crowd 
wait at dover street, where I entered, and just as the nois of the 
approach train began to reverber in the tunnel I caught sight of 
sir henri payl stand near the open from which the train would 
present emerge, apart from the rest of the crowd. and I thought to 
myself how odd it wa that I should have seen the phantom of him at 
thi veri hour last night and the man himself now, and I began walk 
toward him with the idea of saying, ‘anyhow, it is in the tube that we 
meet to-night.’... and then a terribl and aw thing happened. just 
as the train emerg from the tunnel he jump down on to the line in 
front of it, and the train swept along over him up the platform. 

“for a moment I wa stricken with horror at the sight, and I rememb 
cover my eye against the dread tragedy. but then I perceiv 
that, though it had taken place in full sight of those who were 
waiting, no one seem to have seen it except myself. the driver, 
look out from hi window, had not appli hi brakes, there wa no 
jolt from the advanc train, no scream, no cry, and the rest of the 
passeng began board the train with perfect nonchalance. I must 
have staggered, for I felt sick and faint with what I had seen, and 
some kindli soul put hi arm round me and support me into the train. 
He wa a doctor, he told me, and ask if I wa in pain, or what ail 
me. I told him what I thought I had seen, and he assur me that no 
such accid had taken place. 

“it wa clear then to my own mind that I had seen the second act, so 
to speak, in thi psychic drama, and I ponder next morn over 
the problem as to what I should do. alreadi I had glanc at the 
morn paper, which, as I knew would be the case, contain no mention 
whatev of what I had seen. the thing had certainli not happened, but 
I knew in myself that it would happen. the flimsi veil of time had been 
withdrawn from my eyes, and I had seen into what you would call the 
future. In term of time of cours it wa the future, but from my point 
of view the thing wa just as much in the past as it wa in the future. 
It existed, and wait onli for it materi fulfilment. the more I 
thought about it, the more I saw that I could do nothing.” 

I interrupt hi narrative. 

“you did nothing?” I exclaimed. “sure you might have taken some step 
in order to tri to avert the tragedy.” 

He shook hi head. 

“what step precisely?” he said. “wa I to go to sir henri and 
tell him that onc more I had seen him in the tube in the act of 
commit suicide? look at it like this. either what I had seen wa 
pure illusion, pure imagination, in which case it had no exist or 
signific at all, or it wa actual and real, and essenti it had 
happened. Or take it, though not veri logically, somewher between 
the two. say that the idea of suicide, for some caus of which I knew 
nothing, had occur to him or would occur. should I not, if that wa 
the case, be do a veri danger thing, by make such a suggest 
to him? might not the fact of my tell him what I had seen put 
the idea into hi mind, or, if it wa alreadi there, confirm it and 
strengthen it? ‘it’ a ticklish matter to play with souls,’ as brown 
says.” 

“but it seem so inhuman not to interfer in ani way,” said I, “not to 
make ani attempt.” 

“what interference?” ask he. “what attempt?” 

the human instinct in me still seem to cri aloud at the thought of 
do noth to avert such a tragedy, but it seem to be beat 
itself against someth auster and inexorable. and cudgel my brain 
as I would, I could not combat the sens of what he had said. I had no 
answer for him, and he went on. 

“you must recollect, too,” he said, “that I believ then and believ 
now that the thing had happened. the caus of it, whatev that was, 
had begun to work, and the effect, in thi materi sphere, wa 
inevitable. that is what I allud to when, at the begin of my 
story, I ask you to consid how difficult it wa to say when an 
action took place. you still hold that thi particular action, thi 
suicid of sir henry, had not yet taken place, becaus he had not 
yet thrown himself under the advanc train. To me that seem a 
materialist view. I hold that in all but the endors of it, so to 
speak, it had taken place. I fanci that sir henry, for instance, now 
free from the materi dusks, know that himself.” 

exactli as he spoke there swept through the warm lit room a current of 
ice-cold air, ruffl my hair as it pass me, and make the wood 
flame on the hearth to dwindl and flare. I look round to see if the 
door at my back had opened, but noth stir there, and over the 
close window the curtain were fulli drawn. As it reach anthony, he 
sat up quickli in hi chair and direct hi glanc thi way and that 
about the room. 

“did you feel that?” he asked. 

“yes: a sudden draught,” I said. “ice-cold.” 

“anyth else?” he asked. “ani other sensation?” 

I paus befor I answered, for at the moment there occur to me 
anthony’ differenti of the effect produc on the behold by 
a phantasm of the live and the apparit of the dead. It wa the 
latter which accur describ my sensat now, a certain physic 
shrinking, a fear, a feel of desolation. but yet I had seen nothing. 
“I felt rather creepy,” I said. 

As I spoke I drew my chair rather closer to the fire, and sent a swift 
and, I confess, a somewhat apprehens scrutini round the wall of the 
brightli lit room. I notic at the same time that anthoni wa peer 
across to the chimney-piece, on which, just below a sconc hold two 
electr lights, stood the clock which at the begin of our talk he 
had offer to stop. the hand I notic point to twenty-f minut 
to one. 

“but you saw nothing?” he asked. 

“noth whatever,” I said. “whi should I? what wa there to see? Or 
did you----” 

“I don’t think so,” he said. 

somehow thi answer got on my nerves, for the queer feel which had 
accompani that cold current of air had not left me. If anyth it 
had becom more acute. 

“but sure you know whether you saw anyth or not?” I said. 

“one can’t alway be certain,” said he. “I say that I don’t think I 
saw anything. but i’m not sure, either, whether the stori I am tell 
you wa quit conclud last night. I think there may be a further 
incident. If you prefer it, I will leav the rest of it, as far as I 
know it, unfinish till to-morrow morning, and you can go off to bed 
now.” 

hi complet calm and tranquil reassur me. 

“but whi should I do that?” I asked. 

again he look round on the bright walls. 

“well, I think someth enter the room just now,” he said, “and 
it may develop. If you don’t like the notion, you had better go. Of 
cours there’ noth to be alarm at; whatev it is, it can’t hurt 
us. but it is close on the hour when on two success night I saw 
what I have alreadi told you, and an apparit usual occur at the 
same time. whi that is so, I cannot say, but certainli it look as if 
a spirit that is earth-bound is still subject to certain conventions, 
the convent of time for instance. I think that person I shall 
see someth befor long, but most like you won’t. you’r not such a 
suffer as I from these--thes delusions----” 

I wa frighten and knew it, but I wa also intens interested, and 
some pervers pride wriggl within me at hi last words. why, so I 
ask myself, shouldn’t I see whatev wa to be seen?... 

“I don’t want to go in the least,” I said. “I want to hear the rest of 
your story.” 

“where wa I, then? ah, yes: you were wonder whi I didn’t do 
someth after I saw the train move up to the platform, and I said 
that there wa noth to be done. If you think it over, I fanci you 
will agre with me.... A coupl of day passed, and on the third 
morn I saw in the paper that there had come fulfil to my vision. 
sir henri payle, who had been wait on the platform of dover street 
station for the last train to south kensington, had thrown himself in 
front of it as it came into the station. the train had been pull up 
in a coupl of yards, but a wheel had pass over hi chest, crush 
it in and instantli kill him. 

“an inquest wa held, and there emerg at it one of those dark stori 
which, on occas like these, sometim fall like a midnight shadow 
across a life that the world perhap had thought prosperous. He had 
long been on bad term with hi wife, from whom he had live apart, 
and it appear that not long befor thi he had fallen desper in 
love with anoth woman. the night befor hi suicid he had appear 
veri late at hi wife’ house, and had a long and angri scene with 
her in which he entreat her to divorc him, threaten otherwis 
to make her life a hell to her. she refused, and in an ungovern 
fit of passion he attempt to strangl her. there wa a struggle, and 
the nois of it caus her manserv to come up, who succeed in 
over-mast him. ladi payl threaten to proceed against him for 
assault with the intent to murder her. with thi hang over hi 
head, the next night, as I have alreadi told you, he commit suicide.” 

He glanc at the clock again, and I saw that the hand now point to 
ten minut to one. the fire wa begin to burn low and the room 
sure wa grow strang cold. 

“that’ not quit all,” said anthony, again look round. “are you 
sure you wouldn’t prefer to hear it to-morrow?” 

the mixtur of shame and pride and curios again prevailed. 

“no: tell me the rest of it at once,” I said. 

befor speaking, he peer suddenli at some point behind my chair, 
shade hi eyes. I follow hi glance, and knew what he meant by 
say that sometim one could not be sure whether one saw someth 
or not. but wa that an outlin shadow that interven between me and 
the wall? It wa difficult to focus; I did not know whether it wa near 
the wall or near my chair. It seem to clear away, anyhow, as I look 
more close at it. 

“you see nothing?” ask anthony. 

“no: I don’t think so,” said I. “and you?” 

“I think I do,” he said, and hi eye follow someth which wa 
invis to mine. they came to rest between him and the chimney-piece. 
look steadili there, he spoke again. 

“all thi happen some week ago,” he said, “when you were out in 
switzerland, and sinc then, up till last night, I saw noth further. 
but all the time I wa expect someth further. I felt that, as 
far as I wa concerned, it wa not all over yet, and last night, with 
the intent of assist ani commun to come through to me 
from--from beyond, I went into the dover street tube-st at a few 
minut befor one o’clock, the hour at which both the assault and 
the suicid had taken place. the platform when I arriv on it wa 
absolut empty, or appear to be so, but presently, just as I began 
to hear the roar of the approach train, I saw there wa the figur 
of a man stand some twenti yard from me, look into the tunnel. 
He had not come down with me in the lift, and the moment befor he had 
not been there. He began move toward me, and then I saw who it was, 
and I felt a stir of wind icy-cold come toward me as he approached. 
It wa not the draught that herald the approach of a train, for it 
came from the opposit direction. He came close up to me, and I saw 
there wa recognit in hi eyes. He rais hi face toward me and 
I saw hi lip move, but, perhap in the increas nois from the 
tunnel, I heard noth come from them. He put out hi hand, as if 
entreat me to do something, and with a cowardic from which I cannot 
forgiv myself, I shrank from him, for I knew, by the sign that I have 
told you, that thi wa one from the dead, and my flesh quak befor 
him, drown for the moment all piti and all desir to help him, if 
that wa possible. certainli he had someth which he want of me, 
but I recoil from him. and by now the train wa emerg from the 
tunnel, and next moment, with a dread gestur of despair, he threw 
himself in front of it.” 

As he finish speak he got up quickli from hi chair, still look 
fixedli in front of him. I saw hi pupil dilate, and hi mouth worked. 

“it is coming,” he said. “I am to be given a chanc of aton for 
my cowardice. there is noth to be afraid of: I must rememb that 
myself....” 

As he spoke there came from the panel abov the chimney-piec one 
loud shatter crack, and the cold wind again circl about my head. 
I found myself shrink back in my chair with my hand held in front 
of me as instinct I screen myself against someth which I knew 
wa there but which I could not see. everi sens told me that there wa 
a presenc in the room other than mine and anthony’s, and the horror of 
it wa that I could not see it. ani vision, howev terrible, would, I 
felt, be more toler than thi clear certain knowledg that close to 
me wa thi invis thing. and yet what horror might not be disclos 
of the face of the dead and the crush chest.... but all I could see, 
as I shudder in thi cold wind, wa the familiar wall of the room, 
and anthoni stand in front of me stiff and firm, making, as I knew, 
a call on hi courage. hi eye were focus on someth quit close 
to him, and some semblanc of a smile quiver on hi mouth. and then 
he spoke again. 

“yes, I know you,” he said. “and you want someth of me. tell me, 
then, what it is.” 

there wa absolut silence, but what wa silenc to my ear could not 
have been so to his, for onc or twice he nodded, and onc he said, 
“yes: I see. I will do it.” and with the knowledg that, even as there 
wa someon here whom I could not see, so there wa speech go on 
which I could not hear, thi terror of the dead and of the unknown 
rose in me with the sens of powerless to move that accompani 
nightmare. I could not stir, I could not speak. I could onli strain my 
ear for the inaud and my eye for the unseen, while the cold wind 
from the veri valley of the shadow of death stream over me. It wa 
not that the presenc of death itself wa terrible; it wa that from 
it tranquil and seren keep there had been driven some unquiet 
soul unabl to rest in peac for whatev ultim awaken rous the 
countless gener of those who have pass away, driven, no less, 
from whatev activ are theirs, back into the materi world from 
which it should have been delivered. never, until the gulf between the 
live and the dead wa thu bridged, had it seem so immens and so 
unnatural. It is possibl that the dead may have commun with 
the living, and it wa not that exactli that so terrifi me, for such 
communication, as we know it, come voluntarili from them. but here wa 
someth icy-cold and crime-laden, that wa chase back from the peac 
that would not pacifi it. 

and then, most horribl of all, there came a chang in these unseen 
conditions. anthoni wa silent now, and from look straight and 
fixedli in front of him, he began to glanc sideway to where I sat and 
back again, and with that I felt that the unseen presenc had turn 
it attent from him to me. and now, too, gradual and by aw 
degre I began to see.... 

there came an outlin of shadow across the chimney-piec and the panel 
abov it. It took shape: it fashion itself into the outlin of a 
man. within the shape of the shadow detail began to form themselves, 
and I saw waver in the air, like someth conceal by haze, the 
semblanc of a face, stricken and tragic, and burden with such a 
weight of woe as no human face had ever worn. next, the shoulder 
outlin themselves, and a stain livid and red spread out below them, 
and suddenli the vision leap into clearness. there he stood, the 
chest crush in and drown in the red stain, from which broken ribs, 
like the bone of a wreck ship, protruded. the mournful, terribl 
eye were fix on me, and it wa from them, so I knew, that the bitter 
wind proceeded.... 

then, quick as the switch off of a lamp, the spectr vanished, and 
the bitter wind wa still, and opposit to me stood anthony, in a 
quiet, bright-lit room. there wa no sens of an unseen presenc ani 
more; he and I were then alone, with an interrupt convers still 
dangl between us in the warm air. I came round to that, as one come 
round after an anæsthetic. It all swam into sight again, unreal at 
first, and gradual assum the textur of actuality. 

“you were talk to somebody, not to me,” I said. “who wa it? what 
wa it?” 

He pass the back of hi hand over hi forehead, which glisten in 
the light. 

“A soul in hell,” he said. 

now it is hard ever to recal mere physic sensations, when they 
have passed. If you have been cold and are warmed, it is difficult to 
rememb what cold wa like: if you have been hot and have got cool, 
it is difficult to realis what the oppress of heat realli meant. 
just so, with the pass of that presence, I found myself unabl to 
recaptur the sens of the terror with which, a few moment ago only, 
it had invad and inspir me. 

“A soul in hell?” I said. “what are you talk about?” 

He move about the room for a minut or so, and then came and sat on 
the arm of my chair. 

“I don’t know what you saw,” he said, “or what you felt, but there ha 
never in all my life happen to me anyth more real than what these 
last few minut have brought. I have talk to a soul in the hell of 
remorse, which is the onli possibl hell. He knew, from what happen 
last night, that he could perhap establish commun through me 
with the world he had quitted, and he sought me and found me. I am 
charg with a mission to a woman I have never seen, a messag from the 
contrite.... you can guess who it is....” 

He got up with a sudden briskness. 

“let’ verifi it anyhow,” he said. “he gave me the street and the 
number. ah, there’ the telephon book! would it be a coincid 
mere if I found that at no. 20 in chasemor street, south kensington, 
there live a ladi payle?” 

He turn over the leav of the bulki volume. 

“yes, that’ right,” he said. 




roderick’ stori 




roderick’ stori 


My power of persuas at first seem quit ineffectual; I could 
not induc my friend roderick cardew to strike hi melancholi tent in 
chelsea, and (leav it struck) steal away like the arab and spend 
thi month of spring with me at my newli acquir hous at till to 
observ the spell of april’ wand make magic in the country. I seem 
to have brought out all the argument of which I wa master; he had 
been veri ill, and hi doctor recommend a clearer air with as mild a 
climat as he could conveni attain; he love the great stretch 
of drain marsh-land which lay spread like a pool of verdur round the 
littl town; he had not seen my new home which made a breach in the 
function of hospitality, and he realli could not be expect to object 
to hi host, who, after all, wa one of hi oldest friends. besid (to 
leav no stone unturned) as he regain hi strength he could begin to 
play golf again, and it entailed, as he well remembered, a veri mild 
exert for him to keep me in my proper posit in such a pursuit. 

At last there wa some sign of yielding. 

“yes. I should like to see the marsh and the big sky onc more,” he 
said. 

A rather sinist interpret of hi word “onc more,” made a 
sudden flash signal of alarm in my mind. It wa utterli fanciful, no 
doubt, but that had better be extinguish first. 

“onc more?” I asked. “what doe that mean?” 

“I alway say ‘onc more,’” he said. “it’ greedi to ask for too much.” 

the veri fact that he fenc so ingeni deepen my suspicion. 

“that won’t do,” I said. “tell me, roddie.” 

He wa silent a moment. 

“I didn’t intend to,” he said, “for there can be no use in it. but 
if you insist, as appar you mean to do, I may as well give in. 
it’ what you think; ‘onc more’ will veri like be the most. but you 
mustn’t fuss about it; i’m not go to. No proper person fuss about 
death; that’ a train which we are all sure to catch. It alway wait 
for you.” 

I have notic that when one learn tide of that sort, one feels, 
almost immediately, that one ha known them a long time. I felt so now. 

“go on,” I said. 

“well, that’ about all there is. i’v had sentenc of death pass 
upon me, and it will probabl be carri out, i’m delight to say, in 
the french fashion. In france, you know, they don’t tell you when you 
are to be execut till a few minut before. It is like that I shall 
have even less than that, so my doctor inform me. A second or two will 
be all I shall get. congratul me, please.” 

I thought it over for a moment. 

“yes, heartily,” I said. “I want to know a littl more though.” 

“well, my heart’ all wrong, quit unmend so. heart-disease! 
doesn’t it sound romantic? In mid-victorian romance, hero and 
heroin alon die of heart-disease. but that’ by the way. the fact 
is that I may die at ani time without a moment’ warning. I shall give 
a coupl of gasps, so he told me when I insist on know details, 
and that’ll be all. now, perhaps, you understand whi I wa unwil 
to come and stay with you. I don’t want to die in your house; I think 
it’ dread bad manner to die in other people’ houses. I long 
to see till again, but I think I shall go to an hotel. hotel are 
fair game, for the manag over-charg those who live there to 
compens themselv for those who die there. but it would be rude of 
me to die in your house; it might entail a lot of bother for you, and I 
couldn’t apologize----” 

“but I don’t mind your die in my house,” I said. “at least you see 
what I mean----” 

He laughed. 

“I do, indeed,” he said. “and you couldn’t give a warmer assur of 
friendship. but I couldn’t come and stay with you in my present plight 
without tell you what it was, and yet I didn’t mean to tell you. but 
there we are now. think again; reconsid your decision.” 

“I don’t,” I said. “come and die in my hous by all means, if you’v 
got to. I would much sooner you live there: your die will, in ani 
case, annoy me immensely. but it would annoy me even more to know that 
you had done it in some beastli hotel among plush and looking-glasses. 
you shall have ani bedroom you like. and I want you dread to see 
my house, which is adorable.... O roddie, what a bore it all is!” 

It wa imposs to speak or to think differently. I knew well how 
trivial a matter death wa to my friend, and I wa not sure that at 
heart I did not agre with him. We were quit at one, too, in that 
we had so often gossip about death with cheer conjectur and 
interest surmis base on the steadi assur that someth of new 
and delight import wa to follow, sinc neither of us happen to be 
of that melancholi cast of mind that can envisag annihilation. I had 
promised, in case I wa the first to embark on the great adventure, to 
do my best to “get through,” and give him some irrefut proof of the 
continu of my existence, just by way of endors of our belief, 
and he had given a similar pledge, for it appear to us both, that, 
whatev the condit of the futur might turn out to be, it would 
be imposs when late translat there, not to be still greatli 
concern with what the present world still held for us in tie of 
love and affection. I laugh now to rememb how he had onc imagin 
himself beg to be excus for a few minutes, directli after death, 
and say to st. peter: “may I keep your holi wait for a minut 
befor you final lock me into heaven or hell with those beauti 
keys? I won’t be a minute, but I do want so much to be a ghost, and 
appear to a friend of mine who is on the look-out for such a visit. If 
I find I can’t make myself visibl I will come back at once.... oh, 
_thank_ you, your holiness.” 

So we agre that I should run the risk of hi die in my house, and 
promis not to make ani reproach posthum (a far as he wa 
concerned) in case he did so. He on hi side promis not to die if he 
could possibl help it, and next week or so he would come down to me in 
the heart of the countri that he loved, and see april at work. 

“and I haven’t told you anyth about my hous yet,” I said. “it’ 
right at the top of the hill, squar and georgian and red-bricked. A 
panel hall, dining-room and panel sitting-room downstairs, and 
more panel room upstairs. and there’ a garden with a lawn, and 
a high brick wall round it, and there is a big garden room, full of 
books, with a bow-window look down the cobbl street. which bedroom 
will you have? Do you like look on to the garden or on to the 
street? you may even have my room if you like.” 

He look at me a moment with eager attention. “i’ll have the squar 
panel bedroom that look out on to the garden, please,” he said. 
“it’ the second door on the right when you stand at the top of the 
stairs.” 

“but how do you know?” I asked. 

“becaus i’v been in the hous before, onc only, three year ago,” 
he said. “margaret alton took it furnish and live there for a year 
or so. she die there, and I wa with her. and if I had known that 
thi wa your house, I should never have dream of hesit whether 
I should accept your invitation. I should have thrown my good manner 
about not die in other people’ hous to the winds. but the moment 
you began to describ the garden and garden-room I knew what hous it 
was. I have alway long to go there again. when may I come, please? 
next week is too far ahead. you’r off there thi afternoon, aren’t 
you?” 

I rose: the clock warn me that it wa time for me to go to the 
station. 

“yes. come thi afternoon,” I suggested. “come with me.” 

“I wish I could, but I take that to mean that it will suit you if I 
come to-morrow. for I certainli will. good lord! To think of your 
have got just that house! It ought to be a wonder happi one, 
for I saw---- but i’ll tell you about that perhap when i’m there. but 
don’t ask me to: i’ll tell you if and when I can, as the lawyer say. 
are you realli off?” 

I wa realli off, for I had no time to spare, but befor I got to the 
door he spoke again. 

“of course, the room I have chosen wa _the_ room,” he said, and there 
wa no need for me to ask what he meant by _the_ room. 

* * * * * 

I knew no more than the barest and most public outlin of that affair, 
distant now by the space of mani years, but, so I conceived, ever green 
in roderick’ heart, and, as my train thread it way through the 
gleam of thi transluc spring evening, I retrac thi outlin as 
far as I knew it. It wa the one thing of which roderick never spoke 
(even now he wa not sure that he could manag to tell me the end of 
it), and I had to rummag in my memori for the reconstruct of the 
half-obliter lines. 

margaret--h maiden-nam would not be conjur back into memory--had 
been an extrem beauti girl when roderick first met her, and, not 
without encouragement, he had fallen head over ear in love with her. 
all seem to be go well with hi wooing, he had the air of a happi 
lover, when there appear on the scene that handsom and outrag 
fellow, richard alton. He wa the heir to hi uncle’ baroni and hi 
realli vast estates, and the girl, when he proceed to lay siege, veri 
soon capitulated. she may have fallen in love with him, for he wa 
an attract scamp, but the verdict at the time wa that it wa her 
ambition, not her heart, that she indulged. In ani case, there wa the 
end of roderick’ wooing, and befor the year wa out she had marri 
the other. 

I rememb see her onc or twice in london about thi time, 
splendid and brilliant, of a beauti that dazzled, with the world 
veri much at her feet. she bore him two sons; she succeed to a 
great position; and then with the grant of her heart’ desire, the 
lean withal followed. her husband’ infidel were numer and 
notorious; he treat her with a subtl cruelti that just kept on the 
right side of the law, and, finally, seek hi freedom, he desert 
her, and openli live with anoth woman. whether it wa pride that 
kept her from divorc him, or whether she still love him (if she 
had ever done so) and wa readi to take him back, or whether it wa 
out of reveng that she refus to have done with him legally, wa an 
affair of which I knew nothing. calam follow on calamity; first 
one and then the other of her son wa kill in the european war, and 
I rememb have heard that she wa the victim of some malign and 
disfigur disease, which caus her to lead a hermit life, see 
nobody. It wa now three year or so sinc she had died. 

such, with the addit that she had die in my house, and that 
roderick had been with her, wa the sum of my meagr knowledge, which 
might or might not, so he had intimated, be supplement by him. He 
arriv next day, have motor down from london for the avoid 
of fatigue, and certainli as we sat after dinner that night in the 
garden-room, he had avoid it veri successfully, for never had I seen 
him more animated. 

“oh, I have been so right to come here,” he said, “for I feel steep 
in tranquil and content. there’ such a tremend sens of 
margaret’ presenc here, and I never knew how much I want it. 
perhap that is pure subjective, but what doe that matter so long as 
I feel it? how a scene soak into the place where it ha been enacted; 
my room, which you know wa her room, is aliv with her. I want noth 
better than to be here, prowl and pur over the memori of the 
last time, which wa the onli one, that I wa here. yes, just that; and 
I know how odd you must think it. but it’ true, it wa here that I saw 
her die, and instead of shun the place, I bath myself in it. for 
it wa one of the happiest hour of my life.” 

“because----” I began. 

“no; not becaus it gave her release, if that’ in your mind,” he said. 
“it’ becaus I saw----” 

He broke off, and rememb hi stipul that I should ask him 
nothing, but that he would tell me “if and when” he could, I put no 
question to him. hi eye were danc with the sparkl of fire that 
burn on the hearth, for though april wa here, the even were 
still chilly, and it wa not the fire that gave them their light, but 
a joyous that wa as bright as glee, and as deep as happiness. 

“no, i’m not go on with that now,” he said, “though I expect I 
shall befor my day are out. At present I shall leav you wonder 
whi a place that should hold such mourn memori for me, is such a 
well-spring. and as I am not for tell you about me, let me enquir 
about you. bring yourself up to date; what have you been doing, and 
much more important, what have you been think about?” 

“mi do have chiefli been confin to settl into thi house,” I 
said. “i’v been pull and push furnitur into place where it 
wouldn’t go, and curs it.” 

He look round the room. 

“it doesn’t seem to bear you ani grudge,” he said. “it look contented. 
and what else?” 

“in the intervals, when I couldn’t push and curs ani more,” I said, 
“i’v been write a few spook stories. all about the borderland, which 
I love as much as you do.” 

He laugh outright. 

“do you, indeed?” he said. “then it’ no use my say that it is quit 
impossible. but I should like to know your view on the borderland.” 

I point to a sheaf of typewritten stuff that litter my table. 

“them’ my sentiments,” I said, “and quit at your service.” 

“good; then i’ll take them to bed with me when I go, if you’ll allow 
me. i’v alway thought that you had a pretti notion of the creepy, 
but the mistak that you make is to imagin that creepi is 
characterist of the borderland. No doubt there are creepi thing 
there, but so there are everywhere, and a thunder-storm is far more 
terrifi than an apparition. and when you get realli close to 
the borderland, you see how enchant it is, and how vastli more 
enchant the other side must be. I got right on to the borderland 
once, here in thi house, as I shall probabl tell you, and I never 
saw so happi and kindli a place. and without doubt I shall soon be 
career across it in my own person. that’ll be, as we’v often 
determined, wildli interesting, and it will have the solemn of a 
first night at a new play about it. there’l be the curtain close 
in front of you, and present it will be raised, and you will see 
someth you never saw before. how well, on the whole, the secret ha 
been kept, though from time to time littl bit of information, littl 
scrap of dialogue, littl descript of sceneri have leak out. 
enthrallingli interesting; one wonder how they will come into the 
great new drama.” 

“you don’t mean the sort of thing that medium tell us?” I asked. 

“of cours I don’t. I hate the sloshy--r there’ no other word for 
it, and whi should there be, sinc that word fit so admirably--th 
sloshi utter of the ordinari high-class, beyond-suspicion medium 
at half a guinea a sitting, who ask if there’ anybodi present who 
onc knew a charles, or if not charles, thoma or william. natur 
somebodi ha known a charles, thoma or william who ha pass over, 
and is the son, brother, father or cousin of a ladi in black. So 
when she claim thomas, he tell her that he is veri busi and happy, 
help people.... O lord, what rot! I went to one such séanc a month 
ago, just befor I wa taken ill, and the medium said that margaret 
want to get into touch with somebody. two of us claim margaret, 
but margaret chose me and said she wa the spirit of my wife. wife, 
you know! you must allow that thi wa a veri unfortun shot. when I 
said that I wa unmarried, margaret said that she wa my mother, whose 
name wa charlotte. Oh dear, oh dear! well, I shall go to bed with joy, 
bring your spook with me....” 

“sheaves,” said I. 

“yes, but aren’t they the sheaves? isn’t one’ glean of sheav in 
thi world what they call spooks? that is, the knowledg of what one 
take across?” 

“I don’t understand one word,” said I. 

“but you must understand. all the knowledge--worth anything--which 
you or I have collect here, is the begin of the other life. We 
toil and moil, and make our glean and our harvestings, and all our 
decent effort help us to realiz what the real harvest is. sure we 
shall take with us exactli that which we have reaped....” 

after he had gone up to bed I sat tri to correct the error of a 
typist, but still between me and the page there dwelt that haunt 
sens of all that we did here be onli the grist for what wa to 
come. our achiev were rewarded, so he seem to say, by a 
glimpse. and those glimpses--so I tri to follow him--wer the hint 
that had leak out of the drama for which the curtain wa twitching. 
wa that it? 

roderick came down to breakfast next morning, superl frank and 
happy. 

“I didn’t read a singl line of your stories,” he said. “when I got 
into my bedroom I wa so immeasur content that I couldn’t risk 
get interest in anyth else. I lay awak a long time, pinch 
myself in order to prolong my sheer happiness, but the flesh wa weak, 
and at last, from sheer happiness, I slept and probabl snored. did 
you hear me? I hope not. and then sheer happi dictat my dreams, 
though I don’t know what they were, and the moment I wa call I got 
up, becaus ... becaus I didn’t want to miss anything. now, to be 
practic again, what are you do thi morning?” 

“I wa intend to play golf,” I said, “unless----” 

“there isn’t an ‘unless,’ if you mean me. My plan made itself for me, 
and I intend--thi is my plan--to drive out with you, and sit in the 
hollow by the fourth tee, and read your stori there. there’ a great 
south-westerli wind, like a celesti housemaid, scour the skies, 
and I shall be complet shelter there, and in the interv of my 
reading, I shall pleasantli observ the unsuccess effort of the 
golfer to carri the big bunker. I can’t person play golf ani more, 
but I shall enjoy see other peopl attempt to do it.” 

“and no prowl or purring?” I asked. 

“not thi morning. that’ all right: it’ there. it’ so much all right 
that I want to be activ in other directions. sit in a windless 
hollow is about the rang of my activities. I say that for fear that 
you should.” 

I found a match when we arriv at the club-house, and roderick 
stroll away to the goal of hi observations. half an hour afterward 
I found him watch with crimin ecstat joy the soar drive 
that, in the teeth of the great wind, were arrest and blown back into 
the unholiest bunker in all the world or the low clever ball that 
never rose to the height of the shored-up cliff of sand. the coupl 
in front of my partner and me were sarcast dogs, and bade us wait 
onli till they had delv themselv over the ridge, and then we might 
follow as soon as we chose. after violent deed in the bunker they 
climb over the big dune, thirti yard beyond which lay the green on 
which they would now be putting. 

As soon as they had disappeared, roderick snatch my driver from my 
hand. 

“I can’t bear it,” he said. “I must hit a ball again. tee it low, 
caddie.... no, no tee at all.” 

He hit a superb shot, just high enough to carri the ridge, and not so 
high that it caught the oppos wind and wa stop toward the end 
of it flight. He gave a loud croak of laughter. 

“that’ll teach them not to insult my friend,” he said. “it must have 
been pitch right among their care puttings. and now I shall read 
hi ghost-stories.” 

I have record thi athlet incid becaus better than ani analysi 
of hi attitud toward life and death it convey just what that 
attitud was. He knew perfectli well that ani swift exert might be 
fatal to him, but he want to hit a golf ball again as sweetli and as 
hard as it could be hit. He had done it: he had score off death. and 
as I went on my way I felt perfectli confid that if, with that brisk 
free effort, he had fallen dead on the tee, he would have thought it 
well worth while, provid onli that he had made that irreproach 
shot. while alive, he propos to partak in the pleasur of life, 
amongst which he had alway reckon that of hit golf balls, not 
caring, though he like to be alive, whether the immedi consequ 
wa death, just becaus he did not in the least object to be dead. 
the choic wa of such littl consequence.... the histori of that I wa 
to know that evening. 

the stori which roderick had taken to read were design to be of 
an uncomfort type: one concern a vampire, one an elemental, the 
third the reincarn of a certain execr personage, and as we sat 
in the garden-room after tea, he with these page on hi knees, I had 
the pleasur of see him give hasti glanc round, as he read, as if 
to assur himself that there wa noth unusu in the dimmer corner 
of the room.... I like that; he wa do as I intend that a reader 
should. 

befor long he came to the last page. 

“and are you intend to make a book of them?” he asked. “what are the 
other stori like?” 

“worse,” said I, with the complac of the horror-monger. 

“then--did you ask for criticism? I shall give it in ani case--y will 
make a book that not onli is inartistic, all shadow and no light, but 
a fals book. fiction can be false, you know, inher false. you 
play godfath to your stories, you see: you tell them in the first 
person, those at least that I have read, and that, though it need not 
be suppos that those experi were actual yours, yet give a 
sort of guarante that you believ the borderland of which you write to 
be entir terrible. but it isn’t: there are probabl terror there--i 
think for instanc that I believ in element spirits, of some ghastli 
kind--but I am sure that I believ that the borderland, for the most 
part, is almost inconceiv delightful. i’v got the best of reason 
for believ that.” 

“i’m will to be convinced,” said I. 

again, as he look at the fire, hi eye sparkled, not with the 
reflect flame, but with the bright of some interior vision. 

“well, there’ an hour yet befor dinner,” he said, “and my stori won’t 
take half of that. it’ about my previou experi of thi house; 
what I saw, in fact, in the room which I now occupy. It wa becaus of 
that, naturally, that I want the same room again. here goes, then. 

“for the twenti year of margaret’ marri life,” he said, “I never 
saw her except quit accident and casually. casually, like that, 
I had seen her at theatr and what not with her two boy whom thu I 
knew by sight. but I had never spoken to either of them, nor, after her 
marriage, to their mother. I knew, as all the world knew, that she had 
a terribl life, but circumst be what they were, I could not 
bring myself to her notice, the more so becaus she made no sign or 
gestur of want me. but I am sure that no day pass on which I did 
not long to be abl to show her that my love and sympathi were hers. 
only, so I thought, I had to know that she want them. 

“I heard, of course, of the death of her sons. they were both kill 
in franc within a few day of each other; one wa eighteen, the other 
nineteen. I wrote to her then formally, so long had we been strangers, 
and she answer formally. after that, she took thi house, where she 
live alone. A year later, I wa told that she had now for some month 
been suffer from a malign and disfigur disease. 

“I wa in london, stroll down piccadilli when my companion mention 
it, and I at onc becam awar that I must go to see her, not to-morrow 
or soon, but now. It is difficult to describ the qualiti of that 
conviction, or tell you how instinct and over-mast it was. 
there are some thing which you can’t help doing, not exactli becaus 
you desir to do them, but becaus they must be done. if, for instance, 
you are in the middl of the road, and see a motor come toward you 
at top-speed, you have to step to the side of the road, unless you 
deliber choos to commit suicide. It wa just like that; unless I 
intend to commit a sort of spiritu suicid there wa no choice. 

“A few hour later I wa at your door here, ask to see her, and wa 
told that she wa desper ill and could see nobody. but I got her 
maid to take the messag that I wa here, and present her nurs came 
down to tell me that she would see me. I should find margaret, she 
said, wear a veil so as to conceal from me the dread ravag 
which the diseas had inflict on her face, and the scar of the two 
oper which she had undergone. veri like she would not speak to 
me, for she had great difficulti in speak at all, and in ani case 
I wa not to stay for more than a few minutes. probabl she could not 
live mani hours: I had onli just come in time. and at that moment I 
wish I had done anyth rather than come here, for though instinct 
had driven me here, yet instinct now recoil with unspeak horror. 
the flesh war against the spirit, you know, and under it stress I 
now suggest that it wa better perhap that I should not see her.... 
but the nurs mere said again that margaret wish to see me, and 
guess perhap the caus of my unwillingness, ‘her face will be quit 
invisible,’ she added. ‘there will be noth to shock you.’ 

“I went in alone: margaret wa prop up in bed with pillows, so that 
she sat nearli upright, and over her head wa a dark veil through which 
I could see noth whatever. her right hand lay on the coverlet, and 
as I seat myself by her bedside, where the nurs had put a chair for 
me, margaret advanc her hand toward me, shyly, hesitatingly, as if 
not sure that I would take it. but it wa a sign, a gesture.” 

He paused, hi face beam and radiant with the light of that memory. 

“I am speak of thing unspeakable,” he said. “I can no more convey 
to you all that meant than by a mere enumer of colour can I steep 
your soul in the feel of a sunset.... So there I sat, with her hand 
cover and clasp in mine. I had been told that veri like she would 
not speak, and for myself there wa no word in the world which would 
not be dross in the gold of that silence. 

“and then from behind her veil there came a whisper. 

“‘i couldn’t die without see you,’ she said. ‘I wa sure you would 
come. i’v one thing to say to you. I love you, and I tri to choke 
my love. and for years, my dear, I have been reap the harvest of 
what I did. I tri to kill love, but it wa so much stronger than I. 
and now the harvest is gathered. I have suffer cruelly, you know, but 
I bless everi pang of it. I need it all....’ 

“onli a few minut before, I had quak at the thought of see her. 
but now I could not suffer that the veil should cover her face. 

“‘put up your veil, darling,’ I said. ‘I must see you.’ 

“‘no, no,’ she whispered. ‘I should horrifi you. I am terrible.’ 

“‘you can’t be terribl to me,’ I said. ‘I am go to lift it.’ 

“I rais her veil. and what did I see? I might have known, I think: I 
might have guess that at thi moment, suprem and perfect, I should 
see with vision. 

“there wa no scar or ravag of diseas or disfigur there. she wa 
far loveli than she had ever been, and on her face there shone the 
dawn of the everlast day. she had shed all that wa perish and 
subject to decay, and her immort spirit wa manifest to me, purg 
and punish if you will, but humbl and holy. there wa grant to my 
frail mortal sight the power of see truly; it wa permit to me to 
be with her beyond the bound of mortality.... 

“and then, even as I wa lost in an amaz of love and wonder, I 
saw we were not alon in the room. two boys, whom I recognized, were 
stand at the other side of the bed, look at her. It seem 
utterli natur that they should be there. 

“‘we’v been allow to come for you, mother darling,’ said one. ‘get 
up.’ 

“she turn her face to them. 

“‘ah, my dears,’ she said. ‘how love of you. but just one moment.’ 

“she bent over toward me and kiss me. 

“‘thank you for coming, roderick,’ she said. ‘good-bye, just for a 
littl while.’ 

“at that my power of sight--mi power of true sight--failed. her head 
fell back on the pillow and turn over on one side. for one second, 
befor I let the veil drop over it again, I had a glimps of her face, 
mar and cruelli mutilated. I saw that, I say, but never then nor 
afterward could I rememb it. It wa like a terribl dream, which 
utterli fade on the awaking. then her hand, which had been clasp 
mine, in that moment of her farewel slacken it hold, and drop on 
to the bed. she had just move away, somewher out of sight, with her 
two boy to look after her.” 

He paused. 

“that’ all,” he said. “and do you wonder that I chose that room? how 
I hope that she will come for me.” 

My room wa next to roderick’s, the head of hi bed be just opposit 
the head of mine on the other side of the wall. that night I had 
undressed, lain down, and had just put out my light, when I heard a 
sharp tap just abov me. I thought it wa some fortuit noise, as of 
a pictur swing in a draught, but the moment after it wa repeated, 
and it struck me that it wa perhap a summon from roderick who want 
something. still quit unalarmed, I got out of bed, and, candl in 
hand, went to hi door. I knocked, but receiv no answer, open it 
an inch or two. 

“did you want anything?” I asked, and, again receiv no answer, I 
went in. 

hi light were burning, and he wa sit up in bed. He did not 
appear to see me or be consciou of my presence, and hi eye were 
fix on some point a few feet away in front of him. hi mouth smiled, 
and in hi eye wa just such a joy as I had seen there when he told me 
hi story. then, lean on hi arm, he move as if to rise. 

“oh, margaret, my dear....” he cried. 

He drew a coupl of short breaths, and fell back. 


print IN great britain AT the pitman press, bath 




* * * * * * 




transcriber’ note: 

obviou typograph error have been corrected. 

inconsist in hyphen have been standardized. 



***end OF the project gutenberg ebook visibl and invisible*** 


******* thi file should be name 60339-0.txt or 60339-0.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/0/3/3/60339 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org 

section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

