the project gutenberg ebook of the parasite, by arthur conan doyl 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the parasit 

author: arthur conan doyl 

releas date: march 19, 2008 [ebook #355] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the parasit *** 














the parasit 

A stori 


BY 

A. conan doyl 


author OF "the refugees" "micah clarke" etc. 




1894 




the parasit 

I 

march 24. the spring is fairli with us now. outsid my laboratori 
window the great chestnut-tre is all cover with the big, glutinous, 
gummi buds, some of which have alreadi begun to break into littl green 
shuttlecocks. As you walk down the lane you are consciou of the 
rich, silent forc of natur work all around you. the wet earth 
smell fruit and luscious. green shoot are peep out everywhere. 
the twig are stiff with their sap; and the moist, heavi english air is 
laden with a faintli resin perfume. bud in the hedges, lamb 
beneath them--everywher the work of reproduct go forward! 

I can see it without, and I can feel it within. We also have our 
spring when the littl arteriol dilate, the lymph flow in a brisker 
stream, the gland work harder, winnow and straining. everi year 
natur readjust the whole machine. I can feel the ferment in my blood 
at thi veri moment, and as the cool sunshin pour through my window I 
could danc about in it like a gnat. So I should, onli that charl 
sadler would rush upstair to know what wa the matter. besides, I 
must rememb that I am professor gilroy. An old professor may afford 
to be natural, but when fortun ha given one of the first chair in 
the univers to a man of four-and-thirti he must tri and act the part 
consistently. 

what a fellow wilson is! If I could onli throw the same enthusiasm 
into physiolog that he doe into psychology, I should becom a claud 
bernard at the least. hi whole life and soul and energi work to one 
end. He drop to sleep collat hi result of the past day, and he 
wake to plan hi research for the come one. and yet, outsid the 
narrow circl who follow hi proceedings, he get so littl credit for 
it. physiolog is a recogn science. If I add even a brick to the 
edifice, everi one see and applaud it. but wilson is tri to dig 
the foundat for a scienc of the future. hi work is underground 
and doe not show. yet he goe on uncomplainingly, correspond with 
a hundr semi-maniac in the hope of find one reliabl witness, 
sift a hundr lie on the chanc of gain one littl speck of 
truth, collat old books, devour new ones, experimenting, 
lecturing, tri to light up in other the fieri interest which is 
consum him. I am fill with wonder and admir when I think of 
him, and yet, when he ask me to associ myself with hi researches, 
I am compel to tell him that, in their present state, they offer 
littl attract to a man who is devot to exact science. If he 
could show me someth posit and objective, I might then be tempt 
to approach the question from it physiolog side. So long as half 
hi subject are taint with charlataneri and the other half with 
hysteria we physiologist must content ourselv with the bodi and 
leav the mind to our descendants. 

No doubt I am a materialist. agatha say that I am a rank one. I tell 
her that is an excel reason for shorten our engagement, sinc I 
am in such urgent need of her spirituality. and yet I may claim to be 
a curiou exampl of the effect of educ upon temperament, for by 
natur I am, unless I deceiv myself, a highli psychic man. I wa a 
nervous, sensit boy, a dreamer, a somnambulist, full of impress 
and intuitions. My black hair, my dark eyes, my thin, oliv face, my 
taper fingers, are all characterist of my real temperament, and 
caus expert like wilson to claim me as their own. but my brain is 
soak with exact knowledge. I have train myself to deal onli with 
fact and with proof. surmis and fanci have no place in my scheme of 
thought. show me what I can see with my microscope, cut with my 
scalpel, weigh in my balance, and I will devot a lifetim to it 
investigation. but when you ask me to studi feelings, impressions, 
suggestions, you ask me to do what is distast and even 
demoralizing. A departur from pure reason affect me like an evil 
smell or a music discord. 

which is a veri suffici reason whi I am a littl loath to go to 
professor wilson' tonight. still I feel that I could hardli get out 
of the invit without posit rudeness; and, now that mrs. marden 
and agatha are going, of cours I would not if I could. but I had 
rather meet them anywher else. I know that wilson would draw me into 
thi nebul semi-sci of hi if he could. In hi enthusiasm he is 
perfectli impervi to hint or remonstrances. noth short of a 
posit quarrel will make him realiz my avers to the whole 
business. I have no doubt that he ha some new mesmerist or 
clairvoy or medium or trickster of some sort whom he is go to 
exhibit to us, for even hi entertain bear upon hi hobby. well, 
it will be a treat for agatha, at ani rate. she is interest in it, 
as woman usual is in whatev is vagu and mystic and indefinite. 

10.50 P. M. thi diary-keep of mine is, I fancy, the outcom of 
that scientif habit of mind about which I wrote thi morning. I like 
to regist impress while they are fresh. onc a day at least I 
endeavor to defin my own mental position. It is a use piec of 
self-analysis, and has, I fancy, a steadi effect upon the character. 
frankly, I must confess that my own need what stiffen I can give 
it. I fear that, after all, much of my neurot tempera survives, 
and that I am far from that cool, calm precis which character 
murdoch or pratt-haldane. otherwise, whi should the tomfooleri which I 
have wit thi even have set my nerv thrill so that even 
now I am all unstrung? My onli comfort is that neither wilson nor miss 
penclosa nor even agatha could have possibl known my weakness. 

and what in the world wa there to excit me? nothing, or so littl 
that it will seem ludicr when I set it down. 

the marden got to wilson' befor me. In fact, I wa one of the last 
to arriv and found the room crowded. I had hardli time to say a word 
to mrs. marden and to agatha, who wa look charm in white and 
pink, with glitter wheat-ear in her hair, when wilson came 
twitch at my sleeve. 

"you want someth positive, gilroy," said he, draw me apart into a 
corner. "mi dear fellow, I have a phenomenon--a phenomenon!" 

I should have been more impress had I not heard the same before. hi 
sanguin spirit turn everi fire-fli into a star. 

"no possibl question about the bona fide thi time," said he, in 
answer, perhaps, to some littl gleam of amus in my eyes. "mi 
wife ha known her for mani years. they both come from trinidad, you 
know. miss penclosa ha onli been in england a month or two, and know 
no one outsid the univers circle, but I assur you that the thing 
she ha told us suffic in themselv to establish clairvoy upon an 
absolut scientif basis. there is noth like her, amateur or 
professional. come and be introduced!" 

I like none of these mystery-mongers, but the amateur least of all. 
with the paid perform you may pounc upon him and expos him the 
instant that you have seen through hi trick. He is there to deceiv 
you, and you are there to find him out. but what are you to do with 
the friend of your host' wife? are you to turn on a light suddenli 
and expos her slap a surreptiti banjo? Or are you to hurl 
cochin over her even frock when she steal round with her 
phosphoru bottl and her supernatur platitude? there would be a 
scene, and you would be look upon as a brute. So you have your 
choic of be that or a dupe. I wa in no veri good humor as I 
follow wilson to the lady. 

ani one less like my idea of a west indian could not be imagined. she 
wa a small, frail creature, well over forty, I should say, with a 
pale, peaki face, and hair of a veri light shade of chestnut. her 
presenc wa insignific and her manner retiring. In ani group of 
ten women she would have been the last whom one would have pick out. 
her eye were perhap her most remarkable, and also, I am compel to 
say, her least pleasant, feature. they were gray in color,--gray with 
a shade of green,--and their express struck me as be decidedli 
furtive. I wonder if furtiv is the word, or should I have said 
fierce? On second thoughts, felin would have express it better. A 
crutch lean against the wall told me what wa pain evid when 
she rose: that one of her leg wa crippled. 

So I wa introduc to miss penclosa, and it did not escap me that as 
my name wa mention she glanc across at agatha. wilson had 
evid been talking. and presently, no doubt, thought I, she will 
inform me by occult mean that I am engag to a young ladi with 
wheat-ear in her hair. I wonder how much more wilson had been 
tell her about me. 

"professor gilroy is a terribl sceptic," said he; "I hope, miss 
penclosa, that you will be abl to convert him." 

she look keenli up at me. 

"professor gilroy is quit right to be sceptic if he ha not seen ani 
thing convincing," said she. "I should have thought," she added, "that 
you would yourself have been an excel subject." 

"for what, may I ask?" said I. 

"well, for mesmerism, for example." 

"mi experi ha been that mesmerist go for their subject to those 
who are mental unsound. all their result are vitiated, as it seem 
to me, by the fact that they are deal with abnorm organisms." 

"which of these ladi would you say possess a normal organism?" she 
asked. "I should like you to select the one who seem to you to have 
the best balanc mind. should we say the girl in pink and 
white?--miss agatha marden, I think the name is." 

"yes, I should attach weight to ani result from her." 

"I have never tri how far she is impressionable. Of cours some 
peopl respond much more rapidli than others. may I ask how far your 
sceptic extends? I suppos that you admit the mesmer sleep and 
the power of suggestion." 

"I admit nothing, miss penclosa." 

"dear me, I thought scienc had got further than that. Of cours I 
know noth about the scientif side of it. I onli know what I can 
do. you see the girl in red, for example, over near the japanes jar. 
I shall will that she come across to us." 

she bent forward as she spoke and drop her fan upon the floor. the 
girl whisk round and came straight toward us, with an enquir look 
upon her face, as if some one had call her. 

"what do you think of that, gilroy?" cri wilson, in a kind of ecstasy. 

I did not dare to tell him what I thought of it. To me it wa the most 
barefaced, shameless piec of impostur that I had ever witnessed. the 
collus and the signal had realli been too obvious. 

"professor gilroy is not satisfied," said she, glanc up at me with 
her strang littl eyes. "mi poor fan is to get the credit of that 
experiment. well, we must tri someth else. miss marden, would you 
have ani object to my put you off?" 

"oh, I should love it!" cri agatha. 

By thi time all the compani had gather round us in a circle, the 
shirt-front men, and the white-thro women, some awed, some 
critical, as though it were someth between a religi ceremoni and 
a conjurer' entertainment. A red velvet arm-chair had been push 
into the centre, and agatha lay back in it, a littl flush and 
trembl slightli from excitement. I could see it from the vibrat 
of the wheat-ears. miss penclosa rose from her seat and stood over 
her, lean upon her crutch. 

and there wa a chang in the woman. she no longer seem small or 
insignificant. twenti year were gone from her age. her eye were 
shining, a ting of color had come into her sallow cheeks, her whole 
figur had expanded. So I have seen a dull-eyed, listless lad chang 
in an instant into brisk and life when given a task of which he 
felt himself master. she look down at agatha with an express 
which I resent from the bottom of my soul--th express with which 
a roman empress might have look at her kneel slave. then with a 
quick, command gestur she toss up her arm and swept them slowli 
down in front of her. 

I wa watch agatha narrowly. dure three pass she seem to be 
simpli amused. At the fourth I observ a slight glaze of her eyes, 
accompani by some dilat of her pupils. At the sixth there wa a 
momentari rigor. At the seventh her lid began to droop. At the tenth 
her eye were closed, and her breath wa slower and fuller than 
usual. I tri as I watch to preserv my scientif calm, but a 
foolish, causeless agit convuls me. I trust that I hid it, but 
I felt as a child feel in the dark. I could not have believ that I 
wa still open to such weakness. 

"she is in the trance," said miss penclosa. 

"she is sleeping!" I cried. 

"wake her, then!" 

I pull her by the arm and shout in her ear. she might have been 
dead for all the impress that I could make. her bodi wa there on 
the velvet chair. her organ were acting--h heart, her lungs. but 
her soul! It had slip from beyond our ken. whither had it gone? 
what power had dispossess it? I wa puzzl and disconcerted. 

"so much for the mesmer sleep," said miss penclosa. "a regard 
suggestion, whatev I may suggest miss marden will infal do, 
whether it be now or after she ha awaken from her trance. Do you 
demand proof of it?" 

"certainly," said I. 

"you shall have it." I saw a smile pass over her face, as though an 
amus thought had struck her. she stoop and whisper earnestli 
into her subject' ear. agatha, who had been so deaf to me, nod her 
head as she listened. 

"awake!" cri miss penclosa, with a sharp tap of her crutch upon the 
floor. the eye opened, the glaze clear slowli away, and the soul 
look out onc more after it strang eclipse. 

We went away early. agatha wa none the wors for her strang 
excursion, but I wa nervou and unstrung, unabl to listen to or 
answer the stream of comment which wilson wa pour out for my 
benefit. As I bade her good-night miss penclosa slip a piec of 
paper into my hand. 

"pray forgiv me," said she, "if I take mean to overcom your 
scepticism. open thi note at ten o'clock to-morrow morning. It is a 
littl privat test." 

I can't imagin what she means, but there is the note, and it shall be 
open as she directs. My head is aching, and I have written enough 
for to-night. to-morrow I dare say that what seem so inexplic 
will take quit anoth complexion. I shall not surrend my 
convict without a struggle. 

march 25. I am amazed, confounded. It is clear that I must reconsid 
my opinion upon thi matter. but first let me place on record what ha 
occurred. 

I had finish breakfast, and wa look over some diagram with which 
my lectur is to be illustrated, when my housekeep enter to tell me 
that agatha wa in my studi and wish to see me immediately. I 
glanc at the clock and saw with sun rise that it wa onli half-past 
nine. 

when I enter the room, she wa stand on the hearth-rug face me. 
someth in her pose chill me and check the word which were 
rise to my lips. her veil wa half down, but I could see that she 
wa pale and that her express wa constrained. 

"austin," she said, "I have come to tell you that our engag is at 
an end." 

I staggered. I believ that I liter did stagger. I know that I 
found myself lean against the bookcas for support. 

"but--but----" I stammered. "thi is veri sudden, agatha." 

"yes, austin, I have come here to tell you that our engag is at an 
end." 

"but surely," I cried, "you will give me some reason! thi is unlik 
you, agatha. tell me how I have been unfortun enough to offend you." 

"it is all over, austin." 

"but why? you must be under some delusion, agatha. perhap you have 
been told some falsehood about me. Or you may have misunderstood 
someth that I have said to you. onli let me know what it is, and a 
word may set it all right." 

"we must consid it all at an end." 

"but you left me last night without a hint at ani disagreement. what 
could have occur in the interv to chang you so? It must have 
been someth that happen last night. you have been think it 
over and you have disapprov of my conduct. wa it the mesmerism? 
did you blame me for let that woman exercis her power over you? 
you know that at the least sign I should have interfered." 

"it is useless, austin. all is over:" 

her voic wa cold and measured; her manner strang formal and hard. 
It seem to me that she wa absolut resolv not to be drawn into 
ani argument or explanation. As for me, I wa shake with agitation, 
and I turn my face aside, so asham wa I that she should see my 
want of control. 

"you must know what thi mean to me!" I cried. "it is the blast of 
all my hope and the ruin of my life! you sure will not inflict such 
a punish upon me unheard. you will let me know what is the matter. 
consid how imposs it would be for me, under ani circumstances, to 
treat you so. for god' sake, agatha, let me know what I have done!" 

she walk past me without a word and open the door. 

"it is quit useless, austin," said she. "you must consid our 
engag at an end." An instant later she wa gone, and, befor I 
could recov myself suffici to follow her, I heard the hall-door 
close behind her. 

I rush into my room to chang my coat, with the idea of hurri 
round to mrs. marden' to learn from her what the caus of my 
misfortun might be. So shaken wa I that I could hardli lace my 
boots. never shall I forget those horribl ten minutes. I had just 
pull on my overcoat when the clock upon the mantel-piec struck ten. 

ten! I associ the idea with miss penclosa' note. It wa lie 
befor me on the table, and I tore it open. It wa scribbl in pencil 
in a peculiarli angular handwriting. 

"mi dear professor gilroy [it said]: pray excus the person natur 
of the test which I am give you. professor wilson happen to 
mention the relat between you and my subject of thi evening, and 
it struck me that noth could be more convinc to you than if I 
were to suggest to miss marden that she should call upon you at 
half-past nine to-morrow morn and suspend your engag for half 
an hour or so. scienc is so exact that it is difficult to give a 
satisfi test, but I am convinc that thi at least will be an 
action which she would be most unlik to do of her own free will. 
forget ani thing that she may have said, as she ha realli noth 
whatev to do with it, and will certainli not recollect ani thing 
about it. I write thi note to shorten your anxiety, and to beg you to 
forgiv me for the momentari unhappi which my suggest must have 
caus you. 
"your faithfully; 
"helen penclosa. 


really, when I had read the note, I wa too reliev to be angry. It 
wa a liberty. certainli it wa a veri great liberti inde on the 
part of a ladi whom I had onli met once. but, after all, I had 
challeng her by my scepticism. It may have been, as she said, a 
littl difficult to devis a test which would satisfi me. 

and she had done that. there could be no question at all upon the 
point. for me hypnot suggest wa final established. It took 
it place from now onward as one of the fact of life. that agatha, 
who of all women of my acquaint ha the best balanc mind, had 
been reduc to a condit of automat appear to be certain. A 
person at a distanc had work her as an engin on the shore might 
guid a brennan torpedo. A second soul had step in, as it were, had 
push her own aside, and had seiz her nervou mechanism, saying: "I 
will work thi for half an hour." and agatha must have been 
unconsci as she came and as she returned. could she make her way in 
safeti through the street in such a state? I put on my hat and 
hurri round to see if all wa well with her. 

yes. she wa at home. I wa shown into the drawing-room and found her 
sit with a book upon her lap. 

"you are an earli visitor, austin," said she, smiling. 

"and you have been an even earlier one," I answered. 

she look puzzled. "what do you mean?" she asked. 

"you have not been out to-day?" 

"no, certainli not." 

"agatha," said I seriously, "would you mind tell me exactli what you 
have done thi morning?" 

she laugh at my earnestness. 

"you'v got on your profession look, austin. see what come of be 
engag to a man of science. however, I will tell you, though I can't 
imagin what you want to know for. I got up at eight. I breakfast 
at half-past. I came into thi room at ten minut past nine and began 
to read the 'memoir of mme. de remusat.' In a few minut I did the 
french ladi the bad compliment of drop to sleep over her pages, and 
I did you, sir, the veri flatter one of dream about you. It is 
onli a few minut sinc I woke up." 

"and found yourself where you had been before?" 

"why, where els should I find myself?" 

"would you mind tell me, agatha, what it wa that you dream about 
me? It realli is not mere curios on my part." 

"I mere had a vagu impress that you came into it. I cannot 
recal ani thing definite." 

"if you have not been out to-day, agatha, how is it that your shoe are 
dusty?" 

A pain look came over her face. 

"really, austin, I do not know what is the matter with you thi 
morning. one would almost think that you doubt my word. If my boot 
are dusty, it must be, of course, that I have put on a pair which the 
maid had not cleaned." 

It wa perfectli evid that she knew noth whatev about the 
matter, and I reflect that, after all, perhap it wa better that I 
should not enlighten her. It might frighten her, and could serv no 
good purpos that I could see. I said no more about it, therefore, and 
left shortli afterward to give my lecture. 

but I am immens impressed. My horizon of scientif possibl 
ha suddenli been enorm extended. I no longer wonder at wilson' 
demon energi and enthusiasm. who would not work hard who had a vast 
virgin field readi to hi hand? why, I have known the novel shape of a 
nucleolus, or a trifl peculiar of stripe muscular fibr seen 
under a 300-diamet lens, fill me with exultation. how petti do such 
research seem when compar with thi one which strike at the veri 
root of life and the natur of the soul! I had alway look upon 
spirit as a product of matter. the brain, I thought, secret the 
mind, as the liver doe the bile. but how can thi be when I see mind 
work from a distanc and play upon matter as a musician might 
upon a violin? the bodi doe not give rise to the soul, then, but is 
rather the rough instrument by which the spirit manifest itself. the 
windmil doe not give rise to the wind, but onli indic it. It wa 
oppos to my whole habit of thought, and yet it wa undeni 
possibl and worthi of investigation. 

and whi should I not investig it? I see that under yesterday' date 
I said: "if I could see someth posit and objective, I might be 
tempt to approach it from the physiolog aspect." well, I have 
got my test. I shall be as good as my word. the investig would, 
I am sure, be of immens interest. some of my colleagu might look 
askanc at it, for scienc is full of unreason prejudices, but if 
wilson ha the courag of hi convictions, I can afford to have it 
also. I shall go to him to-morrow morning--to him and to miss 
penclosa. If she can show us so much, it is probabl that she can show 
us more. 




II 

march 26. wilson was, as I had anticipated, veri exult over my 
conversion, and miss penclosa wa also demur pleas at the result 
of her experiment. strang what a silent, colorless creatur she is 
save onli when she exercis her power! even talk about it give 
her color and life. she seem to take a singular interest in me. I 
cannot help observ how her eye follow me about the room. 

We had the most interest convers about her own powers. It is 
just as well to put her view on record, though they cannot, of course, 
claim ani scientif weight. 

"you are on the veri fring of the subject," said she, when I had 
express wonder at the remark instanc of suggest which she had 
shown me. "I had no direct influenc upon miss marden when she came 
round to you. I wa not even think of her that morning. what I did 
wa to set her mind as I might set the alarum of a clock so that at the 
hour name it would go off of it own accord. If six month instead of 
twelv hour had been suggested, it would have been the same." 

"and if the suggest had been to assassin me?" 

"she would most inevit have done so." 

"but thi is a terribl power!" I cried. 

"it is, as you say, a terribl power," she answer gravely, "and the 
more you know of it the more terribl will it seem to you." 

"may I ask," said I, "what you meant when you said that thi matter of 
suggest is onli at the fring of it? what do you consid the 
essential?" 

"I had rather not tell you." 

I wa surpris at the decis of her answer. 

"you understand," said I, "that it is not out of curios I ask, but 
in the hope that I may find some scientif explan for the fact 
with which you furnish me." 

"frankly, professor gilroy," said she, "I am not at all interest in 
science, nor do I care whether it can or cannot classifi these powers." 

"but I wa hoping----" 

"ah, that is quit anoth thing. If you make it a person matter," 
said she, with the pleasantest of smiles, "I shall be onli too happi to 
tell you ani thing you wish to know. let me see; what wa it you ask 
me? oh, about the further powers. professor wilson won't believ in 
them, but they are quit true all the same. for example, it is 
possibl for an oper to gain complet command over hi subject-- 
presum that the latter is a good one. without ani previou 
suggest he may make him do whatev he likes." 

"without the subject' knowledge?" 

"that depends. If the forc were strongli exerted, he would know no 
more about it than miss marden did when she came round and frighten 
you so. or, if the influenc wa less powerful, he might be consciou 
of what he wa doing, but be quit unabl to prevent himself from do 
it." 

"would he have lost hi own will power, then?" 

"it would be over-ridden by anoth stronger one." 

"have you ever exercis thi power yourself?" 

"sever times." 

"i your own will so strong, then?" 

"well, it doe not entir depend upon that. mani have strong will 
which are not detach from themselves. the thing is to have the 
gift of project it into anoth person and supersed hi own. I 
find that the power vari with my own strength and health." 

"practically, you send your soul into anoth person' body." 

"well, you might put it that way." 

"and what doe your own bodi do?" 

"it mere feel lethargic." 

"well, but is there no danger to your own health?" I asked. 

"there might be a little. you have to be care never to let your own 
conscious absolut go; otherwise, you might experi some 
difficulti in find your way back again. you must alway preserv 
the connection, as it were. I am afraid I express myself veri badly, 
professor gilroy, but of cours I don't know how to put these thing in 
a scientif way. I am just give you my own experi and my own 
explanations." 

well, I read thi over now at my leisure, and I marvel at myself! Is 
thi austin gilroy, the man who ha won hi way to the front by hi 
hard reason power and by hi devot to fact? here I am grave 
retail the gossip of a woman who tell me how her soul may be 
project from her body, and how, while she lie in a lethargy, she can 
control the action of peopl at a distance. Do I accept it? 
certainli not. she must prove and re-prov befor I yield a point. 
but if I am still a sceptic, I have at least ceas to be a scoffer. 
We are to have a sit thi evening, and she is to tri if she can 
produc ani mesmer effect upon me. If she can, it will make an 
excel starting-point for our investigation. No one can accus me, 
at ani rate, of complicity. If she cannot, we must tri and find some 
subject who will be like caesar' wife. wilson is perfectli impervious. 

10 P. M. I believ that I am on the threshold of an epoch-mak 
investigation. To have the power of examin these phenomena from 
inside--to have an organ which will respond, and at the same time a 
brain which will appreci and criticise--that is sure a uniqu 
advantage. I am quit sure that wilson would give five year of hi 
life to be as suscept as I have prove myself to be. 

there wa no one present except wilson and hi wife. I wa seat with 
my head lean back, and miss penclosa, stand in front and a littl 
to the left, use the same long, sweep stroke as with agatha. At 
each of them a warm current of air seem to strike me, and to suffus 
a thrill and glow all through me from head to foot. My eye were fix 
upon miss penclosa' face, but as I gaze the featur seem to blur 
and to fade away. I wa consciou onli of her own eye look down at 
me, gray, deep, inscrutable. larger they grew and larger, until they 
chang suddenli into two mountain lake toward which I seem to be 
fall with horribl rapidity. I shuddered, and as I did so some 
deeper stratum of thought told me that the shudder repres the 
rigor which I had observ in agatha. An instant later I struck the 
surfac of the lakes, now join into one, and down I went beneath the 
water with a ful in my head and a buzz in my ears. down I went, 
down, down, and then with a swoop up again until I could see the light 
stream brightli through the green water. I wa almost at the 
surfac when the word "awake!" rang through my head, and, with a start, 
I found myself back in the arm-chair, with miss penclosa lean on her 
crutch, and wilson, hi note book in hi hand, peep over her 
shoulder. No heavi or weari wa left behind. On the contrary, 
though it is onli an hour or so sinc the experiment, I feel so wake 
that I am more inclin for my studi than my bedroom. I see quit a 
vista of interest experi extend befor us, and am all 
impati to begin upon them. 

march 27. A blank day, as miss penclosa goe with wilson and hi wife 
to the suttons'. have begun binet and ferre' "anim magnetism." 
what strange, deep water these are! results, results, results--and 
the caus an absolut mystery. It is stimul to the imagination, 
but I must be on my guard against that. let us have no infer nor 
deductions, and noth but solid facts. I know that the mesmer 
tranc is true; I know that mesmer suggest is true; I know that I 
am myself sensit to thi force. that is my present position. I 
have a larg new note-book which shall be devot entir to 
scientif detail. 

long talk with agatha and mrs. marden in the even about our 
marriage. We think that the summer vac. (the begin of it) would 
be the best time for the wedding. whi should we delay? I grudg even 
those few months. still, as mrs. marden says, there are a good mani 
thing to be arranged. 

march 28. mesmer again by miss penclosa. experi much the same 
as before, save that insens came on more quickly. see note-book 
A for temperatur of room, barometr pressure, pulse, and respir 
as taken by professor wilson. 

march 29. mesmer again. detail in note-book A. 

march 30. sunday, and a blank day. I grudg ani interrupt of our 
experiments. At present they mere embrac the physic sign which 
go with slight, with complete, and with extrem insensibility. 
afterward we hope to pass on to the phenomena of suggest and of 
lucidity. professor have demonstr these thing upon women at 
nanci and at the salpetriere. It will be more convinc when a woman 
demonstr it upon a professor, with a second professor as a witness. 
and that I should be the subject--i, the sceptic, the materialist! At 
least, I have shown that my devot to scienc is greater than to my 
own person consistency. the eat of our own word is the greatest 
sacrific which truth ever requir of us. 

My neighbor, charl sadler, the handsom young demonstr of 
anatomy, came in thi even to return a volum of virchow' 
"archives" which I had lent him. I call him young, but, as a matter of 
fact, he is a year older than I am. 

"I understand, gilroy," said he, "that you are be experi upon 
by miss penclosa." 

"well," he went on, when I had acknowledg it, "if I were you, I 
should not let it go ani further. you will think me veri impertinent, 
no doubt, but, none the less, I feel it to be my duti to advis you to 
have no more to do with her." 

Of cours I ask him why. 

"I am so place that I cannot enter into particular as freeli as I 
could wish," said he. "miss penclosa is the friend of my friend, and 
my posit is a delic one. I can onli say this: that I have myself 
been the subject of some of the woman' experiments, and that they have 
left a most unpleas impress upon my mind." 

He could hardli expect me to be satisfi with that, and I tri hard 
to get someth more definit out of him, but without success. Is it 
conceiv that he could be jealou at my have supersed him? Or 
is he one of those men of scienc who feel person injur when 
fact run counter to their preconceiv opinions? He cannot serious 
suppos that becaus he ha some vagu grievanc I am, therefore, to 
abandon a seri of experi which promis to be so fruit of 
results. He appear to be annoy at the light way in which I treat 
hi shadowi warnings, and we part with some littl cold on both 
sides. 

march 31. mesmer by miss P. 

april 1. mesmer by miss P. (note-book a.) 

april 2. mesmer by miss P. (sphygmograph chart taken by 
professor wilson.) 

april 3. It is possibl that thi cours of mesmer may be a littl 
tri to the gener constitution. agatha say that I am thinner and 
darker under the eyes. I am consciou of a nervou irrit which 
I had not observ in myself before. the least noise, for example, 
make me start, and the stupid of a student caus me exasper 
instead of amusement. agatha wish me to stop, but I tell her that 
everi cours of studi is trying, and that one can never attain a result 
with out pay some price for it. when she see the sensat which 
my forthcom paper on "the relat between mind and matter" may 
make, she will understand that it is worth a littl nervou wear and 
tear. I should not be surpris if I got my F. R. S. over it. 

mesmer again in the evening. the effect is produc more rapidli 
now, and the subject vision are less marked. I keep full note of 
each sitting. wilson is leav for town for a week or ten days, but 
we shall not interrupt the experiments, which depend for their valu as 
much upon my sensat as on hi observations. 

april 4. I must be care on my guard. A complic ha crept 
into our experi which I had not reckon upon. In my eager 
for scientif fact I have been foolishli blind to the human relat 
between miss penclosa and myself. I can write here what I would not 
breath to a live soul. the unhappi woman appear to have form an 
attach for me. 

I should not say such a thing, even in the privaci of my own intim 
journal, if it had not come to such a pass that it is imposs to 
ignor it. for some time,--that is, for the last week,--ther have 
been sign which I have brush asid and refus to think of. her 
bright when I come, her deject when I go, her eager that I 
should come often, the express of her eyes, the tone of her voice--i 
tri to think that they meant nothing, and were, perhaps, onli her 
ardent west indian manner. but last night, as I awok from the 
mesmer sleep, I put out my hand, unconsciously, involuntarily, and 
clasp hers. when I came fulli to myself, we were sit with them 
locked, she look up at me with an expect smile. and the horribl 
thing wa that I felt impel to say what she expect me to say. 
what a fals wretch I should have been! how I should have loath 
myself to-day had I yield to the temptat of that moment! but, 
thank god, I wa strong enough to spring up and hurri from the room. I 
wa rude, I fear, but I could not, no, I could not, trust myself 
anoth moment. I, a gentleman, a man of honor, engag to one of the 
sweetest girl in england--and yet in a moment of reasonless passion I 
nearli profess love for thi woman whom I hardli know. she is far 
older than myself and a cripple. It is monstrous, odious; and yet the 
impuls wa so strong that, had I stay anoth minut in her 
presence, I should have commit myself. what wa it? I have to 
teach other the work of our organism, and what do I know of it 
myself? wa it the sudden upcrop of some lower stratum in my 
nature--a brutal primit instinct suddenli assert itself? I could 
almost believ the tale of obsess by evil spirits, so overmast 
wa the feeling. 

well, the incid place me in a most unfortun position. On the 
one hand, I am veri loath to abandon a seri of experi which have 
alreadi gone so far, and which promis such brilliant results. On the 
other, if thi unhappi woman ha conceiv a passion for me---- but 
sure even now I must have made some hideou mistake. she, with her 
age and her deformity! It is impossible. and then she knew about 
agatha. she understood how I wa placed. she onli smile out of 
amusement, perhaps, when in my daze state I seiz her hand. It wa 
my half-mesmer brain which gave it a meaning, and sprang with such 
bestial swift to meet it. I wish I could persuad myself that it 
wa inde so. On the whole, perhaps, my wisest plan would be to 
postpon our other experi until wilson' return. I have written a 
note to miss penclosa, therefore, make no allus to last night, but 
say that a press of work would caus me to interrupt our sit 
for a few days. she ha answered, formal enough, to say that if I 
should chang my mind I should find her at home at the usual hour. 

10 P. M. well, well, what a thing of straw I am! I am come to know 
myself better of late, and the more I know the lower I fall in my own 
estimation. sure I wa not alway so weak as this. At four o'clock 
I should have smile had ani one told me that I should go to miss 
penclosa' to-night, and yet, at eight, I wa at wilson' door as 
usual. I don't know how it occurred. the influenc of habit, I 
suppose. perhap there is a mesmer craze as there is an opium craze, 
and I am a victim to it. I onli know that as I work in my studi I 
becam more and more uneasy. I fidgeted. I worried. I could not 
concentr my mind upon the paper in front of me. and then, at last, 
almost befor I knew what I wa doing, I seiz my hat and hurri 
round to keep my usual appointment. 

We had an interest evening. mrs. wilson wa present dure most of 
the time, which prevent the embarrass which one at least of us 
must have felt. miss penclosa' manner wa quit the same as usual, 
and she express no surpris at my have come in spite of my note. 
there wa noth in her bear to show that yesterday' incid had 
made ani impress upon her, and so I am inclin to hope that I 
overr it. 

april 6 (evening). no, no, no, I did not overr it. I can no longer 
attempt to conceal from myself that thi woman ha conceiv a passion 
for me. It is monstrous, but it is true. again, tonight, I awok from 
the mesmer tranc to find my hand in hers, and to suffer that odiou 
feel which urg me to throw away my honor, my career, everi thing, 
for the sake of thi creatur who, as I can plainli see when I am away 
from her influence, possess no singl charm upon earth. but when I 
am near her, I do not feel this. she rous someth in me, someth 
evil, someth I had rather not think of. she paralyz my better 
nature, too, at the moment when she stimul my worse. decidedli it 
is not good for me to be near her. 

last night wa wors than before. instead of fli I actual sat for 
some time with my hand in her talk over the most intim subject 
with her. We spoke of agatha, among other things. what could I have 
been dream of? miss penclosa said that she wa conventional, and I 
agre with her. she spoke onc or twice in a disparag way of her, 
and I did not protest. what a creatur I have been! 

weak as I have prove myself to be, I am still strong enough to bring 
thi sort of thing to an end. It shall not happen again. I have sens 
enough to fli when I cannot fight. from thi sunday night onward I 
shall never sit with miss penclosa again. never! let the experi 
go, let the research come to an end; ani thing is better than face 
thi monstrou temptat which drag me so low. I have said noth 
to miss penclosa, but I shall simpli stay away. she can tell the 
reason without ani word of mine. 

april 7. have stay away as I said. It is a piti to ruin such an 
interest investigation, but it would be a greater piti still to ruin 
my life, and I know that I cannot trust myself with that woman. 

11 P. M. god help me! what is the matter with me? Am I go mad? 
let me tri and be calm and reason with myself. first of all I shall 
set down exactli what occurred. 

It wa nearli eight when I wrote the line with which thi day begins. 
feel strang restless and uneasy, I left my room and walk round 
to spend the even with agatha and her mother. they both remark 
that I wa pale and haggard. about nine professor pratt-haldan came 
in, and we play a game of whist. I tri hard to concentr my 
attent upon the cards, but the feel of restless grew and grew 
until I found it imposs to struggl against it. I simpli could not 
sit still at the table. At last, in the veri middl of a hand, I threw 
my card down and, with some sort of an incoher apolog about have 
an appointment, I rush from the room. As if in a dream I have a 
vagu recollect of tear through the hall, snatch my hat from 
the stand, and slam the door behind me. As in a dream, too, I have 
the impress of the doubl line of gas-lamps, and my bespatt 
boot tell me that I must have run down the middl of the road. It wa 
all misti and strang and unnatural. I came to wilson' house; I saw 
mrs. wilson and I saw miss penclosa. I hardli recal what we talk 
about, but I do rememb that miss P. shook the head of her crutch at 
me in a play way, and accus me of be late and of lose 
interest in our experiments. there wa no mesmerism, but I stay some 
time and have onli just returned. 

My brain is quit clear again now, and I can think over what ha 
occurred. It is absurd to suppos that it is mere weak and forc 
of habit. I tri to explain it in that way the other night, but it 
will no longer suffice. It is someth much deeper and more terribl 
than that. why, when I wa at the mardens' whist-table, I wa drag 
away as if the noos of a rope had been cast round me. I can no longer 
disguis it from myself. the woman ha her grip upon me. I am in her 
clutch. but I must keep my head and reason it out and see what is best 
to be done. 

but what a blind fool I have been! In my enthusiasm over my research I 
have walk straight into the pit, although it lay gape befor me. 
did she not herself warn me? did she not tell me, as I can read in my 
own journal, that when she ha acquir power over a subject she can 
make him do her will? and she ha acquir that power over me. I am 
for the moment at the beck and call of thi creatur with the crutch. 
I must come when she will it. I must do as she wills. worst of all, 
I must feel as she wills. I loath her and fear her, yet, while I am 
under the spell, she can doubtless make me love her. 

there is some consol in the thought, then, that those odiou 
impuls for which I have blame myself do not realli come from me at 
all. they are all transfer from her, littl as I could have guess 
it at the time. I feel cleaner and lighter for the thought. 

april 8. yes, now, in broad daylight, write coolli and with time for 
reflection, I am compel to confirm everi thing which I wrote in my 
journal last night. I am in a horribl position, but, abov all, I 
must not lose my head. I must pit my intellect against her powers. 
after all, I am no silli puppet, to danc at the end of a string. I 
have energy, brains, courage. for all her devil' trick I may beat 
her yet. may! I must, or what is to becom of me? 

let me tri to reason it out! thi woman, by her own explanation, can 
domin my nervou organism. she can project herself into my bodi and 
take command of it. she ha a parasit soul; yes, she is a parasite, a 
monstrou parasite. she creep into my frame as the hermit crab doe 
into the whelk' shell. I am powerless what can I do? I am deal 
with forc of which I know nothing. and I can tell no one of my 
trouble. they would set me down as a madman. certainly, if it got 
nois abroad, the univers would say that they had no need of a 
devil-ridden professor. and agatha! no, no, I must face it alone. 




iii 

I read over my note of what the woman said when she spoke about her 
powers. there is one point which fill me with dismay. she impli 
that when the influenc is slight the subject know what he is doing, 
but cannot control himself, wherea when it is strongli exert he is 
absolut unconscious. now, I have alway known what I did, though 
less so last night than on the previou occasions. that seem to mean 
that she ha never yet exert her full power upon me. wa ever a man 
so place before? 

yes, perhap there was, and veri near me, too. charl sadler must 
know someth of this! hi vagu word of warn take a mean now. 
oh, if I had onli listen to him then, befor I help by these 
repeat sit to forg the link of the chain which bind me! but 
I will see him to-day. I will apolog to him for have treat hi 
warn so lightly. I will see if he can advis me. 

4 P. M. no, he cannot. I have talk with him, and he show such 
surpris at the first word in which I tri to express my unspeak 
secret that I went no further. As far as I can gather (bi hint and 
infer rather than by ani statement), hi own experi wa 
limit to some word or look such as I have myself endured. hi 
abandon of miss penclosa is in itself a sign that he wa never 
realli in her toils. oh, if he onli knew hi escape! He ha to thank 
hi phlegmat saxon tempera for it. I am black and celtic, and 
thi hag' clutch is deep in my nerves. shall I ever get it out? 
shall I ever be the same man that I wa just one short fortnight ago? 

let me consid what I had better do. I cannot leav the univers in 
the middl of the term. If I were free, my cours would be obvious. I 
should start at onc and travel in persia. but would she allow me to 
start? and could her influenc not reach me in persia, and bring me 
back to within touch of her crutch? I can onli find out the limit of 
thi hellish power by my own bitter experience. I will fight and fight 
and fight--and what can I do more? 

I know veri well that about eight o'clock to-night that crave for her 
society, that irresist restlessness, will come upon me. how shall 
I overcom it? what shall I do? I must make it imposs for me to 
leav the room. I shall lock the door and throw the key out of the 
window. but, then, what am I to do in the morning? never mind about 
the morning. I must at all cost break thi chain which hold me. 

april 9. victory! I have done splendidly! At seven o'clock last 
night I took a hasti dinner, and then lock myself up in my bedroom 
and drop the key into the garden. I chose a cheeri novel, and lay 
in bed for three hour tri to read it, but realli in a horribl 
state of trepidation, expect everi instant that I should becom 
consciou of the impulse. noth of the sort occurred, however, and I 
awok thi morn with the feel that a black nightmar had been 
lift off me. perhap the creatur realiz what I had done, and 
understood that it wa useless to tri to influenc me. At ani rate, I 
have beaten her once, and if I can do it once, I can do it again. 

It wa most awkward about the key in the morning. luckily, there wa 
an under-garden below, and I ask him to throw it up. No doubt he 
thought I had just drop it. I will have door and window screw 
up and six stout men to hold me down in my bed befor I will surrend 
myself to be hag-ridden in thi way. 

I had a note from mrs. marden thi afternoon ask me to go round and 
see her. I intend to do so in ani case, but had not except to find 
bad news wait for me. It seem that the armstrongs, from whom 
agatha ha expectations, are due home from adelaid in the aurora, and 
that they have written to mrs. marden and her to meet them in town. 
they will probabl be away for a month or six weeks, and, as the aurora 
is due on wednesday, they must go at once--to-morrow, if they are readi 
in time. My consol is that when we meet again there will be no 
more part between agatha and me. 

"I want you to do one thing, agatha," said I, when we were alon 
together. "if you should happen to meet miss penclosa, either in town 
or here, you must promis me never again to allow her to mesmer you." 

agatha open her eyes. 

"why, it wa onli the other day that you were say how interest it 
all was, and how determin you were to finish your experiments." 

"I know, but I have chang my mind sinc then." 

"and you won't have it ani more?" 

"no." 

"I am so glad, austin. you can't think how pale and worn you have been 
lately. It wa realli our princip object to go to london now 
that we did not wish to leav you when you were so pull down. and 
your manner ha been so strang occasionally--especi that night 
when you left poor professor pratt-haldan to play dummy. I am 
convinc that these experi are veri bad for your nerves." 

"I think so, too, dear." 

"and for miss penclosa' nerv as well. you have heard that she is 
ill?" 

"no." 

"mrs. wilson told us so last night. she describ it as a nervou 
fever. professor wilson is come back thi week, and of cours mrs. 
wilson is veri anxiou that miss penclosa should be well again then, 
for he ha quit a programm of experi which he is anxiou to 
carri out." 

I wa glad to have agatha' promise, for it wa enough that thi woman 
should have one of us in her clutch. On the other hand, I wa 
disturb to hear about miss penclosa' illness. It rather discount 
the victori which I appear to win last night. I rememb that she 
said that loss of health interf with her power. that may be whi I 
wa abl to hold my own so easily. well, well, I must take the same 
precaut to-night and see what come of it. I am childishli 
frighten when I think of her. 

april 10. all went veri well last night. I wa amus at the 
gardener' face when I had again to hail him thi morn and to ask 
him to throw up my key. I shall get a name among the servant if thi 
sort of thing goe on. but the great point is that I stay in my room 
without the slightest inclin to leav it. I do believ that I am 
shake myself clear of thi incred bond--or is it onli that the 
woman' power is in abey until she recov her strength? I can 
but pray for the best. 

the marden left thi morning, and the bright seem to have gone 
out of the spring sunshine. and yet it is veri beauti also as it 
gleam on the green chestnut opposit my windows, and give a touch of 
gayeti to the heavy, lichen-mottl wall of the old colleges. how 
sweet and gentl and sooth is nature! who would think that there 
lurk in her also such vile forces, such odiou possibilities! for of 
cours I understand that thi dread thing which ha sprung out at me 
is neither supernatur nor even preternatural. no, it is a natur 
forc which thi woman can use and societi is ignor of. the mere 
fact that it ebb with her strength show how entir it is subject to 
physic laws. If I had time, I might probe it to the bottom and lay 
my hand upon it antidote. but you cannot tame the tiger when you are 
beneath hi claws. you can but tri to writh away from him. ah, when 
I look in the glass and see my own dark eye and clear-cut spanish 
face, I long for a vitriol splash or a bout of the small-pox. one or 
the other might have save me from thi calamity. 

I am inclin to think that I may have troubl to-night. there are two 
thing which make me fear so. one is that I met mrs. wilson in the 
street, and that she tell me that miss penclosa is better, though 
still weak. I find myself wish in my heart that the ill had 
been her last. the other is that professor wilson come back in a day 
or two, and hi presenc would act as a constraint upon her. I should 
not fear our interview if a third person were present. for both these 
reason I have a presenti of troubl to-night, and I shall take the 
same precaut as before. 

april 10. no, thank god, all went well last night. I realli could not 
face the garden again. I lock my door and thrust the key 
underneath it, so that I had to ask the maid to let me out in the 
morning. but the precaut wa realli not needed, for I never had ani 
inclin to go out at all. three even in success at home! I 
am sure near the end of my troubles, for wilson will be home again 
either today or tomorrow. shall I tell him of what I have gone through 
or not? I am convinc that I should not have the slightest sympathi 
from him. He would look upon me as an interest case, and read a 
paper about me at the next meet of the psychic society, in which 
he would grave discuss the possibl of my be a deliber liar, 
and weigh it against the chanc of my be in an earli stage of 
lunacy. no, I shall get no comfort out of wilson. 

I am feel wonder fit and well. I don't think I ever lectur 
with greater spirit. oh, if I could onli get thi shadow off my life, 
how happi I should be! young, fairli wealthy, in the front rank of my 
profession, engag to a beauti and charm girl--hav I not everi 
thing which a man could ask for? onli one thing to troubl me, but 
what a thing it is! 

midnight. I shall go mad. yes, that will be the end of it. I shall 
go mad. I am not far from it now. My head throb as I rest it on my 
hot hand. I am quiver all over like a scare horse. oh, what a 
night I have had! and yet I have some caus to be satisfi also. 

At the risk of becom the laughing-stock of my own servant, I again 
slip my key under the door, imprison myself for the night. then, 
find it too earli to go to bed, I lay down with my cloth on and 
began to read one of dumas' novels. suddenli I wa gripped--grip 
and drag from the couch. It is onli thu that I can describ the 
overpow natur of the forc which pounc upon me. I claw at 
the coverlet. I clung to the wood-work. I believ that I scream out 
in my frenzy. It wa all useless, hopeless. I must go. there wa no 
way out of it. It wa onli at the outset that I resisted. the forc 
soon becam too overmast for that. I thank good that there 
were no watcher there to interfer with me. I could not have answer 
for myself if there had been. and, besid the determin to get 
out, there came to me, also, the keenest and coolest judgment in 
choos my means. I lit a candl and endeavored, kneel in front of 
the door, to pull the key through with the feather-end of a quill pen. 
It wa just too short and push it further away. then with quiet 
persist I got a paper-knif out of one of the drawers, and with 
that I manag to draw the key back. I open the door, step into 
my study, took a photograph of myself from the bureau, wrote someth 
across it, place it in the insid pocket of my coat, and then start 
off for wilson's. 

It wa all wonder clear, and yet disassoci from the rest of my 
life, as the incid of even the most vivid dream might be. A 
peculiar doubl conscious possess me. there wa the predomin 
alien will, which wa bent upon draw me to the side of it owner, 
and there wa the feebler protest personality, which I recogn as 
be myself, tug feebli at the overmast impuls as a led 
terrier might at it chain. I can rememb recogn these two 
conflict forces, but I recal noth of my walk, nor of how I wa 
admit to the house. 

veri vivid, however, is my recollect of how I met miss penclosa. 
she wa reclin on the sofa in the littl boudoir in which our 
experi had usual been carri out. her head wa rest on her 
hand, and a tiger-skin rug had been partli drawn over her. she look 
up expectantli as I entered, and, as the lamp-light fell upon her face, 
I could see that she wa veri pale and thin, with dark hollow under 
her eyes. she smile at me, and point to a stool besid her. It wa 
with her left hand that she pointed, and I, run eagerli forward, 
seiz it,--i loath myself as I think of it,--and press it 
passion to my lips. then, seat myself upon the stool, and 
still retain her hand, I gave her the photograph which I had brought 
with me, and talk and talk and talked--of my love for her, of my 
grief over her illness, of my joy at her recovery, of the miseri it wa 
to me to be absent a singl even from her side. she lay quietli 
look down at me with imperi eye and her provoc smile. onc 
I rememb that she pass her hand over my hair as one caress a dog; 
and it gave me pleasure--th caress. I thrill under it. I wa her 
slave, bodi and soul, and for the moment I rejoic in my slavery. 

and then came the bless change. never tell me that there is not a 
providence! I wa on the brink of perdition. My feet were on the 
edge. wa it a coincid that at that veri instant help should come? 
no, no, no; there is a providence, and it hand ha drawn me back. 
there is someth in the univers stronger than thi devil woman with 
her tricks. ah, what a balm to my heart it is to think so! 

As I look up at her I wa consciou of a chang in her. her face, 
which had been pale before, wa now ghastly. her eye were dull, and 
the lid droop heavili over them. abov all, the look of seren 
confid had gone from her features. her mouth had weakened. her 
forehead had puckered. she wa frighten and undecided. and as I 
watch the chang my own spirit flutter and struggled, tri hard 
to tear itself from the grip which held it--a grip which, from moment 
to moment, grew less secure. 

"austin," she whispered, "I have tri to do too much. I wa not 
strong enough. I have not recov yet from my illness. but I could 
not live longer without see you. you won't leav me, austin? thi 
is onli a pass weakness. If you will onli give me five minutes, I 
shall be myself again. give me the small decant from the tabl in 
the window." 

but I had regain my soul. with her wane strength the influenc had 
clear away from me and left me free. and I wa aggressive--bitterly, 
fierc aggressive. for onc at least I could make thi woman 
understand what my real feel toward her were. My soul wa fill 
with a hatr as bestial as the love against which it wa a reaction. 
It wa the savage, murder passion of the revolt serf. I could 
have taken the crutch from her side and beaten her face in with it. 
she threw her hand up, as if to avoid a blow, and cower away from me 
into the corner of the settee. 

"the brandy!" she gasped. "the brandy!" 

I took the decant and pour it over the root of a palm in the 
window. then I snatch the photograph from her hand and tore it into 
a hundr pieces. 

"you vile woman," I said, "if I did my duti to society, you would never 
leav thi room alive!" 

"I love you, austin; I love you!" she wailed. 

"yes," I cried, "and charl sadler before. and how mani other befor 
that?" 

"charl sadler!" she gasped. "he ha spoken to you? so, charl 
sadler, charl sadler!" her voic came through her white lip like a 
snake' hiss. 

"yes, I know you, and other shall know you, too. you shameless 
creature! you knew how I stood. and yet you use your vile power to 
bring me to your side. you may, perhaps, do so again, but at least you 
will rememb that you have heard me say that I love miss marden from 
the bottom of my soul, and that I loath you, abhor you! 

"the veri sight of you and the sound of your voic fill me with horror 
and disgust. the thought of you is repulsive. that is how I feel 
toward you, and if it pleas you by your trick to draw me again to 
your side as you have done to-night, you will at least, I should think, 
have littl satisfact in tri to make a lover out of a man who ha 
told you hi real opinion of you. you may put what word you will into 
my mouth, but you cannot help remembering----" 

I stopped, for the woman' head had fallen back, and she had fainted. 
she could not bear to hear what I had to say to her! what a glow of 
satisfact it give me to think that, come what may, in the futur 
she can never misunderstand my true feel toward her. but what will 
occur in the future? what will she do next? I dare not think of it. 
oh, if onli I could hope that she will leav me alone! but when I 
think of what I said to her---- never mind; I have been stronger than 
she for once. 

april 11. I hardli slept last night, and found myself in the morn 
so unstrung and feverish that I wa compel to ask pratt-haldan to 
do my lectur for me. It is the first that I have ever missed. I rose 
at mid-day, but my head is aching, my hand quivering, and my nerv in 
a pitiabl state. 

who should come round thi even but wilson. He ha just come back 
from london, where he ha lectured, read papers, conven meetings, 
expos a medium, conduct a seri of experi on thought 
transference, entertain professor richet of paris, spent hour gaze 
into a crystal, and obtain some evid as to the passag of matter 
through matter. all thi he pour into my ear in a singl gust. 

"but you!" he cri at last. "you are not look well. and miss 
penclosa is quit prostrat to-day. how about the experiments?" 

"I have abandon them." 

"tut, tut! why?" 

"the subject seem to me to be a danger one." 

out came hi big brown note-book. 

"thi is of great interest," said he. "what are your ground for 
say that it is a danger one? pleas give your fact in 
chronolog order, with approxim date and name of reliabl 
wit with their perman addresses." 

"first of all," I asked, "would you tell me whether you have collect 
ani case where the mesmerist ha gain a command over the subject and 
ha use it for evil purposes?" 

"dozens!" he cri exultantly. "crime by suggestion----" 

"I don't mean suggestion. I mean where a sudden impuls come from a 
person at a distance--an uncontrol impulse." 

"obsession!" he shrieked, in an ecstasi of delight. "it is the rarest 
condition. We have eight cases, five well attested. you don't mean to 
say----" hi exult made him hardli articulate. 

"no, I don't," said I. "good-evening! you will excus me, but I am 
not veri well to-night." and so at last I got rid of him, still 
brandish hi pencil and hi note-book. My troubl may be bad to 
hear, but at least it is better to hug them to myself than to have 
myself exhibit by wilson, like a freak at a fair. He ha lost sight 
of human beings. everi thing to him is a case and a phenomenon. I 
will die befor I speak to him again upon the matter. 

april 12. yesterday wa a bless day of quiet, and I enjoy an 
unev night. wilson' presenc is a great consolation. what can 
the woman do now? surely, when she ha heard me say what I have said, 
she will conceiv the same disgust for me which I have for her. she 
could not, no, she could not, desir to have a lover who had insult 
her so. no, I believ I am free from her love--but how about her hate? 
might she not use these power of her for revenge? tut! whi should I 
frighten myself over shadows? she will forget about me, and I shall 
forget about her, and all will be well. 

april 13. My nerv have quit recov their tone. I realli believ 
that I have conquer the creature. but I must confess to live in 
some suspense. she is well again, for I hear that she wa drive with 
mrs. wilson in the high street in the afternoon. 

april 14. I do wish I could get away from the place altogether. I 
shall fli to agatha' side the veri day that the term closes. I 
suppos it is pitiabl weak of me, but thi woman get upon my nerv 
most terribly. I have seen her again, and I have spoken with her. 

It wa just after lunch, and I wa smoke a cigarett in my study, 
when I heard the step of my servant murray in the passage. I wa 
languidli consciou that a second step wa audibl behind, and had 
hardli troubl myself to specul who it might be, when suddenli a 
slight nois brought me out of my chair with my skin creep with 
apprehension. I had never particularli observ befor what sort of 
sound the tap of a crutch was, but my quiver nerv told me that 
I heard it now in the sharp wooden clack which altern with the 
muffl thud of the foot fall. anoth instant and my servant had 
shown her in. 

I did not attempt the usual convent of society, nor did she. I 
simpli stood with the smoulder cigarett in my hand, and gaze at 
her. she in her turn look silent at me, and at her look I 
rememb how in these veri page I had tri to defin the express 
of her eyes, whether they were furtiv or fierce. to-day they were 
fierce--coldli and inexor so. 

"well," said she at last, "are you still of the same mind as when I saw 
you last?" 

"I have alway been of the same mind." 

"let us understand each other, professor gilroy," said she slowly. "I 
am not a veri safe person to trifl with, as you should realiz by now. 
It wa you who ask me to enter into a seri of experi with you, 
it wa you who won my affections, it wa you who profess your love 
for me, it wa you who brought me your own photograph with word of 
affect upon it, and, finally, it wa you who on the veri same 
even thought fit to insult me most outrageously, address me as no 
man ha ever dare to speak to me yet. tell me that those word came 
from you in a moment of passion and I am prepar to forget and to 
forgiv them. you did not mean what you said, austin? you do not 
realli hate me?" 

I might have piti thi deform woman--such a long for love broke 
suddenli through the menac of her eyes. but then I thought of what I 
had gone through, and my heart set like flint. 

"if ever you heard me speak of love," said I, "you know veri well that 
it wa your voic which spoke, and not mine. the onli word of truth 
which I have ever been abl to say to you are those which you heard 
when last we met." 

"I know. some one ha set you against me. It wa he!" she tap with 
her crutch upon the floor. "well, you know veri well that I could 
bring you thi instant crouch like a spaniel to my feet. you will 
not find me again in my hour of weakness, when you can insult me with 
impunity. have a care what you are doing, professor gilroy. you stand 
in a terribl position. you have not yet realiz the hold which I 
have upon you." 

I shrug my shoulder and turn away. 

"well," said she, after a pause, "if you despis my love, I must see 
what can be done with fear. you smile, but the day will come when you 
will come scream to me for pardon. yes, you will grovel on the 
ground befor me, proud as you are, and you will curs the day that 
ever you turn me from your best friend into your most bitter enemy. 
have a care, professor gilroy!" I saw a white hand shake in the air, 
and a face which wa scarc human, so convuls wa it with passion. 
An instant later she wa gone, and I heard the quick hobbl and tap 
reced down the passage. 

but she ha left a weight upon my heart. vagu presenti of come 
misfortun lie heavi upon me. I tri in vain to persuad myself that 
these are onli word of empti anger. I can rememb those relentless 
eye too clearli to think so. what shall I do--ah, what shall I do? I 
am no longer master of my own soul. At ani moment thi loathsom 
parasit may creep into me, and then---- I must tell some one my 
hideou secret--i must tell it or go mad. If I had some one to 
sympath and advise! wilson is out of the question. charl sadler 
would understand me onli so far as hi own experi carri him. 
pratt-haldane! He is a well-balanc man, a man of great common-sens 
and resource. I will go to him. I will tell him everi thing. god 
grant that he may be abl to advis me! 




IV 

6.45 P. M. no, it is useless. there is no human help for me; I must 
fight thi out single-handed. two cours lie befor me. I might 
becom thi woman' lover. Or I must endur such persecut as she 
can inflict upon me. even if none come, I shall live in a hell of 
apprehension. but she may tortur me, she may drive me mad, she may 
kill me: I will never, never, never give in. what can she inflict 
which would be wors than the loss of agatha, and the knowledg that I 
am a perjur liar, and have forfeit the name of gentleman? 

pratt-haldan wa most amiable, and listen with all polit to my 
story. but when I look at hi heavi set features, hi slow eyes, and 
the ponder studi furnitur which surround him, I could hardli tell 
him what I had come to say. It wa all so substantial, so material. 
and, besides, what would I myself have said a short month ago if one of 
my colleagu had come to me with a stori of demon possession? 
perhaps. I should have been less patient than he was. As it was, he 
took note of my statement, ask me how much tea I drank, how mani 
hour I slept, whether I had been overwork much, had I had sudden 
pain in the head, evil dreams, sing in the ears, flash befor the 
eyes--al question which point to hi belief that brain congest 
wa at the bottom of my trouble. final he dismiss me with a great 
mani platitud about open-air exercise, and avoid of nervou 
excitement. hi prescription, which wa for chloral and bromide, I 
roll up and threw into the gutter. 

no, I can look for no help from ani human being. If I consult ani 
more, they may put their head togeth and I may find myself in an 
asylum. I can but grip my courag with both hands, and pray that an 
honest man may not be abandoned. 

april 10. It is the sweetest spring within the memori of man. So 
green, so mild, so beautiful! ah, what a contrast between natur 
without and my own soul so torn with doubt and terror! It ha been an 
unev day, but I know that I am on the edg of an abyss. I know 
it, and yet I go on with the routin of my life. the one bright spot 
is that agatha is happi and well and out of all danger. If thi 
creatur had a hand on each of us, what might she not do? 

april 16. the woman is ingeni in her torments. she know how fond 
I am of my work, and how highli my lectur are thought of. So it is 
from that point that she now attack me. It will end, I can see, in my 
lose my professorship, but I will fight to the finish. she shall not 
drive me out of it without a struggle. 

I wa not consciou of ani chang dure my lectur thi morn save 
that for a minut or two I had a dizzi and swimmi which rapidli 
pass away. On the contrary, I congratul myself upon have made 
my subject (the function of the red corpuscles) both interest and 
clear. I wa surprised, therefore, when a student came into my 
laboratori immedi after the lecture, and complain of be 
puzzl by the discrep between my statement and those in the text 
books. He show me hi note-book, in which I wa report as have 
in one portion of the lectur champion the most outrag and 
unscientif heresies. Of cours I deni it, and declar that he had 
misunderstood me, but on compar hi note with those of hi 
companions, it becam clear that he wa right, and that I realli had 
made some most preposter statements. Of cours I shall explain it 
away as be the result of a moment of aberration, but I feel onli too 
sure that it will be the first of a series. It is but a month now to 
the end of the session, and I pray that I may be abl to hold out until 
then. 

april 26. ten day have elaps sinc I have had the heart to make ani 
entri in my journal. whi should I record my own humili and 
degradation? I had vow never to open it again. and yet the forc of 
habit is strong, and here I find myself take up onc more the record 
of my own dread experiences--in much the same spirit in which a 
suicid ha been known to take note of the effect of the poison which 
kill him. 

well, the crash which I had foreseen ha come--and that no further back 
than yesterday. the univers author have taken my lectureship 
from me. It ha been done in the most delic way, purport to be a 
temporari measur to reliev me from the effect of overwork, and to 
give me the opportun of recov my health. none the less, it ha 
been done, and I am no longer professor gilroy. the laboratori is 
still in my charge, but I have littl doubt that that also will soon go. 

the fact is that my lectur had becom the laughing-stock of the 
university. My class wa crowd with student who came to see and 
hear what the eccentr professor would do or say next. I cannot go 
into the detail of my humiliation. oh, that devilish woman! there is 
no depth of buffooneri and imbecil to which she ha not forc me. 
I would begin my lectur clearli and well, but alway with the sens of 
a come eclipse. then as I felt the influenc I would struggl 
against it, strive with clench hand and bead of sweat upon my 
brow to get the better of it, while the students, hear my incoher 
word and watch my contortions, would roar with laughter at the 
antic of their professor. and then, when she had onc fairli master 
me, out would come the most outrag things--silli jokes, sentiment 
as though I were propos a toast, snatch of ballads, person abus 
even against some member of my class. and then in a moment my brain 
would clear again, and my lectur would proceed decor to the end. 
No wonder that my conduct ha been the talk of the colleges. No wonder 
that the univers senat ha been compel to take offici notic 
of such a scandal. oh, that devilish woman! 

and the most dread part of it all is my own loneliness. here I sit 
in a commonplac english bow-window, look out upon a commonplac 
english street with it garish 'buse and it loung policeman, and 
behind me there hang a shadow which is out of all keep with the age 
and place. In the home of knowledg I am weigh down and tortur by 
a power of which scienc know nothing. No magistr would listen to 
me. No paper would discuss my case. No doctor would believ my 
symptoms. My own most intim friend would onli look upon it as a 
sign of brain derangement. I am out of all touch with my kind. oh, 
that devilish woman! let her have a care! she may push me too far. 
when the law cannot help a man, he may make a law for himself. 

she met me in the high street yesterday even and spoke to me. It 
wa as well for her, perhaps, that it wa not between the hedg of a 
lone countri road. she ask me with her cold smile whether I had 
been chasten yet. I did not deign to answer her. "we must tri 
anoth turn of the screw;" said she. have a care, my lady, have a 
care! I had her at my merci once. perhap anoth chanc may come. 

april 28. the suspens of my lectureship ha had the effect also of 
take away her mean of annoy me, and so I have enjoy two bless 
day of peace. after all, there is no reason to despair. sympathi 
pour in to me from all sides, and everi one agre that it is my 
devot to scienc and the arduou natur of my research which have 
shaken my nervou system. I have had the kindest messag from the 
council advis me to travel abroad, and express the confid hope 
that I may be abl to resum all my duti by the begin of the 
summer term. noth could be more flatter than their allus to 
my career and to my servic to the university. It is onli in 
misfortun that one can test one' own popularity. thi creatur may 
weari of torment me, and then all may yet be well. may god grant it! 

april 29. our sleepi littl town ha had a small sensation. the onli 
knowledg of crime which we ever have is when a rowdi undergradu 
break a few lamp or come to blow with a policeman. last night, 
however, there wa an attempt made to break-into the branch of the bank 
of england, and we are all in a flutter in consequence. 

parkenson, the manager, is an intim friend of mine, and I found him 
veri much excit when I walk round there after breakfast. had the 
thiev broken into the counting-house, they would still have had the 
safe to reckon with, so that the defenc wa consider stronger 
than the attack. indeed, the latter doe not appear to have ever been 
veri formidable. two of the lower window have mark as if a chisel or 
some such instrument had been push under them to forc them open. 
the polic should have a good clue, for the wood-work had been done 
with green paint onli the day before, and from the smear it is evid 
that some of it ha found it way on to the criminal' hand or clothes. 

4.30 P. M. ah, that accurs woman! that thrice accurs woman! 
never mind! she shall not beat me! no, she shall not! but, oh, the 
she-devil! she ha taken my professorship. now she would take my 
honor. Is there noth I can do against her, noth save---- ah, 
but, hard push as I am, I cannot bring myself to think of that! 

It wa about an hour ago that I went into my bedroom, and wa brush 
my hair befor the glass, when suddenli my eye lit upon someth 
which left me so sick and cold that I sat down upon the edg of the bed 
and began to cry. It is mani a long year sinc I shed tears, but all 
my nerv wa gone, and I could but sob and sob in impot grief and 
anger. there wa my hous jacket, the coat I usual wear after 
dinner, hang on it peg by the wardrobe, with the right sleev 
thickli crust from wrist to elbow with daub of green paint. 

So thi wa what she meant by anoth turn of the screw! she had made 
a public imbecil of me. now she would brand me as a criminal. thi 
time she ha failed. but how about the next? I dare not think of 
it--and of agatha and my poor old mother! I wish that I were dead! 

yes, thi is the other turn of the screw. and thi is also what she 
meant, no doubt, when she said that I had not realiz yet the power 
she ha over me. I look back at my account of my convers with 
her, and I see how she declar that with a slight exert of her will 
her subject would be conscious, and with a stronger one unconscious. 
last night I wa unconscious. I could have sworn that I slept soundli 
in my bed without so much as a dream. and yet those stain tell me 
that I dressed, made my way out, attempt to open the bank windows, 
and returned. wa I observed? Is it possibl that some one saw me do 
it and follow me home? ah, what a hell my life ha become! I have 
no peace, no rest. but my patienc is near it end. 

10 P. M. I have clean my coat with turpentine. I do not think that 
ani one could have seen me. It wa with my screw-driv that I made 
the marks. I found it all crust with paint, and I have clean it. 
My head ach as if it would burst, and I have taken five grain of 
antipyrine. If it were not for agatha, I should have taken fifti and 
had an end of it. 

may 3. three quiet days. thi hell fiend is like a cat with a mouse. 
she let me loos onli to pounc upon me again. I am never so 
frighten as when everi thing is still. My physic state is 
deplorable--perpetu hiccough and ptosi of the left eyelid. 

I have heard from the marden that they will be back the day after 
to-morrow. I do not know whether I am glad or sorry. they were safe 
in london. onc here they may be drawn into the miser network in 
which I am myself struggling. and I must tell them of it. I cannot 
marri agatha so long as I know that I am not respons for my own 
actions. yes, I must tell them, even if it bring everi thing to an 
end between us. 

to-night is the univers ball, and I must go. god know I never felt 
less in the humor for festivity, but I must not have it said that I am 
unfit to appear in public. If I am seen there, and have speech with 
some of the elder of the univers it will go a long way toward 
show them that it would be unjust to take my chair away from me. 

10 P. M. I have been to the ball. charl sadler and I went together, 
but I have come away befor him. I shall wait up for him, however, 
for, indeed, I fear to go to sleep these nights. He is a cheery, 
practic fellow, and a chat with him will steadi my nerves. On the 
whole, the even wa a great success. I talk to everi one who ha 
influence, and I think that I made them realiz that my chair is not 
vacant quit yet. the creatur wa at the ball--un to dance, of 
course, but sit with mrs. wilson. again and again her eye rest 
upon me. they were almost the last thing I saw befor I left the 
room. once, as I sat sideway to her, I watch her, and saw that her 
gaze wa follow some one else. It wa sadler, who wa danc at 
the time with the second miss thurston. To judg by her expression, it 
is well for him that he is not in her grip as I am. He doe not know 
the escap he ha had. I think I hear hi step in the street now, and 
I will go down and let him in. If he will---- 

may 4. whi did I break off in thi way last night? I never went down 
stairs, after all--at least, I have no recollect of do so. but, 
on the other hand, I cannot rememb go to bed. one of my hand is 
greatli swollen thi morning, and yet I have no remembr of injur 
it yesterday. otherwise, I am feel all the better for last night' 
festivity. but I cannot understand how it is that I did not meet 
charl sadler when I so fulli intend to do so. Is it possible---- 
My god, it is onli too probable! ha she been lead me some devil' 
danc again? I will go down to sadler and ask him. 

mid-day. the thing ha come to a crisis. My life is not worth living. 
but, if I am to die, then she shall come also. I will not leav her 
behind, to drive some other man mad as she ha me. no, I have come to 
the limit of my endurance. she ha made me as desper and danger 
a man as walk the earth. god know I have never had the heart to hurt 
a fly, and yet, if I had my hand now upon that woman, she should never 
leav thi room alive. I shall see her thi veri day, and she shall 
learn what she ha to expect from me. 

I went to sadler and found him, to my surprise, in bed. As I enter 
he sat up and turn a face toward me which sicken me as I look at 
it. 

"why, sadler, what ha happened?" I cried, but my heart turn cold as 
I said it. 

"gilroy," he answered, mumbl with hi swollen lips, "I have for some 
week been under the impress that you are a madman. now I know it, 
and that you are a danger one as well. If it were not that I am 
unwil to make a scandal in the college, you would now be in the 
hand of the police." 

"do you mean----" I cried. 

"I mean that as I open the door last night you rush out upon me, 
struck me with both your fist in the face, knock me down, kick me 
furious in the side, and left me lie almost unconsci in the 
street. look at your own hand bear wit against you." 

yes, there it was, puf up, with sponge-lik knuckles, as after some 
terrif blow. what could I do? though he put me down as a madman, I 
must tell him all. I sat by hi bed and went over all my troubl from 
the beginning. I pour them out with quiver hand and burn 
word which might have carri convict to the most sceptical. "she 
hate you and she hate me!" I cried. "she reveng herself last night 
on both of us at once. she saw me leav the ball, and she must have 
seen you also. she knew how long it would take you to reach home. 
then she had but to use her wick will. ah, your bruis face is a 
small thing besid my bruis soul!" 

He wa struck by my story. that wa evident. "yes, yes, she watch 
me out of the room," he muttered. "she is capabl of it. but is it 
possibl that she ha realli reduc you to this? what do you intend 
to do?" 

"to stop it!" I cried. "I am perfectli desperate; I shall give her 
fair warn to-day, and the next time will be the last." 

"do noth rash," said he. 

"rash!" I cried. "the onli rash thing is that I should postpon it 
anoth hour." with that I rush to my room, and here I am on the eve 
of what may be the great crisi of my life. I shall start at once. I 
have gain one thing to-day, for I have made one man, at least, 
realiz the truth of thi monstrou experi of mine. and, if the 
worst should happen, thi diari remain as a proof of the goad that ha 
driven me. 

evening. when I came to wilson's, I wa shown up, and found that he 
wa sit with miss penclosa. for half an hour I had to endur hi 
fussi talk about hi recent research into the exact natur of the 
spiritualist rap, while the creatur and I sat in silenc look 
across the room at each other. I read a sinist amus in her 
eyes, and she must have seen hatr and menac in mine. I had almost 
despair of have speech with her when he wa call from the room, 
and we were left for a few moment together. 

"well, professor gilroy--or is it mr. gilroy?" said she, with that 
bitter smile of hers. "how is your friend mr. charl sadler after the 
ball?" 

"you fiend!" I cried. "you have come to the end of your trick now. I 
will have no more of them. listen to what I say." I strode across and 
shook her roughli by the shoulder "a sure as there is a god in heaven, 
I swear that if you tri anoth of your deviltri upon me I will have 
your life for it. come what may, I will have your life. I have come 
to the end of what a man can endure." 

"account are not quit settl between us," said she, with a passion 
that equal my own. "I can love, and I can hate. you had your 
choice. you chose to spurn the first; now you must test the other. It 
will take a littl more to break your spirit, I see, but broken it 
shall be. miss marden come back to-morrow, as I understand." 

"what ha that to do with you?" I cried. "it is a pollut that you 
should dare even to think of her. If I thought that you would harm 
her----" 

she wa frightened, I could see, though she tri to brazen it out. 
she read the black thought in my mind, and cower away from me. 

"she is fortun in have such a champion," said she. "he actual 
dare to threaten a lone woman. I must realli congratul miss 
marden upon her protector." 

the word were bitter, but the voic and manner were more acid still. 

"there is no use talking," said I. "I onli came here to tell you,--and 
to tell you most solemnly,--that your next outrag upon me will be your 
last." with that, as I heard wilson' step upon the stair, I walk 
from the room. ay, she may look venom and deadly, but, for all 
that, she is begin to see now that she ha as much to fear from me 
as I can have from her. murder! It ha an ugli sound. but you don't 
talk of murder a snake or of murder a tiger. let her have a care 
now. 

may 5. I met agatha and her mother at the station at eleven o'clock. 
she is look so bright, so happy, so beautiful. and she wa so 
overjoy to see me. what have I done to deserv such love? I went 
back home with them, and we lunch together. all the troubl seem in 
a moment to have been shred back from my life. she tell me that I 
am look pale and worri and ill. the dear child put it down to my 
loneli and the perfunctori attent of a housekeeper. I pray 
that she may never know the truth! may the shadow, if shadow there 
must be, lie ever black across my life and leav her in the sunshine. 
I have just come back from them, feel a new man. with her by my 
side I think that I could show a bold face to ani thing which life 
might send. 

5 P. M. now, let me tri to be accurate. let me tri to say exactli how 
it occurred. It is fresh in my mind, and I can set it down correctly, 
though it is not like that the time will ever come when I shall 
forget the do of to-day. 

I had return from the mardens' after lunch, and wa cut some 
microscop section in my freez microtome, when in an instant I 
lost conscious in the sudden hate fashion which ha becom onli 
too familiar to me of late. 

when my sens came back to me I wa sit in a small chamber, veri 
differ from the one in which I had been working. It wa cosey and 
bright, with chintz-cov settees, color hangings, and a thousand 
pretti littl trifl upon the wall. A small ornament clock tick 
in front of me, and the hand point to half-past three. It wa all 
quit familiar to me, and yet I stare about for a moment in a 
half-daz way until my eye fell upon a cabinet photograph of myself 
upon the top of the piano. On the other side stood one of mrs. marden. 
then, of course, I rememb where I was. It wa agatha' boudoir. 

but how came I there, and what did I want? A horribl sink came to 
my heart. had I been sent here on some devilish errand? had that 
errand alreadi been done? sure it must; otherwise, whi should I be 
allow to come back to consciousness? oh, the agoni of that moment! 
what had I done? I sprang to my feet in my despair, and as I did so a 
small glass bottl fell from my knee on to the carpet. 

It wa unbroken, and I pick it up. outsid wa written "sulphur 
acid. fort." when I drew the round glass stopper, a thick fume rose 
slowli up, and a pungent, choke smell pervad the room. I 
recogn it as one which I kept for chemic test in my chambers. 
but whi had I brought a bottl of vitriol into agatha' chamber? wa 
it not thi thick, reek liquid with which jealou women had been 
known to mar the beauti of their rivals? My heart stood still as I 
held the bottl to the light. thank god, it wa full! No mischief had 
been done as yet. but had agatha come in a minut sooner, wa it not 
certain that the hellish parasit within me would have dash the stuff 
into her---- ah, it will not bear to be thought of! but it must have 
been for that. whi els should I have brought it? At the thought of 
what I might have done my worn nerv broke down, and I sat shiver 
and twitching, the pitiabl wreck of a man. 

It wa the sound of agatha' voic and the rustl of her dress which 
restor me. I look up, and saw her blue eyes, so full of tender 
and pity, gaze down at me. 

"we must take you away to the country, austin," she said. "you want 
rest and quiet. you look wretchedli ill." 

"oh, it is nothing!" said I, tri to smile. "it wa onli a momentari 
weakness. I am all right again now." 

"I am so sorri to keep you waiting. poor boy, you must have been here 
quit half an hour! the vicar wa in the drawing-room, and, as I knew 
that you did not care for him, I thought it better that jane should 
show you up here. I thought the man would never go!" 

"thank god he stayed! thank god he stayed!" I cri hysterically. 

"why, what is the matter with you, austin?" she asked, hold my arm 
as I stagger up from the chair. "whi are you glad that the vicar 
stayed? and what is thi littl bottl in your hand?" 

"nothing," I cried, thrust it into my pocket. "but I must go. I 
have someth import to do." 

"how stern you look, austin! I have never seen your face like that. 
you are angry?" 

"yes, I am angry." 

"but not with me?" 

"no, no, my darling! you would not understand." 

"but you have not told me whi you came." 

"I came to ask you whether you would alway love me--no matter what I 
did, or what shadow might fall on my name. would you believ in me and 
trust me howev black appear might be against me?" 

"you know that I would, austin." 

"yes, I know that you would. what I do I shall do for you. I am 
driven to it. there is no other way out, my darling!" I kiss her 
and rush from the room. 

the time for indecis wa at an end. As long as the creatur 
threaten my own prospect and my honor there might be a question as 
to what I should do. but now, when agatha--mi innoc agatha--wa 
endangered, my duti lay befor me like a turnpik road. I had no 
weapon, but I never paus for that. what weapon should I need, when I 
felt everi muscl quiver with the strength of a frenzi man? I ran 
through the streets, so set upon what I had to do that I wa onli dimli 
consciou of the face of friend whom I met--dimli consciou also 
that professor wilson met me, run with equal precipit in the 
opposit direction. breathless but resolut I reach the hous and 
rang the bell. A white cheek maid open the door, and turn whiter 
yet when she saw the face that look in at her. 

"show me up at onc to miss penclosa," I demanded. 

"sir," she gasped, "miss penclosa die thi afternoon at half-past 
three!" 









end of the project gutenberg ebook of the parasite, by arthur conan doyl 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the parasit *** 

***** thi file should be name 355.txt or 355.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/355/ 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
