the project gutenberg ebook, the sorceri club, by elliott o'donnel 


thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 





title: the sorceri club 

author: elliott o'donnel 

releas date: decemb 10, 2004 [ebook #14317] 

language: english 


***start OF the project gutenberg ebook the sorceri club*** 


e-text prepar by suzann shell, nathan strom, and the project gutenberg 
onlin distribut proofread team 



note: project gutenberg also ha an html version of thi 
file which includ the origin illustrations. 
see 14317-h.htm or 14317-h.zip: 
(http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/3/1/14317/14317-h/14317-h.htm) 
or 
(http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/3/1/14317/14317-h.zip) 





the sorceri club 

by 

elliott o'donnel 

author of _byway of ghostland_, _werwolves_, 
_dream and their meanings_, _some haunt hous of england 
and wales_, _scottish ghost tales_, _haunt hous of london_, etc., etc. 

london 
william rider & son, limit 
8 paternost row, e.c. 

1912 







[illustration: "for heaven' sake keep off!" kelson shrieked] 



content 


I how they first heard OF atlanti 

II the black art OF atlanti 

iii learn TO sin 

IV the test 

V the initi 

VI the first power 

vii san francisco ladi and divin 

viii two dream 

IX love AT first sight 

X how the dream were interpret 

XI leon hamar call ON the martin 

xii the great challeng 

xiii the modern sorceri co. ltd. give A grati perform 

xiv shiel TO the rescu 

XV how hamar, curti and kelson enter the astral plane 

xvi hamar make advanc 

xvii the cours OF true love 

xviii stage three 

xix A seri OF misadventur 

XX the stage OF haunt 

xxi the sell OF spell 

xxii the persecut OF the martin 

xxiii love 

xxiv the subpoena 

xxv curti IN A new rôle 

xxvi IN hyde park AT night 

xxvii the right girl TO marri 

xxviii whom will HE marry? 

xxix the end and 'the beyond' 




list OF illustr 

"for heaven' sake keep off," kelson shriek (frontispiece) 

the initi 

they gaze fascin 

the room fill with luminous, stripe figur 






chapter I 

how they first heard OF atlanti 


rain is respons for a great deal more than the mere growth of 
vegetables--it is a controller, if a somewhat caprici controller, 
of man' destiny. It wa mainly, if not entirely, owe to rain that 
the french lost the battl of agincourt; whilst, if I mistak not, 
confuciu alon know how mani victori have been snatch from the 
chines by the same factor. 

It wa most certainli rain that drove leon hamar to take refug in a 
second-hand bookshop; for so deep-root wa hi avers to ani 
literatur save a financi gazett or the stock and share column 
of a daily, that noth would have induc him to get within touch 
distanc of a book save the risk of a sever wetting. now, to hi 
unutter disgust, he found himself surround by the thing he 
loathed. book ancient--veri ancient, judg by their bindings--and 
modern--histories, biographies, novel and magazines--anyth from 
ten dollar to five cents, and all array with most laudabl tact 
accord to their bulk and condition. but hamar wa neither to be 
tempt nor mollified. He frown at one and all alike, and the 
coloss edit of miss somebodi or other' poems--that by reason of 
it magnific cover of crimson and gold occupi a most promin 
position--met with the same vindict recept as the tatter and 
torn volum of whittier stow away in an obscur corner. 

back still further into the entranc of the store for a better 
protect from the rain, which, now fall heavier and heavier, wa 
blown in by the wind, hamar collid with a stand of books, with the 
result that one of them fell with a loud bang on the pavement. 

A man, evid the owner of the store, and unmistak a jew, 
instantli appeared. pick up the book, and wipe it with a dirti 
handkerchief, he thrust it at hamar. 

"see!" he said, "you have damag thi properti of mine. you must 
either buy it or give me adequ compensation." 

"what!" hamar cried, "compens for such rubbish as that? whi all 
your book togeth are not worth five dollars. inde i'v seen twice 
as mani sold at a sale for half that amount. you can't jew me!" 

the two men eye each other quizzically. 

"perhaps," the owner of the store observ slowly, "perhap some of 
your ancestor were onc yiddish. In which case there ought to be a 
bond of sympathi between us. you may have that book for a nickel. 
what, no! your cheek are hollow, your finger thin. A nickel is too 
much for you. I will take your chain in exchange." 

"and leav me the watch!" hamar retorted, with a grim smile. "you are 
a philanthropist--not a storekeeper." 

"I should leav you nothing!" the jew laughed. 

"there' no watch there! see!" and he point to the concav surfac 
of the watch-pocket. "I notic it absenc at once. it' been keep 
you aliv for some day past. i'll give you four dollar on the 
chain--and you may have the book!" 

"the book' no good to me!" hamar grunted. "the money is. here! hand 
me over the four dollar and you can have the chain. it' eighteen 
carat gold and worth at least ten dollars." 

"then whi not take it to some one who will give you ten dollars!" 
sneer the jew. "becaus you know better. you'r no greenhorn. that 
chain is fifteen carat at the most, and there' not a man in thi citi 
who would give you more than four dollar for it." 

"veri well, then!" hamar said sulkily. "I agree. no! the money first." 

the jew dive deep down into hi trouser pocket, and, after forag 
about for some seconds, produc a hand of greasi coins, out of 
which he care select the sum named. 

hamar, who had been watch him greedily, grab the coins, bit them 
with hi teeth, and rang them on the counter. with an air of relief he 
then slip hi watch-chain into the outstretch palm befor him, 
remark upon the fact that the rain had suddenli ceased, and prepar 
to take hi departure. 

"here' the book!" the jew ejaculated, whilst hi face becam suffus 
with a smirk. "don't go without it. now! there' no know but what 
we may not have further deal with one another. i'm a 
money-lender--i'v a place down-stairs--i take all sort of 
things--al sort of things. On the strict q.t. mind. sabez!" 

In anoth moment hamar found himself stand on the wet pavement, 
nurs the four dollar in hi waistcoat pocket with one hand, and 
mechan clutch the despis volum with the other. had he ever 
act upon impulse, he would most certainli have hurl the book into 
the gutter; but on second thought he came to the conclus that it 
would be better to dispos of it less obstrusively. 

It wa now evening, and have tast noth sinc mid-day, he 
realized, for at least the hundredth time that week, that he wa 
hungry. the touch of the dollars, however, onli made him smile. He 
could eat hi full for twenty-f cent and yet live well for anoth 
four days. and, besides, he still had a tie-pin and a fur coat. He 
might get a dollar on the one and two, if not two and a half, on the 
other; which would carri him through till the end of the week when 
someth els might turn up--someth which would not involv too 
hard work and would just keep him clear of jail. He turn sharpli 
down montgomeri street, cross kearney street, and slip 
noiselessli through the side doorway of a restaurant, in a 
suspicious-look alley, not a hundr yard distant from the 
gorgeous illumin palac hotel. here, within five minutes, he wa 
serv with as good a meal as one could get in san francisco for the 
money--and if the tabl linen wa not as clean as it might have been, 
the food wa not a whit the less excel for that. At least so hamar 
thought; and it wa not until there wa noth left to eat that he 
left off eating. when he thought no one wa look in hi direction, 
he pop the despis book under hi chair and rose to go. befor he 
had gone ten yards, however, one of the waiter came run after 
him. 

"hi, sir, stop, sir!" the fellow cried. "you'v left someth 
behind!" and in spite of hamar' denial the offici menial 
persist the book wa his. In the end hamar wa oblig to submit. 
He took the book, and reward the waiter with curses. 

hamar next tri to dispos of it down the area of a chines laundry; 
but a policeman saw him, and he onli escap be taken up on 
suspicion, by part with a dollar. thi wa the climax. He did not 
dare make ani further attempt to dispos of the book, but, with bitter 
hatr in hi heart, tuck it savag under hi arm, and made direct 
for hi room in 115th street. 

To hi annoyance--for under the circumst he prefer to be 
alone--h found two men sit in front of hi empti hearth. they 
were matt kelson and Ed curtis; both of whom had been hi colleagu 
at meidler, meidler & co., in sacramento street, and like himself had 
been thrown out of work when the firm had "smashed." sinc that affair 
hamar had studious avoid them. It wa true he had onc been as 
friendli with them as he deem it polit to be friendli with ani 
one; but now--they were out of employment, and in danger of 
starvation. that made all the difference. He did not believ in 
poverti encourag poverty, ani more than he believ in chariti 
among beggars. He had noth to share with them, not even a thought; 
and resolv to get rid of hi quondam friend as soon as possible, 
he confin hi welcom to a frown. 

"hulloa! what' the matter?" kelson exclaimed. "when a man frown like 
that, it usual mean he is cross in love." 

"or ha an empti stomach, which amount to the same thing," curti 
interposed. "come--let the sun loose, leon! we'v good news for 
you!--haven't we, matt?" 

kelson nodded. 

"what is it, then?" hamar grunted. "have you both got cancer?" 

"no! we'v come to borrow from you!" 

"then you'v come to the wrong shop! i'm about done, and unless 
someth turn up mighti quick I shall clear out." 

"for good?" 

"I don't count on be a ghost nor yet an angel," hamar said; "when 
we'v done here, I reckon we'v done altogether!" 

"I shouldn't have thought suicid wa in your line," curti remarked. 
"more matt's. I should have credit you with someth more 
original." 

"original!" hamar snarled. "I defi ani man to be origin when he 
hasn't a cent, and hi stomach contain noth but air. give me 
money, give me food--then, perhaps, i'll be original." 

"you don't mean to say you'r clear out of grub!" kelson and curti 
cri in chorus. "we'v come to you as our last hope. we'v neither of 
us tast anyth sinc yesterday." 

"then you'll tast noth again to-day--at least as far as i'm 
concerned," hamar jeered. "I tell you i'm broke--haven't as much as a 
crumb in the room; and i'v pawn everything, save the cloth you 
see me in!" 

"and yet you can buy books--unless--unless you stole it!" curti said, 
eye with suspicion the volum hamar had thrown on the table. 

"buy it! not much!" hamar cri quickly. "it' one i'v had all my 
life. belong to my grandfather. I took it with me to-night to see 
what I could rais on it." 

"and no one would have it? I should guess not," kelson said, draw 
it toward him. "whi it' got a new label inside--s. leipman! I know 
him. he' slick even for a jew. thi look as if it belong to your 
grandfather, leon. If i'm not real mistaken you bought the book 
to-night. there' someth in it you thought you could make capit 
of. trust you for that. now I wonder what it was!" 

"you'r welcom to see!" hamar sneered. "perhap you'd like some 
water!" 

"water! whi water?" 

"well, instead of tea or whiski to help digest the book. besides, it' 
the onli thing I have to offer you." 

"look here, leon," curti interrupted; "what' the good of behav 
like this? We are all in the same boat--starving--desperate. So let us 
lay our head togeth and see if we can't think of something--som 
way out of it." 

"A burglari compani limited, for instance!" hamar sneered. "no! i'm 
not have any. i'v neither tool nor experience. the san francisco 
polic handl one roughly, so i'm told, and hard labour isn't to my 
liking." 

"there are other thing besid burglary!" curti said in tone of 
annoyance. "we might work a fake." 

"if I work anyth of that sort," hamar said hastily, "I work alone. 
think of someth else." 

"I tell you matt and I are pretti well desperate," curti cried, "and 
if we don't think of someth soon, we shan't be abl to think at 
all. we'v tri our level best to get work--we'v answer everi 
like and unlik advertis in the papers--and all to no 
purpose. So if provid won't help us we must help ourselves. 
robbery, burglary, fakes, anyth short of murder--it' all the same 
to us now--we'r tire of starving--dead sick of it. We would do 
anything, sell our veri soul for a meal. My god! I never imagin how 
terribl it is to feel so hungry. you appear to be interested, matt. 
what is it?" 

"why, look here, you fellows!" kelson said slowly. "thi book is all 
about a place call atlanti that is said to have exist in the 
atlant ocean between america and ireland, and to have been delug 
by an earthquak owe to the wicked of it inhabitants. they 
practis sorcery." 

"practis foolery," hamar said. "it' tosh--al tosh! wicked is 
onli a matter of climate--and there' no such thing as sorcery." 

"so I thought," kelson replied; "but i'm not so sure now. the author 
of thi book write darn sensibly, and is appar at no loss for 
corrobor testimony. He wa a professor too. see! thoma henri 
maitland, at one time professor of english at the univers of basl 
in switzerland. there' an asterisk against hi name and a footnot in 
veri old-fashion handwriting--th 's's' are all 'f's,' and half the 
letter capitals. listen-- 

"'thoma maitland, despit the remonstr of hi friends, 
visit spain. By order of the holi inquisit he wa arrested, 
may 5, 1693, on a charg of practis sorcery, and burn aliv 
at the auto da fé, in the grand market square, madrid; have in 
the interim been subject to such tortur as onli the subtl 
brain of the hellish inquisitor could devise. On receipt of a 
messag from him, deliv in hi supernatur body, we attend 
hi execution, and can readili testifi that he suffer no pain, 
although the torment endur by those around him were pitiabl to 
behold. 

"(signed) georg richard pool, physician; and robert jame fox, 
merchant. 

"citizen of boston, massachusetts; august 1, 1693.'" 

"rot!" hamar said savagely; "don't wast time read such bunkum." 

"it may be bunkum, but if it take away hi mind from hi stomach let 
him go on," curti interposed. "it' veri obviou you haven't arriv 
at our pitch of starvat yet, leon, or you would welcom anyth 
that would make you forget it even for a moment. let' hear some more, 
matt! Go on, tell us something. how to make coyott out of paraffin 
paint, or convert a sunday pair of pant into a glisten harem 
skirt! anyth that won't remind us of food." 

thu encourag kelson slowli turn over the page of the book. "I 
see it wa print and publish for--i presum that mean by--a. 
bettesworth and J. batley in pater-noster-row, london, england, in 
1690. basle, london, boston, madrid! the author seem to have had 
wander on the brain. By the bye, leon, with your featur you could 
easili work off a fake as 'the wander jew.' there' money in 
it--peopl will swallow anyth in that line now." 

"I don't see how it would profit you anyhow," hamar snarled. "leav my 
featur alon and go on with your reading." 

kelson chuckled--her wa one way at least in which he could 
occasion get even with hamar. hamar' featur were yiddish, and 
the yid were none too popular in california. 

"oh, all right!" he said; "if the subject is so pain i'll tri and 
avoid it in future; but it' odd how some things--for instance, murder 
and noses--wil out. let me see, what have we here? 'discoveri of 
ancient books, manuscripts, etc., relat to atlantis.' apparently, 
thoma maitland, when shipwreck on an island, call inisturk, off 
mayo, in ireland, found a wooden chest of rare workmanship--h had 
seen, he says, similar one in egypt and yucatan--contain some veri 
ancient books--curi bound, and some vellum manuscripts, which, 
after an infinit amount of labour, he manag to translate. the 
books, he says, were standard histories, biographies, and scientif 
work on occultism--al publish in banchicheisi, the capit of 
atlantis--and the manuscripts, he affirms, had been transcrib by one 
coulmenes, who believ himself to be the onli survivor of a 
tremend submarin earthquak that had destroy the whole of 
atlantis. the manuscript includ a diari of the event lead up to 
the catastrophe--even to the meals! how about this?--'sunris on the 
day of thottirnanog in the month of finn-ra. breakfast on cornsop, 
fish (semona, correspond to salmon), fruit, and much sweet milk.'" 

"for god' sake, don't!" curti groaned. "skip over that part. the 
veri mention of grub make the gnaw pain in my stomach ten time 
worse." 

"you'r differ to me then!" hamar grinned; "I love to think of it. 
My word, what wouldn't I give to be in sadler' now. roast beef--don 
to a turn, eh! As onli sadler know how! potato nice and brown and 
crisp! horseradish! greens! boil celery! pud under the meat! 
beer!--what, going?" 

curti had risen from the tabl with hi finger cram in hi ears. 
"there' a fat splice of the devil in you to-night, leon!" he panted. 
"i'v had enough of it. i'm off. come on, matt. If you want us, you 
know where to find us--onli if we don't get someth to eat 
soon--you'l find us dead." 




chapter II 

the black art OF atlanti 


for some time after kelson and curti had left him, hamar loll back 
in hi seat, lost in thought. thought, as he told himself repeatedly, 
should be the poor man' chief recreation--it cost nothing: and if 
one want a littl variety, and the wall of one' room are toler 
thick, one can think aloud. hamar often did, and deriv much 
enjoy from it. 

"i'm convinc of one thing," he suddenli broke out; "i'd rather be 
hungri than cold. one can, in a measure, cheat one' stomach by 
chew leather or suck pebbles, but i'll be hang if one can kid 
one' liver. it' cold that doe me! A touch of cold on the liver! I 
could jog along comfort on few dollar for food--but it' a fire, 
a fire I want! the temperatur of thi room is infern low after 
sunset: and half a dozen coat and three pair of pant don't make 
up for half a grate of fuel. hunger onli make me think of 
suicide--but cold--cold and a chill liver--mak me think of crime. 
yes, it' cold! cold that would make me a criminal. I would 
steal--burgle--housebreak--cut the sweetest lady' throat in 
christendom--for a fire! 

"there! that littl outbreak ha reliev me. now let me have a look 
at the book." 

He drag the volum toward him, and despit the feel of 
antagon with which it had inspir him, and despit the cynic 
attitud he had, up to the present, adopt toward the supernatural, 
he speedili becam engrossed. On a few leaves, somewhat clumsili 
insert between the cover and first page of the book, hamar read an 
account, presum in the author' own penmanship, of how he, thoma 
maitland, after be shipwrecked, had remain on inisturk island for 
a fortnight befor be rescued, and had spent the greater portion of 
that time in examin the books, etc., in the chest he had found--hi 
onli food--shell-fish and a keg of mildewi ship' biscuits. 

He wa taken, so the account ran, by hi rescuers, on the barqu 
_hannah_, to london, where he live for five years. hi lodg were 
in cheapside, and it wa there that he compil hi work on atlantis, 
have obtain hi subject matter from the atlantean book he had 
manag to bring with him, and which, after an enorm amount of 
persever and labour, he had translat into english. though these 
book were subsequ destroy in a big fire that demolish the 
entir street, luckili for him, he had sent hi ms. to the publishers, 
messrs. bettesworth and batley, a week or so befor the conflagr 
broke out; so that he was, at ani rate, spare the loss of hi own 
arduou and invalu work. 

the publish did not accept the ms. at once. At that time there were 
veri sever law in oper against anyth savour of witchcraft 
and magic, and as the manuscript dealt at length with these subjects, 
and in a manner that left no doubt whatev that he, thoma maitland, 
had practis sorceri extensively, messrs. bettesworth and batley were 
forc to consid whether it would be injuri to them to publish 
it. mrs. bettesworth wa eventu consulted--a inde she alway 
was, on extraordinari occasions--and her interest in the ms. be 
roused, she decid in it favour. within a week of it publication, 
however, it wa suppress by law; all the copi save three 
present one to the author, which he success concealed, were 
destroyed; messrs. bettesworth and batley were put in the stock on 
ludgat hill and fine heavily, and he, thoma maitland, wa order 
to be arrested, flog and imprisoned. 

"but," wrote maitland, "I wa not to be caught napping. My previou 
adventur and hairbreadth escap had render me unusu wary, and 
perceiv a number of people, among whom were two or three sheriff' 
officers, approach my house, I at onc interpret their mission, 
and climb through a trap-door lead on to the roof of the 
building, nimbl made my way to the end of the row, and slip down 
a waterpip easili elud my enemies. london, however, be now too 
hot to hold me, I book passag on board the _peterkin_, a thame 
trade vessel of some eighti tons, and sail for boston. My flight 
had been so hasti that I brought veri littl with me--noth in fact 
except the cloth I stood in--a stout winter suit of home-spun brown 
cloth, a cloak, and a pair of good, strong leather leggings--a purs 
of fifti sovereign (all I had), a knife, pistol and two copi of my 
preciou book, the third copy, alas! I had left behind in my hurry." 

after give a few unimport detail as to hi life on board ship, 
maitland went on to say:-- 

"ow to a success of storm the _peterkin_ wa driven out of her 
course, and after narrowli escap be dash to piec on the 
florida reefs, lat. 24-1/2° n., long. 82° w., we ran ashor with the 
loss of onli two lives--th second mate and cabin boy--on the isthmu 
of yucatan, close to the estuari of a river.[1] here we were forc to 
spend nearli a year, dure which time I made sever journey of 
explor into the interior of the continent. In the cours of one 
of my rambl amid a dens mass of tropic foliage, I suddenli found 
myself face to face with a gigant stone sphinx, which I at onc 
recogn and identified. It wa tat-nuada, an atlantean deity, 
elabor describ in one of the burn books. much excited, I set 
to work, and, after clear the base of the idol of fungi and other 
veget growth adher to it, discov a superscript in 
atlantean dialect to the effect that the imag had been set up there 
by one hullir--to commemor the destruct of atlantis, of which 
catastroph hullir believ himself and hi family, _i.e._ hi wife 
ozilmeav and daughters, taramoo and nikétoth, and the crew of hi 
yacht, the _chaac-molré_ (ten in number), the sole survivors. 

"here, then, to my unutter joy, wa strong corrobor evid 
of the great disast narrat in detail in the manuscript I had 
found in inisturk island. the exist of atlanti wa now thoroughli 
substantiated. On all side of me I stumbl across further evid 
of these earli settlers. here, stand in bold outlin on a slight 
eminence, wa a stone edific adorn with symbol carv of 
eggs, harps, mastodons, triangles, and numer other objects, all of 
which were capabl of interpretation, and indic that the build 
wa a templ to some god. 

"I wa much struck by the extraordinari similar in mani of the 
thing I saw--not in the sphinx, idol and symbols--to mani I had 
seen in egypt, and to some extent in ireland, and I at onc set to 
work to draw up a care analog between the languag of those 
countries. 

"the word banchicheisi[2] I found to contain the celtic ban, a barrow; 
and coptic isi, plenty; whilst I recogn in the word coulmenes,[3] 
the celtic coul, a man' name, _i.e._ finn, son of coul; in 
thottirnanoge, the coptic thoth, _i.e._ name of ancient egyptian 
deity, and ers tirnanoge, the name of the wife of oisin, the last of 
the feni; in chaac-molrée[4] the coptic deity, ré; in ozilmeave,[5] 
the celtic meave, a girl' name; in taramoo,[6] the celtic tara, a 
girl' name; and in nikétoth,[7] toth, the ers technic form of 
feminin gender; and compar the alphabet I trace a veri strike 
like between the atlantean-- 

"[atlantean: a] (a) and the gaelic or ers [erse: A] 
[atlantean: B] (b) and the coptic [coptic: B] 
[atlantean: d] (d) and ers [erse: D] 
[atlantean: g] (g) and ers [erse: g] 
[atlantean: T] (t) and coptic [coptic: T] 

"and mani of the other letters. To the atlantean 

"[atlantean: C, O, E, z][8] 

"I could, however, find no likeness. 

"from all these similarities, _i.e._ in architecture, symbols, 
letters, and words, I could come to no other conclus than that 
there wa some strong connect link between atlanti and ancient 
ireland and egypt. 

"assuredli thi great link could not have been mere due to stray 
survivor of the great catastrophe! wa it not much more probabl that 
the earliest inhabit of ireland and egypt had origin migrat 
from atlantis, carri it language, and way and custom with them? 
moreover, sinc the atlantean were so deepli vers in magic and 
everyth appertain to the occult, thi migrat would account 
for the mystic that ha alway been so close associ with 
egypt and ireland, and for the psychic faculti so strongli observ 
in the inhabit of these two countries. 

"I wa highli satisfied--i had prove much and my discoveri had 
upset mani of the theori advanc by the modern sages. I could now 
posit assert that the wisdom of the world came not from the east 
but from the west. It wa to the golden west--to banchicheisi, capit 
of atlantis, that human owe it knowledg of the scienc and 
arts, and of all thing good and evil. eden, if eden exist at all, 
wa not in asia, it wa in atlantis; and the deluge, that is record 
in the hebrew bible, and is tradit in the histori of nearli 
everi tribe and nation, wa none other than the mighti inrush of the 
ocean over atlantis, due to some abnorm submarin earthquake. 

"of what eventu becam of the atlantean whose relic I had so 
opportun alight upon, I could onli surmise. 

"the last record I found wa on a tablet set up by nikétoth. On thi 
she spoke of the death of hullir and ozilmeave, of the inter-marriag 
of the crew of the _chaac-molré_ with nativ women; of the consequ 
growth of the colony; and of her determin to leav it, and, 
accompani by a chosen few, to push her way further inland.[9] 

"the anxieti of my comrad to leav the continent, perforc put an 
end to my explorations, and in the begin of the year 1692--exactli 
ten month after our landing--th _peterkin_ wa refloated. 

"thi time noth happen to imped our progress, and in april of 
the same year, we sight boston. here I remain for some months, 
make mani new friends, and studi magic and sorcery. but the love 
of travel had laid so strong a hold on me that I again took to a 
rove life. I set sail for spain in novemb 1692; land at corunna, 
and made my way to madrid, where I arriv on januari 1, 1693." 

for the rest, hamar had to turn to messrs. fox and pool' addendum, 
_i.e._ the footnot that matt kelson had read aloud. 

hamar wa now inclin to regard the book in a veri differ light. 
what he had read seem to him to be set down in too simple, 
straightforward, and, at the same time, detail a manner to be other 
than true. Up to the present he had not believ in ghost and 
witches, for the veri simpl reason that--lik all sceptics--h had 
never inquir into the testimoni respect them. He had pooh-pooh 
the subject, becaus everi one he knew pooh-pooh it, and also 
becaus it had never seem worth hi while to do otherwise. but 
provid he thought it would pay him, he wa readi to believ in 
anything--in christianity, mahommedanism, buddhism, theosophy, or 
ani other creed; and grant the book he had in hi hand wa 
realli written by maitland, and maitland wa _bona fide_ (which hamar 
saw no reason to doubt), and granted, also, that maitland wa sane and 
logical--which from hi write he certainli appear to be--then 
there wa a certain amount in the volum that in hamar' opinion 
wa "a find." needless to say, he refer to the magic of the 
atlanteans--th art through the practic of which they had got in 
touch with the power that could endow them with riches. the actual 
histori of atlantis--onc he wa satisfi there had been such a 
place--did not interest him. He skim through it quickly, and I 
append a brief summary, only, for the benefit of more intellig and 
disinterest readers. 

the atlantean were the oldest intellig race in the world--they 
exist contemporan with paleolith man, with whom their 
marin and explor frequent came in contact, and about whom 
their novelist wrote the most delight stories, just as fenimor 
cooper and mayn reid, in these days, have written the most delight 
stori about the red indians. In religion they were polytheists; they 
believ that, in the work of creation, mani power participated; that 
some of these power were benevolent, some malevolent, whilst 
others--neith benevol nor malevolent--wer mere neutral. To the 
benevol creativ power they attribut all that is beauti in 
the world (_i.e._ certain of the trees, plants, flowers, animals, 
insects, and pleas colour and scents); all that is fair and 
agreeabl in the human being, such as affection, love, kindness, the 
art and sciences--in a word all that in ani degre affect the 
welfar of mankind; and to the malevol creativ power they 
attribut all that wa noxiou in creation; all that wa harm to 
man, and detriment to hi moral and physic progress (_i.e._ 
diseases, and all savag and filthi passions); all race of low 
intelligence, viz. paleolith and neolith man--and all those born 
with black or red skin (those colour be particularli signific 
of the malign occult elements); all destruct animals; (_i.e._ 
reptil such as the teleosaurus, steneosaurus, etc.; birds, such as 
the ptereodactyl, vulture, eagle, etc.; mammals, such as the cave 
lion, cave tiger, etc.; fish, such as the shark, octopus, etc.); and 
all ugli and venom insects. 

these earliest record show that at one time the physic and 
superphys world were in close touch; all kind of spirits--trolls, 
pixies, nymphs, satyrs, imps, vagrarians, barrowvians, etc.--mix 
freeli with live human beings; but that as the popul increas 
and civil evolved, superphys manifest becam more and 
more rare, until final they becam restrict to certain condit 
depend on time and locality.[10] 

Up to thi period there had been no state religion--no templ in 
atlantis. If ani one wish for a particular favour from the occult 
powers--for example, from the rabsés, the occult power of music; the 
brakvos, the occult power of medicine; or the derinas, the occult 
power of love, they retir to some seclud spot and held direct 
intercours with these powers. the idea of pray to an invis 
being--who might or might not hear them--nev enter their minds; 
they were far too matter of fact for that--and it wa not until 
superphys manifest had becom confin to a veri select few, 
that the plan of erect public build in spot frequent by the 
spirits, so that all who wish could assembl there and commun 
with them, wa propos and put into operation. In these buildings, 
however, the spirit did not choos always, to appear to 
order--sometim they quit the spot where the edific had been 
erected; sometim they would onli appear there periodically; and 
sometimes, out of perversity, they would appear when least expected. 
but whether occult manifest realli took place in these build 
or not, those assembl to see them were persuad by those in charg 
of the building, who saw therebi an opportun of make money, that 
the spirit were actual there; and in due time these build 
becam known as temples, and their showmen as priests. everi templ 
wa dedic to an individu spirit--on to the spirit bara-boo; 
anoth to the spirit karaboro, and so on; whilst in the absenc of 
genuin spirit manifestations, prayers, incant and rituals, 
invent by the priests, alway attract a larg concours of peopl 
to these temples, and final prove a greater sourc of attract 
than the spirit themselves. 

It wa to gain favour from the occult power that donat from the 
public were at first invited, then demanded; and the priest in thi 
manner accumul vast fortunes. later on, too, there sprang up, in 
connect with these temples, colleg for the train of young 
men--invari select from the wealthi classes--to the priesthood; 
and from the parent of these youth aspir larg fees, which in 
cours of time becam exorbitant, were extracted, therebi furnish 
anoth sourc of revenu to the priests. the most famou colleg for 
the train of priest in atlanti were those of bara-boo-rek[11] at 
keisionwo, karaboro-rek at diniangek, and ballygarap-rek at tijimin. 

It wa in the reign of barrahneil,[12] fifty-first sovereign of the 
dynasti of shaotak, that the evoc of spirit (from which modern 
spiritu take it origin) commenced. barrahneil wa most eager to 
see a superphys manifestation. be of a somewhat poetic turn 
of mind he wa particularli enamour of fairies, and in the hope of 
see one, constantli frequent their favourit haunts, _i.e._ 
woods, caves, and lone isol habitations. but all to no 
purpose--they never would manifest themselv to him. At last, he lost 
patience. against the advic of hi oldest and most trusti 
counsellors, and accompani by one or two of hi favourit courtiers, 
he went to an excess lone spot in the heart of a desert, and 
besought spirits--spirit of ani sort--h did not care what--to 
manifest themselves. To hi surprise--for he had grown extrem 
sceptical--an occult form, half man and half beast,[13] materialized. 
It inform them that it wa daramara, _i.e._ in atlantis, the 
unknown--that it had no begin and no end, and that it would remain 
an impenetr mysteri to them dure their exist in the physic 
sphere, but would be fulli reveal to them when they pass over into 
malanok--on of the superphys planes. On this, and on sever 
subsequ occasions, when it manifest itself to them, it gave them 
instruct with regard to evocation, and describ to them the test 
they must undergo befor they could acquir the great power the 
unknown wa abl to bestow on them, namely, (1) second sight; (2) 
divin other people' thought and detect the presenc of water 
and metals; (3) thought transference, _i.e._ be abl to transmit 
messages, irrespect of distance, from one brain to anoth without 
ani physic medium; (4) hypnotism; (5) the power to hold convers 
with animals; (6) invisibility, _i.e._ demateri at will; (7) 
walk on, and breath under, water; (8) inflict all manner of 
diseas and torments; (9) cure all kind of diseases; (10) 
convert peopl into beast and minerals; (11) foretel the 
futur by palmistry, pyromancy, hydromancy, astrology, etc.; (12) 
conjur up all manner of spirit antagonist to men' moral 
progress, _i.e._ vice elementals--vagrarians, barrowvians, etc. 

take everi care to observ the greatest secrecy, barrahneil caus a 
full account of these interview with daramara, togeth with all the 
instruct the latter had given him, to be transcrib in a book, 
which he call _brahnapotek_[14]--or the _book of mysteries_; and 
which he kept seal and guard in a room in hi palace. 

dure hi lifetim no one held commun with daramara save 
himself and hi friends, but after hi death the secret of black magic 
leak out; countless peopl sought to acquir it, and ultim the 
practic of it becam universal. but the atlantean littl knew the 
danger they were incurring. the spirit they conjur up--though at 
first subservient, that is to say, mere instruments--at length 
obtain complet dominion over them--th whole race becam steep in 
crime and vice of everi kind--and so horribl were the enorm 
perpetr that, fear lest man should be entir obliter the 
benevol occult powers, after a desper struggl with the 
malevol occult powers, succeeded, by mean of a vast earthquake, in 
submerg the contin and hurl it to the bottom of the atlant 
ocean, where, what remain of it, now lies. thi catastroph took 
place in the reign of aboonirin, twentieth sovereign of the dynasti of 
molonekin--thre thousand year after the reign of barrahneil. 

So ran the histori of atlantis, or at least all of it that need be 
quot for the elucid of thi story. that black magic--th black 
art of the atlantean wa by no mean dead--hamar felt convinced, and 
if maitland could resuscit it--whi could not he? At ani rate he 
might try. He could lose noth by give it a trial--at least 
noth to speak of--th outlay on chemic would be a mere 
song--whereas, on the other hand, what might he not gain! He eagerli 
perus the tests--th test he must impos upon himself befor he 
could get in touch with the unknown, and acquir the magic 
powers--which, accord to thoma maitland, were copi from the 
origin brahnapotek, and includ a preface, ran as follows: 
(_preface_) "it is essenti that the person desir of be 
initi into the black art--th art of commun with the 
unknown (daramara) in order to acquir certain great powers, should 
dismiss from hi mind all idea of moral progress, and wholli 
concentr on the better of hi materi self--on acquir rich 
and fame in the physic sphere. hi aspir must be entir 
earthly, and all hi affect subordin to hi main desir for 
wealth and carnal pleasures. have acquir thi preliminari 
psycholog stage, for one clear week he must give himself up 
entir to the break of all the convention of moral with 
which societi is hedg in. He must practic everi kind of 
deception--lie, cheat and steal, and go out of hi way to seek an 
opportun to aveng ani person injury; and if hi mind is 
earnestli and wholli concentr on acquir knowledg of the black 
art no bodili mishap will befal him. dure thi time of probat he 
must will himself to dream, at night, of all the deed he had it in 
hi mind to do, dure the day; when he will know, by hi visions, to 
what extent he is progressing. At the end of the week he must appli 
the test to see if he is in a ripe state to proceed. 

"the tests-- 

"no. 1. At midnight, when the moon is full, place a mirror, set in 
a wooden frame, in a tub of water, so that it will float on the 
surfac with it face uppermost. put in the water fifteen grain 
of bicarbon of potash, and sprinkl it with three drop of 
blood, not necessarili human If the reflect of the moon in the 
mirror then appear crimson, the test is satisfactorili 
accomplished. 

"no. 2. At midnight, when the moon is full, take a black cat, place 
it where the moonbeam are thickest, sprinkl it with three drop 
of blood, not necessarili human, and rub it coat with the palm of 
the hand. spark will then be given out, and if those spark 
appear crimson the test is satisfactorili done. 

"no. 3. take a human skull--prefer that of some person who ha 
met with an unnatur end, pour on it a singl drop of fresh, 
human blood--plac it on a couch, and go to sleep with the back 
part of the head rest on it. If you are awakened, at the second 
hour after midnight, by hear a great commot close at hand, 
and the room is then discov to be full of crimson light, the 
test is satisfactorili fulfilled. 

"no. 4. take half a score of the berri of enchanter' 
nightshade,[15] two ounc of hemlock leav in powder, and one 
ounc of red sorrel leaves. heat them in an oven for two hours, 
pound them together, in a mortar, and at midnight boil them in 
water. As soon as the content begin to bubble, remov them from 
the fire and stand them in a dark place; and if the experi is 
to prove satisfactory, three bubbl of lumin green light will 
rise simultan from the water and burst. 

"no. 5. In the abov prepar after the test described, soak a 
hazel twig, fashion in the shape of a fork. On meet a child 
hold the fork with the V downward in front of it face, and if 
the child exhibit violenc and sign of terror, and fall down, 
the experi is successful. 

"no. 6. take a coupl of hand of fine soil from over the spot 
where some four-foot anim ha recent been buried. put it in 
a tin vessel, mix with it three ounc of assafoetida and one 
drachm of quassia chips, to which add a death's-head moth 
(_acherontia atropos_). heat the vessel over a wood fire for three 
hours. then remov it and place it on the hearth, rake out the 
fire and make the room absolut dark. keep watch besid the 
vessel, and if, at the second hour after midnight, ani strang 
phenomena occur, the test will be known to have been 
satisfactorili executed. 

"(_addendum_) If ani of these test fail the candid must wait 
for six month befor give them a further trial, and he must 
occupi the interim by train hi thought in the manner alreadi 
prescribed. but if, on the other hand, the test have been 
success performed, he can proceed with the rite appertain 
to the black art." 

hamar had read so far when, with a gestur of impatience, he close 
the book. "what a fool I am!" he exclaimed, "to wast my time with 
such stuff!... but maitland write in such a devilish convinc way! 
jerusalem! ani straw is good enough for the drown man, and if 
witchcraft and sorceri with motor dash by everi second and the 
whole air aliv with wireless and telephones, is a bit beyond my 
comprehension, what then? all I care about is money--and i'll leav no 
stone unturn to get it. If it were possibl for man to get in touch 
with daramara--th unknown--devil, or whatev els it choos to call 
itself--i'l call it an angel if it onli give me money--twenti 
thousand year ago--whi shouldn't it be possibl to get in touch with 
it now? anyhow as I said before, i'll have a try. As far as the 
preliminari stage is concerned, I fanci i'm pretti well fixed. My mind 
is occupi right enough with thing of thi world--i don't give a 
cent for anyth belong to another--and if onli I had half a dozen 
souls, i'd sell them right away now, for less than twenti thousand 
dollars--a damn sight less. As for these tests--foolish isn't the 
word for them--but it won't cost much just to tri them.... now, 
accord to thoma maitland, the ceremoni of call up the unknown 
stand a far greater chanc of success if there are three human be 
present ... but, of course, if there is ani truth in thi business, 
i'd rather keep the secret of it to myself. however, if I tri alone, 
the unknown may not come to me, and then I shall have had all the 
troubl of go through the test for nothing!... ah! now I see! If 
the other two get more of the profit than I think necessary--i can 
make use of my newli acquir occult power to--to dissolv 
partnership! ha! ha! I could--i could trick the unknown if it come to 
that. trust a jew to outwit the devil! i'll just look up kelson 
and--curtis." 


footnotes: 

[footnot 1: the river refer to by maitland is the river 
lagartos, which wa then (1691) unnamed.] 

[footnot 2: for chich compar the ancient maya or yucatan word 
chicken-itza (_i.e._ name of town in yucatan where excav are 
now take place--1912).] 

[footnot 3: for mene compar mayan menes, wise men.] 

[footnot 4: compar mayan chaac-mol, a leopard.] 

[footnot 5: compar ozil, mayan for well-beloved.] 

[footnot 6: moo, mayan for macaw.] 

[footnot 7: niké, woman' name in mayan.] 

[footnot 8: recent (1912) discoveri of statu in easter island 
still further corrobor the sink of atlantis. 

the atlantean charact [c] resembl the easter island [c] (c) 
" " [o] " " " [o] (o) 
" " [e] " " " [e] (e) 
" " [z] " " " [z] (z) 

It will be notic that all the atlantean charact are 
distinguish by addit curl strokes.] 

[footnot 9: In all probabl she wa the founder of chicken-itza, 
the capit of yucatan.] 

[footnot 10: type of element still to be met with in certain 
local (vide _byeway of ghostland_, publish by rider & son).] 

[footnot 11: compar egyptian ré.] 

[footnot 12: maitland rais the question as to whether barrahneil 
wa the ancestor of niall of the nine hostages. Of thi there is 
everi possibility, sinc mani atlantean undoubtedli escap to 
ireland, carri with them the knowledg of black magic--to which 
might be trace the banshe and other famili ghosts.] 

[footnot 13: probabl a vice elemental.] 

[footnot 14: all subsequ work deal with black magic were 
found on it.] 

[footnot 15: close alli to deadli nightshade, and known in 
botani as _circæa_. It is found in damp, shadi place and wa use 
to a veri larg extent in mediæv sorcery.] 




chapter iii 

learn TO sin 


messrs. kelson and curti did not live in pacif avenu where the 
pope hold sway, nor yet in california street where the crocker are 
wont to entertain their millionair friends. where they lived, there 
were no massiv granit step flank with equal massiv 
pillars--such as herald the approach to the nob hill palaces; no rare 
glass bow-window look out on to flower bedeck lawns; no vast 
betil hall, with rotunda in the centre; no highli polish oak 
staircases; no fresco ceilings; no tufted, cerulean blue silk 
draperies; and no sweet perfumery--onli the smell, if one may so 
suddenli sink to a third-class expression--onli the smell of rank 
tobacco and equal rank lager beer. no, messrs. kelson and curti 
resid within a stone' throw of the five cent bath in rutter 
street--and that wa the nearest they ever got to bathing. their suit 
of apart consist of one room, about ten by eight feet, which 
serv as a dining-room, drawing-room, study, boudoir, kitchen, 
bedroom, and--from sheer forc of habit, I wa about to add bathroom; 
but as I have alreadi hint cold water on half-empti stomach and 
chilli liver is uninviting; besides, soap cost something. their 
furnitur wa antiqu but not massive; nor could ani of it be fairli 
reckon superfluous. all told, it consist of a bedstead (three 
six-foot plank on four sugar cubes; the bedclothes--a pair of 
discard overalls, a torn and much emaci blanket, a woolli neck 
wrap, a yellow vest, and the garment they stood in); a small round 
and rather ricketi deal table; and one chair. Of the veri limit 
number of culinari utensils, the frying-pan wa by far the most 
important. it handl serv as a poker, and it pan, as well as for 
frying, roast and boiling, did duti for a teapot and a slop-basin. 
they had no crockery. they had onli one thing in abundance--namely, 
air; for the lower frame of the window have long lack glass in it, 
a coupl of page of the _examiner_, fix in it, flap dismal 
everi time the wind came blow down 216th street. 

they had not live there always. In the palmi day of work, befor the 
firm smashed, they had aspir to what might properli be call 
diggings; and, moreover, had "digged" in respect surroundings. It 
wa the usual thing--th thing that is happen always, everi hour of 
the day, in all the great citi of the world--starvation, through 
lack of employment. civil still shut it eye to everyday 
poverty. who knows? who cares? who is responsible? No one. Is there a 
remedy? ah! that is a question that requir time. time--alway time! 
time for the politician, and time for the starv ones! half the 
world thinks, whilst half the world dies; and the caus of it all is 
time--too much, a damn sight too much--time! 

but kelson and curti could not grumble. they had their room--bare, 
dirti and well-ventilated--for next to nothing. fifti cent a week! 
and they could furnish it as they pleased. fanci that! what a 
privilege! they were glad of it all the same--glad of it in prefer 
to the streets; and probably, when asleep, they thought of it as home. 
but on leav hamar's, that evening, they had fulli resolv to 
convert their littl room into a cemetery. what els could they do? 
what can ani one do who ha no money and no prospect of get any, 
and who ha reach the pitch of acut hunger? He ha pass the stage 
of want work, because, if work were offer to him, he would not be 
in a fit state to do it--h would be too weak. too weak to work! what 
a phenomenon! yes--to all those who have never miss a day' meals. 
To others--no! they can understand--and understand onli too well--th 
realli poor who have long ceas to eat, cannot work--they are beyond 
it. 

when curti and kelson stagger down the stair of the hous where 
hamar lodged, they realiz that unless someth turn up pretti 
soon, it would be too late--they would be past the stage of care for 
anything--too feebl to do anyth but lie on the ground and pray 
that death would come quickly. 

"home?" kelson inquired, as they emerg on to the pavement. 

"hell!" curti answered, and kelson, take it for grant that the 
term were synonymous, at onc head for their garret. 

"don't walk so confoundedli fast," curti gasped; "thi pain in my 
side is like a hundr stitch roll in one. It fairli doubl me 
up. eas down a bit, for heaven' sake!" 

kelson obeyed, and present came to a dead halt befor a 
dingy-look restaurant. both men lean against the window and gaze 
wolfishli at the food. A warm, foetid rush of air from under the 
grate at their feet tickl their nostril and mock their hunger 
with a mockeri past endurance. arrang on the window-sil wa a 
miscellan collect of veri smeari plate and dishes, contain 
an even more miscellan collect of food. A half-consum ham, 
with more than a mere suspicion of dirt on it yellowish-whit fat; 
some concoct in a bowl that might have been brawn made from some 
peculiarli liverish pig, or--from one of the mani homeless mongrel 
that roam the street at night; a pile of noxious-look mussels, 
side by side with a glisten mass of particularli yellow whelks; a 
round of what purport to be beef--veri fat and veri underdone; some 
black shini sausages, and a score or so of luridli red polonies. A 
similar assort wa to be seen on the counter behind which loll 
an anæmic girl, in a dirti cotton blouse, and a much soil sky-blu 
skirt. 

A month ago such an exhibit would have been an offenc in the 
fastidi eye of messrs. kelson and curtis; but now it wa 
otherwise. their stomach would have refus noth short of garbage. 

"matt!" curtis' hand had left off clutch at hi belt and were now 
hang by hi side; the finger twitch to and fro in a manner that 
fascin kelson. "matt! Is there ani logic in our starving?" 

"none, except that we haven't a cent between us!" kelson rejoined. 

"I know that," curti went on slowly, "but--i mean--whi should we 
starv when all thi grub is within two inch of us! it' 
unreasonable--it' intolerable." 

"doesn't the smell of it satisfi you?" kelson replied, attempt to 
forc a smile, and fail dismally. 

"d--n the smell!" curti cried. "it' the ham I want. i'd give my soul 
for a good munch at it. and just look at that tea, too! don't you see 
it steam over there? what wouldn't I give for just one cup! ten 
minut more and it may be too late. the pain will come on again--and 
it will be veri doubt if I shall ever get home. i'm close on the 
stage when one begin to digest one' own stomach. curs it! I won't 
starv ani longer! matt! she' in there all by herself!" 

"so i'v been thinking," kelson murmured, glanc uneasili up and 
down the street. "still she' a girl, ed!" 

"that' just it!" curti whispered; "it is becaus she is a girl. If 
she were a man, in our present condit we shouldn't stand a chance. 
come! it' thi or die in the gutters. it' our one and onli chance. 
let' go in--hav a feed--tak what we can and make a bolt for it. If 
she tri to stop us we can settl her right enough." 

"without be too rough! there' no need to be too rough with her, 
ed." 

"I shouldn't stick at much!" curti answered. "occas like these 
don't admit of chivalry. come along! it' the ham i'm after." 

curti shuffl forward as he spoke, and the next moment kelson and he 
were stand in front of the counter. 

the girl eye curti veri dubious and it is more than like would 
have refus to serv him had he been alone. but her express 
chang on look at kelson. kelson wa one of those individu who 
seldom fail to meet with the approv of women--ther wa a someth 
in him they liked. probabl neither he nor they could have defin 
that something; but there it was, and it came in extrem handi now. 

"what do you want?" she inquir shortly. 

"ham! give me some of that ham over there, miss, and a cup of tea! 
bread too!" curti cri eagerly. "do you know what it is to have a 
twist on, miss? I have one on now--so pleas give us a full 
twenty-f cents' worth." 

kelson said nothing, but hi eye glistened, and the girl wonder as 
she pass him the polonies. 

both men ate as they had never eaten before, and as they would not have 
eaten now had they paid ani attent to the advic of hunger experts. 
however, they survived, and when they could eat no more they lean 
back in their chair to enjoy the sensat of returning--albeit, 
slowli returning--strength. 

curti wa the first to make a move. "matt," he murmured, "we'v about 
sat our sit. we'd better be off. you go and say a few nice word to 
the girl and make pretenc of paying. i'll secur the ham--there' 
still a good bit left--and anyth els I can grab. the moment I do 
this, throw these chair on the ground so that the girl will fall over 
them when she make a dash for me, which she is certain to do. We will 
then head straight away for 216th street. don't look so scare or she 
will think there is someth up. she ha never taken her eye off you 
sinc we sat down!" 

"she' rather a nice girl!" kelson said. "I wish I didn't look quit 
such a blackguard--and--i wish I hadn't to be quit such a blackguard. 
who'll pay for all this? will she?" 

"we shan't, anyway," curti sneered. "come, thi is no time to be 
sentimental. It wa a question of life and death with us, and we'v 
onli done what ani one els would do in our circumstances. the girl 
won't lose much! are you ready?" 

curti rose, and kelson, who wa accustom to obey him, reluctantli 
follow suit. A look almost suggest of fear came into the girl' 
eye as they encount those of curtis, and she shot a swift glanc 
at an inner door. then kelson spoke, and as she turn her head 
toward him, her lip part in a sort of smile. 

"nice night, miss, isn't it?" kelson said, halt half-way between 
the counter and the chairs. "aren't you a bit lone here all by 
yourself?" 

"sometimes," the girl laughed. "but my mother' in the room there," 
and she nod in the direct of the close door. "and one can't be 
dull when she' about. she' that there activ as a rule, there' no 
keep her quiet--onli just at present"--her she glanc 
apprehens at curtis--"she' recov from ague. get it everi 
year about thi time. your friend seem to have kind of taken a fanci 
to our ham!" 

kelson look at curti and hi heart thumped. curtis' right hand wa 
get readi to spring at the ham, whilst hi left wa creep 
stealthili along the counter in the direct of a loaf of bread. 
kelson slowli realiz that an acut crisi in both their live wa at 
hand, and that it depend on him how it would end. He had never 
thought it possibl to feel as mean as he felt now. besides, hi 
natur sympathi with women tempt him to stand by the girl and 
prevent curti from rob her. He wa still deliberating, when he 
saw two long dark objects, with lightn rapidity, swoop down on the 
plate and dishes. there wa a loud clatter, and the next moment the 
whole place seem aliv with movement. 

A voic which in hi confus he did not recogn at onc 
shouted--and seemingli from far away--"quick, you fool, quick! fling 
down the chair and grab those sausages!" whilst from close besid 
him--almost, he fancied, in hi ears--cam a wild shriek of "mother! 
mother! We are be robbed!" 

had the girl appeal to him to help her it is more than like that 
kelson, who wa even yet undecid what cours to adopt, would have 
offer her hi aid; but the instant she act on the defens hi 
mind wa made up; a mad spirit of self-preserv swept over 
him--and dash the chair on the ground at her feet, he seiz the 
sausages, and flew after curtis. 

ten minut later, curti and kelson, their arm full of spoil, 
clamber up the staircas of their lodgings, and reel into their 
room. 

"look!" curti gasped, sink into the chair. "look and see if we are 
followed!" 

"there' no one about!" kelson whispered, peer cautious out of 
the window. "not a soul! I don't believ after that first rush across 
rutter street, ani one notic us. To leav off run wa far the 
best thing to do. you are a perfect genius, ed. I wonder if thi sort 
of thing--er--thieving--i dormant in most of us? I say, old fellow, I 
wish I hadn't look at that book of hamar's. Do you know, directli I 
took it up, an extraordinari sensat of cun came over me; and I 
declare, when I put it down, I felt it would take veri littl to make 
me a criminal!" 

"we'r both crimin now--in the eye of the law--anyway!" curti 
said. "and now we'v got so far there' no altern but to go on! 
it' easier for a hundr camel to pass through the eye of a needl 
than for a clerk to get work, that' a fact. the market are 
hopelessli overstocked--no one want us! No one help us! No one even 
think about us. the labour man get piti and cent galore--w get 
nothing!--noth but rotten pay whilst we work, and when we'r out of 
work, dosshous or kerbstones. d--n clerks, I say. d--n everything! 
there' no justic in creation--there' no justic in anything--and 
the onli peopl who prate of it are those who have never known what it 
is to want. say, when shall we take the next lot?" 

"when we'r obliged, not before!" kelson said. "or rather, you do as 
you like--and i'll do the same." 

"well, i'm not go to commit suicid anyhow," curti sneered. "we 
haven't the money to buy poison--and i'v no mind to drown myself or 
cut my throat--they'r too painful! If we don't go on do what we'v 
done to-night, what are we go to do?" 

"trust to luck," kelson sighed. 

"all right--you trust to luck--but I won't trust ani more in 
providence, and that' a fact," curti retorted. "we'v been done 
enough. now i'm for do other people. good-night." 

He tumbl into the makeshift bed as he spoke; and in a few minutes, 
worn out after the unwont exert of the evening, both men were 
fast asleep. 

they were at breakfast next morning--r _déjeuner à la 
carte_--sausages, bread, water--and they were do ampl justic to 
it, when some one rap at the door. for a few second there wa 
silence. their heart stood still. had they been followed, after all? 
wa it the police? some one spoke--and they breath again. It wa 
hamar. 

"thi look like starving, I must say!" hamar exclaimed, as he snif 
hi way into the room and sat on the bed. "why, from what you fellow 
told me last night I thought you were clear out. and here you are, 
stuf like roosters! you look a bit surpris to see me, but you'll 
look more surprised, I reckon, when I tell you what bring me here. 
you rememb that book?" 

kelson and curti nodded. 

"well," hamar went on. "I read it after you left last night, and i'v 
come to the conclus that there' someth in it that may be of use 
to us." 

"us!" curti ejaculated. 

"yes! us!" hamar mimicked. "it contain full particular of how we can 
get in touch with certain occult powers--that can give us money or 
anyth els we want!" 

"rot, of course!" curti said. 

"you say that now. but, listen to me," hamar replied. "sinc i'v read 
that book, I believ there' a lot more in occult than peopl 
imagine. you may recollect the name of the author of the book--thoma 
maitland? well! to begin with, he impress me as be truthful; and 
he not onli believ in magic but he practis it. If he hadn't gone 
into detail I shouldn't think anyth of it, but he' so darn 
thorough, and tell you exactli what you'v got to do to get in touch 
with the occult power and to practis sorcery. He learn it all from 
that old ms. he found, written by an atlantean; and the atlanteans, he 
says, were adept in everi form of occultism. I tell you, thi chap 
himself scof at it at first; and it wa more out of curiosity, he 
says, than becaus he wa convinced, that he began to experiment. He 
afterward came to the conclus that the atlantean were no fools. 
what they had written about the occult wa absolut correct--ther 
wa anoth world, and it wa possibl to get in touch with it. now, 
if thoma maitland wa abl to practis sorcery, whi can't we? there 
wa a gap of close on twenti thousand year between hi time and that 
of atlantis, and there' not much more than two hundr year between 
hi day and ours. but, of course, if you'r go to pooh-pooh the 
whole thing I won't troubl to tell you ani more!" 

"well, leon," kelson ejaculated, "magic and sorceri do seem a trifl 
out of date, don't they? could ani one look out of the window at what 
is go on in the street below, and at the same time believ in 
fairi and hobgoblins? still the book made a bit of an impress on 
me, so that i'm inclin to agre with you. anyway, go ahead! Ed is 
agreeable, aren't you, ed?" 

curti gave a sulki nod. "i'm not avers to anyth that may put us 
in the way of a livelihood," he said. 

hamar, somewhat appeased, briefli inform them of the test and other 
preliminari necessari for the acquir of the black art, and 
without more ado propos that they--th three of them--should form a 
syndic and call it the sorceri compani limited. "to begin with," he 
said, "we might sell trick and spells, and later on tackl someth 
more subtle. why, we could soon knock all the juggler and doctor on 
the head--and make a huge fortune." 

"that is to say if it isn't all humbug!" curti observed. 

"well--do you or don't you think it worth trying?" hamar cut in. "you 
call me a jew--but jews, you know, have a toler cool head, and a 
keen faculti for business. they don't touch anyth unless it is 
pretti certain to bring them in money. will you try?" 

"y-e-s!" curti said slowly; "i'll try." 

"and you, matt?" hamar queried. "we must have three." 

"I don't mind trying," kelson replied. "I expect it will be onli a 
try." 

"that settl it, then!" hamar cried. "now, we'll get to business. To 
begin with we'r all wholli occupi with thing of thi world--money 
chiefly!" 

"sometim music!" curti said sententiously. 

"and sometim girls," kelson join in. "music' a pose on ed' part. 
I don't believ he realli care a bit for it. he' far too material." 

"just what I want him to be!" hamar laughed. "girl are materi 
enough too--especi when you take them out to supper. anyhow, money 
is our first consideration, isn't it?" 

To thi there wa gener assent. 

"the preliminari requir is fix then," hamar said. "now for the 
week of wild oats! lying, stealing, cheating--anyth to counteract 
the code of moses! let' take them in turn. ly won't troubl us 
much. everi one lies. ly is the stock-in-trad of doctors, lawyers, 
sky pilots, storekeepers--" 

"and dentists!" curti chime in. 

"and shop girls!" kelson added. 

"all women--rich as well as poor!" hamar went on. "li is woman' 
birthright. she lie about her age, her looks, her clothes--everything. 
with a lie she send caller away, and when she is in the mood, 
entertain them with lies. women are born liars, but they are not the 
onli liars. In these day of keen competit everi one lies--everi 
editor, publisher, undertaker, piano-tuner, dustman--they couldn't live 
if they didn't. moreov lie is natur to us all. everi child lie 
as soon as it can speak; and educ mere teach him to lie the 
more effectually. ly come just as natur as sweating--" 

"or kissing," kelson interrupted. 

"or ani of the other so-cal vices," hamar continued. "so we can 
manag that all right. As to cheating--hav noth to cheat 
with--accord to instruct we'v got to keep in with each other, 
so present compani is excepted--w must pass over that. now--how about 
thieving!" 

"never done ani yet, so can't say," curti exclaimed. 

"nor I either," kelson put in rather hurriedly. 

"well, I didn't suppos you had!" hamar laughed; "though, after all, 
more than half the world doe thieve--al employ steal labour from 
their employés, all tradesmen steal a profit--th wholesal man from 
the middleman--th middleman from the retailer. everi govern 
thieves. look at england--right england! At one time or anoth 
she ha stolen land in everi part of the world. but theft is an ugli 
word. when statesmen steal it' call diplomacy, when the rich steal 
it' call kleptomania or business, and it' onli when the poor steal 
that steal is term theft. We who have everi excuse--w who are 
starving--wil be content with--that is to say--w will onli 
take--just enough to keep us alive--a few lump of sugar, a hand of 
raisins, or a loaf of bread. how about that?" 

"I might manag that," curti said. "I might--but I don't want to get 
caught." 

"and you, matt?" 

"I don't mind steal food so much," kelson said. "in the face of so 
much wealth--and wast too--it seem a bigger sin to starv than to 
steal a loaf of bread." 

"the lie and steal are fix then," hamar laughed. "what you have 
to do, too, is to make the most of everi opportun you can find of 
do people--pres compani excepted--bad turns." 

"I don't see how--in our present condition--w can do ani one much 
harm," curti remarked. "we haven't even the mean to buy a tin sword, 
let alon a bomb or pistol. If we wish them ill, perhaps, that will do 
instead." 

"possibly--but don't be such an ass as to wish ani one ani good!" 
hamar said. "do your best to carri out the injunct I have given 
you, and we will meet here, thi day week, to discuss the tests." 




chapter IV 

the test 


seven day later, hamar again knock at curtis' and kelson' door 
and walk in. A faint sigh of relief escap him. 

"I see we are all right so far," he said. "I wonder whether I should 
find you both flown, or lie stretch in the ici hand of death. 
have you experimented?" 

"we have," curti said. "we'v done our best. In what way, we prefer 
not to say." 

"perhap there is no need," hamar replied, eye the mantelshelf 
which bore ampl testimoni to a full larder, and glanc at curtis' 
feet which were encas in a pair of new and veri shini boots. (A 
handsom overcoat that wa hang on the door also attract hi 
attention; but that he had seen before, and conclud that it had been 
there on the occas of hi last visit.) "but you had better dri up 
now, ed," he continu somewhat caustically, "or there'l be no chanc 
of form the sorceri society; it will be dissolv befor it' 
started. there' no need to ask if you'v tri to carri out 
instruct as to thoughts, I see it--in your faces. I could never 
have believ one experiment week in bad would have made such a 
differ to your looks." 

"you told us to tri hard!" kelson murmured, "and natur we did. I 
reckon you'v done the same by your expression. I should hardli have 
known you." 

"it show pretti clearly," curti said, "what a lot of bad is latent 
in most people; and that the right circumst onli are need to 
bring it out. starvation, for instance, is calcul to bring out the 
evil in ani one--no matter whom. but what puzzl me, is how we have 
escap be caught!" 

"that' a good sign," hamar said. "it bear out what is written in the 
book. If you give your whole mind to do wrong dure thi trial 
week you'll meet with no mishap. but you must be heart and soul in it. 
hunger made us--hung ha been our friend." 

"what do you mean?" curti said. 

"why," hamar replied, "if we hadn't been well-nigh starv we 
shouldn't have been abl to carri out the instruct quit so 
thoroughly." 

"have you, too, stolen?" curti queried. 

"I have certainli appropri a few necessaries," hamar said shortly, 
"but I mean to stop now. We have higher game to fli at. now, with 
regard to the tests. I have not been idl I can assur you. I have 
secur all the requisites. the mirror and black cat i--well, er--to 
use a convention that come in rather handy--th mirror and 
cat--i pick up. the skull I borrow from a medic I know--th 
moth--er--from some one' privat collection--and the elderberries, 
hemlock and chemic I obtain from a drug store man in batteri 
street with whom I use to deal. the moon will be full to-night so 
that we may as well begin. will you come round to my room at 
eleven-thirty?" 

they promised; and hamar, as he took hi departure, again glanc at 
the handsom fur coat hang on the door. 

He wa hardli out of hear when curti look across at kelson. "do 
you think he recognis it!" he whispered. "you may bet he did, and he 
had onli just stolen it himself! however, it' hi own fault. He told 
us to lie and steal, and we'v done hi bidding." 

"we have indeed!" kelson sighed; "at least you have. for my part i'd 
rather be content with food!" 

"well, I need cloth just as much as food!" curti snarled. "if I 
went about nake I should onli be sent to prison--that' the law. It 
punish you for take clothes, and it punish you for go without 
them. there' logic for you!" 

curti and kelson spent the rest of the day indoors; and at night 
salli forth to hamar's. 

the solitari attic--if one could thu design a space of about three 
squar feet--which compris hamar' lodging--had the advantag of 
be situat in the top storey of a skyscraper--at least a 
skyscrap for that part of the city. from it window could be seen, 
high abov the serri rank of chimney-pot on the opposit side of 
the street, those two newli erect buildings: william carman' chew 
gum factori in hearn street, and mark goddard' eight-stori 
privat resid in van ness avenue; and, as if thi were not enough 
architectur grace for the eye to dwell on, glimmer away to the 
right wa the needle-lik spire of moss bates' devil-dodg 
establish in branman street; whilst, just behind it, in sauci 
mock impudence, peep out the gild roof of the knee brothers' 
recent erect cinematograph palace. 

all thi and more--much more--wa to be seen from hamar' outlook, and 
all for the sum of one dollar and a half per week. when curti and 
kelson entered, the room wa aglow with moonlight, and hamar and the 
black cat were stealthili regard one anoth from opposit corner 
of the room. from far away--from somewher in the veri base of the 
building, came the dull echo of a shout, succeed by the violent 
slam of a door; whilst from outside, from one of the mani desert 
thoroughfar below, rose the frighten cri of a fugit woman. 
otherwis all wa compar still. 

"you'r a bit early!" wa hamar' greeting, "but better that than 
late. everyth is ready, and all we'v got to do is to wait till 
twelve. sit down." 

they did as they were bid. present the cat, forsak it sanctuary, 
and ignor curtis' solicitations, glide across the floor, and 
climb on to kelson' knee, refus to budge. the trio sat in 
silenc till a few minut befor midnight, when hamar rose, and, 
select a spot where the moonbeam lay thickest, place thereon the 
tub of water, in which--with it face uppermost--h proceed to float 
a small mirror, set in a cheap wooden frame. He then calmli produc a 
pocket knife. 

"what' that for?" kelson inquir nervously. 

"blood!" hamar responded. "one of us must spare three drops. the 
condit demand it--and after all the ham and sausag you two have 
eaten I think one of you can spare it best. which of you shall it be? 
come, there' no time to lose!" 

"matt ha more blood than I have!" curti growled; "but whi not the 
cat?" 

"it would spoil our chanc with it for the other experiment," hamar 
said. "it' a sulky, cross-grain brute, and would give us no end of 
trouble. besid it can bite. look here, let' draw lots!" 

curti and kelson were inclin to demur; but the propos method wa 
so in accord with custom that there realli did not seem ani 
feasibl object to rais to it. accordingli lot were drawn--and 
hamar himself wa the victim. curti laugh coarsely, and kelson hid 
hi smile in the cat' coat. A neighbour clock now began to strike 
twelve. 

"look alive, leon!" curti cried, nudg kelson' elbow. "look aliv 
or it will be too late. the unknown is mighti particular to a few 
seconds. let me oper on you. i'v alway fanci I wa born to use 
the knife--that i'v realli miss my vocation. you needn't be 
afraid--there' no arteri in the palm of your hand--you won't bleed to 
death." 

thu goaded, hamar prick away nervous at hi hand, and, after 
sundri efforts, at last succeed in draw blood; three drop of 
which he veri care let fall in the tub. 

"I wish it wa light so that we could see it," curti whisper in 
kelson' ear. "I believ jew have differ colour blood to other 
people." 

though kelson wa apprehensive, hamar did not appear to have heard; 
hi whole attent wa rivet on the mirror, on the face of which 
wa a reflect of the moon. 

"I knew noth would happen," curti cried, "you had better wipe your 
knife or you'll be arrest for sever some one' jugular. hulloa! 
what' up with the cat?" 

hamar wa about to tell him to be quiet when kelson caught hi arm. 
"look, leon! look! what' the brute doing? Is it mad?" kelson gasped. 

hamar turn hi head--and there crouch on the floor, in the 
moonlight, wa the cat, it hair bristl on end and it green eye 
ablaz with an express which held all three men speechless. when 
they were at last abl to avert their eye a fresh surpris await 
them; the reflect of the moon in the mirror wa red--not an 
ordinari red--not mere a colour--but red with a lurid luminos 
that vibrat with life--with a life that all three men at onc 
recogn as eman from noth physical--from noth good. 

It vanish suddenly, quit as suddenli as it had come; and the 
reflect of the moon wa onc again onli a reflection--a white, 
placid sphere. 

for some second no one spoke. hamar wa the first to break the 
silence. "well!" he exclaimed, draw a long breath; "what do you 
think of that!" 

"are you sure you weren't faking?" curti said. 

"I swear I wasn't," hamar replied; "besid could ani one produc a 
thing like that? the cat didn't think it wa a fake--it knew what it 
wa right enough. besides, whi are your teeth chattering?" 

"whi are yours?" curti retorted; "whi are matt's?" 

"shall we tri the second?" hamar asked. 

"no!" kelson and curti said in chorus. "no! we'v had enough for one 
night. we'll be off!" 

"I think i'll come with you," hamar said, "after what ha happen I 
don't quit relish sleep here alone--or rather with that cat. 
hi--satan, where are you?" 

satan wa not visible. It had probabl hidden under the bed, but as no 
one care to look, it whereabout remain undiscovered. 

with the come of the sun, the terror of the night wore off, and the 
trio separated. hamar would on no account accept hi friends' 
invit to breakfast on the sausag and ham they had run such 
risk in procuring; he made hasti track for a snug restaur in 
bolter' street, where he had a sumptuou repast for a dollar; and 
then slunk home. 

shortli befor midnight all three met again, and at onc commenc 
prepar for the second test. the question aros as to who should 
hold satan. they all had vivid recollect of the cat' behaviour 
the previou night; consequ no one wa anxiou to officiate. 
final they drew lots, and fate settl on curtis. An excit chase 
now began. satan, demonstr hi resent of their treatment of 
him, at everi turn, knock over a water bottle, rip the skin of 
kelson' knuckles, and made hi teeth meet in the fleshi part of 
curtis' thumb. 

"hulloa! what are you up to?" curti savag demanded, as hamar 
thrust a cup at him. 

"hold your hand over it!" hamar said sharply. "don't suck it! We want 
blood for thi test and for the next." 

"I wish the brute had bitten you!" curti snarled; "then, perhaps, you 
wouldn't be so preciou keen on economics. you did right to name it 
satan! and if it doesn't attract devil noth will. i'm not go to 
touch it again. see if you can hold the beast by yourself, matt! It 
seem to be less afraid of you than of either of us." 

kelson call out: "puss!", and the cat at onc came to him. 

As it wa now strike twelve, hamar care shook three drop of 
curtis' blood from the cup on to satan' back, while he instruct 
kelson to rub the animal' coat with the palm of the hand. kelson 
cautious obeyed. there wa a loud crackl and a shower of sparks, 
of the same lurid red colour as the reflect in the mirror on the 
previou night, flew out into the envelop darkness. 

"that will do!" hamar observ quietly. "test two is satisfactorili 
accomplished. We must be riper for hell than we imagined. there is no 
need for you fellow to stay ani longer. I can manag the third test 
alone." 

As soon as hi colleagu had gone and he felt assur they were no 
longer within hearing, hamar took a saucer from the mantelshelf, 
fill it half full of milk, and pour into it some colourless liquid 
out of a tini phial label poison. 

"here pussy," he call out, softly. "pretti pussy, come and have your 
supper! pussy!" 

and satan, unabl to resist the tempt sight of the milk, crept out 
of hi hiding-plac and quit unsuspici dip hi tongu into 
the saucer and lapped. hamar, in the meanwhil went to a box at the 
foot of the bed and produc a sack. then he slip on hi boot and 
coat, and open the door of a cupboard near the head of the bed 
fetch out a small spade. 

He wa now ready; and--so wa pussy. 

"that pave the way for test six," hamar observed; "no one can say I 
am a waster--i make use of everything--and everi one;" and so say 
he tumbl the cat into the sack and hurri out. 

some half-hour later he had return to hi room, and wa busili 
engag make prepar for test three. let a drop of curtis' 
blood fall on the skull, he put the latter under hi pillow, and 
retir to rest. He had slept for littl over an hour, when he awok 
with a start. the muffl sound of hammering--a of nail in a 
coffin--wa go on all around him, and occasion it seem to him 
that someth big and heavi stalk across the floor; but in spite of 
the fact that the room wa illumin with a red glow--th same lurid 
red as had appear in test one and two--noth wa to be seen. the 
phenomena last five or six minut and then everyth wa again 
normal. hamar wa so terrifi that he lay with hi head under the 
bedcloth till morning, and vow noth on earth would persuad him 
to sleep in that room again. but sunlight soon restor hi courage, 
and by the even he wa quit eager to go on with the next test. He 
had some difficulti in persuad ani one to allow him the use of an 
oven for so pernici a mixtur as nightshad and hemlock; but at 
last he over-rul the object of some good-natur woman--th 
mother of one of the offic boy at hi former employer's--and test 
four prove as success as the previou three. the preliminari part 
of test five wa also success accomplished; but in carri out 
the second part of it, hamar all but met with disaster. He wa walk 
along kearney street with the special prepar hazel twig care 
conceal beneath hi coat, when just opposit saddler' jewelri 
store, he came across a child stand by itself. the nearest person 
be some fifti yard away, and no policeman within sight, hamar 
conclud thi wa too good an opportun to be lost. He whip out 
the twig, and held it, in the manner prescribed, in front of the 
child. the effect wa instantaneous. the child turn white as death, 
it eye bulg with terror, and open it mouth to it full extent 
it commenc to shriek and yell. then it fell on the pavement; and 
clutch and claw the air, and foam at the mouth roll over 
and over. peopl from everi quarter flock to the spot, and judg 
hamar, from hi proxim to the child, to be respons for it 
condition, shout for the police. the latter, however, arriv too 
late. hamar, whose presenc of mind had onli left him for the moment 
see a bicycl lean against a store door, jump on it and soon 
put a respect distanc between himself and the crowd. 

that night the trio met onc more in hamar' room for test six. there 
wa a wood fire in the grate, and on it a tin vessel contain the 
prescrib ingredients. somewhat unpleasantli conspicu amongst 
these ingredi were the death's-head moth, and the soil from 
satan' grave. As soon as the mixtur had been heat three hours, the 
vessel wa removed, the fire extinguished, and the room made 
absolut dark. then the three sat close togeth and waited. 

On the stroke of two everi articl in the room began to rattle, whilst 
out of the tin vessel flew a blood red moth. after circl three 
time round each of the sitter' heads, the moth flew back again into 
the vessel, and the silenc that ensu wa follow by a soft tap 
at the window, and the appear of something, that resembl a big 
tube fill with a thick, pale blue fluid, made up of a mass of 
distinct veins. thi tube float into the room, and pass close to 
the three sitters, who involuntarili shrank away from it, disappear 
in the wall, behind them. A loud crack as if the branch of a tree had 
broken, termin the phenomena--th room again becom pitch dark. 
but the three sitters, although they knew there would be no further 
manifest that night, were too terrifi to move. they remain 
huddl togeth in the same spot till the morn wa well advanced. 




chapter V 

the initi 


san francisco possess one great advantage--y can easili get out of 
it. leav the pan-handl of the park behind one, and follow the 
turn of the cars, one pass through a pretti valley, green and fair 
as ani garden, and dot with small houses. An old cemeteri lie to 
one side of it; where unconvent inscript and queer epitaph 
can be trace on the half-buri stones, cover with a tangl of 
vine and weeds. still move forward one reach olympus, and 
climb to it heights, one see away below, in the far distance, the 
coast range--lik a rampart of strength; the blue water of the bay, 
sparkl and danc in the sunlight--steam flash their path on 
it bosom; and tini white speck scud in the breeze. below is the 
city, it houses, small, and close in, like toy villag in christma 
boxes; whilst the slope around are green with fresh grass; and here 
and there are thick cluster of eucalyptu and pines. the ocean is 
partli hidden from view by a peak, which rise directli to the west, 
and is separ from that on which one is stand by a deep and 
thickli wood valley. descending, by mean of a narrow wind path, 
one pass through dens clump of hickory, chestnut, mountain ash, 
and walnut trees, whose strong later branch afford ampl 
protect from the sun, and at the same time furnish playground to 
innumer bright-ey squirrels. further down one come upon gentl 
elms, succeed by sassafra and locust--these, in their turn, 
succeed by the softer linden, red bud, catalpa, and maple; and at 
the foot of the declivity, and in the bottom of the valley, wild 
shrubbery, interspers with silver willows, and white poplars. still 
follow the path down the vale, in a southerli direction, one, at 
length, find oneself in an amphitheatre, shut in on all side by 
tree and bush of a still greater variety; here and there, a 
gigant and much begnarl oak; here, a triple-stem tulip tree of 
some eighti feet in height, it glossy, vivid green leav and profus 
blossom present a pictur of unsurpass beauti and splendour; 
there, equal beautiful, though in mark contrast, a tall and 
slender silver birch. the floor of the amphitheatr is, for the most 
part, grass--soft, thick, velveti and miracul green. the silenc 
is such as make it wholli inconceivable, that so vast a citi as san 
francisco can be littl over six mile distant. though one may strain 
one' ear to the utmost, noth is to be heard but the occasion 
tinkl of a cow-bell, the low of cattl and the desultori note of 
birds. It is the perfect quiet which natur alon can give; and it so 
impress hamar that he at onc decid that thi wa the veri spot 
essenti for the ceremoni of initi into the black art. 

the local selected, the night had next to be chosen--and the 
condit demand that on the night of the initi there must be 
a new moon, cusp of seventh house, and conjoin with saturn, in 
opposit to jupiter,[16] hamar and hi confeder had to wait 
exactli three weeks, from the date of the conclus of the tests, 
befor they could proceed. 

shortli befor midnight, on the spot alreadi described, hamar, curti 
and kelson met; and, after search thoroughli amongst the tree and 
bush in the vicin of the amphitheatr to make sure no one wa in 
hiding, they commenc operations. 

On a perfectli level piec of ground a circl of seven feet radiu wa 
clearli defined. thi circl wa cut into seven sectors; and an inner 
circl from the same centr and with a radiu of six feet wa next 
drawn. In each part of the sectors, between the circumfer of the 
first and second circle, were inscribed, in chalk, the name of the 
seven princip vice (accord to atlantean ideas), and the seven 
most malign diseases. within the second circle, and use the same 
centre, wa drawn a third circle, of five feet in radius, and in each 
part of the sectors, between the circumfer of the second and 
third circles, were written the name of the seven type of spirit 
most antagonist to man' moral progress.[17] 

hamar had brought with him a sack--th same he had use to transport 
satan' corpse--and from out of it he produc a half-starv tabby, 
that obvious could harm no one, owe to the fact that it head wa 
tie up in a muslin bag and it four leg strap together. 

"it' a good thing there is no member of the societi for the 
prevent of cruelti to anim anywher near," kelson exclaimed, 
eye hamar resentfully. "wouldn't a mous or a rat have done as 
well?" 

"no!" hamar ejaculated, deposit the brute with a plump on the 
ground; "the condit are that the anim sacrif must be a cat. 
I got the poorest specimen I could find, for I dislik butcher just 
as much as you do." 

"how are you go to do it?" kelson asked. 

hamar point to a chopper. "the condit say with steel," he said; 
"onli with steel, and I should bungl with a knife. you must look the 
other way. now help me with the fire." 

besid the cat, the sack contain a dozen or so bundl of faggots, 
well steep in paraffin, sever block of wood, a tripod, and a big 
tin saucepan. 

with the wood, a fire wa soon kindl in the centr of the circle; 
and the tripod place over it. two pint of spring water were then 
pour into the saucepan, and to thi were ad 1 ounc of oxal 
acid, 1 ounc of verdigris, 1-1/2 ounc of hemlock leaves, 1/2 ounc 
of henbane, 3/4 ounc of saffron, 2 ounc of aloes, 3 drachm of 
opium, 1 ounc of mandrake-root, 5 drachm of salanum, 7 drachm of 
poppy-seed, 1/2 ounc of assafoetida, and 1/2 ounc of parsley. As 
soon as the saucepan contain these ingredi began to boil hamar 
threw into it two adders' heads, three toad and a centipede. 

"where on earth did you get all those horrors?" curti asked, 
shrink away from the bag which had held them. 

"here," hamar said laconically. "it' extraordinari what a lot of 
nasti thing there are amid so much appar beauty. I say apparent, 
becaus natur is a champion faker. you have onli to rake about in 
these bush and you'll find snake galore, whilst under pretti nearli 
everi stone are centipedes. like both of you, who never by ani chanc 
poke your nose outsid the city, I fanci snake and centiped were 
confin to the prairies. but I know better now. besides, where do you 
think I found the toads? why, in the cellar under meidlers'!" 

"what, our late governor's?" kelson cried. 

hamar nodded. "yes!" he said; "under the veri spot where we use to 
sit. the water' a foot deep in that cellar, and if there are as mani 
toad in the cellar of the other hous in the block, then sacramento 
street ha a corner in them. i'm go to be execution now, so look 
the other way, matt!" 

kelson need no second bidding; and stick hi finger in hi ears, 
walk to some littl distance. when hamar call him back, the deed 
wa accomplished--th condit prescrib in the rite had been 
observed--th tabbi wa in the saucepan on the fire, and it blood had 
been besprinkl on each of the seven sector of the circle. 

"we must now take our seat on the ground," hamar said; "i'd better be 
in the centre--you, matt, on the right, and you, ed, on the 
left--allow three clear feet between us." 

hamar show them how to sit--with leg cross and arm folded. 

for some minut no one spoke. the wind rustl through the bush and 
an owl hooted. kelson, feel the night air cold, drew hi overcoat 
tightli around and the other follow suit. then curti said-- 

"do you realli think there' anyth in it, leon? aren't we fool to 
go on wast our time like this?" 

To which hamar replied: "shut up! you were frighten enough do the 
tests!" 

from afar off, away on the shimmer bosom of the bay came the faint 
hoot of a steamer. 

"that' the _oleander_!" kelson murmured. 

"rot!" curti snapped. "how do you know? you can't tell from thi 
distance. It might be the _daisy_, or the _san marie_, or ani other 
ship." 

kelson made no reply; hamar blew hi nose, and onc again there wa 
silence. 

the effect of the moonlight had now becom weird. from the tree and 
bush crept legion of tall, gaunt shadows, and whilst some of these 
were explicable, there were other that certainli had no appar 
counterpart in ani of the natur object around them. even curtis, 
in spite of hi scoffing, show no inclin to examin them too 
closely; but kept hi face resolut turn to the more cheeri light 
of the fire. the soft, cool, sweet-scent air gradual act as an 
anæsthetic, and kelson and curti were almost asleep, when hamar' 
voic recal them sharpli to themselves. 

"it' just two!" he said. "sit tight and listen while I repeat the 
incantation, and for goodness' sake keep cool if anyth happens. 
rememb we are here with an object--namely--to get everyth we can 
out of the other world." 

"trust you for that!" curti sneered; "but all the same nothing' 
go to happen." 

"I am not sure of that," hamar said, and after a brief paus began to 
repeat these words[18]-- 

"morba from the mountains, 
where flow malign fountains. 
We are readi for you--come! 
vampir from the passes, 
where grow blood-suck grasses, 
We are readi for you--come! 
vice element pretti 
give ear unto our ditti 
We are readi for you--come! 
planetians, form so fearful, 
We inform you, eager, tearful, 
We are readi for you--come! 
clanogrians, thing of sorrow. 
postpon not till to-morrow, 
We are readi for you--come! 
barrowvians, shade seclusive, 
Be not to us exclusive, 
We are readi for you--come! 
earthbound spirit of the dead 
approach with grim and noiseless tread-- 
We are readi for you--come!" 

He then got up and, go to the fire, sprinkl over the flame six 
drachm of belladonna, three drachm of drosera and one ounc of nux 
vomica; use in each case hi left hand. return to hi former 
posit he drew with the forefing of hi left hand, on the ground, 
the outlin of a club-foot; a hand with the finger clench and a 
long point thumb stand upright; and a bat. At hi request kelson 
and curti care imit the devices, each in the space allot 
to him. 

hamar then cried: "creasti havoonen balababoo!"; which hamar 
explain wa atlantean for "devil of the damn appear!" 

"he won't!" curti muttered, "becaus he doesn't exist. there are 
devils--meidl brother were devils--but there is no one devil! it' 
all----" He suddenli stop and an intens hush fell upon them all. 

A cloud obscur the moon, the fire burn dim, and the gloom of the 
amphitheatr thicken till the men lost sight of each other. A cold 
air then rose from the ground and fan their nostrils. someth 
flew past their head with an omin wail; whilst from the direct 
of the fire came a hollow groan. 

"the advent of the unknown," hamar murmured, "shall be herald in by 
the shriek of an owl, the groan of the mandrake--ther is 
mandrak in the saucepan--th croak of a toad--w haven't had that 
yet!" 

"yes, there it is!" kelson whispered--and whilst he wa speak there 
came a dismal croak, croak, and the sway and cri of an 
ash--"hush!" 

they listened--and all three distinctli heard the swish of a 
slender tree trunk as it hiss backward and forwards. then, a cri so 
horrid, harsh and pierc that even the sceptical, sneer curti 
gave vent to an express of fear. again a hush, and increas 
dark and cold. kelson call out-- 

"don't do that, leon." 

"i'm not do anything," hamar said testily. "pull yourself 
together." A moment later he said to curtis, "it' you, curtis. shut 
up. thi is no time for monkeying." 

"you are both either mad or dreaming," curti replied. "I haven't 
stir from my seat. hulloa! what' that? what' that, leon? 
there--ov there! look!" 

As curti spoke they all three becam consciou of live thing 
around them--th that move about, silent and surreptiti and 
convey the impress of mockery. the hills, the valley, the tree 
were full of it--th whole place teem with it--teem with silent, 
subtle, stealthi mockery. the sens of the three men were now keenli 
alive, but a dead weight hung upon their limb and render them 
useless. and as they stare into the gloom, in sickli fear, the 
firelight flicker and they saw shadows, such as the moon, when low 
in the heaven, might fashion from the figur of a man; but yet they 
were shadow neither of man, nor god, nor of ani familiar thing. they 
were dark, vague, formless and indefinite, and they quivered--quiv 
with a quiver that suggest mockery. 

suddenli the shadow disappeared; the flicker of the flame ceased; 
and in the place of the fire appear a seething, writh mass of 
what look like white lumin snakes. and in the midst of thi mass 
sprang up a cylindr form, which grew and grew until it attain a 
height of ten or twelv feet, when it remain stationari and threw 
out branches. and the three men now saw it wa a tree--a tree with a 
sleek, pulpy, semi-transparent, perspir trunk full of a thick, 
white, vibrating, lumin fluid; and that it wa laden with a fruit, 
in shape resembl an apple, but of the same hue and materi as the 
trunk. spread out on the ground around it, were it roots, twitch 
and palpit with repuls life, and bare with a bare that 
shock the senses. It wa so utterli and inconceiv unlik what 
hamar, curti and kelson had imagin the unknown--and yet, withal, so 
monstrou (not mere in it shape but in it suggestions), and so 
vividli real and livid, that they were not mere terrified--they were 
stricken with a terror that render them dumb and helpless. and as 
they look at it, from out the trunk, shot an enorm thing--whit 
and glistening, and fashion like a human tongue. and after point 
deris at them, it withdrew; whereupon all the fruit shook, as if 
convuls with unseemli laughter. they then saw between the foremost 
branch of the tree a big eye. the white of it wa thick and pasty, 
the iri spongi in texture, and the pupil bulg with a lurid light. 
It stare at them with a steadi stare--insol and quizzical. hamar 
and hi friend stare back at it in fascin horror, and would have 
continu stare at it indefinitely, had not hamar' mercenari 
instinct come to their rescue. He recollect that time wa pressing, 
and that unless he got into commun with the strang thing at 
once, accord to the book, it would vanish--and he might never be 
abl to get in touch with it again. thu eg on, he made a great 
effort to regain hi courage, and at length succeed in forc 
himself to speak. though hi voic wa weak and shake he manag to 
pronounc the prescrib mode of address, viz.:--"bara phonen etek 
mo," which be interpret is, "spirit from the unknown, give ear to 
me." He then explain their earnest desir to pay homag to the 
supernatural, and to be initi into the mysteri of the black art. 
when hamar had conclud hi address, the anticip of the three 
as to how it would be answered, or whether it would be answer at 
all--wer such that they were forc to hold their breath almost to 
the point of suffocation. If the thing _could_ speak what would it 
voic be like? the second passed, and they were begin to prepar 
themselv for disappointment, when suddenli across the interven 
space separ them from the unknown, the repli came--cam in soft, 
silky, lisp tones--human and yet not human, novel and yet in some 
way--a way that defi analysis--familiar. strang to say, they all 
three felt that thi familiar belong to a far back period of 
their existence, no less than to a more modern one--to a period, in 
fact, to which they could affix no date. and, although a perfect uniti 
of express suggest that the utter of the thing wa the 
utter of one be only, a certain variat in it tones, a 
rise and fall from syllabl to syllable, led them to infer that 
the voic wa not the voic of one but of many. 

"you are anxiou to acquir knowledg of the secret associ with 
the great atlantean magic?" the voic lisped. 

"we are!" hamar stammered, "and we are will to give our soul in 
exchang for them." 

"souls!" the voic lisped, whilst trunk and branch sway lightly, 
and the air wa full of silent merriment. "souls! you speak in term 
you do not understand. To acquir the secret of black magic, all you 
have to do is to agre that dure a brief period--a period of a few 
months, you will live togeth in harmony; that you will make use of 
the power you acquir to the detriment of all save yourselves; that 
you will never allow your mind to revert to anyth spiritual; 
and--that you will abstain from--marrying." 

"and if we succeed in carri out the conditions?" hamar asked. 

[illustration: the initiation] 

"then," the voic replied, "you will retain free, untrammel 
possess of your knowledge." 

"for how long?" curti queried. 

"for the natur term of your lives--that is to say, for as long as 
you would have live had you never been initi into the secret of 
magic." 

"and if we fail?" 

"you will pass into the perman possess of the unknown." 

"doe that mean we shall die the moment we fail?" kelson inquir 
timidly. 

"die!" the voic lisped. "again you speak in term you do not 
understand. you may be sent for." 

"you say--in perfect harmony." hamar put in. "doe that mean without a 
quarrel, howev slight?" 

"it mean without a quarrel that would lead to separation. the moment 
you disunit the compact is broken." 

"what advantag will the secret bring us?" hamar inquired. "can we 
gain unlimit wealth?" 

"yes!" the voic replied. "unlimit wealth and influence." 

"and health?" 

"so long as you fulfil the condit of the compact you will enjoy 
perfect health. will you, or will you not, pledg yourselves?" 

"I am readi if you fellow are," hamar whispered. 

"I am!" curti cried. "anyth is better than the life we are live 
at present." 

"and I, too," kelson said. "I agre with ed." 

"veri well then," the voic onc more lisped. "each of you take a 
fruit and eat it, and the compact is irrevoc struck. you cannot 
back out of it without incur the consequ alreadi named. don't 
be afraid, step up here and help yourselves--on apiece--mind, no 
more." and again it seem to hamar, curti and kelson as if the tree 
and everyth around it wa convuls with silent laughter. 

"come on!" hamar cried, somewhat imperatively. "don't wast time. 
you'v decided, and besides, rememb thi affair may turn out trumps. 
i'll go first," and walk up to the tree he pluck a fruit and 
began to eat it. curti and kelson slowli follow suit. 

"I believ i'm eat a live slug, or a toad," curti muttered, with a 
retch. 

"and I, too," kelson whispered. "it' filthy. I shall be sick. If I 
am, will it make ani differ to the compact, I wonder?" 

what the fruit realli tast like they could never decide. It remind 
them of mani thing and of nothing. It wa sweet yet bitter; it 
repel but at the same time pleas them; it wa as perplex as 
the voice--a enigmatical. when they had eaten it they resum their 
former posit on the ground, and the voic onc again address 
them. 

"the fruit you have consum ha creat in you a fit to make use 
of the power about to be conferred. you have acquir the faculti of 
sorcery--y will be initi by stages, into the knowledg and 
practic of it. these stages, seven in number, will cover the period 
of your compact, _i.e._ twenty-on months, and at the end of everi 
three months--when a fresh stage is reached--y will receiv fresh 
powers. 

"in the first stage, the stage you are now enter upon, you will 
receiv the power of divination. you will be told how to detect the 
presenc of water and all kind of metals, and how to read people' 
thoughts. 

"in the second stage--exactli three month from to-day--y will 
receiv the gift of second-sight; the power of separ your 
immateri from your materi bodi and project it, anywher you 
will, on the physic plane; and, to a larg extent, you will be 
enabl to circumv gravity. thu you will be abl to perform all 
manner of juggleri tricks--trick that will set the whole world 
gaping. profit by them. 

"in the third stage you will possess the secret of invisibility; of 
walk on the water; of breath under the water; of tame wild 
beasts; and of understand their language. 

"in the fourth stage you will understand how to inflict all manner of 
diseases, and work all sort of spells; such, for instance, as 
bewitch milk, caus peopl to have fits, bad dreams, etc. you 
will also know how to creat plagues--plagu of insects, or of ani 
other noxiou thing. 

"in the fifth stage you will possess absolut knowledg of the art of 
medicin and be abl to cure everi ailment. 

"in the sixth stage you will acquir the power of produc vampir 
and werwolv from the human being, and of transform peopl from 
the human to ani anim guise. 

"in the seventh and final stage you will be given the complet masteri 
of everi art and science--includ astrology, astronomy, necromancy, 
etc.; and for thi stage is reserv the greatest power of 
all--namely, the complet dominion over woman' will and affections. 
the power of creat life, and of extend life beyond the now 
natur limit, and of avoid accidents, will never be confer on 
you. neither shall you learn, not at least dure your physic 
existence--who or what we are, or the secret of creation. 

"each success stage will cancel the preced one--that is to say, 
the power you have acquir in the first stage will be annul on 
your arriv at the second stage, and so on. but if you carri out 
your compact faithfully--that is to say, if at the end of the 
twenty-on month you are still united--al the power you have held 
hitherto, in the differ stages, temporarily, will return to you and 
remain in your possess permanently. have you anyth to say?" 

"yes!" hamar answered; "I fulli understand all you have explain to 
us and I like the idea of it immensely. the fear of our come to ani 
seriou loggerhead and of dissolv partnership doesn't worri me 
much--but I must say, it seem veri remote--th prospect of gain 
such tremend powers--pow that will give us practic 
everyth we want--sav youth--" 

"youth you will never regain," lisp the voice. "and elixir of life, 
sure you must know, are no longer sought after, by be of the 
planet earth. they are quit out of date. you will, of course, learn 
the most efficaci mean of make yourselv and other peopl 
youth in appearance." 

"yes, but how shall we learn these secrets?" kelson nerv himself to 
ask. 

"they will be reveal to you in variou ways--sometim when asleep. 
you will receiv preliminari instruct as to divin befor thi 
time to-morrow." 

"and meanwhile, we shall be in want of money," curti remarked. 

"no!" the voic replied, "you will not be in want of money. have you 
anyth more to ask?" 

No one spoke, and the silenc that follow wa interrupt by a loud 
rustl of the wind. the dark then lifted; but noth wa to be 
seen--noth save the tree and bushes, moon and stars. 


footnotes: 

[footnot 16: thi is a veri sinist sign in astrology, denot 
the presenc of evil influenc of all kinds.--(_author' note._)] 

[footnot 17: accord to atlantean idea these spirit were:--vic 
elementals; morba (or diseas elementals); clanogrian (or 
malici famili ghosts, such as banshees, etc.); vampires; 
barrowvians, _i.e._ a grotesqu kind of phantasm that frequent 
place where prehistor man or beast ha been interred; planetians, 
_i.e._ spirit inim to dweller on thi earth that inhabit 
variou of the other planets; and earthbound spirit of such dead 
human be as were mad, imbecile, cruel and vicious, togeth with 
the phantasm of viciou and mad beasts, and beast of 
prey.--(_author' note_.)] 

[footnot 18: they are a liter translat of the atlantean by 
thos. maitland, and are veri nearli identifi with form of spirit 
invoc use in egypt, india, persia, arabia, and among the red 
indian of north and south america.--(_author' note_.)] 




chapter VI 

the first power 


after their rencontr with the unknown, hamar and hi companion did 
not get back to their respect quarter till the sun wa high in the 
heavens, and the street of the citi were begin to vibrat with 
the rattl and clatter of traffic. 

"it' all veri well--thi wonder compact of ours," curti grumbled, 
"but i'm deuc hungry, and matt and I haven't a cent between us. As 
we went all that way last night to oblig you, leon, I think it is 
onli fair you should stand us treat. i'll bet you have some nickel 
stow away, somewhere, in those pocket of yours--it wouldn't be you 
if you hadn't! what do you say, matt?" 

"I think as you do," kelson replied. "we'v stood by leon, he should 
stand by us. how much have you, leon?" 

"how much have you?" curti echoed, "come, out with it--no jew-jew 
pal for me." 

"I might manag a dollar," hamar said ruefully, as the prospect of a 
good meal all to himself, at hi favourit restaurant, fade away. 
"where shall we go?" 

just then, kelson, happen to look behind him, saw a young woman of 
prepossess appear ascend the step of a dive in clay street. 
He wa instantli attracted, as he alway wa attract by a pretti 
woman, and something--a kind of intuit he had never had 
before--told him that she wa a waitress; that she wa discont 
with her present situation; that she wa engag to be marri to a 
pen driver at hast & hast in sacramento street; and that she 
had a mother, of over seventy, whom she kept. all thi came to kelson 
like a flash of lightning. 

yield to an impuls which he did not stay to analyse, he grip 
hamar and curtis, each too astonish even to remonstrate, by the arm, 
and, drag them along with him, follow the girl. 

the dive had onli just been opened, and wa be dust and swept by 
two slatternli women with dago complexions, and voic like hyenas. It 
still reek of stale drink and tobacco. 

"what' the good of come to a place like this?" hamar demanded, as 
soon as he had freed himself from kelson' clutches. "we can't get 
breakfast here." 

"matt' mad, that' what' the matter with him," curti ad in 
disgust. "let' get out." 

He turn to go--then, halted--and stood still. He appear to be 
listening. "what' up with you?" hamar asked. "both you fellow are 
behav like lunat thi morning--there' not a pin to choos 
between you." 

"they'r play cards, that' all," curti said. "can't you hear 
them?" 

hamar shook hi head. "not a sound," he said. "just look at matt!" 

while the other two were talking, kelson had follow the girl to the 
bar, and catch her up, just as she enter it, said in a manner 
that wa peculiar to him--a manner seldom without effect upon girl of 
hi class--"i beg your pardon, miss, are we too earli to be served? 
jerusalem! haven't I met you somewher before?" 

the girl look him squar in the eye and then smiled. "a like as 
not," she said. "I go pretti near everywhere! what do you want?" 

"well!" kelson soliloquized; "breakfast is what we are particularli 
anxiou for--but I suppos that is out of the question in a dive!" 

"then whi did you come here?" the girl queried. 

"becaus of you! simpli becaus of you," kelson replied. "you 
hypnot me!" 

"that be so, then I reckon you can have your breakfast," the girl 
laughed, "though we don't provid them as a rule befor nine. indeed, 
the manag have onli just decided--thi morning--on provid them 
at all." 

"how odd!" 

"whi odd?" the girl questioned, take off her hat and arrang her 
curl befor a mirror. 

"why, that I should have happen to strike the right moment! had I 
come here yesterday it would have been useless. As I said, you 
hypnot me. evid fate intend us to meet." 

"do you believ in fate?" the girl asked, shrug her shoulders. "I 
believ in nothing--least of all in men!" 

"you say so!" kelson observed, befor he knew what he wa saying. "and 
yet you have just got engag to one. but you'v got a bad attack of 
the pip thi morning, you have had enough of it here--y want to get 
anoth post." 

the girl ceas do her hair and eye him in amazement. "well!" she 
said. "of all the queer men i'v ever met you are the queerest. are 
you a seer?" 

"no!" hamar observed, suddenli join in. "he' onli veri hungry, 
miss. hungri bodi and soul! hungri all over. and so are we." 

"well, then, go into the room over there," the girl cried, point in 
the direct of a half-open door, "and breakfast will be brought you 
in half a jiffy." 

"who' that play cards?" curti asked. 

"how do you know ani one is play cards?" the girl queri with an 
incredul stare. "you can't see through walls, can you?" 

"no! and i'm hang if I can explain," curti said, "I seem to hear 
them. there are two--on is call arnold, and the other lemon, or 
some such name, and they are rehears certain card trick they mean 
to play to-night." 

"that' right," the girl said, "two men name arnold and lemon are 
here. they were play all last night with two of the clerk in 
willow bank, in sacramento street, and they clear them out of everi 
cent. you knew it!" 

"no! I didn't," curti growled, "I don't lie for fun, and i'm just as 
much in a fog, as to how I know, as you are. let' have breakfast now, 
and we'll look up these two gent afterwards, if they haven't gone." 

"your friend' a brute, I don't like him," the girl whisper to 
kelson. "let him lose all he' got--you stay out here." 

"noth I should like better," kelson said, "it' a bargain!" 

the breakfast wa so good that they linger long over it, and the 
bar-room had a fair sprinkl of peopl when they re-ent it. 
leav kelson to chat with the girl, hamar and curtis, obey her 
directions, found their way to a small parlour in the rear of the 
building, where two men were loll over a card table, smoke and 
drinking, and read aloud extract from a pink sport paper. 

"it' a funni thing," one of them exclaimed, "we can't be allow to 
sit here in peace--when there' so much spare space in the house." 

"we beg your pardon for intruding," curti said, "but my friend and I 
came in here for a quiet game of cards. we'r farmer down missouri 
way, and don't often get the chanc to run up to town." 

"farmers, are you!" the man who had not yet spoken said, eye them 
both closely. "you don't look it. My friend lemon, here, and I were 
also want to have a game--would you care to join us?" 

"bi all means," curti at onc exclaimed. "what do you play?" 

"poker!" the man said, "nap! don! but i'll show you someth first, 
which, be fresh from the country, you'v probabl never seen 
before, though they do tell me peopl in missouri are mighti cute." He 
then proceed to show them what he call the bull and buffalo trick, 
the secret of which he offer to sell them for ten dollars. 

"I wouldn't give you a cent for it!" curti snapped. "ani one can see 
how it is done." 

"you can't!" the man retorted, turn red. "i'll wager twenti dollar 
you can't." curti accept the wager, and at onc did the trick. He 
had seen through it at a glance--ther appear no difficulti in it at 
all; and yet he wa quit certain if he had been ask to do it the 
day before, he would have utterli failed. 

"now," he said, "give me the money,"--and the man compli with an 
oath. 

"ani more tricks?" curti ask complacently. 

"I know heaps," the man rejoined. "there' one you won't guess--th 
seven card trick." 

He did it. and so did curtis. 

"well i'm----" the man call lemon ejaculated. 

"he' the dandiest cove at trick we'v ever struck. tri him with the 
princ and slipper, arnold!" 

arnold rather reluctantli assented, and curti burst out laughing. 

"why!" he said, "that' the simplest of all! see!" and it wa done. 
"you two had better come to an understand with us or you'll not 
shine to-night. how about a game of don?" 

lemon and arnold agreed, but they had bare begun befor curti cri 
out, "it' no use, lemon, I can see those deuc up your sleeve. 
you'v some up yours, too, arnold--th deuc of club and the deuc of 
hearts. moreover, you can tell our card by notch and thumb smear 
on the backs. i'll show you how." He told the card correctly--ther 
wa no gainsay it. the men were overwhelmed. 

"what are you, anyway?" lemon asked; "tecs?" 

"never mind what we are!" curti said savagely. "we know what you 
are--and that' where the rub come in. now what are you go to pay 
us to hold our tongues?" 

"pay you!" lemon hissed. "why, damn you--nothing. we'r not bankers. 
all we'v got to do is clear out and tri somewher else." 

"that might not be so easi as you imagine," hamar interposed. "we 
would make it our busi to have a scene first. whi not come to 
terms? we'll not be over exorbitant--and consid the conveni of 
not have to shift your quarters." 

"well, of all the bloom froust i'v struck, none beat this," 
lemon said. "fanci be pip by a coupl of sucker like these. 
farmers, indeed! whi don't you call yourselv parsons? how much do 
you want?" 

after a prolong haggling, hamar and curti agre to take fifti 
dollars; and, consid their penniless condition, they were by no 
mean dissatisfi with their bargain. 

they were now readi to go, and look round for kelson, found him 
engag in a desper _tête-à-tête_ with the young ladi at the bar, 
who, despit her avow lack of faith in mankind, count half the 
room her friends. she promis kelson that she would meet him at eight 
o'clock that evening; but as both she and he were quit use to make 
such promis and subsequ forget all about them, their 
rencontr result in onli one thing, namely, in furnish the three 
alli with the nucleu of the big fortun they intend making. 

On find themselv outsid the dive hamar, curti and kelson first 
of all divid the spoil. they then went to a cloth depot and rig 
themselv out in fashion cut garments; after which they took 
room at a present hotel in kearney street, next door to knobble' 
boot store. then, dress for the first time in their live like nob 
hill dukes, they parad the pet resort of the beau-monde--of the 
bonanza and railroad set--and make eye at all the pretti wive and 
daughter they met, cogit fresh devic for make money. As they 
saunter across pacif avenue, in the direct of californian 
street, kelson suddenli gave vent to a whistle. 

"what the deuc is wrong with you?" hamar exclaimed. "seen your 
grandmother' ghost?" 

"no! but i'v seen the inner read of that ladi yonder," kelson 
replied, indic with a jerk of hi finger a fashion dress 
woman walk toward them on the other side of the road. "the deuc 
know how it all come to me, but I know everyth about her, just 
the same as I did with the girl in the dive--though i'v never seen 
her before. she is the wife of d.d. belton, the cotton magnate, who 
live in a big, white hous at the corner of powel street--and a 
beauty, I can assur you. suppos to be most devot to her husband, 
she is now on her way to keep an appoint with the rev. j.t. 
calthorp of sancta maria' church in appleyard street, with whom she 
ha been hold clandestin meet for the past six months." 

"whew!" hamar ejaculated. "you speak as if it wa all be pump 
into you by some extern agency--automatically." 

"that' just about what I feel!" kelson said, "I feel as if it were 
some one els say all this--som one els speak through me. yet 
I know all about that woman, just as much as if I had been acquaint 
with her all my life!" 

"it' the first power," hamar said excitedly, "the power of 
divination. It take that form with you, and the form of card trick 
with ed--with me noth so far." 

"but what shall I do?" kelson cried. "how can I benefit by it?" 

"how can't you?" curti growled. "why, blackmail her! If it is true, 
she will pay you anyth to keep your mouth shut. If onc you can 
tell a woman' secret, your future' made. all san francisco will be 
at your mercy--god know who'll escape! after her at once, you idiot!" 

"now?" kelson gasped. 

"yes! now! follow her to calthorpe' and waylay her as she come out. 
you can refer to us as witnesses." 

"I feel a bit of a blackguard," kelson pleaded. 

"you look it, anyway," curti grinned. "but cheer up--it' the 
clothes. cloth are respons for everything!" 

after a littl persuas kelson gave in, but he had to make hast as 
the ladi wa nearli out of sight. she took a taxi from the stand 
opposit kitson' hotel, and kelson took one, too. two hour later, 
rais hi hat, he accost her as she stood tap the pavement of 
batteri street with a daintili shod foot, wait to cross. "mrs. 
belton, I think," he said. the ladi eye him coldly. 

"well!" she said, "what do you want? who are you?" 

"mi name can scarc matter to you," kelson responded, "though my 
busi may. I have been engag to watch you, and am fulli post as 
to your meet and correspond with the rev. j.t. calthorpe." 

"I don't understand you," the ladi said, her cheek flaming. "you have 
made a mistake--a veri seriou mistak for you." 

for a moment kelson' heart failed. He wa still a clerk, with all the 
humil of an offic stool and shine trousers' seat thick on him, 
whilst she wa a _grand dame_ accustom to the bow and scrape of 
employ as well as employed. 

sever peopl pass by and stare at him--a he thought--suspiciously, 
and he felt that thi wa the most critic time in hi life, and 
unless he pull through, smartli in fact, he would be done onc and 
for all. If he didn't make haste, too, the woman would undoubtedli 
call a policeman. It wa thi thought as well as--though, perhaps, 
hardli as much as--th look of her that stimul kelson to action. 
He hate behav badli to women; but wa thi thing, dress in a 
skirt that fit like a glove and show up everi detail of her 
figure--thi thing with the paint on her cheeks, and eyebrows, and 
lips--artist done, perhaps, but done all the same--thi thing 
all load with jewelleri and buttons--thi thing--a woman! no! she 
wa not--sh wa onli a millionaire' plaything--brainless, 
heartless--a hobbi that cost thousands, whilst countless men such as 
he--starved. He detested--abomin such luxuries! and thu nerv he 
retorted, borrow some of her imperiousness-- 

"do you deny, madam, that for the past two hour you'v been sit 
on the sofa of the end room of the third floor of no. 216, market 
street, flirt with the rev. j.t. calthorpe, whom you call 
'mickey-moo'; that you gave him a photo you had taken at bell' studio 
in clay street, special for him; that you gave him five greenback 
to the valu of one hundr and fifti dollars, and that you'v plan 
a moonlight promenad with him to-morrow, when your husband will be in 
denver?" 

"don't talk so loud," the ladi said in a low voice. "walk along with 
me a littl and then we shan't be noticed. I see you do know a good 
deal--how, I can't imagine, unless you were hidden somewher in the 
room. who ha employ you to watch me?" 

"that, madam, I can't say," kelson truth responded. 

"and I can't think," the ladi said, "unless it is some woman enemy. 
but, after all, you can't do much sinc you hold no proofs--your word 
alon will count for nothing." 

"ah, but I have strong corrobor evidence," kelson retorted. "I 
have the testimoni of at least two other peopl who know quit as much 
as I do." 

"adventur like yourself," the ladi sneered. "mi husband would 
neither believ you nor your friends." 

"he would believ your letters, ani way," said kelson. 

"mi letters!" the ladi laughed, "you'v no letter of mine." 

"no, but I know where the correspond that ha pass between you 
and the rev. j.t. calthorp is to be found. He ha sixty-nin letter 
from you all tie up in pink ribbon, lock up in the bottom drawer of 
the bureau in hi studi at the vicarage. some of the letter begin 
with 'dearest, duckiest, handsomest herby'--short for herbert; and 
others, 'fondest, blondest, darlingest micky-moo!' some end with 'A 
thousand and one kiss from your love and ever devot francesca,' 
and other with 'love and kiss ad infinitum, ever your loving, 
thirsting, ador one, toosie!' nice letter from the wife of a 
respect nob hill magnat to a marri clergyman!" 

the ladi walk a trifl unsteadily, and much of her colour wa gone. 
"I can't understand it," she panted; "somebodi ha play me false." 

"a the rev. j.t. calthorp is on hi way to sacramento, where he ha 
to remain till to-morrow," kelson went on pitilessly, "it will be the 
easiest thing in the world to get those letters. I have mere to call 
at the hous and tell hi wife." 

"and what good will that do you?" the ladi asked. 

"revenge! I hate the rich," kelson said. "I would do anyth to 
injur them." 

"you are a socialist?" 

"an anarchist! but come, you see I know all about you and that I have 
you complet in my power. If onc either your husband or mrs. 
calthorp get hold of those letters--y and your lover would have a 
veri unpleas time of it." 

"you'r a devil!" 

"mayb I am--at all event i'm talk to one. but that' neither here 
nor there. I want money. give me a thousand dollar and you'll never 
hear from me again." 

"blackmail! I could have you arrested!" 

"yes, and I would tell the court the whole histori of your intrigues! 
that wouldn't help you,"--and kelson laughed. 

"could I count on you not molest me again if I were to pay you?" 
the ladi said mockingly. 

"you could." 

"do you ever speak the truth?" 

"you needn't judg everi one by your own standard of morality--th 
standard set up by the millionaire' wife," kelson said. "I swear that 
if you pay me a thousand dollar I will never troubl you again." 

the ladi grew thoughtful, and for some minut neither of them spoke. 
then she suddenli jerk out: "I think, after all, i'll accept your 
proposal. wait outsid here and you shall have what you want within an 
hour." 

"not good enough," kelson said, "I prefer to come with you to your 
hous and wait there." 

the ladi protested, and kelson consent to wait in the street outsid 
her house, where, eventually, she deliv the money into hi hands. 

"i'v kept my word," she said, "and if you'r half a man you'll keep 
yours." 

kelson reassur her, and more than pleas with himself, made for the 
hotel, where the three of them were now stopping. 

thi wa mere a beginning. befor the day wa out he had secur two 
more victims. No woman whose charact wa not without blemish wa 
safe from him--hi wonder newli acquir gift enabl him to 
detect ani vice, no matter how snugli hidden. and thi wonder power 
of discern brought with it an express of mysteri and 
penetr which, by enhanc the effect of the power, made the 
applic of it compar easy. kelson had onli to glide after 
hi victim, and with hi eye fix searchingli on her, to say, 
"madam, may I have a word with you?"--and the battl wa more than 
half won--th women were too fascin to think of resistance. 

for example, shortli after hi initi adventure, he saw a veri 
smartli dress woman in van ness avenu peep about furtively, and 
then stop and speak to a littl child, who wa walk with it nurse. 
divin at onc told him everything--th ladi wa the mother of the 
child, but it father wa not her legitim husband, w.s. hobson, the 
millionair mine owner. 

when kelson courteous inform her he wa in possess of her 
secret--a secret she had felt posit certain onli one other person 
knew, she went the colour of her pea-green sunshad and attempt to 
remonstrate. but kelson' appearance, no less than hi marvel 
knowledg of her life, and charact dumbfound her--sh wa simpli 
paralys into admission; and befor he left her, kelson had ad 
anoth thousand dollar to hi hoard. 

that evening, close to the academi of scienc in market street, he saw 
a ladi get out of a taxi and quickli enter a pawnbroker's. her whole 
life at onc rose up befor him. she wa ella crockford, the wife of 
the californian street sugar king, and, unknown to her husband, she 
spent her afternoon at a gambl saloon in kearney street, where she 
ran through thousands. 

she wa now about to pledg her husband' latest present to her--a 
diamond tiara, one of the most notabl piec of jewelleri in the 
country--in the hope that she would soon win back suffici money at 
card to redeem it. 

kelson stop her as she came out, and in a marvel few words, 
prove to her that he knew everything. her amaz wa beyond 
description. 

"you must be a magician," she said, "becaus i'm certain no one saw me 
take my jewel-cas out of the drawer--no one wa in the room! and as I 
put it in my muff immediately, no one could have seen it as I left the 
house. besides, I never told a soul I intend pawn it, so how is 
it possibl you could know--and be abl to repeat the whole of the 
convers I had with walter le-grand, to whom I lost so heavili 
last night? tell me, how do you know all this?" 

but kelson would tell her nothing--noth beyond her own sin and 
misfortunes. 

"I have noth to give you," she told him. "I dare not ask my husband 
for more money." 

"what, nothing!" kelson replied, "when the pawnbrok ha just 
advanc you fifti thousand dollars. you call that nothing? Be pleas 
to give me one thousand, and congratul yourself that I do not ask 
for all your 'nothing.'" and as neither tear nor prayer had ani 
effect, she wa oblig to pay him the sum he asked. 

flush and excit with victory, and thinking, perhaps, that he had 
done enough for one day, kelson took hi spoil to a bank near the 
palac hotel, and for the first time in hi career open a bank 
account. As he wa leav the build he ran into hamar, bent on a 
similar errand. the two gleefulli compar notes. 

"I thought," hamar said, "mi turn would never come, and that I must 
have done someth to get out of favour with the unknown; but as I 
wa sit in the pig and whistl saloon in corn street drink a 
lager, I suddenli felt a peculiar throb sensat run up my left 
leg into my left hand, and the floor seem to open up, and I saw deep 
below me, in a black pit, a skeleton clutch hold of a linen bag, 
full of coins. I could see the gold quit distinctly--spanish doubles, 
none newer than the eighteenth century. I knew then that the unknown 
had not forgotten me. 'look here, boss,' I said to old man moss--th 
proprietor, you know--'you'r a bit of a juggin to go on work with 
so much money under here,'--and I point to the floor. 

"'i'm surpris at you, hamar,' moss said, cock an eye at me, 'and 
lager, too!' 

"'no, old man!' I said, 'i'm not drunk. i'm sober and serious. you'v 
got a cellar below here, haven't you?' 

"'well, and what if I have!' moss retorted, draw a step closer and 
run hi eye care over me. 'what if I have! there' no harm 
in that, is there?' 

"'you keep all your stock down there,' I went on, 'and more beside. I 
can see a hat-pin with a gold nob, that' not your wife's, and a pair 
of shoe with dandi silver buckles, that' not intend for your wife, 
nohow.' 

"at that moss made a queer nois in hi throat, and I thought he wa 
go to have a fit. 'what--what the devil are you talk about?' he 
gurgled. 

"'i wish I had had you with me--then, matt, for you could have 
doubtless sum up the woman to him--sh wa a blank to me--i onli 
divin one had been there. 'yes, mr. mossy,' I said, 'you'r a gay 
deceiv and no mistake! I know all about it!' 

"'do you,' he said, eye me excitedly. 'do you know all about it? 
i'm not so sure, but in order to avoid run ani risks, drop your 
voic a bit and have a cocktail with me!' 

"he pour me out one, and I went on softly, 'well, boss moss,' I 
said, 'we'll leav the femal out of the question for the present. 
underneath thi cellar of yours, is a pit.' 

"'i'm damn if there is!' moss snorted; 'leastways, it' the first 
i'v ever heard of it.' 

"'and in thi pit,' I said, 'i the skeleton of a spanish buccan 
call don guzman, who land in thi port on august 10, 1699, and 
after rob and slice up a famili of the name of hervada, who 
live on the site of what is now the copthorn hotel, wa hurri off 
with all their money and jewels, when he fell into a pit, cover with 
brambl and briars, and broke hi neck.' 

"'and you expect me to believ thi cock and bull story,' moss 
growled. 'be out of a job so long ha made you balmy.' 

"'it hasn't made me too balmi not to see through the way you deceiv 
your wife, moss,' I said. 'i'll bet she would think me sane enough if 
I were to tell her all I know. but i'll spare you if you will take me 
into your cellar and help me to do a bit of excav there. but 
promise, mind you, that we will go share in what we find.' 

"'oh, i'll promis right enough,' moss replied. 'i'll promis 
anything--if onli to keep you from talk such moonshine.' 

"well, in the end I prevail upon him to accompani me, and we went 
into the cellar--just as I had depict it--arm with a pick-ax and 
crowbar. moss growl and jeer everi step he took, and I, deadli 
in earnest. 

"'it' under here,' I said, halt over a flagston in the corner of 
the vault. 'but befor we do anyth you had better hide that hat-pin 
and these shoes, or your missi will find them. she'll hear us 
scrape and come to see what' up.' 

"moss, who wa in a vile temper all the time, made a grab at the 
things, prick hi finger and swear horribly. In the meanwhil I 
had set to work, and, with hi aid, rais the stone. We dug for 
pretti nearli an hour, moss call upon me all the time to 'chuck 
it,' when I suddenli struck someth hard--it wa the skeleton and 
close besid it, wa the bag. you should have seen moss then. He wa 
simpli overcome--cal me a wizard, a magician, and heaven alon 
know what, and fairli stood on hi head with delight when we open 
the bag, and hundr of gold coin and preciou stone roll out on 
the floor. He want to go back on hi word then, and onli give me a 
handful; but I wa too smart for him, and swore I would tell hi wife 
about the girl unless he gave me half. when we were leav the 
cellar, of course, he want me to go first, so that he could follow 
with the pickaxe, but here again I wa too sharp for him--and I got 
safe out of the place with my pocket bulging. I went right away to 
prescott' in clay street, and let the lot go for three thousand 
dollars. I wonder how curti ha got on!" 

they walk togeth to the hotel, and found curti busili engag 
eating. "i'v work hard," he said, "and now i'm in for enjoy 
myself. i'v made them get out a special menu for me, and i'm go to 
eat till I can't hold anoth morsel. i'v starv all my life and now 
I intend make up for it." 

"been successful?" hamar asked, wink at kelson. 

"pretti well! noth to grumbl at," curti rejoined, pour himself 
out a glass of champagne. "first of all I went to simpson' dive in 
sacramento street, and start do the trick we discov 
yesterday. not a soul in the place could see through them, and I made 
about two hundr dollar befor I left. I then had lunch." 

"whi you had lunch with us!" hamar laughed. 

"well, can't I have as mani lunch as I like?" curti replied. "I had 
lunch, I say, at a place in market street, and there I read in a paper 
that peter & pervis, the tin food people, were offer a prize of 
three thousand dollar for a solut to a puzzl contain on the 
insid cover of one of their tins. I immedi determin to enter 
for it. I bought a tin and saw through the puzzl at once. bribe a 
policeman to go with me to see fair play, off I set to peter & 
pervis'. 

"'i want to see your boss,' I said to the first clerk I saw. 

"'which of them?' the clerk grunted, hi cheek turn white at the 
sight of the policeman. 

"'either will do,' I replied, 'peter or pervis. trot 'em up, time is 
precious.' 

"away he went, but in a coupl of minut wa back again, look 
scared, 'they'r both engaged,' he says. 

"'then they'll have to break it off,' I responded, 'and mighti quick. 
i'm here to talk with them, so get a move on you again and give that 
message.' 

"if it hadn't been for the policeman I don't think he would have gone, 
but the policeman back me up, and the clerk hurri off again; and 
in the end the boss decid they had better see me. they look 
preciou cross, I can assur you, but befor I had done speak they 
look crosser still. 

"'you say you'v done that puzzle,'--they shouted--'th puzzl that 
ha stuck all the mathemat gun at harvard and yale--you--a 
nonent like you--begone, sir, don't wast our time with such humbug 
as that.' 

"'all right,' I said, 'give me some paper and a pen, and i'll prove 
it.' 

"'that' veri reasonable,' the policeman chip in, 'do the thing 
fair and square--i'm here as a witness.' 

"well, with much grunt and grumbl they hand me paper and ink, 
and in a trice the puzzl wa done; and it appear so easi that the 
policeman clap hi hand and broke out into a loud guffaw. My eyes! 
you should have seen how the face of pervi and peter fell, and have 
heard what they said. but it wa no use swear and cursing, the 
thing wa done, and there wa the policeman to prove it. 

"'we'll give you five hundr dollars,' they said, 'to clear out and 
say no more about it.' 

"'five hundr dollar when you'v advertis three thousand,' I 
cried. 'what do you take me for? i'll have that three thousand or i'll 
show you both up.' 

"'a thousand, then?' they said. 

"'no!' I retorted; 'three! three, and look sharp. and look here,' I 
added, as my glanc rest on some of the sampl of their past they 
had round them, 'I understand the secret of all these so-cal 
patent of yours--ther isn't one of them I couldn't imitate. take 
that "rabsidab," for instance. what is it? why, a compound of 
horseflesh, turnip and popcorn, flavour with lazenby' sauce--for 
the infring of which patent you are liabl to prosecution--and 
colour with cochineal. then there' the stuff you label 
"ironcastor,"'--but they shut me up. 'there, take your three thousand 
dollars, write us out a receipt for it, and clear.'" 

"nine thousand dollar in one day! we'v done well," kelson 
ejaculated. "what' the programm for to-morrow?" 

"same as to-day and plenti of it," curti said, pour himself out 
anoth glass of champagn and make a vigor attack on a chicken. 
"I think i'll let you two fellow do all the work to-morrow, and 
content myself here. waiter! what time' breakfast?" 




chapter vii 

san francisco ladi and divin 


curti wa as good as hi word. the follow day he remain indoor 
eating, and plan what he should eat, whilst hamar and kelson went 
out with the express purpos of ad to their bank accounts. 

In a garden in bryant street, hamar saw a man rest on hi spade and 
mop the perspir from hi forehead. As he stop mechan 
to see what wa be done, a cold sensat ran up hi right leg into 
hi right hand, the first and third finger of which were drawn 
violent down. with a cri of horror he shrank back. directli beneath 
where he had been standing, he saw, under a fifteen or sixteen feet 
layer of gravel soil--water; a huge caldron of water, black and 
silent; water, that gave him the impress of tremend depth and 
coldness. 

"hulloa! matey, what' the matter?" the man with the spade call out. 
"are you look for your skin, for I never saw ani one so complet 
jump out of it?" 

"so would you," hamar said with a shudder, "if you saw what I do!" 

"what' that, then?" the man said leer on the ground. "snakes! 
that' what I alway see when i'v got them." 

"so long as you don't see yourself, there' some chanc for you!" 
hamar retorted. "what make you so hot?" 

"why, digging!" the man laughed; "ani one would get hot dig at 
such hard ground as this. As for a littl whippersnapp like you, 
you'd melt right away and onli your nose would remain. noth would 
ever melt that--there' too much of it." 

hamar scowled. "you needn't be insulting," he said, "I ask you a 
civil question, and I repeat it. what make you so hot--when you 
should be cold--or at least cool?" 

"oh, should i!" the man mimicked, "I thought first you wa mere 
drunk; I can see quit clearli now that you'r mad." 

"and yet you have such defect sight." 

"what make you say that?" the man said testily. 

"why," hamar responded, "becaus you can't see what lie beneath your 
veri nose. shall I tell you what it is?" 

"yes, tell away," the man replied, "tell me my old mother' got twins, 
and that boss croker is come to lodg with us. i'd know you for a 
liar anywher by those teeth of yours." 

"look here," said hamar draw himself up angrily, "I have had enough 
of your abuse. If I have ani more i'll tell your employers. It is 
evid you take me for a bummer, but see,"--and plung hi hand in 
hi pocket he pull it out full of gold. "kindli understand i'm 
somebody," he went on, "and that i'm stay at one of the biggest 
hotel in the town." 

"i'm damn if I know what to make of you," the man muttered, "unless 
you'r a hoptic delusion!" 

"underneath where I wa standing--just here,"--and hamar indic the 
spot--"i water. ani amount of it, you have onli to sink a shaft 
fifteen feet and you would come to it." 

"water!" the man laughed, "yes, there is ani amount of it--on your 
brain, that' the onli water near here." 

"then you don't believ me?" hamar demanded. 

"not likely!" the man responded, "I onli believ what I see! and when 
I see a face like your hold out a pot of dollars, I know as how 
you'v stolen them. git!"--and hamar flew. 

but hamar wa not so easili nonplussed; not at least when he saw a 
chanc of make money. enter the garden, and keep well out of 
sight of the gardener, he arriv at the front door by a side path, and 
with much formal request to see the owner of the establishment. 
the latter happen to be cross the hall at the time, heard hamar 
and ask what he wanted. 

hamar at onc inform him he wa a dowser, and that, chanc to pass 
by the garden on hi way to hi hotel, he had divin the presenc of 
water. 

"I onli wish there were," the gentleman exclaimed, "but I fear you are 
mistaken. I have attempt sever time to sink a well but never with 
the slightest degre of success. I have had all the ground care 
prospect by figgin of sacramento street--h ha a veri big 
reputation--and he assur me there isn't a drop of water anywher 
near here within two hundr feet of the surface." 

"I know better," hamar said. "will you get your gardener--who by the 
way wa veri rude to me just now when I spoke to him--to dig where I 
tell him. I have absolut confid in my power of divination." 

the owner of the property, whom I will call mr. B. assented, and 
sever gardeners, includ the one who had so insult hamar, were 
soon dig vigorously. At the depth of fifteen feet, water wa 
found, and, indeed, so fast did it begin to come in that within a few 
minut it had risen a foot. the onlook were jubilant. 

"I shall send an account of it to the local papers," mr. B. remarked. 
"your fame will be spread everywhere. you have increas the valu of 
my properti a thousandfold, I cannot tell you how grate I am"--and 
he, then and there, invit hamar to luncheon. 

after luncheon mr. B. made him a present of a cheque--rath in excess 
of the sum which hamar had all along intend to have, and could not 
have refrain from demand much longer. 

In the afternoon all the san francisco special were full of the 
incident, and hamar, see hi name placard for the first time, wa 
so overcom that he spent the rest of the even in the hotel 
deliber how he could best turn hi sudden notorieti to account. 

At ten o'clock kelson came in, look somewhat fatigued, but, 
nevertheless, pleased. he, too, had had adventures, and he detail 
them with so much elabor that the other two had frequent to 
tell him to "dri up." 

"I began the morning," he commenced, "bi accost a veri fashion 
dress ladi come out of bushwell' store in commerci street. 
divin at onc told me she wa the popular widow of j.k. bater, 
the biscuit king of nob hill, and that she wa carri in her big 
seal-skin muff a gold hatpin mount with an emerald butterfly, a 
silver-back hair brush, a blue enamel scent bottle, and a 
porcelain jar, all of which she had slyli 'nicked,' when no one wa 
looking. 

"I step up to her, and polit rais my hat said, 'good morning, 
mrs. bater. i'v a messag for you.' 

"'i don't know you,' she said eye me veri doubtfully, 'who are 
you?' 

"'forgotten!' I said tragically, 'and I had flatter myself it would 
be otherwise. still I must tri and survive. I want to ask you a 
favour, mrs. bater.' 

"'a favour!' she exclaim nervously, 'what is it? you are realli a 
veri extraordinari individual.' 

"'i wa onli go to ask if I might examin the content of your 
muff? I think you have certain articl in it that have not been paid 
for--and I believ I am right in say thi is by no mean the first 
time such a thing ha happened.' 

"she turn so pale I thought she wa go to faint. 'why, whatev 
do you mean,' she stammered, 'i'v noth that doe not belong to 
me.' 

"'opinion differ on that score, mrs. bater,' I replied, 'you have a 
pin, a hair brush, a scent bottl and a jar,' and I describ them 
each minutely, 'whilst in your hous you have on your dressing-t a 
silver-back cloth brush, a silver manicur set you kleptomaniad--if 
you prefer to call it so--from deacon' in sacramento street; a 
tortoiseshel manicur set, and an ivori card case you obtain in the 
same manner from varter' in market street; a set of silver buttons, a 
glove stretcher, and a mauv pin-cushion--y likewis help yourself 
to--from selter' in kearney street; but I might go on detail them 
to you till further orders, for your hous is liter cram with 
them. you have done veri well, mrs. bater, with the san francisco 
storekeepers.' 

"'good god, man, what are you?' she gasped. 'you seem to read into the 
innermost recess of my soul, and to know everything.' 

"'you are right, madam,' I said, tri to appear veri stern and 
almost failing, she wa so pretty. By jove! you fellows, I wonder I 
didn't kiss her; she had such fine eyes, my favourit nose, a rip 
mouth and--" 

"oh! go on! go on with your story. never mind her looks," curti 
interrupted, "i'v got a touch of indigestion." 

"a I wa saying," kelson went on complacently, "I could have kiss 
her and I felt downright mean for upset her so. 

"'now you have found me out,' she said, 'what do you intend doing? 
show me up in there?' and she point shudderingli at the store. 

"'no,' I said, 'not if you are sensibl and come to terms. I will 
agreeto say noth about either thi or ani of your other--ahem!-- 
thefts--if you let me escort you home, and write me out a chequ for 
a thousand dollars!' 

"'beast!' she hissed, 'so you are a blackmailer!' 

"'a black beetl if you like,' I responded, 'but I assur you, mrs. 
bater, I am let you off cheap. I have onli to call for a policeman 
and your reput would be gone at once. besides, I know other 
thing about you.' 

"'what other things?' she stuttered. 

"'well, madam!' I replied, 'some thing are rather delicate--er--for 
singl men like me to mention, but I do know that--er--a lady--veri 
like--remark like--you, ha in her pocket at thi moment a rattl 
which she bought and paid for in oakland' late last night. and as, 
madam, mr. bater ha been dead over two years--let me see--yes, two 
year yesterday--on can--!' 

"'stay! that will do,' she whispered; 'come to my hous and I will 
give you the thousand dollars. you must pretend you are my cousin.' 

"'i will pretend anything, mrs. bater,' I murmured, help her into a 
taxi, 'anyth so long as I can be with you.'" 

"you got the money?" hamar queried. 

"yes," kelson said with a smile, "I got the money--in fact, everyth 
I ask for." 

there wa silenc for some minutes, and then hamar said, "what next?" 

"what next!" kelson said, "whi I thought I had done a veri good day' 
work and wa on my way back here to take a much need rest, when i'm 
dash if the unknown hadn't anoth adventur in store for me. come 
out of a garden in gough street, within sight of goad' house, wa a 
lady, young and veri plain, but rig out in one of those latest 
fashion costumes--a veri tight, short skirt, and huge hat with high 
plume in it. By the bye, I can't think whi thi costume, which is so 
admir suit to pretti girls--becaus it attract attent to 
them--should be almost exclus adopt by the ugli ones. but to 
continue. I knew immedi that she wa ella barlow, the 
much-pamp and onli daughter of j.b. barlow, the vinegar magnate; 
that she wa in love, or imagin herself in love with herbert delmas, 
the manag of the columbian bank--a young, good-look fellow, whom 
she had been tri to set against hi fiancée, dora roberts. dora is 
onli nineteen, veri pretti and a trifl giddy--noth more. but thi 
fail of hers--if you can call it a failing, wa just the veri 
weapon ella barlow wanted. she work on it at once, and by send 
delma a seri of anonym letter made him mad with jealousy. thi 
result in a breach between delma and dora, and ella barlow, much 
elated, at onc tri to step into her shoes. she ha been go out a 
good deal with delmas, who is in realiti still veri much in love with 
dora, and consequ exceedingli miserable. thi morn ella, 
anxiou to show off a magnific set of diamonds, given her by her 
father, telephon to delma to take her to the baldwyn theatre, where 
she ha engag a box for thi evening--fondli hope that the 
diamond will bring him up to the scratch, and that he will propos to 
her. when I saw her she wa on her way to a notori quack doctor and 
beauti specialist in californian street. she suffer from some nasti 
skin disease, and is in mortal terror lest delma should get to know 
of it, and also of the fact that all her teeth are false, and that two 
of her toe are badli deformed." 

"bi jupiter!" hamar ejaculated, "thi divin of your beat mine 
into fits--noth escap you!" 

"no!" kelson laughed, "nothing! ella barlow, metaphys and physic 
wa laid befor me just as bare as if the almighti had got hold of her 
with hi dissect knife. I saw everything--and what is more I said 
to myself--here' plenti I can turn to a profit account. well! I 
didn't stop her--i let her go." 

"let her go!" curti growled, hi mouth full of almond and raisins. 
"you squirrel!" 

"onli for a time," kelson said, "I went to see delmas!" 

"delmas!" hamar interlocuted, "whi the deuc delmas?" 

"impulse!" kelson explained, "pure impulse." 

"yes, but impuls is often a danger thing!" hamar said, "it is 
essenti for us three, especially, to be on our guard against 
impulse. what did you get out of delmas?" 

"nothing!" kelson said look rather shamefaced, "but the matter 
hasn't end yet. i'm go to the theatr after i'v had someth to 
eat. i'll tell you what happens, to-morrow." 

It wa late ere kelson came down to breakfast the follow day, and 
hamar and curti were comfort seat in armchair read the 
_examiner_, when he join them. 

"well!" hamar said, look up at him, "what luck?" 

but kelson wouldn't say a word till he had finish eating. He then 
loll back in hi seat and began:-- 

"arriv at the baldwyn I went straight to box one. A tall figur 
rose to greet me, and then, an angri voic exclaimed, 'whi it' not 
herbert! who are you, sir? Do you know thi box is engaged?' 

"'i humbl beg your pardon, miss barlow,' I said, 'I do know it is 
engaged, but I came as mr. delmas' deputi and friend.' 

"'came as herbert' deputi and friend,' ella barlow repeated--and by 
jove the diamond did shine--sh wa simpli a mass of them, hair, 
neck, arm and fingers--and she had been so well fake up for the 
occas that she wa almost good-looking; but I thought of all I knew 
about her--and shuddered. 

"'i will explain myself,' I said, 'mr. delma telephon to you thi 
afternoon, did he not?' 

"she nodded. 

"'say that he veri much regret he could not leav busi in 
time to escort you here. would you mind veri much go by yourself, 
and he would join you as soon as possible.' 

"'yes,' ella barlow said, 'he told me all that.' 

"'veri well, then,' I went on, 'he rang me up some minut later and 
ask me if I would take hi place for the first hour or so, and he 
would be here by the end of the first act.' 

"'but it is most unheard of,' ella barlow ejaculated, 'I don't know 
you--i'v never seen you before!' 

"'that is, of course, veri regrettable,' I said, 'but I will do all I 
can for the past. i'v someth to say that i'm sure will interest 
you. have I your permission?'--and without wait for her repli I sat 
next to her. the box wa a big one, big enough to hold half a dozen 
people, and we sat in the extrem front of it. the light were not 
full up, as the orchestra had not start playing. I kept her 
attent fix on my face so that she wa unawar what wa take 
place, immedi behind her. 

"'what is it?' she said, 'whatev can you have to say that can be of 
ani possibl interest to me?' 

"'why,' I replied, 'to begin with I know someth about your 
character!' 

"'then you'r a fortun teller!' she exclaim eagerly, 'can you read 
hands?' 

"'i can read everything,' I said look hard at her, 'hands, head, 
and feet. I am psychometrist, dentist, physician, metaphysician all in 
one!' 

"'i don't understand,' she said look queer, 'what is the mean of 
all this?' 

"'it means,' I said slowly, 'that I have discov who sent those 
anonym letter to herbert delmas!' 

"'anonym letters! how dare you!' she cried, 'what have anonym 
letter to do with me?' 

"'a veri great deal, madam,' I replied, 'shall I remind you of their 
content and the occas on which you wrote them?' I did so. I 
recit everi word in them and told her the hour, day and 
place--namely, when and where each wa written, and I sum up by 
ask what she would pay me not to tell delmas. 

"for some minut she wa too overcom to say anything; she sat grim 
and silent, her pale eye glare at me, her freckl finger toy 
with the diamonds. she wa baffl and perplexed--sh did not know 
what cours to pursue! 

"'well,' I repeated, 'what have you to say? Do you deni it?' 

"she rous herself with an effort. 'no,' she said venomously, 'I 
don't deni it. denial would be useless. how did you find out? through 
one of the maids, I suppose. they were bribe to spi on me!' 

"'how I discov it is of no consequence,' I said, 'but what is of 
consequ to you as much as to me--i the payment for hush it 
up!' 

"'payment!' she cried, rais her voic to a posit shriek in her 
excitement, 'pay _you_--you nasty, beastly, cadg toad. you--' but I 
can't repeat all she said, it would make you both blush! I let her go 
on till she had worn herself out and then I said, 'well, miss barlow, 
whi all thi fuss--whi these fireworks! It can't do you ani good. We 
must come to busi sooner or later. If you don't pay me handsom 
I shall tell miss robert as well as mr. delmas.' 

"'mr. delma won't believ you,' she hissed, 'you'v no proof at 
all!' 

"'perhap not,' I said, 'but i'v proof of this. I know you have two 
deform toe on your left foot, that all your teeth are false, and 
that you go to that charlatan, howard prince, in californian street to 
be fake up. I must be brutal--it' no use be anyth els to 
women of your sort. you'v got a certain speci of eczema, and you 
flatter yourself that no one but you and princ are awar of it. what 
have you got to say now, miss barlow?' but ella barlow had fainted. 
when she came to, which I manag after vigor applic of salt 
and water--th effect of the latter on her complexion I leav you to 
imagine--i again broach the subject. 

"'what is it you propose?' she said feebly. 

"'whi this,' I said, 'you hand me over all those diamonds, and your 
defect will--a far as I am concerned--alway remain a secret. 
refuse, and miss robert and mr. delma shall know all there is to be 
known at once.' 

"for some minut she sat with her face buri in her 
hands--shivering. then she look up at me--and jerusalem! it wa like 
look at an old woman. 'take them,' she said, 'take them! I shall 
never wear them again, anyhow. take them--and leav me.' 

"well, you fellows, I steel my heart, and slip everi jack one 
that wa on her into my pocket. 

"'you won't tell them,' she whispered, catch hold of me by the arm, 
'you swear you won't.' I won't tri and rememb exactli what I 
answered--but outsid the door of the box delma join me. He had 
been conceal within and had heard everyth that passed. 

"'i can't say how grate I am to you,' he said. 'it' a bit low 
down, perhaps, but, then, we were deal with a low-down person. you 
thoroughli deserv those diamonds--wil you accept an offer for them 
from me? I should like to buy them for miss robert and present them 
to her on our reconciliation.' We came to term then and there, and he 
'phone through to me an hour ago to say that he had made it up with 
miss roberts, that she wa delight with the diamonds, and that they 
are go to be marri next month." 

"so out of evil good comes," hamar said, "the maxim for us, remember, 
is--out of evil evil alon must come. what are you go to do to-day, 
you two?" 

"rest!" said kelson, "i'm tired." 

"eat!" said curtis, "i'm hungry!" 

"now look here, thi won't do," hamar remarked, "you'v earn your 
rest, matt, but you haven't, ed. you can't go on eat eternally." 

"can't i?" curti snapped, "i'm not so sure of that, i'v year to 
make up for." 

"then do the thing in moderation, for good sake!" hamar 
expostulated, "and recollect we must, at all costs, act together. We 
have now twelv thousand dollar between us in the bank--that is to 
say, the capit of the firm of hamar, curti and kelson repres 
that amount. It is our ambit to increas that amount--and to go on 
increas it till we can fairli claim to be the richest firm in the 
world. now to do that we must work, and work hard, if we are to live 
at the pace Ed is set us--but there is no reason whi we should 
remain here, and I propos that we move elsewhere. i'v got a scheme 
in my head, rather a coloss one I admit, but not altogeth 
impossible." 

"what is it?" kelson asked. 

"yes, out with it," curti grunted. 

"it is this," hamar said, "I suggest that we go to london--london in 
england--i guess it' the richest town in the world--and there set up 
as sorcerers--th sorceri compani ltd. We should begin with divin 
and juggling, and go on, accord to the seven stages. We should of 
cours sell our cure and spells, and there is not the slightest doubt 
but that we should make an enorm pile, with which we would 
gradual buy up, not mere london, but the whole of england." 

"that' rather a tall order," kelson murmured. 

"A small one, you mean," curti sneered, "you could put the whole of 
england twice over in california, and from what i'v heard I don't go 
much on london. I reckon it isn't much bigger than san francisco." 

"still you wouldn't mind be joint owner of it," hamar laughed." 

"no, perhap not," curti said rather dubiously. "I guess we could buy 
the crown and wear it in turn. sam westlak up at meidler' alway 
use to say the british would sell their soul if ani one bid high 
enough. they think of noth but money over there. when shall we go?" 

"at the end of our week," hamar said, "that is to say on wednesday--in 
three days' time." 

"first class all the way, of course," curti said, "i'll see to the 
arrang for the cater and berths." 

"all right!" hamar laughed, as he fill three glass with champagne. 
"here, drink, you fellows, 'long life, health and prosperity--to 
hamar, curti and kelson, the modern sorceri compani ltd.'" 




chapter viii 

two dream 


"do you believ in dreams?" gladi martin inquired, as, fresh from a 
stroll in the garden, she join her aunt, miss templeton, in the 
breakfast room at pine cottage. 

"I believ in fairies," miss templeton rejoined, smile indulg 
as she look at the fair face besid her. "what wa the dream, 
dearie?" 

gladi laugh a littl mischievously. "I don't quit know whether I 
ought to tell you," she said. "it might shock you." 

"perhap i'm not so easili shock as you imagine," miss templeton 
replied. "what wa it?" 

"well!" gladi began, fling both arm round her aunt' neck and 
play with the pleat in her blouse, "I dream that I wa walk 
in the littl wood at the end of the garden, and that the tree and 
flower walk and talk with me. and we danc together--and, first 
of all, I had for my partner, a red rose--and then, an ash. they both 
made love to me, and squeez my waist with their hot, fibrou hands. 
A poppi piped, a brambl play the concertina, and a lilac grew 
desper jealou of me and tri to claw my hair. then the danc 
ceased, and I found myself in the midst of bluebel that shook their 
bell at me with loud trill of laughter. and out from among them, 
came a buttercup, point it yellow head at me. 'see! see,' it 
cried, 'what gladi is carri behind her. naughti gladys!' and tree 
and flowers--everyth around me--shook with laughter. then I grew 
hot and cold all over, and did not know which way to look for my 
confusion, till a willow, have compass on me said, 'take no 
notic of them! they don't know ani better.' 

"I beg him to explain to me whi they were so amused, and he grew 
veri embarrass and uncomfortable, and stammered--oh! so funnily, 
'well if you realli wish to know--it' a bud, a babi white rose, and 
it' cling to your dress.' 

"'a baby! A babi rose!' shriek all the flowers. 

"'and it means,' a bluebel said, step perkili out from amidst 
it fellows, 'that your lover is coming--your lover with a 
troll-le-loll-la--and--well, if you want to know more ask the 
gooseberries, the gooseberri that hang on the bushes, or the parsley 
that grow in the bed,'--and at that all the flower and tree 
shriek with laughter--'ta-ta-tra-la-la'--and with my ear full of 
the rude laughter of the wood I awoke. what do you think of it? isn't 
it rather a quaint mixtur of the--of the sacred--at least the 
artistic--and the profane?" 

"quit so," said miss templeton with an amus chuckle, "but I 
shouldn't ask for an interpret of it if I were you." 

"not for an interpret of the tree and flowers?" gladi ask 
innocently. "i'm sure tree and flower have a special signific in 
dreams." 

"veri well then, my dear, ask mrs. sprat." 

"what! ask the vicar' wife!" gladi ejaculated, "when I never go to 
church." 

"certainly," miss templeton replied, laugh again, "mrs. sprat will 
quit understand. and i'v alway been told she is veri interest in 
anyth to do with the occult. but hush! here' your father. you'd 
better not tell him your dream. he' tire to death, he says, of 
hear about your lovers, and agre with me--there' no end to 
them." 

"never mind what he says--hi bark' wors then hi bite," gladi 
rejoined, "he doesn't realli care how mani I have so long as they keep 
within bounds, and I like them! father!" 

john martin, who enter the room at that moment, went straight to hi 
daughter to be kissed. 

"I wish you wouldn't alway select that bald spot," he said testily, 
"I don't want to be everlastingli remind i'm lose my hair." 

"where do you want me to kiss you, then?" gladi argued, "on the tip 
of your nose? that' all veri well for you, john martin, but I prefer 
the top of your head. but the poor dear look worried, what is it?" 

"I didn't have a veri good night," her father replied, "I dream a 
lot!" gladi look at miss templeton and laughed. 

"did you?" she said gently. "what a shame! I never dream. what wa it 
all about?" 

"flowers!" john martin snapped, "idiot flowers! roses, lilac, 
tulips! bah! I do wish you would have some other hobby." 

gladi look at her aunt again, thi time with a half serious, half 
question expression. 

"shall I be a politician?" she cooed, "and fill the hous with 
suffragettes? you bad man, I believ you would revel in it. don't you 
think so, auntie?" 

"I think, instead of teas your father so unmercifully, you had 
better pour him out a cup of tea," miss templeton replied. "jack, 
there' a letter for you." 

"where? under my plate! what a place to put it. that' you," and john 
martin frowned, or rather, attempt to frown, at gladys. "whi it' 
about davenport--dick davenport. he' veri ill--had a stroke 
yesterday, and the doctor declar hi condit critical. hi nephew, 
shiel, so ann says, ha been sent for, and arriv at sydenham last 
night! If that' not bad news I don't know what is!" john martin said, 
thrust hi plate away from him and lean back in hi chair. "it' 
true I can manag the busi all right myself--and there' the 
possibility, of course, that thi young shiel may shape all right. I 
suppos if anyth happen he will step into dick' shoes. i'v never 
heard dick mention ani one else. poor old dick!" 

"I am so sorry, father!" gladi said, lay her hand on his. "but 
cheer up! It may not be as bad as you expect. shall you go and see how 
he is?" 

"I think so, my dear! I think so," john martin replied, "but don't 
worri me about it now. talk to your aunt and leav me out of it, i'm a 
bit upset. My brain' in a regular whirl!" 

undoubtedli the news wa someth in the natur of a blow: for dick 
davenport, apart from be john martin' partner--partn in the firm 
of martin and davenport, the world-renown conjurors, whose hall in 
the kingsway wa one of the chief amus place in london, wa john 
martin' oldest friend. they had been chum at cheltenham college, had 
enter the armi and gone to india together, had quit the servic 
together, and, on return togeth to england, had start their 
conjur business, first of all in sloan street, and subsequ in 
the kingsway. from the veri start their enterpris had met with 
success, and, had it not been for davenport' wild extravagance, they 
would have been littl short of millionaires. but davenport, though a 
most lovabl charact in everi respect, could not keep money--h no 
sooner had it than it wa gone. hi hous in sydenham wa littl short 
of a palace; whilst, it wa said, he almost rival royalty, in 
magnific display, whenev he entertained. the result of all thi 
reckless expenditur wa no uncommon one--h ran through consider 
more than he earn and--a there wa no one els to help him--h 
invari came down on john martin. It wa "jack, old boy, i'm damn 
sorry, but I must have anoth thousand;" or, "jack! these infern 
scamp of creditor are worri the life out of me, can you, will 
you, lend me a trifle--a coupl of thousand will do it"--and so on--so 
on, ad infinitum. john martin never refused, and at the time of 
davenport' illness, the latter owe him someth like a hundr 
thousand pounds. 

fortun john martin, though far from parsimonious, wa careful. He 
had an excel busi head, and, thank to hi sagaci share in 
the management, the busi remain solvent. He knew davenport' 
capacity--that nowher could he have found anoth such a brilliant 
geniu in conjuring--nor, apart from hi thriftlessness, ani one so 
thoroughli reliable. In davenport' keep all the great trick they 
had invented--and great trick they undoubtedli were--wer absolut 
safe. 

despit the fact that they had repeatedli offer big sum of money to 
ani one who could discov the secret of how they were done, everi 
attempt to do so had utterli failed. the mysteri of martin and 
davenport' home of wonder, in the kingsway, baffl the world. Of 
cours one thing had help them enormously--namely, they had no 
rivals. So coloss wa their reputation, that no one els had ever 
even thought of set up in opposition. 

and now one of the two great master-minds, that had accomplish all 
these marvel and acquir such univers fame, wa stricken down, 
checkmat by the still greater power of nature; and hi 
colleague--th onli other man in exist who share hi 
knowledge--wa oblig to rack hi brain as to what wa now to be 
done--don for the continu and prosper of the firm. 

after finish her breakfast gladi join her aunt in the garden. 

"to dream of flower and tree evid mean bad news," she said. 
"but as I feel in a mood for a walk, I shall call at the vicarage." 

"what, now! At thi hour!" miss templeton cri aghast. 

"whi not?" gladi said imperturbably. "i'm not go to pay a call. 
they haven't call on us. I shall say i'v mere come to make an 
inquiry. can she tell me of ani one who interpret dreams? come with 
me!" 

but as her aunt plead an excuse, gladi went alone. 

the vicar wa in the garden in hi shirt sleeves, and though obvious 
surpris to see gladys, seem quit prepar to enter into 
convers with her. but gladi wa not enamour of clergymen. her 
way were not their ways, and she had come strictli on business. 
consequ she somewhat curtli demand to be conduct into the 
presenc of hi wife, who receiv her veri affably. 

"why, how veri strange," she observ when gladi had state the 
object of her visit. "I wa ask a similar question onli yesterday. A 
miss rosenberg, who is stay with us, had an extraordinari dream 
about tree and flowers--onli it took the form of a poem, which she 
awok repeating. there were sever verses--quit doggerel it is 
true--but nevertheless rather remark for a dream. she wrote them 
down, and ask me if I could tell her whether there wa ani hidden 
mean in them. here they are," and she hand gladi two page of 
sermon paper on which wa written-- 

"in the greenest of green valleys, 
aglow with summer sun, 
live a maiden fair and radiant, 
more radiant there wa none. 

"the flower gave her their friendship; 
her couch wa on the ground. 
A happier, gayer maiden, 
wa nowher to be found. 

"the air wa fill with music 
sung by the babbl brook. 
sweet lullabi with choru clear 
In which the flower partook. 

"thi maiden knew not sorrow, 
until an evil day; 
when ride lone across the moors, 
A hunter lost hi way. 

"and chanc on thi valley, 
He met the maiden sweet. 
her beauti overwhelm him; 
He fell love-sick at her feet. 

"despit the fervent warn 
Of her friend the flower and trees, 
she listen to hi courting; 
and with him roam the leas. 

"the leas, far from the valley, 
they rode the livelong night; 
till a heavi mist descend 
hid the roadway from their sight. 

"uprose, then, form of evil. 
from out the mock gloom; 
and seiz hors and hunter scared, 
left the maiden to her doom. 

"travel now within those regions, 
through the nightli grey fog see 
A woman' shade crawl slow along, 
To a ghastli melody. 

"and those who linger--follow 
the phantom pale and wan. 
o'er hill and dale, and rill and vale 
It slowli lead them on. 

"on till they reach the valley, 
A valley grim and drear, 
where lurid thing with fibrou arm 
their cours through dark steer. 

"and on the travel palsi 
In frenzi crowd they pour. 
and those who view their faces, 
are heard but seen no more." 

"do you mean to say she dream all that?" gladi exclaimed. 

"yes," the vicar' wife said. "she told me so and I have no reason to 
doubt her. she doesn't romanc as a rule, and is certainli not the 
least bit in the world poetical--on the contrari she is most practic 
and matter-of-fact. her onli hobby, as far as I know, is flowers." 

"mine, too!" gladi interrupted. "were you abl to explain the 
verses?" 

"no, I can't interpret dreams. i'm intens interest in them; as I 
am in all thing psychic. I wa at a lectur given by mrs. anni 
besant last night! she--" 

"do you know ani one who doe interpret dreams?" gladi asked. 

"why, yes! A firm, claim to do all sort of wonder things--to 
tell dreams, solv tricks, divin the presenc of metal and water, 
and so on, ha just set up in cockspur street. I read a short notic 
about them in thi morning' paper. I will get it for you." 

she left the room and in a few moment returned. 

"here it is," she said. and under the head of "sorceri revived" 
gladi read as follows:-- 

"there is realli no end to the devic to which peopl resort nowaday 
to make money, but for sheer novelty, nothing, we think, beat this. 
three americans, messrs. hamar, kelson and curtis, fresh from san 
francisco, california, have just bought premis in cockspur street, 
s.w., and set up there as sorcerers! 

"they style themselv 'the modern sorceri compani ltd.,' and profess 
to interpret dreams, read people' thoughts, tell their pasts, solv 
all manner of trick and detect the presenc of metal and water. one 
wonder what next!" 

"thi paper evid ha it doubts," gladi commented. "they are 
frauds, of course." 

"I dare say they are," the vicar' wife replied, "though I believ in 
thought-read and other thing they say they can do. I advis miss 
rosenberg to see them about her dream. she went in by the nine o'clock 
train. had you come a few minut earlier you would have seen her." 

"well, thank awfully," gladi said, "for tell me about these 
people. veri probabl i'll go in to town some time dure the day and 
call at cockspur street. I must apolog again for call at such an 
unearthli hour. good-bye," and gladi smilingli took her departure. 




chapter IX 

love AT first sight 


shortli after gladi reach home after her visit to the vicarage, a 
young man with a seriou express somewhat out of keep with hi 
jaunti walk, enter the gate of pine cottage, and came to an abrupt 
halt. 

"well," he ejaculated, "thi is a pretti place, and what' more--for 
dozen of hous and garden are pretty--it' artistic!" In front of 
him stretch a miniatur avenu of chestnut trees, which wa render 
striking, even to the most casual observer, probably, not onli on 
account of the irregular mound of moss-cov stone that occupi 
it interven spaces, but also, by reason of the mass of wild 
flower (great clump of which were spring up in the crevic of 
thi impromptu wall) that lent to it an appear half negligent, but 
wholli and entrancingli picturesque. here, undoubtedly, wa art. that 
did not astonish the young man. all avenues, in the ordinari sense, 
are work of art; and the mere excess of art he saw manifest did not 
surpris him; it wa the charact of the art that had brought him to 
a standstil and held him spellbound. and the longer he look the 
more he becam convinced, that whoever had superintend the 
arrang of thi sceneri wa an artist--an artist with a scrupul 
eye for form. 

the greatest care had been taken to keep the balanc between neat 
and grace on the one hand and picturesqu on the other. 
there were few straight lines, and no long uninterrupt ones; whilst 
at no one point of view did the same effect of curvatur or colour 
appear twice. varieti in uniform wa the keynote. 

At last tear himself away from thi one spot--wher he felt he 
could have spent centuries--h turn to the right and then again to 
the left--for the path had now becom serpentine, and at no moment 
could be trace for more than two or three pace in advance. present 
the sound of water fell gentli on hi ear, and in the shadiest of 
diminut forests, amidst the interlac branch of elm and beech, 
he caught the glimps of a fountain. for an instant the wild thought 
of forc hi way through it, of plung hi burn forehead in it 
cool spray, well-nigh master him. but hi better sens conquered, 
and he kept to the path. anoth turn, and he caught hi first glimps 
of a chimney; another--and the summit of a gabl show abov the 
trees. the sun, which had been hitherto obscured, now came out, and 
suddenly--a if by the hand of magic--th whole scene wa a brilliant 
blaze of colour. He had arriv at the end of the avenue, where the 
path forked; one branch turn sharpli round in the direct of a 
side entranc to the house, whilst the other led with a gentl 
curvatur to the front. 

face the build wa a broad expans of velveti turf, reliev 
occasionally, here and there, by such showi shrub as the hydrangea, 
rhododendron, or lilac; but more frequently, and at closer intervals, 
by clump of geraniums, or roses--ros of everi variety. there wa 
noth pretenti in the garden, ani more than there wa in the 
adjoin edifice. it unusu pleas effect lay altogeth in it 
artist arrangement; and one could hardli help imagin that the 
whole scene had, in reality, been call into exist by the brush 
of some emin landscap painter. 

the cottag itself wa construct of old-fashion dutch 
shingles--broad and with round corners--and paint a dull grey; a 
tint which, when contrast with the vivid green of the tulip tree 
that overshadow the entranc to the house, and rear themselv 
high abov it on either side, afford an artist happi perfectli 
intox to it present visitor. the architectur of the cottag 
was--if not earli tudor--someth equal pleasing. it roof were 
divid into mani gables; it window were diamond pane and 
projecting, whilst oaken beam ran latitudin and vertic over 
it grey shingl front. encompass the whole base of the exterior 
were mass of flowers--pinks, carnations, heliotrope, pansies, 
poppies, lilies, wallflowers, rose and jasmines; and besid the 
latter sever other creeper had been plant beneath the walls, but 
had not yet attain to ani height. 

shiel davenport, for it wa he, could not resist the temptat of 
peep in at the windows; and he saw that the interior of the cottag 
wa artistri and simplic itself. At the windows, curtain of heavi 
white jaconet muslin, not too full, hung in sharp parallel plait to 
the floor--just to the floor. the wall were paper with french 
paper of rare delicacy--to match the seasons; (spring, summer, autumn 
and winter were all most effect depicted), and the furnitur 
though light, wa at the same time costly. and here again wa the same 
effect of arrangement--an arrang obvious design by the same 
brain that had plan the build and grounds. shiel could not 
conceiv anyth more graceful. flowers--flow of everi hue and 
odour were the chief decor of the cottage. On almost everi tabl 
were vases--in themselv beauti enough--yet fill to overflow 
with the finest roses. ox-ey daisies, hollyhock and forget-me-not 
cluster about the open windows. and everi puff of wind, everi breath 
of air transmit scent--th most delici medley of scent 
imaginable. 

the young man drew in deep draught of it; he threw back hi head, 
and, open hi mouth, revel in the joy of feel it steal softli 
down hi throat and permeat hi lungs. He wa thu engag when the 
sound of a voic brought him sharpli back to earth. 

In the open doorway of the house, an amus express in her violet 
eyes, stood a girl--so wondrous pretty, that at the sight of her 
shiel wa again overcome, and could onli gaze in helpless admiration. 

"do you want to see my father?" she inquired. "he is get readi to 
go out, but I daresay he will see you first." 

"i--i am sure he will," the young man replied, "i'm shiel davenport. 
i'v come to tell him my uncl die at four o'clock thi morning." 

"oh, dear!" the girl exclaimed, "I am so sorry--sorri for you, and for 
my father. i'm sure he will be terribl upset. i'm gladi martin, 
perhap you'v heard of me--i knew your uncle." 

"often," shiel said, "and I think my uncle' descript of you an 
excel one." 

"hi descript of me!" 

"yes! he alway spoke of you as the queen of flowers, and said you had 
a mania for all thing beautiful, which wa not surprising, see how 
beauti you were yourself." 

"that wa veri nice of him," gladi said, look amus again. "won't 
you come in? If you will wait here"--sh led him to the 
drawing-room--"i'l tell my father." 

she disappeared, and shiel heard her run lightli up the stairs. 

"bi jove," he said to himself, "she' the loveliest girl i'v ever 
seen. from be so much among flowers, she ha becom one herself. 
violets, roses, and heliotrop have all had a share in her creation! 
what eyes, what a mouth! what teeth! what hands! sure I have found 
here, not onli the perfect of all thing beautiful, but the 
perfect of all thing natural, the perfect of natur grace in 
contradistinct from artifici grace. moreover, she is a 
romanticist. there is an express of romance, of unworldliness, in 
those deep-set eye of hers, that sink into my heart of hearts. 
'romance' and 'womanliness,' and the two term appear to me to be 
convertible, are her distinguish features. she is an artist, an 
idealist, and, over and abov all--a woman! hang it! i'm in love with 
her!" 

more he could not evolve, for hi medit were abruptli cut short 
by the entranc of a servant, who usher him, straightway, into the 
presenc of john martin. 

the latter, though visibl affect by the news of hi friend' death, 
wa a man of the world, and, consequently, came to busi at once. 
much had to be discussed--arrang for the funeral, the 
examin of correspond rel to the firm, and plan for the 
immedi future. 

"you don't know how my uncle' affair stand, I suppose?" shiel ask 
somewhat nervously. 

"yes," john martin said, "I do. may I ask if you have ani privat 
mean at all--or are you sole depend on what you earn? By the 
way, what is your calling?" 

"I am an artist," shiel said. "no, i'v noth beyond what my uncl 
wa good enough to allow me." 

"an artist!" john martin murmured, "how like dick! have you 
entertain the idea of inherit a fortune? have you ani reason to 
suppos that your uncl wa well off and had made you hi heir!" 

"I gather so, sir, from the manner in which he live and hi 
attitud toward me." 

"well! we won't talk it over now--leav it till after the funeral. are 
you bent on continu painting? there is veri littl remuner in 
it, is there?" 

"not much," shiel answer gloomily, "but I shouldn't care to give it 
up--unless of cours it is absolut necessari for me to do so." 

"be an artist you wouldn't be much good in business." 

"none!" 

"at all events, you are candid. well! I don't see ani good in our 
dalli here--i had best go back with you to sydenham. i'v got a 
letter to write first, but I shan't be long." 

He wa long enough, however, for shiel to have anoth chat with 
gladys. "do you believ in dreams?" she ask him. "I had such a queer 
one last night, about tree and flowers; and, oddli enough, my father 
also dream of tree and flowers, and of the veri same one too. I am 
go into town to-day to consult a firm that ha just set up, call 
the modern sorceri compani ltd. they profess to interpret dreams, and 
I am anxiou to see whether they can." 

"in cockspur street, aren't they?" shiel asked. "I saw their 
advertis in one of the papers. I presum you are not go there 
alone?" 

"no!" gladi laughed, "I shall go with a friend, though I often do go 
into town alone. I can assur you I am quit capabl of look after 
myself. In that respect, at least, I am quit up to date. probabl you 
are more accustom to french girls?" 

"yes! I have spent most of my life in paris," shiel said. "but how 
could you tell that?" 

"oh! I guess you were an artist--and had probabl spent some time in 
paris"--gladi rejoined, "bi the way you look at the hous and 
garden. I could read appreci in your eye and gesture; such 
appreciation, as I knew, could onli come from an artist. g.w. barnett 
help me in plan thi cottag and the garden." 

"what! barnett the landscap painter! I am a great admir of hi 
work. were you a pupil of his?" 

"yes, he wa one of the visit r.a.' at the beechcroft studio in st. 
john' wood, where I work for three years. We were then live in 
blackheath--st. john' park--a hate place. mr. barnett wa aw 
good, when I told him we were moving, and that I want to live in 
realli artist surroundings--h suggest that I should be my own 
architect, and promis to do everyth he could to assist me," 

"and your father hadn't a say in the matter," shiel commented, with an 
amus smile. 

"not in that," gladi said complacently, "though there are one or two 
thing in which he ha a veri decid say. father can be veri 
self-wil and obstinate, when he likes. but as I wa remark when 
you interrupt me--" 

"I beg pardon!" shiel murmured. 

"mr. barnett promis to assist me. He came over here with me, and we 
chose thi site." 

"i he an old man?" shiel inquired, a trifl anxiously. 

"not much more than middl aged--fifti perhaps!" gladi said, "though 
he look much younger. He is still veri good-looking. well! he came 
over here--w chose thi site, and--" 

"i he married?" 

"no! realli you seem veri interest in him. perhap you will meet him 
some day: he come here a good deal. As I wa saying, we chose the 
site together, and he superv the plan I drew up for the garden 
and cottage; I don't think, perhaps, I should have thought of that 
avenu if it hadn't been for him!" 

"at all event it doe you both credit," shiel remarked, "for a more 
charm hous and garden I have never seen. I should like to live 
here all my life. I should like--" but he wa interrupt by john 
martin. "come, it' time we were off," the latter call out 
brusquely, "time and train wait for no man!" 

"A young ass!" john martin whisper in gladys' ear, as the trio 
pass through the entranc of the railway station on to the platform, 
"not a bit of good to me. don't encourag him, whatev you do!" 

"encourag him!" gladi retort indignantly, see that shiel, who 
had hi ticket to get, wa out of hearing. "do I encourag ani one? 
all the same," she ad defiantly, "I rather like him. It isn't everi 
one' good fortun to be as smart as you, john martin. quick--hurri 
up! that' your train--and the guard' about to blow hi whistle." 

with a vigor push she hustl her father into the first compart 
they came to, and shiel sprang in after him as the train move out of 
the station. 

An hour later gladys, look extrem demur and proper, wa rap 
with a daintili glove hand at the inquiri offic in the great stone 
lobbi of the modern sorceri company' build in cockspur street. 

"have you an appointment, madam?" the commissionaire, in a bright blue 
uniform, asked. 

"no," gladi replied. "i it necessary? 

"the firm are unusu busy," the man explained, "and unless you have 
made an appoint with them some day beforehand, it is doubt 
whether they will be abl to see you. however, if you will step into 
the wait room and fill in one of the form you see on the table, I 
will take it to them. which member of the firm have you come to 
consult?" 

"I haven't the slightest idea," gladi said. "I want to have a dream 
interpreted." 

"then, that will be mr. kelson," the man observ "he doe all that 
kind of thing--tel dreams, characters, pasts, and read thoughts. 
mr. curti solv all manner of puzzl and tricks; and mr. hamar 
divin the presenc of metal and water. there is a ladi in the 
waiting-room now, come to have a dream interpreted. she' been there 
nearli an hour. thi way, madam!"--and he escorted, rather than 
ushered, gladi into a large, elabor furnish room, in which a 
dozen or so well dress people--of both sexes--wer waiting, look 
over the leav of magazin and journals, and tri in vain to hide 
their onli too obviou excitement. 

have fill in the necessari form, and given it to the 
commissionaire, gladi look round for a seat, and espi one, next 
to a strikingli handsom girl, she at onc appropri it. 

there wa someth about thi showi girl that had attract gladys. 
she wa one of those rare peopl that have a personality, and although 
thi wa a person that gladi wa not at all sure she liked, 
nevertheless she felt anxiou to becom more close acquaint with 
it. both girl suddenli realiz that they were stare hard at one 
another. the girl with the person wa the first to speak. with a 
smile that, while reveal a perfect set of white teeth, at the some 
time reveal exceedingli thin lips, she remarked, "it' most 
wearisom work waiting. i'v been here nearli an hour. I shouldn't 
stay ani longer, onli i'v come from a distance. london is so hot and 
stuffy, I detest it." 

"do you?" gladi observed. "I don't. I find it so full of human 
interest--indeed, of everi kind of interest. not that I should care to 
live in it, but I like be near enough to come up sever time a 
week. I live at kew." 

"then you'r lucky!" the girl said, "i'd live at kew if I could. but I 
can't--i'm one of those unfortun creatur who have to earn their 
living." 

"I sometim wish I had to," gladi remarked. 

"do you! then you don't know much about it. It isn't all jam by a long 
way. I loath work. i'v been spend my holiday at kew. i'v just 
come from there." 

"are you by ani chanc miss rosenberg?" gladi asked. 

"that' my name," the girl repli with a look of astonishment. "how 
do you know?" 

gladi explained. "i'v just been to the vicarage," she said, "and 
mrs. sprat ha told me about the verses. did you realli dream them?" 

"of course! I shouldn't have said so if I hadn't," miss rosenberg 
repli angrily. "I don't tell crams. besides, i'v never compos a 
line of poetri in my life. the vers were repeat to me in my sleep 
by some occult agency--of that I am quit certain. they were so 
vividli impress on my mind that I had no difficulti at all in 
rememb them--everi one of them, and I got up and wrote them down. 
Of cours they must mean something." 

gladi wa about to make some observation, when the commissionaire, 
open the door of the room, call out, "miss rosenberg;" whereupon, 
with a sigh of relief, miss rosenberg took her departure. 




chapter X 

how the dream were interpret 


"tell miss rosenberg i'll see her now," matt kelson said; and as he 
lean back in hi luxuri chair with that digniti of self-assur 
onli the man who is rich can maintain, it wa hard to realis that he 
and the matt kelson of a year ago were the same. A year ago he had 
been a poor, underpaid, ill nourish pen-driver, with all the odiou 
mark of a pen-driver' servil thick upon him. It wa true he had 
been fastidi as to hi appearance--that is to say, as fastidi as 
ani one can be, who ha to buy cloth readi made and can onli afford 
to pay a few dollar for them; that he had sacrif meal to wear 
white shirts--boil shirt as one call them in san francisco--and 
to get hi thing got up decent at a respect laundry; but hi 
teeth in those day did not receiv the attent they ought to have 
receiv (he could not afford a dentist), the tobacco he smoke wa 
often offensive; and there were to be found in him sundri other 
detail that one usual find in clerks, and in most other peopl who 
liter have to fight for a living. 

but now, all that wa changed. kelson wa rich. He bought hi suit at 
poole's, hi hat at christie's, hi boot in regent street. He 
patron a dentist in cavendish square, and a manicurist in bond 
street. He belong to a crack club in pall mall, and never smoke 
anyth but the most expens cigars. hi ambit had been speedili 
realized. He had passion long to be a fop--h wa one. the onli 
thing that troubl him, wa that he could not be an aristocrat at the 
same time. but, after all, what did that matter? the girl look at 
him all the same, and that wa all he wanted. He worshipped, he 
adored, pretti girls; and he wa most anxiou that they should ador 
him. 

consequently, hi first thought, when he saw lilian rosenberg' name 
on the form the commissionair present him, wa "i she pretty?" and 
the first thing he said to himself directli the door open to admit 
her was, "bi jove! she is." 

then he assum an air more suit to a partner in a big london firm, 
and flourish a richli bejewel hand, said "pray take a seat, 
madam. what can I do for you?" 

"I want you to tell me the mean of these verses," lilian rosenberg 
said, hand him two sheet of foolscap and then sit down. "they 
were suggest to me in my sleep--in other words, I dream them." 

"you dream them, did you!" kelson said, notic with approv that 
the girl had well-kept white hands, and that her clothes, though not 
particularli expensive, were _chic_, and up-to-date. "do you want me 
onli to interpret thi poem, or shall I tell you someth about 
yourself first?" 

"bi all mean tell me someth about myself first--if you can," 
lilian rosenberg said. "I want to get as much as I can out of you. 
your fee are exorbitant." 

"veri well, then," kelson rejoin with a smile. "don't blame me if I 
tell you too much. you were born at sea. be a troublesom girl at 
home, you were sent to a boarding-school, where you distinguish 
yourself in variou ways, and last but not least, by make the 
headmistress--a marri woman--desper jealous. thi led to your 
be removed. remov is a more delic term than 'expelled.' Am I 
right?" 

"yes! I believ you are inspir by the devil." 

"shall I go on?" 

"yes--i think so. yes, go on, please." 

"you came home. your mother died. your father marri again. you 
dislik your stepmother--y consid she ill treat you." 

"she did!" 

"I won't disput it. At all event you had your revenge. you pretend 
to commit suicide, and wrote sever letters--to the polic amongst 
others--declar that you were about to drown yourself owe to the 
cruelti of your stepmother. and so cleverli did you manag it, that 
everi one believ you were drowned, and blame your stepmoth 
accordingly. chang your name to lilian rosenberg you came direct to 
london. for some time you work in a milliner' shop in beauchamp 
gardens, and then you set up as a manicurist in woodstock street. 
among your client wa the wife of the vicar of st. katherine's, kew, 
who took a great like to you--you have extraordinari person 
magnetism. unable, however, to do more than pay your way at legitim 
manicur you--" 

"that will do," lilian rosenberg cried, a faint flow of colour 
pervad her cheeks. "that will do! explain the verses." 

"a you will!" kelson said, "but mind, I don't insist on the necess 
of your pay the slightest heed to my explanation. accord to the 
usual method of interpret dreams, the valley of flower is 
symbol of innoc and self-restraint--of that path in life with 
which the goody-goodi say everi young ladi should be satisfied. 

"the hunter is repres of the love of chang and excitement; 
the horse--of self-indulgence. the misti moon mean ruin, the 
metamorphosi into the crawl phantasm--death. leav the path of 
virtue, and give way to self-indulg and a crave for everlast 
chang and excitement, and a miser end will be your mead--and 
ha been the mead of all other who have done the same thing." 

"then the dream is a warning?" 

kelson wa about to reply, when the door opened, and hamar, with an 
apolog for intruding, beckon to him. 

He spoke with him for sever moment rel to a matter of some 
consequence, and then, glanc at miss rosenberg, and draw kelson 
still further aside, whispered, "let me caution you again, matt. On no 
account let your soft feel with regard to the other sex get the 
better of you. rememb it is imper for us to do evil not 
good--to lead our client into temptation, not out of it. I am do 
my best to follow the injunct of the unknown, but we must all work 
in harmony--that is the most vital point in our compact, and you know 
if we do not keep the compact someth fright will happen to us. I 
can't impress thi fact on you too much. onli yesterday I had to pull 
you up for give good advic to a lady. damn your good advice, give 
bad--bad advice, I say; anyth that will do peopl harm--no matter 
whether they are ugli or pretty--and if you are not jolli well 
careful, pretti girl will be your--and our--undoing. I see you have a 
pretti girl here now--and from what I can read in her face, she is not 
a saint. rub it in to her--rub it into her well--persuad her to be a 
bigger sinner still. now I can't wait to say more, I must go." 

"I ask you," lilian rosenberg said, as kelson resum hi seat, "if 
the dream wa a warning?" 

"no," kelson said, "I shouldn't take it as such. despit the rather 
peculiar form it took, I am inclin to think it isn't a dream with 
ani real significance--but mere a chanc dream--a dream compound 
of say and action of the past that have come back to you all 
higgledy-piggledy, as they so often do in dreams. you learn a lot of 
poetri I suppos when you were at school?" 

"yes, but none like this." 

"no, I didn't suppos so, but the mere fact that your mind wa at one 
time use to verses--acquaint with metr and rhythm, would account 
for the form adopt by your dream. I assur you it wa pure 
chance--and that there is no signific in it! you are on the look 
out for work, is it not so?" 

"I am," lilian rosenberg said. "can you tell me where to go to get 
it?" 

"I am just thinking," kelson replied, "I believ my partner, mr. 
hamar, want a secretary. I can't, of course, say whether you would 
suit him. Do you type?" 

"I can type and do shorthand," lilian rosenberg repli eagerly, "and 
I can correspond in german and french." 

"and the salary? would two hundr a year do?" 

"yes," after a slight pause, "I could make it do. I should want one 
half-day holiday--from one o'clock--everi week; and sundays--and three 
weeks' holiday in the summer, and one at christmas, and of course, the 
usual bank holidays." 

"I see!" kelson said thoughtfully; "you want plenti of time for 
amusement. well! I will speak about it to mr. hamar, and if you leav 
me your address I will give it him. how nice you keep your hands." 

"I manicur them everi day," lilian rosenberg said; then look up at 
him from under the long lash which swept her cheeks, she added, "you 
won't forget to tell mr. hamar about me, will you? I am veri anxiou 
to get a post. you don't know what it is to be hard up, do you?" 

the earnest, plead express in her long, dark eye appeal to 
kelson as noth els had ever appeal to him. sinc hi arriv in 
london, he had seen mani pretti faces, mani beauti eyes, but 
assuredli none so love as these. and what features! what teeth! what 
lips! what a chin! what a figure! It seem to him that she wa not 
like an ordinari girl, that she wa not of the same composit as ani 
of the girl he had ever met; that she wa someth hardli 
human--someth elfish, someth gener by the beauti english 
wood and glades, fill with the soft glamour of the moon and stars. 
and all the while he wa think thus, hi heart rise in rebellion 
against the word of hamar, the girl continu gaze up at him, and 
toy with the ring on her slender, milk-whit fingers. 

At last he dare look at her no longer, but stammer out hi promis 
to do all he could to get her the vacant post, he press her hand 
gently, and bade her good morning. 

then he return to hi chair, and, lean back in it, wa see 
onc again in hi mind' eye the fair face of the girl who had just 
left him, when there wa a rap at the door, and the commissionair 
announc miss martin. 

"anoth of them," kelson said to himself. "and about as pretti in her 
way as the last. now I wonder what she wants." He look close at 
her, but no past rose up befor him--a far as thi client wa 
concern hi power of divin in that direct wa nil--sh wa a 
blank. 

"i'v come to ask you the mean of a dream I had last night," she 
began, inwardli shudder at the sight of so much pomad and 
jewellery. 

"yes," he said with an encourag smile, "what wa it?" 

Of cours she did not tell him all, but mere that she had dream of 
certain flower and tree as, curious enough, so had her father. 

kelson look at her thoughtfully. onc he open hi mouth to speak 
and then check himself; and it wa some second befor he actual 
broke silence. 

"taken separately," he said at last, "the ash tree portend an 
unexpect visit; a poppy, a visit from a man; red roses, fall in 
love; lilac, a present; a willow, kisses--heap of them; bluebells, a 
proposal; brambles, difficulti in the way--for example, tiresom 
relatives; buttercups, a marriage; an ash tree, a son and heir--a dear 
little----" 

"thank you!" gladi remarked, rise frigidly. thank you! I will go 
now. what is your fee?" 

"I trust, madam, you are pleased," kelson said in great distress. 

"will you kindli take your fee and let me out," gladi demanded, as he 
nervous place himself in her way. "thank you. good morning!" 

and as she swept regal past him and down the stone passage, hamar 
came out of hi room and pass by her on hi way to kelson' office. 

"ye gods!" he exclaimed, eye the discomfit kelson wrathfully. 
"what in the world have you done to offend the lady? I never saw ani 
one look so angri in my life. d--n it all! I hope you didn't insult 
her!" 

"it wa all your fault!" kelson wailed. "she ask me to tell her the 
mean of a dream which wa brim of warn against us." 

"against us!" 

"yes, against us! I have never listen to such admonit in a dream 
before. she must have some veri friendli spirit watch over her. 
well! what wa I to do? I did my best. mind of what you said to me 
a short time ago, I put her entir off the track; gave her an 
entir misleading--and as I thought veri pleasant--interpret of 
the dream." 

"what did you say?" 

kelson told him. 

"jackass!" hamar exclaimed. "jackass! you were far too broad. what 
pleas a san francisco girl shock a london lady. for good sake 
have more tact anoth time, we don't want to get into hot water. I 
feel quit convinc that if ani harm befal us--if that compact is 
in ani way broken--it will be through you. I wish to heaven the 
unknown had given you some other power." 

"so do i," kelson groaned. 

"at all events," hamar went on, "the first three month is nearli at 
an end. who wa she?" 

"miss gladi martin!" 

"where doe she live?" 

"I don't know. I could divin noth about her. she can't have ani 
vices." 

"I don't suppos she has," hamar remark dryly, "not from the look of 
her anyway. but there is time yet. matt! i'v taken a fanci to that 
girl and I mean to get hold of her somehow. I wonder if she is relat 
to martin--davenport' partner! jerusalem! what sport if she is!" 

"why? whi sport?" kelson asked. 

"dolt! don't you see! martin is at our mercy. We are more than hi 
rivals. We can drive him out of london ani moment we like. hi trick 
indeed! pshaw! curti can do them all right off the reel! and curti 
shall--w will show martin up--mak a laugh stock of him--ruin him! 
unless--unless--" 

"unless what?" 

"great scott! don't look so alarmed! unless--suppos that girl is 
hi daughter--unless he give me permiss to pay my address to 
her!"--and hamar laugh coarsely. 




chapter XI 

leon hamar call ON the martin 


"where' gladys?" john martin ask as he rose with an effort, stiff 
and tired, from the remain of a meat tea. 

In repli miss templeton mere point a finger--and went on 
crocheting. 

follow the direct indicated, john martin step out on to the 
lawn, and glanc round the garden, call "gladys!" then he 
listened, and there came to him snatch of a song, the word of 
which, full of arch sentiment, alli with (and to a larg extent 
depend on), a uniqu knowledg of and love of nature--would not 
have disgrac a herrick or a raleigh--th music--a schubert, or a 
sullivan. john martin had spare no money in educ gladys, and she 
did him credit. He thought so now, as exhaust from a hard day' 
pore over letters, he paus and lean hi back against a tree. A 
gentl breez blew her note to him, full of melodi and mirth; fresh 
and young and tender--a tender as the rosebud and violet that 
nestl at her bosom. 

"bi jove!" john martin murmured. "fanci my have a daughter like 
gladys! I ought to be jolli well pleased. and so I am. the onli thing 
I fear, is, that she'll marri some one who isn't half good enough for 
her! but who would be good enough for her! god alon knows! and god 
alon know whether she or I ought to decide! gladys!" 

"hulloa!", and the next moment a vision in pink emerg from the 
bushes. 

"gladys, I want to confid in you!" 

"what' wrong, daddy, dear?" gladi said, thrust an arm through hi 
and walk him gentli along with her through the glade. "you weren't 
at all nice to me when we part thi morning, but you look so weari 
that i'll be magnanim and forgiv you. what is it?" 

"whi it' like this!'" john martin said, put hi arm round her and 
hold her close to him, as he use to do when, a littl girl, she 
came sidl up to him for sugar-plums. "poor dick' affair are in a 
terribl muddle. unknown to me he specul right and left, and he 
ha not onli muddl through everyth he had, but he ha left a 
number of debts, and unfortun I have to meet them." 

"you, father! but whi you?" gladi cried. 

"becaus they were incur in the name of the firm. I can meet them 
all right, but it will be a big drain on my resources. that' worri 
number one. worri number two is about young davenport--shiel. I don't 
know what to do about him. He wa entir depend on dick. hi work 
as an artist doesn't bring him in enough to keep him in tobacco, and 
the worst of it is he doesn't seem capabl of turn hi hand to 
anyth else; I can't see him starve, so I shall have to allow him 
something." 

"he seem to me veri intelligent," gladi observed, "couldn't you 
take him into the firm? who are you go to have in hi uncle' 
place?" 

"that' the trouble!" john martin replied. "I do feel I want some one. 
I am get on in years, my brain is not so vigor as it use to 
be, and I can't go on invent fresh trick _ad infinitum_. moreover, 
I need assist in the pure busi side of the concern. I want 
some one who is both business-lik and inventive--som one young, 
brilliant and reliable." 

"you couldn't sell out I suppose?" 

"no, not just at present. thank to poor old dick the firm is in 
rather a precari condition! anoth six month over, and we may be 
perfectli all right. no! I must stick on, and get anoth partner. and 
look here, gladys, you know I let you do pretti nearli everyth you 
like. but let me beg of you not to be too friendli with that young 
davenport. I caught him look veri impress at you thi morning, 
and I am quit sure, if he see anyth more of you, he will be 
fall head over ear in love. which is the veri last thing in the 
world I want!" 

"that' make me out to be veri attractive, daddy," gladi said, 
look round at him mischievously. 

"and so you are, dear!" john martin said. "wonder attractive! and 
none know it better than yourself. but in thi case you must think of 
consequences--consequ that might be disastr to us all! 
confound it all, who' this? what on earth doe he want?" 

gladi gaze in astonishment. A young and veri smartli dress man wa 
advanc toward them with a soft, cat-lik tread. He wa of medium 
height and slim build. hi head disproportion large; hi right 
ear stand out, in proof that it had long been use as a pen-rest; 
hi nose pronounc and semit in outline; hi eyes, big, project 
and yellowish brown; hi chin, retreating; hi complexion, dark and 
saturnine. 

gladi shivered. "what a horribl person!" she whispered, "there is 
someth posit uncanni about him. I feel cold all over and how 
he stares!" 

"yes--what is it?" john martin demanded. "do you want to see me?" 

"you'r mr. martin, I reckon!" the stranger repli in the soft drawl, 
characterist of california. "i'v come to have a littl talk with 
you on business." 

"with me--on business!" john martin cried. "I don't know you! i'v 
never seen you before!" 

"you see me now anyway!" the stranger laughed, cast approv eye 
at gladys. "mi name' leon hamar, and i'v come to talk over that show 
of yours." 

"d--n your impudence!" john martin said, rais hi stick 
threateningly. "how dare you intrud upon me here on such a pretext." 

"calmly, calmly, sir!" hamar cried, hi cheek paling. "i'v come here 
with everi intent of be civil. I am chief partner in the modern 
sorceri compani ltd., and as conjur figur promin in our 
programm I thought you might prefer to have us as friend rather than 
rivals." 

"i'm sure my father need not fear your rivalry," gladi broke in, 
meet hamar' admir gaze stonily. 

hamar bowed. 

"if," he said, "you desir a proof of our abil to accomplish what 
we profess, I will give that proof without delay. with your per--" 

"you have no permiss from me, sir," john martin cri fiercely. 
"go!" 

hamar mere shrug hi shoulders. "you ought not to get so heated," 
he said, "consid that exactli twenti feet below where you are 
stand is a spring. all you have to do is to mark the spot, and sink 
a well, and there will be no need for you to use the company' water. 
As you are probabl aware, spring water is a thousand time clearer 
and purer. also," he went on, step hastili back as john martin 
again rais hi stick, "in the trunk of that elm over yonder is a 
hollow about eight feet from the ground, and if you look insid it, 
you will discov an iron box full of curio and jewellery. shall i--" 

"no!" retort john martin. "if you don't go instantli i'll send for 
the police,"--and hamar, come to the conclus that upon thi 
occas discret wa better than valour, hurriedli beat a retreat. 

"you'll be sorry, john martin!" he shout from a safe distance, "and 
so will miss gladys, charm miss gladys. but rememb you have onli 
yourselv to blame. ta-ta!", and the next moment he wa lost to 
sight. 

"well!" gladi ejaculated, "of all the beastli cad I have ever seen 
he fairli take the biscuit. what coloss cheek! the idea of hi 
come here and speak to us like that! can't we prosecut him, 
father?" 

"hardly!" john martin replied, "best leav him alone. I wish he hadn't 
come! he' upset me! My nerv are anyhow! which wa the tree he spoke 
about?" 

"thi one," gladi exclaimed, walk up to an elm, and pat it 
with her hand, "but you sure don't believ what he said, do you? It 
wa all rubbish from start to finish. daddy, my dear old daddy, I do 
believ you are worri about it." 

"hold my hat and stick a moment," john martin said, and make a 
spring, which for one of hi age and weight show surpris agility, 
he succeed in catch hold of one of the nearest later branches. 
the elm be old, the bark had becom veri gnarl and uneven, and 
thu the difficulti of ascens lay more in semblance, perhaps, than 
in reality. embrac the huge trunk, as close as possible, with hi 
arm and knees, much to the detriment of hi clothes, seiz with hi 
hand some projections, and rest hi feet upon others, john martin, 
after one or two narrow escap from falling, at length wriggl 
himself into the first great fork, and paus to wipe hi forehead. 

"oh, do take care, father!" gladi pleaded, "you'll fall and break 
your neck. Do be sensibl and come down now." 

but john martin paid no attention, he went on groping. 

"i'v found it," he suddenli shouted. "that bounder wa right, the 
trunk is hollow." He wa silent then, for some minutes, and gladi 
could onli see hi boots. then there wa a muffl oath, a sound of 
choke and gasping, which made gladys' blood run cold, and then--a 
great cry. "there' someth here, someth hard and heavy. it' a 
box, an iron box! take it from me." and lean as far down as he 
dared, he place in gladys' outstretch hands, a rusti iron box. 
then there wa the sound of scrape and tearing, and john martin 
gradual lower himself to the ground--hi coat cover with green, 
and the knee of hi trouser rip to pieces. 

gladi ran indoor for a hammer and chisel, and, the hing of the box 
be worn with age and exposure, it wa but the work of a few second 
to break it open. It wa full of gold and silver coin and jewellery; 
there were onli a few gold pieces, the greater number of the coin 
were silver--th bulk georgian--and their date rang from 1697 to 
1750. the jewelleri consist of sever massiv gold bracelets, (two 
or three of veri fine workmanship); some dozen or so plain gold rings; 
two silver watches, and a vari assort of silver trinkets. all 
were more or less antique, but none--apart from the gold bracelets--of 
ani great value. 

"well!" john martin exclaimed, as they conclud their examin of 
the articles, "what do you make of it?" 

"whi that man put them there, of course," gladi said, "can't you see 
the whole thing is noth but a dodg to intimid you into form 
a friendship with him. I daresay he ha heard that mr. davenport is 
dead, and think he see an opportun to be taken into partnership. 
He had a horrid face--sli and cunning, and hi way of look at me 
wa posit disgusting. It make me feel sick and horrid even to 
think of it." 

"what shall we do with these things?" john martin asked, pick up 
one of the watch and eye it with curiosity. 

"are they ours?" gladi replied. 

"I certainli consid we'v a right to keep them," her father said, 
"sinc we'v found them ourselv on our own property, but I suppose, 
legally, they are treasur trove and ought to be given up." 

"then sure the govern would pay us someth for them, wouldn't 
it?" 

"I should think so, at least a decent govern would. anyhow, I 
think to give them up will be our best course. I doubt if the whole 
lot is worth fifti pounds. where wa it he said there wa water?" 

"good gracious!" gladi exclaimed, "you don't mean to say you are 
go to bother about that now!" 

"it wa here, I think," john martin went on, thrust hi stick in 
the ground, "to the best of my knowledge--and I had experts' 
advice--ther is no water ani where near here. had there been, I 
should not have gone to the expens of have pipe laid down to feed 
the pond." 

"oh, father, how can you be so silly," gladi cried, "of cours there 
isn't ani water here. it' onli a trick, a trick to frighten you--and 
i'm begin to think it ha succeeded." 

"I shall tri here anyway to-morrow," john martin said grimly. "let us 
go in now." 

when gladi went into the garden on the follow morn she beheld 
an extraordinari sight. her father, the gardener, and a man whom she 
did not recogn at first, as hi back wa turn toward her, but 
who, to her utter astonishment, prove to be shiel davenport, were 
hard at work, dig a pit. 

her father paus everi now and then, and rested; but he did not allow 
the other a moment' respite. everi time they were about to slack, he 
urg them on. It wa all veri well for the garden who wa 
accustom to it, but it wa obvious kill work for shiel 
davenport, and gladys--a soon as she had overcom a preliminari 
outburst of laughter--gav vent to her sympathies. 

"what a shame," she exclaimed, "father how can you? poor mr. davenport 
look readi to drop. take a rest, mr. davenport! do--you have my 
permission." 

look veri hot and exhausted, shiel davenport threw down hi spade 
and attempt to make himself presentable. 

"hi cloth will be ruined, father," gladi said, indignantly. 

"they'r not hi clothes--he' wear an old suit of mine," john 
martin explained, tri to appear unconcerned. 

shiel forc a laugh. "i'm rather out of form, miss martin, I haven't 
had much exercis lately." 

"you'r get it now anyway," john martin chuckled. 

"and it' blister your hand horribly!" gladi cried, point to 
sever raw places. "I will fetch you a pair of father' gloves--he' 
a brute!" 

"pleas don't trouble," shiel exclaimed, "i'll use my handkerchief 
instead. dig is even harder work than painting--in one way." 

"it' not fit work for you," gladi repli with anoth reproach 
glanc at her father. "when did you arrive, I never heard you?" 

"I 'phone to him last night," john martin said, look rather 
sheepish. "I thought a day out here would do him good. He thought so 
too, and came on by the seven o'clock train. we'v been dig ever 
sinc breakfast--but a bit of exercis won't hurt him, and i'll give 
him plenti of vaselin presently." 

they resum work again; and gladi retir indoors. At eleven o'clock 
john martin let shiel go. "you can amus yourself till luncheon with 
book and papers," he said, "you'll find plenti of them in my study. 
i'll join you later." 

but shiel had other idea of amus himself, and as soon as he had 
wash and chang back into hi own clothes, he follow the sound 
of music until he reach the drawing-room. 

"i'm sure you must feel dread tired," gladi said, leav off 
playing. "it wa too bad of father to make you work like that." 

"i'm afraid your father think me a veri useless article," shiel 
replied, seat himself in an easi chair, and tri hi hardest not 
to look too ardently. "and an artist is not much good outsid hi 
profession." 

"who is?" gladi smiled. "shall you still go on painting?" 

"now that my uncl ha died? It all depends--depend on whether he ha 
been abl to leav me anyth in hi will. from one or two thing 
your father ha said I fear he ha not--in which case I don't quit 
know what I shall do. I could hardli expect mr. martin to take me into 
hi firm." 

"aren't you ani good at invention?" gladi asked, "I know he want 
some one who is--som one who can help him devis fresh tricks. thi 
everlast rack of the brain to think of someth new is 
begin to be too much for him." 

"I wish I could be of some use," shiel said, "both for hi sake and 
mine, and may I add yours. anyhow i'll try. I have a certain amount of 
imagination--i suppos most artist have, and henceforth i'll devot 
it to trickery." 

"no, not to trickery!" gladi said, "to conjuring!" 

"well, to conjur then--to plan someth novel and startl in 
the way of a trick. and as they say, two head are better than one, 
perhaps, you will help me." 

"i," gladi laughed, "whi i'v never invent anyth in my life, 
bar a song." 

"nevertheless i'm sure you would be of great help to me," shiel said; 
"you would at least critic my efforts, wouldn't you?" 

"oh! I should certainli do that," gladi laughingli rejoined, "and 
probabl do more harm than good." 

"you could never do ani harm!" shiel said, with so much eager that 
gladi got up and began search for a piec of music. "I would give 
anyth to paint you." 

"I have been painted--twice," gladi observed. 

"for the r.a.?" 

"yes! I didn't much care about it, and I grew desper tire of 
sitting." 

"who paint you?" 

"heniblow paint me once, and darker paint me once." 

"then it' useless for me even to think of it. how did they treat you 
in their pictures?" 

"heniblow paint me in even dress, and darker paint me in the 
charact of enid--y know, the enid in the 'idyl of the king.'" 

"yes. but I should like to paint you as 'melodi in flower land.'" 

"i'm afraid I can't grasp it," gladi said. 

"can't you!" shiel exclaimed, "I can. the idea came to me when I heard 
you sing just now, and saw you sit here, in the midst of 
flowers, and dress like a rose. I should paint you clad as you are 
now--al in pink--seat in the garden singing; and all the flower 
lean toward you listening. I would give anyth to paint it," and 
he spoke with such enthusiasm that gladys, rememb her dream, 
flushed. 

"I think," she said, "we might go into the garden and see how the work 
is progressing." 

"I fear I can't do ani more digging," shiel put in hastily, "I 
willingli would if I could, but I realli can't use my hands." 

"and you'v not had ani vaseline," gladi cried. "i'll get you some," 
and befor he could prevent her she had gone. 

she wa back again, however, in a few moment with a tini white jar 
and some linen bandages. "I couldn't find my aunt," she began, "or she 
would bandag your hand for you." 

"won't you?" shiel asked. "do!" 

He thrust hi hand toward her as he spoke, and gladi utter an 
exclam of horror--th palm and finger were raw and swollen. 

"I feel heartili asham of myself for be so thin-skinned," shiel 
said. but gladi had disappeared. she return almost immedi with 
a bowl of water. 

"i'm sure they must hurt you dreadfully," she exclaimed, as she gentli 
bath the hands. "it make me feel quit ill to see them." 

for the next few moment shiel wa in paradise. the touch of her cool, 
white finger on hi hot and burn skin wa far nicer than anyth 
he had ever imagined. her sweet-scent breath steal gentli up hi 
nostril sooth away all hi care--even the remembr of hi recent 
loss. 

with hi whole heart and soul concentr in hi gaze, he watch her 
everi movement--watch the wave and toss of the stray wisp of 
hair over her templ and ears, as the breez rustl through the open 
windows; and the gentl tighten and relax of her delic 
mould lip each time she breathed. 

shiel had alway led a veri solitari existence. apart from hi uncl 
he had no near relatives, and with the except of the five or six 
week in the year he had spent at dick davenport' hous at sydenham, 
he had alway been in rooms. He had often felt lonely, but never quit 
so lone as now--now that the onli person he had known intim and 
for whom he had entertain ani real affection, wa suddenli taken 
away. He wa now absolut alon in the world, and the poignanc of 
hi posit came home to him acutely. 

It is a terribl thing to be lonely. lone men do all sort of 
dread things--th they would certainli never dream of do if 
they had companionship. and shiel wa do a dread thing now. 
everi moment he wa fall more and more desper in love, despit 
the fact that he had no money, and wors still--no prospect of ever 
make any. and loneli wa in the main respons for it. 

had he not been so lonely--had he not spent day and days, alon in 
lodgings, with no one to talk to--no one to care whether he were ill 
or dying; had thi not been hi experience--th experi he wa even 
then undergoing, reason would have outweigh folly, and even though 
he might have realiz that in gladi martin he had found hi ideal of 
beauty--of womanliness, he would have been content onli to admire. 

As it was, he wa in that veri danger mood when the heart yearn 
for sympathy; when a plain woman' sympathi mean much--and a pretti 
woman' more than much. It is no exagger to say that shiel would 
have lain down and die for gladi ten time over. for her sake--if 
onli to see her smile, no mere physic pain would have been too 
excruci for him to bear. and when she put the finish touch 
to the bandages, and quit by chance, of course, their eye met, he 
look at her as if he never meant to leav off look at her, as if 
he never meant to do anyth els but look at her for all eternity. 

whether she understood as much or not, is imposs to say. shiel 
ask himself the question over and over again befor the day wa out, 
and in hi sleep, and dure the next day, and for mani day 
afterwards. could she tell how much he admir her? how much he 
worship her? all that he wa prepar to do for her sweet sake? all 
thi he ask himself repeatedly, and went on think of her when he 
knew he ought never to have thought of her at all. 

"i'm sure your hand are more comfort now. won't you go into the 
garden and see how the work is progressing?" she said. "or if you are 
afraid father will want you to dig again, perhap you would like to go 
into hi studi and read the papers." 

"I should like to stay here and listen to you singing," he said. 
"mayn't I do that?" 

"you might," she said, "but I have to go out." 

"then i'll stay here till you return," he said, "i'v never been in 
such a delight room." 

"what do you think of shiel davenport?" gladi remark to her aunt a 
few minut later. "I don't think i'v ever met such an extraordinari 
young man. He doe noth but stare at me, and when I ask him to do 
one thing he suggest do another. he' the most difficult person to 
manage. In fact, I can't manag him at all." 

"never mind about manag him, my dear," miss templeton replied, "so 
long as you don't let him manag you. young men who do noth but 
stare are not mere difficult--they are dangerous." 




chapter xii 

the great challeng 


when john martin came into tea that afternoon, he gave gladi a shock. 
despit the fact that he had been in the sun all day and wa much 
tan in consequ he had never looked--so gladi thought--so old 
and haggard. 

"you dear old daddie!" she said, hasten to pour him out some tea, 
"you shouldn't work so hard--thi silli dig ha quit knock you 
up! haven't you finished?" 

"yes, i'v finished!" john martin said, catch hi breath. "i'v 
found water!" 

"nonsense!" 

"it' true all the same. We struck it at exactli the distanc he 
said--twenti feet." 

"then of cours he knew." 

"how? how the deuc could he have known?" 

"I can't say," gladi replied. "all I know is, that he' not straight, 
and that there' some underhand trickeri go on. but do have your 
tea now, and dismiss it from your mind. anyhow, he can do you no 
harm." 

"here' a letter for you, john," mrs. templeton exclaimed, enter 
the room at that moment. 

john martin took it from her, and tore open the envelop curiously. It 
wa a handwrit he did not know, and did not like--it 
characterist were sinister. 

"I knew it!" he cried; "I knew the fellow wa a scoundrel. what the 
deuc do you think he ha the impertin to do now?" 

"he!" gladi said, look anxious at her father. "whoever do you 
mean?" 

"why, that confound young bounder who came here last night--leon 
hamar he sign himself. In thi letter he declar that he can perform 
ani of our tricks, and will accept the wager I offer for their 
solut some littl time ago. He also say that unless I consent to 
see him, and to listen courteous to what he ha to say, he will 
publicli announc hi intent of take up the wager, at our hall, 
in kingsway, to-night." 

"do you think there is ani possibl of hi have discov the 
secret of your tricks?" gladi asked. "could he have bribe ani one 
to tell him?" 

"I don't think so," john martin said. "the onli peopl who have ani 
clue as to how they are done are my two attendants--both as you know 
nativ of cashmere, and men who, I feel pretti certain, could not be 
'got at.'" 

"in that case," gladi remarked, "I fail to see what there is to worri 
about. your cours is perfectli clear--tak no notic of it." 

john martin wa silent--dazed. He did not know what to think or do! 
there wa someth pain omin to him in the discoveri of the 
money and the water--someth that accentu the impress hamar' 
sinist appear had made on him. the man did not look 
ordinary--hi manner, gestures, walk and express were decidedli 
abnormal--in fact they put him in mind of the superphysical. the 
superphysical! might not that account for hi knowledge? bah! there 
wa no such thing as the superphysical. the man wa extraordinary--but, 
after all, onli a man--hi knowledg onli that of a man. and it must 
be as the shrewd gladi conjectured--h had put the money in the tree 
himself and had learn of the presenc of water through some subtl 
artifice--perhap onli guess at it. He would defi him--let him do 
what he would! 

thi wa john martin' decis as he finish tea. An hour later he 
had chang hi mind, and wa speak to hamar on the telephone, 
express hi willing to grant him a brief interview if he came 
at once. 

In rather less than an hour a motor drew up at the martins' door and 
hamar step out of it. 

"glad to find you in a more tractabl mood, mr. martin," he exclaim 
on be usher into the latter' presence. "I reckon you would 
sing to a differ tune when you found that water. would you like me 
to give you a few more sampl of my skill, befor we proceed to 
business?" 

"name your busi at once," john martin repli gruffly; "I haven't 
mani minut to spare." 

"no!" hamar said, "that' a pity; becaus part of what I have at the 
back of my brain may take more than a few minut arranging. the 
situat in a nutshel is this. you have a pretti daughter, mr. 
martin?" 

"how dare you, sir?" john martin broke in, clench hi fist. 

"gently, gently, mr. martin!" hamar observed, back toward the 
door. "gently--y promis to give me a courteou hearing. I meant no 
offence. I say I admir your daughter immensely--sh take the shine 
out of our american girls." 

"the deuc she does!" john martin foamed. 

"she does, you bet!" hamar went on. "and I see no reason if she like 
me, whi we couldn't get engaged. I would do the thing handsom as 
far as money goes. what do you say?" 

"I say that unless you'r veri care I shall break my promis and 
kick you." 

"I would pay you a big lump sum to take me into partnership," hamar 
went on complacently, "and I would introduc a number of new trick 
that would stagger creation. I shouldn't be in ani hurri to marry--th 
length of the engag would be for you to decide." 

"then it would be _ad infinitum_," john martin said grimly, "for 
you'll never get my consent to a marriage." 

"never is a long day--and even a john martin may change. you want new 
blood and new capit in your firm--you would have both in me. I 
assur you your show would boom as it ha never boom before!" 

"and the onli condit on which you offer me all thi is my 
daughter?" 

"you have said it--that is the one and onli condition. your 
daughter--mi brains, my dollars." 

"I have decided!" john martin said. 

"good!" hamar exclaimed; "I guess you would! there' noth like 
the almighti dollar, is there?" 

"yes!" john martin rejoined; "the almighti fist--and that' what 
you'll get if you don't clear out of thi hous instantly. and if you 
ever come skulk round here again, or write me ani more letter i'll 
set my. solicitor on to you." 

"then it' war--war to the knife!" hamar sneered. "how melodramatic! 
but it won't last long. I shall yet be your partner--and I shall yet 
have miss gladys! Au revoir--i won't say good-bye!" and with a mock 
bow he hurriedli took hi departure. 

that night messrs. martin and davenport' entertain had progress 
as usual for about half an hour when it suddenli came to a full stop. 
A man in the lowest tier of box had risen and wa address the 
audienc in a loud voice: "ladi and gentlemen!" 

In an instant all head swung round and there were stentorian shout 
of "silence!" 

but curtis--for it wa he--wa not easili daunted. "do you call thi 
fair play!" he demanded; "I am here to-night to make a sport offer, 
and one which will afford you vast entertainment." 

cri of "shut up!" "silence!" "he' drunk!" "turn him out!" merg 
into one loud roar forc him to pause. sever uniform offici 
now invad the box, but hamar--who, as well as kelson, wa with 
curtis--fix them with hi big dark eye that gleam eerili in the 
half-low light of the house--for the stage onli at that moment 
wa fulli illuminated--held them in check, and they hung back not 
know what to do. thi move of hamar' took with a larg section of 
the audience--som of whom were possess with sport instincts, 
whilst other were mere curious--and the somewhat prematur cri of 
"turn him out!" etc., were soon lost in vocifer shout of: "let 
them alone!" "let them speak!" "let us hear what they have to say." It 
wa in the midst of thi hubbub that john martin in a great state of 
nervou agit came to the front of the stage and inquir the 
caus of the commotion. the shout still continued, and gladys, who 
had come to the perform anticip someth of the sort, call 
to her father, from the wings, bid him give curti permiss to 
speak. 

"you will lose all sympathi if you don't, father," she added; "and 
besid you have noth to fear. it' sheer bravado and impud on 
their part." 

thu advised, for gladi wa a level-head girl, john martin gave in; 
and the audienc show their approv by a vigor round of 
clapping. 

"I wish I were spokesman," kelson sighed, hi eye glisten at the 
sight of so mani pretti upturn faces. "go on, old man!" he added, 
give curti a nudge. "fire away, and show them you know a bit about 
elocution, for the credit of the firm." 

curti need no encouragement. what littl bash he had onc 
possess he had certainli left behind in san francisco, for he lean 
over the front of the box and smile familiarli at the audience. 

"I am edward curtis," he said, "one of the director of the modern 
sorceri compani ltd. messrs. martin and davenport have so often 
boast that no one outsid their firm can perform their trick that I 
have come here to-night resolv to disillus them. I not onli 
accept their offer of ten thousand pound for the solut of their 
tricks, but I agre to pay them doubl that amount--cash down--if I do 
not do everyth they do--from 'the brass coffin' to their 
world-fam 'pumpkin puzzle.' with messrs. martin and davenport' 
permiss I will explain one and all of their trick to you to-night, 
and the onli thing I ask of you, ladi and gentlemen, is to see that 
I get fair play." 

A spontan outburst of clap follow thi speech, and as soon 
as it had ceas one of the audienc who had risen and wa wait to 
speak, said: "I trust messrs. martin and davenport will accept thi 
challenge, and allow the modern sorceri compani the opportun here, 
in thi hall to-night, of display their skill--or their ignorance, 
as the case may be. If messrs. martin and davenport' trick cannot be 
perform by ani outsider--th firm in accept thi challeng will 
mere be twenti thousand pound the richer--and if--a is hardli 
likely, messrs. martin and davenport should be outwitted, I am sure 
they themselv will be amongst the first to congratul their 
success rivals. I, for one, am quit readi to act as referee." 

"I too!" shout a dozen other voices. "be a sport and accept hi 
bet!" 

"ladi and gentlemen," john martin repli with dignity, "you have 
given me no alternative; I accept the challenge. perhap those who 
have so kindli volunt to act as refere will see that order is 
maintain whilst I go on with my performance, at the conclus of 
which mr. curtis--i think that is the name of my rival--wil be quit 
at liberti to tri hi exposit of my tricks." 

the perform then proceeded, and when it wa over, curtis, hamar 
and kelson, accompani by six of those of the audienc who had 
volunt to act as referees, step on to the stage. seat were 
provid for the referees--thre on the one side of the stage and 
three on the other; and have seen that everyth wa fair and 
squar john martin retir to the o.p. wing, behind which gladi wa 
concealed. 

A brief descript of "the brass coffin" trick, which wa the first 
messrs. hamar, curti and kelson proceed to explain, will, perhaps, 
suffice. 

A massiv construct brass-bound coffin is hand round to the 
audience, who care examin it, and be unabl to discov 
anyth amiss, pronounc themselv satisfi that it is genuine. 

the oper then summon an assistant, jokingli refer to him as "the 
corpse"--put him into a sack, made to repres a winding-sheet, 
secur bind the sack with a piec of cord, and ask one of the 
audienc to seal it. the sack and it content are then place in the 
coffin which is lock and corded. the oper then throw a sheet 
over the coffin, let it remain there for a few seconds, and on 
remov it and open the lid, the coffin, is found to be empty. A 
shout from the front of the hous make everi one turn round, when, to 
their amazement, "the corpse" is seen stand up at the back of "the 
pit," hold the sack with the rope and seal--intact--in hi hand. 
such wa the marvel feat which had been accomplish in martin and 
davenport' hall night in and night out for years, the solut of 
which no one as yet had been abl to discover. one can imagine, in 
these circumstances, the tremend excit of the audienc at the 
prospect of see thi notori puzzl tackled--and tackl by a 
member of a firm which wa alreadi reput to be do all kind of 
weird and extraordinari things. but, wherea it wa quit obviou that 
john martin wa greatli perturb (hi eyebrow were work 
nervously, and hi lip and finger twitching), curtis, on the other 
hand, wa as cool as possible--h liter did not turn a hair. 

"now, gentlemen," he said, turn to the referees, "keep your eye 
well skin and observ everyth I do. ladi and gentlemen," he 
went on, rais hi voice, "I am now about to show you how the coffin 
trick is done. observ me--i'm 'the corpse'--mr. kelson, here, is the 
operator--" and matt kelson, rather to hamar' annoy advanced, 
down the stage to take part in the proceedings. 

"watch me get into the sack!" He step into it as he spoke. "look at 
what I have in my hand," he went on, hold up hi right hand in full 
view of the audience. "I have a plug of wood cover with the same 
materi as thi sack. As soon as I stoop down and the sack is pull 
over me I shall thrust thi plug into the mouth of it and mr. kelson 
will bind the sack round it. I shall then be put into the coffin. you 
think you know thi coffin but you don't. see!"--and step out of 
the sack he tap the head of the coffin, which wa veri broad and 
deep. "come closer!" and he beckon to the referees, whose number 
were now augment by three newspap reporters--repres of 
the _daili snapper_, the _planet_ and the _hooter_ respectively. "here 
is a secret panel work by a spring. I will press, and you will press 
too." 

and amidst a breathless silence--th nine member of the audienc on 
the stage follow everi movement--curti put hi hand insid the 
head of the coffin and touch a veri slight elev in the wood. In 
an instant, by a wonder neat piec of mechanism, a panel slid 
back, leav just suffici room for a man of moder dimens to 
squeez through. 

everyon now look at john martin--h wa lean back in hi chair, 
breath hard, hi eye start out of hi head, hi cheek white. 
hamar saw him and grinned, grin malevolently, but the smile die 
out of hi face when he glanc at gladys--th scorn in the girl' 
eye made hi blood boil. 

"all right, miss martin," he mutter between hi teeth; "you adopt 
that attitud now, but you will adopt a veri differ one later on! 
i'll win you bodi and soul, or my name is not what it is." 

He wa interrupt in thi amiabl reflect by curtis. "i'm too 
stout to play the rôle of the corpse, and so is matt," curti said to 
him; "you must undertak that part. now!" he went on, "take thi plug 
and get into the sack," and he whisper a few instruct in hi 
ear. then he tie the top of the sack--in realiti tie it round the 
plug hamar wa holding--and one of the audienc seal the knot. 
curti and kelson then lift hamar into the coffin, shut the lid and 
cord it. then curtis, turn to the audience, said: 

"what is now happen insid the coffin is this--'th corpse' pull 
the plug out of the mouth of the sack from the inside. the cord thu 
becom loos and 'the corpse' is abl to open the sack. He at onc 
touch the spring I point out to you in the head of the coffin, and 
the panel slide back--so!" 

and as the audienc looked, they saw the panel slide back, and first 
of all hamar' head, and then hi body, wriggl through the apertur 
thu made. 

"the reason whi you, audience, cannot see him make hi escap is 
this," curti explained; "the head of the coffin is alway turn away 
from you and place against a mirror which you can't see, and which to 
you appear but the continu of the stage. In thi mirror exactli 
opposit the head of the coffin is an aperture, and it is through thi 
'the corpse' make hi exit to the back of the stage. I will show it 
you. here it is"--and beckon to the refere to come quit close, 
he point to a glass screen, in the centr of the base of which wa a 
glass trap-door, correspond in height and girth to the head of the 
coffin. "here, corpse!" curti said, "crawl through"--and hamar, 
look as if he by no mean appreci the undignifi task of 
wriggl on hi stomach befor so mani eyes, drew himself as tight 
togeth as he could, and squirm through. 

"doe that satisfi you, gentlemen?" curti inquired. 

"perfectly!" the refere answered. "noth could be plainer. We see 
exactly, now, how the trick is done." 

At thi there wa a loud outburst of clapping, and curti bow in the 
eleg manner in which he had been patient and assidu coach 
by kelson. 

He then proceed to the second trick--"ev at the window," a trick 
almost, if not quite, as famou as "the brass coffin," and for the 
solut of which martin and davenport had frequent offer huge 
sum of money. 

A larg pane of glass some nine by six feet in area, and set in 
a frame, made to repres that of a window, is place on the 
stage, about eighteen inch from the floor. thirty-six inch 
from the ground a wooden shelf is place against the window. An 
assistant--usu a woman--then mount on the shelf and, look out 
of the glass, proce to kiss her hand vigorously. the oper in a 
shock voic ask her to desist. she refus and, to the amus of 
the audience, carri on her pantomim flirtat more desper 
than before. the oper pretend to lose hi temper, and snatch 
up a screen place it at the back of her. He then fire a pistol, 
pull asid the screen, and she ha vanished. As the top, bottom and 
side of the window, all in fact except the veri middle, have been in 
full view of the audience, and as the window ha been tightli close 
all the time, the disappear of the girl complet mystifi the 
audience. 

curti explain it all. He point out that the keynot to the 
illus lay behind the wooden shelf, which wa so place as to 
conceal the fact that the lower part of the window wa made double, 
the bottom of the upper part be conceal from view by a second 
sheet of silver glass place in front of it. the shelf cover the 
line of junction and enabl the window frame to be scrutin by the 
audience. 

As soon as the screen is put in front of the ladi on the shelf--th 
glass pane slide up about a foot and a half into the top of the 
frame, purpos made veri deep. the bottom of the window is cut away 
in the middle, leav an apertur about two feet square, which wa 
previous hidden from view by the doubl glass at the base. eve make 
her exit through thi hole, and slide on to a board place behind the 
window in readi for her. the pane of glass then slide down again, 
the screen is removed, and the window appear just as solid as before. 

when curti conclud hi verbal explan he gave the audienc a 
practic illustr of how the thing wa done; he manipul the 
screen and pistol, whilst hamar pose as eve, and directli he had 
finish there wa anoth outburst of applause. kelson dare not look 
at john martin or gladys. the brief glanc he had taken of them at the 
conclus of the give away of the first trick had shock him--and 
he purpos stood with hi back to them. with hamar it wa 
otherwise--th joy of triumph wa strong within him, and the pictur 
of john martin, lean forward in hi chair, with hi mouth half open 
and a dazed, glassi express in hi eyes, onli thrill him with 
pleasure; he laugh at the old man, and still more at gladys. 

"that' the way to treat a girl of that sort," he whisper to kelson; 
"scoff at her--scoff at her well. let her see you don't care a snap 
for her--and in the end she'll run after you and haunt you to death." 

"i'm not so sure," kelson said. "it might act in some cases, perhaps, 
but I don't think you can quit depend on it." 

"pooh! you are no judg of women, in spite of all your experience," 
hamar retorted. "i'll bet you anyth you like she'll come round and 
make a tremend fuss of me." 

"suppos you fall in love with her, how about the compact?" kelson 
asked. "you'v warn me often enough." 

"oh, but i'm not like you," hamar replied. "there' noth soft in my 
nature. I fall in love! not much! why, you might as well have 
apprehens of my join the salvat army, or want to becom a 
milit suffragette--eith would be just about as possible. no--! I 
shall make the girl love me--and we shall be engag for just as long 
as I please. If I find some one that attract me more, I shall throw 
her aside--if not, maybe, I shall marri her--but in either case there 
will be no question of love--at least not on my part. she shall do as 
I want--that is all! hulloa! curti is begin again." 

there were five other trick on the programme--al of which were world 
renowned. they were "the float head"; "the mango seed"; "the 
haunt bathing-machine," "the girl with the five eyes," and "the 
vanish bicycle" illusion. As with the first two tricks, so curti 
did with the follow five--h explain them, and then, aid by 
hamar and kelson, gave practic demonstr of their solutions; 
and so thoroughli and clearli were these solut demonstr that 
the refere ask no questions--they were absolut satisfied. 
turn to the audience--at a sign from curtis--they announc that 
the whole of messrs. martin and davenport' trick had been solv to 
their entir satisfaction, and that messrs. hamar, curti and kelson 
of the modern sorceri compani ltd. had, without doubt, won the wager. 

"have you anyth to say?" curti asked, address john martin. 

"I acknowledg my defeat, though I do not understand it!" john martin 
said with veri white lips. "I shall pay you the ten thousand pound 
to-night." 

"don't worri about that," hamar interposed; "we don't want to take 
your money, all we want to do wa to prove to you we could perform 
the trick you believ to be insoluble. 

"ladi and gentlemen!" he went on, rais hi voice, "the modern 
sorceri compani ltd. ha given you some proof to-night of their 
capabl in the conjur line, and if you will give us the 
pleasur of your compani to-morrow night--w invit you all free of 
charg for the occasion--w will give you a still further 
demonstr of our powers. may we count upon your patronage?" 

A terrif storm of clap wa the reply, and as the audienc slowli 
file from the hall, john martin stagger into the wing, reel past 
gladi ere she could catch him, and sank helplessli on to the floor. 




chapter xiii 

the modern sorceri compani ltd. give A grati perform 


the day that follow were dark day for gladys. her father, whom she 
loved--and, until now, had never realiz how much she loved--lay 
serious ill. He had had a stroke which, although fortun slight, 
must, as the doctor said, be regard as a prelud to what would 
happen, unless he wa kept veri quiet. and to keep him quiet wa not 
an easi thing to do. hi mind continu revert to what had just 
taken place, and he wa for ever ask gladi to tell him whether 
anyth further had occur in connect with it, whether there wa 
anyth about it in the papers. 

gladys, of course, wa oblig to dissemble. she hate anyth 
approach dissimulation, but on thi occas there wa no help for 
it, and what she told john martin wa the revers of what she knew to 
be actual happening. the paper were full to overflow with 
account of that fatal night' proceedings, and of the marvel 
grati exhibit given on the succeed even by the modern 
sorceri compani ltd. 

the _hooter_, for example, had a full column on the middl page head 
in larg type-- 

extraordinari scene AT martin and davenport' 
the greatest conjur trick IN the world solved! 

whilst the _daili snapper_, determin to be none the less sensational, 
began thus: 

mysteri NO longer! 
"the brass coffin trick" and "eve AT the window" done AT last! 
martin and davenport lose their prestig 

thi wa bad enough, but the _planet_ publish a paragraph that wa 
even more galling, viz.-- 

"now that messrs. martin and davenport' great illus have been 
explain and their hall in kingsway, so long famou as the home 
of puzzledom, of necess shorn of it glamour, one need not be 
surpris if those who delight in thi kind of mystery, should 
turn elsewher for their amusement. the british public, which is 
abov all thing enamour of novelty, will, doubtless, now resort 
to the modern sorceri company, whose hous in cockspur street bid 
fair to becom the futur home of everyth uncanny. their 
programme--to the uninitiated--pres possibilities--and 
impossibilities." 

So said the _planet_, and as the number of attend at martin and 
davenports' fell from 820 on the night of the challeng to 89 on the 
succeed night, whilst the modern sorceri company' hall wa fill 
to overflowing, there wa everi prospect of it predict be 
verified. the solut of martin and davenports' trick had taken 
place (hamar had so plan it) on the last night the trio possess 
the properti of divination, and, consequently, on the night that 
termin the first stage of their compact. the follow night they 
would be in possess of new powers, such power as would warrant 
them give a grati exhibition--an exhibit of juggleri absolut 
new and unprecedented. that the exhibit wa success may be 
gather from the follow articl in the _daili cyclone_-- 

"marvel display OF psychic phenomena IN cockspur street. 

"the modern sorceri compani ltd., in their new premis in 
cockspur street, gave the most remark display of phenomena it 
ha ever yet fallen to our lot to report. indeed, the perform 
were of such an extraordinari natur that the huge audience, _en 
masse_, wa scared; not a few peopl fainted, whilst everi now and 
again were heard scream of terror intermingl with long 
protract 'ohs!'" 

A brief _résumé_ of the entertain ran as follows:--th first part 
of the modern sorceri company' programm wa carri out by mr. leon 
hamar, solus, who, step to the front of the stage, announc that 
he wa about to give a display of clairvoyance. without further 
prelud he point to variou member of the audience, and describ 
spiritu presenc he saw stand behind them. He did not say he 
could see a spirit, answer to the name of jame or george--or some 
such equal familiar name--and then proceed to give a descript of 
it, so elastic, that with veri littl stretch it would undoubtedli 
have fit nine out of everi ten peopl one meet with everi day, but 
unlik ani other clairvoy we have known, he describ the 
individu physic and moral trait of the peopl he profess to 
see. for example: To a ladi sit in the third row of the stalls, he 
said: "there is the phantasm of an elderli gentleman stand behind 
you. He ha a vivid scar on hi right cheek that look as if it might 
have been caus by a sabr cut. He ha a grey militari moustache, a 
veri mark chin; wear hi hair part in the middle, and ha 
light-blu eye that are fix feroci on the gentleman seat on 
your left. Do you recogn the person I am describing?" 

"I think so," the ladi answer in a faint voice. 

"I will spare you a descript of hi person," hamar went on, "but I 
should like to remind you that he met with a rather peculiar accident. 
He wa look over some engin work in leeds, when some one 
push him, and he wa instantli whip off the ground by a piec of 
revolv mechan and dash to piec against the ceiling. Am I 
right?" 

there wa no reply--but the sigh, we think, wa more signific than 
words. 

mr. hamar then turn to a ladi in the next row. "I can see behind 
you," he said, "an old dowag with yellow hair. she wear larg 
emerald drop earrings, black satin skirt, and a heliotrop bodic of 
which she appear to be somewhat vain. she is cough terribly. she 
die of pneumonia, brought about by the excess zeal of--ahem!--of 
her relatives--for the open-air treatment. contrari to expectations, 
however, all her money went to a societi in hanov square--a societi 
for the anti-propag of children. I think you know the ladi to 
whom I refer." 

mr. hamar had again hit the mark. 

"onli too well!" came the indign and spontan reply. 

mr. hamar then turn to a man in the fifth row. "hulloa!" he 
exclaimed. "what have we here--an irish terrier answer to the name 
of 'peg.' It is stand upright with it two front paw rest on 
your knees. It is look up into your face, and it mouth is open as 
if anticip a lump of sugar. from the mark on it bodi I should 
say it ha been kill by be run over?" 

again mr. hamar wa correct. "what you say is absolut true," the 
gentleman replied; "I had a dog name peg. I wa greatli attach to 
it, and it wa run over in piccadilli by a motor cyclist. I hate the 
veri sight of a motor bicycle." 

after a brief interv of awestruck silenc a voic from the galleri 
call out-- 

"you are in leagu with him!" 

then the man in the stall stood up, and essay to speak; but hi 
voic wa drown in a perfect tornado of applause. He had no need--h 
wa instantli recognized--h wa j---- b----. with a few more exampl 
of clairvoy mr. hamar continu to entertain hi audienc for half 
an hour or so, by the end of which time, we have no hesit in 
say that everi one wa convinc that he actual saw what, he 
said, he saw. 

the second part of the programm wa entir in the hand of mr. 
curtis, who now came forward with a bow. "ladi and gentlemen," he 
said; "you all know that man is complex--that he is compos of mind 
and matter, the materi and immaterial. I now propos to give you a 
physic demonstr of thi fact. will twelv of the audienc 
kindli come up on the stage and sit around me, so that you may feel 
quit certain that I have here no mechan devic to assist 
me?"--and amongst other well-known peopl who respond to mr. 
curtis' request, were lord bayle, sir charl tenningham and the 
right hon. john blaine, m.p. have arrang these twelv volunt 
in a semi-circl at the back of the stage, mr. curtis, stand in the 
centr of the stage, again address hi audience. "ladi and 
gentlemen," he said; "the secret of separ the mind--or what 
spiritualists, who love to bolster up their pretend knowledg of the 
other world by the invent of pretenti nomenclature, call the 
'ethic ego'--from the body, lie in intens concentration. If you 
wish to acquir the power, practis concentration--concentr on 
be in a certain place. If noth happen at first, don't be 
discouraged, but keep on trying, and a time will come when you will 
suddenli leav your body, in a form, which is the exact counterpart of 
the bodi you have left. you will visit the place whereon you are 
concentrating. perhap the best method of practis project is to 
put your forehead against a door or wall, and concentr veri hard on 
be on the other side. It may take week befor you get a result, 
but if you persevere, you will eventu succeed in leav your 
physic form and pass through the door, or wall, into the space 
beyond. now watch me! I shall concentr on project my immateri 
body, and of walk in it, three time round my materi body." 

mr. curti close hi eyes, and for some second appear to be 
think veri hard. then the audienc wit a remark 
phenomenon--a figure, the exact counterpart of mr. curtis, step 
out, as it were, from hi body, and slowli walk round it three 
times, deliber glide into it, and appar amalgam with 
it. the twelv member from the audienc who were within a few feet of 
the alleg ether body, as it walk past them, declar they saw 
it most vividly, and that featur for feature, detail for detail, it 
wa the exact counterpart of mr. curtis, whose materi bodi remain 
standing, upright and motionless, with it eye tightli closed. our 
repres question sever of these eye-wit veri closely, 
and they were all most emphat in their belief that what they had 
seen wa a _bona-fide_ case of spiritu projection. At the request of 
a larg part of the audience, mr. curti repeat hi demonstration, a 
further complement of men from the stall join those alreadi on the 
stage to wit the operation. 

sever test were now appli to the ether bodi of mr. curtis, as 
it walk round hi materi body. one man, clutch at it sleeve, 
tri to detain it, but hi hand pass through the sleeve, and 
held--nothing. anoth man put out an arm to act as a barrier, and the 
projection, without swerv from it course, pass right through it; 
and, on the complet of the third round, disappear as before. 

In answer to inquiries, mr. curti state that the phenomenon might be 
taken as a good illustr of projections; and that he wa prepar 
to project himself onc again, in order to prove that it wa erron 
to suppos that phantasm could not do all manner of physic actions. 
A deal tabl (upon which stood a tumbler and jug of water), a 
grandfath clock, and a piano were brought on to the stage, and mr. 
curti onc again project hi spirit form. the latter at onc walk 
to the table, and, take up the tumbler, fill it with water from 
the jug; after which it wound up the clock, and, sit down on a 
seat in front of the piano, play "killarney" and "the star-spangl 
banner." and then, amidst the wildest applause--th first time 
assuredli "a ghost" ha ever receiv public plaudit in recognit 
of it services--it modestli re-ent it physic home. 

mr. curti then announc that not onli could he project hi ether 
bodi from hi materi bodi in the manner he had alreadi demonstrated, 
but that with hi ether bodi he could amalgam with inorgan 
matter. He bade those on the stage approach the tabl in conveni 
numbers, _i.e._ two or three at a time, and listen attentively. He 
then took hi stand on one side of the stage, about fourteen feet from 
the table; and the audienc approach the tabl and listen 
attentively, first of all heard it pulsat as with the throb of a 
heart, and then breath with the deep and heavi respir of some 
one in a sound sleep. the tabl then rais itself some three or four 
inch from the ground and move round the stage; at the conclus of 
which feat mr. curti inform the audienc that "table-turning"--when 
not accomplish through the trickeri of one of the sitters--wa 
frequent perform by the work of some earth-bound spirit--usu 
an elemental--that could amalgam with ani piec of furniture, in 
precis the same way as hi own project had amalgam with the 
tabl in front of them. "elementals," mr. curti continued, "are 
respons for mani of the foolish and purposeless trick perform 
at séances; and for the unintellig and useless kind of answer the 
tabl so often rap out. the best you can hope for, from an elemental, 
is amusement--it will never give you ani reliabl information; nor 
will it ever do you ani good." 

with these word mr. curtis' share in the entertain concluded. He 
retir to the wings, whilst mr. kelson step forward--beg those 
sever gentlemen who, on mr. curtis' exit, had reseat themselv 
among the audience, onc again to step up on to the stage. 

"be good enough," he said address them in hi most polit manner, 
"to observ me veri closely. I am about to give you a few further 
exampl of what intens mental concentr can do, thu prove to 
you to what an unlimit extent mind can gain dominion over matter. 
you all know that will-pow can overcom ani of the intern physic 
forces; for instance, when you have tooth or ear ache--y have onli 
to say to yourselves: 'I shan't suffer'--and the suffer ceases. but 
what you may not know--what you may not have realized, is that 
will-pow can over-rul extern forc and principles--a for 
example--gravity. As a matter of fact, airship and aeroplan are 
absolut superfluous--and the time, money and labour they involv is 
a prodigi waste. ani man with strong mental capac can fli 
without the aid of mechanism. He ha onli to will himself to be in the 
air--and he is there. look!" and to the amazement--th indescribable, 
unparallel amazement--of all present, mr. kelson knit hi brows, as 
if engag in intens thought, and, jump off hi feet, remain in 
the air, at a height of some four feet from the floor. 

At hi request member of the audienc came up to him, and pass 
their hand under, over and all around him, to make sure there were no 
wires. He then struck out with hi hand and leg after the manner of 
a swimmer, and move first of all round the stage, and then over the 
stall and pit, gradual ascend higher and higher, till he reach 
the level of the boxes, to the occup of which he spoke. 

such an extraordinari spectacle--which appar give the lie to all 
our preconceiv notion of gravity--ha certainli never befor been 
witnessed, and the effect it had on those who saw it, baffl 
description. when mr. kelson return to the stage, and the terrif 
applaus that greet hi arriv there had subsided, he gave the 
audienc a few valuabl hint as to how they, too, might accomplish 
thi feat. 

"practis concentration," he said, "and develop your will power, if 
onli by a veri little, everi day. jump off a stool to begin with, 
say to yourself as you do so: 'I will remain in the air. I won't 
touch the ground,'--and though you may fail for the hundredth time, if 
onli you keep on tri you will eventu succeed. To keep your 
equilibrium on a bicycl is a feat which would have been pronounc 
utterli imposs by your ancestor of two hundr year ago; but 
just as that power came to you--aft mani futil efforts, all at 
once--so, in the end, will fli come to you. see, I am now go to 
rise to the highest point in the building. graviti pull me back, but 
I say to myself: 'I will rise--i will fli there'--and fli there I 
do!"--and, spring off the ground, he struck out with hi arm and 
legs, flew swiftli and easili to the dome of the hall, which he 
touched--and then flew back again to the stage. 

thi complet the evening' entertainment. If onli on the strength of 
it first performance, the modern sorceri company, in our opinion, ha 
more than justifi it name; and although we understand they will 
give no more perform gratis, we feel confid in prophesi 
that, for mani a long night, there will be no fall off in the 
attendance. 




chapter xiv 

shiel TO the rescu 


gladi did not feel too happi when she read notic such as these; she 
could not do other than see in them destruct to her father, and the 
worst of it all wa she could do noth to help him. who could? who 
could possibl invent anyth as wonder as the marvel of the 
modern sorceri compani ltd.? and yet unless john martin gave up 
altogether, that is what he must do. nay, he must do more--h must not 
onli equal the modern sorceri company' marvels, he must eclips them. 
but after the affair of the challenge, it seem to gladi that there 
wa no help for it--th hall would have to be close for a time. now 
that dick davenport wa dead, there wa no one to take her father' 
place. On the night succeed the catastrophe, she had persuad one 
of the indian attend to undertak the rôle of operator, but hi 
skill wa not equal to the tax upon it, and the audience--a poor 
one--wa veri lukewarm in it applause. the follow day she talk 
the matter over with her father. the latter wa in favour of keep 
the show on at ani cost; gladys, for close it temporarily. 

"A bad perform is wors than no performance," she said, "much 
better to close till you have invent some new tricks." 

john martin groaned. "I fear my day of invent are over," he 
muttered. "if I can read the paper and write letters, that will be 
about as much as I shall be abl to do." 

"couldn't you retire?" 

"I would if I were not a britisher," john martin replied, "but be a 
british i'd sooner shoot myself than give in to a d----d yank!" 

and gladys, in terror lest her father should over-excit himself, 
promis she would see that the entertain wa carri on as usual, 
and that the indian continu in the rôle of operator. 

but when out of her father' presence, gladi gave way to despair. how 
could she--a woman--hop to cope with such a difficult situation? and 
she wa rack her brain to know how to act for the best, when shiel 
wa announced. 

A wave of relief swept over her. she could explain her difficulti to 
shiel, in a way that she could not to ani one who had no knowledg at 
all of her father' affairs--and she told him just how matter stood. 

"look here!" he exclaimed, when she had finished, "whi not let me take 
your father' place at the kingsway? I have done a littl amateur 
acting, and am not nervou at the thought of appear in public. your 
father confid in you so much--you must know all hi trick by 
heart--couldn't you coach me!" 

gladi look at him critically. 

"it wouldn't be half a bad idea," she said. "suppos you come with 
me to the hall, I can explain the trick better if I show you the 
apparatu at the same time." 

shiel thoroughli enjoy that journey up to town. He knew it wa wrong 
of him to think of hi own pleasure, when the affair of hi companion 
were in such a critic condition. He knew he ought not to look at her 
in the way he did--a if she wa the most preciou thing in the world, 
and he would give her hi soul if she want it--h knew that he--a 
penniless artist without ani prospects--had no right to behav thus. 
but her beauti appeal to him with a forc he wa entir incap 
of resisting, and he went on look at her in the way he knew he 
ought not to look at her, simpli becaus he couldn't help it. 

He lunch with her at her club in dover street, and then they taxi 
to the kingsway. 

the door-keeper, the onli live creatur in the building, save 
themselves, seem to share in the gener depress hang over 
everything--th great, empti front of the hous with it gloomy, 
cavern box and grim, grey gallery--th dark, dismal flies--th 
chilli wings--al hush and still, and impregn with the sens of 
desertion. but with thi man besid her, who, she knew, would do 
anyth he could to help, the place did not look quit so bad to 
gladi as it had done the day before. there wa a ray of light now 
where, before, ebon black had prevailed. 

without delay gladi rang up the indian attend on the telephone, 
and occupi the time prior to their arriv by describ to shiel 
how each of the trick wa done. 

her pupil prove far more abl than she had anticipated. after sever 
rehears he wa abl to go through the whole perform without a 
hitch. 

when they had finished, gladi stretch out her hand impulsively. "I 
don't know how to thank you enough," she said. "you are a brick, and 
if onli you do half as well thi even as you have done now, we 
shall get on swimmingly--that is to say, as well as we can expect, 
until we can arrang a fresh programme. If onli you were an inventor!" 

"if onli I were. If onli I had money!" 

"why, what would you do?" gladi ask curiously. 

"give it to you! give you everi halfpenni of it!--but as I haven't 
any, I mean to give you all the energi I possess instead." 

"whi me? My father you mean!" 

"no, you!" shiel said impulsively, "both of you if you prefer it, but 
you first." 

"me first! that doesn't seem veri lucid--but I can't stay to hear an 
explan now, for if I miss the four-thirti train I shall miss my 
dinner, which would inde be a calamity!" and slip on her gloves, 
she hurri off, forbid shiel to escort her further. 

left to himself, shiel stroll along the strand into the victoria 
gardens, where he bought an even paper, and sat down to read it. 
the first thing that caught hi eye was-- 

"magic IN london" 

"thi morn the west end receiv a shock. about twelv o'clock, 
a gentleman, fashion dressed, turn into bond street from 
piccadilly, and when opposit messrs. truefitt' prepar to cross 
over. the street happen just then to be block by a long line 
of taxis. the gentleman, however, had no intent of wait till 
they had passed. measur the distanc from one pavement to the 
other with hi eyes, he jump about fifteen feet into the air and 
clear the interven space without the slightest appar 
effort--a feat that liter paralys with astonish all who 
beheld it. On be remonstr with by a policeman, who wa 
highli perplex as to whether such extraordinari conduct 
constitut a breach of the peac or not, the gentleman calmli 
leap over the policeman' head, and strike out with arm and 
leg swam through the air. 

"continu in thi fashion, the cynosur of all eyes--even the 
traffic be suspend to watch him--h pass along bond street 
into oxford street, where he onc more alight on hi feet. On 
be question by a repres of the press, it transpir 
he wa mr. kelson, one of the partner in the modern sorceri 
compani ltd., whose wonder perform at their hall, in 
cockspur street, have alreadi been report in these columns." 

"I should well like to know how that fli trick is done," shiel said 
to himself. "accord to kelson it is entir a question of will 
power. i'll see if I can't develop my concentr faculti and 
introduc a few of the same perform in our show. i'll go to the 
hall and tri them now." 

but hi preliminari effort were certainli far from successful. He 
jump off chair say to himself, "i'll fly! I will fly," and he 
struck out heroic each time, but the result wa alway the 
same--grav conquered--h fell. 

had he not been so much in love with gladys, he would have desisted; 
as it was, the more he bump and bruis himself, the more determin 
he wa to go on trying. In fact, fli with him becam a mania; and 
accord to the daili journals, hi wa by no mean the onli case. 
all over england peopl were tri to fly. An old lady, in gipsi 
hill, appear in the polic court to answer a charg of caus 
annoy to her neighbour by practis flying, from off her bed, at 
night. her bulk be larg and her will power appar small, she 
yield to graviti and land on the ground with prodigi bumps, 
which set everyth in the room vibrating, and which could be plainli 
heard in the adjoin houses, through the thin brick wall on either 
side of her room. 

An old gentleman in guilsborough had an extrem narrow escape. be 
warn on no account to practis fli in the hous or garden, lest 
hi grandchildren should see him and want to do the same, he retir 
to the seclus of an old, disus and dilapid coach house. here, 
in the upper storey, he practis by the hour together. He climb on 
to a stool which he had taken there for the purpose, and when he 
fanci he had acquir the right amount of concentration, he sprang 
into the air, arriving, presum through want of will power, on the 
floor. for two whole day he practised--bump--bump--bump--and the more 
he bumped, the more he persevered. At last, however, the floor gave 
way, and with loud cri of "I will! I will!" he fell on the ground 
floor, ten feet below! He wa unabl to go on experimenting, owe to 
a broken leg and a fractur collar-bone. 

In aylsham, norfolk, there had been a perfect epidem among the 
children for tri aeron gravity. rudolph crabbe, age five, after 
listen to an account of the perform at the modern sorceri 
company' hall, which hi father had read aloud, sprang off the 
dining-room tabl cri out "I will fly! I will stay in the air." 
fortunately, he fell on the tabbi cat, which somewhat broke the shock 
of concussion, and he escap unhurt. 

In colleg road, clifton, bristol, an octogenarian think he would 
add novelti to the jubile celebr at the college, leap off the 
roof of hi house, crying, "i'll fli over the close! I will fli over 
the close!"--and broke hi neck. 

In st. ives, cornwall, where the treatment of anim is none too 
humane, a fisher-boy threw a visitor' pomeranian over the malakoff 
saying, "you shall fly! you shall remain in the air;" whilst at bath a 
girl of ten, snatch her babi brother from the perambulator, leap 
over beechen cliff, call out, "we will fli together! We will fli 
together!" 

these are onli a few of the mani similar case shiel read in the 
paper, and which he narrat afterward to gladi martin. 

"I am quit convinced," gladi said, "that kelson doe hi fli 
through supernatur agency. hi assert that it can be done through 
mere will power, is sheer humbug. It wouldn't be a bad idea to consult 
a clairvoyant. what do you think?" 

shiel thought it wa an excel suggestion. He saw in it an 
opportun of spend yet anoth afternoon in gladys' company, and 
ask her to go with him to an occultist the veri next day. when she 
assented, the pleasur of it tingl through everi pore of hi skin. 
Of course, gladi assur herself there wa no harm in her accept 
of shiel' escort--that neither he nor she meant anyth by it--that 
it wa on her part mere a sort of an acknowledg that he had been 
aw good to her in her present predicament. besides, if she need 
further excuse, she had no reason for suppos shiel to be in love 
with her--and had her father not spoken to her about it, she would not 
have remark anyth differ in hi glances, from the glances--for 
the time being, perhaps, earnest enough--bestow upon her by other 
young men; which excuse, was, certainly, in gladys' case, a more or 
less honest one. 

they had some difficulti in select a psychometrist--so numer 
were those who advertised, in an equal allur manner--but they at 
length decid in favour of madam elvita, whose consult room were 
in new bond street. when they arriv there, madam elvita was, of 
course, engaged. shiel wa delighted--it gave him an extra half-hour 
with gladys. when madam wa free, she had much to tell them. first of 
all she spoke to them of karmas, kamadevas, rupadevas, vital 
shells, ether doubles, the nermanakaya, and afterward solemnli 
announc that she must relaps into a state of clairvoyance, in order 
to get in touch with tilli toot, a certain spirit from whom she could 
learn all that gladi and shiel want to know. accordingly, in the 
manner of most other two-guinea clairvoyants, she compos herself in 
a grace and recumb attitude, made a lot of queer grimac and 
still queerer noises, and spoke in a falsetto voice, which purpos to 
be that of tilli toot, onc a barmaid in edinburgh, now one of 
madame' familiar spirits. and the gist of what "tillie" told them wa 
that hamar & co. deriv their power from black magic; and that the 
secret thereof could onli be learn from madame, after a seri of 
sit with her--sit for which madam would onli requir a fee 
of fifti guineas: a most moderate, in fact quit trifling, sum, 
consid the wonder instruct they would receive. 

but madame' magnanim offer tempt neither gladi nor shiel; and 
they abruptli took their departure. 

kateroski (_née_ jones) in regent street, whom gladi and shiel had 
agre to consult in the event of a non-success visit to madam 
elvita in bond street, also told them that black magic wa the key to 
hamar, curti & kelson' performances. she advis them to get on the 
astral plane, where they would meet spirit who would give them all 
the inform they desired. 

madam kateroski' instruct were simple. "it is realli a matter of 
faith," she said. "all you have to do is to go to some seclud 
spot--th privaci of your bedroom will do admirably--sit down, close 
your eyes, look into your lid and concentr hard. after a while you 
will no longer see your eyelids--your lid will fade away and you will 
be on the astral plane, and see strang creatures, which, although 
terrifying, won't harm you. when you get use to them, you will 
commun with them, and learn from them all you want to know." 

"shall we try?" gladi remark laughingli to shiel, as they step 
into the street. "but if faith is essenti to success, I fear 
failure, as far as I am concerned, is a foregon conclusion. I know I 
shouldn't have suffici faith." 

"nor I either," shiel said. "but, perhaps, we could acquir a 
necessari amount of it, if we were to experi together. suppos 
we tri in that delight seclud cops in your garden." 

gladi shook her head. "i'm afraid it would be useless. besides, if my 
father were to hear of it, he would fear worri had turn my brain, 
and most like have anoth fit. no, we must think of someth more 
practical. In the meanwhile, if you will keep on with the part, you 
have so gener undertaken, you will be do me an inestim 
service." 

"then i'll keep on with it for ever," shiel replied, and befor she 
could stop him, he had kiss her hand. 




chapter XV 

how hamar, curti and kelson enter the astral plane 


In order to explain the manner in which hamar, kelson and curti were 
initi into their new properties, I must now go back to the day 
preced the grati perform of the modern sorceri company, that 
is to say the last day of stage one of the compact. 

To kelson the day had been one of surpris throughout. when he 
arriv at the build in cockspur street (he prefer live alone, 
and, consequently, rent a handsom suit of room in john street, 
mayfair), he wa not a littl astonish to meet lilian rosenberg on 
the staircase. 

"I thank you so much!" she exclaimed, shake hand with him most 
effusively. "it is all owe to you I got the post." 

"then hamar ha engag you," kelson ejaculated. 

"why, yes! didn't you know!" lilian said with a smile. "I had a letter 
from him the veri even of the day I call here." 

"did you! He never told me anyth about it! how do you think you 
will get on?" 

"oh, splendidly! the work is interest and full of variety. 
moreover, I like the atmospher of the place, it is so weird. I 
believ the three of you realli are magicians!" 

"if that be so," kelson said, "then we have onli act in accord 
with our charact in engag the servic of a witch--a witch who 
ha alreadi bewitch one member of the trio. now pleas don't go to 
the expens of lunch out: lunch with me instead. lunch with me 
everi day." 

"it is veri kind of you," lilian rosenberg replied, "and I will gladli 
do so when I am not lunch with mr. hamar. but he ha invit me to 
have all my meal with him." 

"that doesn't mean you are oblig to have them with him everi day!" 
kelson cried. "lunch with me thi morning." 

"I am veri sorry," lilian rosenberg replied, look at kelson with 
mock plead eyes, "pleas don't scold me, but i'v realli promis 
mr. hamar." 

"have tea with me, then," kelson said. 

"i'v promis him that, too." 

"supper then!" kelson said, savagely. 

"i'm aw sorry, but i'm engag all thi evening, and practic 
everi evening." 

"with mr. hamar?" kelson ask suspiciously. 

"oh no! my own privat business," lilian rosenberg replied. "do 
forgiv me. I should so like to have been abl to accept your 
invitation. now I must hurri back to my work," and she gave him her 
hand, which kelson held, and would have gone on hold all the 
morning, had he not heard hamar' well-known tread ascend the 
stairs. 

"look here!" he said, as they enter hi room together, "I want miss 
rosenberg to have luncheon with me one day thi week, and she tell me 
you have alreadi invit her. let her come with me to-morrow." 

"it is impossible," hamar said. "now i'll tell you what it is, matt, I 
anticip thi the moment I saw you two together, and it got to 
stop. you would genuin fall in love with that girl--or as a matter 
of fact ani other pretti girl--if you saw much of her--and love, I 
tell you, would be absolut disastr to our interests. you must 
let her alone--absolut alone, I tell you. I have given her strict 
order she is to confin herself to her work, and to me." 

"I think you take a great deal too much on yourself. I shall see just 
as much of miss rosenberg, when she is disengaged, as I please." 

"then she never shall be disengaged. but come, do be sane and put some 
restraint on thi mad infatu of your for pretti faces. can't you 
keep it in check anyhow for two years--til after the term of the 
compact ha expired! then you will be free to indulg in it, to your 
heart' content. for heaven' sake, be guid by me. harmoni between 
us must be kept at all costs. don't you understand?" 

"oh, yes! I understand all right," kelson said, "and i'll try. but 
it' veri hard--and I realli don't see there would be ani danger in my 
take her out occasionally." 

"well, I do," hamar replied, "and there' an end. To turn to someth 
that may spell business. just befor I got up thi morn I saw a 
stripe figur bend over me!" 

"A stripe figure?" 

"yes! A cylindr figure, about seven feet high, without ani visibl 
limbs; but which gave me the impress it had limbs--of a sort--if it 
care to show them." 

"you were frightened?" 

"naturally! So would you have been. It didn't speak, but in some 
indefin manner it convey to me the purport of it visit. 
to-night, at twelv o'clock, we are to go to the hous of a hindu, 
call karaver, in berner street, where we shall be initi into 
the second stage of our compact." 

"I hope to good we shan't see ani spectral tree or stripe 
figures--i'v had enough of them," kelson said. 

"then take care you don't do anyth that might lead to the break 
of the compact," hamar retorted, "otherwis you'll see someth far 
worse." 

shortli befor midnight, hamar, curti and kelson, obey the 
injunct hamar had received, set off to berner street, where they 
had littl difficulti in find karaver' house. 

To their astonish karav wa expect them. 

"how did you know we were coming," curti asked. 

"A gentleman call here earli thi morn and told me," karav 
explained. "he said three friend of hi particularli wish to be on 
the astral plane, at twelv o'clock thi evening, and that they would 
each pay me a hundr guineas, if I would show them how to get there. 
I demurred. the secret that have come down to me through gener 
of my cashmer ancestors, I tell onli to a chosen few--thos born 
under the sign of dejellum brava. 

"the stranger show me the sign--written plainer than I have ever 
seen it--in the palm of hi hand, I at onc consented, and I had no 
sooner done so than he vanished. I knew then that I had been speak 
to an elemental--a spirit of my nativ mountains." 

"mi nerv are not in a condit to stand much. Is there anyth 
veri alarm in thi astral business?" kelson asked. 

"it depend on what you call alarming," the indian said coldly. "I 
shouldn't be alarmed." 

"don't be a fool, matt," hamar interposed. "I never saw such a 
frighten idiot in my life. you ought to be asham of yourself. 
think of what there is at stake." 

"think of lilian rosenberg," curti whispered, "and be comforted." 

karav took them upstair into a dimli light attic. In the centr 
of the carpetless floor wa a tripod, around which the three were told 
to sit. karav then proceed to pour into an iron vessel a mixtur 
compos of: 1/2 oz. of hemlock, 3/4 oz. of henbane, 2 oz. of opium, 1 
oz. of mandrak roots, 2 oz. of poppi seeds, 1/2 oz. of assafoetida, 
and 1/4 oz. of saffron. 

"are these prepar absolut necessary?" kelson asked. 

"absolutely," karav said. "english clairvoy will, doubtless, 
tell you they are not necessary. It is their custom, with a few 
slipshod instructions, to lead you to suppos that get on the 
astral plane is mere child' play. It is not! It is extrem 
difficult and can onli be done, in the first place, through the 
guidanc of a skill orient occultist." 

He then took a sword, and with it make the sign of a triangl in the 
air, afterward scratch a triangl on the floor, over which, in red 
chalk, he superscrib a tree, an eye, and a hand. then he heat the 
mixtur in the iron vessel over an oil stove. As soon as fume aros 
from it, he place it on the tripod, crying, "great spirit of the 
mountains, river and bowel of the earth, invest me with the heavi 
seal, in order that I may conduct these three seeker after knowledg 
to the realm of thi etern phantoms." 

immedi after thi orat karaver, dip a twig of hazel in the 
fumigation, wave it north, south, east and west cri "give me 
authority! give me ka-ta-la-derany;" and then kneel down in front 
of the brazier, in a drone voic repeat these words: 

"green phantom figur of the air, 
A readi welcom see that you prepare. 
black phantom figur from the earth, 
Of friendli salut see there is no dearth. 
red phantom figur of the furiou fire, 
for kindli greet chang your usual ire. 
grey, grizzli googi from the wood and dells, 
To gentl whisper chang your harrow yells. 
flagae, devas, mara rupas,[19] hie to the plane, the astral plane, 
and to these three poor fools, explain, explain 
the secret that they wish to learn, to learn!" 

the mixtur in the iron vessel wa now give off such dens fume that 
hamar, curti and kelson felt their sens slowli eb away. the 
dark, lith form of karaver, hi swarthi face and gleam teeth 
reced farther and farther into the background, whilst hi voic 
appear to grow fainter and fainter. they were dimli consciou that 
he spray them all over with some sweet-smel scent,[20] and that 
he whisper (in realiti he spoke in hi normal tones) these words: 
"darkona--droomer--doober--parlar--poohmer--perler. a--ta-rama-- 
skatarinek--ook--drooksi--noomig--viartikorsa."[21] then there came a 
temporari blank, which wa broken by a sudden burst of light. the 
light, at first, wa so blind that they involuntarili close their 
eyes. It wa quit differ to ani light they had been accustom 
to--it wa far more vivid, and wa in a perpetu state of vibration. 
when they had got suffici use to thi dazzl effect to keep 
their eye open, they becam awar that they were standing, appar 
on nothing, that the atmospher wa not compos of air such as they 
knew, but of an indescrib someth that render the act of 
breath wholli unnecessary, and that all around them wa no ground, 
no scenery, but only--space! 

they had bare finish remark on these facts, when there suddenli 
glide across their vision, forms--of everi conceiv shape, _i.e._, 
those resembl corps of human be and animals, with bloodless 
faces, glassi eye and stiff limbs--som appar just dead and 
other in an advanc state of decomposition, all possess and 
propel by imperson elementals; phantom of actual earthbound 
people--misers, murderers, etc., sever of whom approach the trio 
and tri to peer into their faces. 

"for heaven' sake keep off!" kelson shrieked, as the vibrat form 
of an epilept imbecile, with protrud blue eye and pimpli cheeks, 
came up to him, and thrust it face into his. 

"thi is a bit thick," hamar said, vainli attempt to elud the 
phantom of a short, stout woman with a big head and purpl face, who, 
put out a larg black, swollen tongue, leer at him. 

"curs you! d--n you!" curti screamed, throw out hi hand in a 
vain endeavour to beat off the phantom of two idiot boys, who were 
tri to bite him with their loose, dribbl mouths. "A littl more 
of this, and I shall go mad!" 

see a tall, grey phantom with a man' bodi and wolf' head bound 
up to them, kelson would have run away, had not hamar, whose presenc 
of mind never quit desert him, grip him by the arm. "if you 
leav us, matt," he said, "we are lost. I feel our safeti depend on 
our keep together. If i'm not mistaken thi is a cun dodg on 
the part of the unknown to separ us. If that happens, I feel we may 
never get back to our bodies--and the compact will then be broken. We 
must hang on to each other at all costs." So saying, he slip hi 
free arm through that of curtis, and the three stood link together. 

hamar clung on to the other two, until hi hand grew numb, and 
the sweat stood on hi chest and forehead in great beads. As figur 
after figur stealthili and noiselessli approach them, kelson and 
curti writh and shrieked; and, at times, it seem as if the 
chain must be broken. but alarm as were these harrow type of 
vice-elementals--_i.e._, nude thing with head of beast and bodi of 
men and women; grotesqu heads; malevol eyes; mal-shap hands; 
headless beasts, etc.; none had so danger an effect on the uniti of 
the trio as the allur type of vice-elementals, _i.e._, shape of 
beauti women that smile seduct at kelson, and resort to 
everi devic to entic him away with them. It wa then that hamar wa 
tax to the utmost, that he exhaust voice, strength, and patience, 
in hold kelson back. 

He wa about to give in, when to hi astonish these vice-element 
vanished, and a phantasm, the exact counterpart of karaver, onli much 
taller, appear befor them, and commenc give them instruct 
as to stage two. 

"you," he said, address hamar, "will possess the properti of second 
sight, _i.e._, the power to see, at will, earthbound spirits, 
conditionally, that you fumig your room, for ten minut everi 
night, befor retir to rest, with a mixtur compos of 2 drachm 
of henbane, 3 drachm of saffron, 1/2 oz. of aloes, 1/4 oz. of 
mandrake, 3 drachm of salanum, 2 oz. of assafoetida; that you abstain 
from anim food and wine, and give up smoking; that, three time 
everi day, you bath your face in distil water, to which ha been 
ad three drop of the juic of the whortleberry, one drop of the 
juic of the mountain ash berry, 1 oz. of lavend water, 1 oz. of 
nitre, and 1/2 oz. of tinctur of arnica; and that, just befor go 
to sleep, you look for three minutes, without blinking, at an 
equilater triangle, transcrib in blood, on white paper, and 
compos of these letter and figures." and he hand hamar a piec of 
paper, on which were written these symbols: 

k.t.o.p.i.6.x.7.4.h.i.p.3.s.4.w.v.2.8. 

"so long as you observ these condit the power will remain with 
you. to-morrow, only, it will be award you without ani 
preparations." 

"you," he went on, turn to kelson, "will possess the properti of 
projection, _i.e._, the power of leav your body, and of visiting, 
where you will, on the materi plane. you will continu to possess 
the same, conditionally, that you carri out the same rule as leon 
hamar, with the except that, instead of look at a triangl 
befor go to sleep, you will repeat these words. see, I have 
written them down for you." and he hand kelson a slip of paper, on 
which were transcrib "darkona, droomer, doober, parlar, poohmer, 
perler. a--ta--rama--skatarinek--ook--drooksi--noomeg--viartikorsa." 

"you," he said, turn to curtis, "will be endow with the properti 
of overcom gravity, _i.e._, you will be abl to fly, to jump great 
heights, and to lift and move prodigi weights; and thi properti 
will remain in your possess dure the prescrib period, provid 
you abstain from all anim food, from smoke and from drink 
alcohol; and observ the same rule with regard to fumig your 
sleep apartment, and bath your face, as hamar and kelson. but, 
always, befor you attempt to fli or to jump, it will be necessari for 
you to set in motion certain vibrations, in the ether, that counteract 
the attract of gravity. you must repeat the word 'karjako 
mandarbsa guahseela,' which I have written on thi blue paper; and 
when you want to move or lift objects, you must first repeat the word 
'perabibo henlile oko-kokotse,' which I have written on thi green 
paper. gravity, as you will see, is entir depend on sound--sound 
can move mountains. It did so in atlantis, it did so in egypt." 

make the sign of a triangle, an eye, and a tree in the air, with the 
forefing of hi left hand, he slowli repeat the word 
"barjakva--ookpoota--trylisa." and the conclud syllabl wa no 
sooner uttered, than the trio found themselv stand in berner 
street. but of karaver' house--th hous they had just quitted--ther 
wa no trace. 


footnotes: 

[footnot 19: accord to brahmin teach there are seven 
main class of spirits; some have innumer sub-divisions. 
they are-- 

1. arrippa devas, with forms. 

2. arrippa devas, without forms. (both class 1 and 2 are 
intelligent, sixth principl of certain planets. I style them 
planetians, and classifi them with all other spirit hail from 
jupit neptune, etc.) 

3. mara rupa (ident with vice-elementals). 

4. pisachas, _i.e._ male and femal elementaries. (I have term 
them imperson elementals, sinc they consist of the astral 
form of the dead, that may be util by elementals.) 

5. asuras, _i.e._ gnomes, pixies, etc. (correspond to those 
I have design vagrarian elementals.) 

6. monstrosities. (these I includ among vice-element and 
vagrarians.) 

7. kaksasas, viz. soul of wizards, witches, and of clever peopl 
with evil tendencies, scientist with cruel or harsh 
tendencies--such as vivisectionist and sophists. all these come 
under my divis of "earthbound phantasm of the dead"--spirit 
tie to thi earth by passion or vices; and I should add to the 
list--milit suffragettes, strike agitators, hooligans, apaches, 
pseudo-humanitarians, religi bigots, misers, all peopl 
obsess with manias, idiots, epilept imbecil and crimin 
lunatics. all such may at time be encount on the lowest 
spiritu plane.] 

[footnot 20: compos of 2 drachm of myrrh, 1/2 oz. of sweet oil, 
2 oz. of attar of roses, 1/2 oz. heliotrop and 1/4 oz. of musk.] 

[footnot 21: these word are so arrang as to set in vibrat and 
loosen the atmosphere, that keep the spirit incarcer in the 
physic body, and so set the latter free.] 




chapter xvi 

hamar make advanc 


the doctor had state that the tenth day would see the crisi of john 
martin' illness; if he could tide over that period, he might go on 
for year without anoth attack. when the moment day arrived, 
gladi wa simpli eat her heart out with suspense. not a sound wa 
permit in the house. the servants, tipto about, hardli ventur 
even to exchang glances; the errand boy were waylaid and sent to the 
right-about, with a vagu notion that if they open their mouth 
their head would be off; and some one wa post at the garden gate 
to deal, in a scarc less summari manner, with visitors. indeed, so 
fear wa gladi lest her father should hear shiel, who had manag 
to elud her outpost, that without mean it, she greet him curtly, 
and, more plainli than politely, gave him to understand that she 
wish him elsewhere. 

"what have you been say to shiel davenport?" miss templeton ask 
gladys, when they met at lunch. "I pass him in the road just now, 
and he look so wretch that, despit hi ineligibility, I felt 
quit sorri for him. I am sure he is veri much in love with you." 

"nonsense," gladi said, "he is onli a boy." but boy though it pleas 
her to call him, she knew that he had play a man' part dure her 
father' illness. everi night he had faith perform the rôle, 
she had allot to him, at the kingsway hall, and upon him she wa 
forc to admit the success of the entertainment, in a larg measure, 
depended. without push himself, or be the least bit officious, 
he had been equal help behind the scenes. He had held in check 
all those who, take advantag of her father' absence, were dispos 
to disput her author and shirk their work--and he had also, on her 
behalf, success resist their demand for higher wages. and, over 
and abov all this, he had alway consid her person comfort. her 
meals--which she could never bother about for herself, when engag 
all day at the hall--were, thank to him, brought to her as 
punctually, and serv as daintily, as they would have been for her 
father; he had taken everi care that she should not be disturb when 
resting; and there was, in short, noth he had not thought of do 
to lighten the load, so unexpectedli laid upon her shoulders. the onli 
fault she could find with him, wa that he had not gain the good 
grace of her father. 

the day slowli waned. gladi had stolen into her father' room 
repeatedli to see how he fared, and to her hi condit had seem 
much about the same--h wa as usual tire and peevish. but when, at 
six o'clock, she again stole in to peep at him, and found him lie 
back on hi pillow absolut still and motionless, and without 
appar breathing, she wa immeasur shocked. had he had anoth 
fit, or wa he dead? wild with grief and terror, she rush from the 
room to telephon to the doctor, and met him on the landing. 

"you need have no fear," he said to her the moment he had look at 
john martin, "he is sound asleep, and, when he awakes, the crisi will 
be past. to-morrow, he may go out for a bit, and, in a week, he will 
be himself again. onli you must take care that he doe not use hi 
brain too much." 

gladi could hardli restrain her delight. she felt pleas with 
everyth and everybody; and her greet of shiel, some two hour 
later, at the theatre, almost turn hi brain. In fact it wa owe 
to thi pleasant surprise, that he made one or two stupid mistak in 
hi performance, and wa sharpli pull back to earth by the iron 
laughter of the audience. when the entertain wa over, and he wa 
prepar to accompani gladi as usual to her motor, the thought of 
her sparkl eye and anim featur again overcam him. 

"what shall you advis your father to do?" he asked. 

"I think he ought to lose no time in get a partner," gladi 
replied, "some one who can attend to the busi side of the concern 
for him. It is essenti he should not be worri with figures." 

"I suppos my servic won't be requir much longer?" shiel said, 
speak with rather an effort. 

"of cours I can't answer for my father," gladi replied, "but I 
should imagin he would be onli too glad to employ you. the onli thing 
is the salary. you can't live on air, you know, and with the poor 
attend he get now, I don't see how he can afford to pay much." 

"I would work for veri little," shiel said. "I should be aw sorri 
to give up now. I wonder if you would miss me at all?" 

"of cours I should!" gladi retorted. "you have behav admirably, 
and I am most grate to you." 

"you needn't be grate to me. I have never enjoy anyth half so 
much as I have tri to help you. I am poor, penniless in fact, sinc 
my uncl left me nothing, but supposing--suppos I were to get some 
lucr post, do you think--do you think there would ever be ani 
possibl of--" 

"of what?" 

"of your care for me! I am terribl in love with you." 

"I fear I must have given you encouragement," gladi said. "i'm 
aw sorry. you see I never thought of this, and I don't know what 
to say to you." 

"won't you give me a chance, just a chance?" 

"but my father would never hear of it. unfortun he seem to be 
prejud against you. won't you wait a while, and then, if you are 
still in the same mind, speak to me again in--say--a year. By that 
time you will, no doubt, have made some sort of a posit for 
yourself." 

"and in the meanwhil you will get engag to some one else," shiel 
exclaimed. 

"I don't think I shall," gladi said. "of course, I meet crowd of 
men, but you see I am not the marri sort." 

"do you think you would care for me just a bit?" shiel ask eagerly. 

"A tiny, tini bit, perhaps," gladi said, "but i'm not at all sure. I 
can think of no one now but my father, so that if you valu my good 
opinion, or realli want to prove your devot to me, you must, for 
the time being, devot yourself to him. who knows--it may lie in your 
power to do him some service." 

"I don't see how," shiel replied, somewhat despondingly. "but no 
matter--aft you, your father and your father' affair shall be my 
first consideration. you will let me see you sometimes, won't you?" 

"sometimes," gladi laughed. "good-bye! don't make ani mistak 
to-morrow. your perform to-night wa not as good as usual." and, 
with thi somewhat cruel remark, she step lightli into her motor, 
and drove off. 

shiel now gave way to despair. there are few condit in life so 
utterli unenvi as penuri and love--to be next door to starving, 
and at the same time in love. day after day shiel, who wa thu 
afflicted, had revel in gladys' company, and had intox 
himself with her beauty, fulli awar that for each moment of pleasur 
there would, later on, be a correspond moment of pain. It wa onli 
in romance, he told himself, that the penniless lover suddenli find 
himself in a posit to marry--in reality, hi love suit is reject 
with scorn; hi ador one marri some one who has, or pretend he 
has, limitless wealth; and the despis swain end hi day a 
miser and deject bachelor. 

all the same, shiel determin that he would for onc fare like the 
hero in romance--that he would either win the object of hi affect 
or perish in the attempt; and no sooner did the fit of the blues, 
consequ on the convers just related, wear off, than he set to 
work in grim earnest to discov some mean of break up the modern 
sorceri compani ltd., and of restor to the firm of martin and 
davenport their former prestige. 

In the meanwhile, affair were by no mean stationary, as far as hamar 
and hi colleagu were concerned. the appear of their paper 
_to-morrow_, a morn journal, that chronicl faith everi event 
of the follow day, caus a tremend sensation; and the sale of 
everi other paper sank to nil--no one, naturally, want to buy the 
news that had happen yesterday, when, for the same money, they could 
obtain news of what would happen that veri day. the stupid method of 
chronicl past events, hamar announc in the first issu of hi 
organ, wa now obsolete. It was, perhaps, good enough for the 
victorian era, but it wa utterli out of keep with the present age 
of hourli progress. who, for instance, want to know that at 6 p.m., 
on the preced evening, there had been a big fire in new york? wa 
it not far more to the point for them to learn, for example, that at 2 
p.m., on that veri day, rio de janeiro would be partial destroy by 
an earthquake; that the post offic in king' road, chelsea, would be 
broken into by thieves; that nelson' monument in trafalgar squar 
would be blown up by suffragettes; or someth equal fresh and 
exciting? one cannot get thrills--at least not the right kind of 
thrill in read of what ha alreadi taken place. To say to 
ourselves, or to a friend, "just fancy, we might have been in that 
railway accident," or, in read of a shipwreck "what a merci we did 
not embark after all, is it not?" is not half as enthral as to be 
wonder if, at eleven o'clock that night, when the terrif storm in 
which twenty-six peopl will be kill by lightn in variou part 
of england, we shall be among the fatal number. one is not much move 
to find oneself aliv when a danger is passed, but one doe get 
terribl excit in contempl the risk we are bound to run of 
be killed. within a week, the circul of _to-morrow_ had gone 
up from fifti thousand to ten million, and hamar, inflat with 
success, said to himself, "now I will go and have anoth look at john 
martin." 

when he arrived, gladi wa in the garden. hi stealthi approach had 
given her no chanc to escape. 

"what is your business?" she asked, glanc nervous in the 
direct of the house, and dread lest her father should see hamar 
from hi window. 

"i'v come to see your father," hamar said, hi eye rest 
admiringli on her face and then run leisur over her figure. 
"how is the old gentleman?" 

"he is not well enough to see visitors," gladi said, with absolut 
hauteur. "perhap you will state your busi to me." 

"well! I don't mind if I do!" hamar replied. "let us sit down. it' 
more comfort than standing." and he drop into a seat as he 
spoke. "now i'v been noticing," he went on, "that your show in the 
kingsway is not get on veri well--that there are fewer and fewer 
peopl there everi night, and i'v no doubt it will soon have to dri 
up altogether. we, on the other hand, are do better and better 
everi night, and we shall go on do better--ther is no limit to our 
possibilities. We are worth half a million now--next year, we shall be 
worth ten time that amount!" 

"you are optimistical, at all events," gladi said. 

"I can afford to be," hamar grinned. "now, do you know what we intend 
do befor veri long?" 

"I haven't the least idea, and I am not in the slightest degre 
curious." 

"aren't you? well, you should be, sinc it concern you. We mean to 
buy up the whole of kingsway!" 

"and later on, of course, the whole of regent street!" 

"you are satirical. you are not alarm at the prospect of have me 
for a landlord!" 

"I don't understand you! the hall in kingsway is my father' own 
property." 

"if that is so then you have noth to fear," hamar laughed, "but I 
think it just possibl you are mistaken. At ani rate, i'v been in 
commun with some one style himself the landlord." 

"mi father would have an agreement, anyhow!" gladi said. 

"of course," hamar replied, "and i'v a pretti shrewd idea of the 
term of it. but enough of this--let me come to the point. I intend 
buy the property, and I shall refus to renew your father' lease, 
unless he agre to give me what I want!" 

"of cours a preposter price?" 

"no, you--onli you!" 

"me!" 

"yes! i'v never seen a girl I like more. i'v limitless wealth and 
i'll give you everyth you want--a steam yacht, motors, diamonds, 
anything, everything, and all I ask in return is that you should 
consent to be engag to me on trial--say for fifteen months--just to 
see how we get on! what pretti hand you have." 

and befor gladi could draw them away, he had caught hold of them in 
an iron grasp, and, turn them over, cast admir glanc at the 
slim, white finger with the long, almond-shap and care 
manicur nails. 

"I reckon," he said, "I shall never find ani one prettier all through. 
what do you say?" 

"your proposit is impossible--monstrous! I detest you," gladi 
retorted, her cheek white with anger. "leav go my hand at once, and 
never let me see you again!" 

"I can't promis not to see you again," hamar said, "but i'll let go 
your hand now, for i'm no more a lover of scene than you. I 
anticip a littl fuss at first--it' the way all you women 
have--y are so modest, you don't like to appear too eager to snap up 
a good offer. you'll close with it right enough in the end. i'll call 
again in a few days. By that time you may have chang your mind." 
and, befor she could prevent him, he had again seiz her hand and 
wa kiss it over and over again. 

with an ejacul of the utmost indignation, she sprang away from 
him, and with all the digniti she could assume, walk to the house. 
what becam of him she did not know. some few second later she told 
the garden to see him safe off the premises, but he wa nowher to 
be found. 

A week later, hamar turn up again at the cottage, and, despit the 
vigil of gladi and the servants, caught john martin alone. 

when the latter, at last, came to the end of what had, at first, 
seem an inexhaust stock of invectives, hamar state hi 
propos with mathemat exactitude. 

"I don't believ for one moment my landlord would be such a blackguard 
as to play into your hands," john martin spluttered. 

"oh, yes, he would!" hamar replied. "an englishman will do anyth 
for money, and I am prepar to offer him just twice as much as ani 
one els for your hall. Do you think he will refuse--not he!" 

"but what on earth' your object! you'v ruin me already." 

"your daughter!" hamar cried. "miss gladys! I am prepar to go ani 
length to get her. refus to give her to me and i'll turn you out of 
your hall, i'll torment you with everi kind of insect, i'll plagu you 
with disease, i'll make your life hell. but give her to me--and 
i'll--" 

"but I won't! and I defi you to do your worst, you--you--" and there 
is no know what would have happened, had not gladi suddenli come 
in and drag her father out of the room. 

"how dare you?" she exclaimed, return to the studi to find hamar 
still there. "i'v telephon to the police, and unless you go 
instantli and promis not to come again, I shall give you in charge, 
for annoyance." 

"foolish of you--veri foolish!" hamar said, "when I want to be 
friendly. sooner or later you must give in, so whi not end all thi 
needless unpleas now, and receiv me--if not with open arms--at 
least amicably. you are so aw pretty! I must have just one----" 
but befor he could kiss gladi the polic arrived, and hamar onc 
more retired--with somewhat undignifi haste, and more than a littl 
discomfited. 

On arriv in cockspur street, hamar' temper underw a still 
further trial. kelson, take advantag of hi absence, had gone off 
to tea with lilian rosenberg. 

In ill-suppress fury, he wait till they returned. 

"A word with you, matt," he said, as kelson tri to shuffl past him. 
"so thi is the way you behav when my back is turned. I suppos 
you'v had a good time!" 

"delightful!" 

"and you know the consequences!" 

"onli that i'm look forward to the same thing anoth day." 

"she'll go!" 

"she won't," kelson chuckled. "she is far too valuable. So there, old 
man! A month ago your threat might have held good. It won't now. you 
daren't--y posit daren't part with her--because, if you did so, 
you'd not onli part with a good few of your secrets, but you'd part 
with me." 




chapter xvii 

the cours OF true love 


"what' to be done with matt?" hamar ask curtis, soon after the 
interview just recorded. "he' as sweet on rosensberg as he can be, 
and say if I dismiss her he'll go too!" 

"then don't dismiss her," curti replied. "leav them both alone, 
that' my tip. I don't believ matt' such a fool as to fall in love, 
and i'm quit sure the girl isn't. why, she went to the tivoli with me 
two night ago, and to the empir with anoth fellow the night befor 
that. It isn't in her to stick to one, she would go with ani one who 
would treat her. don't worri your head over that. matt might say 'how 
about leon and gladi martin.'" 

"so he might, but there' no danger there. the girl is deuc 
pretty--splendid eyes, hair, teeth, hand and all that sort of thing, 
and i'v set my heart on a bit of canoodl with her, but as for 
love! well! it' not in my programme." 

"still, stranger thing have happened," curti said. "anyhow, I guess 
you'r both mad and that i'm the onli sane one. give me a ten-cours 
dinner at the savoy, and you may have all the women in london--i don't 
go a cent on them." 

To revert to kelson. from the hour he had first seen lilian rosenberg 
he had becom more and more deepli enamoured. In the hope of meet 
her, he had hung about the hall and passag of the building; had 
never miss an opportun of speak to her, of feast himself on 
the elfish beauti of her face, of squeez her hand, and of tell 
her how much he admir her. 

"you realli mustn't," she said. "mr. hamar ha given me strict order 
to attend to noth but my work." 

"oh, damn hamar!" kelson replied, "if I choos to talk to you it' no 
busi of his. you'v not treat me well. I got you the post, and 
it is I you should go out with, not hamar." 

and in the quiet nook and corners, perch on the window-sill, with 
one eye kept warili on the guard for fear of interruptions, he told 
her hi history--al about himself from the day of hi birth--told her 
about hi parents, hi childhood, hi schooldays, hi hobbi and 
cranks, hi indiscretions, extravagancies, hi carousals, debts, 
flirtations, with just an excus amount of exaggeration. He even 
went so far as to speak of a chronic rheumatism, of a twing of 
hereditari gout, and of a slightli hectic cough with which, he 
suddenli remembered, he had at one time, been troubled. 

"don't you think," lilian rosenberg said, with mock earnestness, "you 
are somewhat rash! have you forgotten that no woman can keep a 
secret--and you are not tell me one secret but many. suppos in a 
fit of thoughtless or absent-mindedness, I were to divulg them! I 
should never forgiv myself." 

"would it distress you so much?" 

"of cours it would. I should be miserable," she laughed. and kelson, 
unabl to restrain himself, seiz her hand and smother them with 
kisses. 

"your finger would look well cover with rings," he said. "I will 
give you some, and you shall come with me and choose. onli on no 
account tell hamar." and he kiss her--not on the hand thi 
time--but the lips. 

hamar saw him. He watch him from behind the angl of the passag 
wall, but he said nothing--at least, noth to kelson. It wa to 
lilian rosenberg he spoke. 

"it is realli not my fault," she said. "I don't encourag him, and if 
you take my advice, you will not interfere, for I am sure at present 
he mean noth serious. He is the sort of man who imagin himself 
in love with everi one he meets. If you prevent him see me, you may 
actual bring about the result you are most anxiou to avoid." 

"i'll risk that," hamar said, "and I absolut forbid you do more 
than mere say good morn to him. It is either that, or you must 
go." 

"well, of cours I will do as you wish," lilian said. "I don't care a 
snap for him; and, after all, you ought to know your own busi 
best! It is onli natur that you should want him to marri some one 
who can bring money into the firm." 

"I don't want him to marri at all, or anyhow, not yet. however, there 
is no necess to discuss that point. We have definit settl the 
line you are to adopt, and that is all I want to speak to you about. 
when next you feel inclin to flirt, come to me, and you shall have 
kiss as well as--rings." 

It wa shortli after thi _tête-à-tête_ that lilian rosenberg wa 
interrupt in her work, by a rap at the door. 

"come in," she called, and a young man entered. 

"I believ a clerk is want here," he explained. "i'v come to appli 
for the situation. can I see mr. hamar?" 

"i'm afraid he' out. there' no one in at present," lilian rosenberg 
replied, eye the stranger critic "if you like to wait awhile, 
you may do so. sit down." she signal to him to take a chair and 
went on typing. 

for some minut the silenc wa unbroken, save for the tap of 
finger and the click of the machine. then she look up, and their 
eye met. 

"it' not pleasant to be out of work," he said. "have you ever 
experienc it?" 

"onc or twice," she said. "and I never wish to again. you don't look 
as if you were much use to offic work." 

"no! i'm an artist; but time are hard with us. the present govern 
ha driven all the money out of the countri and no one buy pictur 
now; so i'm forc to turn my hand to someth else." 

"I love pictures. My father wa an artist." 

"then we have someth in common," the young man said. "would you 
like to see my work? I love show it to peopl who understand 
someth about painting, and are not afraid to criticize." 

"I should like to see it, immensely--though I won't presum to 
criticize." 

"may I inquir your name?" the young man ask eagerly. "mine is shiel 
davenport." 

"and mine--lilian rosenberg," the girl said, with a smile. 

"if I don't get the post, may I write to you sometimes, miss 
rosenberg, and ask you to my studio. I call it a studio, though it' 
realli onli an attic." 

lilian rosenberg nodded. "I shall be delight to come," she said. "I 
am afraid I am veri unconventional." 

there wa no time for further conversation, as hamar enter the room 
at that moment. 

"what do you want?" he ask curtly. 

shiel told him. 

"you'r too late," hamar said. "i'v engag some one. If you'd call 
earlier, there might have been some chanc for you, as you look 
toler intelligent. but it' no use now, so be off." 

As shiel left the room he caught lilian rosenberg look at him; and 
he saw that her eye were full of sympathy. 

the acquaintance, thu begun, ripened. she went to see hi pictures, 
they had tea together, and they spent mani subsequ hour in each 
other' company. and although shiel saw in lilian rosenberg onli a 
rather prepossess girl from whom, after cultiv her 
acquaintance, he wa hope to learn the inner work of the modern 
sorceri compani ltd., with her it wa different. 

In shiel, lilian rosenberg saw the qualiti she had alway been 
seeking--th qualiti she had almost despair of ever finding--and 
which she had so often declar exist onli in fiction. He onli 
interest her, she argued; but she forgot that interest as well as 
piti is akin to love--and that where the former leads, the latter 
almost invari follows. 

"I don't believ you have enough to eat," she said to him one day. 
"you are a perfect shadow. how do you exist if you have no privat 
means?" 

"I just manag to exist, and that is all," shiel laughed, and he spoke 
the truth, hi present state of semi-starv have result from 
the untoward events, which had happen prior to hi applic for 
the post of clerk to the modern sorceri compani ltd., and hi 
subsequ acquaint with lilian rosenberg. 

whilst john martin had been ill, and he had help at the hall in 
king way, he had live well. gladi had taken care he wa paid--not a 
big sum to be sure--but enough to keep him. but directli john martin, 
in spite of gladys' remonstrances, had resum work, shiel had been 
dismissed. 

"I wish I could help you," john martin said to him, "for I realli feel 
grate to you for all you have done, but to tell you the candid 
truth, I can't afford to pay ani salaries. As you know, the receipt 
of the hall are next to nothing; but the expens continu just the 
same--rent, gas, and staff--al heavi items. moreover, at your uncle' 
death, mani of hi creditor put in claim on the firm for 
debts--debt he had incur without either my sanction or 
knowledge--and it ha been a seriou drain on me to pay them off. In 
fact, my financ are now at such a low ebb that I cannot possibl do 
anyth for you. If onli the modern sorceri compani could be clear 
off the scenes." 

"you would, I suppose, feel extrem grate to whoever clear them 
off?" 

"I would," john martin replied, with a signific chuckle. 

"even though it were some one who had not stood veri high in your 
estimation?" 

"even though it were the devil." 

"now, look here, mr. martin," shiel said, tri to appear calm. "I 
will devot all my energi and all my time to your cause--th 
overthrow of the modern sorceri company, if only--if only, in the 
event of my be successful, you will give me some hope of be 
permit to win your daughter." 

"I promis you that hope, and ani other you may see fit to aspir to," 
john martin said, with a grim smile, "sinc there isn't the remotest 
chanc of your succeed in the task you have set yourself. believ 
me, it will take both money and wit to get the better of hamar, 
curti and kelson." 

"anyhow, I have your permiss to try. I shall do my best." 

"you may do what you like," john martin rejoined, "so long as you 
don't talk to me again about gladi till you'v redeem your pledge, 
that is to say, till you'v overthrown the modern sorceri company. In 
the meanwhile, I must ask you to abstain from see her." 

"I am afraid I can't promis that." 

"can't promis that," john martin cried, hi eye suffus with 
sudden passion. "can't you! then damn it, you must. i'm not go to 
have my daughter throw herself away on a penniless puppy. there, curs 
it all, you know what I think of you now--you'r a bumptiou puppy, 
and I swear you shall not come within a mile of her." 

"I shall," shiel retorted, draw himself up to hi full height. "I 
shall see her whenev she will permit me--and sinc she is not at 
home at the present moment, I shall now await her return outsid the 
house, and defi the savag old bull-dog insid it." leav john 
martin too taken aback with astonish to articul a syllable, 
shiel withdrew. 

true to hi word, he wait to see gladys. He pace up and down the 
road in front of the hous from eleven o'clock in the morning, when 
hi interview with john martin had terminated, till eight o'clock in 
the evening, and wa just begin to think he would have to give up 
all hope of see her that day, when she came in sight. 

"really!" she exclaimed, after shiel had explain the situation. "do 
you mean to say you have stay here all day?" 

"of cours I have," shiel answered. "I told your father I would see 
you, and I meant to stay here till I did." 

"and what good ha it done you?" 

"all the good in the world. I shall sleep twice as well for it. i'm 
more in love with you than you think, and I mean to marri you one day. 
My prospect at present are absolut thame embankmentish, but no 
matter, i'v hit upon a capit way of ferret out the secret of 
the modern sorceri company. I shall get employ by them"--and he told 
gladi of the advertis he had seen in the paper. 

"well! I wish you all success," she said, "but i'm afraid you'v upset 
my father dreadfully, and the doctor say excit is the veri worst 
thing for him and may lead to anoth stroke. you must on no account 
come here again, until I give you leave." 

"but I may see you elsewhere?" 

"if you'r a wise man, you'll do one thing at a time. you'll discov 
the secret of the sorceri compani first, and then--" 

"when I have discov it?" 

"mi father may forgiv you. have I told you i'm go on the stage? I 
know bromley burnham, and he' offer me a part at the imperial. It 
is imper now, that I should do someth to help my father." 

"if you becom an actress," shiel said bitterly, "mi chanc of 
marri you will inde be small." 

"not smaller than they are now," gladi observed. "_au revoir._" and 
with one of those tantalis and perplex smiles, with which some 
women, conscious or unconsciously, counteract--and sometimes, 
perhaps, for reason best known to themselves--complet nullifi the 
needless sever of their speech, shook hand with shiel, and left 
him. 




chapter xviii 

stage three 


the week sped by. gladi martin went on the stage, and thank to 
beauti and influence, rather than to talent--though in the latter 
respect she wa certainli not wanting--sh becam an immedi 
success. her photos, some taken alone, and some with bromley burnham, 
occupi a conspicu place in all the weekli illustrateds, and in 
innumer shop windows. peopl talk of her as they do of all 
actresses. some said her father wa a broken-down peer; some, a needi 
parson, and some, a policeman! some said the duke of warminst wa 
madli in love with her; other that seaton smyth, the notori 
cabinet minister, wa pine for a divorc on her behalf, and others, 
that she wa seldom seen off the stage--sh wa entertain the king 
of the belgians. 

"i'v met her," lilian rosenberg said to shiel, as they stop one 
even to gaze at gladys' portrait outsid the imperi theatre. 
"she came to our place to have a dream interpreted, and I thought 
noth of her. I don't admir her the least bit in the world, do 
you?" 

"I do," shiel replied, rather sharply. 

"why, you sound quit angry," lilian rosenberg laughed. "one would 
think you knew her. I wonder if bromley burnham is veri much in love 
with her! He look as if he were in these photographs! Do you think it 
possibl for a man and woman to make love to each other everi night on 
the stage, like they do, without one or other of them be affected?" 

"I realli couldn't say," shiel replied. "i'm no author on such 
matters--they don't interest me in the least." 

but thi wa an untruth--they did interest him--and veri much, too. He 
seldom, indeed, thought of anyth else. had gladi fallen in love 
with bromley burnham? could she resist the fascin of so handsom 
a man? He did not, of course, pay ani heed to the gossip that coupl 
her name with duke and other notorieties. He knew gladi too well for 
that, but when he saw her thu photographed, clasp in the arm of 
bromley burnham, he had grave apprehensions. He long to see her--to 
ask her if she were still free; but hi everi attempt failed. she 
alway avoid him, and there wa no other altern save to further 
hi scheme--hi scheme for crush the sorceri company--and to hope 
for the best. 

and in these dark day of hi life, when he wa torment by the 
yellow demon of jealousy, and at the same time endur hunger, lilian 
rosenberg wa hi solac angel. utterli regardless of 
appearances--sh did not exagger when she said, "I am not 
conventional; I don't care twopenc for mrs. grundy." she visit him 
in hi garret, and she seldom went empty-handed. 

"I don't want your things," he rude expostulated, when she load 
hi tabl with cold chicken, jelli and pot meats. "i'm not 
starving." 

"yes, you are," she said, "and you'v got to eat all I bring you." and 
she made him eat. she made him, too, go for walk with her, and she 
insist that he should go with her on saturday afternoon for long 
rambl in the country, know all the time that kelson wa eat 
hi heart out for love of her, and prophesi all kind of terribl 
happen to himself, unless she return hi affections. 

Up to thi point, at all events, shiel did not allow hi friendship 
with lilian to blind him to the fact that he wa cultiv her 
acquaint with a set object. He frequent sound her to see how 
much she knew of the inner work of the firm, and he satisfi 
himself that she knew veri little. 

"they never discuss their power in my presence," she told him, "but I 
see them do veri queer things, mr. kelson seldom walk to hi room, he 
flies. He take a littl jump into the air, move hi arm and leg as 
if he were swimming, and fli upstair and along the corridor. and 
what do you think happen the other day? some men were carri into 
the build a huge, oak chest and sever larg pictur that mr. 
hamar had bought at a sale, when mr. kelson arriv on the scene. 

"'there is no need to lift these things,' he said to the men, 'put 
them down.' He then made some rapid sign in the air and mutter 
something; whereupon the chest and pictur rose in the air, and 
follow him into the building, and up the stair to their respect 
quarters." 

"the men must have been surprised," shiel said. 

"surprised!" lilian rosenberg ejaculated. "they were simpli bowl 
over, and look at one anoth with such idiot express in their 
bulg eye and gape mouths, that I nearli die with laughter." 

"and you'v no idea how kelson did that trick?" 

"none, excepting, of course, that the sign he made, and what he said, 
must have had someth to do with it." 

It wa on the tip of shiel' tongu to ask her, if she would tri and 
find out for him, but he check himself. even at thi junctur of 
their friendship he dare not appear too curious. He must wait. 

To go back to hamar. He had seen gladi act; he had becom more 
infatu with her than ever; and hi passion wa stimul by the 
knowledg that she wa univers admired, and that half the men in 
london were die to be introduc to her. 

"money will do anything," one of hamar' friends--they were all 
jews--remark to him. "offer the manag of the imperi a hundr 
pound and he'll do anyth you like with regard to the girl. everi 
manag can be bought and everi actress, too." 

the suggest wa a welcom one, and hamar act on it. but whether 
or not the except prove the rule, he wa immeasur disconcert 
to find that with regard to money and managers, hi friend had 
deceiv him. far from be pleas at the offer of a bribe, the 
manag of the imperial, an old harrovian, rais hi foot, and hamar, 
who invari pale at the prospect of violence, hurriedli withdrew. 

On the eve of the initi into stage three, the trio were veri much 
perturbed. 

"I hope to good noth will appear to me," kelson said. "mi heart 
isn't strong enough to stand the shock of see stripe figures. they 
should come to you, curtis--a few jump wouldn't do you ani 
harm--you'r fat enough." 

agre each to sleep with a light in hi room, they separated, and 
at about two o'clock curtis, who had been suffer of late from hi 
liver--th effect, so the doctor told him, of live a littl too 
well--and could not sleep, heard a knock at hi door. To hi 
astonish it wa kelson--kelson, in hi pyjamas. 

"hulloa!" curti exclaimed. "what on earth bring you here, and 
howev did you come?" 

"the usual way!" kelson said, in what struck curti as rather unusu 
tones. "I flew here to tell you that we are now in stage three. give 
me paper and ink. I want to write down the instruct I have 
received." 

curti conduct him into hi sitting-room, switch on the light 
and, give him what he wanted, pour out a coupl of tumbler of 
soda-and-milk. 

"thi will lower my temperature," he said to himself. "I shall know if 
i'm dreaming." 

He then sat by kelson' side and observ what he wrote. 

"the properti of walk on the water, and of breath under the 
water are confer on you dure the forthcom stage. you must 
refrain from red flesh and alcohol, but may eat poultry, fish, fruit, 
and veget in abundance." 

"the devil I may!" curti said, in a fury. "how veri kind! I would 
rather have roast beef than all the poulet and kipper in 
christendom." 

without notic thi interruption, kelson went on writing. 

"you must also concentr for one hour everi morning. grade two in 
the scale of concentration, though suffici for project through 
ether, will not enabl you to offer suffici resist to the 
pressur of water. you must reach grade three in the scale of 
concentration, befor you can either walk on, or breath under, the 
water. from six to seven a.m. you must fix your eye on a glass of 
fresh spring water, and concentr your veri hardest on amalgam 
with it, on pass your immateri ego into it. At night, befor 
go to bed, you must drink a mixtur compos of two drachm of 
vindroo sookum, one drachm of harnoon oobey, and one ounc of 
distil water. vindroo sookum and harnoon oobey are a speci of 
seaweed; the former of a pale salmon colour, the latter of a deep 
blue. they were formerli shrub grow in the wood of endlemok in 
atlantis, and are now to be found at a depth of two hundr fathoms, 
twenti mile to the north-east of achil island. these weed must be 
well rins first; and when the prescrib amount of each ha been 
care cut off and weighed, it must be boil in the distil 
water, and the compound, thu formed, allow to cool befor be 
drunk. thi mixtur render the lung immun to the action of fluid, 
and will enabl you to breath as easili in water as in air. there is 
still, however, the action of graviti to be considered, and thi must 
be counteract by sound. befor experimenting, these atlantean word 
must be repeat aloud in the follow order: karma--nardka--rapto-- 
nooman--k--arma--oola--piskooskte.'" 

"it' all veri well to write all these directions," curti said, "but 
how am I to obtain the weeds? I can't go and fish for them." 

"you must engag the servic of mr. john waley, formerli employ by 
the brazilian govern in repair marin cables. He will do all 
you want for the sum of £200." 

kelson left off writing, and, wish curti good-night, walk out of 
the room. 

"you'll be deuc cold without an overcoat," curti call out after 
him. "won't you have mine?" 

but there wa no reply, and though curti strain hi ear to listen, 
he could catch no sound of a vehicle. 

kelson left curti at twenti minut past two. At half-past two, 
hamar, who had been sound asleep, wa awaken by a loud rap. 

"kelson!" he gasped. "how on earth did you get here? are you a 
projection?" 

"don't worri me with questions," kelson replied. "I have come to give 
you instructions. A paper and ink, quick." 

hamar obey with alacrity. 

"on you," kelson wrote, "i confer the properti of invisibility--a 
properti common in atlantis, and still possess by the fakir of 
hindoostan, the nativ of easter island and certain tribe in new 
guinea. you must reach grade three in the scale of concentration, by 
concentrating, from five to six o'clock, everi morning, on 
amalgam yourself with the ether. you must sit, with your head 
thrown back, gaze up into space--allow noth to distract your 
mind. wholli and solely, your thought must be fix on the ether. 
thi properti of invis can onli be success practised, when 
the third grade in the scale of concentr ha been reached. carri 
out these instructions, and, in a week' time, you will then be abl 
to experiment--to becom invis at will. but befor experi it 
will alway be necessari to repeat the word 'bakra--naka--taksomana,' 
and to swallow a pill, compos of two drachm of derhen voskry, one 
drachm of karka voli and one drachm of saffron. derhen voskri and 
karka voli are a crimson and white speci of seaweed, that grow on 
the hundred-fathom level, thirti mile west-southwest of the aran 
islands, galway bay. mr. john waley, employ by the brazilian 
govern for repair cables, will procur these ingredi for 
you. To becom visible, you'v onli to repeat the words, 
'bakra--naka--taksomana,' backwards." 

"but how about my clothes?" hamar asked. "will they disappear too?" 

"everything!" kelson answered. "hat, boots, tie and breeches. all you 
have on! good-night!" and walk out of the room, he leap into the 
air, and flew downstairs. but though hamar listen attentively, he 
could not hear him leav the building--ther wa no sound of ani door. 

when they met the follow mid-day in cockspur street, kelson 
rememb noth of hi visits. 

"all I know is," he said, "that the moment I got into bed, I fell 
asleep, and suddenli found myself stand in a kind of brown desert, 
talk to a tall man with most peculiar featur and eyes, and a 
dazzling, white skin. He inform me he had been an animal-train in 
the state of ballyynkan, atlantis, and wa order to give me 
instruct as to the tame of the present day wild beast. 

"'you must obtain a stone call the red laryx,' he said. 'it is to be 
found in great quantiti on the three-hundr fathom level, forti 
mile to the west-south-west of north aran island, and can be procur 
for you by the same man that get the weed for hamar and curtis. It 
is a blood-r pebble, cover with peculiarli vivid green spots, and 
cannot be mistaken. sit with it press against your forehead for an 
hour everi morning, and concentr hard on amalgam yourself with 
it--_i.e._ pass into it, and it properti will gradual be 
impart to you. Do thi regularly, for a week, and by the end of that 
time, you will be abl to experi with animals. all you will have 
to do, will be to hold the stone slightli clench in your left hand, 
whilst, with your right, you make these sign in the air,' and he 
show me certain passes. 'stare fixedli into the animal' eye all 
the while, and, by the time you have finish make the passes, you 
will find the anim are subdued. pronounc these word 
"meta--ra--ka--va--avakana," hold up, as you do so, your right hand 
with the thumb turn down and held right across the palm, and the 
littl finger stretch out as wide as it will go, and you will 
understand what ani anim wish to say.' 

"he ceas speaking, and approach close to me, tap my forehead; 
whereupon there wa a blank; and on recov consciousness, I found 
myself in bed, feel somewhat exhaust and veri cold." 

"you have no recollect of come to see us, in your pyjamas, about 
two o'clock in the morning?" hamar asked. 

"don't talk rot," kelson said. "i'm in no mood for fooling, i'v got a 
chill on my liver." 

"what wa it, leon?" curti inquired. 

"A case of unconsci projection," hamar said. "clearli the work of 
the unknown. We must commenc carri out the instruct at once." 

At the end of a week, hamar, kelson and curtis, began to put in 
practic their newli acquir properties. 

hamar test his, in a first-class railway carriage, on the london, 
brighton & south coast railway. 

"i'll go for a day' trip to brighton," he said, "and cheat the 
company. they deserv it." 

He went to victoria, and ignor the booking-office, calmli seat 
himself in a first-class compartment, where, amongst other occupants, 
sat a quit remark proper-look clergyman, and a veri handsom 
dress lady, with a haughti stare, and a typic _nouveau riche_ 
nose! 

when the ticket collector came round befor the train started, hamar 
waited, till everi one els in the compart had shown him their 
tickets, and then, just as the man wa about to demand his, swallow 
one of the prescrib pills, repeat immediately, in a loud voice, 
which caus consider excit among the other passengers, the 
words, "bakra--naka--taksomana!" the next moment he had disappeared. 

"strike me red!" the collector gasped, put one hand to hi heart, 
and grasp the door with the other. "what' becom of him? wa 
he--a--a--gho--st?" 

"I don't--er--know-- what to--to make of it," the parson said, 
heroic preserv hi oxford drawl, in spite of hi chatter 
teeth. "I don't--er, of course--er, believ in gho--sts! He must--er 
have been--a--a--an evil spirit. dear me--aw!" 

"help me out of the carriag at once," the ladi with the stare panted. 
"I consid the whole thing most disgraceful. I shall report it to the 
company." 

"what' the matter, joe?" an inspector call out, thread hi way 
through the crowd of people, that had commenc to collect at the door 
of the compartment. 

"i'm bless if I know!" the collector said. "the honli explan I 
can give is that a gent who wa seat here ha dissolved--th hot 
weather ha melt him like butter!" 

At thi there wa a shout of laughter, the inspector slam the door, 
the guard whistled, and the next moment the train wa off. 

As soon as the train wa well out of the station hamar repeat the 
word he had used, backwards, and he wa onc again visible. 

the effect of hi reappear amongst them wa even more strike 
than that of hi previou disappearance. 

"take it away--tak it away!" the ladi opposit him shouted, throw 
up her hand to ward him off. "it' there again! take it away! I shall 
die--i shall go mad!" 

"how hideous! how diabolical!" a stout, elderli man said in slow, 
measur tones, as if he were read hi own funer service. "it 
must be the devil! the devil! ha!" and buri hi face in hi hands, 
he indulg in a loud fit of mirthless laughter. 

"whi don't you do something? talk theolog to it, exorcis it," a 
remark plain woman, in the far corner of the carriag said, in 
highli indign tone to the clergyman. "a usual, whenev there is 
someth to be done, it is woman who must do it!" 

she got up, and cast a look of infinit scorn at the 
clergyman--whos condit of terror prevent him utter even the 
one telling, bite word--suffragette--that had risen and stuck in hi 
throat--rais her umbrella, and, befor hamar could stop her, struck 
it vigor at him. 

"ghost, demon, devil!" she cried. "I know no fear! begone!" and the 
point of her umbrella come in violent contact with hamar' 
waistcoat, all the breath wa unceremoni knock out of him; and 
with a ghastli groan he roll off hi seat on to the floor, where he 
writh and grovel in the most dread agony, whilst hi assail 
continu to stab and jab at him. 

In all probability, she would have succeeded, eventually, in reach 
some vital part of hi body, had not one of the frenzi passeng 
pull the communication-cord and stop the train! 




chapter xix 

A seri OF misadventur 


with the advent of the guard, hamar' assail wa drag off him, 
and he wa lock up in a separ compartment, "to be given in 
charge," so the indign offici announced, directli they got to 
brighton. but hamar ordain it otherwise. As soon as he had 
suffici recov from the effect of the sever castig the 
femal furioso had inflict on him, he becam invisible, and when the 
train drew up at the brighton platform, and a coupl of policemen 
arriv to march him on, he wa nowher to be found! thi wa hi 
first experi with the newli acquir property. "in future," he 
said to himself, "befor I tri ani tricks, i'll take veri good care 
there are no suffragett about." 

In london there was, of course, no need for him ever to pay fares. all 
he had to do, wa to becom invis as soon as the taxi stopped, 
calmli step out of the vehicle, and walk away. As for meals, he wa 
abl to enjoy many--gratis. He simpli walk into a restaurant, fed on 
the veri best, and then disappeared. Of course, he could not repeat 
the trick in the same place, and cautiou though he was, he wa at 
last caught. It appear that a descript of him had been circul 
among the police, and that privat detect were employ to watch 
for him in the princip hotel and restaurants. consequently, 
directli he enter the grill room at the piccadilli hotel, he wa 
arrest and handcuf befor he had time to swallow a pill. 

He wa now in a most unpleas predicament--th tightest corner he 
had ever been in. suppos he could not escape--hi sentenc would be 
at the least two years' penal servitude--what would happen? curti and 
kelson would never work the show without him. curti would give 
himself entir up to eat and drinking, kelson would marri lilian 
rosenberg; the compact with the unknown would be broken; and after 
that--h dare not think. He must escape! He must get at the pills! the 
polic took him away in a taxi, and all the time he sat between them, 
he struggl desper to squeez hi hand through the small, cruel 
circl that held them. "it' all right for curti and kelson!" he said 
to himself, "all right at least--now! they know nothing! they have 
never tri to think what the break of the compact means! their 
weak, silli mind are entir centr on the present! the present! 
damn the present! they are fools, idiots, imbecil who think onli of 
the present--it' the future--th futur that matters!" He scrape the 
skin off hi wrists, he sweated, he swore! and it wa not until one of 
the detect threaten to rap him over the head, that he sullenli 
gave in and sat still. 

the taxi drew up in front of the gerald road polic station, and hamar 
wa conduct to an ante-room, prior to be taken befor the 
inspector. just as a policeman wa about to search him, he made one 
last desper effort. 

"look here," he said, "if I pledg you my word i'll not attempt to do 
anything, will you let me have my hands--or at least one of my 
hands--fre a moment. some grit ha got in my eye and I cannot stand 
the irritation." 

"that game won't work here," one of the detect said, "you should 
keep your eye shut when there' dust about, or els not have such 
protrud ones." 

hamar threaten to report him to the home secretari for brutal 
conduct, but the detect onli laughed, and hamar had to submit to 
the mortif of be searched. 

"what are these?" a detect said, finger the seawe pill 
gingerly. 

"stomach pills!" hamar said bitterly, "they are taken as a digest 
after meals. you look dyspeptic--hav one." 

"now, none of your sauce!" the detect said, "you come along with 
me,"--and hamar wa haul befor the inspector. 

"can I go out on bail?" hamar asked. 

"certainli not," the inspector replied. 

"then I shan't give you my name and address," hamar said. "I shan't 
tell you anything." 

the inspector mere shrug hi shoulders, and after the charg 
sheet wa read over, hamar wa conduct to a cell. 

"thi is awful," he said, "what the deuc am I to do! To send for 
curti and kelson will be fatal, and it will be equal fatal to leav 
them in ignor of what ha happen to me. I am, indeed, in the 
horn of a dilemma. I must get at those pills." 

Up and down the floor of the tini cell he paced, hi mind tortur 
with a thousand conflict emotions. and then, an idea struck him. He 
would ask to be allow to see hi lawyer. 

"cotton' the man," he said to himself, "he will get the pill for 
me!" 

the inspector, after satisfi himself that cotton wa on the 
register, rang him up, and after an hour of terribl suspens to 
hamar, the lawyer briskli enter hi cell. 

they confer togeth for some minutes, and have arrang the 
method of defence, cotton wa prepar to depart, when hamar 
whisper to him-- 

"I want you to do me a particular favour. In the top right hand drawer 
of the chest of drawer in my bedroom, in cockspur street, I have left 
a red pill-box. these pill are for indigestion. I simpli can't do 
without them. will you get them for me?" 

"what, to-night?" the lawyer ask dubiously. 

"yes, to-night," hamar pleaded. "i'll make it a matter of busi 
between us--get me the pill befor eight o'clock, and you have £1000 
down. My chequ book is in the same drawer." 

the lawyer said nothing, but gave hamar a look that meant much! 

again there wa a dread wait, and hamar had abandon himself to 
the deepest despair when cotton reappeared. He shook hand with hi 
client, slip the pill into the latter' palm. whilst the lawyer 
wa pocket hi cheque, hamar gleefulli swallow a pill, and cri 
out "bakra--naka--takso--mana,"--vanished! 

"heaven preserv us! what' becom of you?" cotton exclaimed, put 
hi hand to hi forehead and lean against the wall for support. "am 
I ill or dreaming?" 

"anyth wrong, sir?" a policeman inquired, open the cell door and 
look in. "why, what have you done with the prisoner--wher is he?" 

"I have no more idea than you," the lawyer gasped. "he wa talk to 
me quit naturally, when he suddenli left off--said someth 
idiotic--and disappeared." 

hamar did not dally. He quietli slip through the open door, and 
dart swiftli along a stone passage, found hi way to the entrance, 
which wa block by two constabl with their back to him. 

"i'll give the brute someth to rememb me by," hamar chuckled, 
and, take a run, he kick first one, and then the other with all 
hi might, precipit them both into the street. He then sped past 
them--home. 

hamar, by astut inquiries, learn that the polic had decid to 
hush up the affair, not be quit sure how they had figured, or, 
indeed, what had actual occurred. As to cotton, the shock he had 
undergone, at see hamar suddenli melt away befor hi eyes, wa so 
great that he went off hi head, and had to be confin in an asylum. 

after thi adventur hamar shun restaurants, and manipul hi 
new properti sparingly, and with the utmost caution, warn kelson and 
curti to do the same. 

"i'll bet anything," he said to them, "it wa a put-up job on the part 
of the unknown--a cun devic to make us break the compact." 

"oh, we'll be care enough as far as that goes," curti growled. 
"it' thi vegetarian diet that I can't stick. fanci live on bean 
and potatoes, and onli milk and aerat water to wash them down. It 
wa bad enough in san francisco, when we hadn't the mean even to 
smell meat cooking--but with the money liter burn a hole in 
one' pocket, it' ten time worse! whatev the unknown ha in store 
for us it can't be a wors hell than what i'v got now. what say you, 
matt?" 

"the same! precis the same!" kelson said. "onli it' love--not 
potato and bean that worri me. In the old day when I wa 
penniless, I did get some consol from know it wa all 
hopeless--but now--now, when, as Ed says, 'the money' liter 
burn a hole in one' pocket,' and everyth might go 
swimmingly--not to be allow even to buy a bracelet--i more than 
human natur can endure. I certainli can't conceiv a hell to beat 
it." 

"don't be too sure," hamar said, "and for goodness' sake don't let the 
unknown give you an opportun of comparing." 

the night succeed thi conversation, hamar, curti and kelson 
introduc their new properti into the programm of their 
entertain in cockspur street, and london got anoth big thrill. 
hamar exhibit such startl proof of hi power of invisibility, 
that not onli wa the whole audienc convinced, but from amongst 
certain promin member of the council of the psychic research 
society, who were attend with the express purpos of unmask 
hamar, two had epilept fit on the spot, and several, befor they 
could get home, becam rave lunatics. 

At the commenc of the second part of the programme--th audienc 
wa still too flabbergast to fulli grasp what wa happening. they 
saw on the stage a huge tank of water--with which they were told mr. 
curti would experiment. 

"what I am about to do," mr. curtis--who now walk on to the 
stage--inform hi audience, "i quit simple. all you want is faith. 
those of you who are christian scientist should be abl to do it as 
easili as I. say 'I will! I will walk on the water!' and your 
faith--your coloss faith--faith in your abil to do it will 
actual enabl you to do it." 

curti then repeated--in tone that could not be heard by the 
audience--th atlantean cabalist words--"karma--nardka--rapto-- 
nooman--k--arma--oola--piskooskte," and glide grace on to the 
surfac of the water. everi now and then he sank slowli down to the 
bottom, where he stroll about, or sat, or lay down. 

the audienc wa simpli fascinated. noth they had hitherto seen 
tickl their fanci half as much. As an american, who wa present, put 
it--"to live under the water like a fish is immense--so hygien and 
economical." 

though the time apport to thi part of the entertain wa 
half an hour, it wa extend to over an hour, and even then the 
audienc wa not satisfied. they would have gone on watch 
curtis--eating--drinking--jumping--skipping--sing and chase gold 
fish--und the water all night, and when he wa at length permit to 
come out of the tank--exhaust and sulky--they gave him even heartier 
applaus than they had given hamar. 

but the cup of their enjoy wa not yet full. the greatest treat of 
all wa in store for them. 

for the third and last part of the entertainment, a cage, contain a 
larg bengal tiger, wa wheel on to the stage. 

"you look preciou white," curti remarked, just as kelson wa about 
to go on. 

"I guess you'd look the same," kelson retorted, "if you had to hobnob 
with a tiger. the unknown alway give me the nasti jobs." 

"and in thi case," curti said with a low, mock laugh, "it also 
load you with consolations. the hous is full of ladi who ador 
you, and if you are eaten, just think of the sympathi well up in 
their beauti eyes! If that isn't suffici compens for you, 
i--" but the remaind of thi encourag speech wa lost in a loud 
roar. the bengal tiger shook it bars--th audienc screamed, and 
curti flew. 

with a desper attempt to look calm, kelson, clutch the red laryx 
stone in hi left hand, walk on to the stage, whilst the tiger, 
rear on it hind leg tri to reach him with it paws. 

there were loud cri of "oh! oh!" from the audience, and kelson' 
heart beat quicker, when a girl with wavy, fair hair and big, starri 
eyes, scream out "don't go near it! don't go near it!" 

As soon as there wa compar quiet kelson spoke. 

"a you can see, ladi and gentlemen," he said, "thi anim is 
genuin savage! It is not like the tiger one see in menageries, 
drug and depriv of their natur weapons--teeth and claws. It 
come direct from india, where it reput as a man-eat is 
widespread. I am not, however, intimidated--it growl mere amus 
me." 

quak all over, he approach the cage, and stare fixedli into the 
tiger' face, made the prescrib passes. In an instant, the whole 
attitud of the great cat changed. drop on to it fore-legs, it 
rub it head against the bar and purred. A low buzz of 
astonish burst from the audience, and kelson, now assur that the 
spell had worked, wave hi disengag hand, in the most gallant 
fashion, at the audience, and strut into the cage. He shook paw 
with the tiger, pat it on the back, sat down by it side, and, 
whilst pretend to be on the most familiar term with it, took everi 
precaut to avoid come in too close contact with it teeth and 
claws. 

the audienc wa charmed--th men cheered, the ladi wave 
handkerchiefs, and the onli disappoint person present were a few 
belliger and bloodthirsti boys, and a suffragette, who severally, 
and for divers reasons, would have relish the perform of a 
savag tiger, but had littl sympathi with the perform of a tame 
one. 

the next surpris that mr. kelson had for hi audience, wa the 
announc that he could interpret the languag of animals. At hi 
invitation, a dozen member of the audienc came on to the platform 
and stood near the cage. look steadili at the tiger he then 
pronounc the mystic word "meta--ra--ka--va--avakana," hold up 
hi right hand, with the thumb turn down and stretch right across 
the palm, and the littl finger extend to the utmost. In an instant 
the great secret--th secret that darwin had studi so strenuous 
for years--wa reveal to him. the languag of anim wa olfactory. 
the tiger spoke to him through the sens of smell--through hi nose 
instead of hi ears. It regul and modifi the odour it gave off 
from it body, and which work it way out through the pore of it 
skin, just as human be regul and modifi the inton of 
their voices. indeed, so delic are the olfactori organ of anim 
that the faintest of these languag smell make an impress on 
them, which impress is at onc interpret by the brain. If an 
anim wish to leav a messag behind it, it mere impregn some 
article--a leaf or a root, or a clump of grass--or mere the ether 
with a brain smell, and ani other animal, happen to pass by the 
spot, within a certain time (in favour weather), will at onc be 
attract by the smell, and be abl to interpret it. that is the 
reason one so often see an anim suddenli stop at a spot and sniff 
it--it is read some messag left there by some other animal. all 
this, and more, kelson explain to hi audience, who were exceedingli 
interested, mani of them get up to ask him questions. He also 
report to them the tiger' conversation, which consist chiefli of 
complaint against the manag with regard to it food. 

"to be everlastingli fed on scrap of horse-flesh," it said, "when 
there were dozen of plump young women sit in the stalls, under 
it veri nose, wa tantal to a degree. would mr. kelson kindli 
speak to whoever wa respons for such cruelti and negligence?" 

A bear and a crocodil have been tame in the same manner, and their 
remark interpret to the audience, the entertain concluded. 

the next day the paper were full of it. 

the _planet_, under the startl announcements-- 

"recoveri OF the lost senses. 
more extraordinari feat IN cockspur street. 
leon hamar becom invis AT will," 

--narrat all that had occurred. 

the _monitor_--if anyth more sensational--declared-- 

"the languag OF anim discov AT last! 
the problem OF breath under water--solved! 
demateri AT will established!" 

and even the _courier_--th steady, ever cautiou old _courier_, 
england' premier paper, creat a preced by the use of a quit 
conspicu larg type; vide the following-- 

"the age OF miracl revived! 
actual case OF subdu and convers with wild animals. 
recoveri OF the properti OF invisibility; OF walk ON water, 
and OF breath under water." 

As before, there were innumer case of imitation, mani of them, 
unhappily, result in the death of the imitator. At dover, for 
instance, a congregationalist minist convinc that he had the 
requisit amount of faith, announc from the pulpit, that he intend 
walk on the water, in the harbour, after service. thousand flock 
to see him, but despit the fact that he said "I will! I will!" with 
the greatest emphasis, the unkind wave would not support him. indeed, 
sinc they swallow him, it might almost be said that the rev. s---- 
support the waves. 

for two whole day there wa regular stamped of experiment to 
hyde park and regent' park, and the bank of their respect water 
resound with the words, "I will walk! I will walk!" succeed by 
splash and cri for help. 

nor wa the water feat the onli one that induc imitators. crowd 
flock to the zoolog gardens, and the variou hous were 
liter pack with peopl tri to get into convers with the 
animals; these attempt be also mark by a larg proport of 
fatal results. one old gentleman--a fellow of the royal 
society--carri away in hi enthusiasm to talk with a tiger, after 
make what he thought to be the correct signs, slip hi nose 
through the bar of the tiger' cage, and had it promptli bitten 
off--whilst a girl, in her endeavour to sniff the crocodiles, and so 
get in convers with them, fell in their midst, and wa torn to 
piec befor help arrived. 

however, these fatal onli serv as an advertis to the firm, 
and hundr of people, for whom there wa not even stand room, 
were turn away from the hous nightly. 

but later on there were hitches. curtis, whose dislik to vegetarian 
diet steadili increased, when dine one even at hi club, could no 
longer withstand the sight of roast beef. the smell of it tickl hi 
palat unmercifully. 

"take thi infern mess away!" he said, push a plate of nut steak 
from him in disgust, "and let me have a full course--entrée, soup, 
fish, meat, everyth you'v got--chartreus and a liqueur, and bring 
it quick--i'm famished." 

He ate and ate, and drank and drank, until it wa as much as he could 
do to rise from the table. and then, in excel spirits, he repair 
to cockspur street. 

how he got on to the stage he could never tell. everyth wa in a 
haze around him, until there wa a dull crash in hi ears, and he 
suddenli found himself drowning. No one, at first, notic hi 
helpless condition, but attribut hi antic to part of the 
programme; and he most certainli would have been drowned, had it not 
been for lilian rosenberg, who, be quit by chance, in front of the 
house, perceiv he wa drunk, the moment he came on the stage. she 
flew to the wings, and, just in the nick of time, got two of the 
super to haul him out of the tank. Of course, it wa announced--with 
a pretti apology--bi mr. hamar, that mr. curti had been taken ill. 
kelson immedi came on with hi animals, and the audienc depart 
without the slightest suspicion as to the truth. 

hamar wa furious. 

"you idiot!" he said to curtis, "that all come of your make a beast 
of yourself--y would sacrific matt and me, for your insati 
crave for meat and alcohol. can't you see it wa a trick of the 
unknown to make us break the compact? had you been drowned, the 
partnership, would, of course, have been dissolved--and it would have 
been your fault! you must obey your injunctions! damn it, you must!" 
and hamar spoke so fierc that curti wa for onc in a way cowed, 
and solemnli promis that he would not repeat the offence. 

kelson wa the next culprit; and hi misdo were indirectli 
associ with the forego incident. lilian rosenberg' action in 
save curtis' life, thrill him to the core, and call into play 
all hi ardent passion. He had seen her sit in the front of the 
house, and had come upon the scene just as she wa urg the super 
to go to curtis' assistance; and he then thought she had never look 
so lovely. 

"come out with me to-morrow afternoon," he whispered. "hamar' go 
out of town!" and befor she could stop him he had kiss her. 

kelson hardli expect lilian rosenberg would accept hi invitation, 
but on arriv at the place he had named, he wa delight beyond 
measur to find her there. 

nor could anyon have been nicer to him. No girl, he told himself, who 
did not in some degre at least, reciproc hi sentiments, could 
have allow him to stare into her eye as she did, or squeez her 
hands, as he did. He took her to the ladies' drawing-room of hi club, 
where there were plenti of quiet, seclud nooks, and there, whilst 
she pour out tea for him, he onc more relat to her all hi earli 
deed and ailments--r and imaginary--and all hi ideal and 
aspirations. 

lilian rosenberg wa most sympathetic. 

"you should have been a poet," she said. "there is someth about you 
that is quit byronic." 

and kelson, who had never even heard of byron, wa immens 
flattered. 

"will you come to the jeweller' with me," he said, "and choos 
whatev you like best. those finger of your are made for 
rings--r of all sorts!" and he gave them a gentl pressure. 

she let him escort her to bond street, and follow him gaili into 
raymond's; but when it came to accept a ring from him, she 
laughingli refused, and chose, instead, the most expens diamond 
bracelet and pendant in the shop. some of these she wore--th 
rest--unknown to him of course--sh sold; send the proceeds, 
anonymously, to shiel davenport--who wa starving. 

when kelson went on the stage, that evening, hi thought were so far 
away--plan for hi honeymoon--that he enter the cage of a newli 
import lion without have made the necessari signs, and would most 
certainli have been mangl out of recognition, had not one of the 
supers, perceiv how matter lay, rush to hi assistance, and kept 
the lion at bay with a pole, till further help could be procured. It 
had been a narrow squeak, and to kelson the bare idea of continu 
hi perform wa appalling. hi nerv were, as he himself put it, 
anyhow, and he prefer retir for the rest of the evening. 

but hamar would not hear of it. 

"thi is the second bungl we have had," he said, "and the reput 
of the firm is serious at stake. you must go on again and retriev 
it." 

and kelson, trembl all over, wa oblig to reappear. 

after it wa all over, and he had bow himself out into the wings, 
hamar led him aside. 

"don't look so damn pleas with yourself," he said, "I don't half 
like the look of things. thi is the third time the unknown ha tri 
to trap us--th fourth time it may be successful! take care!" 




chapter XX 

the stage OF haunt 


much to the relief of the trio, the end of stage three wa at length 
reached--and, thank to hamar, reach without further mishap. To keep 
curti and kelson up to the mark, hamar had work indefatigably. He 
had never relax hi effort in the strict watch he kept over them, 
and he had unceasingli impress upon them, the vital import of 
obeying, to the veri letter, the instruct they had receiv from 
the unknown. 

the part he had thu taken upon himself, the difficulti he had to 
encount in thi unceas vigilance, had produc a new hamar--a 
hamar that wa a personality; a person so utterli unlik the 
old hamar--th meek and servil clerk--a to make one wonder if 
there could possibl be two hamars--outwardli and physic the 
same--inwardli and psycholog diametr opposed. A year ago, 
curti and kelson would have ridicul the idea of be afraid of 
hamar--such an idea would have struck them as simpli absurd; but they 
were afraid of him now, they dread hi anger more than anything, 
more even than the prospect of infring their compact with the 
unknown. 

"we have made pot of money," curti remark one day. "whi can't we 
give up work and enjoy it?" 

"becaus I say no!" hamar hissed. "no! We can't give up--not, at 
least, until the last stage ha been safe gone through. To give up 
now would be to break the compact!" 

"well, whi not?" curti mumbled. 

"whi not!" hamar cried. "heavens, man, can't you understand! can you 
form no concept of what failur to keep the compact means? ha the 
memori of that night--of that tree and all the foul thing it 
suggested, pass complet out of your mind? It hasn't out of 
mine--it is as clear now as it wa then. and often--mark this, both of 
you--often when I am alon in the night, I see queer lumin 
shapes--shap of repuls veget growths--of polyps--and of 
disgust tongu that come toward me through the gloom and circl 
slowli round the bed, whilst the whole room vibrat with soft, 
mock laughter! you know how mirror shine in the moonlight. well, 
the other night, when I look at mine, I saw in it the reflection, 
not of a face, but of two light evil eye that look at me 
and--smiled! smile with a smile that said more plainli than words, 'I 
am waiting!' and that is what the shapes, and the veri atmospher of 
the place at night alway seem to say--'w are waiting! you are 
enjoy the joke now--w shall enjoy it later on!' If we knew exactli 
what wa in store for us it wouldn't be so bad, but it is the 
vagu of it, the vagu of the horror that the unknown ha 
hint at, that make it so appalling! We may die aw deaths--or we 
may not die AT all--th shapes, indefinit and misti no longer, but 
materialized--wholli and entir materialized--may come for us and 
take us away with them! and it is to prevent this, that I am urg 
you, compel you, to stick to the compact, and give the unknown no 
loophole! think of the tremend rewards, if we succeed in pass 
through the last stage! As I have said before, curti need do noth 
els but eat, whilst you, matt, can becom a mormon and marri all the 
pretti girl in london!" 

thi speech had the desir effect, and noth more--for the time at 
least--wa said about retiring. 

"do you think leon is quite--er--like--er--lik us?" kelson said, when 
hamar left them, after administ hi admonition. "at time he 
hardli look human. hi face is such a funni colour, such a lurid 
yellow, and hi eyes, so piercing! He give me the jumps! I can't bear 
to think of him at night!" 

"rubbish," curti growled. "you imagin it. there' noth of the 
spook about leon! he' of thi world and noth but thi world." 

It wa odd, however, that from that time he, too, began to have the 
same feeling--th feel that hamar wa perpetu watch 
them--watch them awak and watch them asleep! curti awok one 
night to see, stand on hi hearth, a shadowi figur with a lurid 
yellow face and two gleam dark eyes, which were fix on him. He 
call out, and it vanished! 

"of cours it' the nut steak!" and thu he tri to assur himself. 
but he wa badli scare all the same. 

anoth night, he saw some one, he took to be hamar, peep at him 
from behind the window curtains. He threw a slipper at the figure, and 
the slipper went right through it. If hamar' phantom had been the 
onli thing he saw, he would not have mind much; but both he and 
kelson soon began to see and hear other things. curti frequent saw 
half-materi forms, form of men with cone-shap head and 
peculiarli form limbs, steal up the staircas in front of him, 
and, turn into hi bedroom, vanish there. He heard them move 
about, long after he had got into bed. sometim they would glide up 
to the bed and bend over him, and though he could never see their 
eyes, he could feel they were fix mockingli on him. onc he saw the 
door of hi wardrob slowli open, and a white someth with a 
dread face--half human and half animal--st slyli out and 
disappear in the wall opposite. and onc when he put out hi hand to 
feel for the matches, they were gentli thrust into hi palm, whilst 
the wall of the room shook with laughter. 

kelson wa equal tormented, though the phenomena took rather a 
differ form. alon in hi bedroom at night, the shape of the room 
would frequent change; either the wall and ceil would recede, 
and recede, until they assum the proport of some vast chamber, 
full of gloom and strang shadows; or they would slowly, veri slowly, 
close in upon him, as if it were their intent to crush him to 
death. A feel of suffoc would come over him, and he would 
gasp, choke, beat the air with hi arms, be at the verg of lose 
consciousness, when there would be a loud, mock laugh--and the 
wall and ceil would be in their proper place again. At other 
time he would see strang figur on the wall--numb of circles, 
that would keep on revolv in the most bewild fashion. then, 
suddenly, they would leav the wall and slowli approach him, 
increas in circumference; and the same thing would happen, as 
happen with the wall and ceiling; he would undergo the whole 
sensat of asphyxiation, and be on the brink of swooning, when there 
would be a loud peal of evil, satir laughter, and the circl 
would instantli disappear. 

sometim the bedcloth would assum extraordinari shapes; sometim 
the articl on hi dressing-table; sometim hi clothes; and once, 
when he wa about to put on hi bedroom slippers, he found them 
alreadi occupied--occupi by ici cold feet. anoth time, when he put 
out hi hand to take hold of a tumbler, he put it on the back of 
anoth hand--smooth, cold and pulpy! 

hardli a night pass without some sort of manifest happen to 
one or other of the trio, and even curtis--fat and stolid 
curtis--began to lose flesh and look harassed. 

On the eve of the initi into stage four, the three, separ 
for the night, retir to their respect quarter in a far from 
pleasant state of expectation. 

hamar wa undressing, when there came a loud ring at the telephone, 
outsid hi door. 

"holloa!" he call out, "who are you?" 

"are you mr. hamar?" a voic asked, breathlessly. 

hamar repli in the affirmative, and the voic continued-- 

"i'm mrs. anderson-waite, of 30 queen' mansions, queen' gate. I have 
been hold a séanc here, with some of my friends, and most 
extraordinari thing have happened, and are still happening. there are 
violent knock on the wall and ceiling, and the tabl ha becom 
posit dangerous. It ha repeatedli sprung into the air, and 
savag assault sever of the sitters. It ha thrown one ladi on 
to the floor, and despit our effort to prevent it, ha rampl on 
her so vicious that she is badli hurt, and the doctor who ha just 
arriv think veri serious of it. We want to stop, but some 
strang power seem to be forc us to go on. the tabl ha rap 
out your name and address, and say it ha someth import to 
commun with you, and that unless you come here at once, it won't 
answer for the consequences." 

"all right!" hamar said. "i'll come. i'll be with you in less than 
half an hour." 

when hamar arriv at queen' mansions, he found a terrifi parti of 
ladi await him in the entranc to the flat. 

"thank goodness, you'v come!" they exclaimed, all together. "we'v 
been have an aw time. the tabl ha driven us out of the 
drawing-room--it is obsess by a devil." 

"let me have a look at it," hamar said, "and i'll soon tell you." 

the leader of the party, mrs. anderson-waite, veri cautious open 
the drawing-room door, and hamar peer in. In the centr of the room 
wa a large, round, eboni table, that commenc to rock, in the most 
sinist fashion, the moment hamar look at it. 

"it evid want to speak with me," hamar said; "you had better 
leav me here with it for a few minutes." 

"do take care," mrs. anderson-wait said, as she shut the door. "it 
may want to murder you. If it does, ring thi bell, and we will all 
come to your assistance." 

hamar gave her an assur smile, but he wa by no mean as much at 
eas as he pretend to be. He stood stare at the table, too 
fascin to take hi eye off it, and too afraid to move. 

At length, however, pull himself together, and convinc the tabl 
wa the medium, through which the unknown wish to give him fresh 
instructions, he stealthili approach it. He address it, and it 
rap out to him that he must at onc obtain pen and ink and take 
down what it wish to say. 

obtain the requisit materi from mrs. anderson-waite, he sat 
down and wa prepar to write on hi knee, when the tabl told him 
to rub it surfac briskli with hi left hand, to trace on it the 
three atlantean symbols, _i.e._ a club foot, a hand with the finger 
clench and the long point thumb stand upright, and a bat--and 
then--to place hi paper on it, and transcrib what it had to say. 

hamar obeyed, and after sit for exactli three minut with hi 
pencil between hi fingers, he felt a cold, pulpi hand laid over his, 
impel him to write with lightning-lik rapidity. the script read 
as follows:-- 

"to hamar, curti and kelson--to the three of you in common--i given 
the knowledg of inflict all manner of torment and diseases, of 
impart all kind of injuri properties, and of caus plagues. 

"in the first place, you must understand that the essenc of life, 
compris the psychical, psycholog and physical, permeat everi 
part of the live corpor body--and that ani limb, or fragment of 
skin or flesh, cut off from the live corpor body, retain the 
essenc of life, compris the psychic and physic in it full 
vigour and entirety. consequently, if a person have graft on to them 
a piec of skin or flesh, or be inocul with the blood or vein of 
a tiger--then that person not mere becom liabl to all the 
physic infirm of the tiger, but may--if the counteract 
influenc are not suffici strong--partak of all the tiger' 
psycholog characteristics. 

"thus, if you give a person, in whom there is a latent tendenc to 
drink, a drop of a drunkard' blood--in a glass of wine, or sweet, or 
pill, no matter what--that person will at onc take to drink. 
thus--mark you--peopl can be metamorphos into libertines, suicides, 
idiot and murderers. thi metamorphosi can also be produc by mean 
of a magnet call the 'magn microcosmi,' which is prepar from 
substanc that have had a long associ with the human body, and 
are penetr by it vitality. such substanc are the hair and 
blood. take either one of them, and dri it in a shadi and moder 
warm place, until it ha lost it humid and odour. By thi process 
it will have lost, too, all it mumia--that is to say, it essenc of 
life--and is hungri to regain it. It is now a magn microcosmi, or a 
magnet for attract diseas and properties, and if it be place in 
close contact with a crimin or lunatic, it will be fill with hi 
essenc of life, and may then be use as a mean of infect other 
peopl with hi pernici qualities. buri it under the doorstep of 
the person you wish infected, or hide it in hi house, or mix it well 
with earth, and plant a shrub in the earth, and the vital the 
magnet took from the crimin or lunat will pass into the plant; and 
if the plant, or even flower of the plant, be given to ani one, that 
person--unless she or he be a person absolut free from the germ of 
vice--wil be attract to it, and greatli affect by it. 

"or again, the earth over the grave of a lunat or crimin will 
contain hi essenc of life, _i.e._ hi vitality, which impregn 
everyth around it, and if that earth be place somewher in the 
immedi presenc of a person, in whom there are latent tendenc to 
vice--then that person will be affect by it. 

"and through these method of use the essenc of life, that is 
impregn with the diseas you wish to inflict--y may infect 
peopl with all kind of incur ailments. 

"but a quicker, and equal sure method of smite peopl with 
disease, such as cancer, fever, epilepsy, apoplexy, etc.; of smite 
them blind, deaf, dumb, lame, etc.; or bring upon them all kind of 
accidents, is to make an imag of the person you wish to torment, and, 
set it in front of you, preferably, at time when the moon is new, 
or in conjunct with venus, mar or saturn, concentr with all 
your will on whatev injuri you wish to inflict. if, for example, you 
desir the person to becom blind, stick a pin, or thorn, or nail in 
the eye of the image; if deaf, in it ears; if maimed, cut a limb off 
the image; if to have a certain disease, will veri earnestli that he 
or she shall have that disease. you may thus, too, torment the object 
of your avers with plagu of insect and vermin. 

"if you desir to bewitch your neighbour' milk, wine, or ani food he 
or she has, you may do it by place the mumia, _i.e._ the vehicl 
contain the essenc of life of some crimin or lunatic, in the 
immedi vicin of the food, etc.; or in the case of milk, by 
give it to the cow to eat; or you may accomplish your design simpli 
by mean of concentr and an image. 

"always, however, whatev method you employ, prelud them with thi 
prayer: 'I conjur thee, great unknown power that is antagonist to 
man, that wa at the beginning, that is now, that alway will be; by 
the wind and rain, and thunder and lightning; by the swirl rivers; 
by the moon; by the sinist influenc of the moon with venus, mar 
and saturn; help me obtain the perfect issu of all my desires, which 
I seek to perform sole for the further of what is detriment to 
humanity. amen.' and conclud them with the sign of the foot, the 
hand and the bat. If you desir to know anyth further it will be 
unfold to you in your dreams." 

the hand that had been laid on hamar' wa now removed. the write 
ceased. the tabl rose sever inch from the floor, and struck the 
latter three time in quick, violent succession. then it remain 
quiet, and hamar knew, by a subtl chang in the atmosphere, that all 
occult manifestations--for that night at least--wer at an end. the 
ladi were, of course, die to know what had happened; and like most 
ladies, who dabbl in spiritualism, were readi to believ anyth 
they were told. hamar, who had no intent whatev of tell them 
what had actual occurred, satisfi them admirably. 

He went home delighted--far too delight to sleep--for he had in hi 
possess now the greatest of all weapons--th weapon to torment. and 
with it what could he not do! what could he not get! He could 
get--gladys! 




chapter xxi 

the sell OF spell 


the period of stage four promis to be one of such a lucr 
nature, that the trio set to work to profit by it at once. they bribe 
medic men to procur for them the mumia of peopl suffer from 
everi kind of disease; of crimin lunatics; of idiot and epileptics; 
they obtained, by briberi also, the blood and hair of the most 
abandon men and women--rakes, thieves, murderers. they bottl and 
labelled, and arrang and catalogued, the mumia, in a laboratori 
design for the purpose; and, when all their prepar were 
complete, advertised-- 

spell for sale 

the modern sorceri compani ltd. 
offer for sale everi varieti of spells--lov 
charms, sleep charms, etc. 

In order to carri out the princip condit of the compact, namely, 
to do harm, they made pseudo-lov charm as follows:-- 

they procur the hair of a girl whom they knew to be an incorrigible, 
and, at the same time, heartless flirt; and, in the manner describ 
(and relat in the last chapter) made a magn microcosmi of it. when 
readi for use, _i.e._ after it had been in immedi contact with the 
girl' flesh, so as to get it fulli charged, they had portion of it 
set in rings, locket and pendants. and the purchas of ani one of 
these trinket had onli to persuad the object of hi (or her) 
affect to wear it, and hi (or her) love would at onc be 
reciprocated. 

had the magn microcosmi been charg with real, deep-root love, 
the effect on the wearer would have been highli satisfactory, but 
charg as it wa with the effervesc and fleet fanci of a flirt, 
the effect on whoever wore it could not be more disastrous. the 
sentiment of the hope purchas would be reciproc for a time, 
which would probabl lead to marriage--aft which the affect hi 
ador had profess would suddenli decrease, and befor the honeymoon 
wa over, would have vanish altogether. 

dure the week follow the announc of the sale of these 
spells, over a thousand were sold, the applic be mostli shop 
girls, typists, clerk and servants; in the second week the sale rose 
to three thousand, and everi succeed week show a still greater 
increase. 

In charg the magn microcosmi, the motiv of the purchas had 
alway to be taken into account. If the love charm were want by a 
woman--a housekeep may be, who desir some rich old man to fall in 
love with her, in order that she might come into hi property; or by a 
woman--a companion probably--who, have worm herself into the 
confid of some eccentr old lady, wa anxiou that that ladi 
should leav her all her money--hamar took care that the magn 
microcosmi should be charg with a last infatuation; and the sale 
of thi love spell--th spell that wa sought sole that the 
purchas might inherit properti to which he (or she) had no 
claim--far exceed the sale of ani other spell. indeed, it wa 
extraordinari how mani people--peopl one would never have 
suspected--desir spell that would do other peopl harm. 

ladi De greene, the well-known humanitarian, who wa most 
indefatig in get up petit to the home secretary, whenev 
the perpetr of ani particularli heinou and inexcus murder wa 
about to be hanged, and who wa univers acknowledg "incap of 
harm a fly," called, surreptitiously, on hamar. 

"I understand," she said, "everyth you do here is in strict 
confidence!" 

"certainly, madam, certainly!" hamar said. "we make it a point of 
honour to divulge--nothing!" 

"that be so," ladi De green observed, "I want you to tell me of a 
spell that will hasten some veri obnoxi person' death." 

"if you will give me a rough idea of their person appearance," hamar 
said, "I will make a wax imag of them, and undertak they will 
troubl you no longer." 

but ladi De green shook her head. she had no desir to commit 
herself. 

"can't you do it in ani other way," she said, "can't you let me give 
them an unlucki charm--th sort of thing that might bring about a taxi 
disaster?" 

hamar thought for a moment and then--smiled. 

"yes!" he said, "I think I can accommod you." 

leav her for a few minutes, he went to the laboratory, and from a 
tin box mark homicid lunatic, he took a plain, gold ring. with 
thi he return to ladi De greene, murmur on the way the prayer he 
had learn from the table. 

"here you are," he said hand the ring to ladi De greene, "give it 
to the person you have mention to me--and the result you desir will 
speedili come to pass." 

three day later, london wa immeasur shocked. It read in the 
paper that the highli accomplish ladi De greene, belov and 
respect by all, for the strenuou exert on behalf of 
humanitarianism, had been barbar murder by her husband (from 
whom--unknown to the public--sh had been live apart for years), who 
had suddenly, and, for no appar reason, becom insane. hamar, who 
wa immens tickled, alon knew the reason why. 

thi wa no isol case. score of societi women came to the trio 
with the same request. "A spell, or charm, or something, that will 
bring about a fatal accident--not a linger illness"--and the person 
for whom the accid wa desired, wa usual the husband. and the 
trio often indulg in grim jokes. 

without a doubt, ladi minkhurst got her heart' desir when her 
husband abruptli cut hi throat, but alas, amongst those decimated, 
when the charm fell into the hand of one of the footmen, wa her 
ladyship' lover. 

again, mrs. jacques, the beauty, who, at one time, wrote for half the 
fashion paper in england, certainli secur the demis of colonel 
dick jacques, who tumbl downstair and broke hi neck, but as in hi 
fall the colonel alight on one of the maids, who wa not insured, 
and so serious injur her that she wa pronounc a hopeless 
cripple, mrs. jacques--with whom money wa an object--had, of course, 
to maintain her for the rest of her life. 

likewise, sir charl brimpton, in jump out of the top window of 
hi house, besid pulver himself, pulverized, too, ladi 
brimpton' pet pekinges "waller," without whom, she declared, life 
wasn't worth living; and lord snipping, in set fire to himself, 
set fire to ladi snipping' boudoir (which he had been secretli 
visiting), and therebi destroy treasur which she tear 
declar were quit priceless, and could never be replaced. 

crowd of young marri women were anxiou to get rid of their rich 
old relatives, who clung on to life with a tenac that wa "most 
wearying." 

"can you give me a spell that will make my grandmoth go off 
suddenly?" a girl with beautiful, sad eye said plaintiv to kelson. 
"don't think me veri wicked, but we are not at all well off--and she 
ha live such a long time--such a veri long time." 

"you don't want her to be ill first, I suppose," kelson inquired. 

"oh, no!" the girl replied, "she live with us and we could never 
endur the worri and troubl of nurs her. It must be someth veri 
sudden." 

"thi will do it," kelson said, give her a locket contain the 
mumia or essenc of life of a mad dog; "fasten it round the old lady' 
neck, and you will be astonish how soon it acts." 

"and what is your fee?" the girl asked, her eye brim over with 
joyou anticipation. 

"for you--nothing," kelson said gallantly. "onli tell no one. may I 
kiss your hand." 

the firm' sale of spell for get rid of husband have risen one 
day to five hundred--and the sale of their spell for put old 
peopl out of the way to fifteen hundred--even hamar, who wa no 
believ in the perfect of human nature, wa astonished. 

"mi word!" he remarked. "isn't thi a revelation? who would have 
thought how mani peopl have murder in their hearts? At least half 
societi would, I believe, becom homicid if onli there were no 
chanc of their be found out and punished. anyhow, if we go on at 
thi rate there will be no old peopl left." 

and it did inde seem as if such would be the case. for the moment 
the idea got abroad that old peopl could be thrust out of exist 
with absolut safeti and ease, there wa a perfect mania amongst men, 
women, and even children, to get rid of them, and the death of peopl 
over sixti record in the paper multipli everi day. the follow 
is an extract from the _planet_ of juli 28-- 

bolt.--on juli 27, at no. ---- elgin avenue, s.w., emili jane, 
love and vener mother of mari bolt, m.d., in her 69th year. 
drown in her bath. and all the angel wept! 

cushman.--on juli 27, at no. ---- sheep street, northampton, sarah 
elizabeth, ador mother of josiah cushman, plymouth brother, in 
her 88th year. run over by a taxi. joy in heaven! 

starling.--on juli 27, at no. ---- snargat street, dover, susan, 
highli esteem and greatli belov mother of alfr starling, 
wesleyan minister, in her 71st year. lost in the harbour. asleep in 
jesus. 

tretickler.--on juli 27, at no. ---- the terrace, st. ives, 
cornwall, elizabeth, ador grandmoth of tobia tretickler, 
congregationalist, in her 91st year. fell over the malatoff. "oh, 
paradise! oh, paradise!" 

broot.--on juli 27, at charlton house, queen' gate, s.w., jane, 
greatli belov mother of john broot, labour m.p., in her 83rd 
year. fell down the area. peace, bless peace. 

gum.--on juli 27, at no. ---- church road, upper norwood, sophia, 
widow of the late albert gum, l.c.c., in her 85th year. choke 
whilst eat tripe. sadli missed! 

paveman.--on juli 27, at no. ---- queen' road, clifton, bristol, 
ann rebecca, dearli belov mother of alfr paveman, grocer, in 
her 74th year. accident burn to death! At rest at last. 

but it must not be suppos from these few notices, select from at 
least a hundred, that the applic for spell were by ani mean 
confin to the upper and middl classes. By far the greater number of 
spell were sold to the work people--to those of them who, prudent 
and respectable, count amongst their age relatives, at least, one 
or two who were insured. 

nor wa the sale of spell confin to adults; for among the numbers, 
that flock to consult the trio, were countless counti council 
children. 

"can you give me a spell to make teacher break her neck?" wa the most 
common request, though it wa frequent vari with demand such as-- 

"i'll troubl you for a spell to pay mother out. she won't put more 
than three lump of sugar in my tea;"--or, "mother ha got veri teazi 
lately. I want a spell to make her fall downstairs"--or, "father onli 
give me twopenc a week out of what I earn black boots; give me a 
spell to make him have an accid whilst he' at work." and it wa 
not seldom that the trio were petit thus: "pleas give us a spell 
to make our parent die quickly. teacher say at school 'perfect 
freedom is the birthright of all englishmen,' and we can't have 
perfect freedom whilst our parent are alive."[22] 

the statist of those who die from the effect of accid for the 
week end august 1, of thi year, in london alone, were--ov sixti 
year of age, five thousand; between the age of twenty-f and 
sixty, six thousand; and, for the latter deaths, children alon were 
responsible. 

the greatest number of these accid occur in poplar, west ham, 
battersea, and whitechapel; and at length the work class applic 
becam so numer that the modern sorceri compani could not cope with 
them, and were forc to rais their charges. 

among other customers, as one might expect, were mani milit 
suffragettes; whom hamar and curti palm off on kelson. 

"give me a spell," demand a hatchet-fac lady, wear a 
half-up-to-the-kne skirt, "one that will caus the roof of the hous 
of common to fall in and smash everybody--everybody. thi is no time 
for half-measures." 

had she been pretty, it is just possibl kelson might have assented, 
but he had no sympathi with the ugly--they set hi teeth on edge--h 
loath them. 

"certainly, madam, certainly," he said, "here is a spell that will 
have the effect you desire," and he hand her a ring contain a 
magn microcosmi fulli charg with the essenc of life of an idiot. 
"wear it," he said, "night and day. never be without it." 

she joy obeyed, and within forty-eight hour wa lodg in a home 
for incurables. 

anoth woman, if possibl even uglier than the last, approach him 
with a similar request. 

"let me have a spell at once," she said, "that will make everi member 
of the govern be run over by taxis--and killed. they are monsters, 
tyrants--i abomin them. let them be slowly--veri slowly--squash 
to death!" 

"veri well, madam," kelson said, care conceal a smile, "here 
is what you want--wear it next your heart;" and he gave her a locket, 
contain a magn microcosmi charg with the essenc of life of a 
leper, which he had procur at consider risk and expense. 

"I consid your fee far too high," the suffragett said. "you take 
advantag of me becaus i'm a woman." 

"veri well, madam," he said, "I will make an except in your case, 
and let you have it for half the sum." 

with a good deal more grumbl she paid the half fee, and, fasten 
the locket round her neck, flounc out of the building. As kelson 
gleefulli anticipated, the spell act in less than two days, and with 
such success, that he wa more than compens for the monetari loss. 

shortli afterwards, kelson receiv a frantic visit from anoth 
suffragette--a woman whose virul sandi hair at onc arous hi 
animosity. 

"quick! quick!" she cried, burst into the room where he wa 
sitting. "let me have a spell that will blow up everi cabinet 
minister, and their wive and famili as well." 

"such an ambiti request as that, madam," kelson rejoined, "cannot 
be grant in a hurry. I must have time--to--" 

"no! no! At once!" the ladi cried, stamp her feet with 
ill-suppress rage. 

"--to consid how it can best be done," kelson went on calmly. "I 
must have time to think." 

the ladi fumed, but kelson remain inexorable; and directli she had 
gone, he made a wax imag of her, and take up a knife chop it 
head off. In the evening, he learn that a ladi answer to her 
descript had been run over by a train at chislehurst--and 
decapitated. 

kelson grew heartili sick of the suffragettes. they were not onli 
plain but abusive, and he complain bitterli to hamar. 

"look here," he said, "it' not fair. you and curti see all the 
decent-look women and shelv all the rest on me. i'll stand it no 
longer." and he spoke so determinedly, that hamar thought it polit 
to humour him. 

"veri well, matt," he said, forc a laugh. "i'll tri and arrang 
differ in future. after to-day you shall have your share of the 
pretti ones--anyth to keep the peace. only--remember--no fall in 
love." 


footnotes: 

[footnot 22: lest the reader should queri this, let him consult the 
polic in ani of our big centres, and he will learn that crime and 
prostitut is immens on the increas among children. In 
newcastl it is estim that there are over two thousand girls, of 
under fourteen year of age, voluntarili lead immor lives, and 
make big incomes.] 




chapter xxii 

the persecut OF the martin 


hamar' one great idea on reach stage four wa to util the 
torment as a mean of get gladys. though he saw crowd of pretti 
girl everi day, none appeal to him as she did--and the veri 
difficulti of get her enhanc her valu and stimul hi 
passions. 

"I will give her one more chance," he said to himself, "and then if 
she won't have me i'll plagu her to death." 

He went to the imperial, and pass himself off as her father to the 
new offici at the stage-door entrance, wa shown into the ante-room 
(which led to her dressing-room). It took a good deal to scare hamar, 
but he admit afterward that he did feel a trifl apprehens 
whilst he await her advent; and hi anticip were fulli 
realized. 

"why, father!" she began, as the door of her dressing-room swung open 
and she appear on the threshold, clad in a shimmer white dress, 
that intensifi her fair style of beauty, "what bring you--" the 
smile on her face suddenli die away. 

"you!" she cried, "how dare you! go! Go at once! and if you dare come 
here again or attempt to molest me in ani way, i'll prosecut you!" 

hamar, dumbfound at such an exhibit of wrath, slunk out of the 
room without utter a syllable. 

"the vixen," he mutter as soon as he found himself in the street. "A 
thousand cat in one! treat me like mud. jerusalem! i'll pay her 
out. and i'll lose no time about it either. she'll look differ at 
me next time we meet." 

He hurri back to cockspur street and go into the laboratory, 
threw himself into a chair and--thought. 

that same even at nine-thirty, in the interv between her first 
and second "go on," gladi hasten to her dressing-room, and wa 
prepar to partak of the light refresh she had ordered, 
when--to her horror--sh perceiv crawl toward her, across the 
floor, a huge cockroach--a hideou black thing with spideri leg and 
long antenna that it waved, to and fro, in the air, as it advanced. 
It wa at least doubl the size of ani gladi had hitherto seen, and 
her feel can best be appreci by those who fear such 
things--her blood ran cold, her flesh crawled, she sat glu to her 
chair, terrifi to move, lest it should run after her. she screamed, 
and her dresser, startl out of her senses, came fli into the 
room. 

"what is it, madam? what is it?" she cried. 

gladi point at the floor. 

"kill it!" she shrieked. "stamp on it! oh, quick, quick, it is come 
toward me." 

but the moment the dresser caught sight of the cockroach, she sprang 
on a chair and wound her skirt round her. 

"oh, madam," she panted, "I daren't! I daren't go near it. i'm 
frighten out of my life, at beetles. and there' anoth of 
them"--and she point to the wainscoting--"and another! why, the 
room' full of them!" 

and so it was. everywher gladi look she saw beetl crawl 
toward her--dozen upon dozens, hundr upon hundreds--and all of 
the same monstrou size and ultra-horr appearance. 

"look!" she screamed. "they are climb on to my clothes. one' got 
into my shoes, and anoth will be in them, in a second. there' 
another--crawl up my cloak--and anoth on my skirt. oh! oh!" and 
her cries, and those of the dresser, speedili brought a troop of 
actor and actress to the door. the instant, however, the caus of 
the alarm wa ascertained, there were loud yells, and a wild stamped 
down the passages. the stage manag wa called, but one glanc at the 
floor wa enough for him--h fled. and in the end three of the super 
had to be fetched. hot water, brooms, ashes, and quicklim were used, 
and although thousand of the cockroach were killed, thousand more 
came, and so hopeless did the task of get rid of them become, that 
the room eventu had to be vacated, and the crack under the door 
secur sealed. 

befor gladi left the theatre, she wa call on the telephone. 

"who are you?" she asked. 

"hamar," came the reply, in insinu tones. "how do you like the 
beetles? you'll never see the end of them till--" 

but gladi rang off. 

On her return home someth scuttl across the hall floor in front 
of her. she sprang back with a scream. It wa a gigant cockroach. 
the hall wa full of them. she summon the servants, and they set to 
work to kill them. but they might as well have tri to stop niagara, 
for as fast as they squash one battalion, anoth took it place. 
they came out of crack in the floor, from behind the wainscoting, 
from everi conceiv place in the kitchens, and in a dens black 
ribbon some six inch broad, ascend the staircase. gladi tri to 
barricad her room against them, but it wa of no avail. they came 
from under the board of the floor and pour down the chimney. they 
swarm over the furniture, in the cupboards, chest of drawers, the 
washstand (where they kept continu fall into the water), in her 
cloth (her dressing-gown wa cover with them), over the bed, and 
the climax wa reach when they approach the chair she stood on. 
too fascin with horror to move, she watch them crawl up to 
her. she wa thu found by her father. He had come to her assist 
in the veri nick of time, and after lift her from the chair and 
take her to a place, as yet safe from molestation, return to her 
room, where, with savag blows, smashing, equally, beetl and 
furniture, he remain till daybreak. 

with the first streak of dawn the beetl decamped, and the fray 
ended. the work of devast had been colossal. corps were strewn 
everywhere--and it took the combin household hours, befor all 
evid of the slaughter were obliterated. As for gladys, she had 
not slept all night and wa a wreck. 

"I can never go through anoth night of it," she said to miss 
templeton. "do you think we shall ever get rid of the horribl 
things?" 

"we can but try, dear!" miss templeton said consolingly, and she 
accompani gladi up to town, where they inquir of doctors, and 
chemists, and all sort of possibl and imposs people; and 
return to kew laden with chemicals, and patent beetl destroyers. 
but though they tri remedi by the score, none were of use, and the 
beetl repeat their perform of the preced night. 

gladi did not go to bed: surround with light candles, she sat on 
the top of a wardrob till daybreak. the follow morn the hous 
wa fumig with sulphur; and peopl were told off to kill the 
cockroaches, as they made their escap out of doors. By thi mean an 
enorm number were killed; but at night they were just as bad as 
before. 

An engin friend then suggest a freezing-machine. the temperatur 
of the hous wa reduc to ten degre below zero; the pipe froze 
(and burst next day), the milk froze, the housemaid' toe and the 
cook' littl finger of the left hand froze, everyth froze; and 
presum the beetl froze, for there wa not one to be seen. 

however, it wa quit imposs to resort again to thi extrem 
measure. john martin had the most agon attack of lumbago. gladi 
had neuralgia, and miss templeton--a slight touch of pleurisy. 

when gladi reach the imperi that evening, she found that the 
staff had been battl with cockroach all day, and that they had at 
last succeed in get rid of them with a fumig mixtur of 
camphor, cocculus, sulphur, bezonia and assafoetida--suggest to them 
by a hindoo student. 

for the next week not a beetl wa to be seen at the theatr nor at 
the cottage; and gladi wa begin to hope that hamar had ceas 
plagu her (in despair of ever win her), when the persecut 
suddenli broke out again. 

she had been in bed about half an hour, and wa fall into a gentl 
and much need sleep, when a tremend rap at the wall, close to her 
head, awok her with a start, and set her heart pulsat violently. 
think it must be some one on the landing, she got up and lit a 
candle. there wa no one there. the moment she got into bed again, the 
rap wa repeated, and it continued, at intervals, all night. thi 
went on for a week, dure which time gladi wa never onc abl to 
sleep. 

A brief respit ensued; but it wa abruptli termin one morning, 
when gladi awok feel as if some big insect were attempt to 
penetr her body. utter a shriek of terror, she whip the 
cloth from her, and sprang out of bed. miss templeton, who slept in 
the next room, came rush in, and they both saw an enorm insect, 
half beetl and half scorpion, dart under the pillow. john martin wa 
fetched, but although he search everywhere, not a trace of the 
insect could be found. 

that night, directli gladi got in bed and blew out the light, she 
heard a tick sound on the sheets, and a huge insect with long hairi 
leg ran up her sleeve. her shriek brought the whole household to the 
room, but the insect wa nowher to be seen. 

she wa thu plagu for nearli a fortnight. one insect only--nev a 
number, but onli one, of prodigi size and terrifi form--appear 
to her in the least suspect places, _i.e._, on the dressing-t or 
chimney-piece, in her shoes, or pockets; crawl over her in the dark; 
and could never be caught. 

these perpetu frights, and consequ sleeplessness, wore gladi 
out. she grew so ill that she had to give up acting, and go into a 
home to tri the rest cure. 

hamar then commun with her, through a third person, and offer 
to leav off torment her, if she would agre to be engag to him. 

"I never will!" she said. 

"then I will never leav off persecut you," wa hi retort. 

but he wa wary. He had no wish to kill her or to damag her looks--so 
he let her get well and remain thu for a brief space. when she wa 
onc again in full vigour, act at the imperial, he recommenc hi 
unwelcom attentions. 

At first he confin hi new plagu to the servant at the cottage. 
the cook wa one day turn out a drawer in the kitchen dresser, when 
she wa horrifi out of her sens to find squat there, a large, 
black toad, which stare most malevol at her, and then sprang in 
her face. she shriek to the housemaid to help her kill it, but 
befor a weapon could be got, the creatur had bounc through an open 
window, and disappeared. 

after thi incid the servant knew no peace. their bedcloth were 
thrown off them at night, their dress torn and bespatt with ink, 
their brush and comb thrown out of the window, and the water they 
pour out to wash in wa sometim quit black, sometim full of a 
bright green sediment, and sometim boiling, when it invari 
crack both the jug and basin. 

unabl to stand these annoy the servant left in a body. their 
successor fare the same, and worse. besid have to endur the 
above-nam horrors, pebbl were thrown through the windows, their 
chair were pull away as they were about to sit down (the cook, who 
wa one of those upon whom thi trick wa played, therebi serious 
injur her spine), and all sort of obstacl were place on the 
stairs, so that those who ran down unwarili trip over them and hurt 
themselv (two success housemaid broke their legs, whilst anoth 
sprain her wrist). 

the meat, too, wa a constant worry--it went so bad that enorm 
maggot crawl out of it by the thousand and cover the tabl and 
floor; and the milk, of which a larg quantiti wa taken daily, 
"turned" in a veri curiou manner. after be deposited, in it usual 
place, in the pantry, it began to darken; first of all it becam light 
blue, then deepen into an almost inki blackness, exhibit curiou 
zigzag lines; and, lastly, the whole mass began to putrefi and to emit 
a stench so overpow that everi one in the hous retched, and the 
whole place had to be disinfected. thi occur day after day. 
noth would stop it. the dairyman who suppli the milk did all he 
could to counteract it. He had hi dairi constantli cleansed, he saw 
that the cattl had a chang of food, he bought an entir new stock 
of dairi utensils, and no milk wa ever sent to the cottag that he 
had not had care analyzed. 

the troubl continu for three weeks, at the end of which period 
john martin receiv a telephon call from hamar. 

"hullo!" the latter said, "I guess you'v had about enough of it by 
thi time. wouldn't you like some sweet-smel milk for a change, or 
do you prefer to go on till you all get typhoid? the remedy, you know, 
lie in your own hands. you'v onli to tell that daughter of your to 
accept me, and i'll undertak all your troubl shall cease." 

"i'll see you hang first," john martin answered. 

"veri well, then, you old mule," hamar shouted, "look out for 
yourself--and miss gladys." 




chapter xxiii 

love 


To bring about plagu of insect hamar had resort to a veri simpl 
method. He had first of all made a wax imag repres a 
cockroach--scorpion--centipede, or whatev other speci came into 
hi mind. then, place the imag he had made in front of him, and 
repeat the prayer he had learn from the unknown, through the 
medium of mrs. anderson-waite' table, he had concentr body, soul, 
and spirit on plagu gladi with the insect, which the imag 
represented. when hi concentr reach the highest degree, 
insect in their actual physic bodi were transport from the 
tropics;[23] but when he wa unabl to concentr to the utmost, onli 
the ether project of the insect were obtainable; henc the 
hybrid--partli scorpion and partli beetle, that appear and 
disappear in gladys' bed and bedroom. 

To produc the rap on the wall of gladys' room, he had made a 
wax represent of a wall, and whilst concentr to the veri 
utmost, had struck it with hi knuckles. 

the plagu of the servant hamar had also accomplish by mean of 
imag and concentration. 

but in order to bewitch milk, he had been oblig to resort to other 
means. He had convert the mumia of an idiot into a magn 
microcosmi; and bribe the man who deliv the milk, he gave him 
instruct to soak the magn microcosmi, for a few minutes, in 
everi portion that he left at the cottage.[24] 

At length hamar have fail to gain hi object by plagu gladi 
and the servants, set about torment john martin. He made a wax 
imag of the latter, and after pronounc the necessari prayer, stuck 
the imag full of pins, cri out as he did so "john martin, I hate 
you. john martin, I curs you. john martin, a plagu on you." and each 
time hamar stuck a pin in the imag he had made of john martin, the 
real john martin felt an acut pain in the region of hi bodi 
correspond to that in which the pin wa stuck. 

the doctor, who wa call in, could make noth of the malady, but, 
follow the etiquett of the profession, cloak hi ignor with 
a look of profound wisdom, and the pronounc that he would tell 
them, in a day or two, what wa the matter. In the meanwhile, he found 
it necessari and polit to prescrib a non-committ mixtur of chalk 
and rhubarb, which, although disguis under the usual fanci 
pharmacopoeia appellation, did not, however, allay the pain. sharp, 
agon pricks, now on the neck now in the chest, now in the most 
sensit part of the knee-cap, now under the toe-nail, now--most 
pain of all--und the finger-nail--continu to torment john 
martin, who, though as a rule fairli stoical, could not stand these 
attack with ani degre of composure. He screamed, and swore, and 
cursed, until the whole household wa terrified--and gladys, pretti 
nearli out of her mind. 

dure a lull--an interval, wherein john martin enjoy a brief 
respite, the telephon bell rang. 

"hulloa," call a voice, "i'm hamar. haven't you had about enough of 
it? remember, you'v onli to say the word and i'll stop." 

"tell him i'll do noth of the sort," john martin said, "that he'll 
never get the better of me thi way." 

miss templeton gave the message, and hamar repli "wait! wait and 
see!" 

He then thrust wool, pins, horsenails, straw, needl and moss into 
the mouth of the image, and john martin had such fright pain in 
hi stomach that he went into convulsions; and, after an emet had 
been given him, vomit up all the above-nam articles, save the pin 
and needl which work their way out through hi flesh, caus him 
the most exquisit tortures. 

gladys, have given up go to the theatr in order to be with her 
father dure these attacks, now declar that she could no longer 
bear to see him in such excruci pain, whilst it wa in her power 
to prevent it. 

"tell him," she said, "tell hamar you'll accept hi conditions. don't 
think of me! I would rather do anyth than see you suffer like 
this." 

"I can hold out a bit longer," he groaned, "at ani rate I needn't give 
in yet." 

everi now and then there came a respite--perhap for sever hours, 
perhap for sever days--then the tortur recommenced. and alway 
john martin steel himself to bear them. At last came the climax. 

hamar, infuri that hi efforts, so far, had prove fruitless, 
resolved, sinc time wa pressing, to play hi trump card and either 
win, or lose all. He rang up gladi on the telephone. 

"mi patienc is exhausted," he said. "i'll give you one more chance, 
and one--only. agre to be engag to me at once--or i'll smite your 
father with the most virul form of cancer, and leav him to die." 

there wa no question now in gladys' mind as to what she should do. 
Of all thing in the world, she dread cancer most, and after the 
mani evid hamar had given her of hi skill in black magic, she 
did not doubt for one instant that he could, immedi he chose, 
carri out hi threat. 

"I have decided," she said faintly, "to--to--g in." 

"you accept me, then?" hamar said. 

"y-yes!" 

"when may I see you?" 

"when you like." 

"then i'll come at once," hamar replied. "_au revoir._" 

but hamar, when he arriv at the cottage, did not realiz ani of the 
gleeful anticip he had indulg in _en route_. gladi wa 
ill--so miss templeton inform him--at the same time beg him, if 
he realli had ani regard for miss martin, not to ask to see her for 
the next few days; and to thi request hamar, see no alternative, 
wa oblig to assent. 

shortli after he had gone, shiel davenport called, and found gladi 
alon in the garden. 

"i'v been told that your father is ill," he said, "and should like to 
hear better news of him. how is he?" 

"I think he' all right now," gladi replied, "but he ha suffer 
frightfully. indeed, we'v all had a terribl time," and she told him 
what had happened. 

"then you'v not been act at the imperi lately?" shiel asked. 

"not for the past week," gladi replied. "I couldn't leav father." 

"how ha mr. bromley burnham got on without you?" shiel ask 
bitterly. 

"I don't understand you," gladi said quietly. "I have an understudy, 
and from what I am told she ha given everi satisfaction. I have some 
news which I fear won't be altogeth welcom to you." 

shiel turn a shade paler. "what is it?" he faltered. 

"i'm engag to be married." 

for a few moment there wa silence, and then shiel exclaim 
mechan "engag to be married! To whom?" 

"to leon hamar! I couldn't help it." and she explain the position. 

"but he'll never keep you to it," shiel said. "he couldn't be such a 
brute." 

"i'm afraid he will," gladi replied. "he' shown pretti clearli that 
he' capabl of anything. i'v given him my promise--i must keep it." 

"then it' good-by to all interest in life--for me," shiel said, with 
a gulp. "i'v thought of no one but you sinc we first met. for 
you--in the hope of someday win you, i'v struggl on; i'v 
reconcil myself to a bare existence. now i'v lost you, i'v lost 
everything. I hate life. I shall--" 

"you'll do noth of the sort," gladi interrupted, "unless you want 
me to regret ever have met you. I wonder that you say 'i'v noth 
to live for'--when we can still be friends; and when you can, at 
least, win my respect, by put your shoulder to the wheel, and 
exert yourself to the utmost to get on." 

"and you--what about you?" 

"never mind me--i can well look after myself." 

"you'll live in hell," shiel cried, her eye goad him to madness. 
"even though you may not care for me, I do not choos to stand quietli 
by, whilst you spend your life in purgatory. hamar ha won you through 
some diabol trickery, and if I can't thwart him in ani other 
way--i'l kill him. He shan't marri you." 

"he will," gladi sighed. "no one can stop him. He is omnipotent." 

apparently, gladys' statement wa more or less true; and ninety-nin 
men out of a hundred, in the same circumst as shiel, would have 
now recogn the hopeless of the situation. but shiel wa 
abnormal. As he walk home from the cottag that even he kept on 
repeat to himself "gladi is my goal. I want onli gladys. i'll have 
onli gladys." and have onc made up hi mind to get gladys, it 
seem to him, as if out of everi obstacle, that lay between him and 
gladys, he could and would mere make a stepping-stone. "since," he 
argu to himself, "all' fair in love and war, i'll win gladi 
through anoth woman." 

and he straightway telephon to lilian rosenberg to have tea with 
him. 

the latter had alreadi made an engag for the afternoon; but, all 
the same, she accept shiel' invitation. 

"will you do me a favour?" he asked. 

"if it is anyth that lie in my power," she said. "what is it?" 

"I want you to find out how hamar work hi spells. I ask you 
before?" 

"I know you did and i'v not forgotten," lilian said, "but I have to 
be veri careful. i'v play the part of eavesdropp onc or twice, 
and heard enough to confirm me in my suspicion that hamar is in touch 
with evil, occult powers. i'v heard him pray aloud to them on more 
than one occasion, and i'v also a shrewd idea he performs, at least, 
some of hi spell by mean of wax images. but whi do you want to 
know?" 

"onli curiosity. I am intens interest in the occult." 

"you don't want to start a rival show, do you?" lilian ask 
jestingly. 

"with a maximum capit of two pounds--and a minimum of knowledge!" 
shiel laughed. "hardly. I wish I could. I would offer you the post of 
manageress." 

"partner!" 

"well, partner, if you like. would you take it?" 

"perhaps!" she said, look at him with a sudden shyness. "what a 
piti you are not rich. can't you get a post that would bring you in 
about £200 a year for a start? I believ you realli want someth to 
stimul you, to make you work in grim earnest--then you would 
succeed. there' grit in you--i love grit--but at present it' latent, 
it want bring out." 

"you are veri kind," shiel said, "but i'm afraid i'm a hopeless case, 
and, be such, have no busi to be in your company. will you come 
to the theatr with me?" 

"the theatre! when you'v no busi to be in my company, and when it 
is as much as you can do to pay the rent of a back attic!" 

"oh, never mind that. i'v had ticket given me. i'v been do odd 
bit of journal lately, and a dramat critic I know ha given me 
two stall at the imperial!" 

"the imperial!" lilian rosenberg ejaculated. "that' where gladi 
martin is acting, surely! I can't bear her!" 

"she' not the onli person in the cast," shiel observ drily, "and 
the play' a good one! Do come!" 

with a littl more persuas shiel gain her consent; and both he 
and she enjoy the play, or more correctli speaking, the occasion, 
immensely. So long as gladi wa on the stage shiel' eye never onc 
left her; whilst throughout the perform lilian rosenberg saw onli 
shiel, thought onli of shiel. the interest she had taken in him, the 
interest she had so confid assert wa onli interest, had grown 
apace--had grown out of all recognition. It need onli a fillip now 
to convert that interest into someth warmer; and the fillip wa not 
long in coming. 

shiel wa see lilian home to her lodg in margaret terrace, a 
turn off oakley street, when a man knock a woman down right in 
front of them. He wa just the ordinari type of street ruffian--th 
whitewash english labourer--and the woman, have without doubt been 
serv by him in the same manner fifti time before, wa probabl well 
use to such treatment. but it wa more than shiel, who had spent so 
much of hi life where they treat women differently, could stand, and 
befor lilian rosenberg had time to remonstrate, he had rush up to 
the prostrat woman, and wa hold the man at bay. A scuffl now 
began, in which the woman, whom shiel had help to regain her feet, 
joined. both man and woman now attack shiel, who, place himself 
with hi back against the railings, defend himself as best he could. 

the hour wa late, there were no polic about, and it seem onli too 
probabl that the fraca would end in a tragedy. the labour wa a 
burli fellow, shorter than shiel, but far broader and heavier, and ani 
one could see at a glanc that shiel stood no chanc against him. 
lilian rosenberg, at her wits' end to know what to do, ran into oakley 
street, and as there wa no one in sight, she made for the nearest 
light hous and rang the bell furiously. A man came to the door, 
whom, unheed hi expostulations, she caught by the arm and drag 
into the street. 

they arriv on the scene of action, just as the ruffian, break 
through shiel' guard, struck him a terrif blow on the forehead, 
which sent him reel against the railings. the newcom (upon whom, 
both man and woman, see shiel incapacitated, instantli turned) 
would probabl have share the same fate, had not the occup of 
sever of the neighbour houses--amongst whom were some half-dozen 
athlet young men--rous by the noise, come out into the street, and 
the ruffian and hi companion, see the odd were against them, 
decamped. 

shiel had not fulli regain consciousness, when lilian rosenberg, 
regardless of propriety, led him into her sitting-room, bath hi 
forehead, dose him with brandy, and make up a bed for him on the 
sofa, bade him rest there, till the morning. 

when he took hi departure, he had quit recovered, and lilian 
rosenberg had, at last, realiz that she love him. 


footnotes: 

[footnot 23: there is no doubt that mose inflict the plagues, 
with which he torment pharaoh, in thi way.] 

[footnot 24: In stage two thi might have been perform by 
ether projection, but hamar could not resort to thi method as 
the power of project had now pass from him.] 




chapter xxiv 

the subpoena 


A few day after the incid in margaret terrace, shiel had an 
inspiration. He wa lunch with an old schoolfellow whom, quit by 
chance, he had met in lincoln' inn, have previous lost sight of 
him for mani years, and the conversation, which had at first been 
confin to the old days, had gradual drift to what wa ever 
uppermost in shiel' mind--namely, the modern sorceri company, _i.e._ 
hamar, kelson and curtis. 

"did you know," hi friend remarked, "that the old statute, introduc 
in henri the fifth' reign against sorcery, ha never been repealed?" 

"you don't mean to say so," shiel cri excitedly--a vagu idea 
dawn on him. "tell me all about it." 

"well, that' rather a long order. for one thing, it impos all kind 
of penalti from capit punish to fines. for another, it wa in 
forc up to the begin of georg the third' reign, when the last 
case of a person be burn for witcheri in england occurred, and 
sinc then it ha fallen into disuse." 

"could it be revived?" shiel asked, a sudden wild hope surg through 
him. 

"for all I know to the contrary, it could," hi friend--who, by the 
way, wa a barrister--replied. "of cours no one could be burn or 
hang under it, but they might be fine or imprisoned." 

"then I wish to good you would file a case against the modern 
sorceri company! i'd move heaven and earth to get the scoundrel sent 
to prison!" and he told hi friend how matter stood between gladi 
and hamar. 

the barrister--whos name wa sevenning--h.v. sevenning, of t.c.d. and 
cheltenham colleg renown--wa keenli interested. It wa not onli that 
hi sens of chivalri wa stirred, but he saw sport. consequently, the 
forego convers result in a prosecut which, take place 
some four week later, wa report in the london herald as follows-- 

extraordinari charg heard AT the old bailey. 

reviv OF AN ancient statute. 

yesterday, at the old bailey, befor hi honour judg rosher, leon 
hamar, edward curti and matthew kelson, of the modern sorceri 
compani ltd., were indict under the 23rd of henri the fifth, C. 
15, which make it a capit offenc to practis and administ 
spells. the case for the prosecut promis to be a lengthi one. 
An enorm number of witnesses, who are most anxiou to make 
statements, will be called; and it is anticip that much of 
their evid will be of a most extraordinari nature. 

the accus are cite with have work spell to the 
injury--which injury, in mani instances, ha been fatal--of a vast 
number of people, repres of everi rank in life. 

hilda, countess of ramsgate, who appear in heavi mourning, wa 
the first wit called. In her evid she stated, that it wa 
owe to an advertis she had seen in the _ladies' meadow_, 
that she had consult the modern sorceri compani ltd., with the 
object of buy a spell to prevent her pekinges pet, brutus, 
catch cold on hi liver. she had hope to see mr. kelson, as 
she had heard that he wa more sympathetic, where ladi were 
concerned, than either mr. hamar or mr. curtis, but as mr. kelson 
wa engaged, she had consult mr. edward curti instead. the 
latter had given her a spell which he had assur her would have 
the desir effect, but directli she got home, her ador brutu 
develop melancholia, and die rave mad, after have bitten 
her child, who, by the way, had died, too. 

for the defence, gerald kirby, k.c., declar that the spell hi 
client had given the countess wa perfectli harmless; that it 
could not possibl have produc either melancholia or madness. 
"can ani dependence," he said, "be place on a woman, who 
obvious think more of her dog' death than that of her child!" 

the court wa adjourn till to-morrow. 

In the follow day' paper, the evid for the prosecut wa 
continued. ladi marjori tatler, who, in the weekli and illustr 
journals, for no other reason than her reput beauty, wa reintroduc 
over and over again to the long-suff public, wa the first to 
step into the witness-box. 

she declar that edward curtis, instead of give her a spell to 
make florillda win the derby, had given her a diabol someth 
that had brought out spot all over her face, and that she had to 
undergo a most expens treatment befor they could be got rid 
of. 

In cross-examination, ladi marjori tatler admit that she had 
ask edward curti for a spell that would caus all the hors 
run in that particular race, save florillda, to be taken ill. 

for the defence, gerald kirby, k.c., explain that hi client wa 
so disgust at the immor of ladi marjorie' request, that he 
had purpos given her a spell that would have no effect upon a 
horse, and could not possibl bring out spot on her ladyship' 
face. "the spell edward curti gave her," gerald kirbi said, "wa 
a mixtur of hempse and sago, flavour with violet powder, and 
my client instruct her ladyship to wear it next her heart." 
(loud laughter.) 

ladi corali mars, the next witness, who declar she had sought a 
spell to make the man, she wa forc into marrying, fall into a 
trance, just befor the marriag ceremoni wa to take place; and 
that, instead of bring thi about, the spell edward curti had 
sold her had caus her to have st. vitus' dance,--wa adroitli 
trap into admit that she had realli want her fiancé 
smitten with paralysis. "A wish," gerald kirbi announced, with a 
dramat flourish of hi hands, "that so arous my client' 
indign that, instead of give her the spell she wanted, he 
gave her one that would make her affianc husband more than ever 
hungri for the marriag hour to arrive. As for st. vitus' dance, 
would ani woman, with an emot and hysterical-nature, such as 
obvious wa that of ladi corali mars, ever be free from such a 
complaint?" 

the hon. augusta mapple, who state that she had visit the 
modern sorceri company, for the purpos of obtain a spell to 
bring about a defeat of the government, by afflict the bulk of 
their support with such biliou attack as would necessit 
their absenc from the house, and that, instead of give her such 
a spell, edward curti had given her one which had caus everi 
member of her household to fall downstairs--admitted, under 
cross-examination, that she had ask for a spell that would make 
everi support of the govern in the hous be suddenli seiz 
with tetanus. "A diabol request, your lordship," gerald kirbi 
said, "and one to which my client could not possibl accede. 
consequently, as a punish for such cruelty, he sold her a 
spell that would result in her have a sharp attack of toothache. 
It could not possibl have produc ani of the mishap she 
attribut to it." 

It is unnecessari to quot further. By far the greater number of these 
witnesses, on be cross-examin by mr. kirby, who defend with an 
abil that ha rarely, if ever, been excelled, were made to confess 
that they had want the spell for a far more subtl and danger 
purpos than they had previous stated; admiss which, of course, 
were highli prejudici to the case for the prosecution. 

shiel lost hope. He had look forward to the trial with an excit 
that almost border on frenzy. It wa never out of hi mind. He 
thought of it at meals, he thought of it at hi work, he thought of it 
out of doors, and, when he went to bed, he dream of it. 

"i'll save you! i'll save you yet!" he wrote to gladys. "the trial can 
onli result in one thing--th break up and imprison of the 
trio." 

but when he read the paper each day, and saw how, in almost everi 
instance, evid which ought to have been damn to the accused, 
had been twist into their favour, hi heart sank. 

there wa onli one chanc now--lilian rosenberg. she, of all the staff 
employ in the hall in cockspur street, wa best acquaint with the 
_modu operandi_ of messrs. hamar, curti and kelson. 

"we must get hold of that girl at all costs," h.v. seven remark 
to shiel. "you say you feel sure she like you. work upon her feel 
to show the firm up." 

"I don't much like the idea of it," shiel said, "but I suppos the end 
justifi the means." 

"of cours it does!" seven retorted. "it' your onli chanc of 
save miss martin." 

act on thi suggestion, shiel approach lilian rosenberg on the 
subject. 

"what about the spells?" he ask her. "have you found out yet how 
hamar work them?" 

"I have onli heard him mutter in hi room again," she said, her 
cheek paling. "and--you will onli laugh at me--i have seen queer 
shadow hover in hi doorway and steal down the passages, 
shadow that have terrifi me. I never knew what real fear wa befor 
I came to cockspur street, and for the past few week I have been 
almost too afraid to open my room door, for fear I should see 
someth stand outside." 

"you have no doubt, I suppose, in your own mind, that the trio 
practis sorcery?" 

"I certainli think they are help in all they do by evil spirits." 

"do you approv of such proceedings?" 

"I don't think them right. I don't think we have ani right to pri into 
the unknown. some day, undoubtedly, it will be given us to know, but 
until that day comes, we had far better leav it alone." 

"if you think like that," shiel said, "how can you reconcil yourself 
to work for these people?" 

"how can I help myself?" lilian rosenberg answered. "beggar can't be 
choosers. I am not respons for what they do." 

"but suppos you knew they were about to commit a veri heinou 
crime, wouldn't you feel it your duti to tri and circumv them?" 

"that depends," lilian rosenberg said. "if I could stop them without 
run ani risk of lose my post, then I would probabl tri to stop 
them, but if stop them meant be 'sacked,' I most certainli 
shouldn't. It isn't so easi to get post nowadays--especi good 
pay post like this. what do you take me for, a fool!" 

"then you don't believ in self-sacrifice, even for a friend?" shiel 
said slowly. 

"that depend on the degre of friendship," lilian replied. "if it 
were for some one I like veri much, then--perhaps!" 

"i there ani one you like veri much! I, somehow, couldn't fanci you 
be veri fond of ani one." 

"couldn't you?" lilian said, with a faint laugh. "you don't think me 
capabl of ani deep affection. you forget, perhaps, that a woman 
doesn't alway wear her heart on her sleeve." 

"I confess I don't understand women," shiel said, "and I had best come 
to the point at once. I happen to know that the trio--or at least one 
of the trio--i contempl do someth ultra-abominable--a 
cruel and shame wrong, which I particularli wish to prevent. but I 
may not be abl to do anyth without your help! will you help me?" 

"how _can_ i?" lilian asked. 

"why, by find out someth which might be damn evid against 
them, or by state your opinion in court. there is onli one way of 
stay the trio from do thi dastardli thing, and that is by 
get thi case, which is now be tried, to go against them." 

"well, and supposing, by some chance, the defend should win! what 
would becom of me?" 

"ah! that is where your self-sacrific would come in! It would be a 
nobl action." 

"how doe thi wrong, you say they are about to perpetrate, touch on 
you personally?" 

"it touch on some one with whom I am person acquainted." 

"some one you like?" 

"yes!" 

"A relation?" 

"that I can't say." 

"then I can't help you. I am natur inquisitive; curios is, as 
you know, a woman' privilege. you must tell me all." 

"it' for a friend, then!" 

"A man?" 

"no," shiel replied, "for a girl!" 

there wa an emphat silence, and then lilian rosenberg spoke. 

"have I ever heard you mention her?" 

"occasionally," shiel replied. 

there wa silenc again. then lilian rosenberg said slowly-- 

"you sure don't mean gladi martin! I can think of no one else." 

"I do mean her!" shiel replied, drop hi eyes. "she is to be 
coerc into marri hamar." 

"the silli fool!" lilian rosenberg said. "I would like to see ani one 
tri to coerc me. and it is to serv _her_ you want me to sacrific 
myself." and she turn away in disgust. 

after thi interview, lilian studious avoid shiel; and despairing, 
at length, of ever win her over, shiel report hi failur to 
h.v. sevenning. 

"we must subpoena her," said sevenning. 

"you'll never get her to speak that way," shiel said. "if onc she ha 
made up her mind not to do a thing, noth will ever compel her." 

"I have heard that said of peopl before," h.v. seven repli 
dryly, "but it' wonder what the witness-box can do; it loosen the 
most mulish tongu in a marvel manner." 

"it wouldn't hers," shiel maintained. 

h.v. sevenning, however, thought he knew best--what lawyer doesn't? 
moreover, it wa all part of the game--th great game of becom 
notori at all costs. He serv the subpoena. 

like most modern girls, lilian rosenberg wa wholli selfish; and for 
thi fault onli her parent were to blame. she had been brought up 
with the one idea of pleas herself, of say and do exactli 
what she thought fit; and no one had ever thwart her. now, however, 
the unforeseen had happened. she wa smitten with the grand passion, 
and confront for the first time in her life with the startl 
proposit of "self-sacrifice." she love shiel. she wouldn't marri 
him for the veri simpl reason he had no money--but that onli ad 
poignanc to the situation. she love him all the more. she knew shiel 
love gladi martin. whether he could ever marri gladi wa anoth 
matter--but he love her all the same. and the proposition, that had 
been so abruptli thrust upon lilian rosenberg, wa that she should 
sacrific herself, not onli to save gladi martin from marri hamar, 
but to pave the way for shiel, suppos gladi could reconcil 
herself to penury, to marri her himself. In other word she had been 
call upon to give up what was, at the moment, dearest to her in the 
world, and to court all the inconveni and worri of be thrown 
out of employment--for if she gave evid that would in ani way tend 
to damag the firm of hamar, curti & kelson, she would undoubtedli 
lose her post and, in all probability, never get another--at least not 
anoth as good--for the sake of a woman whom she did not know, but, 
nevertheless, hated. 

yet there wa in her, as there is in almost everi girl, howev up to 
date, a chord that respond to the heroic. A short time back she 
would have scof at the veri thought of self-sacrifice; but now, she 
actual caught herself consid it. she kept on consid it, 
too, until the trial wa well advanced, and had practic made up 
her mind to denounc the trio and go to the wall herself, when the 
subpoena wa served. 




chapter xxv 

curti IN A new rôle 


In an instant, lilian rosenberg had decid the cours she would 
adopt. 

"what a disgust thing to do," she indignantli exclaimed. "I 
wouldn't have believ it of shiel. the idea of forc me to give 
evidence--of forc me to save the situat for the sake of the 
woman he think he loves! I shan't do it!" 

and she prove as good as her word. apart from her import as a 
witness, consider interest attach to her on account of her 
appearance--sh wa infinit more attract than ani of the women 
who had hitherto appear in the witness-box--though mani of them were 
so-cal societi beauties. 

"you were wrong," wa the look which shiel read in h.v. sevenning' 
eyes, as lilian rosenberg took the oath. "she is on our side." 

but simpl as shiel wa in mani ways, he knew women better than the 
lawyer, and the exceedingli sweet express lilian rosenberg had 
assumed, and which he knew to be quit foreign to her, fill him with 
misgivings. nor wa he mistaken. the evid she gave wa entir in 
favour of the trio. 

the case for the prosecut wa concluded. for the defence, gerald 
kirby, k.c., resort to satire. He character the whole 
proceed as the most absurd heard in ani court for the past two 
centuries, and wondered, only, that it had been possibl to procur a 
counsel for such a ridicul prosecution. 

"even though," he remarked, "spirit such as have been specifi by 
the prosecut do exist--which is extrem dubious--ther ha never 
yet been produc ani reliabl corrobor evid respect them, 
and the prosecut ha wholli fail to prove, that it is through the 
medium of these spirits, that the modern sorceri compani have work 
their spells. the marvel feat that we have all seen perform in 
cockspur street have been accomplished--a the defend have all 
along stated--through will--sheer will power and noth else; and I 
intend produc evid to show that the secret of the wonder 
efficaci of all the charm and spell sold by the sorceri company, 
lie in will power also. whenev they have been consult with regard 
to the purchas of a spell, the firm have invari point out 
thi fact to the purchasers, care explain at the same time 
that the rings, locket and other articl sold to them were mere to 
assist them in concentration. It is ridicul to suppos that such 
trivial articl could have produced, of themselves, such calam 
as the wit for the prosecut attribut to them. but, of 
cours you did not believ the statement of such witnesses. how could 
you? how could you expect anyth but falsehood from women who, upon 
cross-examination, had own that their object in obtain the spell 
wa a far more danger object than they had at first led you to 
suppose. they sought spell that would do evil, and that evil wa not 
accomplished. now, I ask you, if the firm work their spell through 
the instrument of evil spirits--for it is assuredli onli evil 
spirit that are associ with sorcery--would not the spell they 
sold natur have brought about the sinist result for which they 
were required? undoubtedli they would! and they fail to produc the 
desir effect, simpli becaus their efficaci depended, not on spirit 
agency, but on human will power; which power one could onli too 
plainli see the societi ladies--who had wit for the 
prosecution--did not possess. 

"it may be asked, whi the defendants, if they do not accomplish their 
spell through black magic, style themselv 'the sorceri company'--and 
so mislead the public? obvious they do so pure for advertisement. 
'the sorceri company' is an attract title, a 'catchy' title, and 
for thi reason, which is sure a legitim one, sinc it is 
strictli in accord with the prevail custom of advertisement--th 
firm of hamar, curti and kelson adopt it. they did not expect--they 
were not so extraordinarili foolish as to expect--ani one would take 
them literally. they thought--a you and I think--that sorceri cannot 
be taken seriously--that it is confin to fairi tales--and that, as a 
fairi tale, it is potent onli in the nursery." 

thi wa the gist of counsel' speech for the defence. A number of 
wit then gave evid for the defendants; and when the 
prosecut counsel rose, it wa onli too evid that he wa plead 
for a lost cause. the court with ill-conc deris bare 
accord him a hearing. 

two hour later the _meteor_, alway the first in the field when 
sensat crop up, head the first column of their front page with-- 

collaps OF the sorceri case 
crush speech BY gerald kirby, k.c. 
acquitt OF the defend 

"the judge"--so the _meteor_ reported--"express himself in absolut 
agreement with the defend counsel. 'the action,' he said, 'ought 
never to have been brought--it wa sublim ridicul to accus ani 
one of be in leagu with forc in the exist of which no sane 
person could possibl believe.'" 

shiel wa in despair. all chanc of save gladi seem to be fast 
disappearing. He telephon to her, and wa answer by miss templeton. 

"gladys," she said, "had gone out with hamar, who had motor down to 
the cottag the moment the trial wa over and the verdict known." 

"I wish to god we had won the case," shiel observed. 

"so do i," miss templeton replied, "and so did gladys--sh regard her 
posit now as absolut hopeless!" 

"tell her not to lose heart," shiel answer hurriedly. "if I can't 
find ani other means, i'll--" but miss templeton rang off, and he 
spoke to the wind. 

full of wrath against lilian rosenberg, he went round to see her, and 
met her, just as she wa enter her house. 

"i'v come to see you for the last time," he announced. "after the way 
you behav in court, we can no longer be friends." 

"I don't understand," she said in rather a falter voice. "what have 
I done?" 

"onli perjur yourself," shiel retorted. "the tale you told the judg 
wa veri differ to the tale you told me, therefor it is imposs 
for us to continu our friendship. I could never have anyth to do 
with a woman whose word I can't reli upon--whos charact I scorn, 
whom I despise--and--" he wa go to add, "detest," but check 
himself, and unabl to trust himself in her presenc ani longer, he 
gave her a glanc of the utmost contempt, and wheel round, walk 
quickli away. 

As in a dream, lilian rosenberg went upstair to her room, and 
throw herself on the bed, buri her face in the pillow and 
indulg in a fit of crying. It wa not the thought of lose shiel 
that wa so pain to her--sh might have grown reconcil to 
that--it wa the thought of lose hi esteem. most peopl would agre 
with her--would assur her she had done the right thing in look 
after number one. "what, after all, is perjury?" she argued. "nearli 
everi one in thi world perjur themselv at one time or 
another--certainli all women." 

but it wa not the opinion of the major she care about--it wa the 
respect of the one; the respect she had wil and spite 
sacrificed. 

wa it too late to recov it? 

with regard to gladi she wa veri sceptical. the reluct to accept 
hamar as her futur husband she still believ to be all pretence, and 
she felt convinc that gladys, in her heart of hearts, wa onli too 
glad to get the chanc of marri ani one so rich. thi be so, she 
could not bring herself to think she had done shiel ani actual wrong. 
gladi would never marri him. the onli person she had harm wa 
herself. she had lied, and shiel wa not the sort of man to condon an 
offenc of that sort easily. still, weep would do no good; it would 
onli make her ugly. she got up, had tea, and went out. she could think 
better in the open air--it sooth her. for some reason or 
other--custom perhaps--sh stroll toward cockspur street, and there 
ran into one of the few peopl she particularli wish to 
avoid--kelson. 

He wa delight to see her. 

"it' nectar to me to be out again," he said. "jerusalem!--it wa 
aw in the courts. have supper with me." 

It wa a fine starlight night--th air cool and refreshing, and a wild 
abandon seiz lilian rosenberg. she would have sup with the 
devil had he ask her. 

"i'v noth to lose now," she said to herself. "nothing! i'll have 
my fling." 

"where shall we go?" she asked. "it must be somewher entertaining." 

"whi not to my rooms?" he said. "we can talk better there--w shall be 
all alone!" 

she rais no objection, and they were about to step into a taxi, when 
hamar and curti suddenli put in appearance. 

"matt!" hamar cried, seiz hi elbow. "I want a word with you." 

"not now," kelson protested, look hungrili at lilian. 

"yes, now!" hamar said. "at once! I shan't keep you more than five 
minutes"--and he drag kelson away with him. 

the moment they had gone, curtis, who wa obvious the wors for 
drink, address lilian. 

"kelson won't come back," he said. "hamar is mad with him. He say if 
he ever see you two togeth again he'll sack you. let me take hi 
place!" 

A sudden inspir came to her. there were one or two thing she 
badli want to know--and with a bit of coaxing, curtis, in hi 
present state, might tell her anything. she would try. 

"all right," she said. "i'll come." 

they got into the taxi and curtis, as far as hi fuddl sens would 
allow, made violent love to her. 

after supper--they had supper in hi rooms--h grew a great deal more 
amorous. she let him sit close besid her, she let him put hi arm 
round her waist; but befor she let him kiss her, she struck her 
bargain. 

"no!" she said, thrust him away. "not just yet. that can come 
later--if you are good. I want you to tell me someth first. about 
thi marriag of mr. hamar and miss martin--i it like to come off?" 

"ish it likely!" curti said with a stupid leer. "ish it likely! not 
much. leon mean nothing! He onli want the fun of be engag to a 
pretti girl--lik I wantsh fun with you. noth more." 

"then he'll throw her over after a while." 

"after he get what he wantsh to get." 

"and suppos she prove differ to what he expects?" 

"after he pash stage seven--that will be all right!" curti said 
give her waist an emphat squeeze. "everybodi will be all right 
then. you and matt--for exshample--and I and--and--whishky!" 

"stage seven! what do you mean?" 

"whi don't--you know!" curti gurgled--and then a sudden gleam of 
intellig come into hi wateri eyes, he added. "then I shan't 
tell you--noth shall make me. it' a shecret!" 

"I won't kiss you till you do!" lilian rosenberg said. 

"i'll make you." 

"oh, no, you won't," lilian rosenberg cried, disengag herself from 
hi grasp, and rising. "don't you dare touch me. i'm going." 

curti watch her with a helpless grin. then he suddenli cri out, 
"come back! come back, I shay!" 

"well, will you do as I want?" lilian rosenberg said. 

"i'll do anything--anyth to pleas you--if onli you shtay with me." 

she sat down, and hi arm onc again encircl her. 

"now," she said, push hi face away. "tell me!" 

bit by bit she drew out of him the whole histori of the compact with 
the unknown, how in stage five, the stage they were about to enter, 
they would have fresh power confer upon them--their present power, 
_i.e._ of work spell and caus diseases, be then cancelled; 
how they would obtain suprem power over women when they reach the 
final stage--stag seven; and how the compact would be broken and 
their ruin brought about, should either of them marry, or should 
anyth happen befor thi final stage wa reached, to disunit them. 

lilian could account for a great deal now. the uncanni feel she had 
alway experienc in the building; the curiou enigmat shadow 
she had seen hover about the doorway and flit down the 
passages; the extraordinari natur of the feat and spells; hamar' 
mutter and hi fury, whenev kelson spoke to her--wer no longer 
wholli unintelligible. but she must know all. she must be most 
exacting. 

finally, she got from curti everyth there wa to be got from him, 
and she laugh immoderately, when he excus himself on the ground 
that it wa all leon' doings--leon had told him to offer her a littl 
compens for the loss of her escort. 

"and you have compens me more than enough," lilian rosenberg said. 
"now you shall have your reward," and she kiss him--kiss him three 
time for luck. 

"but you'r not going?" he said, stagger to hi feet and attempt 
to hold her. "you'r not go till the roshi morn sun shine 
shaucili in on us." 

"oh, yes, I am," she said. "i'v had quit enough of you! good-bye!" 

and befor he could prevent her, she had run to the front door and let 
herself out. 




chapter xxvi 

IN hyde park AT night 


but now that lilian rosenberg wa possess of all thi inform 
respect the trio, she wa onc again in doubt how to act, or 
whether to act at all. suppos she were to attempt to warn gladi 
martin against hamar, how would gladi take the warning? would she pay 
ani attent to it? the odd were she would not; that have set her 
heart on marri hamar for hi money, she would blind herself to hi 
fault and resolut shut her ear to anyth said against him. also 
there wa the veri great possibl of gladi be rude to her--and 
even the thought of thi wa more than she could bear to contemplate. 
If onli shiel were reasonable! If onli he could be made to see how 
utterli ridicul it wa for him to think of win such a girl as 
gladys--gladi the pretty, dolly-faced, pamper actress, who had 
never known a singl hardship, had alway had a well-lin purse, and 
would never, never marri poverty! then back to lilian rosenberg' mind 
came her part with shiel--sh recal hi intens scorn and 
indignation. A liar! He did not wish to have anyth to do with a 
liar! it' a good thing everi man is not so fastidious, she said to 
herself bitterly, or the popul of the world would soon fizz out. 
she laughed. He had never question her moral in ani other 
sense--perhaps, in hi innoc or assum innocence, he had thought 
them spotless--at all event he had most gracious ignor them. but 
a liar! A liar--h could not put up with. and why! becaus the lie had 
touch him on a sore point. when lie do not touch a sore point, 
they, too, are ignored. 

she walk to the imperi and look again at gladys' photographs. 
how ani man could fall madli in love with such a face, wa more than 
she could conceive. It wa a mincing, maudlin, finick face--it 
irrit her intensely. she turn away from it in disgust, yet came 
back to have anoth look--and yet another. god know why! It 
fascin her. final she left it, fulli resolv to let it odiou 
origin go to her fate--without a warning. soon after her return to 
the hall in cockspur street, she wa sent for by hamar. 

"didn't I tell you," he said, "that you were on no account to 
encourag mr. kelson?" 

"you did!" lilian rosenberg replied. 

"will you kindli explain, then," hamar said, "whi you have disobey 
my orders?" 

"how have I disobey them?" lilian rosenberg asked. 

"how!" hamar retorted, hi cheek white with passion. "you dare to 
inquir how! why, you were on the point of accompani him to hi 
room last night to supper, when I stop you! I have overlook your 
disobedi so mani time that I can do so no longer. your servic 
will not be requir by the firm after to-day fortnight." 

"won't they?" lilian rosenberg replied, her anger rising. "I think you 
are mistaken. I know a great deal too much to make it safe for you to 
part with me. I know--for instance--al about your compact with the 
unknown!" 

"you know nothing," hamar said, hi voic faltering. 

"oh, yes, I do!" lilian rosenberg answered. "I know everything. I know 
how you first got in commun with the unknown in san francisco; 
I know how you receiv fresh power from the unknown everi three 
month (the old power be cancelled). I know the penalti you will 
undergo should the compact be broken--and--what is more--i know how 
the compact can be broken." 

"how the deuc have you learn all this?" hamar stammered. 

"never you mind. Am I to remain in your servic or leave?" 

"I think," hamar said, stroke hi chin thoughtfully, "it is better 
that you should remain--bett for all parties. I owe you some littl 
recompens for your loyalti to the firm, and for the admir way you 
spoke up for the firm in court. I will make you out a chequ for a 
hundr pound now--and your salari shall be doubl at the end of 
thi week. promis to keep out of mr. kelson' way in future--for the 
next six month at ani rate--aft that time you may see him as often 
as you like--and I will give you as a wed present a chequ for 
twenti thousand pounds!" 

"twenti thousand pounds! you are joking!" 

"i'm not. I vow and declar I mean it. Is that a bargain?" 

"I will certainli think it well over," lilian rosenberg said, "and let 
you know my decis later on." 

from what curti had told her she knew it wa the last day of stage 
four, that the trio that even would be initi into stage 
five--th stage of cures, and a mad desir seiz her to wit the 
initiation. but how would the unknown manifest itself on thi 
occasion--and to which of the trio? she could not keep a close watch 
on the three of them. If onli she had been friend with shiel, they 
might, in some way, have work it together. curti had care 
avoid her sinc the supper; but she had seen kelson, and he had 
look at her each time he met her as if he yearn to fall down at 
her feet and worship her. should she attach herself to him for the 
evening--and run the risk of anoth quarrel with hamar? she dearli 
love risk and dangers--and the danger she would encount in defi 
hamar appeal to her sport nature. It wa easi to secur 
kelson--on glanc from her eyes--and he would have follow her to 
timbuctoo. 

"chare cross--und clock--aft show to-night," she whisper as 
she flew hurriedli past him. "I want to speak to you." 

now it so happen that hamar had given kelson order to return to hi 
rooms, directli the perform wa over, and to remain in them till 
morning, in case he wa want in connect with the initiation. but 
he might have spare himself the trouble. It wa lilian, and lilian 
only, that kelson now thought of--it wa lilian, and lilian only, that 
he would obey. the idea of meet her--of have her all to 
himself--of be abl to do her a service--fil him with such 
uncontrol delight, that he hardli knew how to comport himself so 
as not to arous hamar' suspicions. directli the perform wa over 
he sneak out of the hall, and pretend not to hear hamar, who 
call after him, he jump into a taxi, and wa whirl away to the 
trysting-place. lilian rosenberg, who arriv a moment later, wa 
dress in a new costume, and kelson thought her look smarter and 
daintier than ever. 

"you shall kiss me at once," she said, "if you promis me one thing." 

"and what is that?" he asked, look hungrili at her lips. 

"I want you to let me see the unknown when it come to you to-night," 
she said. 

"good god! what do you know about the unknown!" he exclaimed, hi jaw 
falling, and a look of terror creep into hi eyes. 

"A great deal," she laughed, "so much that I want to learn more"--and 
of what she knew she told him, just as much as she had told hamar. 
"and now," she said, "I repeat my promise--y shall have a 
kiss--think of that--if onli you will hide me somewher so that I can 
see the unknown or it emissary." 

"I would do anyth for a kiss," kelson said, "but I fear it is 
imposs to fulfil the condition, becaus I haven't the remotest 
idea where or when the unknown will appear. besides, it is just as 
like to go to hamar or curti as to come to me; and up to the 
present I haven't felt the remotest suggest of it favour me. Is 
thi the onli condit I can fulfil, so that you will let me kiss 
you?" 

"certainly," lilian rosenberg replied. "I am not in the habit of be 
kissed. such an event can onli happen in the most except and 
privileg circumstances--such, for example, as exist at the present 
moment, when I ask you to put yourself to some consider 
trouble--if not actual to incur danger--in order to accomplish what 
I wish." 

"and yet I rememb kiss you unconditionally," kelson commented. 

"memori is a fickl thing," lilian rosenberg replied, "and so is 
woman. time have changed. i'll leav you at once, unless you promis 
to do your veri utmost to grant my request." 

kelson promised, and--aft they had had supper at the trocadero, 
suggest that they should take a stroll in hyde park. 

"I hope you are not aw shocked?" he inquir rather anxiously, 
"but a sudden impuls ha come over me to go there. I believ it is 
the will of the unknown. will you come with me?" 

"we shan't be abl to get in, shall we, it' so late?" lilian 
rosenberg said. "otherwis I should like to--i'm rather in a mood for 
adventure." 

"they don't shut the gate till twelve," kelson said, "and it' not 
that yet." 

"veri well, let' go, then. i'm game to go anywher to see the 
unknown," and so say lilian rose from the table, and kelson 
follow her into the street. 

they took a taxi, and alight at hyde park corner enter the park. 
It wa veri dark and deserted. 

"it' nearli close time," a policeman call out to them rather 
curtly. 

"we are onli take a constitutional," kelson explained. "we shall be 
back in five minutes." 

they cross the road to the statue, and were deliber which 
direct to take, when they heard a groan. 

"it' onli some poor devil of a tramp," kelson said. "the bench are 
full of them--they stay here all night. We had better, perhaps, turn 
back." 

"nonsense!" lilian rosenberg replied. "i'm not a bit afraid. there' 
anoth groan. i'm go to see what' up," and befor he could stop 
her she had disappear in the darkness. "here I am," she called; 
"come, it' some one ill." 

plung on, in the darkness, kelson at last found lilian. she wa 
sit on a chair under a tree, by the side of a man, who wa lying, 
curl up, on the ground. 

"he' had noth to eat for two days, and ha bright' disease," 
lilian rosenberg announced. "can't we do someth for him?" 

"two gentlemen told me just now," the man on the ground groaned, "that 
if I stay here for a coupl of hours--they would pass by again and 
guarante to cure me. I reckon there wa no cure for bright' 
disease, when it is chronic, like it is in my case; but they laughed, 
and said, 'we can--or at least--shal be abl to cure anything.'" 

"what were the two gentlemen like?" kelson asked. 

"how could I tell?" the man moaned. "I couldn't see their face ani 
more than I can see yours--but they talk like you. twang--twang-- 
twang--al through their noses." 

"sound as if it might be hamar and curtis," kelson remarked. 

"that' it!" the man ejaculated. "'amar. I heard the other fellow call 
him by that name." 

"how long ago is it sinc they were here?" kelson asked. 

"I can't say, perhap ten minutes. i'v lost count of time and 
everyth else, sinc i'v slept out here. they talk of go to 
the serpentine." 

"we had better tri and find them," kelson said. 

"if you had the money couldn't you get shelter for the night," lilian 
rosenberg said. "it must be aw to lie out here in the cold, feel 
ill and hungry." 

"I dare say some place would take me in," the man muttered, "onli I 
couldn't walk--at least no distance." 

"well! here' five shillings," lilian rosenberg said, "put it 
somewher safe--and tri and hobbl to the gates. If they haven't 
close them, you will be all right." 

"five shillings!" the man gasped; "that's--it' no good--i can't 
count. i'v no head now. thank you, missy! god bless you. i'll get 
someth hot--someth to stifl the pain." He struggl on to hi 
knees, and lilian rosenberg help him to rise. 

"how could you be so foolish as to touch him," kelson said, as they 
start off down a path, they hope would take them to the serpentine. 
"you may depend upon it, he wa swarm with vermin--tramp alway 
are." 

"veri probably, but I run just as much risk in a 'bus, the twopenni 
tube, or a cinematograph show. besides, I can't see a human be 
helpless without offer help. listen! there' some one els 
groaning! the park is full of groans." 

what she said wa true--th park wa full of groans. from everi 
direction, born to them by the gentli rustl wind, came the groan 
of countless suffer outcasts--legion of homeless, starv men 
and women. some lay right out in the open on their backs, other 
under cover of the trees, other again on the seats. they lay 
everywhere--thes shattered, tattered, batter wreck of 
humanity--thes gangren exil from society, to whom no one ever 
spoke; whom no one ever look at; whom no one would even own that 
they had seen; whose lot in life not even a stray cat envied. here 
were two of them--a man and a woman tightli hug in each other' 
embrace--not for love--but for warmth. lilian rosenberg almost fell 
over them, but they took no notic of her. everi now and then, one of 
them would emerg from the shelter of the trees, and cross the grass 
in the direct of the distant, gleam water, with silent, stealthi 
tread. onc a tall, gaunt figure, suddenli sprang up and confront 
the two adventurers; but the moment kelson rais hi stick, it 
jabber someth wholli unintelligible, and sped away into the 
darkness. 

"A scene like thi make one doubt the exist of a good god," 
lilian rosenberg said. 

"it make one doubt the exist of anyth but hell," kelson said. 
"compar with all thi suffering--th suffer of these thousand of 
hungry, hopeless wretches--th bulk of whom are doubtless tortur 
incessantly, with the pain of cancer and tuberculosis, to say noth 
of neuralgia and rheumatism--dante' inferno and virgil' hade pale 
into insignificance. the devil is kind compar with god." 

"I believ you are right," lilian rosenberg said, "I never thought the 
devil wa half as bad as he wa painted. the park to-night give the 
lie direct to the ethic of all religions, and to the boast effort 
of all governments, churches, chapels, hospitals, police, progress and 
civilization. there is no misery, I am sure, to vie with it in ani 
pagan land, either now or at ani other period in the world' history." 

"true," kelson replied, "and whi is it? It is becaus civil ha 
kill charity. giving--in it true sense--if it exist at all--i 
rare to be met with--giv in exchange--that is, in order to 
gain--flourish everywhere. peopl will subscrib for the erect of 
monument to king and statesmen, or to well-known and, often, 
richly-endow charit institutes, in exchang for the pleasur of 
seeing, in the newspapers, a list of the subscribers' names, and 
themselv includ amongst those whom they consid a peg abov them 
socially; or in exchang for votes, or notoriety, they will give 
liber to the brutal strikers, or outing for poor." 

"I suppose, by the poor, you mean the pampered, ill-mann and 
detest conceit counti council children," lilian rosenberg chime 
in. "I wouldn't give a farth to such a miscal charity, no--not 
if I were roll in riches." 

"and I think you would be right," kelson replied. "but for these 
realli poor park refuge it is a differ matter. obviously, no one 
will make the slightest effort to work up the public interest on their 
behalf, simpli becaus they are label 'useless.' they belong 
nowhere--they have no votes--they are too feebl to combine--they are 
even too feebl to commit an atroci murder; consequently, for the 
help they would receive, they could give noth in return. By the 
bye, I doubt if they could muster between them a pair of suspenders--a 
bootlace--a shirt-button, or even a--" 

lilian rosenberg caught him by the arm. "stop," she said, "that' 
enough. don't get too graphic. what' the matter with that tree?" 

they were now close besid the bank of the serpentine; the moon had 
broken through it cover of black clouds, and they perceiv some 
twenti yard ahead of them, a tall, isol lime, that wa rock in 
a most peculiar manner. 

[illustration: they gaze fascinated] 




chapter xxvii 

the right girl TO marri 


though the wind wa noth more than the usual night breez of earli 
autumn, the lime-tre wa sway violent to and fro, as if under 
the influenc of a stupend hurricane. lilian rosenberg and kelson 
were so fascin that they stood and watch it in silence. At last 
it left off sway and becam absolut motionless. they then 
noticed, for the first time, that there were three figur stand 
under it branches, and that one of the figur wa a policeman. 

"hide quickly," kelson whispered, "those two are hamar and curtis. 
quick, for god' sake--or they will see you." 

lilian rosenberg hid behind an elm. 

"hulloa!" kelson call out, advanc to the group. 

"whi it' you, matt!" curti cried. "hamar said you would come!" 

"said I would come! how the deuc did he know?" kelson exclaimed. "I 
didn't know myself till the moment befor I started." 

"I will you," hamar explained; "a soon as I got back to my room 
after the show, a voic said in my ears--i heard it distinctly--'b at 
the serpentine--th south bank--underneath a lime-tree--y will know 
which--at twelv to-night.' I look round--ther wa no one there. 
naturally, conclud thi wa a messag from the unknown I hasten 
off to curtis, who wa in hi digs--and needless to say--eating, and 
have drag him away with me in a diabol temper--i then sought 
you. where were you?" 

"take a walk. I felt I need it." 

"alone! are you sure you weren't out with some girl." 

"I swear it." 

"it seem as if i'm not the onli liar!" lilian rosenberg said to 
herself in her place of concealment. "what would shiel say to that?" 

"humph! I don't know if I ought to believ you," hamar remarked. "did 
you feel me will you to come here?" 

"rather!" kelson said. "that is whi I came. I seem to hear your 
voic say 'to hyde park--to hyde park--th serpentine--th 
serpentine.'" then sink hi voic he whispered, "what' up with the 
policeman, he look deuc queer?" 

"he' in a trance. We found him like this," hamar said. "he is 
undoubtedli under the control of the unknown. I expect it to speak 
through him everi moment. get readi to take down all he says. i'v 
come prepared," and he hand kelson and curtis, each, a pencil and a 
reporter' notebook. 

He had hardli done so, when the policeman--a burli man well over six 
feet in height, who wa stand bolt upright as if at "attention," hi 
limb absolut rigid, hi eye wide open and expressionless--began 
to speak in a soft, lisp voic that the trio at onc identifi 
with the voic of the unknown--th voic of the tree on that event 
night in san francisco. 

"the great secret of medicine--th secret of healing--wil now be 
reveal to you," the voic said. "pay heed. In case of tumour and 
ulcer take a young seringa, lay it for half an hour over the stomach 
of the afflict person, then plant it with the mumia, _i.e._ either 
the hair, blood, or spittl of the sick person, at midnight. As soon 
as the seringa begin to rot, the ulcer will heal. 

"in phthisi pulmonalis, the mumia of the sick person should be 
plant with a cut of the catalpa, after the latter ha been 
subject for some minut to the breath of the diseas person. As 
soon as the cut show sign of decay, the sick person will be 
cured. 

"in diabetes, plant the mumia of the patient with a bignonia, and as 
soon as the latter begin to rot, the diabet will go. 

"in appendicitis, cover the stomach of the sick person with a piec of 
raw beef, until the sweat enter it. then give the meat to a cat, and 
as soon as the latter ha eaten it, the patient will recover." 

"what becom of the cat?" kelson asked. 

"the append is transfer to it," the voic explained. "it 
should be kill at once. 

"in cancer take the sea wrack torrek mendrek--a weed of deep mauv 
colour streak with white. It must be boil for three hour in clear 
spring water (3 ozs. of wrack to half a pint of water), and then let 
to cool. when quit cold, a dessert-spoon of it should be taken by the 
suffer everi four hours--and at the end of two day the diseas will 
have complet disappeared. the wrack is to be found at the twenti 
fathom level, six mile west-south-west of the scilli isles. 

"in bright' disease, the mumia of the afflict should be plant at 
1 a.m., with a cut of sassafras, after the latter ha been slept 
on, for one whole night, by the sufferer. As soon as the sassafra 
begin to rot, the patient will be cured. 

"in dropsy, place a hare, that ha been strangled, over the diseas 
portion of the body, and let it remain there for one hour. then buri 
the hare, togeth with the mumia of the sick person, and as soon as 
the hare begin to decay, the patient will recover. 

"in jaundic and liver diseas (apart from sarcoma), plant the mumia 
of the afflicted, at 2 a.m., with a cut of black walnut, and as 
soon as the latter begin to decay, the suffer will get well. 

"in all skin diseases, the mumia of the patient must be planted, at 
midnight, with a cut of hickory, and when the latter begin to rot 
the diseas disappears. 

"in all fevers, the mumia must be planted, at 3 a.m., with laurel 
cuttings, after the latter have been place under the bed of the 
patient for one night. As soon as the cut show sign of rotting, 
the fever abates. 

"in acut inflammations, diseas of the heart, rheumatism, and 
lumbago, the mumia must be buried, at midnight, with a raven that ha 
been drowned, and place on a chair by the left side of the patient 
for one night. As soon as the raven begin to rot, the patient will be 
fulli restor to health. 

"in case of insanity, hysteria, and nervou diseas the mumia of the 
suffer must be planted, at 2 a.m., with a cut of white poplar, 
and as soon as the latter show evid of decay, the afflict will 
get well. 

"in case of hypochondria, and melancholia, the mumia of the suffer 
must be planted, at 4 a.m., with a crocus, and as soon as the latter 
begin to rot, the diseas will depart. 

"in everi case it will be necessari to prelud the perform with 
the follow invocation-- 

"'oh most power and prescient unknown, befor whom the greatest of 
the atlantean prostrat themselves. that wa in the beginning, that 
is now and alway will be. I conjur thee by the magic symbol of the 
club-foot, the hand with the finger clenched, and the bat, in thi 
the magic year of kefana, to extend to me thi wonder power of 
healing. rena vadoola hipsano eik deoo barrinaz.'" 

the lisp voic ceased, and, with a convuls start, the policeman 
came to himself. 

"hulloa!" he said, in hi natur gruff tones, rub hi eyes. "I 
must have 'drop off.' who are you? what are you do in the park 
at thi time of night?" 

"we'v been watch you!" hamar said. "it is a bit of a phenomenon to 
see a london bobbi asleep on hi beat." 

"and to hear him talk in hi sleep too," curti added. 

"I didn't know I wa talking," the policeman muttered. "it all come 
of be too mani hour on duty. what have you got those note-book 
out for? not been take down anyth about me, have you?" 

"show us out of the park and you'll hear no more about it," hamar 
said. 

"and we'll give you half a sovereign into the bargain," kelson chime 
in. 

"follow me then," the policeman said. "i'll take you to one of the 
side entrances." 

"matt!" hamar exclaim as they pass the tree behind which lilian 
rosenberg wa hiding, "I smell scent--and what is more I recogn it. 
It is violett de mer--th scent that--rosenberg uses! you were with 
her thi evening!" 

"I swear I wasn't!" kelson replied. "I bought some scent in regent 
street thi afternoon." 

"humph," hamar grunted. "I have my doubts." 

they walk on in silenc till they came to a small iron gate, where 
the policemen left them, whilst he went to the lodg for the keys; and 
all the while kelson wa in terror, lest hamar should catch sight of 
lilian rosenberg, who had kept close behind them, and wa now 
standing, but a few yard away, tri to conceal her ident and 
escap notice. 

but the policeman on hi return with the key call out to her, and 
kelson, fear that she might be either taken in charg for loiter 
there, in appar suspici circumstances, or made to remain in 
the park all night--neith of which conting he could possibl 
permit--at onc came forward, and explain that she wa a friend of 
his. 

the policeman wa satisfied. the sight of anoth half-sovereign had 
render him more than polite, and, without say a word, he let them 
all out together. 

the moment they were in the street, hamar turn on kelson, white with 
passion. 

"so," he said, "I wa right after all--liar! fool! you would risk all 
our live for a few hours' flirtat with thi silli girl." 

"if it' onli flirtation, leon, what doe it matter?" curti 
interposed. "for goodness' sake shut up wrangl and let' get home. 
i'm starving." 

"I shall have someth to say to you to-morrow morning," hamar 
remarked, in an undertone, to lilian rosenberg. 

"and I to you," wa the furiou reply. "I shall not forget the 
disrespect way in which you have just spoken of me, in allud to 
the scent." 

she signal to a taxi, and give kelson a friendli good-night, 
jump into it and wa speedili whirl away. 

On the whole, the even had been a disappointment. she had want to 
see the unknown--th aw thing that had inspir kelson and hi 
colleagu with such unmitig horror--and instead she had seen onli 
an obsess policeman--a catalept "copper"--who, had he not spoken 
in a strang uncanni voice, would certainli have seem to her 
absolut ordinary. 

with regard to hamar' displeasure, she wa not in the slightest 
degre disturbed. He would never dare say anyth to her. and after 
all that had occur he would never ventur to "sack her." all the 
same she hate him. there wa just suffici in her conduct to make 
the name he had call her by applicable--therefor her bitterest 
wrath and indign were arous against him. He had behav 
unpardonably. she could kill him for it. 

"i'll just show him," she said to herself, "what that uncivil tongu 
of hi can do. He shall see that it can do him infinit more harm 
than all kelson' love-making. for one thing i'll spoil hi chanc 
with gladi martin; and--i wonder if I could make use of what I know 
about him, as a mean of get friendli again with shiel. At all 
event i'll try." 

with thi object in view she went round to shiel' lodgings, and wa 
inform by the landladi that shiel wa ill. 

"noth seriou I hope?" she asked. 

"it ha been," the landladi replied, "but he is better now. It all 
came through hi not take proper care of himself." 

"may I see him, do you think?" lilian rosenberg inquired. 

"I don't know," the landladi grumbled. "he' in a veri touchi mood--no 
one can do noth right for him. but mayb there won't be ani harm in 
your trying," she added, her eye wander to the half-crown in 
lilian rosenberg' fingers. 

she open the door somewhat wider, and lilian rosenberg entered. 
shiel wa immens surpris to see her. ill and solitud had 
veri consider subdu him, and though at first he show some 
resentment, he speedili soften under her sympathet solicit 
for hi health. she put hi room straight and dust the furniture, 
got tea for him, and when she had complet won him over by these 
kindli actions, and made him beg her pardon for ever have spoken 
harshli to her, she broach the subject all the while uppermost in 
her mind--th subject of hamar and gladys. 

"he hasn't the slightest intent of marri her," she said. "all he 
want is to make her hi mistress, so as to be abl to throw her over 
the moment he get tire of her, and then marri some one of title. He 
is tremend taken with her of course--h physic beauty, which 
he had the impud to tell me surpass that of ani other woman he 
had seen, appeal strongli to hi grossli sensual nature. If she won't 
give in to him now, she will be oblig to do so in six months' time." 

"I don't understand you," shiel said feebly; "whi in six months' 
time?" 

lilian rosenberg then told him what she knew about the compact. 

"so you see," she added, "that if the final stage is reach no woman 
will be safe--th trio will have ani girl they fanci entir at their 
mercy." 

"how inconceiv awful!" shiel exclaimed. "sure there is some way 
of stop them." 

"there is onli one way," lilian said slowly, "the union between the 
three must be broken--they must quarrel, and dissolv partnership." 

"you may be sure they will take good care not to do that." 

"don't be too sure," lilian rosenberg replied. "matthew kelson is veri 
fond of me. with a littl persuas he would do anyth I asked." 

"then do you think you could bring about a ruptur between him and 
hamar!" shiel ask eagerly. 

"I might!" 

"and you will--you will save gladi martin after all!" 

lilian did not repli at once. 

"do you think she is the sort of girl who would marri poverty," she 
said, evasively, "poverti like this!" and she glanc round the room. 

"I won't ask her to!" shiel exclaimed. "whilst I have been lie in 
bed, ill, I have thought of mani things--and have come to the 
conclus I have no right ever to think of marrying. It is difficult 
for me to earn enough to keep one person in comfort--and i'v lost all 
hope of ever earn enough to keep two." 

"well, if you don't ask her," lilian rosenberg said, "there' one 
thing, she will never ask you. and I think you are remark well out 
of it. If you do ever marry, marri a girl that ha grit--a girl that 
would be a real 'pal' to you--a girl that would help you to win fame!" 




chapter xxviii 

whom will HE marry? 


had lilian rosenberg been abl to see the effect of her convers 
upon shiel after she had left him, she would have been disappointed. 
He had, prior to thi interview with lilian rosenberg, as he told her, 
made up hi mind to abandon all idea of marri gladi martin; and 
there is a possibl that had her name not been mentioned, had she 
not been recal so vividli to hi mind, he would have adher to 
that resolution--at all event so long as he refrain from see 
her. but such is human nature--or at least man' nature--that directli 
lilian rosenberg had left him, shiel' love for gladi burst out with 
such wild, invigor forc that it swept reason and everyth els 
befor it. gladys! He could think of noth else! everi detail in her 
appearance, everi word she had spoken, came back to him with 
exagger intensity. her beauti wa sublime. there wa no one like 
her, no one that could inspir him with such a sens of ideality, no 
one that could lead him on to such dizzi height of greatness. It wa 
all nonsens to say, as lilian rosenberg had said, there were just as 
mani good fish in the sea as had ever come out of it--ther wa onli 
one gladys. hamar should never marri her--h would marri her himself. 
she must be told at onc of hamar' infam designs. A mad desir to 
see her came over him, and disregard of the doctor' order that he 
should remain in bed sever more days, he got up, and dress as 
fast as hi weak condit would allow him, took a taxi and drove to 
waterloo. 

On reach the cottage, at kew, he found gladi at home, and to hi 
great joy, alone. 

there is noth that appeal to a woman more than a sick man, and 
shiel, in come to gladi in hi present condition, had unwittingli 
play a trump card. had he appear well and strong she would 
probabl have receiv him none too cordially--for she wa veri tire 
of men just then; but the moment her eye alight on hi thin cheek 
and she saw the dark ring under hi eyes, piti conquered. thi man at 
least wa not to blame--h wa not of the same pattern as other men, 
he wa not like so mani men whose adul had grown fulsom to her, 
and--h wa total unlik hamar. 

In veri sympathet tone she inquir how he was, and on learn 
that he had been suffici ill to be kept in bed, ask whi he had 
not told her. 

"aunti and I would have call to see you," she said, "and brought you 
jelli and other nice things. who wait on you, had you no nurse?" 

fear lest he should give her the impress he wa speak for 
effect, or tri to trade on her feel (shiel wa one of those 
peopl who are pain exact), he told her as simpli as he could 
just how he had been placed. 

"but whi come here," gladi demanded, "when you were told to stay in 
bed till the end of the week. It is fright risky." 

shiel then explain to her the purport of hi visit. 

"then it wa to warn me, to put me on my guard against hamar, that you 
disobey the doctor' orders," she said. 

shiel nodded. "you are not displeased, are you?" he ask nervously. 

"I am displeas with you for think so littl of yourself," gladi 
said, "and more than oblig to you for think so much of me. you 
know I onli consent to marri mr. hamar to save my father--and you 
say he no longer ha the power to work spells?" 

"I believ that to be a fact," shiel replied. 

"then he lie to me!" gladi observed. "he threaten that unless I 
saw him as often as he wished, and went with him wherev he wanted, 
and a good mani more things, he would inflict my father with everi 
conceiv disease. you are quit sure your inform is correct?" 

"absolutely!" 

"then, thank god!" gladi said with a great sigh of relief. "I shall 
know how to act now." 

"you will break off your engagement?" shiel inquir eagerly. 

"no! I can't do that!" gladi said sadly. "i'v promis to marri mr. 
hamar, and, therefore, marri him I must." 

"promis made under such condit are mere extortions, they don't 
count." 

"I fear they do," gladi replied. "i'v never yet broken my word." 

"then there' no hope for me," shiel gasped. "I must go--it madden me 
to see you the affianc bride of that devil." 

He rose to go, but had hardli gain hi feet, when hi strength 
utterli fail and he collapsed. gladi help him into a chair, and 
then flew for some brandy. In the hall, she met her aunt, who had just 
return from an afternoon call. In a few word she explain what had 
happened. 

"poor young man," miss templeton said. "I thought he look veri ill 
the last time I saw him. and he came here sole to benefit you! well, 
you have a good deal to answer for, and your face is not onli your own 
misfortune, but other people' too. but it will never do for your 
father to see mr. davenport. He went off in a veri bad temper thi 
morning, and if he come back and find him here, there'l be a 
scene." 

miss templeton and gladi consult togeth for some minutes, and 
then decid to send for a taxi and have shiel convey back to hi 
rooms, miss templeton accompani him. 

miss templeton knew that shiel wa poor, but like most peopl who have 
live in comfort surround all their lives, she had no idea of 
what poverti wa like--th poverti of a seven-and-sixpenni a week room 
in a back street; and when she saw it she nearli swooned. 

"whi thi is a slum!" she ejacul as the taxi stop next door to 
a fri fish shop in a narrow street swarm with children suck 
bread and jam, and roll each other over in the gutters. 

"I don't wonder the man is ill here!" she said to herself, as the door 
of the hous they stop at open and she snuf the atmosphere. 
"the place reeks--and--oh! gracious! is thi the landlady?" 

yet the woman wa ordinari enough--th type of landladi one see in 
all back streets--greasi face, straggl hair, dirti blouse, black 
hands, bitten fingernails, short skirts, prodigi feet, a grubbi 
child cling on to her dress and everi indic of the speedi 
arriv of another. 

"I suppos you'r 'i mother hain't you, mum?" she said, gape at 
miss templeton' rather fashion cloth in open-mouth wonder. "I 
told 'im 'ee ought not to go out, but 'ee never 'eed what I says." 

miss templeton, though not particularli flatter at be taken for 
shiel' mother--since, like most ladi of matur age, she wish to 
be regard as much younger--nevertheless, thought it better not to 
disillus the woman. the poor, she told herself, often have veri 
decid view on propriety. with the woman' aid she got shiel 
upstairs, and, as he wa too feebl to undress himself, despit hi 
protestations, help to disrob him. she had thought, when she first 
saw the slum, of return to kew at once, but she did no such thing. 
she stay with shiel; persuad the landladi to make him some gruel 
(which prove to be a sorri mess, but had at least the advantag of 
be hot), and bribe one of the children to fetch the doctor. shiel 
nearli died. had it not been for the care nurs and good food 
provid by miss templeton, who visit him everi day, he would never 
have turn the corner. 

"the poor boy is terribl fond of you," miss templeton said to gladys. 
"in hi delirium he talk of noth but save you from leon 
hamar--from that devil leon hamar--and if one can place ani relianc 
at all, on the rave of a sick man, a devil, leon hamar undoubtedli 
is. what a piti it is shiel hasn't money." 

these remark were natur not without effect on gladys, and she 
could not help grow more and more interest in the man, whose love 
for her had prove so deep-root and ideal, that he had practic 
sacrif hi life, in an attempt to serv her. finally, she found 
herself await her aunt' daili report of hi ill with an 
anxieti that wa almost acute. 

In the meanwhile, john martin came home one even in a rare state of 
excitement. 

"what do you think!" he exclaimed, throw a bundl of letter on the 
table, "one of dick' specul ha turn out trumps, after all. 
He had invest sever thousand of pounds--in shiel' name--in 
enamel-ivorine, the new stuff for stop teeth, which look exactli 
like part of the teeth. I rememb I thought it an absurd ventur at 
the time, but for onc in a way I wa wrong--" 

"ahem!" interrupt gladys. 

"there ha been a sudden boom in the patent, everi dentist is use 
it, and, as a consequence, the share have risen enormously. i'v 
heard from dick' lawyer to-day that shiel is now worth fifti thousand 
pounds!" 

"good heavens!" miss templeton ejaculated, "and gladi ha bound 
herself to hamar! I suppose," she said afterwards, when john martin 
and she were alon together, "that you would not have ani object to 
shiel now, if gladi were free to marri him." 

"certainli not!" john martin said, "certainli not, I alway like 
shiel. A fine manli young fellow, veri differ to the type one 
usual meet nowadays. I onli wish gladi were free!" 

"you would rais no obstacl to her becom engag to shiel?" 

"none whatsoever! but what' the good of talk about an 
impossibility. gladi is stubborn itself--when onc she ha made 
up her mind to do a thing, noth in god' world will make her not do 
it." 

"wait," miss templeton said, "wait and see. I think I can see a 
possibl way out of it." 

she had learn much from shiel in hi "wanderings." He had constantli 
allud to hamar, curtis, kelson--and lilian rosenberg; to the great 
compact, and to the one possibl way of break that compact--nam 
through the instig of a quarrel between the trio. from sever of 
the statement he had made, miss templeton deduc that kelson wa 
greatli under the influenc of lilian rosenberg--and it wa from these 
statement that she final receiv an inspiration. 

miss templeton saw deeper than shiel--it had alway been her custom to 
read between the lines. "now," she argued, "if kelson were so easili 
influenc by lilian rosenberg, who wa young and attractive, it wa 
almost a _sine quâ non_ that he wa in love with her," and as marriag 
wa one of the eventu strictli forbidden to the trio in the 
compact--"they must neither quarrel nor marry," shiel had 
exclaimed--her wa their chance. kelson must marri lilian rosenberg, 
and by so doing, break the compact and overwhelm the trio in some 
sudden and dire catastrophe. but the marriag must take place within 
six months' time. how could that be arranged? could lilian rosenberg 
be bribe or persuad into it? for of cours miss templeton be a 
woman--albeit an old maid--had at onc divin that lilian rosenberg 
wa in love with shiel--that she did not care a straw for kelson, and 
that to marri the latter she would need some veri strong inducement. 
and the onli induc she could think of wa lilian' genuin love 
for shiel. 

"yes, it is upon thi one weak of lilian' that I must work," she 
said to herself. "it is the onli way I can see of save gladys." 

resolv at ani rate to experi upon these lines, she lost no time 
in seek out lilian rosenberg, who receiv her veri coldli and wa 
distinctli rude. 

"what have my affair to do with you? who sent you here?" she 
demanded. 

"humanity!" miss templeton replied. "I have come entir of my own 
accord to plead the caus of one who is serious ill--poss 
dying!" 

"serious ill!--poss dying!" lilian rosenberg said incredulously, 
nevertheless, turn pale. "mr. davenport is sure not as bad as all 
that!" 

"when did you see him last?" miss templeton asked. 

"A fortnight ago," lilian rosenberg replied. "I have been inund 
with work the past two weeks." 

"then you'v not heard that he' had a relapse," miss templeton said, 
"and is now in a most critic condition! He ha someth on hi 
mind, and the doctor assur me that whilst he is still worri over 
that something, there is no chanc of hi recovery." 

"do you know what it is--th something?" lilian rosenberg asked, the 
white on her cheek intensifying. 

"yes!" miss templeton said slowly, and tri to appear calm. "he is 
veri worri about miss martin' engag to mr. hamar." 

"and why, pray?" 

"becaus he know all about mr. hamar--and the compact." 

"he ha told you?" 

"I have glean it from what he ha said in hi delirium." 

"ha he been as ill as that?" 

"yes, he has. He had a temperatur of a hundr and four the day 
befor yesterday." 

for a few moment there wa silence. then lilian rosenberg said, "can 
you believ what a man say in delirium?" 

"in thi instanc I feel sure you can," miss templeton replied. 

"whi should miss martin' engag be of such interest to mr. 
davenport?" 

miss templeton thought for a moment. "because," she said at last, "he 
is in love with her." 

"are you sure of it?" 

"absolutely!" 

"do you think she care for him, even as much as that?" and she 
snap her fingers. 

"I think she may care for him a veri great deal some day--sh ha 
begun to care for him already!" 

"but she would never dream of marri ani one as badli off as mr. 
davenport. He is practic starving." 

"he was--but he' not now. he' come into money." and she explain 
about the fifti thousand pounds. 

"I see!" lilian rosenberg said after a prolong pause, "that account 
for her have just begun to care for him. suppos there wa some 
one who had been fond of him all along--in the day when he hadn't a 
halfpenni to hi name, and everi one els shun him!" 

"I should feel veri sorri for that person," miss templeton said, "but 
set asid the sacrific of hi happiness--it would be wrong for 
him to marri her if hi heart wa fix elsewhere." 

"which you say it is." 

"which I am sure it is!" 

"well, suppos it is--what doe it concern me? whi tell me all 
this?" 

"becaus it lie in your power to put an end to the compact and bring 
about the catastroph the unknown threatened." 

"I think you credit me with rather too much. I do not quit see how I 
can accomplish all this?" 

"but I do," miss templeton said, briskly. "I believ I am right in 
say mr. kelson is in love with you--that you can make him do pretti 
well anyth you please. well, all you have to do is to lead him on 
to propos and insist on hi marri you at once--or at all event 
befor the expir of the compact. If you succeed in do thi the 
compact will be broken!" 

"that may be," lilian rosenberg exclaimed, "but where, pray, should I 
come in? whi on earth should I marri a man I don't care a snap for?" 

"why!" miss templeton replied, slowly, "why, becaus by marri a man 
you don't care a snap for, you would save the life of a man--i am 
quit sure, you care a veri great deal for." 




chapter xxix 

the end and "the beyond" 


It took lilian rosenberg some time to make up her mind. 

"it' extraordinary," she said to herself, "how fond I am of shiel. I 
use to think it an imposs for me to be realli fond of 
anyone.... the question is, however, am I suffici in love with 
him, to give him up to that soft littl cat--gladi martin! If it 
weren't for thi illness--if I could onli persuad myself that he 
isn't as ill as miss whatever-her-name-is--said, I shouldn't think 
twice--i should let thing be--but as I feel sure he is realli 
ill--danger ill--and the onli chanc of hi recoveri lie in the 
possibl of hi marri martin--i must deliberate. shall I or 
shall I not? If it were ani other woman I shouldn't so much 
mind--but--gladi martin! I can't endur her. there is one hope, 
however, namely--that if he marri her, he will soon tire of 
her--and--and come to me. what a tremend score off her that would 
be! but, no! I wouldn't do that! because--because--wel there--just 
like my infern luck--i love him. could I marri him, I wonder, even 
if there were no gladi martin? It is doubtful! yet I believ I could. 
but what is the good of conceiv impossibilities! there is a gladi 
martin--and--i can never have shiel. the onli question I have to 
settl is--shal she have him? shall I marri kelson so that martin can 
marri shiel?" 

lilian rosenberg turn thi question over in her mind for a whole day 
and night, sometim arriv at one decision, sometim at another. 
In the end--veri elabor dressed, and look daintier than she 
had ever done in her life, she waylaid kelson and ask him to have 
tea with her. 

ani pretti face, accentu by all the allur of a larg 
mushroom hat and hobbl skirt, wa enough for kelson; but when that 
face belong to the one girl for whom, abov all other girls, he had 
a coloss weakness, he simpli could not feast hi eye enough on it. 

"have tea with you? Of cours I will," he said. "but we must be 
careful. hamar is about. If you walk on up the haymarket, i'll follow 
in a taxi, and pick you up, directli I get to a safe distance." 

"I see you are as much in awe of mr. hamar as ever," lilian rosenberg 
laughed. "i'm not! i'v found him out--he' all talk. but do as you 
will--get your taxi and i'll walk on--we'l have tea in my new flat." 

kelson wa so delight he hardli knew if he stood on hi head or hi 
heels. "you are prettier than ever," he said, as the taxi-door shut 
and they sped away. "I declar there seem no limit to your beauty." 

"onli becaus you'r partial," she said. "I shall grow ugli one day. 
perhaps--soon." with a savag energy, she set to work to complet 
overcom him. with a languish express in her eyes--eyes, which 
she made use of mercilessly, without give him a moment' 
respite--sh watch hi whole be vibrat with love and adoration. 

they had hardli enter the drawing-room of her flat when he threw 
himself at her feet, and pour forth hi worship of her in the most 
extravag phrases. 

"look here, mr. kelson," she said at length, withdraw the hand it 
seem as if he would never leav off kissing, "thi is all veri well; 
but I daresay you make love to countless other girl in thi same 
fashion. how can I tell if you are realli serious?" 

"don't I look as if I am?" he cried. 

"one can never judg correctli by looks," she replied; "they are 
terribl deceptive. you are veri emphat in your avow of love, but 
you say noth about marriage." 

"then you do care for me! jerusalem! how happi I should be if onli I 
thought that!" 

"think it, then," lilian rosenberg said, "and let us come to an 
understanding. can you afford to keep a wife--keep her, as I should 
expect to be kept--plenti of new dresses, jewelry, theatres, balls, 
motors, ascot, henley, cowes?" 

"I reckon I could do all that," kelson replied. "i'v just over a 
hundr and fifti thousand pound in the bank, and with thi 'cure' 
business, i'm take on an averag ten thousand per week. I would 
settl a hundr thousand on you, and make you a handsom allowance--a 
thousand a week--mor if you want it." 

"well!" lilian rosenberg said after a slight pause, dure which 
kelson had again seiz her hand and wa kiss it convulsively, "to 
quot one of your americanisms--i reckon i'll fix up with you. On one 
condition, however." 

"and that," kelson murmured, still kiss her feverishly. 

"that we marri a week to-day!" 

kelson drop her hand as if he had been shot. "we can't!" he cried. 
"the compact!" 

"oh, damn the compact!" lilian rosenberg said coolly. "you marri me 
then--or not at all!" 

"you are joking--y know what the compact means!" 

"I know what you think it means. for my own part I don't see that you 
have the slightest reason to fear. the unknown cannot realli harm you. 
all you have to do is to turn religious. anyhow you must risk it--that 
is to say, if you want me." 

"it will lead to a quarrel with hamar," kelson said desperately. "the 
firm will dissolve--and I shan't get a cent more money." 

"i'll be content with what you have in the bank now. We can live on 
the interest of fifti thousand. the hundr thousand you will, of 
course, settl on me at once." 

He wa silent. she taunt him, she ridicul him; she at last lost 
her temper with him--whereupon he succumbed. the marriag should take 
place at a registri offic within the week. 

"there'l be no time for a trousseau!" he said. 

"oh, hang the trousseau!" she said. "I shall have the hundr thousand 
pounds. and now for a word of advice. Be sure that you do not let 
hamar get ani inkl of our approach marriage, and be most care 
to avoid do anyth that might arous hi suspicions. It isn't 
that i'm afraid of him--but I don't want rows--i'm sick to death of 
them!" 

"you can reli on me to be careful, darling!" kelson said, kiss her 
on the lips. "i'll be discret itself," and so he meant to be. all 
the same--a is the case with everi lover--everi lover worthi of the 
name of lover--who love with all the full, ripe vigour of genuin 
passion, hi heart play havoc with hi head; and he wa blind to 
everyth save vision of hi beloved. In other circumst thi 
would not have matter veri much, but with hamar' lynx eye 
continu watch him, it wa certain to lead to disaster. 

"ed!" hamar said to curti one day. "matt' been get into 
mischief. I know the symptom well. He can't look me in the face, and 
everi now and then, when he fanci my attent is attract 
elsewhere, I catch him peep furtiv at me as if he were 
frighten out of hi life I should ferret out some secret. It would 
be deplor if now that we have got so near the end of the compact, 
we should be held up by some idiot blunder--som nonsens love 
affair of his. I wonder whether it' rosenberg or some other girl. 
will you find out?" 

"how can i?" curti growled. "i'm not hi keeper." 

"I know that!" hamar said. "come be reasonable. you want to be a 
croesus--so that you can eat and drink your head off--don't you! 
well! you will! you will be one of the three wealthiest men in the 
world--you will have the world at your feet, if onli you stick to me 
for the next seven months: till we have pass the seventh stage. If 
you don't--if either you or matt deliber quarrel with me, or 
marry--then, as i'v din into your ear a thousand times, the 
compact will be broken, and--not onli that, but some fright 
catastroph will wipe us off. now will you do what I ask? come--a 
dinner with me everi night thi week, at the piccadilly--champagne--and 
no vegetables!" 

"all right," curti said sulkily, "for the good of the caus I suppos 
I must, but I hate spying." 

two night later in a privat room at the piccadilly, after dinner, 
when the champagn and liqueur had got into curtis' head and he wa 
lean back in hi chair, smile and silly, hamar suddenli said, 
"ed! you rememb what I told you--about watch kelson. have you 
discov anything?" 

"shuppos I have," curti replied, "shuppos I haven't--whatch 
then?" 

"ah, but I know you have," hamar said, strive to hide hi eagerness. 
"come, tell me, anoth liqueur--i'l squar it with the unknown--it 
won't hurt you!" 

"won't it!" curti gurgled. "wont'ch it! i'll tell you everything. 
no--nothingsh, I mean." 

but hamar when onc he had smelt a rat, wa not easili put off. He 
coaxed, and coaxed, and eventu succeeded. 

"leonsh!" curti said, with a sudden burst of drunken confidence. 
"leonsh! it' wors than either you or I shuspected. I caught them 
alon thi morning--in my offish." 

"them! rosenberg and matt!" 

"yesh, of course, shilly! I told matt I wa go out. He thought I 
had--so into the room I came--quit unshuspected, unobsherved. she wa 
sit on hish knees, cuddling--and he wa put a ring on her 
finger. 'four more days, darling,' shay he, 'and we are married! 
jerushalem! damn the compact and damnsh hamar!' 'hamar doesn't 
shuspect, doe he?' rosenberg shays. 'not a bit--not in the 
slightest,' old matt replieshes, 'whi it is I who amsh brave now.' 
then he kissh her, and fear they would detect my presence, I 
slipsh quietli out." 

"will you swear thi is true?" leon said, hi voic trembl with 
excitement. 

"i'll schwear it!" curti answered, "but you look crossh. whatsh the 
matter, leon? _god! what' the matter!_" 

An hour later, as kelson wa rise from hi chair in front of the 
fire to gaze, for the hundredth time that evening, into the eye of 
lilian rosenberg' portrait on the mantelshelf, the door of hi room 
flew open and in stagger curtis--white, wet and bloated. 

"great heavens!" kelson cried. "what the deuc have you been do to 
yourself? you look a perfect devil!" 

"I am one!" curti groaned. "I am one, matt! i'v given your show 
away." 

"mi show away! why, what the deuc do you mean?" 

In a string of broken sentenc curti explain what had happened. 
"i'm damn sorry, matt, old man," he pleaded. "it wa the drink that 
did it--i didn't know what I wa say till it wa too late--til I 
saw leon' face--and that clear my brain--brought me to myself. It 
wa hellish. I rememb the moment I mention the word marriage--h 
sprang up from hi chair, and as he hurri out, I heard him mutter, 
'i'll go to her straight--i'll--' matt, old man, he meant mischief. 
i'm certain of it. come with me to her flat--for god' sake--come." 
and catch hold of kelson, who lean against the mantelshelf, daze 
and stupefied, he drag him into the street. 

To revert to hamar. curtis' inform had transform him. He was, 
now, anoth creature. prior to hi convers with curtis, he had 
suspected, at the most, that kelson might be contempl a secret 
engag to lilian rosenberg--but a hasti marriage--a marriag in a 
few days' time--h had never dreamt that kelson could be as mad as 
that. It wa outrageous! It wa abominable! It wa sheer wholesal 
homicide! At all cost the marriag must be stopped. and mad with 
rage, hamar dash out of the hotel, and call a taxi, drove direct 
to lilian rosenberg' flat. 

He found her alone--alone--and with a strang express in her 
eyes--an express he had never notic in them before. she wa in 
the act of examin a magnific diamond ring. 

"you'r quit out of breath," she said coolly, "didn't you come up by 
the lift?" 

"i'v come to talk business," hamar panted. "it' no use look like 
that. I know your secret." 

"mi secret!" lilian rosenberg replied, open her eye and simul 
the greatest unconcern, "what secret? I don't understand." 

"oh, yes, you do!" hamar said, "you understand onli too well--you 
deceit minx. had I onli been smart--i should have given you the 
sack month ago. thi marriag of your with kelson shall not come 
off." 

"mi marriag with mr. kelson!" lilian rosenberg said, turn a trifl 
pale. "I realli don't know what you are talk about." 

"you do!" hamar shouted, hi furi rising. "you do! you know all about 
it. you were seen sit on hi knee thi morning, and all your 
convers wa overheard. I have found out everything. and I tell 
you, you shan't marri him." 

"I shan't marri him!" lilian rosenberg said with provok coolness. 
"whoever think I want to marri him?" 

"he does--i do!" hamar shouted--hi voic rise to a scream. "you'v 
hoodwink me long enough--y hoodwink me no longer. you'v 
encourag him from the first--mad eye at him everi time you'v seen 
him--taken advantag of my absenc to prowl about the passag to 
waylay him--had him round to your room and visit him in his. you'v 
no sens of shame or honour--you'v broken your promis to me--you'r 
a liar!" 

"anyth els mr. hamar!" lilian rosenberg said, her eye glittering. 
"when you'v quit finished, perhaps--you'l kindli go and leav me in 
peace." 

"go! leav you in peace!" hamar shouted. "damn you, curs your 
impertinence! go! i'll not budg an inch till I wring from you an 
oath--a solemn bind oath, that you'll break off your engag 
with kelson at once." 

"really, mr. hamar!" lilian rosenberg said, "I cannot put up with 
quit so much noise. will you go, or shall I ring for the porter to 
turn you out?" 

she move in the direct of the bell as she spoke, but befor she 
could touch it hamar had intercept her. 

"stop thi foolery!" he said catch hold of her wrist, "i'm in grim 
earnest--th live of all three of us are at stake--jeopard 
through you--through your infern greed and selfishness. Do you 
hear!" 

"pleas let go my wrist," she said quietly. 

"I won't!" he shouted. "i'll squeeze, crush it, break it! break you, 
too, unless you swear to break off your marriage!" 

"i'll swear nothing," lilian rosenberg said faintly. "you'r a brute. 
let me go or i'll cri for help." 

she screamed, but befor she could repeat the scream, hamar had her by 
the throat--and then blind with passion and befor he fulli realiz 
what he wa about, he had shaken her to and fro--lik a terrier shake 
a rat--and had dash her on the floor. 

for some minut he stood rock with passion, and then, hi eye 
fall on the inanim form at hi feet, he gave a great gasp cri 
and bent over it. 

"god in heaven!" he ejaculated, "she' dead! i'v kill her!" 

He wa still bend over her--stil feel her lifeless pulse, still 
tri to resuscit her--feebl wonder how he had kill her, 
feverishli debat the best cours to pursue--when curti and kelson 
burst in on him. 

At the sight of lilian rosenberg' lifeless bodi both men start 
back. "great god! hamar!" curti gasped. "what have you done to her?" 

"nothing!" hamar said, turn a ghastli face to them. "i--i found her 
like this!" 

"liar!" kelson shout besid himself with fury. "liar! We heard her 
scream. look at your hands--there' blood on them! you'v kill her!" 

befor curti could stop him he sprang at hamar, and the next moment 
both men were roll on the floor. 

"call for the police, ed!" kelson gasped, "the police--or--" but 
befor he could utter anoth syllable, walls, floor and ceil shook 
with loud, devilish laughter. there wa then silence--enthralling, 
impressive, omnipot silence--th electr light went out--and the 
room fill with luminous, stripe figures. 


[illustration: the room fill with luminous, stripe figures] 



***end OF the project gutenberg ebook the sorceri club*** 


******* thi file should be name 14317-8.txt or 14317-8.zip ******* 


thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/3/1/14317 



updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
