the project gutenberg ebook of the dark other, by stanley G. weinbaum 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and most 
other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 
whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term of 
the project gutenberg licens includ with thi ebook or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the unit states, you'll have 
to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use thi ebook. 



title: the dark other 

author: stanley G. weinbaum 

releas date: novemb 27, 2015 [ebook #50561] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the dark other *** 




produc by greg weeks, mari meehan and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









the dark other 

By stanley G. weinbaum 

_fantasi publish co., inc._ 
lo angel 1950 

copyright 1950 by fantasi publish co., inc. 

manufactur in U. S. A. 

[transcriber' note: extens research did not uncov ani 
evid that the u.s. copyright on thi public wa renewed.] 

_other book by stanley G. weinbaum_ 

dawn OF flame 
the new adam 
the black flame 
A martian odyssey 




content 


chapter page 

1. pure horror 9 

2. scienc OF mind 17 

3. psychiatr OF geniu 25 

4. the transfigur 33 

5. A fantasi OF fear 42 

6. A question OF scienc 50 

7. the red eye return 58 

8. gateway TO evil 65 

9. descent into avernu 73 

10. rescu from abaddon 81 

11. wreckag 89 

12. letter from lucif 96 

13. indecis 104 

14. too bizarr 112 

15. A modern mr. hyde 119 

16. possess 127 

17. witch-doctor 135 

18. vanish 142 

19. man OR monster? 149 

20. the assign 156 

21. A question OF synaps 164 

22. doctor and devil 172 

23. werewolf 180 

24. the dark other 186 

25. the demon lover 194 

26. the depth 201 

27. two IN hell 209 

28. lunar omen 217 

29. scopolamin for satan 225 

30. the demon free 233 

31. "not humanli possible" 242 

32. revel 250 




the dark other 




1 

pure horror 


"that isn't what I mean," said nichola devine, turn hi eye on hi 
companion. "I mean pure horror in the sens of horror detach from 
experience, apart from reality. not just a formless fear, which impli 
either fear of someth that _might_ happen, or fear of unknown 
dangers. Do you see what I mean?" 

"of course," said pat, let her eye wander over the black expans 
of night-dark lake michigan. "certainli I see what you mean but I don't 
quit understand how you'd do it. It sounds--well, difficult." 

she gaze at hi lean profile, clear-cut against the distant light. 
He had turned, stare thought over the lake, idli finger the 
lever on the steer wheel befor him. the girl wonder a littl at 
her feel of contentment; she, patricia lane, satisfi to spend an 
even in noth more excit than conversation! and they must have 
park here a full two hour now. there wa someth about nick--sh 
didn't understand exactli what; sensitivity, charm, personality. those 
were meaningless cliches, handl to hold the unexplain nuanc of 
character. 

"it _is_ difficult," resum nick. "baudelair tri it, poe tri it. 
and in painting, hogarth, goya, dore. poe came closest, I think; he 
caught the essenc of horror in an occasion poem or story. don't you 
think so?" 

"I don't know," said pat. "i'v forgotten most of my poe." 

"rememb that stori of his--'th black cat'?" 

"dimly. the man murder hi wife." 

"yes. that isn't the part I mean. I mean the cat itself--th second 
cat. you know a cat, use rightly, can be a symbol of horror." 

"inde yes!" the girl shuddered. "I don't like the treacher beasts!" 

"and thi cat of poe's," continu nick, warm to hi subject. "just 
think of it--in the first place, it' black; element of horror. then, 
it' gigantic, unnaturally, abnorm large. and then it' not all 
black--that would be inartist perfect--but ha a formless white 
mark on it breast, a mark that littl by littl assum a fantast 
form--do you rememb what?" 

"no." 

"the form of a gallows!" 

"oh!" said the girl. "ugh!" 

"and then--climax of genius--th eyes! blind in one eye, the other a 
bale yellow orb! Do you feel it? A black cat, an enorm black cat 
mark with a gallows, and lack one eye, to make the other even 
more terrible! literari tricks, of course, but they work, and _that's_ 
genius! isn't it?" 

"genius! yes, if you call it that. the pervers geniu of the devil!" 

"that' what I want to write--what I will write some day." He watch 
the play of light on the restless surfac of the waters. "pure horror, 
the epitom of the horrible. It could be written, but it hasn't been 
yet; not even by poe." 

"that littl analysi of your wa bad enough, nick! whi should you 
want to improv on hi treatment of the theme?" 

"becaus I like to write, and becaus i'm interest in the horrible. 
two good reasons." 

"two excuses, you mean. Of course, even if you'd succeed, you couldn't 
forc anyon to read it." 

"if I succeed, there'd be no need to forc people. success would mean 
that the thing would be great literature, and even today, in these 
times, there are still peopl to read that. and besides--" He paused. 

"besid what?" 

"everybody' interest in the horrible. even you are, whether or not 
you deni it." 

"I certainli do deni it!" 

"but you are, pat. it' natur to be." 

"it isn't!" 

"then what is?" 

"interest in people, and life, and gay times, and pretti things, 
and--and one' self and one' own feelings. and the feel of the 
peopl one loves." 

"yes. It come to exactli the point i'v been stressing. peopl are 
sordid, life is hopeless, gay time are stupid, beauti is sensual, 
one' own feel are selfish. and love is carnal. that' the array of 
horror that hold your interest!" 

the girl laugh in exasperation. "nick, you could out-argu your 
name-sake, the devil himself! Do you realli believ that indict of 
the normal viewpoint?" 

"I do--often!" 

"now?" 

"now," he said, turn hi gaze on pat, "I have no feel of it at 
all. now, right now, I don't believ it." 

"whi not?" she queried, smile ingenu at him. 

"you, obviously." 

"gracious! I had no idea my logic wa as convinc as that." 

"your logic isn't. the rest of you is." 

"that sound like a compliment," observ pat. "if it is," she 
continu in a banter tone, "it' the onli one I can recal 
obtain from you." 

"that' becaus I seldom call attent to the obvious." 

"and that' another," laugh the girl. "i'll have to mark thi date in 
red on my calendar. it' entir uniqu in our--let' see--nearli a 
month' acquaintance." 

"i it realli so short a time? I know you so well that it must have 
taken years. everi detail!" He close hi eyes. "hair like black silk, 
and oddli dark blue eyes--if I were write a poem at the moment, i'd 
call them violet. tini lips, the sort the elizabethan call bee-stung. 
straight nose, and a figur that is a sort of vest-pocket copi of 
diana. right?" He open hi eyes. 

"nice, but exaggerated. and even if you were correct, that isn't pat 
lane, the real pat lane. A camera could do better on a tenth of a 
second' acquaintance!" 

"check!" He close hi eye again. "personality, piquant. character, 
loyal, natur happy, intelligent, but not serious. An intellectu 
butterfly; a dilettante. poised, cool, self-possessed, yet inher 
affectionate. A be untouch by reality, as yet, live in chicago 
and in a make-believ world at the same time." He paused, "how old are 
you, pat?" 

"twenty-two. why?" 

"I wonder how long one could manag to stay in the world of 
make-believe. i'm twenty-six, and i'm long exiled." 

"I don't think you know what you mean by a make-believ world. i'm sure 
I don't." 

"of cours you don't. you can't know and still remain there. it' like 
be happy; onc you realiz it, it' no longer perfect." 

"then don't explain!" 

"wouldn't make ani differ if I did, pat. it' a queer world, like 
the sardoodledom of sardou and the afternoon-tea school of playwrights. 
all stage-set and pretense, but it look real while you'r 
watching, especi if you'r one of the characters." 

the girl laughed. "you'r a delici solemn sort, nick. how would 
you like to hear my analysi of you?" 

"I wouldn't!" 

"you inflict your on me, and i'm entitl to revenge. and so--you'r 
intelligent, lazy, dreamy, and with a fine percept of artist 
values. you'r veri alert to impress of the senses--i mean you'r 
sensuou without be sensual. you'r delight seriou without 
be somber, except sometimes. sometim I feel a hint, just a 
thrill hint, in your character, of someth danger darker--" 

"don't!" said nick sharply. 

pat shot him a quick glance. "and you'r frighten to death of 
fall in love," she conclud imperturbably. 

"oh! Do you think so?" 

"I do." 

"then you'r wrong! I can't be afraid of it, sinc i'v known for the 
better part of a month that i'v been in love." 

"with me," said the girl. 

"yes, with you!" 

"well!" said pat. "it never befor took me a month to extract that 
admiss from a man. Is twenty-two get old?" 

"you'r a tantal imp!" 

"and so?" she purs her lips, assum an air of disappointment. "what 
am I to do about it--scream for help? you haven't given me anyth to 
scream about." 

the kiss, pat admit to herself, wa quit satisfactory. she yield 
herself to the pleasur of it; it wa decidedli the best kiss she had, 
in her somewhat limit experience, encountered. she push herself 
away finally, with a littl gasp, gaze bright-ey at her companion. 
He wa stare down at her with seriou eyes; there wa a tens twist 
to hi mouth, and a curious unexpect attitud of unhappiness. 

"nick!" she murmured. "wa it as bad as all that?" 

"bad! pat, doe it mean you--car for me? A little, anyway?" 

"A little," she admitted. "mayb more. Is that what make you look so 
forlorn?" 

He drew her closer to him. "how could I look forlorn, honey, when 
someth like thi ha happen to me? that wa just my way of look 
happy." 

she nestl as close as the steer wheel permitted, draw hi arm 
about her shoulders. "I hope you mean that, nick." 

"then _you_ mean it? you realli do?" 

"I realli do." 

"i'm glad," he said huskily. the girl thought she detect a strang 
dubiou note in hi voice. she glanc at hi face; hi eye were 
gaze into the dim remot of the night horizon. 

"nick," she said, "whi were you so--well, so reluct about admit 
this? you must have known i--lik you. I show you that deliber 
in so mani ways." 

"i--i wasn't quit sure." 

"you were! that isn't it, nick. I had to practic browbeat you into 
confess you care for me. why?" 

He step on the starter; the motor ground into sudden life. the car 
back into the road, turn toward chicago, that glare like a fals 
dawn in the southern sky. 

"I hope you never find out," he said. 




2 

scienc of mind 


"she' out," said pat as the massiv form of dr. carl horker loom in 
the doorway. "your treatment must be successful; mother' out play 
bridge." 

the doctor gave hi deep, rumbl chuckle. "so much the better, pat. 
I don't feel profession anyway." He move into the live room, 
deposit hi bulk on a groan davenport. "and how' yourself?" 

"too well to be a patient of yours," retort the girl. "psychiatry! 
the new religion! just between friends, it' all applesauce, isn't it?" 

"if I weren't tri to act in place of your father, i'd resent that, 
young lady," said the doctor placidly. "psychiatri is a definit 
science, and a pretti import one. appli psychology, the scienc of 
the human mind." 

"if said mind exists," ad the girl, swing her slim leg over the 
arm of a chair. 

"correct," agre the doctor. "in my practic I find occasion 
evid that it does. Or did; your gener seem to have found 
substitutes." 

"which appear to work just as well!" laugh pat. "all our troubl 
are more or less inherit from your generation." 

"touche!" admit dr. horker. "but my gener also bequeath you 
some solid valu which you don't know how to use." 

"they'v been weigh and found wanting," said pat airily. "we'r busi 
replac them with our own values." 

"which are certainli no better." 

"mayb not, doc, but at least they'r ours." 

"your and tom paine's. I can't see that you young modern have brought 
ani new idea to the social scheme." 

"new or not, we'r the first one to give 'em a try-out. your crowd 
took it out in talk." 

"that' an insult," observ the doctor cheerfully. "if I weren't 
act _in loco parentis_--" 

"I know! you'd give me a few lick in the spot popularli suppos to 
do the most good! well, that' part of a parent' privilege, isn't it?" 

"you'v grown beyond the spank age, my dear. physically, if not 
mentally--though I don't say the process would hurt me as much as you. 
i'd doubtless enjoy it." 

"then you might tri send me to bed without my dinner," the girl 
laughed. 

"that' a doctor' prerogative, pat. i'v even done that to your 
mother." 

"in other words, you'r a complet flop as a parent. all the 
responsibilities, and none of the privileges." 

"that express it." 

"well, you elect yourself, doc. it' not my fault you happen to 
live next door." 

"no. it' my misfortune." 

"and I notice," remark pat wickedly, "that you'r not too thoroughli 
_in loco_ to neglect send mother a bill for servic rendered!" 

"mi dear girl, that' part of the treatment!" 

"so? and how?" 

"I furnish a bill just steep enough to keep your mother from indulg 
too frequent in medic services. without that littl practic check 
on her inclinations, she'd be a confirm neurotic. one of those sweet, 
resigned, profession invalids, you know." 

"then whi not send her a bill tall enough to cure her altogether?" 

"she might chang to psychoanalysi or new thought," chuckl the 
doctor. "besides, your father want me to look after her, and besid 
that, I like have the run of the house." 

"well, i'm sure I don't mind," observ pat. "we'v a dog and a canari 
bird, too." 

"you'r in fine fettl thi afternoon!" laugh her companion. "must'v 
been a success date last night." 

"it was." her eye turn suddenli dreamy. 

"you'r in love again, pat!" he accused. 

"again? whi the 'again'?" 

"well, there wa billy, and that paul--" 

"oh, those!" her tone wa contemptuous. "mere pass fancies, doc. 
just whims, dream of the moment--in other words, puppi love." 

"and this? I suppos thi is different--a grand passion?" 

"I don't know," she said, frown abruptly. "he' nice, but--odd. 
attract as--well, as the devil." 

"odd? how?" 

"oh, he' one of those mind you think we modern lack." 

"intellectual, eh? new varieti for you; out of the usual run of your 
danc collegiates. i'v often suspect that you pick your swain 
by the length and low of their cars." 

"mayb I did. that wa one of the chief differ between them." 

"how'd you meet thi mental paragon?" 

"billi field drag him around to one of those literari even he 
affects--wher they read oscar wild and eugen o'neil aloud. bill met 
him at the library." 

"and he out-shon all the local lights, I perceive." 

"he sure did!" retort pat. "and he hardli said a word the whole 
evening." 

"he wouldn't have to, if they'r all like billy! what' thi prodigy' 
specialty?" 

"he writes. I think--laugh if you want to!--i think perhap he' a 
genius." 

"well," said doctor horker, "even that' possible. it' been known to 
occur, but rarely, to my knowledge, in your generation." 

"oh, we'r just dim by the glare of brillianc from yours." she 
swung her leg to the floor, face the doctor. "do you psychiatrist 
actual _know_ anyth about love?" she queried. 

"we'r suppos to." 

"what is it, then?" 

"just a devic of nature' for perpetu the species. some organ 
manag without it, and do pretti well." 

"yes. i'v heard refer to the poor fish!" 

"then they'r inaccurate; fish have primit symptom of eroticism. 
but below the vertebrates, notabl in the amoeba, I don't recal ani 
amor habits." 

"then your definit doesn't explain a thing, doe it?" 

"not to one of the victims, perhaps." 

"anyway," said pat decisively, "i'v heard of the old biolog urg 
befor your kind analysis. It doesn't begin to explain whi one should 
be attract to thi person and repel by that one. doe it?" 

"no, but freud does. the famou oedipu complex." 

"that' the love of son for mother, or daughter for father, isn't it? 
and I don't see how that clear up anything; for example, I can just 
bare rememb my father." 

"that' plenty. It could be some littl trait in these swain of yours, 
some unimport manner that recal that memory. Or there' that 
portrait of him in the hall--th one under the mellow red light. It 
might happen that you'd see one of these chap under a similar light 
in some attitud that bring the pictur to mind--or a hundr other 
possibilities." 

"doesn't sound entir convincing," object pat with a thought 
frown. 

"well, submit to the proper treatments, and i'll tell you exactli what 
caus each and everi one of your littl pass fancies. you can't 
expect me to hit it first guess." 

"thanks, no! that' one of these cours where you tell the doctor all 
your secrets, and I prefer to keep what few I have." 

"good judgment, pat. By the way, you said thi chap wa odd. doe that 
mean mere that he writes? i'v known perfectli normal peopl who 
wrote." 

"no," she said, "it isn't that. it's--he' so sweet and gentl and 
manag most of the time, but sometim he ha such a thrill 
spark of masteri that it almost scare me. it' puzzl but 
fascinating, if you grasp my import." 

"huh! he' probabl a natur selfish fellow who' put on a good 
show of gentl for your benefit. those flash of tyranni are 
probabl hi real charact in moment of forgetfulness." 

"you doctor can explain anything, can't you?" 

"that' our business. it' what we'r paid for." 

"well, you'r wrong thi time. I know nick well enough to know if he' 
acting. hi person is just what I said--gentle, sensitive, and 
yet--it' perplexing, and that' a good part of hi charm." 

"then it' not such a seriou case you'v got," mock the doctor. 
"when you'r cool enough to analyz your own feelings, and dissect the 
element of the chap' attraction, you'r not in ani danger." 

"danger! I can look out for myself, thanks. that' one thing we 
mindless modern learn young, and don't let me catch you putter 
around in my romances! _in loco parentis_ or just plain loco, you'll 
get the lick instead of me!" 

"believ me, pat, if I want to experi with affair of the heart, 
i'd not pick a spit-fir like you as the subject." 

"well, doctor carl, you'r warned!" 

"thi nick," observ the doctor, "must be quit a fellow to get the 
princess of the north side so het up. what' the rest of hi cognomen?" 

"nichola devine. romantic, isn't it?" 

"devine," mutter horker. "I don't know ani devines. who are hi 
people?" 

"hasn't any." 

"how doe he live? By hi writing?" 

"don't know. I gather that he live on some incom left by hi 
parents. what' the difference, anyway?" 

"none. none at all." the other wrinkl hi brow thoughtfully. "there 
wa a colleagu of mine, a dr. devine; die a good mani year ago. 
reput wasn't anyth to brag about; wa a littl off balanc 
mentally." 

"well, nick isn't!" snap pat with some asperity. 

"i'd like to meet him." 

"he' come over tonight." 

"so'm I. I want to see your mother." He rose ponderously. "if she' not 
play bridg again!" 

"well, look him over," retort pat. "and I think your knowledg 
of love is a decid flop. I think you'r woefulli ignor on the 
subject." 

"why' that?" 

"if you'd known anyth about it, you could have marri mother some 
time dure the last seventeen years. lord know you'v tried, and 
all you'v attain is the state of _in loco parentis_ instead of 
_parens_." 




3 

psychiatr of geniu 


"how do you charge--bi the hour?" ask pat, as doctor horker return 
from the hall. the sound of her mother' depart footstep patter 
on the porch. 

"of course, young one; like a plumber." 

"then your rate per minut must be colossal! the onli time you ever 
see mother is a moment or so between bridg games." 

"I add on the time I wast with you, my dear. such as now, wait to 
look over that odd swain of yours. didn't you say he'd be over thi 
evening?" 

"yes, but it' not worth your rate to have him psychoanalyzed. I can 
do as well myself." 

"all right, pat. i'll give you a sampl analysi free," chuckl the 
doctor, distribut hi bulk comfort on the davenport. 

"I don't like free trials," she retorted. "I sent for a beauty-cultur 
book once, on free trial. I wa twelv year only, and return it in 
seven days, but i'm still get sale letter in the mails. I must be 
on everi sucker list in the country." 

"so that' the secret of your charm." 

"what is?" 

"you must have read the book, I mean. If you rememb the title, I 
might tri it myself. think it'd help?" 

"dr. carl," laugh the girl, "you don't need a book on beauti 
culture--y need one on bridge! it' that atroci game you play 
that' bother mother." 

"indeed? I shouldn't be surpris if you were right; i'v suspect 
that." 

"save your surpris for when i'm wrong, doc. you'll suffer much less 
from shock." 

"confid littl brat! you'r apt to get that knock out of you some 
day, though I hope you never do." 

"I can take it," grin pat. 

"no doubt you can, but you'r an adept at hand it out. where' thi 
chap of yours?" 

"he'll be along. No one' ever stood me up on a date yet." 

"I can understand that, you imp! Is that the famou nick?" he queri 
as a car pur to a stop beyond the windows. 

"no one else!" said the girl, glanc out. "the big thrill in person." 

she dart to the door. horker turn casual to watch her as she 
open it, survey nichola devin with profession nonchalance. 
He entered, tall, slender, with hi thin sensit featur sharpli 
outlin in the light of the hall. He cast a quick glanc toward the 
doctor; the latter note the curiou amber-green eye of the lad, set 
wide in the lean face, deep, speculative, the eye of a dreamer. 

"evening, nick," pat wa bubbling. the newcom gave her a hasti 
smile, with anoth glanc at the doctor. "don't mind dr. carl," she 
continued. "aren't you go to kiss me? It irk the medico, and I 
never miss a chance." 

nichola flush in embarrassment; he gestur hesitantly, then place 
a hasti peck of a kiss on the girl' forehead. He redden again at the 
doctor' rumbl of "young imp of satan!" 

"not veri good," said pat reflectively, obvious enjoy the 
situation. "i'v known you to do better." she pull him toward the 
arch of the live room. "come meet dr. horker. dr. carl, thi is the 
aforesaid nichola devine." 

"dr. horker," repeat the lad, smile diffidently. "you'r the 
psychiatrist and brain specialist, aren't you, sir?" 

"so my patient believe," rumbl the massiv doctor, rise at the 
introduction, and grasp the youth' hand. "and you'r the geniu 
patricia ha been rave about. i'm glad to have the chanc of look 
you over." 

nick gave the girl a harass glance, shift uncomfortably, and 
patent at a loss for a reply. she grin mischievously. 

"sit down, both of you," she suggest helpfully. she seiz hi hat 
from the reluct hand of nick, sail it carelessli to a chair. 

"so!" boom the doctor, lower hi great bulk again to the 
davenport. He eye the youth sit nervous befor him. "devine, did 
you say?" 

"yes, sir." 

"I knew a devin once. colleagu of mine." 

"A doctor? My father wa a doctor." 

"dr. stuart devine?" 

"yes, sir." He paused. "did you say you knew him, dr. horker?" 

"slightly," rumbl the other. "onli slightly." 

"I don't rememb him at all, of course, I wa veri young when he--and 
my mother too--died." 

"you must have been. patricia claim you write." 

"I try." 

"what sort of material?" 

"why--ani sort. prose or poetry; what I feel like writing." 

"whatev inspir you, I suppose?" 

"yes, sir." the lad flush again. 

"ever have anyth published?" 

"yes, sir. In _nation' poetry_." 

"never heard of it." 

"it ha a larg circulation," said nick apologetically. 

"humph! well, that' something. whom do you like?" 

"whom do I like?" the youth' tone wa puzzled. 

"what authors--writers?" 

"oh." He cast anoth uncomfort glanc at pat. "why--i like 
baudelaire, and poe, and swinburne, and villon, and--" 

"decadents, all of them!" snif the doctor. "what prose writers?" 

"well--" He hesitated--"po again, and stern, and rabelais--" 

"rabelais!" horker' voic boomed. "well! your tast can't be as bad as 
I thought, then. there' one we agre on, anyway. and I notic you name 
no moderns, which is anoth good point." 

"I haven't read mani moderns, sir." 

"that' in your favor." 

"cut it!" put in pat with assum sharpness. "you'v taken enough 
whack at my gener for one day." 

"i'm glad to find one of your gener who agre with me," chuckl 
the doctor. "at least to the extent of not read it works." 

"i'll teach him," grin pat. "i'll have him write vess libre, and 
mayb even dadaism, in a week." 

"mayb it won't be much loss," grunt horker. "I haven't seen ani of 
hi work yet." 

"we'll bring some around sooner or later. We will, won't we, nick?" 

"of course, if you want to. but--" 

"he' go to say someth modest," interrupt the girl. "he' in 
the retir mood now, but he' apt to chang ani moment, and snap your 
surli head off." 

"humph! i'd like to see it." 

"so'd i," retort pat. "you'v had it come all day; mayb i'll do it 
myself." 

"you have, my dear, innumer times. but i'm like the hydra, except 
that I grow onli one head to replac the one you snap off." He turn 
again to nicholas. "do you work?" 

"yes, sir. At my writing." 

"I mean how do you live?" 

"why," said the youth, redden again in embarrassment, "mi parents--" 

"listen!" said pat. "that' enough of dr. carl' cross examination. 
you'd think he wa a victorian father who had just been approach for 
hi daughter' hand. We haven't whisper ani news of an engag to 
you, have we, doc?" 

"no, but i'm acting--" 

"sure. _in loco parentis._ We know that." 

"you'r incorrigible, pat! I wash my hand of you. run along, if you'r 
go out." 

"you'll be tell me never to darken my own door again in the next 
breath!" she stretch forth a diminut foot at the extrem of 
a superl attract ankle, caught nick' hat on her toe, and 
kick it expertli to hi lap. "come on, nick. there' a moon." 

"there is not!" object the doctor huffily. "it rise at four, as you 
ought to know. you didn't see it last night, did you?" 

"I didn't notice," said the girl. "come on, nick, and we'll watch 
it rise tonight. we'll check up on the doctor' astronomy, or is it 
chronology?" 

"you do and i'll know it! I can hear you come home, you imp!" 

"nice neighbor," observ pat airily, as she step to the door. "i'll 
bet you peek out of the window, too." 

she ignor the doctor' irrit rumbl as she pass into the hall, 
where nick, after a diffid murmur of farewel to horker, followed. 
she caught up a light cape, which he drape about her shoulders. 

"nick," she said, "suppos you run out to the car and wait. I think 
i'v step too hard on dr. carl' corns, and I want to give him a 
littl cheer up. will you?" 

"of course, pat." 

she dart back into the live room, perch on the arm of the 
davenport besid the doctor. 

"well?" she said, run her hand through hi grizzl hair. "what' 
the verdict?" 

"seem like a nice kid," grumbl horker reluctantly. "nice enough, 
but introverted, repressed, and I shouldn't be surpris to find him 
anti-social. doesn't adjust easili to hi environment; take refug in 
a dream world of hi own." 

"that' what he accus me of doing," grin pat. "that all you'v got 
against him?" 

"that' all, but where' that streak of masteri you mentioned? you lead 
him around on a leash!" 

"it didn't show up tonight. that' the thrill--th unexpected of 
it." 

"bah! you must'v dream it. there' no more aggress in that 
lad than in koko, your canary." 

"don't you believ it, dr. carl! the troubl is that he' a genius, and 
that' where your psycholog fall flat." 

"genius," said the doctor oracularly, "i a sublim of qualities--" 

"i'll tell you tomorrow how sublim the qualiti are," call pat as 
she skip out of the door. 




4 

the transfigur 


the car slid smoothli along a straight white road that stretch ahead 
into the dark like an earth-bound milki way. In the dim distanc 
befor them, red as antares, glow the tail-light of some automobile; 
except for thi lone evid of humanity, reflect pat, they might 
have been flash through the cosmic depth of interstellar space, 
instead of follow a highway in the veri shadow of chicago. the 
coloss citi of the lake-shor wa invis behind them, and the 
cluster suburb with it. 

"queer, isn't it?" said pat, after a silence, "how content we can 
be with none of the purchas amus peopl crave--shows, movies, 
dancing, and all that." 

"it doesn't seem queer to me," answer nick. "not when I look at you 
here besid me." 

"nice of you!" retort pat. "but it' never happen to me before." 
she paused, then continued, "how do you like the doctor?" 

"how doe he like me? that' consider more to the point, isn't it?" 

"he think you'r nice, but--let' see--introverted, repressed, and 
ill-adjust to your environment. I think those were the points." 

"well, _i_ like _him_, in spite of your manoeuvers, and in spite of 
hi be a doctor." 

"what' wrong with be a doctor?" 

"did you ever read 'tristram shandy'?" wa nick' irrelev response. 

"no, but I read the newspapers!" 

"what' the connection, pat?" 

"just as much connect as there is between the evil of be a 
doctor and read 'tristram shandy'. I know that much about the book, 
at least." 

"you'r nearli right," laugh nick. "I wa just refer to one of 
tristram' remark on doctor and lawyers. It fit my attitude." 

"what' the remark?" 

"well, he had the choic of professions, and it occur to him that 
medicin and law were the vultur professions, sinc lawyer live 
by men' quarrel and doctor by men' misfortunes. so--h becam a 
writer." 

"and what do writer live by?" queri pat mischievously. "bi men' 
stupidity!" 

"you'r precious, pat!" nick chuckl delightedly. "if i'd creat you 
to order, I couldn't have plan you more to taste--pepper, tabasco 
sauce, vinegar, spice, and honey!" 

"and to be taken with a grain of salt," retort the girl, pucker 
her piquant, impish features. she edg closer to him, lock her arm 
through hi where it rest on the steer wheel. 

"nick," she said, her tone suddenli gentle, "I think i'm pretti crazi 
about you. heaven know whi I should be, but it' a fact." 

"pat, dear!" 

"i'm crazi about you in thi meek, sensit pose of yours, and i'm 
fascin by those master moment you flash occasionally. really, 
nick, I almost wish you flame out oftener." 

"don't!" he said sharply. 

"whi not?" 

"let' not talk about me, pat. it--embarrass me." 

"all right, mr. modesty! let' talk about me, then. i'll promis we 
won't succeed in embarrass me." 

"and it' quit the most interest subject in the world, pat." 

"well, then?" 

"what?" 

"whi don't you start talking? the topic is all attention." 

He chuckled. "how mani men have told you you were beautiful, pat?" 

"I never kept account." 

"and in mani differ ways?" 

"why? have you, perchance, discov a new way, nick?" 

"not at all. the oldest way of any, the way of sappho and pindar." 

"o-ooh!" she clap her hand in mock delight. "poetry!" 

"the onli medium that could possibl express how love you are," said 
nick. 

"nicholas, have you gone and compos a poem to me?" 

"composed? no. It isn't necessary, with you here besid me." 

"what' that? some veri subtl compliment?" 

"not subtle, pat. you'r the poem yourself; all I need do is look at 
you, listen to you, and translate." 

"neat!" applaud the girl. "do I hear the translation?" 

"you certainli do." He turn hi odd amber-green eye on her, then 
bent forward to the road. He began to speak in a low voice. 

"in no far country' silent way 
shall I forget one littl thing-- 
the soft intent of your gaze, 
the sweet of your murmur 
your gener tender praise, 
the word just hint by a breath-- 
In no far country' silent way, 
unless that country' name be death--" 

He paus abruptly, and drove silent onward. 

"oh," breath pat. "whi don't you go on, nick? please." 

"no. It isn't the mood for thi night, dear. not thi night, alon with 
you." 

"what is, then?" 

"noth sentimental. someth lighter, something--oh, elizabethan. 
that' it." 

"and what' stop you?" 

"lack of an avail idea. or--wait. listen a moment." He began, thi 
time in a tone of banter. 

"when mornings, you attir yourself 
for ride in the city, 
you'r such a love littl elf, 
extravagantli pretty! 
and when at noon you deign to wear 
the habit of the town, 
I cannot call to mind as fair 
A symphoni in brown. 

"then evenings, you blith don 
A dainti of white, 
To flash a veri paragon 
Of lightsomeness--and light! 
but when the round of pleasur cease, 
and you retir at night, 
the godl on your mantelpiec 
must know a fairer sight!" 

"sweet!" laugh pat. "but personal. and anyway, how do you know i'v a 
godl on my mantel? don't you credit me with ani modesty?" 

"if you haven't, you should have! the vision I mention ought to 
enliven even a statue." 

"well," said the girl, "I have one--a jade buddha, and with all the 
charm I flash befor him nightly, he' never bat an eyelash. 
explain that!" 

"easily. he' green with envy, and frozen with admiration, and struck 
dumb by wonder." 

"heavens! I suppos I ought to be thank you didn't say he wa 
petrifi with fright!" pat laughed. "oh nick," she continued, in a 
voic gone suddenli dreamy, "thi _is_ marvelous, isn't it? I mean our 
enjoy ourselv so completely, and our be satisfi to be so 
alone. why, we'v never even danc together." 

"so we haven't. that' a subterfug we haven't needed, isn't it?" 

"it is," repli the girl, drop her glossi gleam black head 
against hi shoulder. "and besides, it' much more satisfactori to be 
held in your arm in private, instead of in the midst of a crowd, and 
sit down, instead of stand up. but I should like to danc with 
you, nick," she concluded. 

"we'll go dancing, then, whenev you like." 

"you'r delight complaisant, nick. but--you'r puzzling." she 
glanc up at him. "you'r so--so reluctant. here we'v been drive an 
hour, and you haven't tri to kiss me a singl time, and yet i'm quit 
posit you care for me." 

"lord, pat!" he muttered. "you never need doubt that." 

"then what is it? are you so spiritu and ethereal, or is my 
attract for you just sort of intellectual? or--ar you afraid?" As 
he made no reply, she continued, "or are those poem you spout about my 
physic charm just--poet license?" 

"they'r not, and you know it!" he snapped. "you'v a mirror, haven't 
you? and other fellow than I have taken you around, haven't they?" 

"oh, i'v been taken around! that' what perplex me about you, nick. 
i'd think you were actual afraid of kiss me if it weren't--" her 
voic trail into silence, and she stare specul ahead at the 
ribbon of road that roll steadili into the headlights' glare. 

she broke the interv of wordlessness. "what is it, nick?" she 
resum almost pleadingly. "you'v hint at someth now and then. 
please--y don't have to hesit to tell me; i'm modern enough to 
forgiv thing past, entanglements, affairs, disgraces, or anyth 
like that. don't you think I should know?" 

"you'd know," he said huskily, "if I could tell you." 

"then there is something, nick!" she press hi arm against her. "tell 
me, isn't there?" 

"I don't know." there wa the suggest of a groan in hi voice. 

"you don't know! I can't understand." 

"I can't either. please, pat, let' not spoil tonight; if I could tell 
you, I would. why, pat, I love you--i'm terribly, deeply, solemnli in 
love with you." 

"and I with you, nick." she gaze ahead, where the road rose over the 
arch of a narrow bridge. the speed car lift to the rise like a 
zoom plane. 

and suddenly, squar in the center of the road, anoth car, until 
now conceal by the arch of the bridge, appear almost upon them. 
there wa a heart-stop moment when a collis seem inevitable, 
and pat felt the arm against her tighten convuls into a bar of 
steel. she heard her own sob gasp, and then, somehow, they had 
slip unscath between the other car and the rail of the bridge. 

"oh!" she gasp faintly, then with a return of breath, "that wa nice, 
nick!" 

beyond the bridge, the road widen onc more; she felt the car 
slowing, edg toward the broad shoulder of the road. 

"there wa danger," said her companion in tone as emotionless as the 
rasp of metal. "I came to save it." 

"save what?" queri pat as the car slid to a halt on the turf. 

"your body." the tone were still cold, like grind wheels. "the 
beauti of your body!" 

He reach a thin hand toward her, suddenli seiz her skirt and 
snatch it abov the silken round of her knees. "there," he 
rasped. "that is what I mean." 

"nick!" pat half-scream in appal astonishment. "how--" she paused, 
shock into abrupt silence, for the face turn toward her wa but a 
remote, evil caricatur of nichola devine's. It leer at her out of 
blood-shot eyes, as if behind the mask of nick' face peer a red-ey 
demon. 




5 

A fantasi of fear 


the satyr besid pat wa lean toward her; the arm about her wa 
tighten with a brutal ruthlessness, and while still stare in 
fascin at the incred eyes, she realiz that anoth arm and 
a white hand wa move relentlessly, exploratively, toward her body. 
It wa the cold touch of thi hand as it slip over her silk-sheath 
leg that broke the chill spell of her fascination. 

"nick!" she screamed. "nick!" she had a curiou sensat of call 
him back from far distances, the while she strove with both hand and 
all her strength to press him back from her. but the ruthless forc of 
hi arm wa overcom her resistance; she saw the red eye a hand' 
breadth from her own. 

"nick!" she sob in terror. 

there wa a change. abruptly, she wa look into nick' eyes, 
blood-shot, frightened, puzzled, but indubit nick' eyes. the 
flame orb of the demon were no more; it wa as if they had reced 
into nick' head. the arm about her bodi relaxed, and they were stare 
at each other in a medley of consternation, amaz and unbelief. the 
youth drew back, huddl in hi corner of the car, and pat, breath 
in sobs, smooth out her rumpl apparel with a convuls movement. 

"pat!" he gasped. "oh, my god! He couldn't have--" He paus abruptly. 
the girl gaze at him without reply. 

"pat, dear," he spoke in a low, tens murmur, "i'm--sorry. I don't 
know--i don't understand how--" 

"never mind," she said, regain a vestig of her customari composure. 
"it's--al right, nick." 

"but--oh, pat--!" 

"it wa that near accident," she said. "that upset you--both of us, I 
mean." 

"yes!" he said eagerly. "that' what it was, pat. It must have been 
that, but dear, can you forgive? Do you want to forgiv me?" 

"it' all right," she repeated. "after all, you just compliment my 
legs, and I guess I can stand that. it' happen before, onli not 
quit so--convincingly!" 

"you'r sweet, pat!" 

"no; I just love you nick." she felt a sudden piti for the miseri in 
hi face. "kiss me, nick--onli gently." 

He press hi lip to hers, veri lightly, almost timidly. she lay back 
against the seat for a moment, her eye closed. 

"that' you again," she murmured. "thi other--wasn't." 

"please, pat! don't refer to it,--not ever." 

"but it wasn't you, nick. It wa just the strain of that narrow escape. 
I don't hold it against you." 

"you're--lord, pat, I don't deserv you. but you know that i--i 
myself--could never touch you except in tenderness, even in reverence. 
you'r too dainty, too lovely, too spirited, to be hurt, or to be held 
roughly, against your will. you know I feel that way about you, don't 
you?" 

"of course. It wa nothing, nick. forget it." 

"if I can," he said somberly. He switch on the engine, back out 
upon the pavement, and turn the car toward the glow that mark 
chicago. neither of them spoke as the machin hum over the arch 
bridg and down the slope, where, so few minut before, the threat of 
accid had thrust itself at them. 

"we won't see a moon tonight," said pat in a small voice, after an 
interval. "we'll never check up on dr. carl' astronomy." 

"you don't want to tonight, pat, do you?" 

"I guess perhap we'd better not," she replied. "we'r both upset, and 
there'l be other nights." 

again they were silent. pat felt strained, shaken; there wa someth 
uncanni about the occurr that puzzl her. the red eye that had 
glare out of nick' face perplex her, and the curiou rasp voic 
he had use still sound inhumanli in her memory. out of recollect 
rose still anoth mystery. 

"nick," she said, "what did you mean--then--when you said there wa 
danger and you came to save me?" 

"nothing," he said sharply. 

"and then, afterwards, you start to say someth about 'he couldn't 
have--'. who' 'he'?" 

"it meant nothing, I tell you. I wa frantic to think you might have 
been hurt. that' all." 

"I believ you, honey," she said, wonder whether she realli did. the 
thing wa begin to grow hazy; alreadi it wa assum mere the 
proport of an upheav of youth fervor. such occurr were 
not unheard of, though never befor had it happen to patricia lane! 
still, even that wa conceivable, far more conceiv than the dark, 
unformed, inchoat suspicion she had been harboring. they hadn't even 
been definit enough to be call suspicions; indefinit apprehens 
came closer. 

and yet--that strange, wild face that had form itself of nick' fine 
features, and the terribl red eyes! were they element in a pictur 
conjur out of her own imagination? they must be, of course. she had 
been frighten by that hairbreadth escape, and had seen thing that 
didn't exist. and the rest of it--well, that might be natur enough. 
still, there wa something--sh knew that; nick had admit it. 

horker' word concern nick' father rose in her mind. suspect 
of be crazy! wa that it? wa that the caus of nick' curiou 
reluct where she wa concerned? wa the face that had glare 
at her the visag of a maniac? It couldn't be. It couldn't be, she 
told herself fiercely. not her fine, tender, sensit nick! and 
besides, that face, if she hadn't imagin it, had been the face, not 
of a lunatic, but of a devil. she shook her head, as if to deni her 
thoughts, and place her hand impuls on nick's. 

"I don't care," she said. "I love you, nick." 

"and I you," he murmured. "pat, i'm sorri about spoil thi evening. 
i'm sorri and ashamed." 

"never mind, honey. there'l be others." 

"tomorrow?" 

"no," she said. "mother and I are go out to dinner. and friday we'r 
have company." 

"really, pat? you'r not just tri to turn me off gently." 

"really, nick. tri ask me for saturday even and see!" 

"you'r asked, then." 

"and it' a date." then, with a return of her usual insouciance, she 
added. "if you'r on good behavior." 

"I will be. I promise." 

"I hope so," said pat. An inexplic sens of forebod had come 
over her; despit her self-given assurances, someth unnam 
troubl her. she gave a mental shrug, and deliber releg the 
unpleas cogit to oblivion. 

the car turn into dempster road; the light of the teem 
roadhouses, danc halls, road-sid hamburg and barbecu stand 
flash by. there were mani car here; there wa no longer ani 
impress of solitud now, in the overflow from the vast citi in 
whose shadow they moved. the incess flow of traffic gave the girl 
a feel of security; these were tangibl thing about her, and onc 
more the memori of that disturb occurr becam dim and dreamlike. 
thi wa nick besid her, gentle, intelligent, kind; had he ever been 
otherwise? It seem highli unreasonable, a fantasi of fear and the 
hysteria of the moment. 

"hungry?" ask nick unexpectedly. 

"I could use a barbecue, I guess. beef." 

the car veer to the gravel area befor a brightli lit stand. nick 
gave the order to an attendant. He chuckl as pat, with the digest 
disregard of youth attack the greasi combination. 

"that' like a hum bird eat hay!" he said. "or better, like a 
leprechaun eat that horse-meat they can for dogs." 

"you might as well discov that I don't live on honey and 
rose-petals," said pat. "not even on caviar and terrapin--at least, not 
exclusively. I leav the dainti palat for mother to indulge." 

"which is just as well. hamburg and barbecu are more easili 
budgeted." 

"nicholas," said the girl, toss the paper napkin out of the car 
window, "i that an indirect and veri evas propos of marriage?" 

"you know it could be, if you wish it!" 

"and do i?" she said, assum a pensiv air. "I wonder. suppos we say 
i'll let you know later." 

"and meanwhile?" 

"oh, meanwhil we can be sort of engaged. just the way we'v been." 

"you'r sweet, pat," he murmured, as the car edg into the line of 
traffic. "I don't know just how to convey my appreciation, but it' 
there!" 

the build drew more close together; the road wa suddenli a 
light street, and then, almost without realiz it, they were befor 
pat' home. nick walk besid her to the door; he stood face her 
hesitantly. 

"good night, pat," he said huskily. He lean down, kiss her veri 
gently, turned, and departed. 

the girl watch him from the open doorway, follow the light of 
hi car until they vanish down the street. dear, sweet nick! then 
the disturb memori of that occurr of the even returned; she 
frown in perplex as the thought rose. that wa all of a piec with 
the puzzl charact of him, and the curiou veil refer he'd 
made. refer to what? she didn't know, couldn't imagine. nick had 
said he didn't know either, which ad still anoth quirk to the maze. 

she thought of dr. horker' words. with the thought, she glanc at hi 
house, adjac to her own home. A light gleam in the library; he 
wa still awake. she close the door behind her, and dart across the 
narrow strip of lawn to hi porch. she rang the bell. 

"good evening, dr. carl," she said as the massiv form of horker 
appeared. she pucker her lip impud at him as she slip by him 
into the house. 




6 

A question of scienc 


"not that i'm displeas at thi visit, pat," rumbl the doctor, 
seat himself in one of the great chair by the fireplace, "but i'm 
curious. I thought you were date your ideal tonight, yet here you 
are, back alon a littl after eleven. how come?" 

"oh," said the girl nonchalantly, drop crosswis in the other 
chair, "we decid we need our beauti sleep." 

"then whi are you here, you young imp?" 

"thought you might be lonesome." 

"i'll bet you did! but seriously, pat, what is it? ani trouble?" 

"no-o," she said dubiously. "no trouble. I just want to ask you a few 
hypothet questions. about science." 

"go to it, then, and quickly. I wa readi to turn in." 

"well," said pat, "about nick' father. He wa a doctor, you said, and 
suppos to be cracked. wa he really?" 

"humph! that' curious. I just look up a brochur of hi tonight in 
the american medic journal, after our convers of thi afternoon. 
whi do you ask that?" 

"becaus i'm interested, of course." 

"well, here' what I rememb about him, pat. He wa an m.d., all 
right, but I see by hi paper there--th one I wa reading--that he wa 
on the staff of northern U. He did some work at the cook counti asylum, 
some research work, and there wa a bit of talk about hi maltreat 
the patients. then, on top of that, he publish a paper that medic 
men consid crazy, and that start talk of hi sanity. that' all I 
know." 

"then nick--." 

"I thought so! So it' come to the point where you'r investig hi 
antecedents, eh? with an eye to marriage, or what?" 

"or what!" snap pat. "I wa curiou to know, naturally." 

"naturally." the doctor gave her a keen glanc from hi shrewd eyes. 
"did you think you detect incipi dementia in your ideal?" 

"no," said the girl thoughtfully. "dr. carl, is there ani sort 
of crazi that could take an ordinarili shi person and make a 
passion devil of him? I don't mean passionate, either," she added. 
"rather cold, ruthless, domineering." 

"none that I know of," said horker, watch her closely. "did thi 
nick of your have one of hi master moments?" 

"wors than that," admit pat reluctantly. "we had a near accident, 
and it startl both of us, and then suddenly, he wa look at me 
like a devil, and then--" she paused. "it frighten me a little." 

"what'd he do?" demand horker sharply. 

"nothing." she lie with no hesitation. 

"were there ani sign of satyromania?" 

"I don't know. I never heard of that." 

"I mean, in plain americanese, did he make a pass at you?" 

"he--no, he didn't." 

"well, what _did_ he do?" 

"he just look at me." somehow a feel of disloyalti wa rise in 
her; she felt a reluct to betray nick further. 

"what did he say, then? and don't lie thi time." 

"he just said--h just look at my leg and said someth about their 
be beautiful, and that wa all. after that, the look on hi face 
fade into the old nick." 

"old nick is right--th impud scoundrel!" horker' voic rumbl 
angrily. 

"well, they'r nice legs," said pat defiantly, swing them as 
evidence. "you'v said it yourself. whi shouldn't _he_ say it? what' 
to keep him from it?" 

"the code of a gentleman, for one thing!" 

"oh, who care for your victorian codes! anyway, I came here for 
information, not to be cross-examined. I want to ask the question 
myself." 

"pat, you'r a reckless littl spit-fire, and you'r go to get 
burn some day, and deserv it," the doctor rumbl ominously. "ask 
your fool questions, and then i'll ask mine." 

"all right," said the girl, still defiant. "I don't guarante to answer 
yours, however." 

"well, ask yours, you imp!" 

"first, then--i that satyro-stuff you mention intermitt or 
continuous?" 

"it' necessarili intermittent, you numb-skull! the male organ can't 
function continuously!" 

"I mean, doe the mania lie dormant for week or months, and then flare 
up?" 

"not at all. it' a perman mania, like ani other psychopath sex 
condition." 

"oh," said pat thoughtfully, with a sens of relief. 

"well, go on. what next?" 

"what are these dual person you read about in the papers?" 

"they'r aphasias. An individu forget hi name, and he picks, or is 
given, another, if he happen to wander among strangers. He forget 
much of hi past experience; the second person is mere what' 
left of the first--sort of a vestig of hi normal character. there 
isn't ani such thing as a dual person in the sens of two distinct 
charact live in one body." 

"isn't there?" queri the girl musingly. "could the second person 
have qualiti that the first one lacked?" 

"not ani more than it could have an extra finger! the second is mere 
a split off the first, a forgetfulness, a loss of memory. It couldn't 
have _more_ qualiti than the whole, or normal, character; it _must_ 
have fewer." 

"isn't that just too interesting!" said pat in a banter tone. "all 
right, dr. carl. it' your turn." 

"then what' the reason for all thi curios about pervers and 
aphasias? what' happen to your geniu now?" 

"oh, i'm think of take up the studi of psychiatry," repli the 
girl cheerfully. 

"aren't you go to answer me seriously?" 

"no." 

"then what' the use of my ask questions?" 

"I know the right answer to that one. none!" 

"pat," said horker in a low voice, "you'r an impud littl hoyden, 
and too clever for your own good, but you and your mother are veri 
preciou to me. you know that." 

"of cours I do, dr. carl," said the girl, relenting. "you'r a dear, 
and i'm crazi about you, and you know that, too." 

"what i'm tri to say," proceed the other, "i simpli that i'm 
tri to help you. I want to help you, if you need help. Do you?" 

"I guess I don't, dr. carl, but you'r sweet." 

"are you in love with thi nichola devine?" 

"I think perhap I am," she admit softly. 

"and is he in love with you?" 

"frankly, could he help being?" 

"then there' someth about him that worri you. that' it, isn't 
it?" 

"I thought there was, dr. carl. I wa a littl startl by the chang 
in him right after we had that narrow escape, but i'm sure it wa 
nothing--just imagination. honestly, that' all that troubl me." 

"I believ you, pat," said the doctor, hi eye fix on hers. "but 
guard yourself, my dear. Be sure he' what you think he is; be sure you 
know him rightly." 

"he' clean and fine," murmur the girl. "I _am_ sure." 

"but thi puzzl yourself about hi character, pat--i don't like it. 
make doubli sure befor you permit your feel to becom too deepli 
involved. that' onli common sense, child, not psychiatri or magic." 

"i'm sure," repeat pat. "i'm not puzzl or troubl ani more. and 
thanks, dr. carl. you run along to bed and i'll do likewise." 

He rose, accompani her to the door, hi face unusu grave. 

"patricia," he said, "I want you to think over what i'v said. Be 
sure, be doubli sure, befor you expos yourself to the possibl of 
suffering. rememb that, won't you?" 

"i'll tri to. don't fret yourself about it, dr. carl; i'm a hard-boil 
young modern, and it take a diamond to even scratch me." 

"I hope so," he said soberly. "run along; i'll watch until you'r 
inside." 

pat dart across the strip of grass, turn at her door to blow a 
goodnight kiss to the doctor, and slip in. she tipto quietli to 
her room, slip off her dress, and survey her long, slim leg in 
the mirror. 

"whi shouldn't he say they were beautiful?" she queri of the image. 
"I can't see ani reason to get excit over a simpl compliment like 
that." 

she made a face over her shoulder at the green buddha abov the 
fireplace. 

"and as for you, fat boy," she murmured, "I expect to see you wink at 
me tonight. and everi night hereafter!" 

she prepar herself for slumber, slip into the great bed. she had 
hardli close her lid befor the imag of a leer face with terribl 
bloodi eye flame out of memori and set her trembl and shuddering. 




7 

the red eye return 


"I suppos I realli ought to meet your friends, patricia," said mrs. 
lane, peer out of the window, "but they all seem to call when i'm 
not at home." 

"i'll have some of them call in february," said pat. "you'r not out as 
often in february." 

"whi do you say i'm not out as often in february?" demand her mother. 
"I don't see what earthli differ the month makes." 

"there are fewer day in february," retort pat airily. 

"faceti brat!" 

"so i'v been told. you needn't worry, though, mother; i'm sober, 
steady, and reliable, and if I weren't, dr. carl would see to it that 
my associ were." 

"yes; carl is a gem," observ her mother. "bi the way, who' thi 
nichola you'r so enthusiast about?" 

"he' a boy I met." 

"what' he like?" 

"well, he speak english and wear a hat." 

"imp! Is he nice?" 

"that mean is hi famili acceptable, doesn't it? He hasn't ani family." 

mrs. lane shrug her attract shoulders. "you'r a self-reli 
sort, patricia, and cool as ice lettuce, like your father. I don't 
doubt that you can manag your own affairs, and here come claud with 
the car." she gave the girl a hasti kiss. "good-bye, and have a good 
time, as i'm sure I shan't with bret cutter in the game." 

pat watch her mother' trim, amazingli youth figur as she enter 
the car. more like a companion than a parent, she mused; she like the 
independ her mother' attitud permit her. 

"better than be watch like a prize-win puppy," she thought. 
"mayb dr. carl as a father would have a detriment or two along with 
the advantages. he' a dear, and i'm mad about him, but he doe lean to 
the nineteenth centuri as far as parent duti are concerned." 

she saw nick' car draw to the curb; as he emerg she wave from the 
window and skip into the hall. she caught up her wrap and bound 
out to meet him just ascend the steps. 

"let' go!" she greet him. she cast an apprehens glanc at hi 
features, but there wa noth disturb about him. He gave her a 
diffid smile, the shy, gentl smile that had taken her in that first 
moment of meeting. thi wa certainli no one but her own nick, with no 
trace of the unsettl person of their last encounter. 

He help her into the car, seat himself at her side. He lean over 
her, kiss her veri tenderly; suddenli she wa cling to him, her 
face against the thrill warmth of hi cheek. 

"nick!" she murmured. "nick! you'r just safe you, aren't you? i'v 
been imagin thing that I knew couldn't be so!" 

He slip hi arm caressingli about her, and the pressur of it wa 
like the secur of encircl battlements. the world wa outsid 
the circl of hi arms; she wa within, safe, inviolable. It wa some 
moment befor she stirred, lift her pert face with tear-bright eye 
from the obscur of hi shoulder. 

"so!" she exclaimed, pat the black glow of her hair into composure. 
"I feel better, nick, and I hope you didn't mind." 

"mind!" he ejaculated. "if you mean that as a joke, honey, it' far too 
subtl for me." 

"well, I didn't think you'd mind," said pat demurely, settl herself 
besid him. "let' be moving, then; dr. carl is nearli pop hi eye 
out in the window there." 

the car hum into motion; she wave a deris arm at the doctor' 
window by way of indic her knowledg of hi surveillance. "ought 
to teach him a lesson some time," she thought. "one of these fine 
even i'll give him a real shock." 

"where'l we go?" queri nick, veer skil into the swift 
traffic of sheridan road. 

"anywhere!" she said blithely. "who care as long as we go together?" 

"dancing?" 

"whi not? know a good place?" 

"no." He frown in thought. "I haven't indulg much." 

"the picador?" she suggested. "the music' good, and it' not too 
expensive. but it' 'most across town, and besides, saturday night 
we'd be sure to run into some of the crowd." 

"what of it?" 

"I want to danc with you, nick--al evening. I want to be without 
distractions." 

"pat, dear! I could kiss you for that." 

"you will," she murmur softly. 

they move aimlessli south with the traffic, paus momentarili at the 
light-control intersections, then whir again to rapid motion. 
the girl lean against hi arm silently, contentedly; block after 
block drop behind. 

"whi so pensive, honey?" he ask after an interval. "i'v never known 
you so quiet before." 

"i'm enjoy my happiness, nick." 

"aren't you usual happy?" 

"of course, onli these last two or three days, ever sinc our last 
date, i'v been make myself miserable. i'v been tell myself 
foolish things, imposs things, and it' onli now that i'v thrown 
off the blues. i'm happy, dear!" 

"i'm glad you are," he said. hi voic wa strang husky, and he 
stare fixedli at the street rush toward them. "i'm glad you are," 
he repeated, a curiou tensiti in hi tones. 

"so'm i." 

"i'll never do anyth to make you unhappy, pat--never. not--if I can 
help it." 

"you can help it, nick. you'r the one make me happy; pleas keep 
do it." 

"i--hop to." there wa a queer catch in hi voice. It wa almost as if 
he fear something. 

"selah!" said pat conclusively. she wa thinking, "wrong of me to refer 
to that accident. after all it wa harmless; just a natur burst of 
passion. might happen to anyone." 

"where'l we go?" ask nick as they swung into the tree-shadow road 
of lincoln park. "we haven't decid that." 

"anywhere," said the girl dreamily. "just drive; we'll find a place." 

"you must know lot of them." 

"we'll find a new place; we'll discov it for ourselves. it'll mean 
more, do that, than if we just go to one of the old place where 
i'v been with everi boy that ever date me. you don't want me danc 
with a crowd of memories, do you?" 

"I shouldn't mind as long as they stay mere memories." 

"well, I should! thi evening' to be ours--exclus ours." 

"a if it could ever be otherwise!" 

"indeed?" said pat. "and how do you know what memori I might choos 
to carri along? are you capabl of inspect my mental baggage?" 

"we'll check it at the door. you'r travel light tonight, aren't 
you?" 

"pest!" she said, give hi cheek an impud viciou pinch. "nice, 
pleasur pest!" 

He made no answer. the car wa idl rather slowli along michigan 
boulevard; half a block ahead glow the green of a traffic light. 
faster traffic flow around them, pass them like water eddi 
about a slow float branch. 

suddenli the car lurch forward. the amber flame of the warn light 
had flare out; they flash across the intersect a split second 
befor the metal click of the red light, and a scant few feet befor 
the converg line of traffic from the side street swept in with 
protest horns. 

"nick!" the girl gasped. "you'll rate yourself a traffic ticket! why'd 
you cut the light like that?" 

"to lose your guardian angel," he mutter in tone so low she bare 
understood hi words. 

pat glanc back; the light of a dozen car show beyond the barrier 
of the red signal. 

"do you mean one of those car wa follow us? what on earth make 
you think that, and whi should it, anyway?" 

the other made no answer; he swerv the car abruptli off the avenue, 
into one of the nondescript side streets. He drove swiftli to the 
corner, turn south again, and turn again on some street pat fail 
to identify--south superior or grand, she thought. they were scarc 
a block from the magnific of michigan avenu and it skyscrapers, 
it brilliant lights, and it teem night traffic, yet here they 
move down a desert dark thoroughfare, a street line with ramshackl 
wooden hous intermingl with mean littl shops. 

"nick!" pat exclaimed. "where are we going?" 

the low voic sounded. "dancing," he said. 

He brought the car to the curb; in the silenc as the motor died, the 
faint strain of a mechan piano sounded. He open the car door, 
step around to the sidewalk. 

"we'r here," he said. 

someth metal in hi tone drew pat' eye to hi face. the eye 
that return her stare were the bloodi orb of the demon of last 
wednesday night! 




8 

gateway to evil 


pat stare curious at the apparit but made no move to alight from 
the vehicle. she wa consciou of no fear, onli a sens of wonder 
and perplexity. after all, thi wa mere nick, her own harmless, 
ador nick, in some sort of mysteri masquerade, and she felt full 
confid in her abil to handl him under ani circumstances. 

"where' here?" she said, remain motionless in her place. 

"A place to dance," came the toneless reply. 

pat eye him; a street car rumbl past, and the brief glow from it 
light window swept over hi face. suddenli the visag wa that 
of nick; the crimson glare of the eye wa imperceptible, and the 
featur were the well-known appurten of nichola devine, but 
queerli tens and strained. 

"A trick of the light," she thought, as the street car lumber away, 
and again a faint gleam of crimson appeared. she gaze curious at the 
youth, who stood impass return her survey as he held the door 
of the car. but the face wa the face of nick, she perceived, probabl 
in one of hi grim moods. 

she transfer her glanc to the build opposit which they had 
stopped. the strain of the mechan piano had ceased; blank, 
shade window face them, around whose edg glow a subdu light 
from within. A drab, battered, paintless shack, she thought, dismal 
and unpleasant; while she gazed, the sound of the discord music 
recommenced, adding, it seemed, the last unprepossess item. 

"it doesn't look veri attractive, nick," she observ dubiously. 

"I find it so, however." 

"then you'v been here?" 

"yes." 

"but I thought you said you didn't know ani place to go." 

"thi one hadn't occur to me--then." 

"well," she said crisply, "I could have done as well as thi with my 
eye closed. It doesn't appeal to me at all, nick." 

"nevertheless, here' where we'll go. you'r apt to find 
it--interesting." 

"look here, nichola devine!" pat snapped, "what make you think you 
can bulli me? No one ha ever succeed yet!" 

"I said you'd find it interesting." hi voic wa unchanged; she stare 
at him in complet bafflement. 

"oh, nick!" she exclaim in suddenli softer tones. "what differ 
doe it make? didn't I say anywher would do, so we went together?" she 
smile at him. "thi will do if you wish, though really, honey, i'd 
prefer not." 

"I do wish it," the other said. 

"all right, honey," said pat the faintest trace of reluct in her 
voic as she slip from the car. "I stick to my bargains." 

she winc at the intens of hi grip as he took her arm to assist 
her. hi finger were like taunt wire bite into her flesh. 

"nick!" she cried. "you'r hurt me! you'r bruis my arm!" 

He releas her; she rub the spot ruefully, then follow him to the 
door of the mysteri establishment. the unharmoni jangl of the 
piano din abruptli louder as he swung the door open. pat enter and 
glanc around her at the room revealed. 

dull, smoky, dismal--not the least excit or interest as yet, 
she thought. A short bar parallel one wall, behind which loung a 
little, thin, nondescript individu with a small mustache. half a 
dozen tabl fill the remaind of the room; four or five occupi 
by the clientel of the place, as unsavori a group as the girl could 
recal have encount on the hither side of the motion pictur 
screen. two women titter as nick entered; then with one accord, the 
eye of the entir group fix on pat, where she stood draw her wrap 
more close about her, stand uncomfort behind her escort. and 
the piano tinkl it discord in the far corner. 

"same place," said nick shortli to the bartender, ignor the glanc 
of the others. pat follow him across the room to a door, into a hall, 
thenc into a smaller room furnish mere with a tabl and four 
chairs. the nondescript man stood wait in the doorway as nick took 
her wrap and seat her in one of the chairs. 

"quart," he said laconically, and the bartend disappeared. 

pat stare intently, studiously, into the face of her companion. nick' 
face, certainly; here in full light there wa no trace of the red-ey 
horror she had fanci out there in the semi-dark of the street. Or 
wa there? now--when he turned, when the light struck hi eye at an 
angle, wa that a glint of crimson? still, the featur were nick's, 
onli a certain grim intens foreign to him lurk about the set of 
hi mouth, the narrow eye-lids. 

"well!" she said. "so thi is paris! what are you tri to do--teach 
me capit l--life? and where do we dance?" 

"in here." 

"and what kind of quart wa that you ordered? you know how littl I 
drink, and i'm darn particular about even that little." 

"you'll like this." 

"I doubt it." 

"I said you'll like it," he reiter in flat tones. 

"I heard you say it." she regard him with a puzzl frown. "nick," 
she said suddenly, "i'v decid I like you better in your gentl pose; 
thi master attitud isn't becoming, and you can forget what I said 
about wish you'd display it oftener." 

"you'll like that, too." 

"again I doubt it. nick, dear, don't spoil anoth even like that 
last one!" 

"thi one won't be like the last one!" 

"but honey--" she paus at the entranc of the bartend bear a 
tray, an open bottl of ginger ale, two glass of ice, and a flask 
of oili amber liquid. He deposit the assort on the red-check 
tabl cloth. 

"two dollars," he said, pocket the money and silent retired. 

"nicholas," said the girl tartly, "there' enough of that poison for a 
regiment." 

"I don't think so." 

"well, I won't drink it, and I won't let you drink it! So now what?" 

"I think you'll do both." 

"I don't!" she snapped. "and I don't like this, nick--th place, or the 
liquor, or your attitude, or anything. we'r go to leave!" 

instead of answering, he pull the cork from the bottle, pour a 
quantiti of the amber fluid into each of the tumblers. To one he ad 
an equal quantiti of ginger ale, and set it deliber squar in 
front of pat. she frown at it distastefully, and shook her head. 

"no," she said. "not I. i'm leaving." 

she made no move, however; her eye met those of her companion, gaze 
at her with a cold intent in their curiou amber depths. and 
again--wa that a flash of red? impuls she reach out her hand, 
touch his. 

"oh, nick!" she said in soft, almost plead tones. "please, honey--i 
don't understand you. don't you know I love you, nick? you can hear me 
say it: I love you. don't you believ that?" 

He continu hi cold, intens stare; the grim set of hi mouth wa as 
unrelax as marble. pat felt a shiver of apprehens run through 
her, and an almost hypnot desir to yield herself to the demand of 
the inexplic eyes. she tore her glanc away, look down at the 
red check of the tabl cloth. 

"nick, dear," she said. "I can't understand this. will you tell me what 
you--wil you tell me whi we'r here?" 

"it is out of your grasp." 

"but--i know it ha someth to do with wednesday night, someth 
to do with that reluct of yours, the thing you said you didn't 
understand. hasn't it?" 

"do you think so?" 

"yes," she said. "I do! and nick, honey--didn't I tell you I could 
forgiv you anything? I don't care what' happen in the past; all I 
care for is now, now and the future. don't you understand me? i'v told 
you I love you, honey! don't you love me?" 

"yes," said the other, stare at her with no chang in the fixiti of 
hi gaze. 

"then how can you--act like thi to me?" 

"thi is my concept of love." 

"I don't understand!" the girl said helplessly. "i'm complet 
puzzled--it' all topsy-turvy." 

"yes," he said in impass agreement. 

"but what is this, nick? please, please--what is this? are you mad?" 
she had almost added, "like your father." 

"no," he said, still in those cold tones. "thi is an experiment." 

"an experiment!" 

"yes. An experi in evil." 

"I don't understand," she repeated. 

"I said you wouldn't." 

"do you mean," she asked, struck by a sudden thought, "that discuss 
of our about pure horror? what you said that night last week?" 

"that!" hi voic wa ici and contemptuous. "that wa the drivel of a 
weakling. no; I mean evil, not horror--th live evil that can be so 
beauti that one walk deliberately, with open eyes, into hell onli 
to prevent it loss. that is the experiment." 

"oh," said pat, her own voic suddenli cool. "i that what you wish to 
do--experi on me?" 

"yes." 

"and what am I suppos to do?" 

"first you are to drink with me." 

"I see," she said slowly. "I see--dimly. I am a subject, a reagent, 
a guinea pig, to provid you materi for your writing. you propos 
to use me in thi experi of yours--thi experi in evil. all 
right!" she pick up the tumbler; impuls she drain it. the 
liquor, dilut as it was, wa raw and strong enough to bring tear 
smart to her eyes. Or _was_ it the liquor? 

"all right!" she cried. "i'll drink it all--th whole bottle!" she 
seiz the flask, fill her tumbler to the brim, while her companion 
watch her with impass gaze. "you'll have your experiment! and 
then, nichola devine, we'r through! Do you hear me? through!" 

she caught up the tumbler, rais it to her lips, and drain the 
sear liquid until she could see her companion' cold eye regard 
her through the glass of it bottom. 




9 

descent into avernu 


pat slam the empti tumbler down on the check tabl cloth and 
buri her face in her hands, choke and gasp from the effect 
of the fieri liquor. her throat burned, her mouth wa parch by the 
acrid taste, and a conflagr seem to be rage somewher within 
her. then she steadied, rais her eyes, and stare straight into the 
strang eye of nichola devine. 

"well?" she said fiercely. "i that enough?" 

He wa watch her coldli as an imag or a painting; the intens of 
hi gaze wa more cat-lik than human. she move her head aside; hi 
eyes, without appar shift, were still on hers, like the eye of a 
pictur face. A resurg of anger shook her at hi immobility; hi 
aloof seem to impli that noth she could do would disturb him. 

"wasn't it enough?" she screamed. "wasn't it? then look!" 

she seiz the bottle, pour anoth stream of the oili liquid 
into her glass, and rais it to her lips. again the burn fluid 
excori her tongu and throat, and then suddenly, the tumbler wa 
struck from her hand, spill the rest of it content on the table. 

"that is enough," said the ici voic of her companion. 

"oh, it is? we'll see!" she snatch at the bottle, still more than 
half full. the thin hand of nichola devin wrench it violent away. 

"give me that!" she cried. "you want what you'r getting!" the warmth 
within her had reach the surfac now; she felt flushed, excited, 
reckless, and desper angry. 

the other set the bottl deliber on the floor; he rose, circl 
the table, and stood glare down at her with that same inexplic 
expression. suddenli he rais hi hand; twist her black hair in 
hi fist, he dealt her a sting blow across the lip half-open to 
scream, then flung her away so violent that she nearli sprawl from 
her chair. 

the scream die in her throat; daze by the blow, she drop her head 
to the table, while sob of pain and fear shook her. coher thought 
had departed, and she knew onli that her lip stung, that her clear, 
activ littl mind wa caught in a mesh of befuddlement. she couldn't 
think; she could onli sob in the haze of dizzi that encompass 
her. after a long interval, she rais her head, open her eye upon 
a swaying, unsteadi world, and face her companion, who had silent 
resum hi seat. 

"nichola devine," she said slowly, speak as if each word were an 
effort, "I hate you!" 

"ah!" he said and wa again silent. 

she forc her eye to focu on hi face, while hi featur danc 
vagu as if smoke flow between the two of them. It wa as if there 
were smoke in her mind as well; she made a great effort to rise abov 
the cloud that bemus her thoughts. 

"take me home," she said. "nicholas, I want to go home." 

"whi should i?" he ask impassively. "the experi is hardli begun." 

"experiment?" she echo dully. "oh, yes--experiment. i'm an 
experiment." 

"an experi in evil," he said. 

"yes--in evil. and I hate you! that' evil enough, isn't it?" 

He reach down, lift the bottl to the table, and method 
pour himself a drink of the liquor. He rais it, watch the oili 
swirl in the light, then tip the fluid to hi lip while the girl 
gaze at him with a sullen set to her own lips. A tini crimson spot 
had appear in the corner of her mouth; at it sting, she rais her 
hand and brush it away. she stare as if in unbelief at the small red 
smear it left on her fingers. 

"nicholas," she said pleadingly, "won't you take me home? please, 
nicholas, I want to leav here." 

"do you hate me?" he asked, a queer twist smile appear on hi 
lips. 

"if you'll take me home I won't," said pat, snatch through the 
rise cloud of dizzi at a straw of logic. "you'r go to take 
me home, aren't you?" 

"let me hear you say you hate me!" he demanded, rise again. the girl 
cring away with a littl whimper as he approached. "you hate me, 
don't you?" 

He twist hi hand again in her eboni hair, draw her face back so 
that he stare down at it. 

"there' blood on your lips," he said as if gloating. "blood on your 
lips!" 

He clutch her hair more tightly; abruptli he bent over her, press 
hi mouth to hers. her bruis lip burn with pain at the fierc 
pressur of his; she felt a sharp anguish at the imping of hi 
teeth. yet the cloudi pall of dizzi about her wa unbroken; she wa 
too frighten and bewild for resistance. 

"blood on your lips!" he repeat exultingly. "now is the beauti of 
evil!" 

"nicholas," she said wearily, cling desper to a remnant of 
logic, "what do you want of me? tell me what you want and then let me 
go home." 

"I want to show you the face of evil," he said. "I want you to know the 
glori of evil, the loveli of suprem evil!" 

He drag hi chair around the table, place it besid her. seated, 
he drew her into hi arms, where she lay passive, too limp and 
befuddl to resist. with a sudden movement, he turn her so that her 
back rest across hi knees, her face gaze up into his. He stare 
intent down at her, and the light, shine at an angl into hi eyes, 
suddenli struck out the red glow that linger in them. 

"I want you to know the power of evil," he murmured. "the irresistible, 
incomprehens fascin of it, and the unspeak pleasur of 
indulg in it." 

pat scarc heard him; she wa struggl now in vain against the 
overwhelm fume of the alcohol she had consumed. the room wa 
waver around her, and behind her despair and terror, a curiou 
elat wa thrust itself into her consciousness. 

"evil," she echo vaguely. 

"blood on your lips!" he muttered, peer down at her. "tast the 
unutter pleasur of kiss on bloodi lips; drain the sweet anguish 
of pain, the fierc delight of suffering!" 

He bent down; again hi lip press upon hers, but thi time she felt 
herself responding. some still sane portion of her brain rebelled, 
but the intox of sens and alcohol wa dominant. suddenli she 
wa cling to him, return hi kisses, glori in the pain of her 
lacer lips. A red mist suffus her; she had no conscious of 
anyth save the exquisit pain of the kiss, that somehow contriv 
to transform itself into an ecstaci of delight. she lay gasp as the 
other withdrew hi lips. 

"you see!" he gloated. "you understand! evil is open to us, and all the 
unutter pleasur of the damned, who cri out in transport of joy 
at the bite of the flame of hell. Do you see?" 

the girl made no answer, sob in a chaotic mingl of pain and 
excruci pleasure. she wa incap of speech or connect 
thought; the alcohol beat against her brain with a persist that 
defi resistance. after a moment, she stirred, struggl erect to a 
sit posture. 

"evil!" she said dizzily. "evil and good--what' difference? all in a 
lifetime!" 

she felt a surg of tipsi elation, and then the muffl music of the 
mechan piano, drift through the close door, penetr her 
befuddl consciousness. 

"I want to dance!" she cried. "i'm drunk and I want to dance! Am I 
drunk?" she appeal to her companion. 

"yes," he said. 

"I am not! I just want to dance, onli it' hot in here. danc with me, 
nicholas--show me an evil dance! I want to danc with the devil, and 
I will! you'r the devil, name and all! I want to danc with old nick 
himself!" 

she rose unsteadili from her chair; instantli the room reel crazili 
about her and she fell sprawling. she felt the grasp of arm beneath 
her shoulders, rais her erect; she lean against the wall and heard 
herself laugh wildly. 

"funni room!" she said. "evil room--on pivots!" 

"you'r still to learn," came the toneless voic of nichola devine. 
"do you want to see the face of evil?" 

"sure!" she said. "got a good memori for faces!" 

she realiz that he wa fumbl with the catch of her dress on her 
left shoulder; again some remnant, some vestig of saniti deep in her 
brain warn her. 

"mustn't," she said vaguely. 

then suddenli the catch wa open; the dress drop away around her, 
crumpl to a shapeless blob of cloth about her diminut feet. she 
cover her face with her hands, fight to hold that last, vanish 
vestig of sobriety, while she stood sway drunkenli against the wall. 

then nichola devine' arm were about her again; she felt the sharp 
sting of hi kiss on her throat. He swung her about, bent her 
backward across the low table; she wa consciou of a bewild 
sensat of helpless and of littl else. 

"now the suprem glori of evil!" he wa mutter in her ear. she felt 
hi hand on her bare shoulder as he press her backward. 

then, abruptly, he paused, releas her. she sat dizzili erect, 
follow the direct of hi gaze. In the half open door stood the 
nondescript bartend leer in at them. 




10 

rescu from abaddon 


pat slid dizzili from her perch on the tabl and sank heavili to 
a chair. the interrupt of the mustach keeper of thi den 
of contradict struck her as extrem humorous; she giggl 
hyster as her waver gaze perceiv the constern in hi 
sharp littl face. some forlorn shred of modesti assert itself, and 
she drag a corner of the red-check tabl cloth across her knees. 

"get out!" said nichola devin in that voic of rasp metal. "get 
out!" he repeat in unchang tones. 

the other made no move to leave. "yeah?" he said. "listen, bud--thi 
place is respectable, see? you want to pull someth like this, you go 
upstairs, see? and pay for your room." 

"get out!" there wa no variat in the voice. 

"_you_ get out! the both of you, see?" 

nichola devin step slowli toward him; hi back, as he advanc 
upon the bartender, wa toward pat, yet through the haze of 
intoxication, she had an impress of evil red eye in a chill, 
impass face. "get out!" 

the other had no stomach for such an adversary. He back out of the 
door, close it as he vanished. hi voic float in from the hall. 

"i'm tell you!" he called. "clear out!" 

nichola devin turn back toward the girl. He survey her sit in 
her chair; she had drop her chin to her hand to steadi the whirl 
of her head. 

"we'll go," he said. "come on." 

"I just want to sit here," she said. "just let me sit here. i'm tired." 

"come on," he repeated. 

"why?" she mutter petulantly. "i'm tired." 

"I want no interruptions. we'll go elsewhere." 

"must dress!" she murmur dazedly, "can't go on street without dress." 

nichola devin swept her frock from it place in the corner, gather 
her wrap from the chair, and flung them over hi arm. He grasp her 
wrist, tug her to an unsteadi stand position. 

"come on," he said. 

"dress!" 

He snatch the red check tabl cloth from it place, precipit 
bottles, ash-tray, and glass into an indiscrimin pile, and threw 
the stain and odor fabric across her shoulders. she gather it 
about her like a toga; it hung at most point bare below her waist, 
but it satisfi the urg of her muddl mind for a cover of some 
sort. 

"we'll go through the rear," her companion said. "into the alley. I 
want no troubl with that rat in the bar--yet!" 

He still held pat' wrist; she stumbl after him as he drag her 
into the dark of the hall. they move through it blindli to a door 
at the far end; nichola swung it open upon a dim corridor flank by 
build on either side, with a strip of star-sprinkl sky above. 

pat' leg were somehow incap of their usual lith grace; she 
fail to negoti the singl step, and crash heavili to the 
concret paving. the shock and the cooler air of the open steadi her 
momentarily; she felt no pain from her bruis knees, but a temporari 
rift in the fog that bound her mind. she gather the red-check cloth 
more close about her shoulder as her companion, still clutch her 
wrist, jerk her violent to her feet. 

they move into the gulch of the alley, and here she found difficulti 
in following. her tini high-heel pump slip at everi step on 
the uneven cobbl of the paving, and the unsteadi foot made her 
lurch and stumbl until the dusti stretch of the alley wa a writh 
panorama of shadow and light window and stars. nichola devin 
turn an impati glare on her, and here in the semi-darkness, hi 
face wa again the face of the red-ey demon. she drag him to a 
halt, laugh strangely. 

"there it is!" she cried, point at him with her free hand. He turn 
again, stare at her with grim features. 

"what?" 

"there! your face--th face of evil!" again she laugh hysterically. 

the other step to her side; the disturb eye were inch from 
her own. He rais hi hand as she laughed, slap her sharply, so 
that her head reeled. He seiz her shoulders, shake her until the 
checker cloth billow like a flag in a wind. 

"now come!" he muttered. 

but the girl, laugh no longer, lean pale and weak against a 
low board fence. her limb seem paralyzed, and movement wa quit 
impossible. she wa consciou of neither the blow nor the shaking, but 
onli of a devast nausea and an all-encompass weakness. she bent 
over the fence; she wa violent ill. 

then the nausea had vanished, and a weariness, a strang lassitude, wa 
all that remained. nichola devin stood over her; suddenli he press 
her bodi to him in a convuls embrace, so that her head drop back, 
and hi face loom abov her, obliter the stars. 

"ah!" he said. He seem about to kiss her when a 
sound--voices--filt out of somewher in the maze of dark court 
and litter yard along the alley. He releas her, seiz her wrist, 
and onc more she wa stumbl wretchedli behind him over the uneven 
surfac of the cobblestones. 

A numb had come over her; conscious burn veri low as she 
waver doggedli along through the darkness. she perceiv dimli that 
they were approach the end of the alley; the brighter glow of the 
street loom befor them, and a pass motor car cut momentari 
parallel shaft of luminesc across the opening. 

nichola devin slow hi pace, still clutch her wrist in a cold 
grip; he paused, move cautious toward the corner of the building. 
He peer around the edg of the structure, survey the now desert 
street, while pat stood dulli behind him, incap alik of thought or 
voluntari movement, clutch desper at the dirti cloth that hung 
about her shoulders. 

her companion finish hi survey; appar satisfi that progress 
wa safe, he drag her after him, turn toward the corner beyond 
which hi car wa parked. the girl stagger behind him with 
diminish vigor; conscious wa veri nearli at the point of 
disappearance, and her step were waver unsteadily, and doggedli 
slow. she drag heavili on hi arm; he gave a gestur of impati 
at her weakness. 

"come on!" he growled. "we'r just go to the corner." hi voic rose 
slightli in pitch, still sound harsh as rasp metals. "there still 
remain the ultim evil!" he said. "there is still a depth of beauti 
unplumbed, a pain whose exquisit pleasur is yet to find!" 

they approach the corner; abruptli nichola devin drew back as two 
figur came unexpectedli into view from beyond it. He turn back 
toward the alley-way, drag the girl in a dizzi circle. He took a 
few rapid steps. 

but pat wa through, exhausted. At hi first step she stumbl and 
sprawled, drag prone behind him. He releas her hand and turn 
defiantli to face the approach men, while the girl lie on the 
pavement struggl to a sit postur with her back against the wall. 
she turn dull, indiffer eye on the scene, then wa rous to a 
somewhat higher pitch of interest by the sound of a familiar voice. 

"there he is! I told you it wa hi car." 

dr. horker! she struggl for clariti of thought; she realiz dimli 
that she ought to feel relief, happiness--but all she could summon 
wa a faint quicken of interest, or rather, a diminut of the 
lassitud that held her. she drew the rag of a tabl cloth about her 
and huddl against the wall, watching. the doctor and some strang 
man, burli and massiv in the darkness, dash upon them, while 
nichola devin waited, hi red-orb face a demoniac pictur of cold 
contempt. then the doctor glanc at her huddled, bedraggl figure; 
she saw hi face aghast, incredulous, as he perceiv the condit of 
her clothing. 

"pat! My god, girl! what' happened? where'v you been?" 

she found a hidden reserv somewher within her. her voic rose, shrill 
and hysterical. 

"we'v been in hell!" she said. "you came to take me back, didn't you? 
orpheu and eurydice!" she laughed. "dr. orpheu horker!" 

the doctor flash her anoth incredul glanc and a grim and veri 
terribl express flame in hi face. He turn toward nichola 
devine, hi hand clenching, hi mouth twist without utterance, 
with no sound save a half-aud snarl. then he spoke, a low, grate 
phrase flung at hi thick-set companion. 

"bring the car," wa all he said. the man lumber away toward the 
corner, and he turn again toward nichola devine, who face him 
impassively. suddenli hi fist shot out; he struck the youth or demon 
squar between the red eyes, send him reel back against the 
building. then the doctor turned, bend over pat; she felt the 
pressur of hi arm beneath knee and shoulders. He wa carri her 
toward a car that drew up at the curb; he wa place her gentli in the 
back seat. then, without a glanc at the figur still lean against 
the building, he swept from the sidewalk the dark mass that wa pat' 
dress and her wrap, and re-ent the car besid her. 

"shall I turn him in?" ask the man in the front seat. 

"we can't afford the publicity," said the doctor, ad grimly, "i'll 
settl with him later." 

pat' head lurch as the car started; she wa lose consciousness, 
and realiz it vaguely, but she retain one impress as the vehicl 
swung into motion. she perceiv that the face of the lone figur 
lean against the building, a face stare at her with horror and 
unbelief, wa no longer the visag of the demon of the evening, but 
that of her own nick. 




11 

wreckag 


pat open her eye reluctantly, with the impress that someth 
unpleas await her return to full consciousness. something, as yet 
she could not recal just what, had happen to her; she wa not even 
sure where she wa awakening. 

however, her eye survey her own familiar room; there opposit the 
bed grin the jade buddha on hi stand on the mantel--th one that 
nick had--nick! A mass of troubled, terribl recollect thrust 
themselv suddenli into consciousness. she vision a medley of 
disturb pictures, as yet disconnected, unassorted, but wait onli 
the return of complet wakefulness. and she realiz abruptli that her 
head ach miserably, that her mouth wa parched, that twing of pain 
were make themselv evid in variou portion of her anatomy. she 
turn her head and caught a glimps of a figur at the bed-side; her 
startl glanc reveal dr. horker, sit quietli watch her. 

"hello, doctor," she said, winc as her smile brought a sharp pain 
from her lips. "or should I say, good morning, judge?" 

"pat!" he rumbled, hi growl tone oddli gentle. "littl pat! how do 
you feel, child?" 

"fair," she said. "just fair. dr. carl, what happen to me last night? 
I can't seem to remember--oh!" 

A flash of recollect pierc the obscur muddle. she rememb 
now--not all of the event of that ghastli evening, but enough. too 
much! 

"oh!" she murmur faintly. "oh, dr. carl!" 

"yes," he nodded. "'oh!'--and would you mind veri much tell me what 
that 'oh' of your implies?" 

"why--". she paus shuddering, as one by one the event of that 
sequenc of horror reassembl themselves. "yes, i'd mind veri 
much," she continued. "it wa nothing--" she turn to him abruptly. 
"oh, it was, though, dr. carl! It wa horrible, unspeakable, 
incomprehensible!--but I can't talk about it! I can't!" 

"perhap you'r right," said the doctor mildly. "don't you realli want 
to discuss it?" 

"I do want to," admit the girl after a moment' reflection. "I want 
to--but I can't. i'm afraid to think of all of it." 

"but what in heaven' name did you do?" 

"we just start out to go dancing," she said hesitatingly. "then, on 
the way to town, nick--changed. He said someon wa follow us." 

"some one was," said horker. "_i_ was, with mueller. that nick of your 
ha the devil' own cleverness!" 

"yes," the girl echo soberly. "the devil' own!--who' mueller, dr. 
carl?" 

"he' a plain-cloth man, friend of mine. I treat him once. what do 
you mean by changed?" 

"hi eyes," she said. "and hi mouth. hi eye got reddish and 
terrible, and hi mouth got straight and grim. and hi voic turn 
sort of--harsh." 

"ever happen before, that you know of?" 

"once. when--" she paused. 

"yes. last wednesday night, when you came over to ask those question 
about pure science. what happen then?" 

"we went to a place to dance." 

"and that' the reason, I suppose," rumbl the doctor sardonically, 
"that I found you wander about the street in a tabl cloth, 
step-ins, and a pair of hose! that' whi I found you on the verg of 
pass out from rotten liquor, and look like the loser of a battl 
with an airplan propellor! what happen to your face?" 

"mi face? what' wrong with it?" 

the doctor rose from hi chair and seiz the hand-mirror from her 
dress table. 

"look at it!" he commanded, pass her the glass. 

pat gaze incredul at the reflect the surfac presented; a dark 
bruis color her cheek, her lip were swollen and discolored, and her 
chin bore a jag scratch. she stare at the injuri in horror. 

"your knee are skinned, too," said horker. "both of them." 

pat slip one pajama limb from the covers, draw the pants-leg up 
for inspection. she gasp in startl fright at the great red stain on 
her knee. 

"that' mercurochrome," said the doctor. "I put it there." 

"_you_ put it there. how did I get home last night, dr. carl? how did I 
get to bed?" 

"i'm respons for that, too. I put you to bed." He lean forward. 
"listen, child--your mother know noth about thi as yet. she wasn't 
home when I brought you in, and she' not awak yet thi morning. 
we'll tell her you had an automobil accident; explain away those 
bruises.--and now, how did you get them?" 

"I fell, I guess. two or three times." 

"that bruis on your cheek isn't from falling." 

the girl shuddered. now in the calm light of morning, the event of 
last night seem doubli horrible; she doubt her abil to believ 
them, so incred did they seem. she wa at a loss to explain even 
her own actions, and those of nichola devin were simpli beyond 
comprehension, a chapter from some dark and blasphem book of ancient 
times--th kabbala or the necronomicon. 

"what happened, pat?" queri the doctor gently. "tell me," he urg 
her. 

"i--can't explain it," she said doubtfully. "he took me to that place, 
but drink the liquor wa my own fault. I did it out of spite becaus 
I saw he didn't--car for me. and then--" she fell silent. 

"yes? and then?" 

"well--h began to talk about the beauti of evil, the delight of evil, 
and hi eye glare at me, and--i don't understand it at all, dr. carl, 
but all of a sudden I was--yielding. Do you see?" 

"I see," he said gently, soberly. 

"suddenli I seem to comprehend what he meant--al that about the 
suprem pleasur of evil. and I wa sort of--swept away. the dress--wa 
hi fault, but i--somehow i'd lost the power to resist. I guess I wa 
drunk." 

"and the bruises? and your cut lips?" queri the doctor grimly. 

"yes," she said in a low voice. "he--struck me. after a while I didn't 
care. He could have--would have done other things, onli we were 
interrupted, and had to leave. and that' all, dr. carl." 

"isn't that enough?" he groaned. "pat, I should have kill the fiend 
there!" 

"i'm glad you didn't." 

"do you mean to say you'd care?" 

"i--don't know." 

"are you intim that you still love him?" 

"no," she said thoughtfully. "no, I don't love him, but--dr. carl, 
there' someth inexplic about this. there' someth I don't 
understand, but i'm certain of one thing!" 

"what' that?" 

"that it wasn't nick--not _my_ nick--who did those thing to me last 
night. It wasn't, dr. carl!" 

"pat, you'r be a fool!" 

"I know it. but i'm sure of it, dr. carl. I _know_ nick; I love him, 
and I know he couldn't have done--that. not the same gentl nick that I 
had to beg to kiss me!" 

"pat," said the doctor gently, "i'm a psychiatrist; it' my busi 
to know all the rotten that can hide in a human being. My offic 
is the scene of a parad of misfits, failures, potenti criminals, 
lunatics, and mental incompetents. it' a nasty, bitter side I see of 
life, but I know that side--and I tell you thi fellow is dangerous!" 

"do you understand this, dr. carl?" 

He reach over, take her hand in hi great palm with it long, 
curiou delic fingers. "I have my theory, pat. the man' a sadist, 
a lover of cruelty, and there' enough masoch in ani woman to make 
him terribl dangerous. I want your promise." 

"about what?" 

"I want you to promis never to see him again." 

the girl turn seriou eye on hi face; he note with a shock of 
sympathi that they were fill with tears. 

"you warn me i'd get burn play with fire," she said. "you did, 
didn't you?" 

"i'm an old fool, honey. If i'd believ my own advice, i'd have seen 
that thi never happen to you." He pat her hand. "have I your 
promise?" 

she avert her eyes. "yes," she murmured. He winc as he perceiv 
that the tear were on her cheeks. 

"so!" he said, rising. "the patient can get out of bed when she feel 
like it--and don't forget that littl fib we'v arrang for your 
mother' peac of mind." 

she stare up at him, still cling to hi hand. 

"dr. carl," she said, "are you sure--quit sure--you'r right about 
him? couldn't there be a chanc that you'r mistaken--that it' 
someth your psychiatri ha overlook or never heard of?" 

"small chance, pat dear." 

"but a chance?" 

"well, neither I nor ani reput medic claim to know everything, and 
the human mind' a subtl sort of thing." 




12 

letter from lucif 


"i'm glad!" pat told herself. "i'm glad it' over, and i'm glad I 
promis dr. carl--i guess I wa mighti close to the brink of disast 
that time." 

she examin the injuri on her face, care powder to conceal 
the worst effect from her mother. the trick had worked, too; mrs. 
lane had deliv herself of an excit lectur on the danger of 
the gasolin age, and then thank heaven it wa no worse. well, pat 
reflected, she had good old dr. carl to thank for the success of the 
subterfuge; he had broken the news veri skillfully, set the stage for 
her appearance, and calm her mother' apprehens of scars. and 
pat, survey her imag in the glass abov her dressing-table, could 
see for herself the minor natur of the hurts. 

"scars--pooh!" she observed. "A bruis cheek, a split lip, a skin 
chin. all I need is a black eye, and I guess i'd have had that in five 
minut more, and perhap a cauliflow ear into the bargain." 

but her mood wa anyth but flippant; she wa fight off the time 
when her thought had of necess to face the unpleasant, disturb 
fact of the affair. she didn't want to think of the thing at all; 
she want to laugh it off and forget it, yet she knew that for an 
impossibility. the veri desir to forget she recogn as a coward' 
wish, and she resent the idea that she wa cowardly. 

"forget the wise-cracks," she advis her image. "face the thing and 
argu it out; that' the onli way to be satisfied." 

she rose with a littl grimac of pain at the twing from her bruis 
knees, and cross to the chais loung besid the far window. she 
settl herself in it and resum her cogitations. she wa feel more 
or less herself again; the headach of the morn had nearli vanished, 
and asid from the variou ach and a listless fagged-out sensation, 
she approxim her normal self. physically, that is; the shadow of 
that other catastrophe, the one she hesit to face, wa anoth 
matter. 

"i'm lucki to get off thi easily," she assur herself, "after go 
on a bust like that one, like a lumberjack with hi pay in hi pocket." 
she shook her head in mourn amazement. "and i'm patricia lane, the 
girl whom billi dub 'pat the impeccable'! impeccable! wander 
through alley in step-in and a tabl cloth--get beaten up in a 
drunken brawl--pass out on rot-gut liquor--b carri home and 
put to bed! not impeccable; incapable' the word! I belong to dr. 
carl' parad of incompetents." 

she continu her rueful reflections. "well, item one is, I don't love 
nick ani more. I couldn't now!" she flung at the smile green buddha 
on the mantel. "that' over; i'v promised." 

somehow there wa not satisfact in the memori of that promise. It 
wa logical, of course; there wasn't anyth els to do now, but 
still-- 

"that _wasn't_ nick!" she told herself. "that wasn't _my_ nick. I guess 
dr. carl is right, and he' a depress what-ever-it-was; but if he' 
crazy, so am I! He had me convinc last night; I understood what he 
meant, and I felt what he want me to feel. If he' crazy, I am too; a 
fine coupl we are!" 

she continued. "but it wasn't nick! I saw hi face when we drove off, 
and it had chang again, and that wa nick' face, not the other. and 
he wa sorry; I could see he wa sorry, and the other could never have 
regret it--not ever! the other isn't--quit human, but nick is." 

she paused, consid the idea. "of course," she resumed, "I might 
have imagin that chang at the end. I wa hazi and quavery, and it' 
the last thing I _do_ remember; that must have been just befor I 
pass out." 

and then, repli to her own objection, "but I _didn't_ imagin it! I 
saw it happen onc before, that other night when--well, what differ 
doe it make, anyway? it' over, and i'v given my promise." 

but she wa unabl to dismiss the matter as easili as that. there 
wa some uncanny, elus element in it that fascin her. cruel, 
terrible, demoniac, he might have been; he had also been kind, lovable, 
and gentle. yet dr. carl had told her that split person could 
contain no characterist that were not present in the original, 
normal character. wa cruelty, then, a part of kindness? wa cruelti 
mere the lack of kindness, or, cynic thought, wa kind but the 
lack of cruelty? which qualiti were posit in the antagonist 
phase of nichola devine' individuality, and which negative? wa the 
gentle, lovable, but indubit weaker charact the split, and the 
demon of last even hi normal self? Or vice-versa? Or were both of 
these fragmentari entities, portion of some greater person as yet 
unappar to her? 

the whole matter wa a mystery; she shrug in helpless perplexity. 

"I don't think dr. carl know as much about it as he says," she mused. 
"I don't think psychiatri or ani other scienc know that much about 
the human soul. dr. carl doesn't even believ in a soul; how could he 
know anyth about it, then?" she frown in puzzlement and gave up 
the attempt to solv the mystery. 

the hour she had spent in her room, at her mother' insistence, began 
to pall; she didn't feel particularli ill--it wa more of a languor, a 
depressed, worn-out feeling. her mother, of course, wa out somewhere; 
she felt a desir for human companionship, and wonder if the doctor 
might by some chanc drop in. It seem improbable; he had hi regular 
sunday afternoon routin of golf at the club, and it took a real 
catastroph to keep him away from that. she sighed, stretch her legs, 
rose from her posit on the chais lounge, and wander toward the 
kitchen where magda wa doubtless to be found. 

It wa in the dusk of the rear hall that the first sens of her loss 
came over her. heretofor her renunci of nichola devin wa a 
ration thing, a promis given but not felt; but now it wa suddenli a 
poignant reality. nick wa gone, she realized; he wa out of her world, 
irrevoc sunder from her. she paus at the top of the rear flight 
of stairs, consid the matter. 

"he' gone! I won't see him ever again." the thought wa appalling; she 
felt alreadi a premonit of loneli to come, of an empti in 
her world, a lack that noth could replace. 

"I shouldn't have promis dr. carl," she mused, know that even 
without that promis her cours must still have been the same. "I 
shouldn't have, not until i'd talk to nick--mi own nick." 

and still, she reflect forlornly, what differ did it make? she 
had to give him up; she couldn't continu to see him not know at 
what instant that terribl caricatur of him might appear to torment 
her. but he might have explained, she argu miserably, answer 
her own object at once--he' said he couldn't explain, didn't 
understand. the thing wa at an impasse. 

she shook her shine black head despondently, and descend the duski 
well of the stair to the kitchen. magda wa there clatter among her 
pot and pans; pat enter quietli and perch on the high stool by the 
long table. old magda, who had warm her babyhood milk and measur 
out her formula, gave her a singl glanc and continu her work. 

"sorri about the accident, I was," she said without look up. 

"thanks," respond the girl. "i'm all right again." 

"you don't look it." 

"I feel all right." 

she watch the mysterious, alchemist mix of a pastry, and thought 
of the vast array of them that had come from magda' hands. As far back 
as she could rememb she had perch on thi stool observ the same 
mystic culinari rites. 

suddenli anoth memori rose out of the grave of forget and 
went gibber across her world. she rememb the stori magda use 
to tell her, frighten stori of witchcraft and the evil eye, tale 
out of an older region and a more credul age. 

"magda," she asked, "did you ever see a devil?" 

"not I, but i'v talk with them that had." 

"didn't you ever see one?" 

"no." the woman slid a pan into the oven. "I saw a man once, when I wa 
a tot, possess by a devil." 

"you did? how did he look?" 

"he scream terrible, then he said queer things. then he fell down and 
foam came out of hi mouth." 

"like a fit?" 

"the priest, he said it wa a devil. He came and pray over him, and 
after a while he wa real quiet, and then he wa all right." 

"possess by a devil," said pat thoughtfully. "what happen to him?" 

"dunno." 

"what queer thing did he say?" 

"wick things, the priest said. I couldn't tell! I wa a tot." 

"possess by a devil!" pat repeat musingly. she sat immers in 
thought on the high stool while magda clatter busili about. the 
woman paus finally, turn her face to the girl. 

"what you so quiet about, miss pat?" 

"I wa just thinking." 

"you get your letter?" 

"letter? what letter? today' sunday." 

"special delivery. the girl, she put it in the hall." 

"I didn't know anyth about it. who'd write me a special?" 

she slip off the high stool and proceed to the front hall. the 
letter wa there, solitari on the salver that alway held the mail. she 
pick it up, examin the envelop in sudden startl amaz and 
more than a trace of illog exultation. 

for the letter, post-mark that same morning, wa address in the 
irregular script of nichola devine! 




13 

indecis 


pat turn the envelop dubious in her hands, while a maze of chaotic 
thought assail her. she felt almost a sensat of guilt as if 
she were in some manner violat the promis given to dr. horker; 
she felt a ting of indign that nichola devin should dare 
commun with her at all, and she felt too that queer exultation, 
an inexplic pleasure, a feel of secret triumph. she slip the 
letter in the pocket of her robe and pad quietli up the stair to 
her own room. 

strangely, her loneli had vanished. the great house, empti now 
save for herself and magda in the distant kitchen, wa no longer a 
place of solitude; the discoveri of the letter, whatev it contents, 
had chang the desert room into chamber teem with her own 
excitements, trepidations, doubts, and hopes. even hopes, she admit 
to herself, though hope of what natur she wa quit unabl to say. 
what _could_ nick write that had the power to chang things? apologies? 
pleas? promises? none of these could alter the naked, horribl fact of 
the predicament. 

nevertheless, she wa almost a-trembl with expect as she skip 
hastili into her own room, care close the door, and settl 
herself by the west windows. she drew the letter from her pocket, and 
then, with a tighten of her throat, tore open the envelope, slip 
out the sever page of scrawl paper. avidli she began to read. 

"I don't know whether you'll ever see this"--th missiv began 
without salutation--"and i'll not blame you, pat dear, if you do 
return it unopened. there' noth you can do that wouldn't be 
justified, nor can you think wors of me than I do of myself. and 
that' a statement so meaningless that even as I wrote it, I could 
anticip it effect on you. 

"pat--how am I go to convinc you that i'm sincere? will you 
believ me when I write that I love you? can you believ that I 
love you tenderly, worshipfully--reverently? 

"you can't; I know you can't after that catastroph of last night. 
but it' true, pat, though the logic of a spinoza might fail to 
convinc you of it. 

"I don't know how to write you this. I don't know whether you want 
to hear what I could say, but I know that I must tri to say it. 
not apologies, pat--i shouldn't dare approach you for so poor a 
reason as that--but a sort of explanation. you more than ani one 
in the world are entitl to that explanation, if you want to hear 
it. 

"I can't write it to you, pat; it' someth I can onli make you 
believ by tell you--someth dark and rather terrible. but 
please, dear, believ that I mean you no harm, and that I plan no 
subterfuge, when I suggest that you see me. It will be, I think, 
for the last time. 

"tonight, and tomorrow night, and as mani night to follow as I 
can, i'll sit on a bench in the park near the place where I kiss 
you that first time. there will be peopl pass there, and car 
drive by; you need fear noth from me. I choos the place to 
bridl my own actions, pat; noth can happen while we sit there 
in the view of the world. 

"to write you more than thi is futile. If you come, i'll be 
there; if you don't, i'll understand. 

"I love you." 

the letter wa sign mere "nick." she stare at the signatur with 
feel so confus that she forebor ani attempt to analyz them. 

"but I can't go," she muse soberly. "i'v promis dr. carl. Or at 
least, I can't go without tell him." 

that last thought, she realized, wa a concession. heretofor she 
hadn't let herself consid the possibl of see nichola devin 
again, and now suddenli she wa weakening, argu with herself about 
the ethic of see him. she shook her head decisively. 

"won't do, patricia lane!" she told herself. "next thing, you'll be 
slip away without a word to anybody, and come home with two black 
eye and a broken nose. won't do at all!" 

she drop her eye to the letter. "explanations," she reflected. "I 
guess dr. carl would give up a hole-in-on to hear that explanation. 
and i'd give more than that." she shook her head regretfully. "noth 
to do about it, though. I promised." 

the sun wa slant through the west windows; she sat watch the 
shadow lengthen in the room, and tri to turn her thought into more 
profit channels. thi wa the first sunday in mani month that 
she had spent alon in the house; it wa a custom for herself and her 
mother to spend the afternoon at the club. the even too, as a rule; 
there wa invari bridg for mrs. lane, and pat wa alway the 
center of a circl of the younger members. she wonder dreamili what 
the crowd thought of her non-appearance, reflect that her mother 
had doubtless enlarg on dr. carl' stori of an accident. dr. carl 
wouldn't say much, simpli that he'd order her to stay at home. but 
sooner or later, nick would hear the accid story; she wonder what 
he'd think of it. 

she caught herself up sharply. "mi idea wander in circles," she 
thought petulantly. "no matter where I start, they curv around back to 
nick. It won't do; i'v got to stop it." 

nearli time for the even meal, she mused, watch the sun as it 
drop behind dr. horker' house. she didn't feel much like eating; 
there wa still a remnant of the exhausted, dragged-out sensation, 
though the headach that had accompani her awaken thi morn had 
disappeared. 

"I know what the morn after feel like, anyway," she reflect with 
a wri littl smile. "everybodi ought to experi it once, I suppose. 
I wonder how nick--" 

she broke off abruptly, with a shrug of disgust. she slip the letter 
back into it envelope, rose and deposit it in the drawer of the 
night-table. she glanc at the clock tick on it shini top. 

"six o'clock," she murmured. nick would be sit in the park in 
anoth two hour or so. she had a twing of sympathi at the thought of 
hi lone vigil; she could visual the harri express on hi face 
when the hour pass without her arrival. 

"can't be helped," she told herself. "he' no right to ask for 
anyth of me after last night. He know that; he said so in hi 
letter." 

she suppress an impuls to re-read that letter, and trot 
deliber out of the room and down the stairs. magda had set the 
tabl in the breakfast room; it wa far cozier than the great dine 
room, especi without her mother' company. and the maid wa away; 
the breakfast room simplifi serving, as well. 

she tri valor to eat what magda supplied, but the food fail 
to tempt her. It wasn't so much her physic condition, either; it 
was--sh clench her jaw firmly; wa the memori of nichola devin to 
haunt her forever? 

"pat lane," she said in admonition, "you'r a crack-brain fool! just 
becaus a man kick you all over the place is no reason to let him 
becom an obsession." 

she drank her coffee, feel the sting of it heat on her injur 
lips. she left the table, tramp firmli to her room, and began 
defiantli to read. the effort wa useless; half a dozen time she 
forc her attent to the page onli to find herself stare vagu 
into space a moment or two later. she close the book final with an 
irrit bang, and vent her restless in pace back and forth. 

"thi hous is unbearable!" she snapped. "i'm not go to stay shut up 
here like a jail-bird in solitari confinement. A walk in the open is 
what I need, and that' what i'll have." 

she glanc at the clock; seven-thirty. she tore off her robe 
pettishly, flung out of her pajamas, and began to dress with angri 
determination. she refus to think of a lone figur that might even 
now be sit disconsol on a bench in the near-bi park. 

she disguis her bruis cheek as best she could, dab a littl 
powder on the abras on her chin, and tramp militantli down the 
stairs. she caught up her wrap, still lie where the doctor had 
toss it last night, and move toward the door, open it and nearli 
collid with the massiv figur of dr. horker! 

"well!" boom the doctor as she start back in surprise. "you'r 
pretti spri for a patient. think you were go out?" 

"yes," said pat defiantly. 

"not tonight, child! I left the club earli to take a look at you." 

"I am perfectli all right. I want to go for a walk." 

"no walk. doctor' orders." 

"i'm of legal age!" she snapped. "I want to go for a walk. Do I go?" 

"you do not." the doctor place hi great form squar in the doorway. 
"not unless you can lick me, my girl, and i'm pretti tough. I put you 
to bed last night, and I can do as much tonight. shall i?" 

pat back into the hall. "you don't have to," she said sullenly. "i'm 
go there myself." she flung her wrap angrili to a chair and stalk 
up the stairs. 

"good night, spit-fire," he call after her. "i'll read down here 
until your mother come home." 

the girl storm into her room in anger that she knew to be illogical. 

"I won't be watch like a problem child!" she told herself viciously. 
"I know damn well what he thought--and I wasn't go to meet nick! I 
wasn't at all!" 

she calm suddenly, sat on the edg of her bed and kick off her 
pumps. It had occur to her that nick had written hi intent to 
wait for her in the park tomorrow night as well, and dr. horker' 
interfer had confirm her in a determin to meet him. 




14 

bizarr explan 


"I won't be bullied!" pat told herself, examin her featur in the 
mirror. the two day interv had fade the discolor of her cheek 
to neglig proportions, and all that remain as evid of the 
violenc of saturday night wa the diminish mark on her chin. Of 
course, her knees--but they were covered; most of the time, at least. 
she gave herself a final inspection, and somewher below a clock boomed. 

"eight o'clock," she remark to her image; "time to be leaving, and it 
serv dr. carl right for hi high-hand action last night. I won't 
be bulli by anybody." she check herself as her mind had almost 
added, "except nick." true or not, she didn't relish the thought; the 
recent recollect it rous were too disturbing. 

she toss a stray wisp of black hair from her forehead and turn to 
the door. she heard her mother' voic as she descend the stairs. 

"are you go out, patricia? Do you think it wise?" 

"I am perfectli all right. I want to go for a walk." 

"I know, dear; it wa larg your appear I meant." she survey 
the girl with a critic eye. "nice enough, except for that littl spot 
on your chin, and will you never learn to keep your hair away from that 
side of your forehead? one can never do a bob right; whi don't you let 
it grow out like the other girls?" 

"make me individual," repli pat, move toward the outer door. "I 
won't be late at all," she added. 

On the porch she cast a cautiou glanc at dr. horker' windows, but 
hi great figur wa nowher evident. onli a light burn in the 
librari evinc hi presence. she gave a sigh of relief, and tipto 
down the step to the sidewalk, and move hastili away from the rang 
of hi watch eyes. 

No sooner had she sight the park than doubt began to torment her. 
suppos thi were some trick of nichola devine's, to trap her into 
some such situat as that of saturday night. even suppos that she 
found him the sweet person that she had loved, might that also 
be a trick? mightn't he be trust to hi abil to win her over, to 
the charm she had confess to him that he held for her? couldn't he 
be put hi faith in hi own amor skill, plan some speciou 
explan to win her forgiv onli to use her onc more as the 
materi for some horribl experiment? and if he were, would she be 
abl to prevent herself from yielding? 

"forewarn is fore-armed," she told herself. "i'll not put up such a 
feebl resist thi time, know what I now know. and it' onli 
fair of me to listen to hi explanation, if he realli ha one." 

she wa reassur by the sight of the crowd park; group stroll 
along the walks, and an endless process of car-headlight mark the 
cours of the roadway. noth could happen in such an environment; 
they'd be fortun even to have an opportun for confidenti 
talk. she wait for the traffic lights, strain her eye to locat 
nichola devine; at the click of the signal she dart across the 
street. 

she move toward the lake; here wa the spot, she wa sure. she glanc 
about with eager unexpect even to herself, peer through the 
shadow-shot dusk. He wasn't there, she concluded, with a curiou sens 
of disappointment; her failur to appear last night had dishearten 
him; he had abandon hi attempt. 

then she saw him. He sat on a bench isol from the rest in a 
treeless area overlook the lake. she saw hi disconsol figure, 
hi chin on hi hand, stare moodili over the waters. A tremor ran 
through her, she halt deliberately, wait until everi trace of 
emot had vanished, then she advanced, stand coolli besid him. 

for a moment he wa unawar of her presence; he sat maintain hi 
deject attitud without glanc at her. suddenli some slight 
movement, the flutter of her skirt, drew hi attention; he turn 
sharply, gaze directli into her face. 

"pat!" He sprang to hi feet. "pat! is it you--truli you? Or are you 
one of these vision that have been plagu me for hours?" 

"i'm real," she said, return hi gaze with a studi cool in her 
face. she made no other move; her cold composur disconcert him, and 
he winced, flushed, and move nervous asid as she seat herself. He 
drop besid her; he made no attempt to touch her, but sat watch 
her in silenc for so long a time that she felt her composur ebbing. 
there wa a hungry, defeat look about him; there wa a wistfulness, 
a frustration, in hi eye that seem about to tug tear from her own 
eyes. abruptli she drop her gaze from hi face. 

"well?" she said final in a small voice, and as he made no reply, 
"i'm here." 

"are you really, pat? are you truli here?" he murmured, still watch 
her avidly. "i--i still don't believ it. I wait here for hour and 
hour last night, and i'd given up hope for tonight, or ani night. but 
I would have come again and again." 

she start as he bent suddenli toward her, but he wa mere examin 
her face. she saw the gleam of horror in hi express as hi eye 
survey the faintli visibl bruis on her cheek, the red mark on her 
chin. 

"oh my god, pat!" hi word were bare audible. "oh my god!" he 
repeated, draw away from her and resum the attitud of desol 
in which her arriv had found him. "i'v hope it wasn't true!" 

"what wasn't?" she wa keep her voic care casual; thi 
miser contrit of nick' wa tug at her rather too power 
for complet safety. 

"what I remembered. what I saw just now." 

"you hope it wasn't true?" she queri in surprise. "but you did it." 

"_i_ did it, pat? Do you think _i_ could have done it?" 

"but you did!" her voic had taken on a chill inflection; the memori of 
those indign came to steel her against him. 

"pat, do you think I could assault your daintiness, or maltreat the 
beauti I worship? didn't anyth occur to you? didn't anyth seem 
queer about--about that ghastli evening?" 

"queer!" she echoed. "that' certainli a mild word to use, isn't it?" 

"but I mean--hadn't you ani idea of what had happened? didn't you 
think anyth of it except that I had suddenli gone mad? Or that i'd 
grown to hate you?" 

"what wa I to think?" she countered, tri to control the tremor that 
had crept into her voice. 

"but did you think that?" 

"no," the girl confess after a pause. "at first, when you start 
with that drink, I thought you were look for materi for your work. 
that' what you said--an experiment. didn't you?" 

"I guess so," he groaned. 

"but after that, after i'd swallow that horribl stuff, but befor 
everyth went hazy, i--thought differently." 

"but what, pat? what did you think?" 

"why, then I realiz that it wasn't you--not the real you. I could 
feel the--well, the presenc of the person I knew; thi presenc 
that wa torment me wa anoth person, a terrible, cold, inhuman 
stranger." 

"pat!" there wa a note almost of relief in hi voice. "did you realli 
feel that?" 

"yes. doe it help matters, my sens that? I can't see how." 

hi eyes, which had been fix on hers, drop suddenly. "no," he 
muttered, all the relief gone out of hi tones, "no, it doesn't help, 
doe it? except that it' a meager consol to me to know that you 
felt it." 

pat struggl to suppress an impuls to reach out her hand, to stroke 
hi hair. she caught herself sharply; thi wa the veri danger against 
which she had warn herself--thi wa the veri attitud she had 
anticip in nichola devine, the lure which might bait a trap. yet 
he look so forlorn, so wistful! It wa an effort to forbear from 
touch him; her finger fairli ach to brush hi cheek. 

"onli a fool walk twice into the same trap," she told herself. aloud 
she said, "you promis me an explanation. If you'v ani excuse, i'd 
like to hear it." her voic had resum it coolness. 

"I haven't ani excuse," he respond gloomily, "and the explan is 
perhap too bizarre, too fantast for belief. _i_ don't believ it 
entirely; I suppos _you_ couldn't believ it at all." 

"you promised," she repeated. the care assum composur of her 
voic threaten to crack; thi wist of hi wa a power 
weapon against her defense. 

"oh, i'll give you the explanation," he said miserably. "I just want 
to warn you you'd not believ me." He gave her a despond glance. 
"pat, as I love you I swear that what I tell you is the truth. Do you 
think you can believ me?" 

"yes," she murmured. the tremor had reappear in her voic despit her 
efforts. 

nichola devin turn hi eye toward the lake and began to speak. 




15 

A modern mr. hyde 


"I don't rememb when I first notic it," began nick in a low voice, 
"but i'm two people. i'm me, the person who' talk to you now, and 
i'm--another." 

pat, look veri pale and seriou in the duski light, said noth at 
all. she simpli gaze at him silently, without the slightest trace of 
surpris in her wide dark eyes. 

"thi is the real me," proceed nick miserably. "the other is an 
outsider, that ha somehow contriv to grow into me. He is different; 
cold, cruel, utterli selfish, and not exactly--human. Do you 
understand?" 

"y--yes," said the girl, fight to control her voice. "sort of." 

"thi is a struggl that ha continu for a long time," he pursued. 
"there were time in childhood when I rememb punish for offens 
I never committed, for nasti littl mean _he_ perpetrated. My 
mother, and after her death, my tutoress, thought I wa lie when I 
tri to explain; they thought I wa tri to evad responsibility. 
after a while I learn not to explain; I learn to accept my 
punish doggedly, and to fight thi other when he sought dominance." 

"and could you?" ask pat, her voic frankli quavery. "could you fight 
him?" 

"I wa the stronger; I could win--usually. He slip into 
conscious as wilful, mean littl impulses, nasti moods, unreason 
hate and such unpleas things. but I wa alway the stronger: I 
learn to drive him into the background." 

"you said you _were_ the stronger," she mused. "what doe that mean, 
nick?" 

"i'v alway been the stronger; I am now. but recently, pat--i think 
it' sinc I fell in love with you--th struggl ha been on even 
terms. i'v weaken or he' gained. I have to guard against him 
constantly; in ani moment of weak he may slip in, as on our ride 
last week, when we had that near accident. and again saturday." He 
turn appeal eye on the girl. "pat, do you believ me?" 

"I guess i'll have to," she said unhappily. "it--mak thing rather 
hopeless, doesn't it?" 

He nod dejectedly. "yes. i'v alway felt that sooner or later i'd 
win, and drive him away permanently. i'v felt on the verg of complet 
victori more than once, but now--" He shook hi head doubtfully. "he 
had never domin me so entir until saturday night--pat, you 
don't know what hell is like until you'r forc as I wa to watch 
the violat of the be you worship, to stand helpless while a 
desecr is committed. i'd rather die than suffer it again!" 

"oh!" said the girl faintly. she wa think of the sorri pictur she 
must have present as she reel half-cloth through the alley. "can 
you see what--_he_ sees?" 

"of course, and think hi thoughts. but onli when he' dominant. I 
don't know what evil he' plan now, els I could forestal him, I 
would have warn you if I could have known." 

"where is he now?" 

"here," said nick somberly. "here listen to us, know what i'm 
think and feeling, laugh at my unhappiness." 

"oh!" gasp pat again. she watch her companion doubtfully. then the 
memori of dr. horker' diagnosi came to her, and set her wondering. 
wa thi stori the figment of an unsettl mind? wa thi irrat 
tale of a fiendish intrud mere evid that the doctor wa right 
in hi opinion? she wa in a maze of uncertainty. 

"nick," she said, "did you ever tri medic help? did you ever go to a 
doctor about it?" 

"of course, pat! two year ago I went to a famou psychiatrist in 
new york--you'd know the name if I mention it--and told him about 
the--th case. and he studi me, and he treat me, and psychoanalyz 
me, and the net result wa just nothing. and final he dismiss 
me with the opinion that 'the whole thing is just a fix delusion, 
fortun harmless!' harmless! bah! but it wasn't I that did those 
things, pat; I had to stand by in horror and watch. It wa enough to 
_drive_ me crazy, but it didn't--quite." 

"but--oh, nick, what is it? what is this--thi outsider? can't we fight 
it somehow?" 

"how can anyon except me fight it?" 

"oh, I don't know!" she wail miserably. "there must be a way. doctor 
claim to know pretti nearli everything; there must be _something_ to 
do." 

"but there isn't," he retort gloomily. "I don't know ani more than 
you what that thing is, but it' beyond your doctors. i'v got to fight 
it out alone." 

"nick--" her voic wa suddenli tense. "are you sure it isn't some 
kind of madness? someth tangibl like that could perhap be treated." 

"it' no kind your doctor can treat, pat. did you ever hear of a 
madman who stood asid and ration watch the work of hi own 
insanity? and that' what i'm forc to do. and yet--thi other isn't 
insan either. were it action insane?" 

pat shuddered. "i--don't know," she said in low tones. "I guess not." 

"no. horrible, cruel, bestial, devilishli cunning, evil--but not 
insane. I don't know what it is, pat. I know that the fight ha to be 
made by me alone. there' nothing, nobodi in the world, that can help." 

"nick!" she wailed. 

"i'm sorry, pat dear. you understand now whi I wa so reluct to fall 
in love with you. I wa afraid to love you; now I know I wa right." 

"nick!" she cried, then paus hopelessly. after a moment she 
continued, "yesterday I wa determin to forget you, and now--now I 
don't care if thi whole tale of your is a mesh of fantast lies, I 
love you! i'd love you even if your real self were that--that other 
creature, and even if I knew that thi wa just a trap. i'd love you 
anyway." 

"pat," he said seriously, "don't you believ me? whi should I offer to 
give you up if thi were--what you said? wouldn't I be plead for 
anoth chance, make promises, find excuses?" 

"oh, I believ you, nick! It isn't that; I wa just think how 
strang it is that I could hate you so two night past and love you so 
tonight." 

"oh god, pat! even you can't know how much I love you; and to win you 
and then be forc to give you up--" He groaned. 

the girl reach out her hand and cover his; it wa the first time 
dure the even that she had touch him, and the feel of hi flesh 
sent a tingl through her. she wa miser distraught. 

"honey," she murmur brokenly. "nick, honey." 

He look at her. "do you suppos there' a chanc to beat the thing?" 
he asked. "i'd not ask you to wait, pat, but if I onli glimps a 
chance--" 

"i'll wait. I don't think I could do anyth els but wait for you." 

"if I onli knew what I had to fight!" he whispered. "if I onli knew 
that!" 

A sudden memori leap into pat' mind. "nick," she said huskily, "I 
think I know." 

"what do you mean, pat?" 

"it' someth magda--th cook--said to me. it' foolish, 
superstitious, but nick, what els can it be?" 

"tell me!" 

"well, she wa talk to me yesterday, and she said that when she 
wa a child in the old country, she had seen a man once--" she 
hesitated--"a man who wa possess by a devil. nick, I think you'r 
possess by a devil!" 

He stare at her. "pat," he said hoarsely, "that's--an impossibility!" 

"I know, but what els can it be?" 

"out of the dark ages," he muttered. "an echo of the black mass and 
witchcraft, but--" 

"what did they do," ask the girl, "to peopl they thought were 
possessed?" 

"exorcism!" he whispered. 

"and how did they--exorcise?" 

"I don't know," he said in a low voice. "pat, that' an imposs 
idea, but--i don't know!" he ended. 

"we'll try," she murmured, still cover hi hand with her own. "what 
els can we do, nick?" 

"what' done i'll do alone, pat." 

"but I want to help!" 

"i'll not let you, dear. I won't have you expos to a repetit of 
those indignities, or perhap worse!" 

"i'm not afraid." 

"then I am, pat! I won't have it!" 

"but what'll you do?" 

"i'll go away. i'll battl the thing through onc for all, and i'll 
either come back free of it or--" He paus and the girl did not 
question him further, but sat stare at him with troubl eyes. 

"I won't write you, pat," he continued. "if you should receiv a letter 
from me, burn it--don't read it. It might be from--th other, a trap or 
a lure of some sort. promis me! you'll promis that, won't you?" 

she nodded; there wa a glint of tear in her eyes. 

"and I don't want you to wait, pat," he proceeded. "I don't want you to 
feel that you have ani oblig to me--god know you'v noth to 
thank me for! when--if I come back and you haven't changed, then we'll 
tri again." 

"nick," she said in a small voice, "how do you know the--th other 
won't come back here? how can you promis for--it?" 

"i'm still master!" he said grimly. "I won't be domin long enough 
at ani time for that to happen. i'll fight it down." 

"then--it' good-bye?" 

He nodded. "but not for always--i hope." 

"nick," she murmured, "will you kiss me?" she felt a tear on her cheek. 
"i'll stand lose you a littl better if I can have a--last kiss--to 
remember." her voic wa faltering. 

hi arm were about her. she yield herself complet to hi caress; 
the park, the crowd pass a few yard away, the peopl on near-bi 
benches, were all forgotten, and onc more she felt herself alon with 
nichola devin in a vast empti cosmos. 

An insist voic penetr her consciousness; she realiz that it 
had been call her name for some seconds. 

"miss lane," she heard, and again, "miss lane." A hand tap her 
shoulder; with a sudden start, she tore her lip away, and look up 
into a face unrecogn for a moment. then she place it. It wa the 
visag of mueller, dr. horker' companion on that disastr saturday 
night. 




16 

possess 


pat stare at the intrud in a mingl of embarrassment, perplexity, 
and indignation. she felt her cheek redden as the latter emot 
gain the domin of her mood. 

"well!" she snapped. "what do you want?" 

"I thought i'd walk home with you," mueller said amiably. 

"walk home with me! pleas explain that!" she grasp the arm of 
nichola devine, who had risen angrili at the interruption. "sit down, 
nick, I know the fellow." 

"so should he," said mueller. "sure; i'll explain. i'm on a job for dr. 
horker." 

"spi on me for him, I suppose!" taunt the girl. 

"no. not on you." 

"he mean on me," said nick soberly. "you can't blame him, pat. and 
perhap you had better go home; we'v finish here. there' noth 
more we can do or say." 

"veri well," she said, her voic suddenli softer. "in a moment, nick." 
she turn to mueller. "would you mind tell me whi you wait until 
now to interfere? we'v been here two hours, you know." 

"sure i'll tell you. I got no order to interfere, that' why." 

"then whi did you?" queri pat tartly. 

"I didn't until I saw him there"--h nod at nick--"put hi arm 
around you. then I figured, have no orders, it wa time to use my own 
judgment." 

"if any!" snif the girl. she turn again to nick; her face 
softened, becam veri tender. "honey," she murmur huskily, "I guess 
it' good-by now. i'll be fight with you; you know that." 

"I know that," he echoed, look down into her eyes. "i'm almost 
happy, pat." 

"when'll you go?" she whisper in tone inaud to mueller. 

"I don't know," he answered, hi voic unchanged. "i'll have to make 
some sort of preparations--and I don't want you to know." 

she nodded. she gaze at him a moment longer with tear-bright eyes. 
"good-bye, nick," she whispered. she rose on tiptoe, and kiss him 
veri lightli on hi lips, then turn and walk quickli away, with 
mueller follow behind. 

she walk on, ignor him until he halt besid her at the cross 
of the drive. then she gave him a cold glance. 

"whi is dr. carl have him watched?" she asked. 

mueller shrugged. "the in and out of thi case are too much for me," 
he said. "I do what i'm paid to do." 

"you'r not watch him now." 

"nope. seem like the doctor would think it wa more import to get 
you home." 

"you'r wast your time," she said irrit as the light chang 
and they step into the street. "I wa go home anyway." 

"well, now you got compani all the way." mueller' voic wa placid. 

the girl snif contemptuously, and strode silent along. the other' 
presenc irrit her; she want time and solitud to consid the 
amaz stori nichola devin had given her. she want to analyz her 
own feelings, and most of all she want just a place of privaci to 
cri out her misery. for now the loss of nichola devin had chang 
from a fortun escap to a tragedy, and liar, madman, or devil, she 
want him terribly, with all the power of her tens littl heart. So 
she move as swiftli as she could, ignor the silent companionship of 
mueller. 

they reach her home; the light in the live room window wa evid 
that the bridg game wa still in progress. she mount the steps, 
mueller watch her silent from the walk; she fumbl for her key. 

suddenli she snap her hand-bag shut; she couldn't face her mother 
and the two spinster brock and elderly, inquisit carter henderson. 
they'd suggest that she cut into the game, and they'd argu if 
she refused, and she couldn't play bridg now! she glanc at the 
impass mueller, turn and cross the strip of lawn to dr. horker' 
residence, where the light still glow in the library, and rang the 
bell. she saw the figur on the sidewalk move away as the shadow of the 
doctor appear on the light squar of the door. 

"hello," boom the doctor amiably. "come in." 

pat stalk into the librari and threw herself angrili into dr. 
horker' particular chair. the other grinned, and chose anoth place. 

"well," he said, "what touch off the fuse thi time?" 

"whi are you spi on my friends?" snap the girl. "bi what right?" 

"so he' spot mueller, eh? that lad' diabol clever, pat--and 
I mean diabolic." 

"that' no answer!" 

"so it isn't," agre the doctor. "say it' becaus i'm act _in loco 
parentis_." 

"and _in loco_ is as far as you'll get, dr. carl, if you'r go to 
spi on me!" 

"on you?" he said mildly. "who' spi on you?" 

"on us, then!" 

"or on us?" queri the doctor. "I set mueller to watch the devin lad. 
have you by some mischanc broken your promis to me?" 

pat flushed. she had forgotten that broken promise; the recollect of 
it suddenli took the wind from her sails, place her on the defensive. 

"all right," she said defiantly. "I did; I admit it. doe that excus 
you?" 

"perhap it help to explain my actions, pat. don't you understand that 
i'm tri to protect you? Do you think I hire mueller out of morbid 
curiosity, or profession interest in the case? time aren't so good 
that I can throw money away on such whims." 

"I don't need ani protection. I can take care of myself!" 

"so I noticed," said the doctor dryly. "you gave convinc evid of 
it night befor last." 

"oh!" said the girl in exasperation. "you would say that!" 

"it' true, isn't it?" 

"suppos it is! I don't have to learn the same lesson twice." 

"well, appar onc wasn't enough," observ the other amiably. "you 
walk into the same danger tonight." 

"I wasn't in ani danger tonight!" suddenli her mood chang as she 
recal the circumst of her part with nichola devine. "dr. 
carl," she said, her voic dropping, "i'm terribl unhappy." 

"lord!" he exclaim stare at her. "pat, your mood are as changeabl 
as my golf game! you'r as mercuri as your devin lad! A moment ago 
you were snap at me, and now i'm suddenli accept again." He 
perceiv the miseri in her face. "all right, child; i'm listening." 

"he' go away," she said mournfully. 

"don't you think that' best for everybodi concerned? I commend hi 
judgment." 

"but I don't want him to!" 

"you do, pat. you can't continu see him, and hi absenc will make 
it easier for you." 

"it'll never be easier for me, dr. carl." she felt her eye fill. "I 
guess i'm--just a fool about him." 

"you still feel that way, after the experi you went through?" 

"yes. yes, I do." 

"then you _are_ a fool about him, pat. he' not worth such devotion." 

"how do you know what he' worth? i'm the onli one to judg that." 

"I have eyes," said the doctor. "what happen tonight to chang your 
attitud so suddenly? you were amen to reason yesterday." 

"I didn't know yesterday what I know now." 

"so he told a story, eh?" the doctor watch her serious, troubl 
features. "would you mind tell me, honey? i'm interest in the 
defens mechan these psychopath case erect to explain their own 
impuls to themselves." 

"no, I won't tell you!" snap pat indignantly. "psychopath cases! 
we'r all just case to you. i'm a case and he' another, and all you 
want is our symptoms!" 

doctor horker smile placatingli into her face. "pat dear," he said 
earnestly, "don't you see i'd give my eye to help you? don't take 
my flippanc too seriously, honey; look onc in a while at the 
intent behind them." He continu hi earnest gaze. 

the girl return hi look; her face softened. "i'm sorry," she said 
contritely. "I never doubt it, dr. carl--it' onli that i'm so--so 
torn to piec by all thi that I get snappi and irritable." she 
paused. "of cours i'll tell you." 

"i'd like to hear it." 

"well," she began hesitantly, "he said he wa two personalities--on 
the charact I knew, and one the charact that we saw saturday night. 
and the first one is--well, dominant, and fight the other one. He say 
the other ha been grow stronger; until late he could suppress 
it. and he says--oh, it sound ridiculous, the way I tell it, but it' 
true! i'm sure it' true!" she lean toward the doctor. "did you ever 
hear of anyth like it? did you, dr. carl?" 

"no." He shook hi head, still watch her seriously. "not exactli 
like that, honey. don't you think he might possibl have lie to you, 
pat? To excus himself for the respons of saturday night, for 
instance?" 

"no, I don't," she said defiantly. 

"then you have an idea yourself what the troubl is? I judg you have." 

"yes," she said in low tones. "I have an idea." 

"what is it?" 

"I think he' possess by a devil!" said the girl flatly. 

A quizzic express came into the doctor' face. "well, of all the 
queer idea that harum-scarum mind of your ha _ever_ produced, that' 
the queerest!" He broke into a chuckle. 

"queer, is it?" flare pat. "I don't think you and your mind-doctor 
know as much as a swahili medicine-man with a mask!" 

she leap angrili to her feet, stamp vicious into the hall. 

"devil and all," she repeated, "I love him!" 

"pat!" call the doctor anxiously. "pat! where are you going, child?" 

"where do devil live?" her voic float tauntingli back from the 
front door. "hell, of course!" 




17 

witch-doctor 


pat had no intentions, however, of follow the famou highway that 
evening. she stamp angrili down the doctor' steps, swish her way 
through the break in the hedg with small regard to the safeti of her 
sheer hose, and mount to her own porch. she found her key, open the 
door and entered. 

As she ascend the stairs, her fit of temper at the doctor passed, and 
she felt lonely, weary, and unutter miserable. she sank to a seat 
on the topmost step and gave herself over to bitter reflections. 

nick wa gone! the realiz came poignantli at last; there would be 
no more even rides, no more convers whose rang wa limit 
onli by the scope of the universe, no more breath-tak kisses, the 
sweeter for hi reluctance. she sat mourn silent, and consid 
the miser situat in which she found herself. 

In love with a madman! Or worse--in love with a demon! with a be 
half of whose natur worship her while the other half wa bent on her 
destruction! wa ani one, she ask herself--wa ani one, anywhere, 
ever in a more hopeless predicament? 

what could she do? nothing, she realized, save sit helplessli asid 
while nick battl the thing to a finish. Or possibly--th onli 
alternative--tak him as he was, chanc the vicissitud of hi 
unstabl nature, lay herself open to the horror she had glimps so 
recently, and pray for her fortun to point the way of salvation. and 
in the mood in which she now found herself, that seem infinit the 
prefer solution. yet ration she knew it wa impossible; she 
shook her head despondently, and lean against the wall in abject 
misery. 

then, thin and sharp sound the shrill summon of the door bell, and 
a moment later, the patter of the maid' footstep in the hall below. 
she listen idli to distract herself from the chain of despond 
that wa her thoughts, and wa mildli startl to recogn the boom 
drum of dr. horker' voice. she heard hi greet and the muffl 
repli from the group, and then a phrase understand becaus of hi 
sonor tones. 

"where' pat?" the word drift up the well of the stairs, follow 
by a scarc audibl repli from her mother. heavi footfal on the 
carpet steps, and then hi figur bulk on the land below her. 
she cup her chin on her hands, and stare down at him while he 
ascend to her side, sprawl hi great figur besid her. 

"pat, honey," he rumbled, "you'r begin to get me worried!" 

"am i?" her voic wa weary, dull. "i'v had myself like that for a 
long time." 

"poor kid! are you realli so miser over thi nick problem of yours?" 

"I love him." 

"yes." He look at her with sympathi and calcul mingl in hi 
expression. "I believ you do. i'm sorry, honey; I didn't realiz until 
now what he mean to you." 

"you don't realiz now," she murmured, still with the weari intonation. 

"perhap not, pat, but i'm learning. If you'r in thi thing as deepli 
at all that, i'm in too--to the finish. want me?" 

she reach out her hand, pluck at hi coatsleeve. abruptli she 
lean toward him, buri her face against the rough tweed of hi 
suit; she sob a little, while he pat her gentli with hi great, 
delic finger hand. "i'm sorry, honey," he rumbled. "i'm sorry." 

the girl drew herself erect and lean back against the wall, shake 
her head to drive the tear from her eyes. she gave the doctor a wan 
littl smile. 

"well?" she asked. 

"i'll return your compliment of the other night," said horker briskly. 
"i'll ask a few questions--pur professional, of course." 

"fire away, dr. carl." 

"good. now, when our friend ha one of these--uh--attacks, is he 
rational? Do hi utter seem to follow a logic thought sequence?" 

"i--think so." 

"in what way doe he differ from hi normal self?" 

"oh, everi way," she said with a tremor. "nick' kind and gentl and 
sensit and--and naive, and this--other--i cruel, harsh, gross, 
crafty, and horrible. you can't imagin a greater difference." 

"um. Is the differ recogniz instantly? could you ever be in 
doubt as to which phase you were encountering?" 

"oh, no! I can--well, sort of domin nick, but the other--lord!" she 
shudder again. "I felt like a terrifi child in the presenc of some 
powerful, evil god." 

"humph! perhap the god' name wa priapus. well, we'll discount your 
feelings, pat, becaus you weren't exactli in the best condit 
for--let' say _sober_ judgment. now about thi stori of his. what 
happen to hi own person when thi other phase is dominant? did 
he say?" 

"yes. He said hi own self wa compel to sort of stand by while 
the--th intrud use hi voic and body. He knew the thought of the 
other, but onli when it wa dominant. the rest of the time he couldn't 
tell it thoughts." 

"and how long ha he suffer from these--intrusions?" 

"a long as he can remember. As a child he wa blame for the other' 
mischief, and when he tri to explain, peopl thought he wa lie to 
escap punishment." 

"well," observ the doctor, "I can see how they might think that." 

"don't you believ it?" 

"I don't exactli disbeliev it, honey. the human mind play queer 
trick sometimes, and thi may be one of it littl jokes. it' a 
psychiatrist' busi to investig such things, and to painlessli 
remov the point of the joke." 

"oh, if you onli can, dr. carl! If you onli can!" 

"we'll see." He pat her hand comfortingly. 

"now, you say the kind, gentle, and all that, phase is the normal one. 
Is that usual dominant?" 

"yes. nick can master the other, or could until recently. He say thi 
last--attack--i the worst he' ever had; the other ha been gain 
strength." 

"strange!" muse the doctor. "well," he said with a smile of 
encouragement, "i'll have a look at him." 

"do you think you can help?" pat ask anxiously. "have you ani idea 
what it is?" 

"it isn't a devil, at ani rate," he smiled. 

"but have you ani idea?" 

"natur I have, but I can't diagnos at second hand. i'll have to 
talk to him." 

"but what do you think it is?" she persisted. 

"I think it' a fixat of an idea gain in childhood, honey. I had 
a patient once--" He smile at the reminiscence--"who had a fix 
delus of that sort. He wa perfectli ration on everi point 
save one--h believ that a pig with a pink ribbon wa follow 
him everywhere! down town, into elev and offices, home to 
bed--everywher he went thi pink-ribbon prize porker pursu him!" 

"and did you cure him?" 

"well, he recovered," said the doctor non-committally. "we got rid of 
the pig. and it might be someth of that natur that' troubl your 
boy friend. your descript doesn't sound like a praecox or a manic 
depressive, as I thought originally." 

"oh," said pat abruptly. "I forgot. He went to a doctor in new york, a 
veri great doctor." 

"muenster?" 

"he didn't say whom. but thi doctor studi him a long time, and 
final came out with thi fix idea theori of yours. onli he couldn't 
cure him." 

"um." horker grunt thoughtfully. 

"do fix idea do thing like that to people?" queri the girl. 
"thing like the pig and what happen to nick?" 

"they might." 

"then they'r devils!" she announc with an air of finality. "they'r 
just your scientif jargon for exactli what magda mean when she say 
a person' possess by a devil. So i'm right anyway!" 

"that' good orthodox theology, pat," chuckl the doctor. "we'll tri a 
littl exorc on your devil, then." He rose to hi feet. "bring your 
boy friend around, will you?" 

"oh, dr. carl!" she cried. "he' leaving! i'll have to call him 
tonight!" 

"not tonight, honey. mueller would let me know if anyth of that sort 
were happening. tomorrow' time enough." 

the girl stood erect, mount to the top step to bring her head level 
with the doctor's. she threw her arm about him, buri her face in 
hi massiv shoulder. 

"dr. carl," she murmured, "i'm a nasty, ill-tempered, viciou littl 
shrew, and i'm sorry, and I apologize. you know i'm crazi about you, 
and," she whisper in hi ear, "so' mother!" 




18 

vanish 


"he doesn't answer! i'm too late," thought pat disconsol as she 
replac the telephone. the cheer with which she had awaken 
vanish like a patch of april sunshine. now, with the failur of her 
third attempt in as mani hour to commun with nichola devine, 
she wa readi to confess defeat. she had wait too long. despit dr. 
horker' confid in mueller, she should have call last night--at 
once. 

"he' gone!" she murmur distractedly. she realiz now the 
imposs of find him. hi solitari habits, hi dearth of 
friends, hi lone existence, left her without the least idea of how 
to commenc a search. she knew, actually, so littl about him--not 
even the sourc of the appar suffici incom on which he 
subsisted. she felt herself complet at a loss, puzzled, lonesome, 
and disheartened. the futil buzz of the telephon signal symbol 
her frustration. 

perhaps, she thought, dr. horker might suggest someth to do; 
perhaps, even, mueller had report nick' whereabouts. she seiz 
the hope eagerly. A glanc at her wrist-watch reveal the time as 
ten-thirty; squar in the midst of the doctor' morn offic hours, 
but no matter. If he were busi she could wait. she rose, bound 
hastili down the stairs. 

she glimps her mother open mail in the library, and paus 
momentarili at the door. mrs. lane glanc up as she appeared. 

"hello," said the mother. "you'v been on the telephon all morning, 
and what did carl want of you last night?" 

"argument," respond pat briefly. 

"carl' a gem! he' been of inestim assist in develop you 
into a veri charm and clever daughter, and heaven know what i'd 
have rais without him!" 

"cain, probably," suggest pat. she pass into the hall and out the 
door, blink in the brilliant august sunshine. she cross the strip 
of turf, pick her way through the break in the hedge, and approach 
the doctor' door. It wa open; it often wa in summer time, especi 
dure hi brief offic hours. she enter and went into the chamber 
use as wait room. 

hi offic door wa closed; the faint hum of hi voic sounded. she sat 
impati in a chair and forc herself to wait. 

fortunately, the delay wa nominal; it wa but a few minut when the 
door open and an opulent, middle-ag ladi swept past her and away. 
pat recogn her as mrs. lowry, some sort of cousin of the brock pair. 

"good morning!" boom the doctor. "profession call, I take it, sinc 
you'r here dure offic hours." He settl hi great form in a chair 
besid her. 

"he' gone!" said pat plaintively. "I can't reach him." 

"humph!" grunt horker helpfully. 

"i'v tri all morning--he' alway home in the morning." 

"listen, you littl scatter-brain!" rumbl the doctor. "whi didn't you 
tell me mueller brought you home last night? I thought he wa on the 
job." 

"I didn't think of it," she wailed. "nick said he'd have to make some 
preparations, and I never dream he'd skip away like this." 

"he must have gone home directli after you left him, and skip out 
immediately," said the doctor ruminatively. "mueller never caught up 
with him." 

"but what'll we do?" she cri desperately. 

"he can't have gone far with no more prepar than this," sooth 
horker. "he'll write you in a day or two." 

"he won't! He said he wouldn't. He doesn't want me to know where he 
is!" she wa on the verg of tears. 

"now, now," said the doctor still in hi sooth tones. "it isn't as 
bad as all that." 

"take off your bed-sid manner!" she snapped, blink to keep back the 
tears. "it' worse! what ever can we do? dr. carl," she chang to a 
plead tone, "can't you think of something?" 

"of course, pat! I can think of sever thing to do if you'll quiet 
down for a moment or so." 

"i'm sorry, dr. carl--but what _can_ we do?" 

"first, perhap mueller can trace him. that' hi business, you know." 

"but suppos he can't--what then?" 

"well, i'd suggest you write him a letter." 

"but I don't know where to write!" she wailed. "I don't know hi 
address!" 

"be still a moment, scatter-brain! address it to hi last residence; 
you know that, don't you? Of cours you do. now, don't you suppos 
he'll leav a forward address? He must receiv some sort of mail 
about hi income, or estate, or whatev he live on. your letter'l 
find him, honey; don't you doubt it." 

"oh, do you think so?" she asked, suddenli hopeful. "do you realli 
think so?" 

"I realli think so. you would too if you didn't fli into a panic everi 
time some littl difficulti confront you. sometim even my psychiatri 
is puzzl to explain how you can be so clever and so stupid, so 
self-reli and so dependent, so capabl and so helpless--al at one 
and the same time. your nick can't be as much of a paradox as you are!" 

"I wonder if a letter _will_ reach him," she said eagerly, ignor the 
doctor' remarks. "i'll try. i'll tri immediately." 

"I sort of had a feel you would," said horker amiably. "I hope you 
succeed; and not onli for your sake, pat, becaus god know how thi 
thing will work out. but i'm anxiou to examin thi youngster of your 
on my own account; he must be a remark specimen to account for all 
the perturb he' manag to caus you. and thi jekyll-and-hyd 
angl sound interesting, too." 

"jekyl and hyde!" echo pat. "dr. carl, is that possible?" 

"not literally," chuckl the other, "though in a sense, stevenson 
anticip freud in hi thesi that liber the evil serv also to 
releas the good." 

"but--it wa a drug that caus that chang in the story, wasn't it?" 

"well? Do you suspect your friend of be addict to some mysteri 
drug? Is that the latest hypothesis?" 

"_is_ there such a drug? one that could chang a person' character?" 

"_all_ alkaloid do that, honey. some of them stimulate, some depress, 
some breed frenzies, and some give vision of delight--but all of 
them influenc one' mental and emot organization, which you call 
character. So for that matter, doe a squar meal, or a cup of coffee, 
or even a raini day." 

"but isn't there a drug that can separ good qualiti from evil, 
like the story?" 

"emphat not, pat! that' not the troubl with thi peski boy 
friend of yours." 

"well," said the girl doubtfully, "I onli wish I had as much faith in 
your psycholog as you have. If you brain-doctor know it all, whi do 
you switch theori everi year?" 

"we _don't_ know it all. On the other hand, there are a few thing to 
be said in our favor." 

"what are they?" 

"for one," repli the doctor, "we do cure peopl occasionally. you'll 
admit that." 

"sure," said pat. "so did the salem witches--occasionally." she 
gave him a suddenli worri look. "oh, dr. carl, don't think i'm 
not grateful! you know how much i'm hope from your help, but i'm 
miser anxiou over all this." 

"never mind, honey. you'r not the first one to point out the 
shortcom of the medic profession. that' a game play by plenti 
of physician too." He paus at the sound of footstep on the porch, 
follow by the buzz of the doorbell. "run along and write your letter, 
dear--her come that tuesday hypochondriac of mine, and he' rich 
enough for my care attention." 

pat flash him a quick smile of farewel and slip quietli into the 
hall. At the door she pass the doctor' patient--a lean, elderli 
gentleman of woe-begon visage--and return to her own home. 

her spirits, mercuri to a degree, had risen again. she wa suddenli 
posit that the doctor' scheme would bring results, and she dart 
into the hous almost buoyantly. her mother had abandon the desk, 
and she ensconc herself befor it, find paper and pen, and stare 
thought at the blank sheet. 

final she wrote. 

"dear nick-- 

"someth ha happened, favorable, I think, to us. I believ I 
have found the help we need. 

"will you come if you can, or if that' not possible, break that 
self-given promis of yours, and commun with me? 

"I love you." 

she sign it simpli "pat", place it in an envelope, address it 
hastily, and hurri out to post it. On her return she spi the 
doctor' hypochondriac in the act of leaving. He walk past her with 
hi lean, worry-smitten face like a studi of hogarth, and she heard him 
mumbl to himself. the elat went out of her; she mount the step 
veri soberly, and went miser inside. 




19 

man or monster? 


pat suffer wednesday through somehow, know that ani such earli 
respons to her letter wa impossible. still, that imposs did 
not deter her from start at the sound of the telephone, and sort 
through the mail with an eager that drew a casual attent from 
her mother. 

"good heavens, patricia! you'r like a child watch for an answer to 
hi note to santa claus!" 

"that' what I am, I guess," respond the girl ruefully. "mayb I 
expect too much from santa claus." 

late in the afternoon she drift over to dr. horker' residence, to 
be inform that he wa out. for distraction, she went in anyway, and 
spent a while brows among the book in the library. she blunder 
into kraft-ebing, and read a few page in grow indignation. 

"i'm asham to be human!" she mutter disgustedli to herself, 
slam shut the _psychopathia sexualis_. "I wouldn't be a doctor, or 
have a child of mine becom one, if I were posit certain he'd turn 
into lord lister himself! nick wa right when he said doctor live on 
people' troubles." 

she wonder how dr. horker could remain so human, so kindli and 
understanding, when as he said himself hi world wa a parad of 
misfits, incompetents, and all the nasti of mortals. _he_ wa nice; 
she felt no embarrass in confid in him even when she might 
hesit to bare her feel to her own mother. Or wa it simpli the 
natur thing to do to tell one' troubl to a doctor? 

not, of course, that the situat reflect ani discredit on her 
mother. mrs. lane wa a veri preciou sort of parent, she mused, 
young as pat in spirit, appreci and enthusiast fond of her 
daughter. that she trust pat, that she permit her to do entir 
as she pleased, wa exactli as the girl would have it; it argu no 
lack of affect that each of them had their separ interests, and 
if the girl occasion found herself in unpleas such as this, 
that too wa her own fault. 

and yet, she reflected, it wa a bitter thing to have no one to whom to 
turn. If it weren't for dr. carl and hi jovial willing to commit 
ani sin up to malpractic to help her, she might have felt differently. 
but there alway _was_ dr. carl, and that, she concluded, wa that. 

she wander back to her own side of the hedge, miss for the first 
time in mani week the companionship of the old crowd. there hadn't 
been mani idl afternoon heretofor dure the summer; there'd alway 
been some of the collegi vacat in town, and pat had never 
need other lure than her own piquant vivac to assur herself 
of ampl attention. now, of course, it wa different; she had so 
definit tag herself with the same nichola devin that even the 
most ardent of the group had taken the warning. 

"and I don't regret it either!" she told herself as she enter the 
house. "trouble, mystery, suffer and all--i don't regret it! i'v 
had my compens too." 

she sigh and trudg upstair to prepar for dinner. 

* * * * * 

morn found pat in a fair frenzi of trepidation. she kept repeat 
to herself that two day wasn't enough, that more time might be 
required, that even had nichola devin receiv her letter, he might 
not have answer at once. yet she wa quiver as she dart into 
the hall to examin the mail. 

It wa there! she spi a fragment of the irregular handwrit and 
seiz the envelop from beneath a clutter of notes, bills, and 
advertisements. she glanc at the post-mark. chicago! He hadn't left 
the city, trust perhap to the anonym confer by it coloss 
swarm of humanity. indeed, she thought as she stare at the missive, 
he might have move around the corner, and save for the chanc of a 
fortuit meet she'd never know it. 

she tore open the envelop and scan the sever scrawl lines. 

No heading, no salutation, not even a signature. just, "thursday 
even at our place in the park." No more; she studi the few word 
intently, as if she could read into their bald phrase the mood and 
hidden emot of the writer. 

A singl phrase, but sufficient. the day wa suddenli brighter, and 
the hope which had glow so dimli yesterday wa abruptli almost more 
than a hope--a certainty. all her doubt of dr. horker' abil were 
forgotten; alreadi the solut of thi uncanni mysteri seem assured, 
and the restor of romanc imminent. she carri the letter to her 
own room and tuck it care by the other in the drawer of the 
night-table. 

thursday evening--thi evening! mani hour interven between now and a 
reason time for the meeting, but they loom no longer drab, dull, 
and hopeless. she lay on her bed and dreamed. 

she could meet nick as earli as possible; perhap at eight-thirty, and 
bring him directli to the doctor' residence. No use wast a moment, 
she mused; the sooner some light could be thrown on the affliction, 
the sooner they could lay the devil--exorcis it. demon, fix idea, 
mental aberration, or whatev dr. carl chose to call it, it had to be 
met and vanquish onc and forever. and it _could_ be vanquished; in 
her present mood she didn't doubt it. then--aft that--ther wa the 
prospect of her own nick regained, and the sweet vista open by that 
reflection. 

she lunch in an abstract manner. In the afternoon, when the phone 
rang, she jump in a startl manner, then relax with a shrug. 

but thi time it _was_ for her. she dart into the hall to take the 
call on the lower phone; she wa hardli surpris but thoroughli 
excit to recogn the voic of nichola devine. 

"pat?" 

"nick! oh, nick, honey! what is it?" 

"mi note to you." even across the wire she sens the strain in hi 
tens tones. "you'v read it?" 

"of course, nick! i'll be there." 

"no." hi voic wa trembling. "you won't come, pat. promis you won't!" 

"but why? whi not, nick? oh, it' terribl import that I see you!" 

"you'r not to come, pat!" 

"but--" An idea wa struggl to her consciousness. "nick, wa it--?" 

"yes. you know now." 

"but, honey, what differ doe it make? _you_ come. you must, nick!" 

"I won't meet you, I tell you!" she could hear hi voic rise 
excitedli in pitch, she could feel the intens of the struggl across 
unknown mile of lifeless copper wire. 

"nick," she said, "i'm go to be there, and you'r go to meet me." 

there wa silenc at the other end. 

"nick!" she cri anxiously. "do you hear me? i'll be there. will you?" 

hi voic sound again, now flat and toneless. 

"yes," he said. "i'll be there." 

the receiv click at the far end of the wire; there wa onli a 
futil buzz in pat' ears. she replac the instrument and sat 
stare dubious at it. 

had that been nick, realli her nick, or--? suppos she went to that 
meet and found--th other? wa she will to face anoth even 
of indign and terror like those still fresh in her memory? 

still, she argued, what harm could come to her on that bench, expos 
as it wa to the gaze of thousand who wander through the park on 
summer evenings? suppos it _were_ the other who met her; there wa no 
way to forc her into a situat such as that of saturday night. nick 
himself had chosen that veri spot for their other meeting, and for that 
veri reason. 

"there' no risk in it," she told herself, "noth can possibl 
happen. i'll simpli go there and bring nick back to dr. carl's, along a 
lighted, busi street, the whole two blocks. what' there to be afraid 
of?" 

noth at all, she answer herself. but suppose--sh shudder and 
deliber abandon her chain of thought as she rose and rejoin 
her mother. 




20 

the assign 


pat wa by no mean as buoyant as she had been in the morning. she 
approach the appoint meet place with a feel of trepid 
that all her argument could not subdue. 

she survey the crowd walk of the park with relief; she felt 
confirm in her assumpt that noth unpleas could occur with 
so mani on-lookers. So she approach the bench with somewhat greater 
self-assur than when she had left the house. 

she saw the seat with it lone occupant, and hasten her steps. 
nichola devin wa sit exactli as he had on that other occasion, 
chin cup on hi hands, eye turn moodili toward the vast lake 
that corusc now with the reflect of star and mani lights. As 
before, she move close to hi side befor he look up, but here the 
similar of the two occas vanished. her fear were realized; she 
wa look into the red-gleam eye and expressionless featur of 
hi other self--th demon of saturday evening! 

"sit down!" he said as a sardon half-smil twist hi lips. "aren't 
you pleased? aren't you thrill to the veri core of your being?" 

pat stood irresolute; she control an impuls to break into sudden, 
abandon flight. the immin of the crowd walk again reassur 
her, and she seat herself gingerli on the extrem edg of the bench, 
stare at her companion with coolli inim eyes. He return her 
gaze with featur as immobil as carven stone; onli hi red eye gave 
evid of the obscene, uncanni life behind the mask. 

"well?" said pat in as frigid a voic as she could muster. 

"yes," said the other survey her. "you are quit as I recal you. 
veri pretty, almost beautiful, save for a certain irregular in your 
features. not unpleasant, however." hi eye travel over her body; 
automat she drew back, shrink away from him. "you have a 
seduct body," he continued. "A most seduct body; I regret that 
circumst prevent our full enjoy of it. but that will come. 
yes, that will come!" 

"oh!" said pat faintly. It took all her determin to remain seat 
by the side of the horror. 

"you were extrem attract as I attir you saturday," the other 
proceeded. hi lip took on a curiou sensual leer. "I could have 
done better with more time; I would have strip you somewhat more 
completely. everything, I think, except your legs; I am pleas by 
the sight of long, straight, silk-clad legs, and should perhap have 
receiv some pleasur by run these hand along them--scratch 
at proper interv for the aesthet effect of blood. but that too 
will come." 

the girl sprang erect, gasp and speechless in outrag anger. she 
turn abruptly; noth remain of her determin now. she felt 
onli an urg to escap from the sneer tormentor who had lost in her 
mind all connect with her own nichola devine. she took a sudden 
step. 

"sit down!" she heard the tone of the entiti behind her, flat, 
unchanged. "sit down, els i'll drag you here!" 

she paus in sheer surprise, turn a startl face on the other. 

"you wouldn't dare!" she said, amaz at the bald effronteri of the 
threat. "you don't dare touch me here!" 

the other laughed. "don't I? what have I to risk? _he_'ll suffer for 
ani deed of mine! you'll call for aid against me and onli loos the 
hound on _him_." 

pat stare blankli at the evil face. she had no answer; for onc her 
readi tongu found no retort. 

"sit down!" reiter the other, and she drop dazedli to her 
posit on the bench. she turn dark question eye on him. 

"do you see," he sneered, "how weaken an influenc is thi love of 
yours? To protect him you are obey me; thi is my author over 
you--thi bodi I share with him!" 

she made no reply; she wa make a desper effort to lash her mind 
into activity, to formul some mean of combat the be who 
tortur her. 

"it ha weaken him, too," the other proceeded. "thi disturb 
love of hi ha taken away the masteri which birth gave him, and hi 
enfeebl ha given that masteri to me. He know now the reason for 
hi weakness; I tell it to him too late to harm me." 

pat struggl for composure. the veri presenc of the cold demon tore 
at the root of her self-control, and she suppress a fierc desir to 
break into hyster laughter. ridiculous, hopeless, incomprehens 
situation! she forc her quiver throat to huski speech. 

"what--what are you?" she stammered. 

"synapse! i'm a question of synapses," jeer the other. "simple! veri 
simple! ask your friend the doctor!" 

"I think," said the girl, a measur of control return to her voice, 
"that you'r a devil. you'r some sort of a fiend that ha manag to 
attach itself to nick, and you'r not human. that' what I think!" 

"think what you please," said the other. "we'r wast time here," he 
said abruptly. "come." 

"where?" pat wa startled; she felt a recurr of fright. 

"no matter where. come." 

"I won't! whi do you want me?" 

"to complet the busi of saturday night," he said. "your lip have 
healed; they bleed no longer, but that is easi to remedy. come." 

"I won't!" exclaim the girl in sudden panic. "I won't!" she move as 
if to rise. 

"you forget," inton the be besid her. "you forget the author 
vest in me by virtu of thi love of yours. let me convinc you." He 
stretch forth a thin hand. "move and you condemn your sweetheart to 
the punish you threaten me." 

He seiz her arm, pinch the flesh brutally, hi nail break the 
smooth skin. pat felt her face turn ashi pale; she close her eye 
and bit her nearly-h lip at the excruci pain, but she made 
not the slightest sound nor the faintest movement. she simpli sat and 
suffered. 

"you see!" sneer the other, releas her. "thank my kindli natur 
that I mark your arm instead of your face. shall we go?" 

A scarc audibl whimper of pain came from the girl' lips. she sat 
pall and unmoving, with her eye still closed. 

"no," she murmur faintli at last. "no. I won't go with you." 

"shall I drag you?" 

"yes. drag me if you dare." 

hi hand close on her wrist; she felt herself jerk violent to her 
feet, so roughli that it wrench her shoulder. A startled, frighten 
littl cri broke from her lips, and then she close them firmli at the 
sight of sever by-pass turn curiou eye on them. 

"i'll come," she murmured. the glimmer of an idea had risen in her 
chaotic mind. 

she follow him in grim, bitter silenc across the clip turf to the 
limit of the park. she recogn nick' modest automobil stand 
in the line of car along the street; her companion, or captor, move 
directli toward it, open the door and clamber in without a singl 
backward glance. He turn about and watch her as she paus with 
one diminut foot on the run board, and rub her hand over her 
ach arm. 

"get in!" he order coldly. 

she made no move. "I want to know where you intend to take me." 

"it doesn't matter. To a place where we can complet that unfinish 
experi of ours. aren't you happi at the prospect?" 

"do you think," she said unsteadily, "that i'd consent to that even to 
save nick from disgrac and punishment? Do you think i'm fool enough 
for that?" 

"we'll soon see." He extend hi hand. "scream--fight--struggle!" he 
jeered. "call them down on your sweetheart!" 

He had close hi hand on her wrist; she jerk it convuls from 
hi grasp. 

"i'll bargain with you!" she gasped. she need a moment' respit to 
clarifi a thought that had been grow in her mind. 

"bargain? what have you to offer?" 

"a much as you!" 

"ah, but I have a threat--th threat to your sweetheart! and i'm 
offer too the lure of that evil whose face so charm you recently. 
have you forgotten how nearli I won you to the worship of that 
principle? have you forgotten the ecstasi of that pain?" 

hi terrible, blood-shot eye were approach her face; and strangely, 
the girl felt a curiou recurr of that illog desir to yield 
that had swept over her on that disastr night of saturday. there 
_had_ been an ecstasy; there _had_ been a wild, ungodly, unhallow 
pleasur in hi blows, in the sear pain of hi kiss on her 
lacer lips. she realiz vagu that she wa stare blankly, 
dazedly, into the red eyes, and that somewher within her, some insan 
brain-cel were urg her to clamber to the seat besid him. 

she tore her eye away. she rub her bruis shoulder, and the pain 
of her own touch restor her vanish logic faculties. she return 
her gaze to the face of the other, meet hi gaze now coolly. 

"nick!" she said earnestly, as if call him from a distance. "nick!" 

there was, she fancied, the faintest gleam of concern appar in the 
featur opposit her. she continued. 

"nick!" she repeated. "you can hear me, honey. come to the hous as 
soon as you are able. come tonight, or ani time; i'll wait until you 
do. you'll come, honey; you must!" 

she back away from the car; the other made no move to halt her. she 
circl the vehicl and dash recklessli across the street. from the 
safeti of the opposit walk she glanc back; the red-ey visag wa 
regard her steadili through the glass of the window. 




21 

A question of synaps 


pat almost ran the few block to her home. she hasten along in a near 
panic, regardless of the glanc of pedestrian she chanc to pass. 
with the disappear of the immedi urge, the composur for which 
she had struggl had desert her, and she felt shaken, terrified, 
and weak. her arm ach miserably, and her wrench shoulder pain at 
each movement. It wa not until she attain her own door-step that she 
paused, pant and quivering, to consid the event of the evening. 

"I can't stand ani more of this!" she mutter wretchedli to herself. 
"i'll just have to give up, I guess; I can't pit myself anoth time 
against--that thing." 

she lean wearili against the rail of the porch, rub her 
injur arm. 

"dr. carl wa right," she thought. "nick wa right; it' dangerous. 
there wa a moment there at the end when he--or it--almost had me. i'm 
frightened," she admitted. "lord onli know what might have happen 
had I been a littl weaker. If the lord _does_ know," she added. 

she found her latch-key and enter the house. onli a dim light burn 
in the hall; her mother, of course, wa at the club, and the maid and 
magda were far away in their chamber on the third floor. she toss 
her wrap on a chair, switch on a brighter light, and examin the 
pain spot on her arm, a red mark alreadi begin to turn a nasti 
blue, with two tini speck of dri blood. she shuddered, and trudg 
wearili up the stair to her room. 

the empti silenc of the hous oppress her. she want human 
companionship--safe, trustworthy, friendli company, anyon to distract 
her thought from the eerie, disturb direct they were taking. 
she wa still in somewhat of a panic, and suppress with difficulti a 
desir to peep fear under the bed. 

"coward!" she chide herself. "you knew what to expect." 

suddenli the recollect of her part word recur to her. she 
had told nick--if nick had inde heard--to come to the house, to come 
at once, tonight, if he could. A tremor of apprehens ran through 
her. suppos he came; suppos he came as her own nick, and she admit 
him, and then--or suppos that other came, and manag by some trick to 
enter, or suppos that unholi fascin of hi prevail on her--sh 
shivered, and brush her hand distractedli across her eyes. 

"I can't stand it!" she moaned. "i'll have to give up, even if it mean 
never see nick again. i'll have to!" she shook her head miser as 
if to deni the pictur that had risen in her mind of herself and that 
horror alon in the house. 

"I won't stay here!" she decided. she peep out of the west window at 
the doctor' residence, and felt a surg of relief at the sight of hi 
iron-gray hair frame in the librari window below. He wa reading; she 
could see the book on hi knees. there wa her refuge; she ran hastili 
down the stair and out of the door. 

with an apprehens glanc along the street she cross to hi door 
and rang the bell. she wait nervous for hi coming, and, with 
a sudden impulse, pull her vanity-cas from her bag and dab a 
film of powder over the mark on her arm. then hi ponder footstep 
sound and the door opened. 

"hello," he said genially. "these late even visit of your are 
becom quit customary--and see if I care!" 

"may I come in a while?" ask pat meekly. 

"have I ever turn you away?" He follow her into the library, push 
a chair forward for her, and drop quickli into hi own with an air 
of have snatch it from her just in time. 

"I didn't want your old arm-chair," she remarked, occupi the other. 

"and what' the troubl tonight?" he queried. 

"i--well, I wa just nervous. I didn't want to stay in the hous alone." 

"you?" hi tone wa skeptical. "you were nervous? that hardli sound 
reasonable, come from an independ littl spit-fir like you." 

"I was, though. I wa scared." 

"and of what--or whom?" 

"of haunt and devils." 

"oh." He nodded. "I see you'v had result from your letter-writing." 

"well, sort of." 

"i'm use to your circumlocutions, pat. suppos you come directli to 
the point for once. what happened?" 

"why, I wrote nick to get in touch with me, and I got a reply. He said 
to meet him in the park at a place we knew. thi evening." 

"and you did, of course." 

"yes, but befor that, thi afternoon, he call up and told me not to, 
but I insist and we did." 

"told you not to, eh? and wa hi warn justified?" 

"yes. oh, yes! when I came to the place, it was--th other." 

"so! well, he could hardli manhandl you in a public park." 

pat thought of her wrench shoulder and bruis arm. she shuddered. 

"he' horrible!" she said. "inhuman! He kept refer to saturday 
night, and he threaten that if I move or made a disturb he'd let 
nick suffer the consequences. So I kept still while he insult me." 

"you nit-wit!" there wa more than a trace of anger in the doctor' 
voice. "I want to see that pup of yours! we'll soon find out what thi 
thing is--a mania or simpli lack of a good licking!" 

"what it is?" echo pat. "oh--it told me! dr. carl, what' a synopsis?" 

"A synopsis! you know perfectli well." 

"I mean appli to physiolog or psycholog or something. it--h told 
me he wa a question of synopsis." 

"thi devil of your said that?" 

"yes." 

"hum!" the doctor' voic wa musing. He frown perplexedly, then 
look up abruptly. "wa it--did he by ani chanc say synapses? not 
synopsis--synapses?" 

"that' it!" exclaim the girl. "he said he wa a question of 
synapses. doe that explain him? Do you know what he is?" 

"doesn't explain a damn thing!" snap horker. "A synaps is a 
juncture, or the meet of two nerves. it' whi you can develop 
automat motion and habits, like play piano, or dancing. when you 
form a habit, the synaps of the nerv involv are sort of worn 
thin, so the nerv themselv are, in a sense, short-circuited. you go 
through motion without the need of your brain intervening, which is 
all a habit amount to. understand?" 

"not veri well," confess pat. 

"humph! It doesn't matter anyway. I can't see that it help to analyz 
your devil." 

"I don't care if it' never analyzed," said pat with a return of 
despondency. "dr. carl, I can't face that evil thing again. I can't do 
it, not even if it mean never see nick!" 

"sensible," said the doctor approvingly. "i'd like to have a chanc at 
him, but not enough to keep you in thi state of jitters. although," he 
added, "a lot of thi mysteri is the product of your own harum-scarum 
mind. you can be sure of that, honey." 

"you _would_ say so," respond the girl wearily. "you'v never seen 
that--change. If it' my imagination, then i'm the one that need your 
treatments, not nick." 

"it isn't _all_ imagination, most likely," said horker defensively. "I 
know these introvert type with their hysterias, megalomanias, and 
defens mechanisms! they'v parad through my offic there for a good 
mani years, pat; they'v provid the lion' share of my practice. but 
thi young psychopath of your seem to have it bad--abnorm so, 
and that' whi i'm so interested, apart from help you, of course." 

"I don't care," said pat apathetically, repress a desir to rub her 
injur arm. "i'm through. i'm scare out of the affair. anoth week 
like thi last one and I _would_ be one of your patients." 

"best drop it, then," said horker, eye her seriously. "nothing' 
worth upset yourself like this, pat." 

"nick' worth it," she murmured. "he' worth it--onli I just haven't 
the strength. I haven't the courage. I can't do it!" 

"never mind, honey," the doctor muttered, regard her with an 
express of concern. "you'r probabl well out of the mess. I know 
damn well you haven't told me everyth about thi affair--notably, 
how you acquir that ugli mark on your arm that' so care 
powder over. so, all in all, I guess you'r well out of it." 

"I suppos I am." her voic wa still weary. suddenli the glare of 
headlight drew her attent to the window; a car wa stop befor 
her home. "there' mother," she said. "i'll go on back now, dr. carl, 
and thank for entertain a lonesom and depress lady." 

she rose with a casual glanc through the window, then halt in frozen 
astonish and a trace of terror. 

"oh!" she gasped. the car wa the modest coup of nichola devine. 

she peer through the window; the doctor rose and stare over her 
shoulder. "I told him to come," she whispered. "I told him to come when 
he wa able. He heard me, he or--th other." 

A figur alight from the vehicle. even in the dusk she could perceiv 
the exhaustion, the weari in it movements. she press her face 
to the pane, survey the form with fascin intentness. It turned, 
support itself against the car and gaze steadili at her own door. 
with the movement the radianc of a street-light illumin it 
features. 

"it' nick!" she cri with such eager that the doctor wa 
startled. "it' _my_ nick!" 




22 

doctor and devil 


pat rush to the door, out upon the porch, and down to the street. 
dr. horker follow her to the entranc and stood watch her as she 
dart toward the deject figur besid the car. 

"nick!" she cried. "i'm here, honey. you heard me, didn't you?" 

she flung herself into hi arms; he held her eagerly, press a hasty, 
tender kiss on her lips. 

"you heard me!" she murmured. 

"yes." hi voic wa husky, strained. "what is it, pat? tell me 
quickly--god know how much time we have!" 

"it' dr. carl. he'll help us, nick." 

"help us! No one can help us, dear. No one!" 

"he'll try. It can't do ani harm, honey. come in with me. now!" 

"it' useless, I tell you!" 

"but come," she pleaded. "come anyway!" 

"pat, I tell you thi battl ha to be fought out by me alone. i'm the 
onli one who can do anyth at all and," he lower hi voice, "pat, 
i'm losing!" 

"nick!" 

"that' whi I came tonight. I wa too cowardli to make our last 
meeting--monday even in the park--a definit farewell. I want to, 
but I weakened. So tonight, pat, it' a final good-bye, and you thank 
heaven for it!" 

"oh, nick dear!" 

"it wa touch and go whether I came at all tonight. It wa a struggle, 
pat; _he_ is as strong as I am now. Or stronger." 

the girl gaze searchingli into hi worn, weari face. He look 
miser ill, she thought; he seem as exhaust as one who had been 
engag in a physic battle. 

"nick," she said insistently, "I don't care what you say, you'r come 
in with me. onli for a littl while." 

she tug at hi hand, drag him reluctantli after her. He follow 
her to the porch where the open door still frame the great figur of 
the doctor. 

"you know dr. carl," she said. 

"come inside," growl horker. pat notic the gruff of hi voice, 
hi lack of ani cordiality, but she said noth as she pull her 
reluct companion through the door and into the library. 

the doctor drew up anoth chair, and pat, more accustom to hi 
devices, observ that he place it in such posit that the lamp cast 
a stream of radianc on nick' face. she sank into her own chair and 
wait silent for developments. 

"well," said horker, turn hi shrewd old eye on nick' countenance, 
"let' get down to cases. pat' told me what she knows; we can take 
that much for granted. Is there anyth more you might want to tell?" 

"no, sir," respond the youth wearily. "i'v told pat all I know." 

"humph! mayb I can ask some lead questions, then. will you answer 
them?" 

"of course, ani that I can." 

"all right. now," the doctor' voic took on a cool profession edge, 
"you'v had these--uh--attack as long as you can remember. Is that 
right?" 

"yes." 

"but they'v been more sever of late?" 

"much worse, sir!" 

"sinc when?" 

"since--about as long as i'v known pat. four or five weeks." 

"m--m," drone the doctor. "you'v no idea of the caus for thi 
increas in the malign of the attacks?" 

"no sir," said nick, after a bare percept hesitation. 

"you don't think the caus could be in ani way connect with, let us 
say, the emot disturb attend your acquaint with pat 
here?" 

"no, sir," said the youth flatly. 

"all right," said horker. "let that angl go for the present. are there 
ani after effect from these spells?" 

"yes. there' alway a split headache." He close hi eyes. "I have 
one of them now." 

"localized?" 

"sir?" 

"i the pain in ani particular region? forehead, temples, eyes, or so 
forth?" 

"no. just a nasti headache." 

"but no other after-effects?" 

"I can't think of ani others. except, perhaps, a feel of exhaust 
after i'v gone through what i'v just finished." He close hi eye as 
if to shut out the recollection. 

"well," muse the doctor, "we'll forget the physic symptoms. what 
happen to your individuality, your own consciousness, while you'r 
suffer an attack?" 

"noth happen to it," said nick with a suppress shudder. "I 
watch and hear, but what _he_ doe is beyond my control. it' 
terrifying--horrible!" he burst out suddenly. 

"doubtless," respond horker smoothly. "what about the other? doe 
that one stand by while you'r in the saddle?" 

"I don't know," mutter nick dully. "of cours he does!" he ad 
abruptly. "I can feel hi presenc at all times--even now. he' alway 
lurking, wait to spring forth, as soon as I relax!" 

"humph!" ejacul the doctor. "how do you manag to sleep?" 

"bi wait for exhaustion," said nick wearily. "bi wait until I can 
stay awak no longer." 

"and can you bring thi other person into dominance? can you 
chang controls, so to speak, at will?" 

"why--yes," the youth answered, hesit as if puzzled. "yes, I 
suppos I could." 

"let' see you, then." 

"but--" horror wa in hi voice. 

"no, dr. carl!" pat interject in fright. "I won't let him!" 

"I thought you declar yourself out of this," said horker with a 
shrewd glanc at the girl. 

"then i'm back in it! I won't let him do what you want--anyway, not 
that!" 

"pat," said the doctor with an air of patience, "you want me to treat 
thi affliction, don't you? isn't that what both of you want?" 

the girl murmur a scarc audibl assent. 

"veri well, then," he proceeded. "do you expect me to treat the thing 
blindly--in the dark? Do you think I can guess at the caus without 
observ the effect?" 

"no," said pat faintly. 

"so! now then," he turn to nick, "let' see thi transformation." 

"must i?" ask the youth reluctantly. 

"if you want my help." 

"all right," he agre with anoth tremor. He sat passiv stare 
at the doctor; a moment passed. horker heard pat' nervou breathing; 
other than that, the room wa in silence. nichola devin close hi 
eyes, brush hi hand across hi forehead. A moment more and he open 
them to gaze perplexedli at the doctor. 

"he won't!" he mutter in astonishment. "he won't do it!" 

"humph!" snap horker, ignor pat' murmur of relief. "finicki 
devil, isn't he? like to pick compani he can bully!" 

"I don't understand it!" nick' face wa blank. "he' been torment 
me until just now!" He look at the doctor. "you don't think i'm lie 
about it, do you, dr. horker?" 

"not consciously," repli the other coolly. "if I thought you were 
respons for a few of the indign perpetr on pat here, i'd 
wast no time in questions, young man. i'd be reliev myself of 
certain violent impuls instead." 

"I _couldn't_ harm pat!" 

"you gave a passabl imit of it, then! however, that' besid the 
point; as I say, I don't hold you respons for aberr which I 
believ are beyond your control. the main thing is a diagnosis." 

"do you know what it is?" cut in pat eagerly. 

"not yet--at least, not for certain. there' onli one real method 
available; these question will get us nowhere. we'll have to 
psychoanalyz you, young man." 

"I don't care what you do, if you can offer ani hope!" he declar 
vehemently. "let' get it over!" 

"not as easi as all that!" rumbl horker. "it take time; and besides, 
it can't be success with the subject in a hectic mood such as 
yours." He glanc at hi watch. "moreover, it' after midnight." 

He turn to nichola devine. "we'll make it saturday evening," 
he said. "meanwhile, young man, you'r not to see pat. not at 
all--understand? you can see her here when you come." 

"that' infinit more than i'd plan for myself," said the youth in 
a low voice. "i'd abandon the hope of see her." 

He rose and move toward the door, and the other followed. At the 
entranc he paused; he lean down to plant a brief, tender kiss on 
the girl' lips, and move wordlessli out of the door. pat watch 
him enter hi car, and follow the vehicl with her eye until it 
disappeared. then she turn to horker. 

"do you realli know anyth about it?" she queried. "have you ani 
theori at all?" 

"he' not lying," said the doctor thoughtfully. "I watch him closely; 
he believ he' tell the truth." 

"he is. I know what I saw!" 

"he hasn't the sign of praecox or depressive," muse the doctor. "it' 
puzzling; it' one of those function aberrations, or a fix delus 
of some kind. we'll find out just what it is." 

"it' the devil," declar pat positively. "I don't care what sort of 
scientif tag you give it--that' what it is. you doctor can hide a 
lot of ignor under a long name." 

horker paid no attent to her remarks. "we'll see what the 
psychoanalysi bring out," he said. "I shouldn't be surpris if the 
whole thing were the result of a defens mechan erect by a timid 
child in an effort to evad responsibility. that' what it sound like." 

"it' a devil!" reiter pat. 

"well," said the doctor, "if it is, it ha one thing in common with 
everi spook or devil I ever heard of." 

"what' that?" 

"it refus to appear under ani condit where one ha a chanc to 
examin it. it' like one of these temperament medium tri to 
perform under a spot-light." 




23 

werewolf 


pat awok in rather better spirits. somehow, the actual entranc of dr. 
horker into the case gave her a feel of security, and her natur 
optimist natur rode the pendulum back from despair to hope. even the 
pain black-and-blu mark on her arm, as she examin it ruefully, 
fail to shake her buoyant mood. 

her mood held most of the day; it wa onli at even that a recurr 
of doubt assail her. she sat in the dim live room wait the 
arriv of her mother' guests, and wonder whether, after all, the 
predica wa as easili solvabl as she had assumed. she watch 
the play of light and shadow across the ceiling, pattern cast 
through the window by move headlight in the street, and wonder 
anew whether her faith in dr. carl' abil wa justified. science! 
she had the faith of her gener in it omnipotence, but here in 
the dusk, the outworn superstit of childhood becam appal 
realities, and some of magda' stories, forgotten now for years, rose 
out of their grave and went squeak and maunder like sheet 
ghost in a ghastli parad across the univers of her mind. the 
meaningless taunt she habitu flung at dr. carl' scienc becam 
suddenli pregnant with truth; hi patient, hard-learn scienc seem 
in fact no more than the frenzi of a witch-doctor danc in the 
heart of a rhodesian swamp. 

what wa it worth--thi array of medic facts--if it fail to 
cure? wa medicin fall into the state of chines science--a vast 
collect of good rule for which the reason were either unknown or 
long forgotten? she sighed; it wa with a feel of profound relief 
that she heard the voic of the brock outside; she play miser 
bridg the whole evening, but it wa less of an afflict than the 
solitud of her own thoughts. 

saturday morning, cloudi and threaten though it was, found the 
pendulum onc more at the other end of the arc. she found herself, if 
not buoyantli cheerful, at least no longer prey to the inchoat doubt 
and fear of the preced evening. she couldn't even recal their 
nature; they had been apart from the cool, day-tim logic that preach 
a common-sens relianc on accept practices. they had been, she 
concluded, no more than childish nightmar induc by dark and the 
play of shadows. 

she dress and ate a late breakfast; her mother wa alreadi en rout 
to the club for her bridge-luncheon. thereafter, she wander into the 
kitchen for the compani of magda, whom she found with massiv arm 
immers in dish water. pat perch on her particular stool besid the 
kitchen tabl and watch her at her work. 

"magda," she said finally. 

"i'm listening, miss pat." 

"do you rememb a stori you told me a long time ago? oh, year 
and year ago, about a man in your town who could chang into 
something--som fierc animal. A wolf, or someth like that." 

"oh, him!" said magda, knit her heavi brows. "you mean the 
werewolf." 

"that' it! the werewolf. I rememb it now--how frighten I wa after 
I went to bed. I wasn't more than eight year old, wa i?" 

"I couldn't remember. It wa year ago, though, for sure." 

"what wa the story?" queri pat. "do you rememb that?" 

"why, it wa the time the sheep were be missed," said the woman, 
punctuat her word with the clatter of dish on the drainboard. 
"then there wa a child gone, and another, and then tale of thi great 
wolf about the country. I didn't see him; us littl one stay under 
roof by dark after that." 

"that wasn't all of it," said pat. "you told me more than that." 

"well," continu magda, "there wa my uncle, who wa best hand with 
a rifl in the village. He and other went after the creature, and my 
uncle, he came back tell how he'd seen it plain against the sky, and 
how he'd fire at it. He couldn't miss, he wa that close, but the wolf 
gave him a look and ran away." 

"and then what?" 

"then the priest came, and he said it wasn't a natur wolf. He melt 
up a silver coin and cast a bullet, and he gave it to my uncle, he 
be the best shot in the village. and the next night he went out onc 
more." 

"did he get it?" ask pat. "I don't remember." 

"he did. He came upon it by the pasture, and he aim hi gun. the 
creatur look straight at him with it evil red eyes, and he shot it. 
when he came to it, there wasn't a wolf at all, but thi man--hi name 
I forget--with a hole in hi head. and then the priest, he said he wa 
a werewolf, and onli a silver bullet could kill him. but my uncle, _he_ 
said those evil red eye kept stare at him for mani nights." 

"evil red eyes!" said pat suddenly. "magda," she ask in a faint 
voice, "could he chang ani time he want to?" 

"onli by night, the priest said. By sunris he had to be back." 

"onli by night!" muse the girl. anoth idea wa form in her activ 
littl mind, anoth conception, disturbing, imposs to phrase. "i 
that wors than be possess by a devil, magda?" 

"sure it' worse! the priest, he could cast out the devil, but I never 
heard no cure for be a werewolf." 

pat said noth further, but slid from her high perch to the floor and 
went soberli out of the kitchen. the fear of last night had come to 
life again, and now the over-cast sky outsid seem a fit symbol 
to her mood. she stare thought out of the live room windows, 
and the sudden splash of raindrop against the pane lent a final touch 
to the whole desol ensemble. 

"i'm just a superstiti littl idiot!" she told herself. "I laugh 
at mother becaus she alway like to play north and south, and here 
i'm let myself worri over superstit that were discard befor 
there wa ani such thing as a game call contract bridge." 

but her argument fail to carri conviction. the memori of the 
terribl eye of that _other_ had click too aptli to magda' phrase. 
she couldn't subdu the pictur that haunt her, and she couldn't cast 
off the apprehens of her mood. she recal gloomili that dr. 
horker wa at the club--wouldn't be home befor evening, els she'd 
have gladli avail herself of hi solid, matter-of-fact company. 

she thought of nick' appoint with the doctor for that evening. 
suppos hi psychoanalysi brought to light some such horror as these 
fear of hers--that would forev destroy ani possibl of happi 
for her and nick. even though the doctor refus to recogn it, 
call it by some polysyllab scientif name, the thing would be 
there to sever them. 

she wander restlessli into the hall. the morn mail, unexamined, 
lay in it brazen receptacle, she move over, finger it idly. 
abruptli she paus in astonishment--a letter in familiar script 
had flash at her. she pull it out; it was! It wa a letter from 
nichola devine! 

she tore it open nervously, wonder whether he had revert to hi 
origin refus of dr. horker' aid, whether he wa unabl to come, 
whether _that_ had happened. but onli a singl unfold sheet slip 
from the envelope, inscrib with a few brief line of poetry. 

"the grief that is too faint for tears, 
and scarc breath of pain, 
may linger on a hundr year 
ere it creep forth again. 
but I, who love you now too well 
To suffer your disdain, 
must tri tonight that love to quell-- 
and tri in vain!" 




24 

the dark other 


It wa earli in the evening, not yet eight o'clock, when pat saw the 
car of nichola devin draw up befor the house. she had alreadi been 
watch half an hour, sit cross-leg in the deep window seat, 
like her jade buddha. that equivoc poem of hi had disturb her, 
lent an ad strength to the mood and doubt alreadi implant by 
magda' mystic tale, and it wa with a feel of trepid that 
she watch him emerg wearili from hi vehicl and stare in indecis 
first at her window and then at the horker residence. the wane 
daylight wa still suffici to delin hi worn features; she 
could see them, pale, harried, but indubit the mild featur of her 
own nick. 

while he hesitated, she dart to the door and out upon the porch. He 
gave her a wan smile of greeting, advanc to the foot of the steps, 
and halt there. 

"the doctor' not home yet," she call to him. He stood motionless 
below her. 

"come up on the porch," she invited, as he made no move. she utter 
the word with a curiou feel of apprehension; for even as she ach 
for hi presence, the uncertain state of affair wa frightening. she 
thought fear that what had happen befor might happen again. 
still, there on the open porch, in practic full daylight, and for 
so brief a time--dr. carl would be come veri shortly, she reasoned. 

"I can't," said nick, stare wist at her. "you know I can't." 

"whi not?" 

"I promised. you remember--i promis dr. horker i'd not see you except 
in hi presence." 

"so you did," said pat doubtfully. the promis offer escap from 
a distress situation, she thought, and yet--somehow, see nick 
stand pathet there, she couldn't imagin anyth harm 
eman from him. there had been mani and mani even in hi 
compani that had pass delightfully, enjoyably, safely. she felt a 
wave of piti for him; after all, the afflict wa his, most of the 
suffer wa his. 

"we needn't take it so literally," she said almost reluctantly. "he'll 
be home veri soon now." 

"I know," said nick soberly, "but it wa a promise, and besides, i'm 
afraid." 

"never mind, honey," she said, after a momentari hesitation. "come up 
and sit here on the steps, then--her besid me. We can talk just as 
well as there on the settee." 

He climb the step and seat himself, watch pat with long 
eyes. He made no move to touch her, nor did she suggest a kiss. 

"I read your poem, honey," she said finally. "it worri me." 

"i'm sorry, pat. I couldn't sleep. I kept wander around the house, 
and at last I wrote it and took it out and mail it. It wa a vent, a 
relief from the thing i'd been thinking." 

"what things, honey?" 

"A way, mostly," he answer gloomily, "of remov myself from your 
life. A perman way." 

"nick!" 

"I didn't, as you see, pat. I wa too cowardly, I suppose. Or perhap 
it wa becaus of thi forlorn hope of ours. there' alway hope, pat; 
even the condemn man with hi foot on the step to the gallow feel 
it." 

"nick dear!" she cried, her voic quaver in pity. "nick, you mustn't 
think of those things! It might weaken you--mak it easier for _him_!" 

"it can't. If it frighten _him_, i'm glad." 

"honey," she said soothingly, "we'll give dr. carl a chance. promis me 
you'll let him try, won't you?" 

"of cours I will. Is there anyth i'd refus to promis you, pat? 
even," he ad bitterly, "when reason tell me it' a futil promise." 

"don't say it!" she urg fiercely. "we'v got to help him. we'v got 
to believe--ther he comes!" she finish with sudden relief. 

the doctor' car turn up the driveway beyond hi residence. pat saw 
hi face regard them as he disappear behind the building. 

"come on, honey," she said. "let' get at the business." 

they move slowli over to the doctor' door, wait there until hi 
ponder footstep sounded. A light flash in the hall, and hi broad 
shadow fill the door for a moment befor it opened. 

"come in," he rumbl jovially. "fine even we'r spoiling, isn't it?" 

"it could be," said pat as they follow him into the library, "onli 
it'll probabl rain some more." 

"hah!" snort the doctor, frown at the mention of rain. "the cours 
wa soft. couldn't get ani distance, and it ad six stroke to my 
score. At least six!" 

pat chuckl commiseratingly. "you ought to lay out a cours in 
greenland," she suggested. "they say anyon can drive a ball a quarter 
of a mile on smooth ice." 

"humph!" the doctor wave toward a great, low chair. "suppos you sit 
over there, young man, and we'll get about our business. and don't look 
so woe-begon about it." 

nick settl himself nervous in the design chair; the doctor 
seat himself at a littl distanc to the side, and pat sat tens in 
her usual place besid the hearth. she wait in strain impati 
for the black magic of psychoanalysi to commence. 

"now," said horker, "I want you to keep quiet, pat--if possible. and 
you, young man, are to relax, compos yourself, get yourself into as 
passiv a state as possible. Do you understand?" 

"yes, sir," the youth lean back in the great chair, close hi eyes. 

"so! now, think back to your childhood, your earliest memories. let 
your thought wander at random, and speak whatev come to your mind." 

nick sat a moment in silence. "that' hard to do, sir," he said finally. 

"yes. It will take practice, week of it, perhaps. you'll have to 
acquir the knack of it, but to do that, we'll have to start." 

"yes, sir." He sat with close eyes. "mi mother," he murmured, "wa 
kind. I rememb her a little, just a little. she wa veri gentle, not 
apt to blame me. she could understand. made excus to my father. He 
wa hard, not cruel--strict. couldn't understand. blame me when I 
wasn't to blame. other did it. I wasn't mischievous, but got the blame. 
couldn't explain, he wouldn't believ me." He paus uncertainly. 

"go on," said horker quietly, while pat strain her ear to listen. 

"mrs. stevens," he continued. "gover after mother died. strict like 
father, got punish when I wasn't to blame. just as bad after father 
died. alway blamed. couldn't explain, nobodi believ me. other threw 
cat in window, I had to go to bed. put salt in bird seed, broke leg of 
chair to make it fall. punished--i couldn't explain." hi voic drone 
into silence; he open hi eyes. "that all," he said nervously. 

"good enough for the first time," said the doctor briskly. "wait a few 
weeks; we'll have your life' histori out of you. It take practice." 

"i that all?" queri pat in astonishment. 

"all for the first time. later we'll let him talk half an hour at a 
stretch, but it take practice, as i'v mentioned. you run along home 
now," he said to nick. 

"but it' early!" object pat. 

"earli or not," said the doctor, "i'm tired, and you two aren't to see 
each other except here. you rememb that." 

nick rose from hi seat in the depth of the great chair. "thank you, 
sir," he said. "I don't know why, but I feel easier in your presence. 
the--th struggl disappear while i'm here." 

"well," said horker with a smile, "I like patient with confid in 
me. good night." 

At the door nick paused, turn wist eye on pat. "good night," he 
said, lean to give her a light kiss. A rush of some emot twist 
hi features; he stare strang at the girl. "i'd better go," he said 
abruptly, and vanish through the door. 

"well?" said pat questioningly, turn to the doctor. "did you learn 
anyth from that?" 

"not much," the other admitted, yawning. "however, the result bear out 
my theory." 

"how?" 

"did you notic how he harp on the undeserv punish theme? He 
wa punish for another' mischief?" 

"yes. what of that?" 

"well, pictur him as a timid, sensit child, rather afraid of be 
punished. afraid, say, of be lock up in a dark closet. now, when 
he inadvert commit a mischief, as all children do, he tri 
desper to divert the blame from himself. but there' no one els 
to blame! So what doe he do?" 

"what?" 

"he invent thi _other_, the mischiev one, and blame him. and 
now the other ha grown to the proport of a delusion, haunt 
him, drive him to commit act apart from hi normal inclinations. 
understand? becaus i'm off to bed whether you do or not." 

"I understand all right," murmur pat uncertainli as she move to the 
door. "but somehow, it doesn't sound reasonable." 

"it will," said the doctor. "good night." 

pat wander slowli down the step and through the break in the hedge, 
muse over doctor horker' express of opinion. then, accord 
to him, the devil wa noth more than an invent of nick' mind, 
the trick of a cowardli child to evad just punishment. she shook her 
head; it didn't sound like nick at all. for all hi gentl and 
sensitivity, he wasn't the one to hide behind a fabrication. He wasn't 
a coward; she wa certain of that. and she wa as sure as she could 
ever be that he hated, feared, loath thi person that afflict 
him; he _couldn't_ have creat it. 

she sighed, mount the steps, and fumbl for her key. the sound 
of a movement behind her brought a faint gasp of astonishment. she 
turn to see a figur materi from the shadow of the porch. 
the light from the hall fell across it features, and she drew back as 
she recogn nichola devine--not the be she had just kiss good 
night, but in the guis of her tormentor, the red-ey demon! 




25 

the demon lover 


pat drew back, lean against the door, and her key tinkl on the 
concret of the porch. she wa startled, shocked, but not as complet 
terrifi as she might have expected. after all, she thought rapidly, 
they were stand in full view of a public street, and dr. carl' 
resid wa but a few feet distant. she could summon hi help by 
screaming. 

"well!" she exclaimed, eye the figur inimically. "your appear 
and disappear are begin to remind me of the cheshir cat." 

"except for the grin," said the other in hi cold tones. 

"what do you want?" snap pat. 

"you know what I want." 

"you'll not get it," said the girl angrily. "you--you'r doom to 
extinction, anyway! Go away!" 

"suppose," said the other with a strange, cold, twist smile, "it were 
_he_ that' doom to extinction--what then?" 

"it isn't!" cri pat. "it isn't!" she repeated, while a quiver of 
uncertainti shook her. "he' the stronger," she said defiantly. 

"then where is he now?" 

"dr. carl will help us!" 

"doctor!" sneer the other. "he and hi clever theory! Am I an 
illusion?" he queri sardonically, thrust hi red-glint eye 
toward her. "am I the product of hi puerile, vacil nature? bah! 
I gave you the clue, and your doctor hasn't the intellig to follow 
it!" 

"go away!" murmur pat faintly. the approach of hi face had unnerv 
her, and she felt terror begin to stir within her. "go away!" she 
said again. "whi do you have to torment me? ani one would serv your 
purpose--ani woman!" 

"you have an aesthet appeal, as i'v told you before," repli the 
other in that toneless voic of his. "there is a pleasur in the 
defac of black hair and pale skin, and your bodi is seductive, 
most seductive. anoth might afford me less enjoyment, and besides, 
you hate me. don't you hate me?" He peer evilli at her. 

"oh, god--yes!" the girl wa shuddering. 

"say it, then! say you hate me!" 

"I hate you!" the girl cri vehemently. "will you go away now?" 

"with you!" 

"i'll scream if you come ani closer. you don't dare touch me; i'll call 
dr. horker." 

"you'll onli damag _him_--your lover." 

"then i'll do it! he'll understand." 

"yes," said the other reflectively. "he' fool enough to forgiv you. 
he'll forgiv you anything--th weakling!" 

"go away! get away from here!" 

the other stare at her out of blood-shot eyes. "veri well," he said in 
hi flat tones. "thi time the victori is yours." 

He back slowli toward the steps. pat watch him as he moved, feel 
a surg of profound relief. As hi shadow shifted, her key gleam 
silver at her feet, and she stoop to retriev it. 

there wa a rush of motion as her eye left the form of her antagonist. 
A hand wa clamp violent over her mouth, an arm pass with 
steel-lik rigid about her body. nichola devin wa drag her 
toward the steps; she wa half-way down befor she recov her wit 
enough to struggle. 

she writh and twist in hi grasp. she drove her elbow into hi 
bodi with all her power, and kick with the strength of desper 
at hi legs. she bit into the palm across her mouth--and suddenly, 
with a subdu grunt of pain, he releas her so abruptli that her own 
struggl sent her spin blindli into the bush of the hedge. 

she turn gasping, unabl for the moment to summon suffici breath 
to scream. the other stood face her with hi eye gleam terribl 
into her own; then they rang slowli from her diminut feet to the 
rumpl eboni of her hair that she wa brush back with her hand 
from her pallid, frighten face. 

"obstinate," he observed, rub hi injur palm. 

"obstin and unbroken--but worth the trouble. well worth it!" He 
reach out a swift hand, seiz her wrist as she back against the 
bushes. 

pat twist around, gaze frantic at doctor horker' house, where 
a light had onli now flash on in the upper windows. her breath flow 
back into her lung with a strengthen rush. 

"dr. carl!" she screamed. "dr. carl! help me!" 

the other spun her violent about. she had a momentari glimps of 
a horribl evil countenance, then he drew back hi arm and shot a 
clench fist to her chin. 

the world reel into a blaze of spin light that fade quickli to 
darkness. she felt her knee buckl beneath her, and realiz that 
she wa crumpl forward toward the figur befor her. then for a 
moment she wa awar of nothing. 

she didn't quit lose consciousness, or at least for no more than a 
moment. she wa suddenli awar that she wa gaze down at a move 
pavement, at her own arm dangl helplessli toward it. she perceiv 
that she wa lie limpli across nichola devine' shoulder with hi 
arm clench about her knees. and then, still unabl to make the 
slightest resistance, she wa bundl roughli into the seat of hi 
coupe; he wa besid her, and the car wa pur into motion. 

she summon what remain of her strength. she drew herself erect, 
fumbl at the handl of the door with a frantic idea of cast 
herself out of the car to the street. the creatur besid her jerk 
her violent back; as she reel into the seat, he struck her again 
with the side of hi fist. It wa a random blow, deliv with 
scarc a glanc at her; it caught her on the forehead, snap her 
head with an audibl thump against the wall of the vehicle. she sway 
for a moment with close eyes, then collaps limpli against him, thi 
time in complet unconsciousness. 

that laps too must have been brief. she open daze eye on a vista 
of move street lights; they were still in the car, pass now along 
some unrecogn thoroughfar line with dark old homes. she lay 
for some moment uncomprehending; she wa complet unawar of her 
situation. 

It dawn on her slowly. she moaned, struggl away from the shoulder 
against which she had been leaning, and huddl miser in the far 
corner of the seat. nichola devin gave her a singl glanc with hi 
unpleas eyes, and turn them again on the street. 

the girl wa helpless, unabl to put forth the strength even for 
anoth attempt to open the door. she wa still onli half awar of her 
position, and realiz onli that someth appal wa occur to 
her. she lay in passiv miseri against the cushion of the seat as the 
other turn suddenli up a dark driveway and into the open door of a 
small garage. He snap off the engine, extinguish the headlights, 
and left them in a horrible, smothering, silent darkness. 

she heard him open the door on hi side; after an appar 
intermin interval, she heard the creak of the hing on her own 
side. she huddl terrified, voiceless, and immobile. 

He reach in, fumbl against her in the darkness. He found her arm, 
and drag her from the car. again, as on that other occasion, she 
found herself reel helplessli behind him through the dark as he 
tug at her wrist. He paus at a door in the build adjac to 
the garage, search in hi pocket with hi free hand. 

"I won't go in there!" she mutter dazedly. the other made no reply, 
but insert a key in the lock, turn it, and swung open the door. 

He step through it, drag her after him. with a sudden access of 
desper strength, she caught the frame of the door, jerk violent 
on her prison wrist, and wa unexpectedli free. she reel away, 
turn toward the street, and took a few falter step down the 
driveway. 

almost instantli her tormentor wa upon her, and hi hand close again 
on her arm. pat had no further strength; she sank to the pavement and 
crouch there, disregard the insist tug on her arm. 

"come on," he growled. "you onli delay the inevitable. must I drag you?" 

she made no reply. He tug violent at her wrist, drag her a few 
inch along the pavement. then he stoop over her, rais her in hi 
arms, and bore her toward the dark open of the door. He crowd her 
roughli through it, disregard the pain bump of her shoulder 
and knees. she heard the slam of the door as he kick it closed, 
and she realiz that they were mount a flight of stairs, move 
somewher into the oppress threaten darkness. 

then they were move along a level floor, and her arm wa bruis 
against anoth door. there wa a moment of stillness, and then she wa 
released, drop indiffer to the surfac of a bed or couch. A 
moment later a light flash on. 

the girl wa consciou at first onli of the gaze of the red eyes. they 
held her own in a fascinating, unbreakable, trance-lik spell. then, in 
a wave of dizziness, she close her own eyes. 

"where are we?" she murmured. "in hell?" 

"you should call it heaven," came the sardon voice. "it' the home of 
your sweetheart. hi home--and mine!" 




26 

the depth 


"heaven and hell alway were the same place," said nichola devine, hi 
red eye glare down at the girl. "we'll demonstr the fact." 

pat shift wearily, and sat erect, pass her hand dazedli across her 
face. she brush the tangl strand of black hair from befor her 
eyes, and stare dulli at the room in which she found herself. 

It had some of the aspect of a study, and some of a laboratory, or 
perhap a doctor' office. there wa a case of dusti book on the wall 
opposite, and anoth crystal-front cabinet contain glassware, 
bottles, littl round box suggest of drug or pharmaceuticals. 
there wa a paper-litt tabl too; she gave a convuls shudder at 
the sight of a bald, varnish death' head, it lower jar articulated, 
that repos on a pile of paper and grin at her. 

"where--" she began faintly. 

"thi wa the room of your sweetheart' father," said the other. "hi 
and my mutual father. He wa an experimenter, a researcher, and so, in 
anoth sense, am i!" He leer evilli at her. "he use thi chamber 
to further hi experiments, and I for mine--th carri on of a nobl 
famili tradition!" 

the girl scarc heard hi words; the expressionless tone carri no 
mean to the chao which wa her mind. she felt onli an inchoat 
horror and a vagu but all-encompass fear, and her head wa ach 
from the blow he had dealt her. 

"what do you want?" she ask dully. 

"why, there is an unfinish experiment. you must rememb our 
interrupt proceed of a week ago! have you alreadi forgotten the 
earli step of our experi in evil?" 

pat cring at the cold, sardon tone of the other. "let me go," she 
whimpered. "please!" she appealed. "let me go!" 

"in due time," he responded. "you lack gratitude," he continued. "last 
time, out of the kind that is my soul, I permit you to dull your 
sens with alcohol, but you failed, apparently, to appreci my 
indulgence. but thi time"--hi eye lit up queerly--"thi time you 
approach the consumm of our experi with undim mind!" 

He approach her. she drew her knee up, huddl back on the couch, 
and summon the final vestig of her strength. 

"i'll kick you!" she mutter desperately. "keep back from me!" 

He paus just beyond her reach. "I had hoped," he said ironically, "if 
not for your cooperation, at least for no further activ resistance. 
it' quit useless; I told you day ago that thi time would come." 

He advanc cautiously; pat thrust out her foot, drive it with all 
her power. instantli he drew back, catch her ankl in hi hand. He 
jerk her leg sharpli upwards, and she wa precipit violent to 
the couch. again he advanced. 

the girl writh away from him. she slip from the foot of the couch 
and dart in a circl around him, turn in an attempt to gain the 
room' singl exit--th door by which they had entered. He move 
quickli to intercept her; he close the door as she back despairingli 
away, retreat to the far end of the room. onc more he face her, 
hi malici eye gleaming, and move deliber toward her. 

she drew back until the tabl halt her; she press herself against 
it as if to forc her way still further. the other move at unalt 
pace. suddenli her hand press over some smooth, round, hard object; 
she grasp it and flung the grin skull at the more terribl 
face that approach her. He dodged; there wa a crash of glass as 
the gruesom missil shatter the pane of the cabinet of drugs. and 
inexorably, nichola devin approach onc more. 

she move along the edg of the table, squeez herself between it and 
the wall. behind her wa one of the room' two windows, curtainless, 
with drawn shades. she found the cord, jerk it, and let the blind 
coil upward with an abrupt snap. 

"i'll throw myself through the window!" she announc with a sort of 
desper calm. "don't dare move a step closer!" 

the demon paus onc more in hi deliber advance. "you will, of 
course," he said as if considering. "given the opportunity. your bodi 
torn and broken, spot with blood--that might be a pleasur second 
onli to that I plan." 

"you'll suffer for it!" said the girl hysterically. "i'll be glad to do 
it, know you'll suffer!" 

"not i--your sweetheart." 

"I don't care! I can't stand it!" 

the other smile hi demoniac smile, and resum hi advance. she 
watch him in terror that had now reach the ultim degree; her 
mind could bear no more. she turn suddenly, rais her arm, and beat 
her fist against the pane of the window. 

with the surpris resist glass sometim displays, it shook at 
her blow but did not shatter. she drew back for a second attempt, 
and her uprais arm wa caught in a rigid grip, and she wa drag 
backward to the center of the room, thrown heavili to the floor. she 
sat dazedli look up at the form stand over her. 

"must I render you helpless again?" queri the flat voic of the 
other. "are you not yet broken, convinc of the useless of thi 
struggle?" 

she made no answer, stare dulli at hi immobil features. 

"are you go to fight me further?" As she wa still silent, he 
repeated, "are you?" 

she shook her head vaguely. "no," she muttered. she had reach the 
point of utter indifference; noth at all wa import enough now to 
struggl for. 

"stand up!" order the be abov her. 

she pull herself wearili to her feet, lean against the wall. she 
close her eye for a moment, then open them dulli as the other moved. 

"what--ar you--ar you go to do?" she murmured. 

"first," said the demon coldly, "I shall disrob you somewhat more 
complet than on our other occasion. thereaft we will proceed to 
the consumm of our experiment." 

she watch him indifferently, uncomprehendingly, as he crook a thin 
finger in the neck of her frock. she felt the pressur as he pulled, 
heard the rip of the fabric, and the pop of buttons, but she wa 
consciou of no particular sensat as the garment cascad into a 
black and red pool at her feet. she stood passiv as he hook hi 
finger in the strap of her vest, and that too join the littl mound 
of cloth. she shiver slightli as she stood bare to the waist, but 
gave no other sign. 

again the thin hand move toward her; from somewher in her torment 
spirit a final shred of resist arose, and she push the quest 
member feebli to one side. she heard a low, sardon laugh from her 
oppressor. 

"look at me!" he commanded. 

she rais her eye wearily; she drew her arm about her in a forlorn 
gestur of concealment. her eye met the strang orb of the other, and 
a faint thrill of horror stirred; other than this, she felt nothing. 
then hi eye were approach her; she wa consciou of the illus 
that they were expanding, fill all the space in front of her. their 
weird glow fill the world, domin everything. 

"will you yield?" he queried. 

the eye commanded. "yes," she said dully. 

she felt hi hand ici cold on her bare shoulders. they travel like a 
shudder about her body, and suddenli she wa press close to him. 

"are you mine?" he demanded. for the first time there wa a ting of 
express in the toneless voice, a trace of eagerness. she made no 
answer; her eyes, held by his, stare like the eye of a person in a 
trance, unwinking, fascinated. 

"are you mine?" he repeated, hi breath hiss on her cheek. 

"yes." she heard her own voic in automat repli to hi question. 

"mine--for the delight of evil?" 

"yours!" she murmured. the eye had blot out everything. 

"and do you hate me?" 

"no." 

the arm about her tighten into crush bands. the pressur 
stop her breath; her veri bone seem to give under their fierc 
compression. 

"do you hate me?" he muttered. 

"yes!" she gasped. "yes! I hate you!" 

"ah!" He twist hi hand in her black hair, wrench it roughli back. 
"are you readi now for the consummation? To look upon the face of evil?" 

she made no reply. her eyes, as glassi as those of a sleep-walker, 
stare into his. 

"are you ready?" 

"yes," she said. 

He press hi mouth to hers. the fierc of the kiss bruis her 
lips, the pull of hi hand in her hair wa a sear pain, the pressur 
of hi arm about her bodi wa a suffocation. yet--somehow--ther wa 
again the dawn of that unholi pleasure--th same degrad delight 
that had risen in her on that other occasion, in the room of the 
red-check tabl cloth. through some hellish alchemy, the leaden pain 
wa transmut itself into the garish gold of a horrible, abnorm 
pleasure. she found her crush lip attempt a feeble, pain 
response. 

At her movement, she felt herself swung abruptli from her feet. with 
hi lip still crush hers, he rais her in hi arms; she felt 
herself born across the room. He paused; there wa a sudden release, 
and she crash to the hard surfac of the couch, whose rough cover 
scratch the bare flesh of her back. nichola devin bent over her; 
she saw hi hand stretch toward her singl remain garment. and 
again, from somewher in her harass soul, a spark of resist 
flashed. 

"nick!" she moaned. "oh, nick! help me!" 

"call him!" said the other, a sneer on hi face. "call him! He hears; 
it add to hi torment!" 

she cover her eye with her hands. she felt hi hand slip coldli 
between her skin and the elast about her waist. 

"nick!" she moan again. "nick! oh, my god! nick!" 




27 

two in hell 


the cold hand against pat wa still; she felt it rigid and stiff on 
her flesh. she lay passiv with close eyes; have voic her final 
appeal, she wa through. the word torn from her miseri repres 
the final iota of spirit remain to her; and her bruis bodi and 
batter mind had noth further to give. 

the hand quiver and withdrew. for a moment more she lay motionless 
with her arm clutch about her, then she open her eyes, gaze 
dully, hopelessli at the demon stand over her. He wa watch her 
with a curiou abstract frown; as she stirred, the scowl intensified, 
and he drew back a step. 

hi face contort suddenli in a spasm of some unguess emotion. 
hi fist clenched; a low unintellig mutter broke from hi lips. 
"strange!" she heard him say, and after a moment, "i'm still master 
here!" 

He _was_ master; in a moment the emot vanished, and he wa again 
stand over her, hi face the same impass demoniac mask. she 
watch him in a dull stupor of despair that wa too deep for even a 
whimper of pain as he wrench at the elast about her waist, and it 
cut into her flesh and parted. He tore the garment away, and the red 
eye bore down with a wild elat in their depths. 

"mine!" the be muttered, a new hoars in hi voice. "are you 
mine?" 

pat made no answer; hi voic croak in more insist tones. "are you 
mine?" 

she could not reply. she felt hi finger bite into the flesh of her 
shoulder. she wa shaken roughly, violently, and the question came 
again, fiercely. the eye flame in command, and she felt through 
her languor and weakness, the stir of that strang and unholi 
fascin that he held over her. 

"answer!" he croaked. "are you mine?" 

the tortur of hi sear grip on her shoulder wrung an answer from 
her. 

"yes," she murmur faintly. "yours." 

she close her eye again in helpless resignation. she felt the 
hand withdrawn, and she lay passive, waiting, on the verg of 
unconsciousness, numb, spirit-broken, and beaten. 

noth happened. after a long interv she open her eyes, and saw 
the other stand again with clench fist and contort countenance. 
hi featur were writh in the intens of hi struggle; a strang 
low snarl came from hi lips. He back away from her, step by step; he 
lean against the book-shelves, and bead of perspir form on 
hi scowl face. 

He wa no longer master! she saw the change; impercept the evil 
vanish from hi features, and suddenli they were no longer his, 
but the weary, horror-stricken visag of her nick! the red eye were 
no longer satanic, but onli the blood-shot, troubled, gentl eye of 
her sweetheart, and the lip had lost their grimness, and gasp and 
quiver and trembled. He reel against the wall, stagger to the 
chair at the table, and sank weakli into it. 

pat wa far too exhausted, far too dazed, to feel anyth but the 
faintest sensat of relief. she realiz onli dimli that tear were 
well from her eyes, and that sharp sob were shake her. she wa 
for the moment unabl to stir, and it wa not long until the be at 
the tabl turn stricken eye on her that she moved. then she drew 
her knee up befor her, as if to hide her bodi behind their slim, 
chiffon-clad grace. 

nick rose from the table, approach her with weary, hesit tread. 
He seiz a cover of some sort that wa fold over the foot of the 
couch, shook it out and cast it over her. she clutch it about her 
body, sat erect and lean back against the wall in utter exhaustion. 
mani minut pass with no word from either of the occup of the 
unholi chamber. It wa nick who broke the long silence. 

"pat," he murmur in low tones. "pat--dear. are you--al right?" 

she stare at him dazedli without answer. 

"honey!" he said. "honey! tell me you'r all right!" 

"all right?" she repeat uncomprehendingly. "yes. I guess i'm all 
right." 

"then go, pat! get away from here befor he--befor anyth happens! 
put your cloth on and hurri away!" 

"I can't!" she said, faintly. "i--can't!" 

"you must, honey!" 

"i'm just--not abl to. I will soon, nick--honest. when i--when I get 
my breath back." 

"pat!" there wa anguish in the cry. "oh, god--pat! We mustn't ever be 
togeth again--not ever!" 

"no," she said. A bit of saniti wa return to her; comprehens of 
her posit sent a shudder through her. "no, we mustn't." 

"I couldn't bear anoth night like this--watching! i'd go mad!" 

"oh!" she choked, tear starting. "if you hadn't come back, nick!" 

"I conquer him," he said. "I don't think I could do it again. It wa 
your call that gave me the strength, pat." He shook hi head as if 
bewildered. "he thought it wa be in love with you that weaken me, 
but in the end it wa that which gave me the strength to subdu him." 

"i'm scared!" said the girl suddenly. "oh, nick! i'm frightened!" 

"you'd better go. you'd better dress and leav at once, honey. here." 
He gather her cloth from the floor, deposit them besid her on 
the couch. "there are pin in the tray on the table, pat. fix yourself 
up as well as you can, dear--and hurri out of here!" 

He turn toward the door as if to leave, and a shock of terror shook 
her. 

"nick!" she cried. "don't go away! i'm more afraid when I can't see 
you--afraid that _he_--" she broke off sobbing. 

"all right, honey. i'll turn my back." 

she slip out from under the blanket, found the pins, and repair 
her ruin costume. the frock wa torn, crush and bedraggled; she 
pin it togeth at the throat, though her trembl finger made the 
task difficult. she pull it on and took a tent step toward the 
door. 

"nick!" she call as a wave of dizzi sent her sway against the 
wall. 

"what' the matter, honey?" He turn anxious at her cry. 

"i'm dizzy," she moaned. "mi head aches, and--i'm scared!" 

"pat, darling! you can't go out alon like this--and," he ad 
miserably, "I can't take you!" He slip hi arm around her tenderly, 
support her to the couch. "honey, what'll we do?" 

"i'll be--al right," she murmured. "i'll go in a moment." the 
dizzi wa leav her; strength wa returning. 

"you must!" he said dolefully. "what a parting, pat! never to see you 
again, and then have thi to rememb as farewell!" 

"I know, nick. you see, I love you too." she turn her dark, troubl 
eye on him. "honey, kiss me good-bye! we'll have that to remember, 
anyway!" tear were again on her cheeks. 

"do I dare?" he ask despondently. "after the thing these lip of 
mine have said, and what these arm have done to you?" 

"but you didn't, nick! could I blame you for--that _other_?" 

"god! you'r kind, pat! honey, if ever I win out in thi battle, if 
ever I know i'm the final victor, i'll--no," he said hi tone drop 
abruptly. "i'll never come back to you, pat. it' far too dangerous, 
and--can I ever be certain? can i?" 

"I don't know, nick. can you?" 

"I can't be, pat! i'll never be sure that _he_ isn't just dormant, as 
he wa before, wait for my weak to betray me! i'll never be 
certain, honey! It _has_ to be good-bye!" 

"then kiss me!" 

she clung to him; the room that had been so recent a chamber of 
horror wa transformed. As she held him, as her lip were press to 
his, she thought suddenli of the word of the demon, that heaven and 
hell were alway the same place. they had taken on a new meaning, those 
words; she drew away from nick and turn her tear-bright eye tenderli 
on his. 

"honey," she murmured, "I don't want you to leav me. I don't want you 
to go!" 

"nor do I want to, pat! but I must." 

"you mustn't! you'r to stay, and we'll fight it out together--b 
married, or ani way that permit us to fight it through together." 

"pat! Do you think i'd consent to that?" 

"nick," she said. "nick darling--it' worth it to me! i'm realiz it 
now; I thought it wasn't--but it is! I can't lose you, nick--anything, 
even that _other_, is better than lose you." 

"you'r sweet, pat! you know i'd trade my veri soul for that, but--no. 
I can't do it! and don't honey, tortur me by suggest it again." 

"but I will, nick!" she wa speak softly, earnestly. "you'r worth 
anyth to me! If _he_ should kill me, you'd still be worth it!" she 
gaze tenderli at him. "i'd want to die anyway without you!" 

"no more than I without you," he mutter brokenly. "but I won't do it, 
pat! I won't do that to you!" 

"I love you, nick!" she said in a low voice. "I don't want to live 
without you. Do you understand me, dear? I don't want to live without 
you!" 

He stare at her somberly. "i'v thought of that too," he said. 
"pat--if I onli believ that we'd be togeth after, togeth 
_anywhere_, i'd say yes. If onli I believ there _were_ an afterwards!" 

"doesn't he prove that by hi veri existence?" 

"your doctor would deni that." 

"doctor carl never saw _him_, nick. and anyway, even oblivion togeth 
would be better than be separated, and far better than this!" 

He gaze at her silently. she spoke again. "that doesn't frighten me, 
nick. it' onli lose you that frighten me, especi the fear of 
lose you to _him_." 

He continu hi silent gaze. suddenli he drew her close to him, held 
her in a tight, tender embrace. 




28 

lunar omen 


after a consider interval, dure which nick held the girl tightli 
and silent in hi arms, he releas her, sat with hi head rest 
on hi cup palm in an attitud of deep study. pat, besid him, 
fell mechan to repin the throat of her frock, which had 
open dure the moment of the embrace. He rose to hi feet, pace 
nervous befor her. 

"it isn't a thing to do on the impuls of a moment, pat," he muttered, 
paus at her side. "you must see that." 

"it isn't the impuls of a moment." 

"but one doesn't abandon everything, the whole world, so easily, 
honey. one doesn't cast away a last hope, howev forlorn a hope it may 
be!" 

"i there a hope, nick?" she ask gently. "i there a chanc left to 
us?" 

"I don't know!" hi voic held an increas tenseness. "befor 
god--i--don't know!" 

"if there' a chance, the veri slightest shadow of the specter of a 
chance, we'll take it, won't we? becaus the other way is alway open 
to us, nick." 

"yes. it' alway open." 

"but we won't take that chance," she continu defiantly, "if it 
involv my lose you, honey. I meant what I said, nick: I don't want 
to live without you!" 

"what chanc have we?" he queri somberly. "those are our 
alternatives--lif apart, death together." 

"then you know my choice!" she cri desperately. "nick, honey--don't 
let' draw it out in futil talking! I can't stand it!" 

He move hi hand in a gestur of bewilder and frustration, and 
turn away, stride nervous toward the window whose blind she had 
raised. He lean hi hand on the table, peer dejectedli out upon 
the street below. 

"what time," he ask irrelevantli in a queer voice, "did the doctor 
say the moon rose? Do you remember?" 

"no," she said tensely. "oh, honey! please--don't stand there with your 
back to me now, when i'm half crazy!" 

"i'm thinking," he responded. "it rise a littl earlier each night--or 
is it later? No matter; come here, pat." 

she rose wearili and join him; he slip hi arm about her, and drew 
her against him. 

"look there," he said, indic the night-dark vista beyond the 
window. 

she look out upon a dim-lit street or court, at the blind end of 
which the hous wa appar situated. far off at the open end, 
across a distant highway where even at thi hour pass a constant 
stream of traffic, flash a narrow strip of lake; and abov it, rise 
gigant from the corusc moon-path, lift the satellite. she 
watch the remot flicker of the wave as they toss back the 
broken bit of the light strewn along the path. then she turn puzzl 
eye on her companion. 

"that' heaven," he said point a finger at the great flow lunar 
disk. "there' a world that never caught the planet-canc call life, 
or if it ever suffered, it' cured. it' clean--burn clean by the 
sun and scour clean by the airless zero of space. A dead world, and 
therefor not an unhappi one." 

the girl stare at him without comprehension. she murmured, "I don't 
understand, nick." 

"don't you, pat?" He point again at the moon. "that' heaven, the 
dead world, and thi is hell, the live one. heaven and hell swing 
forev about their common center!" He gestur toward the sparkl 
moon-path on the water. "look, pat! the dead world strew flower on 
the grave of the live one!" 

some of hi bitter ecstasi caught the girl; she felt hi somber mood of 
exaltation. 

"I love you, nick!" she whispered, press close to him. 

"what differ doe it make--our actions?" he queried. "there' the 
omen, that lifeless globe in the sky. where we go, all human now 
live will follow befor a century, and in a million years, the human 
race as well! what if we go a year or a million year befor the rest? 
will it make ani differ in the end?" He look down at her. "all 
we'v been valu here is hope. To the devil with hope! let' have 
peac instead!" 

"i'm not afraid, nick." 

"nor I. and if we go, _he_ goes, and he' mortal afraid of death!" 

"can he--prev you?" 

"not now! i'm the stronger now. for thi time, i'm master." 

He turn again to stare at the glow satellit as it rose 
impercept from the horizon. "there' noth to regret," he 
murmured, "except one thing--th loss of beauty. beauti like that--and 
like you, pat. that' bitterli hard to foreswear!" He lean forward 
toward the remot disk of the moon; he spoke as if address it, in 
tone so low that the girl, press close to him, had to quiet the 
sound of her own breath to listen. He said: 

"long mile abov cloud-bank and blast, 
and mani mile abov the sea, 
I watch you rise majest 
feel your chilli light at last-- 
cold beauti in the way you cast 
split silver fragment on the waves, 
As if thi planet' life were past, 
and all men peac in their graves." 

pat wa silent for a moment as he paused, then she murmur a low 
phrase. "oh, I love you, nick!" she said. 

"and I you, dear," he responded. "have we decid anything? are 
we--go through with it?" 

"i'v not faltered," she said soberly. "I meant it, nick. without you, 
life would be as empti as that airless void you speak of. i'm not 
afraid. what' there to be afraid of?" 

"onli the transition, pat. that and the unknown--but no situat could 
possibl be more terribl than our present one. It _couldn't_ be! 
oblivion, annihilation--they'r preferable, aren't they?" 

"oh, yes! noth I can imagin could be other than a chang for the 
better." 

"then let' face it!" hi voic took on a note of determination. "i'v 
thought to face it a dozen time befor this, and each time i'v 
hesitated. the hesit of a coward, pat." 

"you'r no coward, dear. It wa that illus of hope; that alway 
weaken one. No one' strong who hasn't given up hope." 

"then," he repeated, "let' face it!" 

"how, nick?" 

"mi father ha left us the means. there in the cabinet are a hundr 
deaths--swift ones, linger ones, painful, and easy! I don't know one 
from the other; our choic must be blind." He strode over to the case, 
send sliver of glass from the shatter front glisten along 
the floor. "i'd choos an easi one, dear, if I knew, for your sake. 
euthanasia!" 

He stare hesitantli at the file of mysteri drug with their 
incomprehens labels. 

suddenli the scene appear humor to the girl, queerli funny, in 
some unnatur horribl fashion. her nerves, overstrain for hours, 
were on the verg of breaking; without realiz of it, she had come 
to the border of hysteria. 

"shop for death!" she choked, tri to suppress the wild laughter 
that beat in her throat. "which one' most suitable? which one' most 
becoming? which one"--an hyster laugh sob shook her--"wil wear 
the longest?" 

He turned, gaze at her with an illog concern in hi face. 

"what' the difference?" she cri wildly. "I don't care--pain or 
pleasant, it all end in the same grave! close your eye and choose!" 

suddenli he wa hold her in hi arm again, and she wa sobbing, 
cling to him frantically. she wa miser unstrung; her bodi 
shook under the impact of her gasp breath. then gradually, she 
quieted, and wa silent against him. 

"we'v been mad!" he murmured. "it' been an insan idea--for me to 
inflict thi on you, pat. Do you think I could consid the destruct 
of your beauty, dear? i'v been lie to myself, stifl my judgment 
with poetic imagery, when all the while it wa just that i'm afraid to 
face the thing alone!" 

"no," she murmured, buri her face against hi shoulder. "i'm the 
coward, nick. i'm the one that' frightened, and i'm the one that broke 
down! it' just been--too much, thi evening; i'm all right now." 

"but we'll not go through with _this_, pat!" 

"but we will! it' better than life without you, dear. we'v argu and 
argued, and at last forgotten the one truth, the one thing i'll never 
retract: I can't face live without you, nick! I can't!" 

He brush hi hand wearili befor hi eyes. "back at the start 
point," he muttered. "all right, honey. So be it!" 

He strode again to the cabinet. "corros sublimate," he murmured. 
"cyanid of potassium. they'r both deadly, but I think the second is 
rapid, and therefor less painful. cyanid let it be!" 

He extract two small beaker from the glasswar on the shelf. He 
fill them with water from a caraf on the table, and, while the girl 
watch him with fascin eyes, he deliber tilt a spoon or 
so of white crystal into each of them. the mixtur swirl a moment, 
then settl clear and colorless, and the crystal began to shrink as 
they pass swiftli into solution. 

"there it is," he announc grimly. "there' peace, oblivion, 
forgetfulness, and annihil for you, for me, and--for _him_! beyond 
all doubt, the logic cours for us, isn't it? Do we take it?" 

"please," she said faintly. "kiss me first, honey. isn't that the 
proper cours for lover in thi situation?" she felt a faint touch of 
astonish at her own irony; the circumst had ceas to have 
ani realiti to her, and had becom mere a dramat sequenc like the 
happen in a play. 

He gather her again into hi arm and press hi lip to hers. It 
wa a long, tender, wist kiss; when at last it ended, pat found her 
eye again fill with tears, but not thi time the tear of hysteria. 

"nick!" she murmured. "nick, darling!" 

He gave her a deep, somber, but veri tender smile, and reach for one 
of the deadli beakers, "to anoth meeting!" he said as hi finger 
close on it. 

suddenly, amazingly, the strident ring of a doorbel sounded, the more 
surpris sinc they had all but forgotten the exist of a world 
about them. interruption! It meant onli the go through onc more of 
all that they had just passed. 

"drink it!" exclaim pat impulsively, seiz the remain beaker. 




29 

scopolamin for satan 


the glass wa struck from pat' hand, and the water-clear content 
stream into pool and darken blot over the tabl and it litter 
of papers. she stare unseeingli at the mess, without realiz 
that it wa nick who had dash the draught from her veri lips. she 
felt neither anger nor relief, but onli a numbness, and a sens of 
anti-climax. somewher below the bell wa ring again, and a door wa 
resound to violent blows, but she onli continu her bewildered, 
question gaze. 

"I can't let you, pat!" he muttered, answer her unspoken query. 

"but nick--why?" 

"there' somebodi at the door, isn't there? mustn't we find out who?" 

"what differ can it make?" she ask wearily. 

"I don't know. I want to find out." 

"it' that illus of hope again," she murmured. "that' all it is, 
nick--and it mean now that it' all to do over again! the whole thing, 
from the beginning--and we were so near--th end!" 

"I know," he said miserably. "I know all that, but--" He paus as the 
insist racket below wa redoubled. "i'm go to answer that bell," 
he ended. 

He move away from her, vanish through the room' singl door. she 
watch hi disappear without moving, but no sooner had he pass 
from sight than a curiou feel of fear oppress her. she cast off 
the numb and languor, and dart after him into the dark of the 
hall. 

"nick!" she called. somewher ahead a light flash on; she saw the 
well of a stair-case, and heard hi footstep descending. she follow 
in frantic haste, gain the top step just as the pound below 
ceased. she heard the click of the door, and paus suddenli at the 
sound of a familiar voice. 

"where' pat?" the word drift up in low, rumbling, omin tones. 

"dr. carl!" she shrieked. she ran swiftli down the stair to nick' 
side, where he stood face the great figur of the doctor. "dr. carl! 
how'd you find me?" 

the newcom gave her a long, narrow-eyed, specul survey. "I 
spent nearli the whole night do it," he growl at last. "it took 
me hour to locat mueller and get thi address from him." He step 
forward, take the girl' arm. "come on!" he said gruffly, without a 
glanc at nick stand silent besid her. "i'm take you home!" 

she held back. "but why?" 

"why? becaus I don't like the compani you keep. Is that reason enough?" 

she still resist hi insist tug. "nick hasn't done anything," she 
said defiantly, with a side glanc at the youth' flushed, unhappi 
features. 

"he hasn't? look at yourself, girl! look at your clothes, and your 
forehead! what' more, I saw enough from my window; I saw him bundl 
you into that car!" hi eye were flash angrily, and hi grip on her 
arm tightened, while hi free hand clench into an enorm fist. 

"that wasn't nick!" 

"no. It wa your devil, I suppose!" said horker sarcastically. "anyway, 
pat, you'r come with me befor I do violenc to what remain of your 
devil!" 

nick spoke for the first time sinc the doctor' entrance. "pleas do, 
pat," he said softly. "pleas go with him." 

"I won't!" she snapped. the sudden shift of situat dure the long 
hour of that terribl even were irrit her. she had altern 
so rapidli between horror and hope and despair that her fray nerv 
had seiz now at the same realiti of anger. 

her mind, so long overstrained, wa now deliber forget her 
swing from the pit of terror to the verg of death. "you come up like a 
hero to the rescue!" she taunt the doctor. "hairbreadth horker!" 

"you littl fool!" growl the doctor. "A fine reception, after 
lose a night' sleep! i'll drag you home, if I have to!" He move 
ponder toward the door; she gave a violent wrench and freed her 
arm from hi grasp. 

"if you can, you mean!" she jeered. she look at hi exasper face, 
and suddenly, with one of her abrupt chang of mood, she softened. 
"dr. carl, honey," she said in apologet tones, "i'm sorry. you'r 
veri sweet, and i'm realli grateful, but I can't leav nick now." her 
eye turn troubled. "not now." 

"why, pat?" mollifi by the chang in her mien, hi voic rumbl in 
sympathet notes. 

"I can't," she repeated. "it's--it' get worse." 

"bah!" 

"so it' 'bah'!" she flared. "well, if you'r so contemptu of the 
thing, whi don't you cure it? what good did your psychoanalysi do? you 
don't even know what it is!" 

"what do you expect?" roar the doctor. "can I diagnos it by absent 
treatment? I haven't had a chanc to see the condit activ yet!" 

"all right!" said pat, her strain nerv drive her to impatience. 
"you'r here and nick' here! Go on with your diagnosis; get it over 
with, and let' see what you can do. _you_ ought at least to be abl 
to name the condition--th outstand author in the middl west on 
neural and mental pathology!" her tone wa sardonic. 

"listen, pat," said horker with exagger patience, in the manner of 
one address a stupid child, "i'v explain befor that I can't get 
at the root of a mental aberr when the subject' as unstrung as 
your young man here seem to be. psychoanalysi just won't work unless 
the subject is calm, composed, and not in a nervou state. can you 
comprehend that?" 

"just dimly!" she snapped. "you ought to know anoth way--you, the 
outstand authority--" 

"be still!" he interrupt gruffly. "of cours I know anoth way, 
if I want to drag all of us back to my office, where I have the 
equipment!--which I won't do tonight," he finish grimly. 

"then do it here." 

"I haven't what I need." 

"there' everyth upstairs," said pat. "it' all there, all nick' 
father' equipment." 

"not tonight! that' final." 

the girl' manner chang again. she turn troubled, implor eye 
on horker. "dr. carl," she said plaintively, "I can't leav nick now." 
she seiz the arm of the silent, deject youth, who had been stand 
passiv by. "I can't leav him, really. i'd not be sure of see him 
again, ever. please, dr. carl!" 

"if these frenzi of yours," rumbl horker, "are so violent and 
malicious, you ought to be confined. Do you know that, young man?" 

"yes, sir," mumbl nick wretchedly. 

"and i'v thought of it," continu the doctor. "i'v thought of it!" 

"please!" cri pat imploringly. "won't you try, dr. carl?" 

"the devil!" he growled. "all right, then." 

He follow the girl up the stairs, while nick trail disconsol 
behind. she led him back into the chamber they had quitted, where a 
curiou odor of peach pit seem to scent the air. horker snif 
suspiciously, then seiz the remain beaker, rais it cautious 
to hi nostrils. 

"damnation!" he exploded. "prussic acid--or cyanide! what in--" He 
caught sight of pat' tragic eyes, and suddenli replac the container. 
"pat!" he groaned. "pat, honey!" He drew her into the circl of hi 
great arm. "i'll help you, dear! all I can, with all my heart, sinc 
it mean that much to you!" He groan again under hi breath. "oh, my 
god!" 

He held her a moment, pat her tousl black head with hi massive, 
delic finger hand. then he releas her, turn to nick. 

"thi the stuff?" he asked, brusquely, indic the cabinet of 
bottles, with it splinter front. 

nick nodded. pat sank to the chair besid the tabl and watch horker 
as he scan the array of containers. He pull out a tini wooden case 
and snap it open to reveal a number of steel needl that glint 
brightli in the yellow light. He grunt in satisfact and continu 
hi inspection. 

"atropine," he muttered, read the label boxes. "cocaine, daturine, 
hyoscine, hyoscyamine--won't do!" 

"what do you need?" the girl queri faintly. 

"A mild hypnotic," said the doctor abstractedly, still searching. 
"pretti good substitut for psychoanalysis--certain drugs. dull the 
consciou mind, but not to complet unconsciousness. good mean of 
get at the subconscious. see?" 

"sort of," said pat. "if it onli works!" 

"oh, it'll work if we can find--ah!" He seiz a tini cardboard box. 
"scopolamine! this'll do the work." 

He extract a tini glassi someth from one or other of the box he 
held, and frown down at it. He seiz the caraf of water, plung 
someth point and shini into it. 

"antiseptic," he mutter thoughtfully. He seiz a brown bottl from 
the case, held it toward the light, and shook it. "peroxide' gone 
flat," he growled. "noth but water." 

He pull a silver cigar-light from hi pocket and snap a yellow 
flame to it. He pass the point of the hypoderm rapidli back and 
forth through the littl spear of fire. final he turn to nick. 

"take off your coat," he ordered. "roll up your shirt sleeve--th left 
one. and sit over there." He indic the couch along the wall. 

the youth obey without a word. the onli indic of emot wa a 
long, miserable, wist look at pat as he seat himself impass 
on the spot that the girl had so recent occupied. 

"now!" said the doctor briskly, approach the youth. "thi will make 
you drowsy, sleepy. that' all it'll do. don't fight the effect. just 
relax, let the thing take it course, and i'll see what I can get out 
of you." 

pat gasp and nick winc as he drove the needl into the bare arm. 

"so!" he said. "now relax. lean back and close your eyes." 

He step to the door, drag in a batter chair from the hall, 
and occupi it. He sat besid pat, watch the pale featur of the 
youth, who sat quietli with close eyes, breath slowly, heavily. 

"long enough," mutter horker. He rais hi voice. "can you hear me?" 
he call to the motionless figur on the couch. there wa no response, 
but pat fanci she saw a slight chang in nick' expression. 

"can you hear me?" repeat horker in louder tones. 

"yes, I can hear you," came in ici tone from the figur on the couch. 
pat start violent as the voic sounded. the eye opened, and she 
saw in sudden terror the ruddi orb of the demon! 




30 

the demon free 


pat emit a small, startl shriek, and heard it echo by a 
surpris grunt from dr. horker. 

"queer!" he muttered. "the stuff must be mislabeled. scopolamin 
doesn't act like this; it' a narcotic." 

"he's--th other!" gasp pat, while the be on the couch grin 
sardonically. 

"eh? An attack? can't be!" the doctor shook hi head emphatically. 

"it' not nick!" cri the girl in panic. "you'r not, are you?" she 
appeal to the grim entity. 

"not your sweetheart?" queri the creature, still with hi mock 
leer. "A few hour ago you were lie here all but naked, confess 
you were mine. have you forgotten?" 

she shudder at the reference, and shrank back in her chair. she heard 
the doctor' ominous, angri rumble, and the evil titter chuckl of 
the other. 

"patholog or not," snap horker, "I can resent your remarks! i'v 
consid sever time vari my treatment with anoth solid cut to 
the jaw!" He rose from hi chair, stamp vicious toward the other. 

"A moment," said nichola devine. "do you know what you'v done? have 
you ani idea what you'v done?" He turn cool, mocking, red-glint 
eye on the doctor. 

"huh?" horker paus as if puzzled. "what _i've_ done? what do you 
mean?" 

"you don't know, then." the other gave a satyr smile. "you'r stupid; 
I gave you the clue, yet you hadn't the intellig to follow it. 
Do you know what I am?" He lean forward, hi eye leer evilli 
into the doctor's. "i'll tell you. i'm a question of synapses. that' 
all--mer a question of synapses!" He titter again, horribly. "it 
still mean noth to you, doesn't it, doctor?" 

"i'll show you what it means!" horker clench a massiv fist and 
strode toward the figure, whose eye stared, steadily, unwinkingli into 
hi own. 

"back!" the be snap as the great form bent over him. the doctor 
paus as if struck rigid, hi arm and heavi fist drawn back like the 
convent fight pose of a boxer. "go back!" repeat the other, 
rising. pat whimper in abject terror as she heard horker' surpris 
grunt, and saw him reced slowly, and final sink into hi chair. hi 
bewild eye were still fix on those of nichola devine. 

"i'll tell you what you'v done!" said the strang being. "you'v freed 
me! there wa noth wrong with your scopolamine. It worked!" He 
chuckled. "you drug _him_ and freed me!" 

horker manag a question grunt. 

"i'm free!" exult the other. "for the first time I haven't _him_ to 
fight! he' here, but helpless to oppos me--he' feeble--feeble!" He 
gave again the horribl titter chuckle. "see how weak the two of you 
are against my unoppos powers!" he jeered. "weaklings--food for my 
pleasures!" 

He turn hi eyes, lumin and avid, on pat. "thi time," he said, 
"there'l be no interruptions. A wit to our experi will add a 
delic touch of pleasure--" 

He broke off at the doctor' sudden movement. horker had snatch 
a glisten blue revolv from hi pocket, held it level at the 
lust-fil eyes. 

"huh!" growl the doctor triumphantly. "do you think I come trail a 
maniac without some protection? especi a viciou one like you?" 

nichola devin turn hi eye on hi opponent. He stare long and 
intently. 

"drop it!" he command at length. pat felt a surg of chaotic terror 
as the weapon clatter to the floor. she turn a frighten glanc on 
horker' face, and her fright redoubl at the sight of hi strain 
jaw, the perspiration-bead forehead, and hi bewild eyes. the 
demon kick the gun carelessli aside. 

"puerile!" he said contemptuously. He back away from them, re-seat 
himself on the couch whenc he had risen. He survey the pair in 
sardon mirth. 

"pat!" mutter the doctor huskily. "get out of here, honey! he' got 
some hellish trick of fascin that' paralyz me. get out and get 
help!" 

the girl move as if to rise. nichola devin shift hi eye for the 
barest instant to her face; she felt the strength drain out of her 
body, and she sank weakli to her chair. 

"it' useless," she murmur hopelessli to the doctor. "he's--he' just 
what I told you--a devil!" 

"I guess you were right," mumbl horker dazedly. 

there wa a burst of demon mirth from the be on the couch. "mere 
a matter of synapses," he rasped, chuckling. hi face changed, took 
on the familiar coldness, the stoni express pat had observ there 
before. "thi palls!" he snapped. "i'v better amusement--aft we'v 
render your friend mere an interest on-looker." He narrow hi 
red eye as if in thought. "take off a stocking," he ordered. "tie hi 
hand to the back of the chair." 

"I won't!" said the girl. the eye shift to her face. "I won't!" she 
repeat tremul as she kick off a diminut pump. she shudder 
at the gleam in the evil eye as she strip the long silken sheath 
from a white, round limb. she slip a bare foot into the pump and 
move reluctantli behind the chair that held the groan horker. she 
took one of the clenched, strain hands, and drew it back, fumbl 
with shake finger as she twist the strip of thin chiffon. the 
demon move closer, stand over her. 

"loos knots!" he snarl abruptly. He knock her violent away with 
a sting slap across her cheek, and seiz the strip in hi own 
hands. He drew the bind tight, twist it about the lowest rung of 
the chair' ladder back. horker wa forc to lean awkwardli to the 
rear; in thi unbalanc posit it wa quit imposs to rise. 

nichola devin turn away from the straining, perspir doctor, and 
advanc toward pat, who cower against the shatter cabinet. 

"now!" he muttered. "the experiment!" He chuckl raspingly. "what 
delicaci of degradation! your lover and your guardian angel--both 
helpless watchers! excellent! oh, veri excellent!" 

He grasp her wrist, draw her after him to the center of the room, 
into the full view of the horrified, stare eye of horker. 

"alway before," continu her tormentor, "these hand have prepar 
you for the rites--th ceremoni that fail on two other occas 
to transpire. would it add a poignanc to the tortur if I made you 
strip thi bodi of your with your own hands? Or will they suffer more 
watch me? which do you think?" 

pat close her eye in helpless resign to her fate. "nick!" she 
moaned. "oh, nick dearest!" 

"not thi time!" sneer the other. "your friend and protector, the 
doctor, ha thought elimin your sweetheart as a factor. He 
struggl too feebli for me to feel." 

"nick!" she murmur again. "dr. carl!" 

but the doctor, now pull pain at hi bonds, could onli groan in 
distraction, and curs the unsuspect strength of sheer chiffon. He 
writh miser at the chafe of hi wrists; hi strang paralysi 
had departed, but he wa quit helpless to assist pat. 

"I think," said the cold tone of nichola devine, "that the more 
delic tortur lie in your willingness. let us see." 

He drew her into hi arms. He twist a hand in her hair, jerk her 
head violent backward, and press avid lip to hers. she struggl a 
little, but hopelessly, automatically. At last she lay quit passive, 
quit motionless, support by hi arms, and make not the slightest 
respons to hi kiss. 

"are you mine?" he queri fiercely, releas her lips. "are you mine 
now?" 

she shook her head without open her eyes. "no," she said dully. "not 
now, or ever." 

again he crush her, while the doctor look on in helpless, 
bewildered, voiceless anger. thi time hi kiss wa painful, burning, 
searing. again that unholi fascin and unnatur delight in her own 
pain stir her, and it took what littl effort she wa abl to make 
to keep from responding. after a long interval, hi lip again withdrew. 

"are you mine?" he repeated. she made no answer; she wa gasping, 
and tear glisten under her close eye-lids, from the pain of her 
crush lips. again he kiss her, and again the wild abandon to 
evil suffus her. she wa suddenli respond to hi agon caress; 
she wa cling fierc to hi tortur lips, feel an unholi 
exalt in the pain of hi tear finger in the flesh of her back. 

"yours!" she murmur in respons to hi query. she heard her voic 
repeat madly, "yours! yours! yours!" 

"do you yield willingly?" came the ici tone of the demon. 

"yes--yes--yes! willingly!" 

"take off your clothes!" sound the terrible, overpow voice. He 
thrust her from him, so that she stagger dizzili backward. she stood 
swaying; the voic repeat it command. 

the girl' eye widen wildly; she had the appear of one in an 
ecstasy, a religi fervor. she rais her hand with a jerki impuls 
gestur to the neck of her frock, still pin togeth in the 
makeshift repair of the evening. 

there came a strang interruption. the doctor, helpless on-looker, 
had at length evolv an idea out of the bewilder in hi mind. He 
open hi mouth and emit a tremendous, deep, ear-shatt bellow! 

nichola devin sent the girl spin to the floor with a viciou 
shove, and turn hi blaze eye on horker, who wa draw in hi 
breath for a repetit of hi roar. "quiet!" he rasped, hi red orb 
bore down at the other. "quiet, or i'll muffl you!" close hi 
eyes, the doctor repeat hi mighti shout. 

the demon snatch the blanket from the couch, toss it over the 
figur of the doctor, where it becam a billowing, writh heap of 
brown wool. He turn hi gaze on pat, who wa just struggl to her 
feet, and move as if to advanc toward her. 

He paused. she had retriev the doctor' revolv from the floor, and 
now face him with the mad gone out of her eyes, support the 
weapon with both hands, the muzzl waver toward hi face. 

"drop it!" he commanded. she felt a recurr of fascination, and an 
impuls to obey. out of the corner of her eye, she saw the doctor' 
head emerg from the blanket as he shook it off. 

"drop it!" repeat nichola devine. 

she close her eyes, shut out the vision of hi domin visage. 
with a surg of terror, she squeez the trigger, stagger back to 
the couch at the roar and the recoil. 

she open her eyes. nichola devin lay in the center of the room on 
hi face; a crimson spot wa mat the hair on the back of hi head. 
she saw the doctor rais a free hand; he wa work clear of hi bonds. 

"pat!" he said softly. He look at her pale, sicken features. 
"honey," he said, "sit down till I get free. sit down, pat; you look 
faint." 

"never faint!" murmur the girl, and pitch backward to the couch, 
with one clad and one bare leg hang in curiou limp over the 
edge. 




31 

"not humanli possible" 


pat open weari eye and gaze at a blank, uninform ceiling. It 
wa some moment befor she realiz that she wa lie on the couch in 
the room of nichola devine. somebodi had place her there, presumably, 
sinc she wa quit unawar of the circumst of her awakening. then 
recollect began to form--dr. carl, the _other_, the roar of a shot. 
after that, noth save a turmoil end in blankness. 

A sound of movement besid her drew her attention. she turn her head 
and perceiv dr. horker kneel over a form on the floor, finger 
a white bandag about the head of the figure. her recollect took 
instant form; she rememb the catastroph of the evening--last 
night, rather, sinc dawn glow dulli in the window. she had shot 
nick! she gave a littl moan and push herself to a sit position. 

the doctor glanc at her with a sick, shaki smile. "hello," he 
said. "come to, have you? sorri I couldn't give you ani attention." 
He gave the bandag a final touch. "here' a job I had no heart 
for," he muttered. "better for everyon to let thing happen without 
interference." 

the girl, return to full awareness, notic now that the bandag 
consist of strip of the doctor' shirt. she glanc fear at the 
still featur of nichola devine; she saw pale cheek and close eyes, 
but indubit not the grim mien of the demon. 

"dr. carl!" she whispered. "he isn't--h isn't--" 

"not yet." 

"but will he--?" 

"I don't know. that' a bad spot, a wound in the base of the brain. 
you'd best know it now, pat, but also realiz that noth can happen 
to you. i'll see to that!" 

"to me!" she said dully. "what differ doe that make? it' nick I 
want saved." 

"i'll do my best for you, honey," said horker with almost a hint of 
reluctance. "i'v phone brigg gener for an ambulance. your faint 
last a full quarter hour," he added. 

"what can we tell them?" ask the girl. "what can we say?" 

"don't you say anything, pat. i'm not on the board for nothing." He 
rose from hi knees, glanc out of the window into the cool dawn. 
"queer neighborhood!" he said. "all that yell and a shot, and still 
no sign of interest from the neighbors. that' chicago, though," he 
mused. "lucki for us, pat; we can handl the thing quietli now." 

but the girl wa stare dulli at the still figur on the floor. "oh 
god!" she said huskily. "help him, dr. carl!" 

"i'll do my best," respond horker gloomily. "I wa a good surgeon 
befor I special in psychiatry. brain surgery, too; it led right 
into my present field." 

pat said nothing, but drop her head on her hand and stare vacantli 
befor her. 

"better for you, and for him too, if I fail," mutter the doctor. 

hi word brought a reply. "you won't fail," she said tensely. "you 
won't!" 

"not voluntarily, i'm afraid," he growl morosely. "i'v still a 
littl respect for medic ethics, but if ever a case--" hi voic 
trail into silenc as from somewher in the dawn sound the wail of 
a siren. "there' the ambulance," he finished. 

pat sat unmov as the sound from outdoor detail the stop 
of the vehicl befor the house. she heard the doctor descend the 
steps, and the creak of the door. though it took place befor her eyes, 
she scarc saw the white-co youth as they lift the form of 
nichola devin and bore it from the room on a stretcher, tread 
with care broken step to prevent the sway of the support. dr. 
horker' order to follow made no impress on her; she sat dulli on 
the couch as the chamber emptied. 

why, she wondered, had the thought of nick' death disturb her so? 
wasn't it but a short time sinc they had both contempl it? what 
had occur to alter that determination? nick wa dying, she thought 
mournfully; all that remain wa for her to follow. there on the 
floor lay the revolver, and on the table, glisten in the wan light, 
repos the untouch lethal draft. that wa the prefer way, she 
mused, stare fixedli at it glow contour. 

but suppos nick weren't to die--she'd have abandon him to hi 
terribl doom, left him to face a situat far more omin than ani 
unknown terror beyond death. she shook her head distractedly, and 
look up to meet the eye of dr. horker, who wa watch her grave 
in the doorway. 

"come on, pat," he said gently. 

she rose, follow him down the stair and out into the morn light. 
the driver of the ambul stare curious at her dishevelled, 
bedraggl figure, but she wa so weari and forlorn that even the 
effort of brush away the black strand of hair that cloud her 
smoke-dark eye wa beyond her. she slump into the seat of the 
doctor' car and sigh in utter exhaustion. 

"rush it!" horker call to the driver ahead. "i'll follow you." 

the car swept into motion, and the swift cool morn air beat 
against her face from the open window restor some clariti to her 
mind. she fix her eye on the rear of the speed vehicl they 
followed. 

"i there ani hope at all?" she queri despondently. 

"I don't know, pat. I can't tell yet. when you close your eyes, he 
half turned, dodged; the bullet enter hi skull near the base, 
near the cerebellum. If it had pierc the cerebellum, hi heart and 
breath must have stop instantly. they didn't, however, and that' 
a mildli hope sign. veri mildli hopeful, though." 

"do you know now what that devil--what the attack was?" 

"no, pat," horker admitted. "I don't. call it a devil if you like; 
I can't name it ani better." hi voic chang to a tone of wonder. 
"pat, I can't understand that paralyz fascin the thing exerted. 
i--ani medic man--would say that mental domin of that sort 
doesn't exist." 

"hypnotism," the girl suggested. 

"bah! everi psychiatrist use hypnot in hi business; it' part of 
some treatments. there' noth of fascin about it; no domin 
of one will over another, despit the popular view. that' natur 
and understandable; thi wa like--well, like the explod claim of 
mesmerism. I tell you, it' not humanli possible--and yet I felt it!" 

"not _humanly_ possible," murmur pat. "that' the answer, then, dr. 
carl. mayb now you'll believ in my devil." 

"i'm tempt to." 

"you'll have to! can't you see it, dr. carl? even hi name, 
nick--that' a colloqui for the devil, isn't it?" 

"and devine, I suppose," said horker, "refer to hi angel ancestry. 
devil are onli fallen angels, aren't they?" 

"all right," said pat wearily. "make fun of it. you'll see!" 

"i'm not make fun of your theory, honey. I can't offer a better one 
myself. I never saw nor heard of anyth similar, and i'm not in 
posit to ridicul ani theory." 

"but you don't believ me." 

"of cours I don't, pat. you'r weav an intric fairi tale about 
a patholog condit and a fortuit suggest in names. 
whatev the condit is--and I confess I don't understand it--it' 
someth rational, and those thing can be treated." 

"treat by exorcism," said the girl. "that' the onli way anyon ever 
succeed in cast out a devil." 

the doctor made no answer. the wail vehicl ahead of them swung 
rapidli out of sight into an alley, and horker halt hi car befor 
the gray facad of brigg general. 

"come in here," he said, help pat to alight. "you'll want to wait, 
won't you?" 

"how long," she queri listlessly, "before--befor you'll know?" 

"perhap immediately. the onli chanc is to get that bullet out at 
once--if there' still time for it." 

she follow him into the building, past a desk where a white-clad girl 
regard her curiously, and up an elevator. He led her into a small 
office. 

"sit here," he said gently, and disappeared. 

she sat dulli in the chair he had indicated, and minut passed. she 
made no attempt to think; the long, cataclysm night had exhaust her 
powers. she simpli sat and suffered; the deep scratch of fingernail 
burn in the flesh of her back, her cheek pain from the violent 
slap, and her head and jaw ach from that first blow, the one that had 
knock her unconsci last evening. but these twing were minor; 
they were mere physical, and the hurt of the demon had struck far 
deeper than ani physic injury. the damag to her spirit wa by all 
odd the more painful; it numb her mind and dull her thoughts, and 
she simpli sat idl and stare at the blank wall. 

she had no concept of the interv befor dr. horker returned. He 
enter quietly, and began rins hi hand at a basin in the corner. 

"i it over?" she ask listlessly. 

"not even begun," he responded. "however, it isn't too late. he'll be 
readi in a moment or so." 

"I wish it were over," she murmured. "one way or the other." 

"I too!" said the doctor. "with all my heart, I wish it were over! If 
there were anyon within call who could handl it, i'd turn it to him 
gladly. but there isn't!" 

He move again toward the door, lean out and glanc down the hall. 

"you stay here," he admonish her. "don't tri to find us; I want no 
interruptions, no matter what enter that mind of yours!" 

"you needn't worry," she said soberly. "i'm not fool enough for that." 
she lean wearili back in the chair, close her eyes. A long interv 
passed; she wa vagu surpris to see the doctor still stand in 
the doorway when she open her eyes. she had fanci him alreadi in 
the midst of hi labor. 

"what will you do?" she asked. 

"about what?" 

"I mean what sort of oper will it need? probe or what?" 

"oh," he said. "i'll have to trephin him. must get that bullet." 

"what' that--trephine?" 

He glanc down the hall. "they'r ready," he said, and turn to go. 
At the door he paused. "trephin is to open a littl door in the 
skull. If your devil is in hi head, we'll have it out along with the 
bullet." 

hi footstep reced down the hall. 




revel 


"i it over now?" queri pat tremul as the doctor final 
reappeared. the intermin wait had left her even more worn, and 
her pallid featur bore the mark of strain. 

"twenti minut ago," said horker. hi face too bore evid of 
tension; moreover, there wa a puzzled, dubiou express in hi eye 
that frighten pat. she wa too apprehens to risk a question as to 
the outcome, and simpli stare at him with wide, fearful, question 
eyes. 

"I call up your home," he said irrelevantly. "I told them you left 
with me earli thi morning. your mother' still in bed, although it' 
after ten." He paused. "slip in without anyon see you, will you, 
honey? and rumpl up your bed." 

"if I haven't lost my key," she said, still with the question in her 
eyes. 

"it' in the mail-box. magda found it on the porch thi morning. I 
talk to her." 

she could bear the uncertainti no longer. "tell me!" she demanded. 

"it' all right, I think." 

"you mean--he'l live?" 

the doctor nodded. "I think so." He turn hi puzzl eye on her. 

"oh!" breath pat. "thank god!" 

"you want him back, honey, didn't you?" horker' tone wa gentle. 

"oh, yes!" 

"devil and all?" 

"yes--devil and all!" she echoed. suddenli she sens someth strang 
in the other' manner. she perceiv the uncertainti in hi visage, and 
felt a rise trepidation. "what' the matter?" she queri anxiously. 
"you'r not tell me everything! tell me, dr. carl!" 

"there' someth else," he said. "i'm not sure, pat, but I think--i 
hope--you'v got him back without the devil!" 

"he' cured?" her voic wa incredulous; she did not dare accept the 
doctor' meaning. 

"I hope so. At least I locat the cause." 

"what wa it?" she demanded, an unexpect vigor liven her tire 
body. "what wa that devil? tell me! I want to know, dr. carl!" 

"I think the best name for it is a tumor," he said slowly. "I told them 
in there it wa a tumor. I wish I knew myself." 

"A tumor! I don't understand!" 

"I don't either, pat--not fully. it' someth on or beyond the border 
of medic knowledge. I don't think ani live author could classifi 
it definitely." 

"but tell me!" she cri fiercely. "tell me!" 

"well, honey--i'l try." He paus thoughtfully. "cancer and 
tumors--sarcomas--ar curiou things, dear. doctor aren't at all 
sure just what they are. and one of their peculiar is that they 
sometim seem to be tri to develop into separ entities, tri 
to becom human by feed like parasit on their hosts. Do you 
understand?" 

"no," said the girl. "i'm sorry, dr. carl, but I don't." 

"I mean," he continued, "that sometim these growth seem to be tri 
to develop into--into organisms. i'v seen them, for instance--everi 
surgeon has--with bone developing. i'v seen one with a rather perfect 
jaw-bone, and littl teeth, and hair. As if," he added, "it were 
make a sort of attempt to becom human, in a primitive, disorgan 
fashion. now do you see what I mean?" 

"yes," said the girl, with a violent shudder. "dr. carl, that' 
horrible!" 

"life sometim is," he agreed. "well," he continu slowly, "I open 
up our patient' skull at the point where the fluoroscop indic the 
bullet. I trephin it, and there, pierc by the shot, wa this--" He 
hesitated, "--thi tumor." 

"did you--remov it?" 

"of course. but it wasn't a natur sort of brain tumor, honey. It wa 
a littl cerebrum, appar join to a y-shape branch of the spinal 
cord. A littl brain, pat--no larger than your small fist, but deepli 
convoluted, and with the pre-roland area highli developed." 

"what' pre-rolandic, dr. carl?" ask pat, shivering. 

"the seat of the motor nerves. the home, you might say, of the will. 
thi brain wa practic all will--and I wonder," he said musingly, 
"if that explain the ungodly, evil fascin the creatur could 
command. A brain that wa noth but pure will-power, reliev by 
it parasit natur of all the distract of a direct body! I 
wonder--" He fell silent. 

"tell me the rest!" she said frantically. 

"that' all, honey. I remov it, and I guess i'm the onli surgeon in 
the world who ever remov a brain from a human skull without kill 
the patient! luckily, he had two of them!" 

"oh god!" murmur the girl faintly. she turn to horker. "but he will 
live?" 

"I think so. your shot kill the devil, it seems." He frowned. "I said 
it wa a tumor; I told them it wa a tumor, but i'm not sure. perhaps, 
just as some peopl are born with six finger or toe on each member, 
he wa born with two brains. it' possible; one develop normally, 
humanly, and the other--into that creatur we face last night. I don't 
know!" 

"it' what I said," assert pat. "it' a devil, and what you'v just 
told me about tumor prove it. they'r devils, that' all, and some 
day some student is go to cut one loos and rais it to matur 
outsid a human body, and you'll see what a devil is realli like! and 
go ahead and laugh!" 

"i'm not laughing, pat. i'd be the last one to laugh at your theory, 
after face that thing last night. It had satan powers, all 
right--that paralyz fascination! you felt it too; it wasn't just a 
mental laps on my part, wa it?" 

"I felt it, dr. carl! i'd felt it befor that; I wa alway helpless in 
the presenc of it." 

"could it," he asked, "have impos it will activ on yours? I mean, 
could it have made you actual do what it ask there at the end, just 
befor I recov enough sens to let out that bellow?" 

"to take off--mi dress?" she shivered. "I don't know, dr. carl.--i'm 
afraid so." she look at him appealingly. "whi did I yield to it so?" 
she cried. "what made me find such a fierc pleasur in it kisses--in 
it blow and scratches, and the pain it inflict on me? whi wa that, 
dr. carl?" 

"why," he countered, "do gangsters' girl and apach women enjoy the 
cruelti perpetr on them by their men? there' a littl masoch 
in most women, and that--creatur wa sadistic, perverted, abnormal, 
and somehow dominating. It took an unfair advantag of you, pat; don't 
blame yourself." 

"it was--utterli evil!" she muttered. "it wa the ultim in 
everyth unholy." 

"it wa an aberr brain," said horker. "you can't judg it by human 
standards, sinc it wasn't actual human. It was, I suppose, just 
what you said--a devil. I didn't even keep it," he ad grimly. "I 
destroy it." 

"do you know what it meant by say it wa a question of synapses?" 
she asked. 

"that wa queer!" the doctor' voic wa puzzled. "that remark impli 
that the thing itself knew what it was. how? It must have possess 
knowledg that the normal brain lacked." 

"wa it a question of synapses?" 

"in a sens it was. the nerv from the two rival brain must have met 
in a synapt juncture. the often the aberr brain gain control, 
the easier it becam for it to repeat the process, as the synapse, so 
to speak, wore thin. that' whi the attack intensifi so horribl 
toward the end; the habit wa be formed." 

"last night wa the veri worst!" 

"of course. As the thing itself point out, I made the mistak of 
drug the normal brain and give the other complet control of 
the body. At other times, there'd alway been the rivalri to weaken 
whichev wa dominant." 

"doe that mean," ask pat anxiously, "that nick' charact will be 
chang now?" 

"I think so. I think you'll find him less meek, less gentle, than 
heretofore. more spirited, perhaps, sinc hi energi won't be drain 
so constantli by the struggle." 

"I don't care!" she said. "i'd like that, and anyway, it doesn't make a 
bit of differ to me as long as he' just--_my_ nick." 

the doctor gave her a tender smile. "let' go home," he said, pinch 
her cheek in hi great hand. 

"can you leav him?" 

"i'll run back after a while, honey. I think he'll do." He took her 
hand, draw her after him. "don't forget to slip in unseen, pat, and 
rumpl up your bed." 

"rumpl it!" she gave him a weari smile. "i'll be _in_ it!" 

"good idea. you look a bit worn out, honey, and we can't have you 
get sick now, or even pull a temporari faint like that one last 
night." 

"I didn't faint!" 

"mayb not," grin horker. "perhap the proceed grew a littl 
boring, and you just lay down on the couch for a nap. It _was_ a dull 
evening." 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the dark other, by stanley G. weinbaum 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the dark other *** 

***** thi file should be name 50561.txt or 50561.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/5/6/50561/ 

produc by greg weeks, mari meehan and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org section 3. inform about the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
