project gutenberg' the mysteri of choice, by robert william chamber 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the mysteri of choic 

author: robert william chamber 

releas date: august 13, 2014 [ebook #46581] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the mysteri OF choic *** 




produc by robert cicconetti and the onlin distribut 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi file wa 
produc from imag gener made avail by the 
internet archive/american libraries.) 









transcriber' note: 

ital have been transcrib use _underscores_, small capit as all 
capitals. inconsist in hyphen and spell have not been 
corrected. punctuat ha been silent corrected. A list of other 
correct can be found at the end of the document. 




the mysteri OF choic 


BY robert W. chamber 

author OF the king IN yellow, the red republic, A king and A few dukes, 
the maker OF moons, etc. 


new york D. appleton and compani 1897 




copyright, 1897, 
BY robert W. chambers. 



prefac 
_dedication._ 


_there is a maid, demur as she is wise, 
with all of april in her winsom eyes, 
and to my tale she listen pensively, 
with slender finger clasp about her knee, 
watch the sparrow on the balcony._ 

_shi eye that, lift up to me, 
free all my heart of vanity; 
clear eyes, that speak all silently, 
sweet as the silenc of a nunnery-- 
read, for I write my rede for you alone, 
here where the city' mighti monoton 
deepen the silenc to a symphony-- 
silenc of saints, and seers, and sorcery._ 

_arm and the man! A nobl theme, I ween! 
alas! I can not sing of these, eileen-- 
onli of maid and men and meadow-grass, 
Of sea and field and woodlands, where I pass; 
noth but these I know, eileen, alas!_ 

_clear eye that, lift up to me, 
free all my soul from vanity; 
gray eyes, that speak all wistfully-- 
noth but these I know, alas!_ 

_r. W. c._ 

_april, 1896._ 




introduction. 


_i._ 

_where two fair paths, deep flower 
and leaf-embowered, 
creep east and west across a world concealed, 
which shall he take who journey far afield?_ 

_ii._ 

_canst thou then say, "I go," 
Or "I forego"? 
what turn thee east or west, as thistl blow? 
Is fair more fair than fair--and dost thou know?_ 

_iii._ 

_turn to the west, unbless 
and uncaressed; 
turn to the east, and, seat at the feast 
thou shalt find life, or death from life released._ 

_iv._ 

_and thou who lovest best 
A maid dark-tressed, 
and passest other by with careless eye, 
canst thou tell whi thou choosest? tell, then; why?_ 

_v._ 

_so when thi kiss is given 
Or half-forgiven, 
whi should she tremble, with her face flame-hot, 
Or laugh and whisper, "love, I trembl not"?_ 

_vi._ 

_or when thi hand may catch 
A half-drawn latch, 
what draw thee from the door, to turn and pass 
through street unknown, dim, still, and choke with grass?_ 

_vii._ 

_what! canst thou not forese 
the mystery? 
heed! for a voic command thi everi deed! 
and it hath sounded. and thou need must heed!_ 

_r. W. c._ 

_1896._ 




contents. 


page 

the purpl emperor 1 

pomp funèbr 39 

the messeng 47 

the white shadow 109 

passeur 175 

the key TO grief 185 

A matter OF interest 213 

envoi 283 




the purpl emperor. 




the purpl emperor. 

Un souvenir heureux est peut-être, sur terre, 
plu vrai que le bonheur. 

A. DE musset. 


I. 

the purpl emperor watch me in silence. I cast again, spin out 
six feet more of waterproof silk, and, as the line hiss through the 
air far across the pool, I saw my three fli fall on the water like 
drift thistledown. the purpl emperor sneered. 

"you see," he said, "I am right. there is not a trout in brittani that 
will rise to a tail fly." 

"they do in america," I replied. 

"zut! for america!" observ the purpl emperor. 

"and trout take a tail fli in england," I insist sharply. 

"now do I care what thing or peopl do in england?" demand the 
purpl emperor. 

"you don't care for anyth except yourself and your wriggl 
caterpillars," I said, more annoy than I had yet been. 

the purpl emperor sniffed. hi broad, hairless, sunburnt featur bore 
that obstin express which alway irrit me. perhap the manner 
in which he wore hi hat intensifi the irritation, for the flap 
brim rest on both ears, and the two littl velvet ribbon which 
hung from the silver buckl in front wiggl and flutter with everi 
trivial breeze. hi cun eye and sharp-point nose were out of all 
keep with hi fat red face. when he met my eye, he chuckled. 

"I know more about insect than ani man in morbihan--or finistèr 
either, for that matter," he said. 

"the red admir know as much as you do," I retorted. 

"he doesn't," repli the purpl emperor angrily. 

"and hi collect of butterfli is twice as larg as yours," I 
added, move down the stream to a spot directli opposit him. 

"it is, is it?" sneer the purpl emperor. "well, let me tell you, 
monsieur darrel, in all hi collect he hasn't a specimen, a singl 
specimen, of that magnific butterfly, apatura iris, commonli known 
as the 'purpl emperor.'" 

"everybodi in brittani know that," I said, cast across the 
sparkl water; "but just becaus you happen to be the onli man who 
ever captur a 'purpl emperor' in morbihan, it doesn't follow that 
you are an author on sea-trout flies. whi do you say that a breton 
sea-trout won't touch a tail fly?" 

"it' so," he replied. 

"why? there are plenti of may-fli about the stream." 

"let 'em fly!" snarl the purpl emperor, "you won't see a trout touch 
'em." 

My arm wa aching, but I grasp my split bamboo more firmly, and, 
half turning, wade out into the stream and began to whip the rippl 
at the head of the pool. A great green dragon-fli came drift by on 
the summer breez and hung a moment abov the pool, glitter like an 
emerald. 

"there' a chance! where is your butterfli net?" I call across the 
stream. 

"what for? that dragon-fly? i'v got dozens--anax junius, drury, 
characteristic, anal angl of posterior wings, in male, round; thorax 
mark with----" 

"that will do," I said fiercely. "can't I point out an insect in 
the air without thi burst of erudition? can you tell me, in simpl 
everyday french, what thi littl fli is--thi one, flit over the 
eel grass here besid me? see, it ha fallen on the water." 

"huh!" sneer the purpl emperor, "that' a linnobia annulus." 

"what' that?" I demanded. 

befor he could answer there came a heavi splash in the pool, and the 
fli disappeared. 

"he! he! he!" titter the purpl emperor. "didn't I tell you the fish 
knew their business? that wa a sea-trout. I hope you don't get him." 

He gather up hi butterfli net, collect box, chloroform bottle, 
and cyanid jar. then he rose, swung the box over hi shoulder, stuf 
the poison bottl into the pocket of hi silver-button velvet 
coat, and light hi pipe. thi latter oper wa a demor 
spectacle, for the purpl emperor, like all breton peasants, smoke one 
of those microscop breton pipe which requir ten minut to find, 
ten minut to fill, ten minut to light, and ten second to finish. 
with true breton stolid he went through thi solemn rite, blew three 
puff of smoke into the air, scratch hi point nose reflectively, 
and waddl away, call back an iron "au revoir, and bad luck to 
all yankees!" 

I watch him out of sight, think sadli of the young girl whose life 
he made a hell upon earth--li trevec, hi niece. she never admit 
it, but we all knew what the black-and-blu mark meant on her soft, 
round arm, and it made me sick to see the look of fear come into her 
eye when the purpl emperor waddl into the café of the groix inn. 

It wa commonli said that he half-starv her. thi she denied. mari 
joseph and 'fine lelocard had seen him strike her the day after the 
pardon of the bird becaus she had liber three bullfinch which 
he had lime the day before. I ask ly if thi were true, and she 
refus to speak to me for the rest of the week. there wa noth to 
do about it. If the purpl emperor had not been avaricious, I should 
never have seen ly at all, but he could not resist the thirti franc 
a week which I offer him; and ly pose for me all day long, happi 
as a linnet in a pink thorn hedge. nevertheless, the purpl emperor 
hate me, and constantli threaten to send ly back to her dreari 
flax-spinning. He wa suspicious, too, and when he had gulp down 
the singl glass of cider which prove fatal to the sobrieti of most 
bretons, he would pound the long, discolour oaken tabl and roar 
curs on me, on yve terrec, and on the red admiral. We were the 
three object in the world which he most hated: me, becaus I wa a 
foreigner, and didn't care a rap for him and hi butterflies; and the 
red admiral, becaus he wa a rival entomologist. 

He had other reason for hate terrec. 

the red admiral, a littl wizen wretch, with a badli adjust 
glass eye and a passion for brandy, took hi name from a butterfli 
which predomin in hi collection. thi butterfly, commonli known 
to amateur as the "red admiral," and to entomologist as vanessa 
atalanta, had been the occas of scandal among the entomologist of 
franc and brittany. for the red admir had taken one of these common 
insects, dy it a brilliant yellow by the aid of chemicals, and palm 
it off on a credul collector as a south african species, absolut 
unique. the fifti franc which he gain by thi rascal were, 
however, absorb in a suit for damag brought by the outrag amateur 
a month later; and when he had sat in the quimperlé jail for a month, 
he reappear in the littl villag of st. gilda soured, thirsty, and 
burn for revenge. Of cours we name him the red admiral, and he 
accept the name with suppress fury. 

the purpl emperor, on the other hand, had gain hi imperi titl 
legitimately, for it wa an undisput fact that the onli specimen of 
that beauti butterfly, apatura iris, or the purpl emperor, as it 
is call by amateurs--th onli specimen that had ever been taken in 
finistèr or in morbihan--wa captur and brought home aliv by joseph 
mari gloanec, ever afterward to be known as the purpl emperor. 

when the captur of thi rare butterfli becam known the red admir 
nearli went crazy. everi day for a week he trot over to the groix 
inn, where the purpl emperor live with hi niece, and brought hi 
microscop to bear on the rare newli captur butterfly, in hope of 
detect a fraud. but thi specimen wa genuine, and he leer through 
hi microscop in vain. 

"no chemic there, admiral," grin the purpl emperor; and the red 
admir chatter with rage. 

To the scientif world of brittani and franc the captur of an 
apatura iri in morbihan wa of great importance. the museum of quimper 
offer to purchas the butterfly, but the purpl emperor, though a 
hoarder of gold, wa a monomaniac on butterflies, and he jeer at the 
curat of the museum. from all part of brittani and franc letter 
of inquiri and congratul pour in upon him. the french academi 
of scienc award him a prize, and the pari entomolog societi 
made him an honorari member. be a breton peasant, and a more than 
commonli pig-head one at that, these honour did not disturb hi 
equanimity; but when the littl hamlet of st. gilda elect him mayor, 
and, as is the custom in brittani under such circumstances, he left hi 
thatch hous to take up an offici life in the littl groix inn, hi 
head becam complet turned. To be mayor in a villag of nearli one 
hundr and fifti people! It wa an empire! So he becam unbearable, 
drink himself vicious drunk everi night of hi life, maltreat 
hi niece, ly trevec, like the barbar old wretch that he was, and 
drive the red admir nearli frantic with hi etern harp on the 
captur of apatura iris. Of cours he refus to tell where he had 
caught the butterfly. the red admir stalk hi footsteps, but in vain. 

"he! he! he!" nag the purpl emperor, cuddl hi chin over a glass 
of cider; "I saw you sneak about the st. gilda spinni yesterday 
morning. So you think you can find anoth apatura iri by run 
after me? It won't do, admiral, it won't do, d'ye see?" 

the red admir turn yellow with mortif and envy, but the next 
day he actual took to hi bed, for the purpl emperor had brought 
home not a butterfli but a live chrysalis, which, if success 
hatched, would becom a perfect specimen of the invalu apatura 
iris. thi wa the last straw. the red admir shut himself up in 
hi littl stone cottage, and for week now he had been invis to 
everybodi except 'fine lelocard who carri him a loaf of bread and a 
mullet or langoust everi morning. 

the withdraw of the red admir from the societi of st. gilda 
excit first the deris and final the suspicion of the purpl 
emperor. what deviltri could he be hatching? wa he experi with 
chemic again, or wa he engag in some deeper plot, the object 
of which wa to discredit the purpl emperor? roux, the postman, 
who carri the mail on foot onc a day from bannalec, a distanc of 
fifteen mile each way, had brought sever suspici letters, bear 
english stamps, to the red admiral, and the next day the admir had 
been observ at hi window grin up into the sky and rub hi 
hand together. A night or two after thi apparit the postman left 
two packag at the groix inn for a moment while he ran across the way 
to drink a glass of cider with me. the purpl emperor, who wa roam 
about the café, snoop into everyth that did not concern him, came 
upon the packag and examin the postmark and addresses. one of the 
packag wa squar and heavy, and felt like a book. the other wa also 
square, but veri light, and felt like a pasteboard box. they were both 
address to the red admiral, and they bore english stamps. 

when roux, the postman, came back, the purpl emperor tri to pump 
him, but the poor littl postman knew noth about the content of the 
packages, and after he had taken them around the corner to the cottag 
of the red admir the purpl emperor order a glass of cider, and 
deliber fuddl himself until ly came in and tear support 
him to hi room. here he becam so abus and brutal that ly call 
to me, and I went and settl the troubl without wast ani words. 
thi also the purpl emperor remembered, and wait hi chanc to get 
even with me. 

that had happen a week ago, and until to-day he had not deign to 
speak to me. 

ly had pose for me all the week, and to-day be saturday, and I 
lazy, we had decid to take a littl relaxation, she to visit and 
gossip with her littl black-ey friend yvett in the neighbour 
hamlet of st. julien, and I to tri the appetit of the breton trout 
with the content of my american fli book. 

I had thrash the stream veri conscienti for three hours, but not 
a trout had risen to my cast, and I wa piqued. I had begun to believ 
that there were no trout in the st. gilda stream, and would probabl 
have given up had I not seen the sea trout snap the littl fli which 
the purpl emperor had name so scientifically. that set me thinking. 
probabl the purpl emperor wa right, for he certainli wa an expert 
in everyth that crawl and wriggl in brittany. So I matched, 
from my american fli book, the fli that the sea trout had snap up, 
and withdraw the cast of three, knot a new leader to the silk 
and slip a fli on the loop. It wa a queer fly. It wa one of those 
unnam experi which fascin angler in sport store and 
which gener prove utterli useless. moreover, it wa a tail fly, 
but of cours I easili remedi that with a stroke of my penknife. 
then I wa all ready, and I step out into the hurri rapid and 
cast straight as an arrow to the spot where the sea trout had risen. 
lightli as a plume the fli settl on the bosom of the pool; then came 
a startl splash, a gleam of silver, and the line tighten from the 
vibrat rod-tip to the shriek reel. almost instantli I check the 
fish, and as he flounder for a moment, make the water boil along 
hi glitter sides, I sprang to the bank again, for I saw that the 
fish wa a heavi one and I should probabl be in for a long run down 
the stream. the five-ounc rod swept in a splendid circle, quiver 
under the strain. "oh, for a gaff-hook!" I cri aloud, for I wa now 
firmli convinc that I had a salmon to deal with, and no sea trout at 
all. 

then as I stood, bring everi ounc to bear on the sulk fish, a 
lithe, slender girl came hurriedli along the opposit bank call out 
to me by name. 

"why, lys!" I said, glanc up for a second, "I thought you were at 
st. julien with yvette." 

"yvett ha gone to bannalec. I went home and found an aw fight 
go on at the groix inn, and I wa so frighten that I came to tell 
you." 

the fish dash off at that moment, carri all the line my reel held, 
and I wa compel to follow him at a jump. lys, activ and grace 
as a young deer, in spite of her pont-aven sabots, follow along the 
opposit bank until the fish settl in a deep pool, shook the line 
savag onc or twice, and then relaps into the sulks. 

"fight at the groix inn?" I call across the water. "what fight?" 

"not exactli fight," quaver lys, "but the red admir ha come out 
of hi hous at last, and he and my uncl are drink togeth and 
disput about butterflies. I never saw my uncl so angry, and the red 
admir is sneer and grinning. oh, it is almost wick to see such 
a face!" 

"but lys," I said, scarc abl to repress a smile, "your uncl and 
the red admir are alway quarrel and drinking." 

"I know--oh, dear me!--but thi is different, monsieur darrel. the red 
admir ha grown old and fierc sinc he shut himself up three week 
ago, and--oh, dear! I never saw such a look in my uncle' eye before. 
He seem insan with fury. hi eyes--i can't speak of it--and then 
terrec came in." 

"oh," I said more gravely, "that wa unfortunate. what did the red 
admir say to hi son?" 

ly sat down on a rock among the ferns, and gave me a mutin glanc 
from her blue eyes. 

yve terrec, loafer, poacher, and son of loui jean terrec, otherwis 
the red admiral, had been kick out by hi father, and had also been 
forbidden the villag by the purpl emperor, in hi majest capac 
of mayor. twice the young ruffian had returned: onc to rifl the 
bedroom of the purpl emperor--an unsuccess enterprise--and anoth 
time to rob hi own father. He succeed in the latter attempt, but wa 
never caught, although he wa frequent seen rove about the forest 
and moor with hi gun. He openli menac the purpl emperor; vow 
that he would marri ly in spite of all the gendarm in quimperlé; 
and these same gendarm he led mani a long chase through brier-fil 
swamp and over mile of yellow gorse. 

what he did to the purpl emperor--what he intend to do--disquiet 
me but little; but I worri over hi threat concern lys. dure 
the last three month thi had bother me a great deal; for when ly 
came to st. gilda from the convent the first thing she captur wa my 
heart. for a long time I had refus to believ that ani tie of blood 
link thi dainti blue-ey creatur with the purpl emperor. although 
she dress in the velvet-lac bodic and blue petticoat of finistère, 
and wore the bewitch white coiff of st. gildas, it seem like a 
pretti masquerade. To me she wa as sweet and as gentli bred as mani a 
maiden of the nobl faubourg who danc with her cousin at a loui XV 
fête champêtre. So when ly said that yve terrec had return openli 
to st. gildas, I felt that I had better be there also. 

"what did terrec say, lys?" I asked, watch the line vibrat abov 
the placid pool. 

the wild rose colour crept into her cheeks. "oh," she answered, with a 
littl toss of her chin, "you know what he alway says." 

"that he will carri you away?" 

"yes." 

"in spite of the purpl emperor, the red admiral, and the gendarmes?" 

"yes." 

"and what do you say, lys?" 

"i? oh, nothing." 

"then let me say it for you." 

ly look at her delic point sabots, the sabot from pont-aven, 
made to order. they fit her littl foot. they were her onli luxury. 

"will you let me answer for you, lys?" I asked. 

"you, monsieur darrel?" 

"yes. will you let me give him hi answer?" 

"mon dieu, whi should you concern yourself, monsieur darrel?" 

the fish lay veri quiet, but the rod in my hand trembled. 

"becaus I love you, lys." 

the wild rose colour in her cheek deepened; she gave a gentl gasp, 
then hid her curli head in her hands. 

"I love you, lys." 

"do you know what you say?" she stammered. 

"yes, I love you." 

she rais her sweet face and look at me across the pool. 

"I love you," she said, while the tear stood like star in her eyes. 
"shall I come over the brook to you?" 


ii. 

that night yve terrec left the villag of st. gilda vow vengeanc 
against hi father, who refus him shelter. 

I can see him now, stand in the road, hi bare leg rise like 
pillar of bronz from hi straw-stuf sabots, hi short velvet 
jacket torn and soil by exposur and dissipation, and hi eyes, 
fierce, roving, bloodshot--whil the red admir squeak curs on 
him, and hobbl away into hi littl stone cottage. 

"I will not forget you!" cri yve terrec, and stretch out hi hand 
toward hi father with a terribl gesture. then he whip hi gun to 
hi cheek and took a short step forward, but I caught him by the throat 
befor he could fire, and a second later we were roll in the dust 
of the bannalec road. I had to hit him a heavi blow behind the ear 
befor he would let go, and then, rise and shake myself, I dash 
hi muzzle-load fowl piec to bit against a wall, and threw hi 
knife into the river. the purpl emperor wa look on with a queer 
light in hi eyes. It wa plain that he wa sorri terrec had not choke 
me to death. 

"he would have kill hi father," I said, as I pass him, go 
toward the groix inn. 

"that' hi business," snarl the purpl emperor. there wa a deadli 
light in hi eyes. for a moment I thought he wa go to attack me; 
but he wa mere vicious drunk, so I shove him out of my way and 
went to bed, tire and disgusted. 

the worst of it wa I couldn't sleep, for I fear that the purpl 
emperor might begin to abus lys. I lay restlessli toss among the 
sheet until I could stay there no longer. I did not dress entirely; 
I mere slip on a pair of chausson and sabots, a pair of 
knickerbockers, a jersey, and a cap. then, loos tie a handkerchief 
about my throat, I went down the worm-eaten stair and out into the 
moonlit road. there wa a candl flare in the purpl emperor' 
window, but I could not see him. 

"he' probabl dead drunk," I thought, and look up at the window 
where, three year before, I had first seen lys. 

"asleep, thank heaven!" I muttered, and wander out along the road. 
pass the small cottag of the red admiral, I saw that it wa dark, 
but the door wa open. I step insid the hedg to shut it, thinking, 
in case yve terrec should be rove about, hi father would lose 
whatev he had left. 

then, after fasten the door with a stone, I wander on through the 
dazzl breton moonlight. A nightingal wa sing in a willow swamp 
below, and from the edg of the mere, among the tall swamp grasses, 
myriad of frog chant a bass chorus. 

when I returned, the eastern sky wa begin to lighten, and across 
the meadow on the cliffs, outlin against the pale horizon, I saw 
a seawe gather go to hi work among the curl breaker on the 
coast. hi long rake wa balanc on hi shoulder, and the sea wind 
carri hi song across the meadow to me: 

st. gildas! 
st. gildas! 
pray for us, 
shelter us, 
Us who toil in the sea. 

pass the shrine at the entranc of the village, I took off my cap 
and knelt in prayer to our ladi of faöuet; and if I neglect myself 
in that prayer, sure I believ our ladi of faöuet would be kinder to 
lys. It is said that the shrine cast white shadows. I looked, but saw 
onli the moonlight. then veri peac I went to bed again, and wa 
onli awaken by the clank of sabr and the trampl of hors in the 
road below my window. 

"good gracious!" I thought, "it must be eleven o'clock, for there are 
the gendarm from quimperlé." 

I look at my watch; it wa onli half-past eight, and as the gendarm 
made their round everi thursday at eleven, I wonder what had brought 
them out so earli to st. gildas. 

"of course," I grumbled, rub my eyes, "they are after terrec," and 
I jump into my limit bath. 

befor I wa complet dress I heard a timid knock, and open my 
door, razor in hand, stood astonish and silent. lys, her blue eye 
wide with terror, lean on the threshold. 

"mi darling!" I cried, "what on earth is the matter?" but she 
onli clung to me, pant like a wound sea gull. At last, when I 
drew her into the room and rais her face to mine, she spoke in a 
heart-break voice: 

"oh, dick! they are go to arrest you, but I will die befor I 
believ one word of what they say. no, don't ask me," and she began to 
sob desperately. 

when I found that someth realli seriou wa the matter, I flung 
on my coat and cap, and, slip one arm about her waist, went down 
the stair and out into the road. four gendarm sat on their hors 
in front of the café door; beyond them, the entir popul of st. 
gilda gaped, ten deep. 

"hello, durand!" I said to the brigadier, "what the devil is thi I 
hear about arrest me?" 

"it' true, mon ami," repli durand with sepulchr sympathy. I look 
him over from the tip of hi spur boot to hi sulphur-yellow sabr 
belt, then upward, button by button, to hi disconcert face. 

"what for?" I said scornfully. "don't tri ani cheap sleuth work on me! 
speak up, man, what' the trouble?" 

the purpl emperor, who sat in the doorway stare at me, start to 
speak, but thought better of it and got up and went into the house. the 
gendarm roll their eye mysteri and look wise. 

"come, durand," I said impatiently, "what' the charge?" 

"murder," he said in a faint voice. 

"what!" I cri incredulously. "nonsense! Do I look like a murderer? 
get off your horse, you stupid, and tell me who' murdered." 

durand got down, look veri silly, and came up to me, offer hi 
hand with a propitiatori grin. 

"it wa the purpl emperor who denounc you! see, they found your 
handkerchief at hi door----" 

"whose door, for heaven' sake?" I cried. 

"why, the red admiral's!" 

"the red admiral's? what ha he done?" 

"nothing--he' onli been murdered." 

I could scarc believ my senses, although they took me over to the 
littl stone cottag and point out the blood-spatt room. but 
the horror of the thing wa that the corps of the murder man had 
disappeared, and there onli remain a nauseat lake of blood on 
the stone floor, in the centr of which lay a human hand. there wa 
no doubt as to whom the hand belonged, for everybodi who had ever seen 
the red admir knew that the shrivel bit of flesh which lay in the 
thicken blood wa the hand of the red admiral. To me it look like 
the sever claw of some gigant bird. 

"well," I said, "there' been murder committed. whi don't you do 
something?" 

"what?" ask durand. 

"I don't know. send for the commissaire." 

"he' at quimperlé. I telegraphed." 

"then send for a doctor, and find out how long thi blood ha been 
coagulating." 

"the chemist from quimperlé is here; he' a doctor." 

"what doe he say?" 

"he say that he doesn't know." 

"and who are you go to arrest?" I inquired, turn away from the 
spectacl on the floor. 

"I don't know," said the brigadi solemnly; "you are denounc by the 
purpl emperor, becaus he found your handkerchief at the door when he 
went out thi morning." 

"just like a pig-head breton!" I exclaimed, thoroughli angry. "did he 
not mention yve terrec?" 

"no." 

"of cours not," I said. "he overlook the fact that terrec tri to 
shoot hi father last night, and that I took away hi gun. all that 
count for noth when he find my handkerchief at the murder man' 
door." 

"come into the café," said durand, much disturbed, "we can talk it 
over, there. Of course, monsieur darrel, I have never had the faintest 
idea that you were the murderer!" 

the four gendarm and I walk across the road to the groix inn and 
enter the café. It wa crowd with bretons, smoking, drinking, 
and jabber in half a dozen dialects, all equal unsatisfactori to 
a civil ear; and I push through the crowd to where littl max 
fortin, the chemist of quimperlé, stood smoke a vile cigar. 

"thi is a bad business," he said, shake hand and offer me the 
mate to hi cigar, which I polit declined. 

"now, monsieur fortin," I said, "it appear that the purpl emperor 
found my handkerchief near the murder man' door thi morning, and 
so he concludes"--her I glare at the purpl emperor--"that I am the 
assassin. I will now ask him a question," and turn on him suddenly, 
I shouted, "what were you do at the red admiral' door?" 

the purpl emperor start and turn pale, and I point at him 
triumphantly. 

"see what a sudden question will do. look how embarrass he is, 
and yet I do not charg him with murder; and I tell you, gentlemen, 
that man there know as well as I do who wa the murder of the red 
admiral!" 

"I don't!" bawl the purpl emperor. 

"you do," I said. "it wa yve terrec." 

"I don't believ it," he said obstinately, drop hi voice. 

"of cours not, be pig-headed." 

"I am not pig-headed," he roar again, "but I am mayor of st. gildas, 
and I do not believ that yve terrec kill hi father." 

"you saw him tri to kill him last night?" 

the mayor grunted. 

"and you saw what I did." 

He grunt again. 

"and," I went on, "you heard yve terrec threaten to kill hi father. 
you heard him curs the red admir and swear to kill him. now the 
father is murder and hi bodi is gone." 

"and your handkerchief?" sneer the purpl emperor. 

"I drop it, of course." 

"and the seawe gather who saw you last night lurk about the red 
admiral' cottage," grin the purpl emperor. 

I wa startl at the man' malice. 

"that will do," I said. "it is perfectli true that I wa walk on the 
bannalec road last night, and that I stop to close the red admiral' 
door, which wa ajar, although hi light wa not burning. after that 
I went up the road to the dinez woods, and then walk over by st. 
julien, whenc I saw the seawe gather on the cliffs. He wa near 
enough for me to hear what he sang. what of that?" 

"what did you do then?" 

"then I stop at the shrine and said a prayer, and then I went to 
bed and slept until brigadi durand' gendarm awok me with their 
clatter." 

"now, monsieur darrel," said the purpl emperor, lift a fat finger 
and shoot a wick glanc at me, "now, monsieur darrel, which did 
you wear last night on your midnight stroll--sabot or shoes?" 

I thought a moment. "shoes--no, sabots. I just slip on my chausson 
and went out in my sabots." 

"which wa it, shoe or sabots?" snarl the purpl emperor. 

"sabots, you fool." 

"are these your sabots?" he asked, lift up a wooden shoe with my 
initi cut on the instep. 

"yes," I replied. 

"then how did thi blood come on the other one?" he shouted, and 
held up a sabot, the mate to the first, on which a drop of blood had 
spattered. 

"I haven't the least idea," I said calmly; but my heart wa beat 
veri fast and I wa furious angry. 

"you blockhead!" I said, control my rage, "i'll make you pay for 
thi when they catch yve terrec and convict him. brigadi durand, do 
your duti if you think I am under suspicion. arrest me, but grant me 
one favour. put me in the red admiral' cottage, and i'll see whether 
I can't find some clew that you have overlooked. Of course, I won't 
disturb anyth until the commissair arrives. bah! you all make me 
veri ill." 

"he' hardened," observ the purpl emperor, wag hi head. 

"what motiv had I to kill the red admiral?" I ask them all 
scornfully. and they all cried: 

"none! yve terrec is the man!" 

pass out of the door I swung around and shook my finger at the 
purpl emperor. 

"oh, i'll make you danc for this, my friend," I said; and I follow 
brigadi durand across the street to the cottag of the murder man. 


iii. 

they took me at my word and place a gendarm with a bare sabr at the 
gateway by the hedge. 

"give me your parole," said poor durand, "and I will let you go 
where you wish." but I refused, and began prowl about the cottag 
look for clews. I found lot of thing that some peopl would have 
consid most important, such as ash from the red admiral' pipe, 
footprint in a dusti veget bin, bottl smell of pouldu cider, 
and dust--oh, lot of dust!--but I wa not an expert, onli a stupid, 
everyday amateur; so I defac the footprint with my thick shoot 
boots, and I declin to examin the pipe ash through a microscope, 
although the red admiral' microscop stood on the tabl close at hand. 

At last I found what I had been look for, some long wisp of straw, 
curious depress and flatten in the middle, and I wa certain 
I had found the evid that would settl yve terrec for the rest 
of hi life. It wa plain as the nose on your face. the straw were 
sabot straws, flatten where the foot had press them, and stick 
straight out where they project beyond the sabot. now nobodi in 
st. gilda use straw in sabot except a fisherman who live near st. 
julien, and the straw in hi sabot wa ordinari yellow wheat straw! 
thi straw, or rather these straws, were from the stalk of the red 
wheat which onli grow inland, and which, everybodi in st. gilda 
knew, yve terrec wore in hi sabots. I wa perfectli satisfied; and 
when, three hour later, a hoars shout from the bannalec road 
brought me to the window, I wa not surpris to see yve terrec, 
bloody, dishevelled, hatless, with hi strong arm bound behind him, 
walk with bent head between two mount gendarmes. the crowd around 
him swell everi minute, crying: "parricide! parricide! death to the 
murderer!" As he pass my window I saw great clot of mud on hi dusti 
sabots, from the heel of which project wisp of red wheat straw. 
then I walk back into the red admiral' study, determin to find 
what the microscop would show on the wheat straws. I examin each 
one veri carefully, and then, my eye aching, I rest my chin on my 
hand and lean back in the chair. I had not been as fortun as some 
detectives, for there wa no evid that the straw had ever been 
use in a sabot at all. furthermore, directli across the hallway stood 
a carv breton chest, and now I notic for the first time that, from 
beneath the close lid, dozen of similar red wheat straw projected, 
bent exactli as mine were bent by the weight of the lid. 

I yawn in disgust. It wa appar that I wa not cut out for a 
detective, and I bitterli ponder over the differ between clew in 
real life and clew in a detect story. after a while I rose, walk 
over to the chest and open the lid. the interior wa wad with 
the red wheat straws, and on thi wad lay two curiou glass jars, 
two or three small vials, sever empti bottl label chloroform, a 
collect jar of cyanid of potassium, and a book. In a farther corner 
of the chest were some letter bear english stamps, and also the 
torn cover of two parcels, all from england, and all direct to 
the red admir under hi proper name of "sieur loui jean terrec, st. 
gildas, par moëlan, finistère." 

all these trap I carri over to the desk, shut the lid of the chest, 
and sat down to read the letters. they were written in commerci 
french, evid by an englishman. 

freeli translated, the content of the first letter were as follows: 

"london, _june 12, 1894_. 

"dear monsieur (_sic_): your kind favour of the 19th inst. 
receiv and content noted. the latest work on the 
lepidoptera of england is blowzer' how to catch british 
butterflies, with note and tables, and an introduct by 
sir thoma sniffer. the price of thi work (in one volume, 
calf) is £5 or 125 franc of french money. A post-offic 
order will receiv our prompt attention. We beg to remain, 

"yours, etc., 
"fradley & toomer, 
"470 regent square, london, S. w." 

the next letter wa even less interesting. It mere state that the 
money had been receiv and the book would be forwarded. the third 
engag my attention, and I shall quot it, the translat be a 
free one: 

"dear sir: your letter of the 1st of juli wa duli received, 
and we at onc refer it to mr. fradley himself. mr. fradley 
be much interest in your question, sent your letter to 
professor schweineri, of the berlin entomolog society, 
whose note blowzer refer to on page 630, in hi how to catch 
british butterflies. We have just receiv an answer from 
professor schweineri, which we translat into french--(se 
inclos slip). professor schweineri beg to present to you 
two jar of cythyl, prepar under hi own supervision. We 
forward the same to you. trust that you will find 
everyth satisfactory, we remain, 

"your sincerely, 
"fradley & toomer." 

the inclos slip read as follows: 

"messrs. fradley & toomer, 

"gentlemen: cythaline, a complex hydrocarbon, wa first use 
by professor schnoot, of antwerp, a year ago. I discov 
an analog formula about the same time and name it cythyl. 
I have use it with great success everywhere. It is as 
certain as a magnet. I beg to present you three small jars, 
and would be pleas to have you forward two of them to your 
correspond in st. gilda with my compliments. blowzer' 
quotat of me, on page 630 of hi gloriou work, how to 
catch british butterflies, is correct. 

"yours, etc., 
"heinrich schweineri, 
p.h.d., d.d., d.s., m.s." 

when I had finish thi letter I fold it up and put it into my 
pocket with the others. then I open blowzer' valuabl work, how to 
catch british butterflies, and turn to page 630. 

now, although the red admir could onli have acquir the book veri 
recently, and although all the other page were perfectli clean, thi 
particular page wa thumb black, and heavi pencil mark inclos a 
paragraph at the bottom of the page. thi is the paragraph: 

"professor schweineri says: 'of the two old method use by 
collector for the captur of the swift-winged, high-fli 
apatura iris, or purpl emperor, the first, which wa use a 
long-handl net, prove success onc in a thousand times; 
and the second, the place of bait upon the ground, such as 
decay meat, dead cats, rats, etc., wa not onli disagreeable, 
even for an enthusiast collector, but also veri uncertain. 
onc in five hundr time would the splendid butterfli leav 
the top of hi favourit oak tree to circl about the fetid 
bait offered. I have found cythyl a perfectli sure bait to 
draw thi beauti butterfli to the ground, where it can be 
easili captured. An ounc of cythyl place in a yellow saucer 
under an oak tree, will draw to it everi apatura iri within 
a radiu of twenti miles. so, if ani collector who possess 
a littl cythyl, even though it be in a seal bottl in hi 
pocket--if such a collector doe not find a singl apatura 
iri flutter close about him within an hour, let him be 
satisfi that the apatura iri doe not inhabit hi country.'" 

when I had finish read thi note I sat for a long while think 
hard. then I examin the two jars. they were label "_cythyl_." one 
wa full, the other _nearli full_. "the rest must be on the corps 
of the red admiral," I thought, "no matter if it is in a cork 
bottle----" 

I took all the thing back to the chest, laid them care on the 
straw, and close the lid. the gendarm sentinel at the gate salut me 
respect as I cross over to the groix inn. the inn wa surround 
by an excit crowd, and the hallway wa choke with gendarm and 
peasants. On everi side they greet me cordially, announc that the 
real murder wa caught; but I push by them without a word and ran 
upstair to find lys. she open her door when I knock and threw both 
arm about my neck. I took her to my breast and kiss her. after a 
moment I ask her if she would obey me no matter what I commanded, and 
she said she would, with a proud humil that touch me. 

"then go at onc to yvett in st. julien," I said. "ask her to har 
the dog-cart and drive you to the convent in quimperlé. wait for me 
there. will you do thi without question me, my darling?" 

she rais her face to mine. "kiss me," she said innocently; the next 
moment she had vanished. 

I walk deliber into the purpl emperor' room and peer into 
the gauze-cov box which had held the chrysali of apatura iris. It 
wa as I expected. the chrysali wa empti and transparent, and a great 
crack ran down the middl of it back, but, on the net insid the 
box, a magnific butterfli slowli wave it burnish purpl wings; 
for the chrysali had given up it silent tenant, the butterfli symbol 
of immortality. then a great fear fell upon me. I know now that it wa 
the fear of the black priest, but neither then nor for year after did 
I know that the black priest had ever live on earth. As I bent over 
the box I heard a confus murmur outsid the hous which end in 
a furiou shout of "parricide!" and I heard the gendarm ride away 
behind a wagon which rattl sharpli on the flinti highway. I went 
to the window. In the wagon sat yve terrec, bound and wild-eyed, two 
gendarm at either side of him, and all around the wagon rode mount 
gendarm whose bare sabr scarc kept the crowd away. 

"parricide!" they howled. "let him die!" 

I step back and open the gauze-cov box. veri gentli but firmli 
I took the splendid butterfli by it close fore wing and lift it 
unharm between my thumb and forefinger. then, hold it conceal 
behind my back, I went down into the café. 

Of all the crowd that had fill it, shout for the death of yve 
terrec, onli three person remain seat in front of the huge empti 
fireplace. they were the brigadi durand, max fortin, the chemist 
of quimperlé, and the purpl emperor. the latter look abash when 
I entered, but I paid no attent to him and walk straight to the 
chemist. 

"monsieur fortin," I said, "do you know much about hydrocarbons?" 

"they are my specialty," he said astonished. 

"have you ever heard of such a thing as cythyl?" 

"schweineri' cythyl? oh, yes! We use it in perfumery." 

"good!" I said. "ha it an odour?" 

"no--and, yes. one is alway awar of it presence, but realli nobodi 
can affirm it ha an odour. It is curious," he continued, look at 
me, "it is veri curiou you should have ask me that, for all day I 
have been imagin I detect the presenc of cythyl." 

"do you imagin so now?" I asked. 

"yes, more than ever." 

I sprang to the front door and toss out the butterfly. the splendid 
creatur beat the air for a moment, flit uncertainli hither 
and thither, and then, to my astonishment, sail majest 
back into the café and alight on the hearthstone. for a moment 
I wa nonplussed, but when my eye rest on the purpl emperor I 
comprehend in a flash. 

"lift that hearthstone!" I cri to the brigadi durand; "pri it up 
with your scabbard!" 

the purpl emperor suddenli fell forward in hi chair, hi face ghastli 
white, hi jaw loos with terror. 

"what is cythyl?" I shouted, seiz him by the arm; but he plung 
heavili from hi chair, face downward on the floor, and at the same 
moment a cri from the chemist made me turn. there stood the brigadi 
durand, one hand support the hearthstone, one hand rais in horror. 
there stood max fortin, the chemist, rigid with excitement, and below, 
in the hollow bed where the hearthston had rested, lay a crush mass 
of bleed human flesh, from the midst of which stare a cheap glass 
eye. I seiz the purpl emperor and drag him to hi feet. 

"look!" I cried; "look at your old friend, the red admiral!" but he 
onli smile in a vacant way, and roll hi head muttering; "bait for 
butterflies! cythyl! oh, no, no, no! you can't do it, admiral, d'ye 
see. I alon own the purpl emperor! I alon am the purpl emperor!" 

and the same carriag that bore me to quimperlé to claim my bride, 
carri him to quimper, gag and bound, a foaming, howl lunatic. 

* * * * * 

this, then, is the stori of the purpl emperor. I might tell you a 
pleasant stori if I chose; but concern the fish that I had hold 
of, whether it wa a salmon, a grilse, or a sea trout, I may not say, 
becaus I have promis lys, and she ha promis me, that no power on 
earth shall wring from our lip the mortifi confess that the fish 
escaped. 




pomp funèbre. 


A wind-swept sky, 
the wast of moorland stretch to the west; 
the sea, low moan in a strang unrest-- 
A seagull' cry. 

wash by the tide, 
the rock lie sullen in the wane light; 
the foam break in long strip of hungri white, 
dissatisfied. 

bateman. 




pomp funèbre. 

In the day when the keeper of the hous shall tremble. 


when I first saw the sexton he wa stand motionless behind a stone. 
present he move on again, paus at times, and turn right and 
left with that nervous, jerki motion that alway chill me. 

hi path lay across the blight moss and wither leav scatter 
in moist layer along the bank of the littl brown stream, and I, 
wonder what hi errand might be, followed, pass silent over the 
rot forest mould. onc or twice he heard me, for I saw him stop 
short, a blot of black and orang in the sombr woods; but he alway 
start on again, hurri at time as though the dead might grow 
impatient. 

for the sexton that I follow through the novemb forest wa one 
of those small creatur that god ha sent to buri littl thing that 
die alon in the world. undertaker, sexton, mute, and gravedigg in 
one, thi thing, robe in black and orange, buri all thing that die 
unheed by the world. and so they call it--thi littl beetl in black 
and orange--th "sexton." 

how he hurried! I look up into the gray sky where ashen branches, 
interlaced, sway in unfelt winds, and I heard the dri leav rattl 
in the tree tops, and the thud of acorn on the mould. A sombr bird 
peer at me from a heap of brush, then ran patter over the leaves. 

the sexton had reach a bit of broken ground, and wa scuffl over 
stick and gulley toward a brown tuft of wither grass above. I dare 
not help him; besides, I could not bring myself to touch him, he wa so 
horribl absorb in hi errand. 

I halt for a moment. the eager of thi live creatur to find hi 
dead and handl it; the odour of death and decay in thi littl forest 
world, where I had wait for spring when ly move among the flower 
gorse, sing like a throstl in the wind--al thi troubl me, and 
I lag behind. 

the sexton scrambl over the dead grass, rais hi sear eye at 
everi wave of wind. the wind brought sad with it, the scent of 
lifeless trees, the vagu rustl of gors buds, yellow and dri as paper 
flowers. 

along the stream, rot water plants, scorch and frost-blighted, 
lay mass abov the mud. I saw their pallid stem sway like worm 
in the listless current. 

the sexton had reach a moulder stump, and now he seem undecided. 
I sat down on a fallen tree, moist and bleached, that crumbl under 
my touch, leav a stale odour in the air. overhead a crow rose 
heavili and flap out into the moorland; the wind rattl the stark 
blackthorns; a singl drop of rain touch my cheek. I look into the 
stream for some sign of life; there wa nothing, except a shapeless 
creatur that might have been a blindworm, lie belli upward on the 
mud bottom. I touch it with a stick. It wa stiff and dead. 

the wind among the sham paperlik gors bud fill the wood with a 
silken rustle. I put out my hand and touch a yellow blossom; it felt 
like an immortel on a funer pillow. 

the sexton had move on again; something, perhap a musti spider' web, 
had stuck to one leg, and he drag it as he labour on through the 
wood. some littl field mous torn by weasel or kestrel, some crush 
mole, some tini dead pile of fur or feather, lay not far off, stricken 
by god or man or brother creature. and the sexton knew it--how, god 
knows! but he knew it, and hurri on to hi tryst with the dead. 

hi path now lay along the edg of a tidal inlet from the groix river. 
I look down at the gray water through the leafless branches, and I 
saw a small snake, head raised, swim from a submerg clot of weed 
into the shadow of a rock. there wa a curlew, too, somewher in the 
black swamp, whose dreary, persist call curs the silence. 

I wonder when the sexton would fly; for he could fli if he chose; it 
is onli when the dead are near, veri near, that he creeps. the soil 
mess of cobweb still stuck to him, and hi progress wa imped by 
it. onc I saw a small brown and white spider, stripe like a zebra, 
run swiftli in hi tracks, but the sexton turn and rais hi 
two club foreleg in a horrid implor attitud that still had 
someth of menac under it. the spider back away and sidl under 
a stone. 

when anyth that is dying--sick and close to death--fal upon the 
face of the earth, someth move in the blue above, float like 
a moat; then another, then others. these speck that grow out of the 
fathomless azur vault are jewel flies. they come to wait for death. 

the sexton also arrang rendezv with death, but never waits; death 
must arriv the first. 

when the heavi clover is ablaz with paint wings, when bee hum and 
blunder among the white-thorn, or pass by like swift sing bullets, 
the sexton snap open hi black and orang wing and hum across the 
clover with the bees. death in a scent garden, the token of the 
plagu on a fair young breast, the gray flag of fear in the face of 
one who reel into the arm of destruction, the sexton scrambl in 
the lap of spring, fold hi sleek wings, unfold them to ape the 
buzz of bees, pass over sweet clover top to the putrid flesh that 
summon him--thes thing must be and will be to the end. 

the sexton wa run now--run fast, trail the cobweb over 
twig and mud. the edg of the wood wa near, for I could see the 
winter wheat, like green sceneri in a theatre, stretch for mile 
across the cliffs, crude as paint grass. and as I crept through 
the brittl forest fringe, I saw a figur lie face downward in the 
wheat--a girl' slender form, limp, motionless. 

the sexton dart under her breast. 

then I threw myself down besid her, crying, "lys! lys!" and as I 
cried, the ici rain burst out across the moors, and the tree dash 
their stark limb togeth till the whole spectral forest toss and 
danced, and the wind roar among the cliffs. 

and through the danc of death ly trembl in my arms, and sob and 
clung to me, murmur that the purpl emperor wa dead; but the wind 
tore the word from her white lips, and flung them out across the sea, 
where the winter lightn lash the stark height of groix. 

then the fear of death wa still in my soul, and I rais her from 
the ground, hold her close. 

and I saw the sexton, just beyond us, hurri across the ground and seek 
shelter under a littl dead skylark, stiff-winged, muddy, lie alon 
in the rain. 

* * * * * 

In the storm, abov us, a bird hover sing through the rain. It 
pass us twice, still singing, and as it pass again we saw the 
shadow it cast upon the world wa whiter than snow. 




the messenger. 


littl gray messenger, 
robe like paint death, 
your robe is dust. 
whom do you seek 
among lili and close bud 
At dusk? 

among lili and close bud 
At dusk, 
whom do you seek, 
littl gray messenger, 
robe in the aw panopli 
Of paint death? 

R. W. C. 




the messenger. 

all-wise, 
hast thou seen all there is to see with thi two eyes? 
dost thou know all there is to know, and so, 
omniscient, 
darest thou still to say thi brother lies? 

R. W. C. 

"the bullet enter here," said max fortin, and he place hi middl 
finger over a smooth hole exactli in the centr of the forehead. 

I sat down upon a mound of dri seawe and unslung my fowl piece. 

the littl chemist cautious felt the edg of the shot-hole, first 
with hi middl finger, then with hi thumb. 

"let me see the skull again," said I. 

max fortin pick it up from the sod. 

"it' like all the others," he observed. I nodded, without offer to 
take it from him. after a moment he thought replac it upon the 
grass at my feet. 

"it' like all the others," he repeated, wipe hi glass on hi 
handkerchief. "I thought you might care to see one of the skulls, so 
I brought thi over from the gravel pit. the men from bannalec are 
dig yet. they ought to stop." 

"how mani skull are there altogether?" I inquired. 

"they found thirty-eight skulls; there are thirty-nin note in the 
list. they lie pile up in the gravel pit on the edg of Le bihan' 
wheat field. the men are at work yet. Le bihan is go to stop them." 

"let' go over," said I; and I pick up my gun and start across the 
cliffs, fortin on one side, môme on the other. 

"who ha the list?" I asked, light my pipe. "you say there is a 
list?" 

"the list wa found roll up in a brass cylinder," said the littl 
chemist. He added: "you should not smoke here. you know that if a 
singl spark drift into the wheat----" 

"ah, but I have a cover to my pipe," said I, smiling. 

fortin watch me as I close the pepper-box arrang over the 
glow bowl of the pipe. then he continued: 

"the list wa made out on thick yellow paper; the brass tube ha 
preserv it. It is as fresh to-day as it wa in 1760. you shall see 
it." 

"i that the date?" 

"the list is date 'april, 1760.' the brigadi durand ha it. It is 
not written in french." 

"not written in french!" I exclaimed. 

"no," repli fortin solemnly, "it is written in breton." 

"but," I protested, "the breton languag wa never written or print 
in 1760." 

"except by priests," said the chemist. 

"I have heard of but one priest who ever wrote the breton language," I 
began. 

fortin stole a glanc at my face. 

"you mean--th black priest?" he asked. 

I nodded. 

fortin open hi mouth to speak again, hesitated, and final shut hi 
teeth obstin over the wheat stem that he wa chewing. 

"and the black priest?" I suggest encouragingly. but I knew it wa 
useless; for it is easier to move the star from their cours than 
to make an obstin breton talk. We walk on for a minut or two in 
silence. 

"where is the brigadi durand?" I asked, motion môme to come out of 
the wheat, which he wa trampl as though it were heather. As I spoke 
we came in sight of the farther edg of the wheat field and the dark, 
wet mass of cliff beyond. 

"durand is down there--y can see him; he stand just behind the mayor 
of st. gildas." 

"I see," said I; and we struck straight down, follow a sun-bak 
cattl path across the heather. 

when we reach the edg of the wheat field, Le bihan, the mayor of st. 
gildas, call to me, and I tuck my gun under my arm and skirt the 
wheat to where he stood. 

"thirty-eight skulls," he said in hi thin, high-pitch voice; "there 
is but one more, and I am oppos to further search. I suppos fortin 
told you?" 

I shook hand with him, and return the salut of the brigadi durand. 

"I am oppos to further search," repeat Le bihan, nervous pick 
at the mass of silver button which cover the front of hi velvet and 
broadcloth jacket like a breastplat of scale armour. 

durand purs up hi lips, twist hi tremend mustache, and hook 
hi thumb in hi sabr belt. 

"a for me," he said, "I am in favour of further search." 

"further search for what--for the thirty-ninth skull?" I asked. 

Le bihan nodded. durand frown at the sunlit sea, rock like a bowl 
of molten gold from the cliff to the horizon. I follow hi eyes. On 
the dark glisten cliffs, silhouet against the glare of the sea, 
sat a cormorant, black, motionless, it horribl head rais toward 
heaven. 

"where is that list, durand?" I asked. 

the gendarm rummag in hi despatch pouch and produc a brass 
cylind about a foot long. veri grave he unscrew the head and 
dump out a scroll of thick yellow paper close cover with write 
on both sides. At a nod from Le bihan he hand me the scroll. but I 
could make noth of the coars writing, now fade to a dull brown. 

"come, come, Le bihan," I said impatiently, "translat it, won't you? 
you and max fortin make a lot of mysteri out of nothing, it seems." 

Le bihan went to the edg of the pit where the three bannalec men were 
digging, gave an order or two in breton, and turn to me. 

As I came to the edg of the pit the bannalec men were remov 
a squar piec of sail-cloth from what appear to be a pile of 
cobblestones. 

"look!" said Le bihan shrilly. I looked. the pile below wa a heap of 
skulls. after a moment I clamber down the gravel side of the pit and 
walk over to the men of bannalec. they salut me gravely, lean on 
their pick and shovels, and wipe their sweat face with sunburn 
hands. 

"how many?" said I in breton. 

"thirty-eight," they replied. 

I glanc around. beyond the heap of skull lay two pile of human 
bones. besid these wa a mound of broken, rust bit of iron and 
steel. look closer, I saw that thi mound wa compos of rusti 
bayonets, sabr blades, scyth blades, with here and there a tarnish 
buckl attach to a bit of leather hard as iron. 

I pick up a coupl of button and a belt plate. the button bore the 
royal arm of england; the belt plate wa emblazon with the english 
arms, and also with the number "27." 

"I have heard my grandfath speak of the terribl english regiment, 
the 27th foot, which land and storm the fort up there," said one of 
the bannalec men. 

"oh!" said I; "then these are the bone of english soldiers?" 

"yes," said the men of bannalec. 

Le bihan wa call to me from the edg of the pit above, and I hand 
the belt plate and button to the men and climb the side of the 
excavation. 

"well," said I, tri to prevent môme from leap up and lick my 
face as I emerg from the pit, "I suppos you know what these bone 
are. what are you go to do with them?" 

"there wa a man," said Le bihan angrily, "an englishman, who pass 
here in a dog-cart on hi way to quimper about an hour ago, and what do 
you suppos he wish to do?" 

"buy the relics?" I asked, smiling. 

"exactly--th pig!" pipe the mayor of st. gildas. "jean mari tregunc, 
who found the bones, wa stand there where max fortin stands, and do 
you know what he answered? He spat upon the ground, and said: 'pig of 
an englishman, do you take me for a desecr of graves?'" 

I knew tregunc, a sober, blue-ey breton, who live from one year' 
end to the other without be abl to afford a singl bit of meat for 
a meal. 

"how much did the englishman offer tregunc?" I asked. 

"two hundr franc for the skull alone." 

I thought of the relic hunter and the relic buyer on the battlefield 
of our civil war. 

"seventeen hundr and sixti is long ago," I said. 

"respect for the dead can never die," said fortin. 

"and the english soldier came here to kill your father and burn your 
homes," I continued. 

"they were murder and thieves, but--they are dead," said tregunc, 
come up from the beach below, hi long sea rake balanc on hi 
drip jersey. 

"how much do you earn everi year, jean marie?" I asked, turn to 
shake hand with him. 

"two hundr and twenti francs, monsieur." 

"forty-f dollar a year," I said. "bah! you are worth more, jean. 
will you take care of my garden for me? My wife wish me to ask you. 
I think it would be worth one hundr franc a month to you and to me. 
come on, Le bihan--com along, fortin--and you, durand. I want somebodi 
to translat that list into french for me." 

tregunc stood gaze at me, hi blue eye dilated. 

"you may begin at once," I said, smiling, "if the salari suit you?" 

"it suits," said tregunc, fumbl for hi pipe in a silli way that 
annoy Le bihan. 

"then go and begin your work," cri the mayor impatiently; and 
tregunc start across the moor toward st. gildas, take off hi 
velvet-ribbon cap to me and grip hi sea rake veri hard. 

"you offer him more than my salary," said the mayor, after a moment' 
contempl of hi silver buttons. 

"pooh!" said I, "what do you do for your salari except play domino 
with max fortin at the groix inn?" 

Le bihan turn red, but durand rattl hi sabr and wink at max 
fortin, and I slip my arm through the arm of the sulki magistrate, 
laughing. 

"there' a shadi spot under the cliff," I said; "come on, Le bihan, and 
read me what is in the scroll." 

In a few moment we reach the shadow of the cliff, and I threw myself 
upon the turf, chin on hand, to listen. 

the gendarme, durand, also sat down, twist hi mustach into 
needlelik points. fortin lean against the cliff, polish hi 
glass and examin us with vague, near-sight eyes; and Le bihan, 
the mayor, plant himself in our midst, roll up the scroll and 
tuck it under hi arm. 

"first of all," he began in a shrill voice, "I am go to light my 
pipe, and while light it I shall tell you what I have heard about 
the attack on the fort yonder. My father told me; hi father told him." 

He jerk hi head in the direct of the ruin fort, a small, squar 
stone structur on the sea cliff, now noth but crumbl walls. then 
he slowli produc a tobacco pouch, a bit of flint and tinder, and a 
long-stem pipe fit with a microscop bowl of bake clay. To 
fill such a pipe requir ten minutes' close attention. To smoke it to 
a finish take but four puffs. It is veri breton, thi breton pipe. It 
is the crystal of everyth breton. 

"go on," said I, light a cigarette. 

"the fort," said the mayor, "wa built by loui xiv, and wa dismantl 
twice by the english. loui XV restor it in 1739. In 1760 it wa 
carri by assault by the english. they came across from the island 
of groix--thre shiploads--and they storm the fort and sack st. 
julien yonder, and they start to burn st. gildas--y can see the 
mark of their bullet on my hous yet; but the men of bannalec and the 
men of lorient fell upon them with pike and scyth and blunderbuss, 
and those who did not run away lie there below in the gravel pit 
now--thirty-eight of them." 

"and the thirty-ninth skull?" I asked, finish my cigarette. 

the mayor had succeed in fill hi pipe, and now he began to put 
hi tobacco pouch away. 

"the thirty-ninth skull," he mumbled, hold the pipestem between hi 
defect teeth--"th thirty-ninth skull is no busi of mine. I have 
told the bannalec men to ceas digging." 

"but what is--whos is the miss skull?" I persist curiously. 

the mayor wa busi tri to strike a spark to hi tinder. present he 
set it aglow, appli it to hi pipe, took the prescrib four puffs, 
knock the ash out of the bowl, and grave replac the pipe in hi 
pocket. 

"the miss skull?" he asked. 

"yes," said I impatiently. 

the mayor slowli unrol the scroll and began to read, translat 
from the breton into french. and thi is what he read: 

"on the cliff OF st. gildas, 

"_april 13, 1760_. 

"on thi day, by order of the count of soisic, gener in 
chief of the breton forc now lie in kerselec forest, the 
bodi of thirty-eight english soldier of the 27th, 50th, 
and 72d regiment of foot were buri in thi spot, togeth 
with their arm and equipments." 

the mayor paus and glanc at me reflectively. 

"go on, Le bihan," I said. 

"with them," continu the mayor, turn the scroll and read on the 
other side, "wa buri the bodi of that vile traitor who betray the 
fort to the english. the manner of hi death wa as follows: By order 
of the most nobl count of soisic, the traitor wa first brand upon 
the forehead with the brand of an arrowhead. the iron burn through 
the flesh, and wa press heavili so that the brand should even burn 
into the bone of the skull. the traitor wa then led out and bidden to 
kneel. He admit have guid the english from the island of groix. 
although a priest and a frenchman, he had violat hi priestli offic 
to aid him in discov the password to the fort. thi password he 
extort dure confess from a young breton girl who wa in the 
habit of row across from the island of groix to visit her husband 
in the fort. when the fort fell, thi young girl, craze by the death 
of her husband, sought the count of soisic and told how the priest had 
forc her to confess to him all she knew about the fort. the priest 
wa arrest at st. gilda as he wa about to cross the river to 
lorient. when arrest he curs the girl, mari trevec----" 

"what!" I exclaimed, "mari trevec!" 

"mari trevec," repeat Le bihan; "the priest curs mari trevec, and 
all her famili and descendants. He wa shot as he knelt, have a mask 
of leather over hi face, becaus the breton who compos the squad of 
execut refus to fire at a priest unless hi face wa concealed. 
the priest wa l'abbé sorgue, commonli known as the black priest on 
account of hi dark face and swarthi eyebrows. He wa buri with a 
stake through hi heart." 

Le bihan paused, hesitated, look at me, and hand the manuscript 
back to durand. the gendarm took it and slip it into the brass 
cylinder. 

"so," said I, "the thirty-ninth skull is the skull of the black priest." 

"yes," said fortin. "I hope they won't find it." 

"I have forbidden them to proceed," said the mayor querulously. "you 
heard me, max fortin." 

I rose and pick up my gun. môme came and push hi head into my hand. 

"that' a fine dog," observ durand, also rising. 

"whi don't you wish to find hi skull?" I ask Le bihan. "it would be 
curiou to see whether the arrow brand realli burn into the bone." 

"there is someth in that scroll that I didn't read to you," said the 
mayor grimly. "do you wish to know what it is?" 

"of course," I repli in surprise. 

"give me the scroll again, durand," he said; then he read from 
the bottom: "i, l'abbé sorgue, forc to write the abov by my 
executioners, have written it in my own blood; and with it I leav my 
curse. My curs on st. gildas, on mari trevec, and on her descendants. 
I will come back to st. gilda when my remain are disturbed. woe to 
that englishman whom my brand skull shall touch!" 

"what rot!" I said. "do you believ it wa realli written in hi own 
blood?" 

"I am go to test it," said fortin, "at the request of monsieur le 
maire. I am not anxiou for the job, however." 

"see," said Le bihan, hold out the scroll to me, "it is signed, 
'l'abbé sorgue.'" 

I glanc curious over the paper. 

"it must be the black priest," I said. "he wa the onli man who wrote 
in the breton language. thi is a wonder interest discovery, 
for now, at last, the mysteri of the black priest' disappear is 
clear up. you will, of course, send thi scroll to paris, Le bihan?" 

"no," said the mayor obstinately, "it shall be buri in the pit below 
where the rest of the black priest lies." 

I look at him and recognis that argument would be useless. but 
still I said, "it will be a loss to history, monsieur Le bihan." 

"all the wors for history, then," said the enlighten mayor of st. 
gildas. 

We had saunter back to the gravel pit while speaking. the men of 
bannalec were carri the bone of the english soldier toward the 
st. gilda cemetery, on the cliff to the east, where alreadi a knot of 
white-coif women stood in attitud of prayer; and I saw the sombr 
robe of a priest among the cross of the littl graveyard. 

"they were thiev and assassins; they are dead now," mutter max 
fortin. 

"respect the dead," repeat the mayor of st. gildas, look after the 
bannalec men. 

"it wa written in that scroll that mari trevec, of groix island, wa 
curs by the priest--sh and her descendants," I said, touch Le 
bihan on the arm. "there wa a mari trevec who marri an yve trevec 
of st. gildas----" 

"it is the same," said Le bihan, look at me obliquely. 

"oh!" said I; "then they were ancestor of my wife." 

"do you fear the curse?" ask Le bihan. 

"what?" I laughed. 

"there wa the case of the purpl emperor," said max fortin timidly. 

startl for a moment, I face him, then shrug my shoulder and 
kick at a smooth bit of rock which lay near the edg of the pit, 
almost embed in gravel. 

"do you suppos the purpl emperor drank himself crazi becaus he wa 
descend from mari trevec?" I ask contemptuously. 

"of cours not," said max fortin hastily. 

"of cours not," pipe the mayor. "I only---- hello! what' that you'r 
kicking?" 

"what?" said I, glanc down, at the same time involuntarili give 
anoth kick. the smooth bit of rock dislodg itself and roll out of 
the loosen gravel at my feet. 

"the thirty-ninth skull!" I exclaimed. "bi jingo, it the noddl of the 
black priest! see! there is the arrowhead brand on the front!" 

the mayor step back. max fortin also retreated. there wa a pause, 
dure which I look at them, and they look anywher but at me. 

"I don't like it," said the mayor at last, in a husky, high voice. "I 
don't like it! the scroll say he will come back to st. gilda when hi 
remain are disturbed. i--i don't like it, monsieur darrel----" 

"bosh!" said I; "the poor wick devil is where he can't get out. for 
heaven' sake, Le bihan, what is thi stuff you are talk in the year 
of grace 1896?" 

the mayor gave me a look. 

"and he say 'englishman.' you are an englishman, monsieur darrel," he 
announced. 

"you know better. you know i'm an american." 

"it' all the same," said the mayor of st. gildas, obstinately. 

"no, it isn't!" I answered, much exasperated, and deliber push 
the skull till it roll into the bottom of the gravel pit below. 

"cover it up," said I; "buri the scroll with it too, if you insist, but 
I think you ought to send it to paris. don't look so gloomy, fortin, 
unless you believ in were-wolv and ghosts. hey! what the--what 
the devil' the matter with you, anyway? what are you stare at, Le 
bihan?" 

"come, come," mutter the mayor in a low, tremul voice, "it' time 
we got out of this. did you see? did you see, fortin?" 

"I saw," whisper max fortin, pallid with fright. 

the two men were almost run across the sunni pastur now, and I 
hasten after them, demand to know what wa the matter. 

"matter!" chatter the mayor, gasp with exasper and terror. 
"the skull is roll uphil again!" and he burst into a terrifi 
gallop. max fortin follow close behind. 

I watch them stamped across the pasture, then turn toward the 
gravel pit, mystified, incredulous. the skull wa lie on the edg 
of the pit, exactli where it had been befor I push it over the 
edge. for a second I stare at it; a singular chilli feel crept up 
my spinal column, and I turn and walk away, sweat start from 
the root of everi hair on my head. befor I had gone twenti pace the 
absurd of the whole thing struck me. I halted, hot with shame and 
annoyance, and retrac my steps. 

there lay the skull. 

"I roll a stone down instead of the skull," I mutter to myself. 
then with the butt of my gun I push the skull over the edg of the 
pit and watch it roll to the bottom; and as it struck the bottom 
of the pit, môme, my dog, suddenli whip hi tail between hi legs, 
whimpered, and made off across the moor. 

"môme!" I shouted, angri and astonished; but the dog onli fled the 
faster, and I ceas call from sheer surprise. 

"what the mischief is the matter with that dog!" I thought. He had 
never befor play me such a trick. 

mechan I glanc into the pit, but I could not see the skull. I 
look down. the skull lay at my feet again, touch them. 

"good heavens!" I stammered, and struck at it blindli with my gunstock. 
the ghastli thing flew into the air, whirl over and over, and roll 
again down the side of the pit to the bottom. breathlessli I stare at 
it, then, confus and scarc comprehending, I step back from the 
pit, still face it, one, ten, twenti paces, my eye almost start 
from my head, as though I expect to see the thing roll up from the 
bottom of the pit under my veri gaze. At last I turn my back to the 
pit and strode out across the gorse-cov moorland toward my home. As 
I reach the road that wind from st. gilda to st. julien I gave one 
hasti glanc at the pit over my shoulder. the sun shone hot on the sod 
about the excavation. there wa someth white and bare and round on 
the turf at the edg of the pit. It might have been a stone; there were 
plenti of them lie about. 


ii. 

when I enter my garden I saw môme sprawl on the stone doorstep. He 
eye me sideway and flop hi tail. 

"are you not mortified, you idiot dog?" I said, look about the upper 
window for lys. 

môme roll over on hi back and rais one deprec forepaw, as 
though to ward off calamity. 

"don't act as though I wa in the habit of beat you to death," I 
said, disgusted. I had never in my life rais whip to the brute. "but 
you are a fool dog," I continued. "no, you needn't come to be babi 
and wept over; ly can do that, if she insists, but I am asham of 
you, and you can go to the devil." 

môme slunk off into the house, and I followed, mount directli to my 
wife' boudoir. It wa empty. 

"where ha she gone?" I said, look hard at môme, who had follow 
me. "oh! I see you don't know. don't pretend you do. come off that 
lounge! Do you think ly want tan-colour hair all over her lounge?" 

I rang the bell for catherin and 'fine, but they didn't know where 
"madame" had gone; so I went into my room, bathed, exchang my 
somewhat grimi shoot cloth for a suit of warm, soft knickerbockers, 
and, after linger some extra moment over my toilet--for I wa 
particular, now that I had marri lys--i went down to the garden and 
took a chair out under the fig-trees. 

"where can she be?" I wondered. môme came sneak out to be comforted, 
and I forgav him for lys' sake, whereupon he frisked. 

"you bound cur," said I, "now what on earth start you off across 
the moor? If you do it again i'll push you along with a charg of dust 
shot." 

As yet I had scarc dare think about the ghastli hallucin of 
which I had been a victim, but now I face it squarely, flush a 
littl with mortif at the thought of my hasti retreat from the 
gravel pit. 

"to think," I said aloud, "that those old woman' tale of max fortin 
and Le bihan should have actual made me see what didn't exist at all! 
I lost my nerv like a schoolboy in a dark bedroom." for I knew now 
that I had mistaken a round stone for a skull each time, and had push 
a coupl of big pebbl into the pit instead of the skull itself. 

"bi jingo!" said I, "i'm nervous; my liver must be in a devil of a 
condit if I see such thing when i'm awake! ly will know what to 
give me." 

I felt mortifi and irrit and sulky, and thought disgustedli of Le 
bihan and max fortin. 

but after a while I ceas speculating, dismiss the mayor, the 
chemist, and the skull from my mind, and smoke pensively, watch the 
sun low dip in the western ocean. As the twilight fell for a moment 
over ocean and moorland, a wistful, restless happi fill my heart, 
the happi that all men know--al men who have loved. 

slowli the purpl mist crept out over the sea; the cliff darkened; the 
forest wa shrouded. 

suddenli the sky abov burn with the afterglow, and the world wa 
alight again. 

cloud after cloud caught the rose dye; the cliff were tint with 
it; moor and pasture, heather and forest burn and pulsat with the 
gentl flush. I saw the gull turn and toss abov the sand bar, 
their snowi wing tip with pink; I saw the sea swallow sheer 
the surfac of the still river, stain to it placid depth with warm 
reflect of the clouds. the twitter of drowsi hedg bird broke out 
in the stillness; a salmon roll it shine side abov tide-water. 

the intermin monoton of the ocean intensifi the silence. I 
sat motionless, hold my breath as one who listen to the first low 
rumour of an organ. all at onc the pure whistl of a nightingal cut 
the silence, and the first moonbeam silver the wast of mist-hung 
waters. 

I rais my head. 

ly stood befor me in the garden. 

when we had kiss each other, we link arm and move up and down 
the gravel walks, watch the moonbeam sparkl on the sand bar as 
the tide eb and ebbed. the broad bed of white pink about us were 
atrembl with hover white moths; the octob rose hung all abloom, 
perfum the salt wind. 

"sweetheart," I said, "where is yvonne? ha she promis to spend 
christma with us?" 

"yes, dick; she drove me down from plougat thi afternoon. she sent her 
love to you. I am not jealous. what did you shoot?" 

"A hare and four partridges. they are in the gun room. I told catherin 
not to touch them until you had seen them." 

now I suppos I knew that ly could not be particularli enthusiast 
over game or guns; but she pretend she was, and alway scorn 
deni that it wa for my sake and not for the pure love of sport. So 
she drag me off to inspect the rather meagr game bag, and she paid 
me pretti compliment and gave a littl cri of delight and piti as I 
lift the enorm hare out of the sack by hi ears. 

"he'll eat no more of our lettuce," I said, attempt to justifi the 
assassination. 

"unhappi littl bunny--and what a beauty! O dick, you are a splendid 
shot, are you not?" 

I evad the question and haul out a partridge. 

"poor littl dead things!" said ly in a whisper; "it seem a 
pity--doesn't it, dick? but then you are so clever----" 

"we'll have them broiled," I said guardedly; "tell catherine." 

catherin came in to take away the game, and present 'fine lelocard, 
lys' maid, announc dinner, and ly trip away to her boudoir. 

I stood an instant contempl her blissfully, thinking, "mi boy, 
you'r the happiest fellow in the world--you'r in love with your 
wife!" 

I walk into the dine room, beam at the plates, walk out again; 
met tregunc in the hallway, beam on him; glanc into the kitchen, 
beam at catherine, and went up stairs, still beaming. 

befor I could knock at lys' door it opened, and ly came hastili out. 
when she saw me she gave a littl cri of relief, and nestl close to 
my breast. 

"there is someth peer in at my window," she said. 

"what!" I cri angrily. 

"A man, I think, disguis as a priest, and he ha a mask on. He must 
have climb up by the bay tree." 

I wa down the stair and out of door in no time. the moonlit garden 
wa absolut deserted. tregunc came up, and togeth we search the 
hedg and shrubberi around the hous and out to the road. 

"jean marie," said I at length, "loos my bulldog--h know you--and 
take your supper on the porch where you can watch. My wife say the 
fellow is disguis as a priest, and wear a mask." 

tregunc show hi white teeth in a smile. "he will not care to ventur 
in here again, I think, monsieur darrel." 

I went back and found ly seat quietli at the table. 

"the soup is ready, dear," she said. "don't worry; it wa onli some 
foolish lout from bannalec. No one in st. gilda or st. julien would do 
such a thing." 

I wa too much exasper to repli at first, but ly treat it as a 
stupid joke, and after a while I began to look at it in that light. 

ly told me about yvonne, and remind me of my promis to have herbert 
stuart down to meet her. 

"you wick diplomat!" I protested. "herbert is in paris, and hard at 
work for the salon." 

"don't you think he might spare a week to flirt with the prettiest girl 
in finistère?" inquir ly innocently. 

"prettiest girl! not much!" I said. 

"who is, then?" urg lys. 

I laugh a trifl sheepishly. 

"I suppos you mean me, dick," said lys, colour up. 

"now I bore you, don't i?" 

"bore me? ah, no, dick." 

after coffe and cigarett were serv I spoke about tregunc, and ly 
approved. 

"poor jean! he will be glad, won't he? what a dear fellow you are!" 

"nonsense," said I; "we need a gardener; you said so yourself, lys." 

but ly lean over and kiss me, and then bent down and hug môme, 
who whistl through hi nose in sentiment appreciation. 

"I am a veri happi woman," said lys. 

"môme wa a veri bad dog to-day," I observed. 

"poor môme!" said lys, smiling. 

when dinner wa over and môme lay snore befor the blaze--for the 
octob night are often chilli in finistère--li curl up in the 
chimney corner with her embroidery, and gave me a swift glanc from 
under her droop lashes. 

"you look like a schoolgirl, lys," I said teasingly. "I don't believ 
you are sixteen yet." 

she push back her heavi burnish hair thoughtfully. her wrist wa as 
white as surf foam. 

"have we been marri four years? I don't believ it," I said. 

she gave me anoth swift glanc and touch the embroideri on her 
knee, smile faintly. 

"I see," said I, also smile at the embroid garment. "do you think 
it will fit?" 

"fit?" repeat lys. then she laughed. 

"and," I persisted, "are you perfectli sure that you--er--w shall need 
it?" 

"perfectly," said lys. A delic colour touch her cheek and neck. 
she held up the littl garment, all fluffi with misti lace and wrought 
with quaint embroidery. 

"it is veri gorgeous," said I; "don't use your eye too much, dearest. 
may I smoke a pipe?" 

"of course," she said, select a skein of pale blue silk. 

for a while I sat and smoke in silence, watch her slender finger 
among the tint silk and thread of gold. 

present she spoke: "what did you say your crest is, dick?" 

"mi crest? oh, someth or other rampant on a someth or other----" 

"dick!" 

"dearest?" 

"don't be flippant." 

"but I realli forget. it' an ordinari crest; everybodi in new york ha 
them. No famili should be without 'em." 

"you are disagreeable, dick. send josephin upstair for my album." 

"are you go to put that crest on the--the--whatev it is?" 

"I am; and my own crest, too." 

I thought of the purpl emperor and wonder a little. 

"you didn't know I had one, did you?" she smiled. 

"what is it?" I repli evasively. 

"you shall see. ring for josephine." 

I rang, and, when 'fine appeared, ly gave her some order in a low 
voice, and josephin trot away, bob her white-coif head with 
a "bien, madame!" 

after a few minut she returned, bear a tattered, musti volume, 
from which the gold and blue had mostli disappeared. 

I took the book in my hand and examin the ancient emblazon covers. 

"lilies!" I exclaimed. 

"fleur-de-lis," said my wife demurely. 

"oh!" said I, astonished, and open the book. 

"you have never befor seen thi book?" ask lys, with a touch of 
malic in her eyes. 

"you know I haven't. hello! what' this? oho! So there should be a 
_de_ befor trevec? ly de trevec? then whi in the world did the purpl 
emperor----" 

"dick!" cri lys. 

"all right," said I. "shall I read about the sieur de trevec who 
rode to saladin' tent alon to seek for medicin for st. louis? or 
shall I read about--what is it? oh, here it is, all down in black and 
white--about the marqui de trevec who drown himself befor alva' 
eye rather than surrend the banner of the fleur-de-li to spain? 
it' all written here. but, dear, how about that soldier name trevec 
who wa kill in the old fort on the cliff yonder?" 

"he drop the _de_, and the trevec sinc then have been 
republicans," said lys--"al except me." 

"that' quit right," said I; "it is time that we republican should 
agre upon some feudal system. My dear, I drink to the king!" and I 
rais my wine-glass and look at lys. 

"to the king," said lys, flushing. she smooth out the tini garment 
on her knees; she touch the glass with her lips; her eye were veri 
sweet. I drain the glass to the king. 

after a silenc I said: "I will tell the king stories. hi majesti 
shall be amused." 

"hi majesty," repeat ly softly. 

"or hers," I laughed. "who knows?" 

"who knows?" murmur lys, with a gentl sigh. 

"I know some stori about jack the giant-killer," I announced. "do 
you, lys?" 

"i? no, not about a giant-killer, but I know all about the were-wolf, 
and jeanne-la-flamme, and the man in purpl tatters, and--o dear me! I 
know lot more." 

"you are veri wise," said I. "I shall teach hi majesti english." 

"and I breton," cri ly jealously. 

"I shall bring playth to the king," said i--"big green lizard from 
the gorse, littl gray mullet to swim in glass globes, babi rabbit 
from the forest of kerselec----" 

"and i," said lys, "will bring the first primrose, the first branch of 
aubepine, the first jonquil, to the king--mi king." 

"our king," said I; and there wa peac in finistère. 

I lay back, idli turn the leav of the curiou old volume. 

"I am looking," said I, "for the crest." 

"the crest, dear? It is a priest' head with an arrow-shap mark on 
the forehead, on a field----" 

I sat up and stare at my wife. 

"dick, whatev is the matter?" she smiled. "the stori is there in that 
book. Do you care to read it? no? shall I tell it to you? well, then: 
It happen in the third crusade. there wa a monk whom men call the 
black priest. He turn apostate, and sold himself to the enemi of 
christ. A sieur de trevec burst into the saracen camp, at the head of 
onli one hundr lances, and carri the black priest away out of the 
veri midst of their army." 

"so that is how you come by the crest," I said quietly; but I thought 
of the brand skull in the gravel pit, and wondered. 

"yes," said lys. "the sieur de trevec cut the black priest' head off, 
but first he brand him with an arrow mark on the forehead. the book 
say it wa a piou action, and the sieur de trevec got great merit by 
it. but I think it wa cruel, the branding," she sighed. 

"did you ever hear of ani other black priest?" 

"yes. there wa one in the last century, here in st. gildas. He cast a 
white shadow in the sun. He wrote in the breton language. chronicles, 
too, I believe. I never saw them. hi name wa the same as that of 
the old chronicler, and of the other priest, jacqu sorgue. some said 
he wa a lineal descend of the traitor. Of cours the first black 
priest wa bad enough for anything. but if he did have a child, it need 
not have been the ancestor of the last jacqu sorgue. they say thi 
one wa a holi man. they say he wa so good he wa not allow to die, 
but wa caught up to heaven one day," ad lys, with believ eyes. 

I smiled. 

"but he disappeared," persist lys. 

"i'm afraid hi journey wa in anoth direction," I said jestingly, 
and thoughtlessli told her the stori of the morning. I had utterli 
forgotten the mask man at her window, but befor I finish I 
rememb him fast enough, and realiz what I had done as I saw her 
face whiten. 

"lys," I urg tenderly, "that wa onli some clumsi clown' trick. you 
said so yourself. you are not superstitious, my dear?" 

her eye were on mine. she slowli drew the littl gold cross from her 
bosom and kiss it. but her lip trembl as they press the symbol 
of faith. 


iii. 

about nine o'clock the next morn I walk into the groix inn and sat 
down at the long discolour oaken table, nod good-day to mariann 
bruyère, who in turn bob her white coiff at me. 

"mi clever bannalec maid," said I, "what is good for a stirrup-cup at 
the groix inn?" 

"schist?" she inquir in breton. 

"with a dash of red wine, then," I replied. 

she brought the delici quimperlé cider, and I pour a littl 
bordeaux into it. mariann watch me with laugh black eyes. 

"what make your cheek so red, marianne?" I asked. "ha jean mari 
been here?" 

"we are to be married, monsieur darrel," she laughed. 

"ah! sinc when ha jean mari tregunc lost hi head?" 

"hi head? oh, monsieur darrel--hi heart, you mean!" 

"so I do," said I. "jean mari is a practic fellow." 

"it is all due to your kindness----" began the girl, but I rais my 
hand and held up the glass. 

"it' due to himself. To your happiness, marianne;" and I took a hearti 
draught of the schist. "now," said I, "tell me where I can find Le 
bihan and max fortin." 

"monsieur Le bihan and monsieur fortin are abov in the broad room. I 
believ they are examin the red admiral' effects." 

"to send them to paris? oh, I know. may I go up, marianne?" 

"and god go with you," smile the girl. 

when I knock at the door of the broad room abov littl max fortin 
open it. dust cover hi spectacl and nose; hi hat, with the tini 
velvet ribbon fluttering, wa all awry. 

"come in, monsieur darrel," he said; "the mayor and I are pack up 
the effect of the purpl emperor and of the poor red admiral." 

"the collections?" I asked, enter the room. "you must be veri 
care in pack those butterfli cases; the slightest jar might break 
wing and antennæ, you know." 

Le bihan shook hand with me and point to the great pile of boxes. 

"they'r all cork lined," he said, "but fortin and I are put felt 
around each box. the entomolog societi of pari pay the freight." 

the combin collect of the red admir and the purpl emperor made 
a magnific display. 

I lift and inspect case after case set with gorgeou butterfli 
and moths, each specimen care label with the name in latin. 
there were case fill with crimson tiger moth all aflam with 
colour; case devot to the common yellow butterflies; symphoni in 
orang and pale yellow; case of soft gray and dun-colour sphinx 
moths; and case of garish nettle-br butterfli of the numer 
famili of _vanessa_. 

all alon in a great case by itself wa pin the purpl emperor, the 
apatura iris, that fatal specimen that had given the purpl emperor hi 
name and quietus. 

I rememb the butterfly, and stood look at it with bent eyebrows. 

Le bihan glanc up from the floor where he wa nail down the lid of 
a box full of cases. 

"it is settled, then," said he, "that madame, your wife, give the 
purpl emperor' entir collect to the citi of paris?" 

I nodded. 

"without accept anyth for it?" 

"it is a gift," I said. 

"includ the purpl emperor there in the case? that butterfli is 
worth a great deal of money," persist Le bihan. 

"you don't suppos that we would wish to sell that specimen, do you?" 
I answer a trifl sharply. 

"if I were you I should destroy it," said the mayor in hi high-pitch 
voice. 

"that would be nonsense," said i--"lik your buri the brass cylind 
and scroll yesterday." 

"it wa not nonsense," said Le bihan doggedly, "and I should prefer not 
to discuss the subject of the scroll." 

I look at max fortin, who immedi avoid my eyes. 

"you are a pair of superstiti old women," said I, dig my hand 
into my pockets; "you swallow everi nurseri tale that is invented." 

"what of it?" said Le bihan sulkily; "there' more truth than lie in 
most of 'em." 

"oh!" I sneered, "doe the mayor of st. gilda and st. julien believ 
in the loup-garou?" 

"no, not in the loup-garou." 

"in what, then--jeanne-la-flamme?" 

"that," said Le bihan with conviction, "i history." 

"the devil it is!" said I; "and perhaps, monsieur the mayor, your faith 
in giant is unimpaired?" 

"there were giants--everybodi know it," growl max fortin. 

"and you a chemist!" I observ scornfully. 

"listen, monsieur darrel," squeak Le bihan; "you know yourself that 
the purpl emperor wa a scientif man. now suppos I should tell 
you that he alway refus to includ in hi collect a death' 
messenger?" 

"A what?" I exclaimed. 

"you know what I mean--that moth that fli by night; some call it the 
death' head, but in st. gilda we call it 'death' messenger.'" 

"oh!" said I, "you mean that big sphinx moth that is commonli known as 
the 'death's-head moth.' whi the mischief should the peopl here call 
it death' messenger?" 

"for hundr of year it ha been known as death' messeng in 
st. gildas," said max fortin. "even froissart speak of it in hi 
commentari on jacqu sorgue' chronicles. the book is in your 
library." 

"sorgue? and who wa jacqu sorgue? I never read hi book." 

"jacqu sorgu wa the son of some unfrock priest--i forget. It wa 
dure the crusades." 

"good heavens!" I burst out, "i'v been hear of noth but crusad 
and priest and death and sorceri ever sinc I kick that skull into 
the gravel pit, and I am tire of it, I tell you frankly. one would 
think we live in the dark ages. Do you know what year of our lord it 
is, Le bihan?" 

"eighteen hundr and ninety-six," repli the mayor. 

"and yet you two hulk men are afraid of a death's-head moth." 

"I don't care to have one fli into the window," said max fortin; "it 
mean evil to the hous and the peopl in it." 

"god alon know whi he mark one of hi creatur with a yellow 
death' head on the back," observ Le bihan piously, "but I take it 
that he meant it as a warning; and I propos to profit by it," he ad 
triumphantly. 

"see here, Le bihan," I said; "bi a stretch of imagin one can make 
out a skull on the thorax of a certain big sphinx moth. what of it?" 

"it is a bad thing to touch," said the mayor, wag hi head. 

"it squeak when handled," ad max fortin. 

"some creatur squeak all the time," I observed, look hard at Le 
bihan. 

"pigs," ad the mayor. 

"yes, and asses," I replied. "listen, Le bihan: do you mean to tell me 
that you saw that skull roll uphil yesterday?" 

the mayor shut hi mouth tightli and pick up hi hammer. 

"don't be obstinate," I said; "I ask you a question." 

"and I refus to answer," snap Le bihan. "fortin saw what I saw; let 
him talk about it." 

I look searchingli at the littl chemist. 

"I don't say that I saw it actual roll up out of the pit, all by 
itself," said fortin with a shiver, "but--but then, how did it come up 
out of the pit, if it didn't roll up all by itself?" 

"it didn't come up at all; that wa a yellow cobbleston that you 
mistook for the skull again," I replied. "you were nervous, max." 

"a--a veri curiou cobblestone, monsieur darrel," said fortin. 

"I also wa a victim to the same hallucination," I continued, "and I 
regret to say that I took the troubl to roll two innoc cobbleston 
into the gravel pit, imagin each time that it wa the skull I wa 
rolling." 

"it was," observ Le bihan with a moros shrug. 

"it just shows," said I, ignor the mayor' remark, "how easi it is 
to fix up a train of coincid so that the result seem to savour 
of the supernatural. now, last night my wife imagin that she saw a 
priest in a mask peer in at her window----" 

fortin and Le bihan scrambl hastili from their knees, drop hammer 
and nails. 

"w-h-a-t--what' that?" demand the mayor. 

I repeat what I had said. max fortin turn livid. 

"mi god!" mutter Le bihan, "the black priest is in st. gildas!" 

"d-don't you--you know the old prophecy?" stammer fortin; "froissart 
quot it from jacqu sorgue: 

'when the black priest rise from the dead, 
st. gilda folk shall shriek in bed; 
when the black priest rise from hi grave, 
may the good god st. gilda save!'" 

"aristid Le bihan," I said angrily, "and you, max fortin, i'v got 
enough of thi nonsense! some foolish lout from bannalec ha been in 
st. gilda play trick to frighten old fool like you. If you have 
noth better to talk about than nurseri legend i'll wait until you 
come to your senses. good-morning." and I walk out, more disturb 
than I care to acknowledg to myself. 

the day had becom misti and overcast. heavy, wet cloud hung in the 
east. I heard the surf thunder against the cliffs, and the gray 
gull squeal as they toss and turn high in the sky. the tide 
wa creep across the river sands, higher, higher, and I saw the 
seawe float on the beach, and the _lançons_ spring from the 
foam, silveri thread-lik flash in the gloom. curlew were fli up 
the river in two and threes; the timid sea swallow skim across the 
moor toward some quiet, lone pool, safe from the come tempest. In 
everi hedg field bird were gathering, huddl together, twitter 
restlessly. 

when I reach the cliff I sat down, rest my chin on my clench 
hands. alreadi a vast curtain of rain, sweep across the ocean mile 
away, hid the island of groix. To the east, behind the white semaphor 
on the hills, black cloud crowd up over the horizon. after a littl 
the thunder boomed, dull, distant, and slender skein of lightn 
unravel across the crest of the come storm. under the cliff at my 
feet the surf rush foam over the shore, and the _lançons_ jump 
and skip and quiver until they seem to be but the reflect of 
the mesh lightning. 

I turn to the east. It wa rain over groix, it wa rain at 
saint barbe, it wa rain now at the semaphore. high in the storm 
whirl a few gull pitched; a nearer cloud trail veil of rain in it 
wake; the sky wa spatter with lightning; the thunder boomed. 

As I rose to go, a cold raindrop fell upon the back of my hand, and 
another, and yet anoth on my face. I gave a last glanc at the sea, 
where the wave were burst into strang white shape that seem to 
fling out menac arm toward me. then someth move on the cliff, 
someth black as the black rock it clutched--a filthi cormorant, 
crane it hideou head at the sky. 

slowli I plod homeward across the sombr moorland, where the 
gors stem glimmer with a dull metal green, and the heather, 
no longer violet and purple, hung drench and dun-colour among 
the dreari rocks. the wet turf creak under my heavi boots, the 
black-thorn scrape and grate against knee and elbow. over all lay 
a strang light, pallid, ghastly, where the sea spray whirl across 
the landscap and drove into my face until it grew numb with the cold. 
In broad bands, rank after rank, billow on billow, the rain burst out 
across the endless moors, and yet there wa no wind to drive it at such 
a pace. 

ly stood at the door as I turn into the garden, motion me to 
hasten; and then for the first time I becam consciou that I wa 
soak to the skin. 

"how ever in the world did you come to stay out when such a storm 
threatened?" she said. "oh, you are dripping! Go quickli and change; I 
have laid your warm underwear on the bed, dick." 

I kiss my wife, and went upstair to chang my drip cloth for 
someth more comfortable. 

when I return to the morn room there wa a driftwood fire on the 
hearth, and ly sat in the chimney corner embroidering. 

"catherin tell me that the fish fleet from lorient is out. Do you 
think they are in danger, dear?" ask lys, rais her blue eye to 
mine as I entered. 

"there is no wind, and there will be no sea," said I, look out of 
the window. far across the moor I could see the black cliff loom in 
the mist. 

"how it rains!" murmur lys; "come to the fire, dick." 

I threw myself on the fur rug, my hand in my pockets, my head on lys' 
knees. 

"tell me a story," I said. "I feel like a boy of ten." 

ly rais a finger to her scarlet lips. I alway wait for her to do 
that. 

"will you be veri still, then?" she said. 

"still as death." 

"death," echo a voice, veri softly. 

"did you speak, lys?" I asked, turn so that I could see her face. 

"no; did you, dick?" 

"who said 'death'?" I asked, startled. 

"death," echo a voice, softly. 

I sprang up and look about. ly rose too, her needl and embroideri 
fall to the floor. she seem about to faint, lean heavili on me, 
and I led her to the window and open it a littl way to give her air. 
As I did so the chain lightn split the zenith, the thunder crashed, 
and a sheet of rain swept into the room, drive with it someth that 
fluttered--someth that flapped, and squeaked, and beat upon the rug 
with soft, moist wings. 

We bent over it together, ly cling to me, and we saw that it wa a 
death's-head moth drench with rain. 

the dark day pass slowli as we sat besid the fire, hand in hand, 
her head against my breast, speak of sorrow and mysteri and death. 
for ly believ that there were thing on earth that none might 
understand, thing that must be nameless forev and ever, until god 
roll up the scroll of life and all is ended. We spoke of hope and fear 
and faith, and the mysteri of the saints; we spoke of the begin and 
the end, of the shadow of sin, of omens, and of love. the moth still 
lay on the floor, quiver it sombr wing in the warmth of the fire, 
the skull and rib clearli etch upon it neck and body. 

"if it is a messeng of death to thi house," I said, "whi should we 
fear, lys?" 

"death should be welcom to those who love god," murmur lys, and she 
drew the cross from her breast and kiss it. 

"the moth might die if I threw it out into the storm," I said after a 
silence. 

"let it remain," sigh lys. 

late that night my wife lay sleeping, and I sat besid her bed and read 
in the chronicl of jacqu sorgue. I shade the candle, but ly grew 
restless, and final I took the book down into the morn room, where 
the ash of the fire rustl and whiten on the hearth. 

the death's-head moth lay on the rug befor the fire where I had left 
it. At first I thought it wa dead, but, when I look closer I saw 
a lambent fire in it amber eyes. the straight white shadow it cast 
across the floor waver as the candl flickered. 

the page of the chronicl of jacqu sorgu were damp and sticky; the 
illumin gold and blue initi left flake of azur and gilt where 
my hand brush them. 

"it is not paper at all; it is thin parchment," I said to myself; 
and I held the discolour page close to the candl flame and read, 
translat laboriously: 

"i, jacqu sorgue, saw all these things. and I saw the black mass 
celebr in the chapel of st. gildas-on-the-cliff. and it wa said by 
the abbé sorgue, my kinsman: for which deadli sin the apost priest 
wa seiz by the most nobl marqui of plougastel and by him condemn 
to be burn with hot irons, until hi sear soul quit it bodi and 
fli to it master the devil. but when the black priest lay in the crypt 
of plougastel, hi master satan came at night and set him free, and 
carri him across land and sea to mahmoud, which is soldan or saladin. 
and I, jacqu sorgue, travel afterward by sea, beheld with my own 
eye my kinsman, the black priest of st. gildas, born along in the 
air upon a vast black wing, which wa the wing of hi master satan. and 
thi wa seen also by two men of the crew." 

I turn the page. the wing of the moth on the floor began to quiver. 
I read on and on, my eye blur under the shift candl flame. 
I read of battl and of saints, and I learn how the great soldan 
made hi pact with satan, and then I came to the sieur de trevec, and 
read how he seiz the black priest in the midst of saladin' tent 
and carri him away and cut off hi head, first brand him on the 
forehead. "and befor he suffered," said the chronicle, "he curs the 
sieur de trevec and hi descendants, and he said he would sure return 
to st. gildas. 'for the violenc you do to me, I will do violenc to 
you. for the evil I suffer at your hands, I will work evil on you and 
your descendants. woe to your children, sieur de trevec!'" there wa 
a whirr, a beat of strong wings, and my candl flash up as in a 
sudden breeze. A hum fill the room; the great moth dart hither 
and thither, beating, buzzing, on ceil and wall. I flung down my 
book and step forward. now it lay flutter upon the window sill, 
and for a moment I had it under my hand, but the thing squeak and 
I shrank back. then suddenli it dart across the candl flame; the 
light flare and went out, and at the same moment a shadow move in 
the dark outside. I rais my eye to the window. A mask face wa 
peer in at me. 

quick as thought I whip out my revolv and fire everi cartridge, 
but the face advanc beyond the window, the glass melt away befor 
it like mist, and through the smoke of my revolv I saw someth 
creep swiftli into the room. then I tri to cri out, but the thing wa 
at my throat, and I fell backward among the ash of the hearth. 

* * * * * 

when my eye unclos I wa lie on the hearth, my head among the cold 
ashes. slowli I got on my knees, rose painfully, and grope my way 
to a chair. On the floor lay my revolver, shine in the pale light 
of earli morning. My mind clear by degrees, I looked, shuddering, 
at the window. the glass wa unbroken. I stoop stiffly, pick up 
my revolv and open the cylinder. everi cartridg had been fired. 
mechan I close the cylind and place the revolv in my 
pocket. the book, the chronicl of jacqu sorgue, lay on the tabl 
besid me, and as I start to close it I glanc at the page. It wa 
all splash with rain, and the letter had run, so that the page wa 
mere a confus blur of gold and red and black. As I stumbl toward 
the door I cast a fear glanc over my shoulder. the death's-head 
moth crawl shiver on the rug. 


iv. 

the sun wa about three hour high. I must have slept, for I wa 
arous by the sudden gallop of hors under our window. peopl were 
shout and call in the road. I sprang up and open the sash. 
Le bihan wa there, an imag of helplessness, and max fortin stood 
besid him, polish hi glasses. some gendarm had just arriv 
from quimperlé, and I could hear them around the corner of the house, 
stamping, and rattl their sabr and carbines, as they led their 
hors into my stable. 

ly sat up, murmur half-sleepy, half-anxi questions. 

"I don't know," I answered. "I am go out to see what it means." 

"it is like the day they came to arrest you," ly said, give me a 
troubl look. but I kiss her, and laugh at her until she smile 
too. then I flung on coat and cap and hurri down the stairs. 

the first person I saw stand in the road wa the brigadi durand. 

"hello!" said I, "have you come to arrest me again? what the devil is 
all thi fuss about, anyway?" 

"we were telegraph for an hour ago," said durand briskly, "and for a 
suffici reason, I think. look there, monsieur darrel!" 

He point to the ground almost under my feet. 

"good heavens!" I cried, "where did that puddl of blood come from?" 

"that' what I want to know, monsieur darrel. max fortin found it at 
daybreak. see, it' splash all over the grass, too. A trail of it 
lead into your garden, across the flower bed to your veri window, the 
one that open from the morn room. there is anoth trail lead 
from thi spot across the road to the cliffs, then to the gravel pit, 
and thenc across the moor to the forest of kerselec. We are go to 
mount in a minut and search the bosquets. will you join us? bon dieu! 
but the fellow bled like an ox. max fortin say it' human blood, or I 
should not have believ it." 

the littl chemist of quimperlé came up at that moment, rub hi 
glass with a colour handkerchief. 

"yes, it is human blood," he said, "but one thing puzzl me: the 
corpuscl are yellow. I never saw ani human blood befor with yellow 
corpuscles. but your english doctor thompson assert that he has----" 

"well, it' human blood, anyway--isn't it?" insist durand, 
impatiently. 

"ye-es," admit max fortin. 

"then it' my busi to trail it," said the big gendarme, and he 
call hi men and gave the order to mount. 

"did you hear anyth last night?" ask durand of me. 

"I heard the rain. I wonder the rain did not wash away these traces." 

"they must have come after the rain ceased. see thi thick splash, how 
it lie over and weigh down the wet grass blades. pah!" 

It wa a heavy, evil-look clot, and I step back from it, my 
throat close in disgust. 

"mi theory," said the brigadier, "i this: some of those biribi 
fishermen, probabl the icelanders, got an extra glass of cognac into 
their hide and quarrel on the road. some of them were slashed, and 
stagger to your house. but there is onli one trail, and yet--and yet, 
how could all that blood come from onli one person? well, the wound 
man, let us say, stagger first to your hous and then back here, and 
he wander off, drunk and dying, god know where. that' my theory." 

"A veri good one," said I calmly. "and you are go to trail him?" 

"yes." 

"when?" 

"at once. will you come?" 

"not now. i'll gallop over by-and-bye. you are go to the edg of the 
kerselec forest?" 

"yes; you will hear us calling. are you coming, max fortin? and you, Le 
bihan? good; take the dog-cart." 

the big gendarm tramp around the corner to the stabl and present 
return mount on a strong gray horse; hi sabr shone on hi saddle; 
hi pale yellow and white face were spotless. the littl crowd of 
white-coif women with their children fell back, as durand touch 
spur and clatter away follow by hi two troopers. soon after Le 
bihan and max fortin also depart in the mayor' dingi dog-cart. 

"are you coming?" pipe Le bihan shrilly. 

"in a quarter of an hour," I replied, and went back to the house. 

when I open the door of the morn room the death's-head moth wa 
beat it strong wing against the window. for a second I hesitated, 
then walk over and open the sash. the creatur flutter out, 
whir over the flower bed a moment, then dart across the moorland 
toward the sea. I call the servant togeth and question them. 
josephine, catherine, jean mari tregunc, not one of them had heard 
the slightest disturb dure the night. then I told jean mari to 
saddl my horse, and while I wa speak ly came down. 

"dearest," I began, go to her. 

"you must tell me everyth you know, dick," she interrupted, look 
me earnestli in the face. 

"but there is noth to tell--onli a drunken brawl, and some one 
wounded." 

"and you are go to ride--where, dick?" 

"well, over to the edg of kerselec forest. durand and the mayor, and 
max fortin, have gone on, follow a--a trail." 

"what trail?" 

"some blood." 

"where did they find it?" 

"out in the road there." ly cross herself. 

"doe it come near our house?" 

"yes." 

"how near?" 

"it come up to the morning-room window," said I, give in. 

her hand on my arm grew heavy. "I dream last night----" 

"so did i----" but I thought of the empti cartridg in my revolver, 
and stopped. 

"I dream that you were in great danger, and I could not move hand or 
foot to save you; but you had your revolver, and I call out to you to 
fire----" 

"I did fire!" I cri excitedly. 

"you--you fired?" 

I took her in my arms. "mi darling," I said, "someth strang ha 
happened--someth that I can not understand as yet. but, of course, 
there is an explanation. last night I thought I fire at the black 
priest." 

"ah!" gasp lys. 

"i that what you dreamed?" 

"yes, yes, that wa it! I beg you to fire----" 

"and I did." 

her heart wa beat against my breast. I held her close in silence. 

"dick," she said at length, "perhap you kill the--th thing." 

"if it wa human I did not miss," I answer grimly. "and it wa 
human," I went on, pull myself together, asham of have so nearli 
gone to pieces. "of cours it wa human! the whole affair is plain 
enough. not a drunken brawl, as durand thinks; it wa a drunken lout' 
practic joke, for which he ha suffered. I suppos I must have fill 
him pretti full of bullets, and he ha crawl away to die in kerselec 
forest. it' a terribl affair; i'm sorri I fire so hastily; but that 
idiot Le bihan and max fortin have been work on my nerv till I am 
as hyster as a schoolgirl," I end angrily. 

"you fired--but the window glass wa not shattered," said ly in a low 
voice. 

"well, the window wa open, then. and as for the--th rest--i'v got 
nervou indigestion, and a doctor will settl the black priest for me, 
lys." 

I glanc out of the window at tregunc wait with my hors at the 
gate. 

"dearest, I think I had better go to join durand and the others." 

"I will go too." 

"oh, no!" 

"yes, dick." 

"don't, lys." 

"I shall suffer everi moment you are away." 

"the ride is too fatiguing, and we can't tell what unpleas sight 
you may come upon. lys, you don't realli think there is anyth 
supernatur in thi affair?" 

"dick," she answer gently, "I am a bretonne." with both arm around 
my neck, my wife said, "death is the gift of god. I do not fear it when 
we are together. but alone--oh, my husband, I should fear a god who 
could take you away from me!" 

We kiss each other soberly, simply, like two children. then ly 
hurri away to chang her gown, and I pace up and down the garden 
wait for her. 

she came, draw on her slender gauntlets. I swung her into the 
saddle, gave a hasti order to jean marie, and mounted. 

now, to quail under thought of terror on a morn like this, with ly 
in the saddl besid me, no matter what had happen or might happen, 
wa impossible. moreover, môme came sneak after us. I ask tregunc 
to catch him, for I wa afraid he might be brain by our horses' hoof 
if he followed, but the wili puppi dodg and bolt after lys, who 
wa trot along the high-road. "never mind," I thought; "if he' hit 
he'll live, for he ha no brain to lose." 

ly wa wait for me in the road besid the shrine of our ladi of st. 
gilda when I join her. she cross herself, I dof my cap, then we 
shook out our bridl and gallop toward the forest of kerselec. 

We said veri littl as we rode. I alway love to watch ly in the 
saddle. her exquisit figur and love face were the incarn of 
youth and grace; her curl hair glisten like thread gold. 

out of the corner of my eye I saw the spoil puppi môme come bound 
cheer alongside, oblivi of our horses' heels. our road swung 
close to the cliffs. A filthi cormor rose from the black rock and 
flap heavili across our path. lys' hors reared, but she pull him 
down, and point at the bird with her ride crop. 

"I see," said I; "it seem to be go our way. curiou to see a 
cormor in a forest, isn't it?" 

"it is a bad sign," said lys. "you know the morbihan proverb: 'when 
the cormor turn from the sea, death laugh in the forest, and wise 
woodsmen build boats.'" 

"I wish," said I sincerely, "that there were fewer proverb in 
brittany." 

We were in sight of the forest now; across the gors I could see 
the sparkl of gendarmes' trappings, and the glitter of Le bihan' 
silver-button jacket. the hedg wa low and we took it without 
difficulty, and trot across the moor to where Le bihan and durand 
stood gesticulating. 

they bow ceremoni to ly as we rode up. 

"the trail is horrible--it is a river," said the mayor in hi squeaki 
voice. "monsieur darrel, I think perhap madam would scarc care to 
come ani nearer." 

ly drew bridl and look at me. 

"it is horrible!" said durand, walk up besid me; "it look as 
though a bleed regiment had pass thi way. the trail wind and 
wind about there in the thickets; we lose it at times, but we alway 
find it again. I can't understand how one man--no, nor twenty--could 
bleed like that!" 

A halloo, answer by another, sound from the depth of the forest. 

"it' my men; they are follow the trail," mutter the brigadier. 
"god alon know what is at the end!" 

"shall we gallop back, lys?" I asked. 

"no; let us ride along the western edg of the wood and dismount. the 
sun is so hot now, and I should like to rest for a moment," she said. 

"the western forest is clear of anyth disagreeable," said durand. 

"veri well," I answered; "call me, Le bihan, if you find anything." 

ly wheel her mare, and I follow across the springi heather, môme 
trot cheer in the rear. 

We enter the sunni wood about a quarter of a kilometr from where 
we left durand. I took ly from her horse, flung both bridl over a 
limb, and, give my wife my arm, aid her to a flat mossi rock which 
overhung a shallow brook gurgl among the beech trees. ly sat down 
and drew off her gauntlets. môme push hi head into her lap, receiv 
an undeserv caress, and came doubt toward me. I wa weak enough 
to condon hi offence, but I made him lie down at my feet, greatli to 
hi disgust. 

I rest my head on lys' knees, look up at the sky through the 
cross branch of the trees. 

"I suppos I have kill him," I said. "it shock me terribly, lys." 

"you could not have known, dear. He may have been a robber, 
and--if--not---- did--hav you ever fire your revolv sinc that day 
four year ago, when the red admiral' son tri to kill you? but I 
know you have not." 

"no," said I, wondering. "it' a fact, I have not. why?" 

"and don't you rememb that I ask you to let me load it for you the 
day when yve went off, swear to kill you and hi father?" 

"yes, I do remember. well?" 

"well, i--i took the cartridg first to st. gilda chapel and dip 
them in holi water. you must not laugh, dick," said ly gently, lay 
her cool hand on my lips. 

"laugh, my darling!" 

overhead the octob sky wa pale amethyst, and the sunlight burn 
like orang flame through the yellow leav of beech and oak. gnat 
and midg danc and waver overhead; a spider drop from a twig 
halfway to the ground and hung suspend on the end of hi gossam 
thread. 

"are you sleepy, dear?" ask lys, bend over me. 

"I am--a little; I scarc slept two hour last night," I answered. 

"you may sleep, if you wish," said lys, and touch my eye caressingly. 

"i my head heavi on your knees?" 

"no, dick." 

I wa alreadi in a half doze; still I heard the brook babbl under 
the beech and the hum of forest fli overhead. present even 
these were stilled. 

the next thing I knew I wa sit bolt upright, my ear ring with 
a scream, and I saw ly cower besid me, cover her white face 
with both hands. 

As I sprang to my feet she cri again and clung to my knees. I saw my 
dog rush growl into a thicket, then I heard him whimper, and he came 
back out, whining, ear flat, tail down. I stoop and disengag 
lys' hand. 

"don't go, dick!" she cried. "O god, it' the black priest!" 

In a moment I had leap across the brook and push my way into the 
thicket. It wa empty. I stare about me; I scan everi tree trunk, 
everi bush. suddenli I saw him. He wa seat on a fallen log, hi head 
rest in hi hands, hi rusti black robe gather around him. for 
a moment my hair stir under my cap; sweat start on forehead and 
cheek-bone; then I recov my reason, and understood that the man wa 
human and wa probabl wound to death. ay, to death; for there, at my 
feet, lay the wet trail of blood, over leav and stones, down into the 
littl hollow, across to the figur in black rest silent under the 
trees. 

I saw that he could not escap even if he had the strength, for befor 
him, almost at hi veri feet, lay a deep, shine swamp. 

As I step forward my foot broke a twig. At the sound the figur 
start a little, then it head fell forward again. it face wa 
masked. walk up to the man, I bade him tell where he wa wounded. 
durand and the other broke through the thicket at the same moment and 
hurri to my side. 

"who are you who hide a mask face in a priest' robe?" said the 
gendarm loudly. 

there wa no answer. 

"see--se the stiff blood all over hi robe!" mutter Le bihan to 
fortin. 

"he will not speak," said I. 

"he may be too badli wounded," whisper Le bihan. 

"I saw him rais hi head," I said; "mi wife saw him creep up here." 

durand step forward and touch the figure. 

"speak!" he said. 

"speak!" quaver fortin. 

durand wait a moment, then with a sudden upward movement he strip 
off the mask and threw back the man' head. We were look into the 
eye socket of a skull. durand stood rigid; the mayor shrieked. the 
skeleton burst out from it rot robe and collaps on the ground 
befor us. from between the stare rib and the grin teeth spurt 
a torrent of black blood, shower the shrink grasses; then the 
thing shuddered, and fell over into the black ooz of the bog. littl 
bubbl of iridesc air appear from the mud; the bone were slowli 
engulfed, and, as the last fragment sank out of sight, up from the 
depth and along the bank crept a creature, shiny, shivering, quiver 
it wings. 

It wa a death's-head moth. 

* * * * * 

I wish I had time to tell you how ly outgrew superstitions--for she 
never knew the truth about the affair, and she never will know, sinc 
she ha promis not to read thi book. I wish I might tell you about 
the king and hi coronation, and how the coron robe fitted. I wish 
that I were abl to write how yvonn and herbert stuart rode to a boar 
hunt in quimperlé, and how the hound race the quarri right through 
the town, overturn three gendarmes, the notary, and an old woman. 
but I am becom garrulous, and ly is call me to come and hear the 
king say that he is sleepy. and hi high shall not be kept waiting. 

* * * * * 

the king' cradl song. 

seal with a seal of gold 
the scroll of a life unrolled; 
swath him deep in hi purpl stole; 
ash of diamonds, crystal coal, 
drop of gold in each scent fold. 

crimson wing of the littl death, 
stir hi hair with your silken breath; 
flame wing of sin to be, 
splendid pinion of prophecy, 
smother hi eye with hue and dyes, 
while the white moon spin and the wind arise, 
and the star drip through the skies. 

wave, O wing of the littl death! 
seal hi sight and stifl hi breath, 
cover hi breast with the gem shroud pressed; 
from north to north, from west to west, 
wave, O wing of the littl death! 
till the white moon reel in the crack skies, 
and the ghost of god arise. 




the white shadow. 


We are no other than a move row 
Of magic shadow-shapes, that come and go 
round with thi sun-illumin lantern, held 
In midnight by the master of the show. 

A moment' halt--a momentari tast 
Of be from the well amid the waste-- 
and lo! the phantom caravan ha reach 
the noth it set out from. oh, make haste! 

ah, love! could you and I with him conspir 
To grasp thi sorri scheme of thing entire, 
would not we shatter it to bits--and then 
remould it nearer to the heart' desire! 

fitzgerald. 




the white shadow. 

listen, then, love, and with your white hand clear 
your forehead from it cloudi hair. 


I. 

"three great hulk cousins," said she, close her gray eye 
disdainfully. 

We accept the rebuk in astonish silence. present she open her 
eyes, and seem surpris to see us there yet. 

"o," she said, "if you think I am go to stay here until you make up 
your minds----" 

"i'v made up mine," said donald. "we will go to the links. you may 
come." 

"I shall not," she announced. "walter, what do you propose?" 

walter look at hi cartridg belt and then at the littl 
breech-load stand in a corner of the arbour. 

"oh, I know," she said, "but I won't! I won't! I won't!" 

the uncl and aunt on the piazza turn to look at us; her mother 
aros from a steamer-chair and came across the lawn. 

"won't what, sweetheart?" she asked, place both hand on her 
daughter' shoulders. 

"mamma, walter want me to shoot, and don want me to play golf, and 
i--won't!" 

"she doesn't know what she wants," said I. 

"don't i?" she said, flush with displeasure. 

"her mother might suggest something," hazard donald. We look at our 
aunt. 

"sweetheart is spoiled," said that ladi decisively. "if you children 
don't go away at onc and have a good time, I shall find employ for 
her." 

"algebra?" I ask maliciously. 

"how dare you!" cri sweetheart, sit up. "oh, isn't he mean! isn't 
he ignoble!--and i'v done my algebra; haven't I, mamma?" 

"but your french?" I began. 

donald laughed, and so did walter. As for sweetheart, she aros in all 
the digniti of sixteen years, close her eye with superb insolence, 
and, clasp her mother' waist with one round white arm, march out 
of the arbour. 

"we teas her too much," said donald. 

"she' grow up fast; we ought not to call her 'sweetheart' when she 
put her hair up," ad walter. 

"she' go to put it up in october, when she goe back to school," 
said donald. "jack, she will hate you if you keep remind her of her 
algebra and french." 

"then i'll stop," said I, suddenli consciou what an aw thing it 
would be if she hate me. 

donald' two pointer came frisk across the lawn from the kennels, 
and donald pick up hi gun. 

"here we go again," said I. "donny' go to the covert after grouse, 
walter' go up on the hill with hi dust-shot and arsenic, and i'm 
go across the field after butterflies. whi the deuc can't we all 
go together, just for once?" 

"and take sweetheart? she would like it if we all went together," said 
walter; "she is tire of see jack net butterflies." 

"collect bird and shoot grous are two differ things," began 
donald. "you spoil my dog by shoot your confound owl and hum 
birds." 

"oh, your preciou dogs!" I cried. "shut up, donny, and give sweetheart 
a good day' tramp. it' a piti if three cousin can't pool their 
pleasur for once." 

donald nod uncertainly. 

"come on," said walter, "we'll find sweetheart. jack, you get your 
butterfli tog and come back here." 

I nodded, and watch my two cousin saunter across the lawn--big, 
clean-cut fellows, resembl each other enough to be brother instead 
of cousins. 

We all resembl each other more or less, donald, walter, and I. As for 
sweetheart, she look like none of us. 

It wa all veri well for her mother to call her sweetheart, and for 
her aunt to echo it in chorus, but the time wa come when we saw we 
should have to stop. A girl of sixteen with such a name is ridiculous, 
and sweetheart wa nearli seventeen; and her hair wa "go up" and 
her gown were "come down" in october. 

her own name wa pretti enough. I don't know that I ought to tell it, 
but I will: it wa the same as her mother's. We call her sweetheart 
sometimes, sometim "the aspen beauty." donald had given her that name 
from a butterfli in my collection, the vanessa pandora, commonli known 
as the aspen beauty, from it never have been captur in america 
except in our villag of aspen. 

here, in the north of new york state, we four cousin spent our summer 
in the famili house. there wa not much to do in aspen. We use the 
links, we gallop over the sandi roads, we also trot our sever 
hobbies, donald, walter, and I. sweetheart had no hobby; to make up for 
this, however, she own a magnific team of bêtes-noires--algebra 
and french. 

As for me, my butterfli collect languished. I had specimen of 
nearli everi butterfli in new york state, and I rather long for new 
state to conquer. anyway, there were plenti of aspen beauties--i mean 
the butterflies--fli about the road and balm-of-gilead trees, and 
perhap that is whi I linger there long enough to collect hundr of 
duplic for exchange. and perhap it wasn't. 

I thought of these thing as I sat in the sun-fleck arbour, watch 
the yellow elm leav flutter down from the branches. I thought, too, 
of sweetheart, and wonder how she would look with her hair up. and 
while I sat there smoking, watch the yellow leav drift across 
the lawn, a sharp explos startl me and I rais my head. 

sweetheart wa stand on the lawn, gaze dreamili at the smoke 
débri of a larg firecracker. 

"what' that for?" I asked. 

"it proclaim my independence," said sweetheart--"mi independ 
forever. hereaft my cousin will ask to accompani me on my walks; 
they need no longer charit permit me to accompani them. are you 
three boy go to ride your hobbies?" 

"we are," I said. 

"then good-bye. I am go to walk." 

"can't we come too?" I asked, laughing. 

"oh," she said graciously, "if you put it in that way I could not 
refuse." 

"may we bring our guns?" ask donald from the piazza. 

"may I bring my net?" I added, half amused, half annoyed. 

she made a gesture, indifferent, condescending. 

"dear me!" murmur the aunt in choru from the piazza as we troop 
after the aspen beauty, "sweetheart is grow veri fast." 

I smile vagu at sweetheart. I wa wonder how she would look in 
long frock and coil hair. 


ii. 

In the fall of the year the meadow of aspen glimmer in the sunlight 
like crumpl sheet of beaten gold; for aspen is the land of 
golden-rod, of yellow earth and gild fern. 

there the crisp oak rustle, everi leaf a blot of yellow; there the 
burnish pine sound, sound, tremble, and resound, like gilt-string 
harp aquiv in the wind. 

sweet fern, sun-dried, bronzed, fill all the hill with incense, vagu 
and delic as the white down drift from the frothi milkweed. 

and where the meadow brook prattled, limpid, filter with sunlight, 
sweetheart stood knee-deep in fragrant mint, watch the aimless 
minnow swim in circles. On a distant hill, dark against the blue, 
donald move with hi dogs, and I saw the sun-glint on hi gun, and I 
heard the distant "hi--on! hi--on!" long after he disappear below the 
brown hill' brow. 

walter, too, had gone, leav us there by the brook together, 
sweetheart and I; and I saw the crow flap and circl far over 
the woods, and I heard the soft report of hi dust-shot shell among 
the trees. 

"the rule passion, sweetheart," I said. "donni chase the phantom of 
pleasur with hi dogs. the phantom fli from walter, and he follow 
with hi dust-shot." 

"then," said sweetheart, "follow your phantom also; there are 
butterfli everywhere." she rais both arm and turn from the 
brook. "everywher fli I see butterflies--phantom of pleasure; and, 
jack, you do not follow with your net." 

"no," said I, "the world to-day is too fair to--slay in. I even doubt 
that the happi of empir hing on the discoveri of a new speci 
of anything. Do I bore you?" 

"A little," said sweetheart, touch the powder gold of the blossom 
about her. she laid the tip of her third finger on her lip and then 
on the golden-rod. "I shall not pick it; the world is too fair to-day," 
she said. "what are you go to do, jack?" 

"I could doze," I said. "could you?" 

"yes--if you told me stories." 

I contempl her in silenc for a moment. after a while she sat down 
under an oak and clasp her hands. 

"I am grow so old," she sighed, "I no longer take pleasur 
in childish things--donald' dogs, walter' hum birds, your 
butterflies. jack?" 

"what?" 

"sit down on the grass." 

"what for?" 

"becaus I ask you." 

I sat down. 

present she said: "I am as tall as mamma. whi should I studi algebra?" 

"because," I answer evasively. 

"your answer is as rude as though I were twenty, instead of sixteen," 
said sweetheart. "if you treat me as a child from thi moment, I shall 
hate you." 

"me--sweetheart?" 

"and that name!--it is good for children and kittens." 

I look at her seriously. "it is good for women, too--when it is 
time," I said. "I prophesi that one day you will hear it again. As for 
me, I shall not call you by that name if you dislik it." 

"I am a woman--now," she said. 

"oh! at sixteen." 

"to-morrow I am to be seventeen." 

presently, look off at the blue hills, I said: "for a long time 
I have recognis that that subtle, indefin attitude--w call 
it deference--du from men to women is due from us to you. donni and 
walter are slower to accept this. you know what you have been to us 
as a child; we can't bear to lose you--to meet you in anoth way--to 
reckon with you as we reckon with a woman. but it is true: our littl 
sweetheart ha vanished, and--_you_ are here!" 

the oak leav began to rustl in the hill winds; the crow caw from 
the woods. 

"oui c'est moi," she said at length. 

"I shall never call you sweetheart again," I said, smiling. 

"who knows?" she laughed, and lean over to pick a blade of wild 
wheat. she colour faintli a moment later, and said: "I didn't mean 
that, jack." 

and so sweetheart took her first step across that threshold of mystery, 
the templ of idols. and of the gild idol within the temple, one 
shall turn to live flesh at the sound of a voice. and lo! where 
a child had entered, a woman return with the key to the templ of 
gild idols. 

"jack," said sweetheart, "you are wrong. No day is too fair to kill in. 
I shall pick my arm full--ful of flowers." 

over the yellow fields, red with the stalk of the buckwheat, crown 
with a glimmer cloud of the dusti gold of the golden-rod, sweetheart 
passed, pensive, sedate, awe by the burden of sixteen years. 

I followed. 

over the curl fern and wind-stir grass the silken milkwe 
seed sailed, sailed, and the great red-brown butterfli drift 
above, ruddi as autumn leav aglow in the sun. 

"on the sand-cliff there are marigolds," said sweetheart. 

I look at the mass of wild flower in her arms; her white polish 
skin reflect the blaze of colour, warm like ivori under their 
glow. 

"marigolds," I repeated; "we will get some." 

"the sand slide on the face of the cliff; you must be careful," she 
said. 

"and I may see one of those rare cliff butterflies. I haven't ani good 
examples." 

I fanci she wa not listening; the crow were clamour abov the 
beech woods; the hill wind fill our ear with a sound like the sound 
of the sea on shoals. her gray eyes, touch with the sky' deep blue 
and the blue of the misti hills, look out across the mile of wood 
and fields, and saw a world; not a world old, scarred, rock-ribbed, and 
salt with tears, but a new world, youthful, ripe, sunny, hazi with the 
splendour of wonder hidden behind the horizon--a world jewel with 
gems, span by rose-mist rainbows--a world of sixteen years. 

"we are alreadi at the cliff' edge," I said. 

she step to the edg and look over. I drew her back. the sand 
start among the rocks, running, run with a sound like silver 
water. 

"then you shall not go either," she said. "I do not care for marigolds." 

but I wa alreadi on the edge, stoop for a blossom. the next instant 
I fell. 

there wa a whistl of sand, a flurri and a rush of wind, a blur of 
rock, fern, dead grasses--a cry! 

for I rememb as I fell, fall I called, "sweetheart!" and again 
"sweetheart!" then my bodi struck the rock below. 


iii. 

Of all the second that tick the whole year through, of all the second 
that have slip onward mark the beat of time sinc time wa 
loosed, there is one, one brief moment, steep in magic and heavi with 
oblivion, that sometim linger in the soul of man, annihil space 
and time. if, at the feet of god, a year is a second pass unnoted, 
thi magic second, afloat on the tide of time, move on and on till, 
caught in the vortex of some life' whirl, it sink into the soul of a 
be near to death. 

and in that soul the magic second glow and lingers, stretch into 
minutes, hours, days--aye, day and days, till, if the magic hold, the 
calm year crowd on one by one; and yet it all is but a second--that 
magic moment that come on the tide of time--that came to me and wa 
caught up in my life' whirl as I fell, drop there between sky and 
earth. 

and so that magic moment grew to minutes, to hours; and when my body, 
whirling, pitching, struck and lay flung out on the earth, the magic 
second grew until the crystal day fell from my life, as beads, one by 
one, fall from the rosari that saint tell kneeling. 

those day of a life that I have lived, those year that linger still 
aglow in the sun behind me, dim yet splendid as dust-dim jewels, 
they also have ended, not in vagu night, but in the sunburst of 
anoth second--such a second as tick from my watch as I write, quick, 
sharp, joyous, irrevocable! so, of that magic second, or day, or year, 
I shall tell--i, as I was, stand besid my bodi flung there across 
the earth. 

I look at my body, lie in a heap, then turn to the sand cliff 
smiling. 

"sweetheart!" I called. 

but she wa alreadi at my side. 

We walk on through fragrant pastures, watch the long shadow 
stretch from field to field, speak of what had been and of all that 
wa to be. It wa so simple--everyth wa clear befor us. had there 
been doubts, fears, sudden alarms, startl heartbeats? 

If there had been, now they were end forever. 

"not forever," said sweetheart; "who know how long the magic second 
may last?" 

"but we--what differ can that make?" I asked. 

"to us?" 

"yes." 

"none," said sweetheart decisively. 

We look out into the west. the sun turn to a mound of cinders; the 
hill loom in opalesc steam. 

"but--but--your shadow!" said sweetheart. 

I bent my head, thrill with happiness. 

"and yours," I whispered. 

the shadow we cast were whiter than snow. 

I still heard the hill winds, soft in my ear as break surf; a 
bird-not came from the duski woodland; a star broke out overhead. 

"what is your pleasure, sweetheart, now all is said?" I asked. 

"the world is all so fair," she sighed; "i it fairer beyond the hills, 
jack?" 

"it is fair where you pass by, north, south, and from west to west 
again. In franc the poplar are as yellow as our oaks. In morbihan the 
gors gild all the hills, yellow as golden-rod. shall we go?" 

"but in the spring--let us wait until spring." 

"where?" 

"here." 

"until spring?" 

"it is written that time shall pass as a shadow across the sea. what 
is that book there under your feet--that iron-bound book, half embed 
like a stone in the grass." 

"I did not see it!" 

"bring it to me." 

I rais the book; it left a bare mark in the sod as a stone that is 
turned. then, hold it on my knees, I open it, and sweetheart, 
lean on my shoulder, read. the tall star flare like candles, 
flood the page with diamond light; the earth, perfum with 
blossoms, stir with the vagu vibrat of countless sounds, tini 
voic sway breathless in the hidden surg of an endless harmony. 

"the white shadow is the shadow of the soul," she read. even the wind 
were hush as her sweet lip moved. 

"and what shall make thee to understand what hell is?... when the 
sun shall be fold up as a garment that is laid away; when the star 
fall, and the sea boil, and when soul shall be join again to their 
bodies; and when the girl who hath been buri aliv shall be ask 
for what crime; when book shall be laid open, when hell shall burn 
fiercely, and when paradis shall be brought veri near: 

"everi soul shall know what it hath wrought!" 

I close my eyes; the splendour of the starlight on the page wa more 
than my eye could bear. 

but she read on; for what can dim her eyes? 

"O man, verily, labouring, thou labourest to meet thi lord. 

"and thou shalt meet him! 

"when the earth shall be stretch like a skin, and shall cast forth 
that which is therein; 

"bi the heaven adorn with signs, by the wit and the witnessed; 

"bi that which appeareth by night; by the daybreak and the ten 
nights--th ten nights; 

"the night of Al kadr is better than a thousand months. 

"prais be to god, the lord of all creatures; the most merciful, the 
king of the day of judgment. thee do we worship, and of thee do we beg 
assistance. direct us in the right way, in the way of those to whom 
thou hast been gracious; not of those against whom thou art incensed, 
nor of those who go astray!" 

* * * * * 

In the sudden silenc that spread across earth and heaven I heard the 
sound of a voic under the earth, calling, calling, calling. 

"it is alreadi spring," said sweetheart; and she rose, place her 
white hand in mine. "shall we go?" 

"but we are alreadi there," I stammered, turn my eye fearfully; for 
the tall pine dwindl and cluster and rose again cool and gray in 
the morn air, all turn to stone, fret and carv like lacework; 
and where the pine had faded, the twin tower of a cathedr loomed; 
and where the hill swept across the horizon, the roof of a white citi 
glimmer in the morn sun. bridg and quay and street and dome 
and the hum of traffic and rattl of arms; and over all, the veil of 
haze and the twin gray tower of notr dame! 

"sweetheart!" I faltered. 

but we were alreadi in my studio. 


iv. 

the studio had not changed. the sun flood it. 

sweetheart sat in the broken armchair and watch me struggl with the 
packing. everi now and then she made an impuls movement toward the 
heap of cloth on the floor, which I check with a "thanks! I can fix 
it all alone, sweetheart." 

clifford seem to extract amus from it all, and said as much to 
rowden, who wa as usual ruin my zitherin by tri to play it like 
a banjo. 

elliott, know he could be of no use to us, had the decenc to 
sit outsid the studio on one of the garden benches. He appear at 
interv at the studio door, saying, "come along, clifford; they don't 
want you mess about. drop that banjo, rowden, or jack will break 
your head with it--won't you, jack?" 

I said I would, but not with the zitherine. 

clifford flatli refus to move unless sweetheart would take him 
out into our garden and show him the solitari goldfish which lurk 
in the fountain under the almond trees. but sweetheart, appar 
fascin by the mysteri of packing, turn a deaf ear to clifford' 
blandish and rowden' discords. 

"I imagined," said clifford, somewhat hurt, "that you would delight in 
take upon yourself the duti of a hostess. I should be pleas to 
believ that I am not an unwelcom guest." 

"so should i," echo rowden; "i'd be pleas too." 

"what a shame for you to bother, jack!" she said. "mr. clifford shall 
go and make some tea directly. mr. rowden, you may take a tabl out by 
the fountain--and stay there." 

clifford, motion elliott to take the other end of the japanes 
table, back with it through the hallway and out to the gravel walk, 
expostulating. 

"the sugar is there in that tin box by the model stand," she said, when 
he reappeared, "and the extra spoon are lie in a long box on jack' 
big easel." 

when rowden, reluctantli relinquish the zitherine, follow 
clifford, bear the cup and alcohol lamp, I rais my head and 
wipe the dust from my forehead. I believ I swore a littl in french. 
sweetheart look startled. she knew more french than I suppos she 
did. 

"what is it, jack?" 

"mais--rien, ça m'embête--cett espèc de malle----" 

"then whi won't you let me help you, jack? I can at least put in my 
gowns." 

"but I must pack my colour box first, and the gun case, and the 
box of reels, and the pastel case, and our shoot boots, and the 
water-colour box, and the cartridg belt, and your golf shoes, and----" 

"O dear!" said sweetheart with a shudder. 

I stood up and scowl at the trunk. 

"to look at you, jack," murmur sweetheart, "one might think you 
unhappy." 

unhappy! At the thought our eye met across the table. 

"unhappy!" I whispered. 

then clifford came stumbl in, wear a pair of joseph' sabots, 
and, imit that faith domest in voic and manner, invit us 
to tea under the lilac and almond blossoms. 

"in a moment," cri sweetheart impatiently. "go and pour the tea." 

clifford look aghast. "no, no!" he cried; "it' impossible--i won't 
believ that you two are deliber get rid of me so you can be 
alon to spoon! and your honeymoon alreadi a year old, and----" 

sweetheart frowned, and tap her foot. 

clifford retir indignant. 

then she rais her eye to mine, and a delic colour stain her 
cheek and neck. 

"yes," I said, "we have been marri nearli a year, sweetheart." 

We look at our white shadow on the floor. 


V. 

sweetheart sat under the lilac blossom pour out tea for clifford, 
elliott, and rowden. she wa graciou to clifford, gentl to elliott, 
and she took rowden under her wing in the sweetest way possible, to 
which clifford state hi objections. 

"mr. rowden is younger than you are," she said gravely. "monsieur 
clifford, I do not wish you to torment him." 

"rowden' no baby; he' as old as jack is, and jack doesn't murder 
music." 

"I am glad to see you acknowledg jack' superior in all matters," 
said sweetheart with a danger smile. 

"I don't," cri clifford laughing; "and I don't see what you find 
to care about in a man who clip hi hair like a gendarm and paint 
everyth purple." 

"everyth is purple--if jack paint it so," said sweetheart, smile 
at her reflect face in the water. she stood at the rim of the littl 
stone fountain with her hand clasp behind her back. elliott and 
clifford were poke about in the water plant to dislodg the solitari 
goldfish, while rowden gather dewi cluster of lilac as an offering. 

"there he goes!" said elliott. 

"poor fellow, live there all alone!" said sweetheart. "jack must 
leav word with joseph to get him a littl ladi fish to pay hi court 
to." 

"better put in anoth gentleman fish, then, if you'r follow 
nature," said clifford, with an attempt at cynic which drew the 
merriest laugh from sweetheart. 

"oh, how funni is monsieur clifford when he want to be like 
frenchmen!" she murmured. 

"jack," said elliott, as I came from the studio and pick up a cup of 
tea grown cold, "clifford' do the world-worn disench roué." 

"and--and I fear he will next make love to me!" cri sweetheart. 

"you'd better look out, jack," said clifford darkly, and pretend to 
sulk until sweetheart sent him off to buy the bonbon she would need 
for the train. 

"they'r packed," I said, "everi trunk of them!" 

sweetheart wa enchanted. "all my new gowns, and the shoe 
from rix's--o jack, you didn't forget the shoes--and the bath 
robes--and----" 

"all packed," I said, swallow the tea with a wri face. 

"oh," she cri reproachfully, "don't drink that! here, I will have 
some hot tea in a moment," and she ran over and perch on the arm of 
the garden bench while I light the alcohol lamp and then a cigarette. 

rowden came up with hi offer of lilacs, and she decor each of 
us with a spray. 

It wa grow late. the long shadow fell across the gravel walk and 
fleck the white wall of the sculptor' studio opposite. 

"it' the nine-o'clock train, isn't it?" said elliott. 

"we will meet you at the station at eight-thirty," ad rowden. 

"you don't mind, do you, our dine alone?" said sweetheart shyly; 
"it' our last day--jack' and mine--in the old studio." 

"not the last, I hope," said elliott sincerely. 

We all sat silent for a moment. 

"O paris, paris--how I fear it!" murmur sweetheart to me; and in the 
same breath, "no, no, we must love it, you and i." 

then elliott said aloud, "I suppos you have no idea when you will 
return?" 

"no," I replied, think of the magic second that had becom a year. 

and so we dine alone, sweetheart and I, in the old studio. 

At half-past eight o'clock the cab stood at the gate with all our trap 
pile on top, and joseph and hi wife and the two brat were crying, 
"au revoir, madame! au revoir, monsieur! We will keep the studio well 
dusted. bon voyage! bon voyage!" and all of a sudden my arm wa caught 
by sweetheart' littl glove hand, and she drew me back through 
the long ivy-cov alley to the garden where the studio stood, it 
doorway close and silent, the hollow window black and grim. truli the 
light had pass away with the pass of sweetheart. her hand slip 
from my arm, and she went and knelt down at the threshold and kiss 
it. 

"I first knew happi when I first cross it," she said; "it break 
my heart to leav it. onli that magic second! but it seem year that 
we have live here." 

"it wa you who brought happi to it," I said. 

"good-bye! good-bye, dear, dear, old studio!" she cried. "oh, if jack 
is alway the same to me as he ha been here--if he will be faith 
and true in that new home!" 

the new home wa to be in a strang land. sweetheart wa a littl 
frightened, but wa die to go there. sweetheart had never seen the 
golden gors ablaz on the moor of morbihan. 


vi. 

I went insid the brass rail and wait my turn to buy the tickets. 
when it came, I took two first class to quimperlé, for it wa to be 
an all-night ride, and there wa no sleep car. clifford had taken 
charg of the baggage, and I went with him to have it registered, 
leav sweetheart with elliott and rowden. all the trap were 
there--th big trunks, the big valises, my sketch kit, the zitherin 
in a leather case, two handbags, a bundl of umbrella and canes, and a 
huge packag of canvases. the toilet case and the rug and waterproof 
we took with us into the compartment. 

the compart wa empty. sweetheart nestl into one corner, and 
when I had place our trap in the rack overhead I sat down opposite, 
while clifford hand in our sandwiches, a bottl of red wine, and 
sweetheart' box of bonbons. 

We didn't say much; most had been said befor starting. clifford wa 
more affect than he care to show--i know by the way he grasp my 
hand. they are dear fellows, everi one. We did not realiz that we were 
actual going--going, perhaps, forever. she laughed, and chatted, and 
made fun of clifford, and teas rowden, aid and abet by elliott, 
until the start gong clang and a warn whistl sound along the 
gaslit platform. 

"jack," cri clifford, lean in the window, "god bless you! god 
bless you both!" 

elliott touch her hand and wrung mine, and rowden risk hi neck to 
give us both one last cordial grasp. 

"count on me--on us," cri clifford, speak in english, "if you 
are--troubled!" 

By what, my poor clifford? can you, with all your gay courage, turn 
back the hand of the dials? can you, with all your warm devotion, add 
one second to the magic second and make it two? the shadow we cast are 
white. 

the train stole out into the night, and I saw them group on the 
platform, silhouett in the glare of the yellow signals. I drew in my 
head and shut the window. sweetheart' face had grown veri serious, but 
now she smile across from her corner. 

"aren't you come over by me, jack?" 


vii. 

We must have been move veri swiftly, for the car rock and trembled, 
and it wa probabl that which awok me. I look across at sweetheart. 
she wa lie on her side, one cheek rest on her glove hand, her 
travel cap push back, her eye shut. I smooth away the curli 
strand of hair which straggl across her cheeks, and tuck anoth 
rug well about her feet. her feet were small as a child's. I speak as 
if she were not a child. she wa eighteen then. 

the next time I awok we lay in a long gaslit station. some soldier 
were disembark from the forward carriages, and a gendarm stalk up 
and down the platform. 

I look sleepili about for the name of the station. It wa paint 
in blue over the buffet--"petit st. yves." "i it possibl we are in 
brittany?" I thought. then the voic of the station hands, who were 
hoist a small boat upon the forward carriage, settl my doubts. 
"allons! tire hardiment, jean louis! met le cannott deboutte." 

"arrêt toi yves! doucement! doucement! sacré garce!" 

somewher in the dark a mellow bell tolled. I settl back to 
slumber, my eye on sweetheart. 

she slept. 


viii. 

I awok in a flood of brightest sunshine. from our window I could look 
into the centr of a most enchant littl town, all built of white 
limeston and granite. the june sunshin slant on thatch roof and 
paint gable, and fairli blaze on the littl river slip by under 
the stone bridg in the square. 

the street and the squar were aliv with rosy-fac women in white 
head-dresses. everywher the constant motion of blue skirt and 
spotless coiffes, the twinkl of varnish socks, the clump! clump! of 
sabots. 

like a black shadow a priest stole across the square. abov him the 
cross on the church glow like a live cinder, flash it reflect 
along the purple-sl roof from the eav of which a cloud of 
ash-gray pigeon drift into the gutter below. I turn from the 
window to encount sweetheart' eyes. her lip move a little, her 
long lash heavi with slumber droop lower, then with a littl sigh 
she sat bolt upright. when I laughed, as I alway did, she smiled, 
a littl confused, a littl ashamed, murmuring: "bonjour, mon chéri! 
quell heur est-il?" that wa alway the way sweetheart awoke. 

"O dear, I am so rumpled!" she said. "jack, get me the satchel thi 
minute, and don't look at me until I ask you to." 

I unlock the satchel, and then turn to the window again threw it 
wide open. oh, how sweet came the morn air from the meadows! some 
young fellow below on the bank of the stream were poke long cane 
fishing-rod under the arch of the bridge. 

"sweetheart," I said over my shoulder, "I believ there are trout in 
thi stream." 

"mr. elliott say that whenev you see a puddl you alway say that," 
she replied. 

"what doe he know about it?" I answered, for I am touchi on the 
subject; "he doesn't know a catfish from a--a dogfish." 

"neither do I, jack dear, but i'm go to learn. don't be cross." 

she had finish her toilet and came over to the window, lean out 
over my shoulder. 

"where are we?" she cri in startl wonder at the littl white town 
and the acr of sway clover. "oh, jack, is--i thi the country?" 

A man in uniform pass under our window look up surprised. 

"what are you do here?" he demanded; then, see sweetheart, he 
took off hi gold-lac cap, and added, with a bow: "thi carriag goe 
no farther, monsieur--madame----" 

"merci!" exclaim sweetheart, "we wish to go to quimperlé!" 

"and we have ticket for quimperlé," I insisted. 

"but," smile the official, "thi is quimperlé." 

It wa true. there wa the name written over the end of the station; 
and, look ahead, I saw that our car had been detach and wa 
stand in state seclus under the freight shed. how long it had 
been stand so heaven alon knows; but they evid had neglect 
to call us, and there we were inhabit a detach carriag in the 
heart of quimperlé. I manag to get a coupl of porters, and present 
we found all our trap pile up on the platform, and a lumber 
vehicl with a breton driver wait to convey us to the hotel. 

"which," said I to the docil breton, "i the best hotel in quimperlé?" 

"the hôtel lion d'or," he replied. 

"how do you know?" I demanded. 

"because," said he mildly, "it is the onli hotel in quimperlé." 

sweetheart observ that thi ought to be convincing, even to me, 
and she torment me all the way to the square, where I got even by 
pretend to be horrifi at her dishevel condit incid to a 
night' railway ride in a stuffi compartment. 

"don't, jack! peopl will look at us." 

"let 'em." 

"oh, thi is cruel! oh, i'll pay you for this!" 

and they did look at us--or rather at her; for from the time sweetheart 
and I had cast our lot together, I notic that I seem to escap the 
observ of passers-by. when I live alon in pari I attract a 
fair share of observ from the world as it wag on it parisian 
way. It wa pleasant to meet a pretti girl' eye now and then in the 
throng which flow through the park and boulevard. I realli never 
flatter myself that it wa becaus of my person beauty; but in 
paris, ani young fellow who is dress in the manner of albion, hat 
and glove in the same style, is not entir a cipher. but now it wa 
not the same, by a long shot. 

sweetheart' beauti simpli put me in my place as an unnot but 
perhap correct supplement to her. 

she knew she wa a beauty, and wa delight when she look into her 
mirror. noth escap her. the soft hair thread with sunshine, 
which, when loosened, curl to her knees; the clear white forehead and 
straight brows; the nose delic and a trifl upturned; the scarlet 
lip and fine cut chin--sh knew the valu of each of these. she wa 
pleas with the soft, full curv of her throat, the littl ears, and 
the colour which came and went in her cheeks. 

but her eye were the first thing one noticed. they were the most 
beauti gray eye that ever open under silken lashes. she approv 
of my tell her this, which duti I fulfil daily. perhap it may be 
superflu to say that we were veri much in love. did I say _were_? 

I think that, as I am chant the grace of sweetheart, it might not 
be amiss to say that she is just an inch shorter than I am, and that 
no parisienn carri a pretti gown with more perfect than she 
did. I have seen gown that look like the devil on the manikin, but 
when sweetheart wore them they were the astonish and admir of 
myself. and I do know when a woman is well dressed, though I am an art 
critic. 

sweetheart regard her beauti as an intim affair between ourselves, 
a preciou gift for our mutual benefit, to be care treasur and 
petted. her attitud toward the world wa unmistakable. the world might 
look--sh wa indifferent. with our intim friend she wa abov 
be flattered. clifford said to me once: "she carri her beauti as 
a princess would carri the koh-i-noor--sh know she is worthi of it, 
and hope it is worthi of her." 

"we ought to be so happi that I am beautiful!" she would say to me. 
"just think, suppos I were not!" 

I use to tri to make her believ that it would have made no difference. 

"oh, not now," she would say gravely. "I know that if I lost it it 
would be the same to us both, now; but you can't make me believ that, 
at first, when you use to lean over the terrac of the luxembourg and 
wait patient for hour just to see me walk out of the odeon." 

"I didn't," I would alway explain; "I wa there by accident." 

"oh, what a funni accid to happen everi day for two months!" 

"stop teasing! Of course, after the first week----" 

"and what a funni accid that I should pass the same way everi day 
for two months, when befor I alway went by the rue de seine!" 

there wa onc such an accident, and such a girl. I never knew her; she 
is dead. I wonder sometim that sweetheart knew, and believ it wa 
she herself. yet the other woman' shadow wa black. 

sweetheart had a most peculiar and unworldli habit of not embellish 
facts. she present display it when we arriv at the hôtel lion 
d'or. 

"jack," said she nervously, "the cinder have made your face 
unpleasant. I am ashamed. they may not believ you are my husband." 

"a monsieur and madame," I said, "we may have dirti face and be 
honest." 

"do you suppos they--they will believ it? these queer people----" 

"they'd better!" I said fiercely. 

"i--i hadn't thought of that," she said. "you see, in our own littl 
place in pari everybodi knew it, but here----" 

I said, "dearest, what nonsense!" and we march unceremoni up 
to the register, where I wrote our names. then, with a hasti littl 
squeez of her glove hand, she turn to the maid and trip off to 
inspect our quarters. while I wa pump the fat-head old proprietor 
about the trout fish in the vicinity, the maid return with the 
request that I mount to the room above. I follow her along the tile 
passag and found sweetheart sit on a trunk. 

"it' charming! charming!" she said. "just look at the rose outside, 
and the square, and the river! and oh, jack, the funni littl breton 
cattle, and the old man with knee-breeches! it' charming! and"--her 
she caught sight of the enraptur and fascin maid--"and you are 
charming, with your red cheek and white coiffe," she said. "oh, how 
pretty!" 

"oh, madame!" murmur the servant in dire confusion. 

I said, "dearest, that will do. nobodi speak of my peculiar charms, 
and I wish to be noticed." 

the presenc of the maid prevent sweetheart from make amends, so we 
told her we were satisfied, and we would spare her life if she prepar 
breakfast in seventeen seconds. 

she accept the gift of exist with a daze courtsey, and vanished. 

It wa refresh to get hold of a spong and cold water after fourteen 
hour in a cramp compartment. hunger drove us to hurry--a thing we 
rare did in the morning--and the way we splash cold water about 
would have been fatal to ani but a tile floor. 

"dear," I said, "you have not yet seen me in my tyroles knickerbock 
and beauti shoot jacket. you have never beheld my leg cloth in 
tyroles stockings, at twenti franc a pair." 

"the legs?" she inquir from the depth of a bath robe. 

I ignor the question, and part my hair with care. then I sat down 
on the window and whistled. 

Of cours I wa readi first. sweetheart' hair had got into a tangl 
and need to be all comb out. 

"oh, I know you are impatient, becaus you'r whistl the chant du 
départ," she said from the door of her toilet room. 

"a usual," I said, "I am readi first." 

"if you say that again----" she threatened. 

I said it, and dodg a sponge. present I wa request to open the 
trunk and select a gown for her. dear littl sweetheart! she love 
to pretend that she had so mani it need long consult to decid 
which. 

"the dark blue?" I inquired. 

"don't you think it is too warm?" 

"the pale blue, then--or the pink and white?" 

"whi not the white, with the cuff à l'anglaise, and the cano hat?" 

I haul it out. 

then, of course, she chang her mind. 

"I think the gray is better for the morning; then I can wear the big 
chip hat." 

I fish up the gray. It wa light, almost silvery, and had white spot 
on it. 

"jack, dear," she said, come out with her hair tuck up in a knot, 
draw the bath robe up to her chin with both hands, "I think that the 
white cloth would be better, and that I can wear the béret." 

By thi time the trunk wa in a pretti mess, which amus her; but at 
last I ferret out the white cloth dress, and, refus to listen to 
further discussion, sat down on the window seat. sweetheart enjoy it. 

"stop tell me to hurry," she said; "I can't, if you keep say it 
all the time." 

after a while she call me to fasten her corsage, which hook with 
about ten hundr hook along the side and collar. I hate to do it, 
and my finger end stung for hour after, but, as sweetheart veri 
rightli says, "when we are rich enough to have a maid you needn't," I 
submit with an air which delight her. her torment "thank you, 
jack," wa the last straw, so I calmli pick her up and carri her 
out, and almost to the dine room, where I set her down just in time 
to avoid the proprietor and three domest issu from the office. 

sweetheart wa half inclin to laugh, half indignant, and wholli 
scandalized. but she did not dare say anything, for we were at the 
dining-room door. 

there were some peopl there, but except for a slight inclin we 
did not notic each other. We had a small tabl to ourselv by the 
rose-bow window. 

We were veri hungry. breakfast began with fresh sardin just caught, 
and end with littl breton cake and a demi-tasse. I finish first; 
I alway do, becaus the wretch habit of bolt my food, contract 
while studi under bouguereau at julian's, cling to me yet. oh, 
I shall have a merri time pay for it when I am forty! I began, as 
usual, to teas sweetheart. 

"if you continu to eat like this, dear, you will never be abl to wear 
your new frocks. thi one seem a trifl too tight now." 

sweetheart, who pride herself as much on her figur as on her love 
face, repel the insult with disdain and nibbl her breton biscuit 
defiantly. when at last she condescend to rise, we stroll out 
under the tree in front of the hotel, and sat down on the low stone 
wall surround the garden. the noon sun hung in the zenith, flood 
the town with a dazzl downpour. sunbeam glanc and danc on 
the water; sunbeam filter through the foliage; sunbeam stole 
under sweetheart' big straw hat, search the depth of the gray 
eyes. sunbeam play merri mischief with my ear and neck, which 
were begin to sting in the first sunburn of the year. through the 
squar the white-coif women pass and repassed; small urchin with 
silver-buckl hatband roam about the bridg and market-plac until 
collect and troop off to school by a black-rob jesuit frère; 
and in the shade of the tree a dozen sprawl men in breton costum 
smoke their microscop pipe and watch the water. 

"they are an industri race," said I with fine irony, watch a 
happi inebri pursu a serpentin cours toward the café opposite. 

sweetheart, who wa as patriot a littl girl as ever hum the 
marseillaise, and adopt franc as long as she live in it, wa up in 
arm in an instant. 

"I have read," she said with conviction, "that the breton are a brave, 
industri race. they are french." 

"they speak a differ language," I said--"not a word of french in it." 

"they are french," repeat sweetheart, with an inflect which 
decid me to shun the subject until I could unpack my guide-book. 

We sat a littl while longer under the trees, until we both began 
nod and mutual accus each other. then sweetheart went up to 
the room to take a nap, and I, scorn such weakness, lay down in a 
steamer chair under our window and fell fast asleep in no time. 

I wa arous by a big pink rose which hit me squar on the mouth. 
sweetheart wa perch in the window seat above, and as I look up she 
sent a shower of blossom down upon me. 

"jack, you lazi creature, it' five o'clock, and i'm dress and readi 
for a walk!" 

"so am i," I said, jump up. 

"but not like that. you must come up and make yourself nice for dinner." 

"nice? what' the matter with these tweeds? aren't these new stock 
presentable?" 

"look at your hair!" she said evasively. "come up thi minut and brush 
it." 

I went, and wa compel to climb into a white collar and shirt, and 
trouser of an english cut. but befor we had gone far along the great 
militari road that climb the height abov the littl river, I took 
sweetheart' hand in mine and impart to her my view and intent 
upon the subject of my costum for the future. 

"you see, dearest, we are here in brittani for three reasons. the 
first is, that I should paint outdoors. the second is, that we should 
econom like the deuce. the third is, our shadows----" 

"I know," she interrupt faintly. "never mind, jack, dear." 

We walk silent for a while, hand clasp hand veri tightly, for we 
were both think of the third reason. 

I broke the silenc first, speak cheerfully, and she look up with 
a quick smile while the shadow fell from her brow. 

"you see, dear, in thi place, where we are going, there are no peopl 
but peasants. your frock are all right for a place like this; we 
must both wear our free-and-easi togs--i for painting, and you for 
scrambl about after your wild flower or fish with me. If you get 
tire of see me in corduroy or tweeds, i'll dress for you when you 
think you can't stand it ani longer." 

"oh, jack, I do like your knickerbockers----" 

"and you shall wear your most gorgeou gown for me----" 

"inde I won't," she laughed, ad impulsively, "inde I 
will--everi day, if you wish it!" 

At the top of the hill stood an ancient ursulin convent surround 
by a high wall, which also inclos the broad acr of the wealthi 
sisterhood. We sat down by the roadsid hedg and look across the 
valley, where the hurri river had ceas to hasten and now linger 
in placid pool and long, deep reaches. the sun had set behind the 
forest, and the sky threw a purpl light over wood and meadow. the 
grassi pool below were swept by flock of whistl martin and 
swallows. one or two white gull flap slowli toward the tide water 
below, and a young curlew, speed high overhead, utter a lonesom 
cry. the grass--th brilliant green grass of brittany--had turn a 
deep metal blue in the twilight. A pale primros light grew and die 
in the sky, and the forest chang from rose to ashes. then a dull red 
bar shot across the part cloud in the west, the forest smoulder 
an instant, and the pool glow crimson. slowli the red bar melt 
away, the light die out among the branches, the pool turn sombre. 
look up, we saw the new moon flash in the sky abov our heads. 
sweetheart sigh in perfect contentment. 

"it' beautiful!" I said, with anoth sigh. 

"ah, yes," she murmured, "beauti to you, and to me--to me, jack, who 
have never befor seen thi land of morbihan." 

after a while she said, "and the ocean--oh, how I long to see it! Is it 
near us, jack?" 

"the river run into it twenti kilometr below. We feel the tide at 
quimperlé." I did not add, "baedeker." 

"I wonder," I said presently, "what are the feel of a littl 
american who see thi country--th real country--for the first time?" 

"I suppos you mean me," she said. "I don't know--i don't think I 
understand it yet, but I know I shall love it, and never want to go 
back." 

"perhap we never shall," I said. "the magic second may stretch into 
year that end at last as all ends." 

then our hand met in that sudden nervou clasp which seem to help 
and steadi us when we were think of the real world, so long, so long 
forgotten. 


ix. 

I wa awaken next morn by a spong of cold water in the face, 
which I hate. I start up to wreak vengeanc upon sweetheart, but she 
fled to the toilet room and lock herself in. from thi retreat she 
taunt me until further sleep wa out of the question, and I bow 
to the inevitable--indignantly, when I saw my watch point to five 
o'clock. 

sweetheart wa perfectli possess to row; so when I had bolt my 
coffe and sat watch her placidli sip hers, we decid to go down to 
the bank of the littl stream and hire a boat. the boat wa a wretched, 
shapeless affair, with two enorm oar and the remnant of rowlocks. 
It wa the best boat in town, so we took it. I manag to get away 
from the bank, and, consciou of sweetheart' open admiration, pull 
boldli down the stream. It wa easi work, for the tide wa ebbing. the 
river up to the bridg wa tidal, but abov the bridg it leap and 
flowed, a regular salmon stream. sweetheart wa so impati to take 
the oar that I relinquish them and pick up my rod. the boat swung 
down the stream and under the high stone viaduct, where I insist 
on anchor and whip the promising-look water. the water wa 
like enough, and the sudden splash of a leap grils ad to it 
likelihood. I wa in hope a grils might becom entangl with one of 
the flies, but though a big one shot up out of the water within five 
feet of sweetheart, caus her to utter a suppress scream, neither 
grils nor trout rose to the beauti lure I trail about, and I 
onli hook two or three enorm dace, which came up like log and 
cover the bottom of the boat with their coars scales. 

sweetheart had never seen a french trout uncooked, and scarc share 
my disappointment. 

"they are splendid fish," she repeated; "you are unreasonable." 

there wa an ancient breton squat on the bank; from hi sulki 
attitud I took him to be a poacher visit hi infern set line and 
snares; but I hail him pleasantli with a bonjour, which he return 
civilli enough. 

"are there trout in thi stream?" 

"about the bridge," he repli cautiously. 

"have you caught any?" 

"I ain't fishing," he said, much alarmed. 

"what' that?" I demanded, point to as plump a trout as ever I saw, 
float on the end of a string under the bank. 

"where?" he asked, look about him with affect concern. 

"there!" 

He look around, everywher except where I pointed. He examin the 
horizon, and the tree tops, as though he expect a fish on everi twig. 
I pole the boat up to the bank and point out the fish. 

"ma doui!" he exclaimed, "there _is_ a fish!" 

"yes, a trout," I said. 

"trout?" He burst into a forc laugh. "trout! ha! ha! why, monsieur, 
that is a dace--a poor littl dace!" He hastili jerk it up with a 
long homemad gaff which lay--of cours quit by accident--at hi feet. 

"A poor littl dace!" he mumbled. "of course, monsieur would not care 
to claim such a poor, coars littl fish; but I am onli too glad to eat 
it--ah, yes, onli too glad!" 

"you see," said sweetheart impulsively, "that you are wrong. give him 
our fish; that will make four dace for the poor fellow." 

I place the three dace across the blade of my oar and held it out to 
the poacher. He took them as if he were realli glad to get them. then 
I said, "these are dace, and they don't have red spots." 

He stood as if readi to bolt, but I laughed, and settl back on my 
oars, saying: "you'r a poacher; but I don't care a continental, and 
you can poach all day in thi confound country, where there is about 
one trout to the kilometre. don't look scared. what do I care? onli 
don't tell me i'm unabl to distinguish a trout when I can see the tip 
of hi nose." 

I then sail majest out into the stream. 

sweetheart want to know whether that wa realli a real poacher. 
she had read about them. her ideal poacher wa a young, stalwart, 
eagle-ey giant, with a tangl of hair and a disposit toward 
assassination. the realiti shock her. 

"anyway," she said, "you frighten the poor old thing. how rough men 
are!" 

We return to the land place with difficulty, for the tide wa 
still on the ebb, and we got aground more than once. My hand were in 
a fine condit when at last I drove that wretch scow into the mud 
and lift sweetheart out to the firm bank. the evil-ey old man who 
rent us the boat glanc sardon at my rod and blister hands, 
and I wa glad enough to pay him all he ask and break away for the 
hotel. 

We had an hour to lunch in, pack, and be readi for the trap which 
wa to bear us to our destination--th distant villag of faöuet, in 
morbihan. 


X. 

A long drive on a smooth white road, acr of gors and broom, beech 
wood and oak thickets, and the "heu! heu! allo! allons! en route!" of 
the breton driver, these are my recollect of the ride to faöuet. 
there are others, too--th hedg heavi with bloom, the perfum of the 
wild honeysuckle, the continu bird choru from everi grove and everi 
brambl patch--and sweetheart' veil fli into my face. 

We have spoken of it sinc together, but she ha few recollect 
of that journey. she onli rememb it as her first step into our 
heritage. 

and so we enter into our heritage, sweetheart and I; and our heritag 
wa veri fair, for it lay everywher about us. It wa a world which 
we alon inhabited. men said, "thi land is gloanec's," "thi is 
gurnalec's," "thi is kerdec's"; they spoke of "mi woods" and "hi 
meadows" and "their pastures." and how we laughed; for when we pass 
togeth through their lands, around us, far as the eye could reach, 
our heritag lay in the sunshine. 


xi. 

one day, when sweetheart had been weeping--for we were think of the 
end to the magic second--i spoke of our heritag which swept far as the 
eye could reach across the moor of faöuet. 

she said: "the past is ours, jack; the present is ours; the future----" 

We tri to smile, but our heart were like lead. yet we know that the 
futur will also be ours. I know it as I write. 


xii. 

the letter from st. gildas, bring with it a breath of salt air, lay 
on the tabl befor us. sweetheart clasp her hand and look at me. 

"i'm in favour of go at once," I said for the third time. over by 
the wall were pile my canvases, the result of three month in faöuet. 

the first wa a studi of sweetheart under the tree of the ancient 
orchard in the convent grounds. what troubl I had had with that 
canvas! I rememb the morn that the old garden came over 
and stood behind me as I painted; and when I had repli to hi 
"good-morning," I recal the pang hi next word gave me: 

"I am so sorry, monsieur, but it is forbidden to enter the convent 
grounds." 

My canva wa almost finished, and, as the romanc have it, "mi 
despair wa great!" A month' work for nothing--or next to nothing! 

sweetheart rose from her pose on the low bough of the appl tree and 
came over to my side. "never mind, jack; I shall go and ask the mother 
superior about it." 

I knew that she would win over the mother superior; and when, that 
evening, she came back radiant, crying, "she is lovely!--sh say you 
may finish the picture, and I think you ought to go and thank her," I 
put on my cap, and step across the street, we rang at the gate. 

the old garden let us in, and in a moment I stood befor the lattic 
window behind which some one wa moving. In a low voic the invis 
nun told us that the superior grant to us the privileg of work in 
the orchard, but we must be care of the grass, becaus it wa almost 
time to cut it. 

"I am sure we may have confid in you," she said. 

"we will not trampl the grass, my sister, and I thank you for us both." 

the lattic trembled, wa rais a little, and then fell. 

"you are english," said the hidden nun. 

"I am american, my sister." 

I look at the lattic a moment, then drop my eyes. I may have been 
mistaken, but I think she sighed. 

sweetheart came closer to the lattic and murmur her thanks. 

there wa a pause. 

then came the voic again, sweet and gentle: "may our ladi of saint 
gilda protect you"; and we went out by the littl iron wicket. 

the next pictur wa anoth studi of sweetheart in the woods; the 
next, anoth studi of sweetheart; and the other were studi of the 
same young lady. 

the light in the room had grown dim, and I walk to the window which 
overlook the convent chapel. the chapel window were open; within, 
the nun stood or knelt chanting. three white-veil figur were 
advanc to the altar, and the others, drape in black now knelt 
behind. I didn't think I had ani busi to look at them, so I did 
not. after all, they were cloister nuns, and it wa onli on hot 
night that they open the chapel windows. sweetheart wa speak 
besid my shoulder. 

"poor things! the one in white, they are the novices; they will never 
see parent or friend again. when they enter the gate they never 
leave--never; they are buri there." 

I said: "after all, we are much like them. We have left all; we have 
noth now but each other, for the world is dead, and we are bound by 
vow which keep us within the narrow confin of our heritage." 

"but our heritag is everywhere--a far as we can see." 

"ah, yes, but we can onli see to the horizon. there is a world beyond." 

"I have renounc it," said sweetheart faintly. 


xiii. 

the letter from st. gilda had been lie on our tabl for a week 
befor I thought of answer it, and even then it wa sweetheart who 
wrote: 

"dear mr. stuart: 

"jack is too lazi to answer your kind note, so, in pure shame 
for hi discourtesy, I hasten to repli to your questions. 

"first: yes; we have been work veri hard, and jack' 
pictur are charming, though he growl over them all day. 

"second: yes; we intend to stay in brittani thi winter for 
lot of reasons--on be economy, and another, jack' 
outdoor painting. 

"third: yes; we are come to st. gildas. 

"fourth: to-morrow. 

"fifth: no; we had not heard of mr. clifford' affair with 
the policeman; and oh, I am so sorri he wa lock up and 
fined! jack laughs. I suspect he, too, wa as wick as you 
all when he wa a student, alon in paris. 

"sixth: I know you are jack' oldest and most intim friend, 
so I allow you more liberti than I do messieur clifford and 
elliott; therefor I will answer your question as to whether 
the honeymoon is not on the wane. no! no! no! there are three 
answer to one question. see how gener I can be!" 

sweetheart call me to see whether or not I approved. I did, and ad 
my answer to stuart' last question as follows: "no, you idiot!" then 
I sign the note, and sweetheart seal and direct it. 

So we left for st. gilda next morn befor sunris and in the rain. 
thi leav at such an unearthli hour wa not my doing, but sweetheart 
wa determined, and rose by candlelight in spite of desper 
opposit on my part. It wa cold, and the rain beat against the 
windows. 

It wa mani kilometr to st. gildas, but befor we had gone six, the 
rain had ceas and the eastern sky flush to a pale rose. 

"thank goodness!" I said, "we shall have the sun." 

then the daili repeat miracl of the come of dawn wa wrought 
befor our eyes. the heaven glow in rainbow tints; the shred mist 
rise along the river wa touch with purpl and gold, and acr 
of meadow and pastur drip preciou stones. shred of the fade 
night-mist drift among the tree tops, now tip with fire, while in 
the forest depth faint sparkl came from some lost ray of morn 
light fall on wet leaves. then of a sudden up shot the sun, and 
against it, black and gigantic, a peasant towered, lean upon hi 
spade. 


xiv. 

We were fast near the end of our long journey. the sun blaze on 
us from the zenith, and the wheel creak with the heat of the white 
road. the driver lean back, saying, "we enter finistèr here by thi 
granit post." present he added, "the ocean!" 

there it lay, a basin of silver and blue. sweetheart had start to her 
feet, speechless, one hand hold to my shoulder, the other clasp 
to her breast. and now, as the road wound through the hill and down 
to the coast, long stretch of white sand skirt the distant cliffs, 
and over the cliff wave mile and mile of yellow gorse. A cluster of 
white and gray hous lay in the hollow to the left almost at the mouth 
of the river, and beyond, the wave were beat in the bar--beat 
the same rhythm which we were to hear so long there together, day and 
night. there wa not a boat to be seen, not a creature, nor wa there 
ani sign of life save for the smoke curl from a cottag chimney 
below. the ocean lay sparkl beneath, and beyond it deeper blue 
melt into the haze on the horizon. 

suddenly, in the road below, the figur of a man appeared, and at the 
same moment a pointer pup came gambol up besid us in an ecstasi 
of self-abneg and apology. I sprang out of the lumber vehicl 
and lift sweetheart to the ground, and in an instant we were shake 
hand with a stalwart young fellow in knickerbock and jersey, who 
said we were a pretti pair not to have come sooner, and told sweetheart 
he piti her lot--mean me. 

then we walk arm in arm down a fragrant lane to the river bank, where 
the dearest old ladi toddl out of the granit hous to welcom us and 
show us our rooms. sweetheart went with her, while I stop an instant 
to chat with stuart. 

"that is madam ylven," he said. "she is the most stun peasant 
woman in finistère, and you will want for nothing." then, after a 
moment, "good heavens! jack, what a beauti your wife----" He stop 
short, but added, "what a delici littl beauti sweetheart ha grown 
to be!" 

A white-coif maid came to the door, and said, "will monsieur have 
the good to come? madam wish him to see the rooms." 

the wind blew from the south, and the thunder of the sea wa in my ear 
as I mount the stair to our new quarters. 

sweetheart met me at the door, saying, "it seem almost too much 
happi to bear, but I feel that we are at home at last--alon 
togeth for all time." 

alon together? the ocean at our threshold, the moor and forest at 
our back, and a good slate roof abov us. befor me through the open 
door I could see the great old-fashion room, warm in the afternoon 
sunlight--th room we were to live in so long, the room in which we 
were to pass the happiest and bitterest moment of our lives. 

she hesit an instant befor the threshold. I think we knew that we 
stood upon the threshold of our destiny. then I said, half in earnest: 
"are you afraid to cross with me into the unknown future? see, the room 
is fill with sunshine. are you afraid?" 

she sprang across the threshold, and, turn to me, held out both 
hands. 


xv. 

the sun slip lower and lower into the sea, until a distant toss 
wave wash it out against the sky. light die in the room, and shadow 
close around us; yet it wa in the dark and shadow that we drew 
nearer to each other, then and after. 


xvi. 

stuart stood under our window and yell up at me, "oh, jack! I say, 
jack!" 

sweetheart, who wa fuss over the half-unpack trunk, went to the 
window and threw open the panes. 

"you don't mean to say you have had your coffee?" she said. "jack isn't 
up yet." 

"jack is up," I explained, come to the window in pajamas. "hello!" 

"I onli want to say that I haven't had my coffee," he explained, "and 
i'm go to take it with you when you'r ready." 

sweetheart pick up her béret, and, pass a hatpin through it, 
turn to me with a warning, "I shall eat all the breakfast, monsieur!" 
and vanish down the stairs. A moment later I heard her clear voic 
below: 

sonnez le chœur, 
chasseur! 
sonnez la mort! 

befor I had finish dressing, sweetheart trip in with my coffe 
and toast. 

"of cours i'v finished," she said, "and you don't deserv this. 
mr. stuart ha gone off with hi canvases, and say he'll see you at 
lunch." 

I swallow the coffe and brows on littl squar of toast which 
she condescendingli butter for me, and then, light a cigarette, I 
announc my intent of command an explor expedit consist 
of sweetheart and myself. A scratch at the door and a patter of feet 
announc that I had been overheard. 

sweetheart unlatch the door, and the pointer pup of the even 
befor charg into the room and cover us with boister caresses, 
which we took to indic that he not onli approv of the expedition, 
but intend to undertak the gener supervis of it himself. I 
resign the leadership at once. 

"hi name," said sweetheart in the tone of one who present a 
distinguish guest, "i 'luff.'" 

I grave acknowledg the honour by pat hi head. 

"i'm afraid," I said to sweetheart, "that there is a bar sinist 
upon hi escutcheon, but possibl it is onli the indel mark of the 
conquer british foxhound." 

sweetheart said, "nonsense!" and the expedit moved, luff lead 
with a seri of ear-split order in the dog languag which we 
perfectli understood. 

In ten minut we stood on the cliffs, the salt wind whip our 
faces. saint-gildas-des-pré lay at our feet. 

"I know," observ sweetheart calmly, "all about thi place. captain 
ylven told me at breakfast." 

"well," said I, "what' that island on the horizon?" 

then she overwhelm me with erudition, until I long for baedek and 
revenge. 

"that is the isl de groix, and all about us is the bay of biscay. thi 
littl hamlet on the cliff is st. julien, and if we follow the coast 
far enough we come to lorient." 

"follow the coast? which way?" 

sweetheart had forgotten, and I triumph in silence, until she stamp 
her foot and march off to assist luff in investig a suspici 
hole in the cliff. 

I went to the edg of the plateau and look over. the surf thunder 
against the rocks, toss long strand of seawe over the pebbl 
beach. A man with a wooden rake stood in the water up to hi knees. He 
rake the seawe from the breaker as a farmer rake weed from the 
lawn. the salt wind began to sting my lip and eyes. My throat felt dri 
and salty. I turn toward the hamlet of st. gildas. I had not imagin 
it so small. besid our hous there were but three other cluster 
under the river bank. behind it stretch wood and grain field broken 
by patch of yellow gorse. across the river stood a stone chapel 
almost lost in the mile of moorland. To the east and west the down 
cover with gors and heather roll to the horizon. here and there 
along the cliff stood what appear to be the ruin of ancient forts, 
and on a rock, just where the river sweep out into the sea, rose a 
dirti white signal tower. the tower wa low and squatti and wet. It 
look like some salin excresc which had slowli exud from the 
brine-soak rock. On the bar hundr of white gull rose and settl 
as the tide encroached; curlew were run along the foam-splash 
shore under the eastern cliff across the river. 

On our side of the river the cliff were cover with blackthorn and 
hawthorn, with here and there a stunt oak, probabl so place by 
provid as gener rendezv for all the small twitter bird of 
finistère. bird were everywhere. from the cloud came the ceaseless 
carol of skylarks; from the grain field and the flower gors rose 
an unbroken chorus, taken up and repeat by flock of microscop 
songster among the blackthorn on the cliffs. 

"thi is paradise, thi wilderness," I thought. 

then, as I heard sweetheart' mock voic from the cliff: 

O frère jacques, 
dormez vous! 

"i'm not asleep!" I cri in answer. "what is it?" 

"luff ha unearth a poor littl mole, but I won't allow him to hurt 
it." 

"jack, dear," she said, as I came up, "couldn't we keep it as a pet? 
see, the poor littl thing is blind." 

As it wa blind we call it "love," which later wa chang to 
"cupid," and finally, when we discov it true gormand 
character, for "cupid" we substitut "cupidity," by which name it 
flourish and fattened. 

"what a change," said sweetheart sadly, "from blind love to blind 
greed!" 

the mole grew veri fat. 


xvii. 

when the wind stir the leav among the poplars, and the long shadow 
fall athwart the fields; when the wind rise at night, and the branch 
scrape and crack abov the moonlit snow; when in the long hot day 
the earth is bath in fragrance, and all the littl creatur of 
the field are silent; when in the still even the flower perfum 
the air, and the gravel walk shine white in the moonlight; when the 
breez quicken from the distant coast; when the sand shake beneath 
the shock of the breakers, and everi wave is plume with white; when 
the calm eye of the beacon turn to mine, lingers, and turn away, and 
the surf is yeasti and thick; when I start at the sound of a voic from 
the cliffs, and my eye are rais in vain; when the white gull toss 
and drift in the storm-clouds, and the water hurri out in the black 
ebb tide; when I rise and look from the window; when I dress; when I 
work with pen and colour; when I rest; when I walk; when I sleep--ther 
is one face befor my eyes, one name on my lips. for the white shadow 
is turn gray, and god alon know the end. 


xviii. 

and god alon know the end, for the mist are crowding, brood 
like angry-brow clouds, and I hear the whistl of unseen winds, and 
my life-flam waver and sink and flares, blown hither and thither, 
tossing, fading, leaping, but fading, alway fading. 

In a flash, like a print pictur on a screen, illuminated, keenli 
etch in the white glare, I see the bed, and the peopl around me, 
the black gowns, the pale eye of the doctor, the spong and basin, the 
roll of lint. 

voices, minut but clean-cut and clear as pick harp-strings, tinkl 
in my ears; the voic of the doctor, other voices, but alway the 
voic of the doctor--"th splinter of bone on the brain; the splinter 
press on the tissues; the depression." 

the doctor! that is the man! that is the man who come to my side, who 
follows, follow where I go, who seek me throughout the world! I saw 
him as I lay flung on the turf, limp, unconscious, below the cliff 
on the aspen hills; I felt hi presenc in the studio; I heard him 
creep at my heel across the gors thicket of st. gildas. and now 
he ha come to cut short the magic second, to turn back time--back, 
back, into the old worn channels, rock-rib and salt with tears. 

As a leaf of written paper torn in two, so shall my life be torn in 
two; and the long tear shall mangl the chapter written in rose and 
gold. 

then, too, my shadow, alreadi turn from white to gray, shall fall 
with a deeper stain wherev I pass; and I shall see the yellow gors 
glimmer and turn to golden-rod, and the poplar turn to oaks; and the 
twin tower of notr dame, filmy, lace-carved, and gray with centuries, 
shall dwindl as I look--dwindl and sway and turn to pines, sing 
pine that murmur to the winds, blow across the aspen hills. 

* * * * * 

all that is fair shall pass away; all that I love, all that I fear 
for--thes shall the doctor take away, lift them from my memori on 
the point of a steel blade. what ha he to give in return? A hell of 
vapour, distort sight; a hell of sound, drown the soul. 

* * * * * 

gigant apparit aris across the world of water, waver like 
shadow on the clouds. steel-clad, cloth in skins, casqu in steel, 
their wing head bend and nod and move against the clouds. and even 
they are chang as cloud chang shape. I see steel limb turn red 
and naked. I see wing casqu trail to the earth, feathered, paint 
in colour of earth. 

ihó! inâh! etó! e-hó! 

the bridg of star span the vast lake of air; the sun and the moon 
travel over it. 

* * * * * 

My shadow is turn dark; I can scarc see the doctor, but now--god 
have mercy!--_i can touch him._ 

* * * * * 

all the high spectr are stoop from the clouds, bend abov me to 
watch. I know them and their eye of shadow--i know them now; hârpen 
that wa to chaské what hárpstinâ shall be to hapéda; and hârka shall 
come after all with the voic of winter winds: 

"aké u, aké u, aké u!" 

but the magic second shall never return. 

"mâ cânté maséca!" 

* * * * * 

now they leav my bed, the peopl who crowd there under the shadowi 
form of the spectres; now the doctor bend over; I see and feel him. 
hi hand are tangl in the thread of time; he is cut a thread; 
he---- 


xix. 

when I spoke to him first I spoke in the french language. befor he 
answered, the scream of a blue jay in the elm outsid set my nerv 
aquiver, and I call for donald and walter. 

As I lay there I could see the aspen hill from the window, heap 
of crumpl gold bath in sunshine. over them sail the froth from 
the silken milkweed; over them drift the big brown-r butterflies, 
lumin as richest autumn leaves. 

some one close the door softly. the doctor had gone. 

the sunlight pour into the window, etch my shadow on the wall 
behind. ly veri still there I saw it motionless besid me. _the 
shadow wa black._ 

somebodi said in the next room, "will he die?" 

"die?" I said aloud. 

A bird twitter outsid my window. 

the door open again, noiselessly. 

"sweetheart?" I whispered. 

"yes, jack." 

after a moment I said, "when do you go back to school?" 

"i? I finish school a year ago." 

"come nearer." 

"I am here, jack." 

"time stop a year ago." 

"A year ago to-day." 

the same gray eyes, the same face, paler, perhaps. 

"we have journey far," I sighed, "alway together, but in those day 
our shadow were white as snow. Am I go to die? there are tear in 
your eyes." 

they fell on my cheek; her arm fell too, closer, closer, around my 
neck. 

"life ha begun," she said. 

"life? what wa the year that end to-day? the magic second of life?" 

"A year of death, to me!" 

ah, but her soul know of a life in death! and she shall know it, 
too, when her shadow turn whiter than snow. for the templ of idol 
ha close it door at the sound of a voice, and an idol of gilt ha 
turn to flesh and blood. 

i-hó! 

So shall she know of the life in death when her soul and her bodi are 
one. 




passeur. 


O friends, i'v serv ye food and bed; 
O friends, the mist is rise wet; 
then bide a moment, O my dead, 
where, lonely, I must linger yet! 




passeur. 

becaus man goeth to hi long home, 
and the mourner go about the streets. 


when he had finish hi pipe he tap the brier bowl against the 
chimney until the ash powder the char log smoulder across 
the andirons. then he sank back in hi chair, absent touch the hot 
pipe-bowl with the tip of each finger until it grew cool enough to be 
drop into hi coat pocket. 

twice he rais hi eye to the littl american clock tick upon the 
mantel. He had half an hour to wait. 

the three candl that light the room might be trim to advantage; 
thi would give him someth to do. A pair of scissor lay open 
upon the bureau, and he rose and pick them up. for a while he stood 
dreamili shut and open the scissors, hi eye roam about the 
room. there wa an easel in the corner, and a pile of dusti canvas 
behind it; behind the canvas there wa a shadow--that gray, menac 
shadow that never moved. 

when he had trim each candl he wipe the smoki scissor on a paint 
rag and flung them on the bureau again. the clock point to ten; he 
had been occupi exactli three minutes. 

the bureau wa litter with neckties, pipes, comb and brushes, 
matches, reel and fly-books, collars, shirt studs, a new pair of 
scotch shoot stockings, and a woman' workbasket. 

He pick out all the neckties, fold them once, and hung them over 
a bit of twine that stretch across the looking-glass; the shirt 
stud he shovel into the top drawer along with brushes, combs, and 
stockings; the reel and fly-book he dust with hi handkerchief 
and place method along the mantel shelf. twice he stretch out 
hi hand toward the woman' workbasket, but hi hand fell to hi side 
again, and he turn away into the room stare at the die fire. 

outsid the snow-seal window a shutter broke loos and bang 
monotonously, until he flung open the pane and fasten it. the soft, 
wet snow, that had choke the window-pan all day, wa frozen hard 
now, and he had to break the polish crust befor he could find the 
rusti shutter hinge. 

He lean out for a moment, hi numb hand rest on the snow, the 
roar of a rise snow-squal in hi ears; and out across the desol 
garden and stark hedgerow he saw the flat black river spread through 
the gloom. 

A candl sputter and snap behind him; a sheet of drawing-pap 
flutter across the floor, and he close the pane and turn back 
into the room, both hand in hi worn pockets. 

the littl american clock on the mantel tick and ticked, but the 
hand lagged, for he had not been occupi five minut in all. He went 
up to the mantel and watch the hand of the clock. A minute--long 
than a year to him--crept by. 

around the room the furnitur stood ranged--a chair or two of yellow 
pine, a table, the easel, and in one corner the broad curtain bed; 
and behind each lay shadows, menac shadow that never moved. 

A littl pale flame start up from the smoke log on the andirons; 
the room sang with the sudden hiss of escap wood gases. after a 
littl the back of the log caught fire; jet of blue flare up here and 
there with mellow sound like the light of gas-burn in a row, and 
in a moment a thin sheet of yellow flame wrap the whole char log. 

then the shadow moved; not the shadow behind the furniture--they 
never moved--but other shadows, thin, gray, confusing, that came and 
spread their slim pattern all around him, and trembl and trembled. 

He dare not step or tread upon them, they were too real; they mesh 
the floor around hi feet, they ensnar hi knees, they fell across 
hi breast like ropes. some night, in the silenc of the moors, when 
wind and river were still, he fear these strand of shadow might 
tighten--creep higher around hi throat and tighten. but even then he 
knew that those other shadow would never move, those gray shape that 
knelt crouch in everi corner. 

when he look up at the clock again ten minut had straggl past. 
time wa disturb in the room; the strand of shadow seem entangl 
among the hand of the clock, drag them back from their rotation. 
He wonder if the shadow would strangl time, some still night when 
the wind and the flat river were silent. 

there grew a sudden chill across the floor; the crack of the board 
let it in. He lean down and drew hi sabot toward him from their 
place near the andirons, and slip them over hi chaussons; and as he 
straighten up, hi eye mechan sought the mantel above, where 
in the dusk anoth pair of sabot stood, little, slender, delic 
sabots, carv from red beech. A year' dust gray their surface; a 
year' rust dull the silver band across the instep. He said thi to 
himself aloud, know that it wa within a few minut of the year. 

hi own sabot came from mort-dieu; they were shave squar and band 
with steel. but in day past he had thought that no sabot in mort-dieu 
wa delic enough to touch the instep of the mort-dieu passeur. So he 
sent to the shore lighthouse, and they sent to lorient, where the women 
are coquettish and show their hair under the coiffe, and wear dainti 
sabots; and in thi town, where vaniti corrupt and there is much lace 
on coiff and collarette, a pair of delic sabot wa found, band 
with silver and chisel in red beech. the sabot stood on the mantel 
abov the fire now, dusti and tarnished. 

there wa a sound from the window, the soft murmur of snow blot 
glass panes. the wind, too, mutter under the roof eaves. present it 
would begin to whisper to him from the chimney--h knew it--and he held 
hi hand over hi ear and stare at the clock. 

In the hamlet of mort-dieu the pine sing all day of the sea secrets, 
but in the night the ghost of littl gray bird fill the branches, 
sing of the sunshin of past years. He heard the song as he sat, 
and he crush hi hand over hi ears; but the gray bird join with 
the wind in the chimney, and he heard all that he dare not hear, and 
he thought all that he dare not hope or think, and the swift tear 
scald hi eyes. 

In mort-dieu the night are longer than anywher on earth; he knew 
it--whi should he not know? thi had been so for a year; it wa 
differ before. there were so mani thing differ before; day and 
night vanish like minut then; the pine told no secret of the 
sea, and the gray bird had not yet come to mort-dieu. also, there wa 
jeanne, passeur at the carmes. 

when he first saw her she wa pole the square, flat-bottom ferri 
skiff from the carm to mort-dieu, a red handkerchief bound across her 
silki black hair, a red skirt flutter just below her knees. the next 
time he saw her he had to call to her across the placid river, "ohé! 
ohé, passeur!" she came, pole the flat skiff, her deep blue eye 
fix pensiv on him, the scarlet skirt and kerchief idli flap in 
the april wind. then day follow day when the far call "passeur!" grew 
clearer and more joyous, and the faint answer cry, "I come!" rippl 
across the water like music ting with laughter. then spring came, 
and with spring came love--love, carri free across the ferri from the 
carm to mort-dieu. 

the flame abov the char log whistled, flickered, and went out in 
a jet of wood vapour, onli to play like lightn abov the ga and 
relight again. the clock tick more loudly, and the song from the 
pine fill the room. but in hi strain eye a summer landscap wa 
reflected, where white cloud sail and white foam curl under the 
squar bow of a littl skiff. and he press hi numb hand tighter 
to hi ear to drown the cry, "passeur! passeur!" 

and now for a moment the clock ceas ticking. It wa time to go--who 
but he should know it, he who went out into the night swing hi 
lantern? and he went. He had gone each night from the first--from that 
first strang winter even when a strang voic had answer him 
across the river, the voic of the new passeur. He had never heard 
_her_ voic again. 

So he pass down the windi wooden stairs, lantern hang light in 
hi hand, and step out into the storm. through sheet of drift 
snow, over heap of frozen seawe and ici drift he moved, shift hi 
lantern right and left, until it glimmer on the water warn him. then 
he call out into the night, "passeur!" the frozen spray spatter 
hi face and crust the lantern; he heard the distant boom of breaker 
beyond the bar, and the nois of mighti wind among the seaward cliffs. 

"passeur!" 

across the broad flat river, black as a sea of pitch, a tini light 
sparkl a moment. again he cried, "passeur!" 

"I come!" 

He turn ghastli white, for it wa her voice--or wa he crazy?--and 
he sprang waist deep into the ici current and cri out again, but hi 
voic end in a sob. 

slowli through the snow the flat skiff took shape, creep nearer 
and nearer. but she wa not at the pole--h saw that; there wa onli a 
tall, thin man, shroud to the eye in oilskin; and he leap into the 
boat and bade the ferryman hasten. 

halfway across he rose in the skiff, and called, "jeanne!" but the roar 
of the storm and the thrash of ici wave drown hi voice. yet he 
heard her again, and she call to him by name. 

when at last the boat grate upon the invis shore, he lift hi 
lantern, trembling, stumbl among the rocks, and call to her, as 
though hi voic could silenc the voic that had spoken a year ago 
that night. and it could not. He sank shiver upon hi knees, and 
look out into the darkness, where an ocean roll across a world. 
then hi stiff lip moved, and he repeat her name; but the hand of 
the ferryman fell gentli upon hi head. 

and when he rais hi eye he saw that the ferryman wa death. 




the key TO grief. 

the move finger writes, and, have writ, 
move on; nor all your pieti nor wit 
shall lure it back to cancel half a line, 
nor all your tear wash out a word of it. 

fitzgerald. 




the key TO grief. 

the wild hawk to the wind-swept sky 
the deer to the wholesom wold, 
and the heart of a man to the heart of a maid, 
As it wa in the day of old. 

kipling. 


I. 

they were do their work veri badly. they got the rope around hi 
neck, and tie hi wrist with moose-bush withes, but again he fell, 
sprawling, turning, twist over the leaves, tear up everyth 
around him like a trap panther. 

He got the rope away from them; he clung to it with bleed fists; he 
set hi white teeth in it, until the jute strand relaxed, unravelled, 
and snapped, gnaw through by hi white teeth. 

twice tulli struck him with a gum hook. the dull blow fell on flesh 
rigid as stone. 

panting, foul with forest mould and rotten leaves, hand and face 
smear with blood, he sat up on the ground, glare at the circl of 
men around him. 

"shoot him!" gasp tully, dash the sweat from hi bronz brow; and 
bates, breath heavily, sat down on a log and drag a revolv from 
hi rear pocket. the man on the ground watch him; there wa froth in 
the corner of hi mouth. 

"git back!" whisper bates, but hi voic and hand trembled. "kent," 
he stammered, "won't ye hang?" 

the man on the ground glared. 

"ye'v got to die, kent," he urged; "they all say so. ask lefti 
sawyer; ask dyce; ask carrots.--he' got to swing fur it--ain't he, 
tully?--kent, fur god' sake, swing fur these here gents!" 

the man on the ground panted; hi bright eye never moved. 

after a moment tulli sprang on him again. there wa a flurri of leaves, 
a crackle, a gasp and a grunt, then the thump and thrash of two 
bodi writh in the brush. dyce and carrot jump on the prostrat 
men. lefti sawyer caught the rope again, but the jute strand gave 
way and he stumbled. tulli began to scream, "he' chokin' me!" dyce 
stagger out into the open, moan over a broken wrist. 

"shoot!" shout lefti sawyer, and drag tulli aside. "shoot, jim 
bates! shoot straight, b' god!" 

"git back!" gasp bates, rise from the fallen log. 

the crowd part right and left; a quick report rang 
out--another--another. then from the whirl of smoke a tall form 
staggered, deal blows--blow that sound sharp as the crack of a 
whip. 

"he' off! shoot straight!" they cried. 

there wa a gallop of heavi boot in the woods. bates, faint and dazed, 
turn hi head. 

"shoot!" shriek tully. 

but bate wa sick; hi smoke revolv fell to the ground; hi white 
face and pale eye contracted. It last onli a moment; he start 
after the others, plunging, wallow through thicket of osier and 
hemlock underbrush. 

far ahead he heard kent crash on like a young moos in november, 
and he knew he wa make for the shore. the other knew too. alreadi 
the gray gleam of the sea cut a straight line along the forest edge; 
alreadi the soft clash of the surf on the rock broke faintli through 
the forest silence. 

"he' got a cano there!" bawl tully. "he'll be into it!" 

and he wa into it, kneel in the bow, drive hi paddl to the 
handle. the rise sun gleam like red lightn on the flash 
blade; the cano shot to the crest of a wave, hung, bow drip in 
the wind, drop into the depths, glided, tipped, rolled, shot up 
again, staggered, and plung on. 

tulli ran straight out into the cove surf; the water broke against hi 
chest, bare and wet with sweat. bate sat down on a worn black rock and 
watch the cano listlessly. 

the cano dwindl to a speck of gray and silver; and when carrots, who 
had run back to the gum camp for a rifle, returned, the speck on the 
water might have been easier to hit than a loon' head at twilight. So 
carrots, be thrifti by nature, fire once, and wa satisfi to save 
the other cartridges. the cano wa still visible, make for the open 
sea. somewher beyond the horizon lay the keys, a string of rock bare 
as skulls, black and slimi where the sea cut their base, white on the 
crest with the excrement of sea birds. 

"he' makin' fur the key to grief!" whisper bate to dyce. 

dyce, moaning, and nurs hi broken wrist, turn a sick face out to 
sea. 

the last rock seaward wa the key to grief, a splinter pinnacl 
polish by the sea. from the key to grief, seaward a day' paddle, if 
a man dared, lay the long wood island in the ocean known as grief on 
the chart of the bleak coast. 

In the histori of the coast, two men had made the voyag to the key to 
grief, and from there to the island. one of these wa a rum-craz pelt 
hunter, who live to come back; the other wa a colleg youth; they 
found hi batter cano at sea, and a day later hi batter bodi wa 
flung up in the cove. 

so, when bate whisper to dyce, and when dyce call to the others, 
they knew that the end wa not far off for kent and hi canoe; and they 
turn away into the forest, sullen, but satisfi that kent would get 
hi due when the devil got his. 

lefti spoke vagu of the wage of sin. carrots, with an eye to 
thrift, suggest a plan for an equit divis of kent' property. 

when they reach the gum camp they pile kent' person effect on a 
blanket. 

carrot took the inventory: a revolver, two gum hooks, a fur cap, a 
nickel-pl watch, a pipe, a pack of new cards, a gum sack, forti 
pound of spruce gum, and a fri pan. 

carrot shuffl the cards, pick out the joker, and flip it 
pensiv into the fire. then he dealt cold deck all around. 

when the good and chattel of their late companion had been divid by 
chance--for there wa no chanc to cheat--somebodi rememb tully. 

"he' down there on the coast, starin' after the canoe," said bate 
huskily. 

He rose and walk toward a heap on the ground cover by a blanket. He 
start to lift the blanket, hesitated, and final turn away. under 
the blanket lay tully' brother, shot the night befor by kent. 

"guess we'd better wait till tulli comes," said carrot uneasily. bate 
and kent had been campmates. An hour later tulli walk into camp. 

He spoke to no one that day. In the morn bate found him down on 
the coast digging, and said: "hello, tully! guess we ain't much hell on 
lynchin'!" 

"naw," said tully. "git a spade." 

"goin' to plant him there?" 

"yep." 

"where he kin hear them waves?" 

"yep." 

"purti spot." 

"yep." 

"which way will he face?" 

"where he kin watch fur that damn canoe!" cri tulli fiercely. 

"he--h can't see," ventur bate uneasily. "he' dead, ain't he?" 

"he'll heav up that there sand when the cano come back! an' it' 
a-comin'! an' bud kent'll be in it, dead or alive! git a spade!" 

the pale light of superstit flicker in bates' eyes. He hesitated. 

"the--th dead can't see," he began; "kin they?" 

tulli turn a distort face toward him. 

"yer lie!" he roared. "mi brother kin see, dead or livin'! an' he'll 
see the hangin' of bud kent! an' he'll git up outer the grave fur to 
see it, bill bates! i'm tellin' ye! i'm tellin' ye! deep as i'll plant 
him, he'll heav that there sand and call to me, when the cano come 
in! i'll hear him; i'll be here! an' we'll live to see the hangin' of 
bud kent!" 

about sundown they plant tully' brother, face to the sea. 


ii. 

On the key to grief the green wave rub all day. white at the summit, 
black at the base, the shaft rock rear splinter pinnacles, 
slant like channel buoys. On the polish pillar sea bird 
brood--white-winged, bright-ey sea birds, that nestl and preen and 
flap and clatter their orange-colour beak when the sift spray 
drive and drift across the reef. 

As the sun rose, paint crimson streak criss-cross over the waters, 
the sea bird sidl together, huddl row on row, steep in downi 
drowse. 

where the sun of noon burnish the sea, an opal wave washed, listless, 
noiseless; a sea bird stretch one listless wing. 

and into the silenc of the water a cano glided, bronz by the 
sunlight, jewel by the salt drop string from prow to thwart, 
seawe a-trail in the diamond-flash wake, and in the bow a man 
drip with sweat. 

Up rose the gulls, sweep in circles, turning, turn over rock and 
sea, and their clamour fill the sky, start littl rippl echo 
among the rocks. 

the cano grate on a shelf of ebony; the seawe rock and washed; 
the littl sea crab sheer sideways, down, down into limpid depth of 
greenest shadows. such wa the come of bud kent to the key to grief. 

He drew the cano halfway up the shelf of rock and sat down, breath 
heavily, one brown arm across the bow. for an hour he sat there. the 
sweat dri under hi eyes. the sea bird came back, fill the air 
with soft querul notes. 

there wa a livid mark around hi neck, a red, raw circle. the salt 
wind stung it; the sun burn it into hi flesh like a collar of 
red-hot steel. He touch it at times; onc he wash it with cold salt 
water. 

far in the north a curtain of mist hung on the sea, dense, motionless 
as the fog on the grand banks. He never move hi eye from it; he knew 
what it was. behind it lay the island of grief. 

all the year round the island of grief is hidden by the bank of mist, 
rampart of dead white fog encircl it on everi side. ship give it 
wide berth. some speak of warm spring on the island whose water flow 
far out to sea, rise in steam eternally. 

the pelt hunter had come back with tale of forest and deer and 
flower everywhere; but he had been drink much, and much wa 
forgiven him. 

the bodi of the colleg youth toss up in the cove on the mainland 
wa batter out of recognition, but some said, when found, one hand 
clutch a crimson blossom half wilted, but broad as a sap pan. 

So kent lay motionless besid hi canoe, burn with thirst, everi 
nerv vibrating, think of all these things. It wa not fear that 
whiten the firm flesh under the tan; it wa the fear of fear. He 
must not think--h must throttl dread; hi eye must never falter, hi 
head never turn from that wall of mist across the sea. with set teeth 
he crush back terror; with glitter eye he look into the hollow 
eye of fright. and so he conquer fear. 

He rose. the sea bird whirl up into the sky, pitching, tossing, 
screaming, till the sharp flap of their pinion set the snap 
echo fli among the rocks. 

under the canoe' sharp prow the kelp bob and dip and parted; the 
sunlit wave ran out ahead, glittering, dancing. splash! splash! bow 
and stern! and now he knelt again, and the polish paddl swung and 
dipped, and swept and swung and dip again. 

far behind, the clamour of the sea bird linger in hi ears, till 
the mellow dip of the paddl drown all sound and the sea wa a sea of 
silence. 

No wind came to cool the hot sweat on cheek and breast. the sun blaze 
a path of flame befor him, and he follow out into the wast of 
waters. the still ocean divid under the bow and rippl innoc 
away on either side, tinkling, foaming, sparkl like the current in 
a woodland brook. He look around at the world of flatten water, and 
the fear of fear rose up and grip hi throat again. then he lower 
hi head, like a tortur bull, and shook the fear of fear from hi 
throat, and drove the paddl into the sea as a butcher stabs, to the 
hilt. 

So at last he came to the wall of mist. It wa thin at first, thin and 
cool, but it thicken and grew warmer, and the fear of fear drag at 
hi head, but he would not look behind. 

into the fog the cano shot; the gray water ran by, high as the 
gunwales, oily, silent. shape flicker across the bows, pillar of 
mist that rode the waters, robe in film of tatter shadows. gigant 
form tower to dizzi height abov him, shake out shred shroud 
of cloud. the vast draperi of the fog sway and hung and trembl as 
he brush them; the white twilight deepen to a sombr gloom. and now 
it grew thinner; the fog becam a mist, and the mist a haze, and the 
haze float away and vanish into the blue of the heavens. 

all around lay a sea of pearl and sapphire, lapping, lap on a 
silver shoal. 

So he came to the island of grief. 


iii. 

On the silver shoal the wave wash and washed, break like crush 
opal where the sand sang with the hum froth. 

troop of littl shore birds, wade on the shoal, toss their 
sun-tip wing and scuttl inland, where, dappl with shadow from 
the fring forest, the white beach of the island stretched. 

the water all around wa shallow, limpid as crystal, and he saw the 
rib sand shine on the bottom, where purpl seawe floated, and 
delic sea creatur dart and swarm and scatter again at the 
dip of hi paddle. 

like velvet rub on velvet the cano brush across the sand. He 
stagger to hi feet, stumbl out, drag the cano high up under 
the trees, turn it bottom upward, and sank besid it, face downward 
in the sand. sleep came to drive away the fear of fear, but hunger, 
thirst, and fever fought with sleep, and he dreamed--dream of a 
rope that saw hi neck, of the fight in the woods, and the shots. He 
dreamed, too, of the camp, of hi forti pound of spruce gum, of tully, 
and of bates. He dream of the fire and the smoke-scorch kettle, of 
the foul odour of musti bedding, of the greasi cards, and of hi own 
new pack, hoard for week to pleas the others. all thi he dreamed, 
lie there face downward in the sand; but he did not dream of the face 
of the dead. 

the shadow of the leav move on hi blond head, crisp with clip 
curls. A butterfli flit around him, alight now on hi legs, 
now on the back of hi bronz hands. all the afternoon the bee hung 
drone among the wildwood blossoms; the leav abov scarc rustled; 
the shore bird brood along the water' edge; the thin tide, sleep 
on the sand, mirror the sky. 

twilight pale the zenith; a breez move in the deeper woods; a star 
glimmered, went out, glimmer again, faded, and glimmered. 

night came. A moth dart to and fro under the trees; a beetl hum 
around a heap of seawe and fell scrambl in the sand. somewher 
among the tree a sound had becom distinct, the song of a littl 
brook, melodious, interminable. He heard it in hi dream; it thread 
all hi dream like a needl of silver, and like a needl it prick 
him--prick hi dri throat and crack lips. It could not awak him; 
the cool night swath him head and foot. 

toward dawn a bird woke up and piped. other bird stirred, restless, 
half awakened; a gull spread a cramp wing on the shore, preen it 
feathers, scratch it tuft neck, and took two drowsi step toward 
the sea. 

the sea breez stir out behind the mist bank; it rais the feather 
on the sleep gulls; it set the leav whispering. A twig snapped, 
broke off, and fell. kent stirred, sighed, trembled, and awoke. 

the first thing he heard wa the song of the brook, and he stumbl 
straight into the woods. there it lay, a thin, deep stream in the gray 
morn light, and he stretch himself besid it and laid hi cheek 
in it. A bird drank in the pool, too--a littl fluffi bird, bright-ey 
and fearless. 

hi knee were firmer when at last he rose, heedless of the drop that 
bead lip and chin. with hi knife he dug and scrape at some white 
root that hung half mesh in the bank of the brook, and when he had 
clean them in the pool he ate them. 

the sun stain the sky when he went down to the canoe, but the etern 
curtain of fog, far out at sea, hid it as yet from sight. 

He lift the canoe, bottom upwards, to hi head, and, paddl and pole 
in either hand, carri it into the forest. 

after he had set it down he stood a moment, open and shut hi 
knife. then he look up into the trees. there were bird there, if 
he could get at them. He look at the brook. there were the print of 
hi finger in the sand; there, too, wa the print of someth else--a 
deer' point hoof. 

He had noth but hi knife. He open it again and look at it. 

that day he dug for clam and ate them raw. He wade out into the 
shallows, too, and jab at fish with hi set pole, but hit 
noth except a yellow crab. 

fire wa what he wanted. He hack and chip at flinty-look 
pebbles, and scrape tinder from a stick of sun-dri driftwood. hi 
knuckl bled, but no fire came. 

that night he heard deer in the woods, and could not sleep for 
thinking, until the dawn came up behind the wall of mist, and he rose 
with it to drink hi fill at the brook and tear raw clam with hi 
white teeth. again he fought for fire, crave it as he had never 
crave water, but hi knuckl bled, and the knife scrape on the flint 
in vain. 

hi mind, perhaps, had suffer somewhat. the white beach seem to 
rise and fall like a white carpet on a gusti hearth. the birds, too, 
that ran along the sand, seem big and juicy, like partridges; and 
he chase them, hurl shell and bit of driftwood at them till he 
could scarc keep hi feet for the rising, plung beach--or carpet, 
whichev it was. that night the deer arous him at intervals. He 
heard them splash and grunt and crackl along the brook. onc 
he aros and stole after them, knife in hand, till a fals step into 
the brook awok him to hi folly, and he felt hi way back to the 
canoe, trembling. 

morn came, and again he drank at the brook, lie on the sand where 
countless heart-shap hoof had pass leav clean imprints; and 
again he rip the raw clam from their shell and swallow them, 
whimpering. 

all day long the white beach rose and fell and heav and flatten 
under hi bright dri eyes. He chase the shore bird at times, till the 
unsteadi beach trip him up and he fell full length in the sand. then 
he would rise moaning, and creep into the shadow of the wood, and watch 
the littl song-bird in the branches, moaning, alway moaning. 

hi hands, sticki with blood, hack steel and flint together, but so 
feebli that now even the cold spark no longer came. 

He began to fear the advanc night; he dread to hear the big warm 
deer among the thickets. fear clutch him suddenly, and he lower hi 
head and set hi teeth and shook fear from hi throat again. 

then he start aimlessli into the woods, crowd past bushes, 
scrape trees, tread on moss and twig and mouldi stump, hi bruis 
hand swinging, alway swinging. 

the sun set in the mist as he came out of the wood on to anoth 
beach--a warm, soft beach, crimson by the glow in the even clouds. 

and on the sand at hi feet lay a young girl asleep, swath in the 
silken garment of her own black hair, round limbed, brown, smooth as 
the bloom on the tawni beach. 

A gull flap overhead, screaming. her eyes, deeper than night, 
unclosed. then her lip part in a cry, soft with sleep, "ihó!" 

she rose, rub her velvet eyes. "ihó!" she cri in wonder; "inâh!" 

the gild sand settl around her littl feet. her cheek crimsoned. 

"e-hó! e-hó!" she whispered, and hid her face in her hair. 


iv. 

the bridg of the star span the sky seas; the sun and the moon are 
the travel who pass over it. thi wa also known in the lodg of 
the isantee, hundr of year ago. chaské told it to hârpam, and when 
hârpam knew he told it to hapéda; and so the knowledg spread to hârka, 
and from winona to wehârka, up and down, across and ever across, woof 
and web, until it came to the island of grief. and how? god knows! 

wehârka, prattl in the tules, may have told ne-kâ; and ne-kâ, 
high in the novemb clouds, may have told kay-óshk, who told it to 
shinge-bis, who told it to skeé-skah, who told it to sé-só-kah. 

ihó! inâh! behold the wonder of it! and thi is the fate of all 
knowledg that come to the island of grief. 

* * * * * 

As the red glow die in the sky, and the sand swam in shadows, the girl 
part the silken curtain of her hair and look at him. 

"ehó!" she whisper again in soft delight. 

for now it wa plain to her that he wa the sun! He had cross the 
bridg of star in the blue twilight; he had come! 

"e-tó!" 

she step nearer, shivering, faint with the ecstasi of thi holi 
miracl wrought befor her. 

He wa the sun! hi blood streak the sky at dawn; hi blood stain 
the cloud at even. In hi eye the blue of the sky still lingered, 
smother two blue stars; and hi bodi wa as white as the breast of 
the moon. 

she open both arms, hand timidli stretched, palm upward. her face 
wa rais to his, her eye slowli closed; the deep-fring lid 
trembled. 

like a young priestess she stood, motionless save for the sudden quiver 
of a limb, a quick pulse-flutt in the round throat. and so she 
worshipped, nake and unashamed, even after he, reeling, fell heavili 
forward on hi face; even when the even breez steal over the 
sand stir the hair on hi head, as wind stir the fur of a dead 
anim in the dust. 

* * * * * 

when the morn sun peer over the wall of mist, and she saw it wa 
the sun, and she saw him, flung on the sand at her feet, then she knew 
that he wa a man, onli a man, pallid as death and smear with blood. 

and yet--miracl of miracles!--th divin wonder in her eye deepened, 
and her bodi seem to swoon, and fall a-trembling, and swoon again. 

for, although it wa but a man who lay at her feet, it had been easier 
for her to look upon a god. 

He dream that he breath fire--fire, that he crave as he had never 
crave water. mad with delirium, he knelt befor the flames, rub 
hi torn hands, wash them in the crimson-sc flames. He had 
water, too, cool scent water, that spray hi burn flesh, that 
wash in hi eyes, hi hair, hi throat. after that came hunger, 
a fierc rend agony, that scorch and clutch and tore at hi 
entrails; but that, too, die away, and he dream that he had eaten 
and all hi flesh wa warm. then he dream that he slept; and when he 
slept he dream no more. 

one day he awok and found her stretch besid him, soft palm tightli 
closed, smiling, asleep. 


V. 

now the day began to run more swiftli than the tide along the tawni 
beach; and the nights, star-dust and blue, came and vanish and 
returned, onli to exhal at dawn like perfum from a violet. 

they count hour as they count the golden bubbles, wink with 
a million eye along the foam-fleck shore; and the hour ended, and 
began, and glimmered, iridescent, and end as bubbl end in a tini 
rainbow haze. 

there wa still fire in the world; it flash up at her touch and where 
she chose. A bow strung with the silk of her own hair, an arrow wing 
like a sea bird and tip with shell, a line from the silver tendon of 
a deer, a hook of polish bone--thes were the mysteri he learned, 
and learn them laughing, her silken head bent close to his. 

the first night that the bow wa wrought and the glossi string attuned, 
she stole into the moonlit forest to the brook; and there they stood, 
whispering, listening, and whispering, though neither understood the 
voic they loved. 

In the deeper woods, kaug, the porcupine, scrape and snuffed. they 
heard wabóse, the rabbit, pit-a-pat, pit-a-pat, lope across dead 
leav in the moonlight. skeé-skah, the wood-duck, sail past, 
noiseless, gorgeou as a float blossom. 

out on the ocean' placid silver, shinge-bis, the diver, shook the 
scent silenc with hi idl laughter, till kay-óshk, the gray gull, 
stir in hi slumber. there came a sudden rippl in the stream, a 
mellow splash, a soft sound on the sand. 

"ihó! behold!" 

"I see nothing." 

the belov voic wa onli a wordless melodi to her. 

"ihó! ta-hinca, the red deer! e-hó! the buck will follow!" 

"ta-hinca," he repeated, notch the arrow. 

"e-tó! ta-mdóka!" 

So he drew the arrow to the head, and the gray gull feather brush 
hi ear, and the dark hum with the harmoni of the sing 
string. 

thu die ta-mdóka, the buck deer of seven prongs. 


vi. 

As an appl toss spin into the air, so spun the world abov the 
hand that toss it into space. 

and one day in earli spring, sé-só-kah, the robin, awok at dawn, and 
saw a girl at the foot of the blossom tree hold a babe cradl in 
the silken sheet of her hair. 

At it feebl cry, kaug, the porcupine, rais hi quill head. 
wabóse, the rabbit, sat still with palpit sides. kay-óshk, the 
gray gull, tipto along the beach. 

kent knelt with one bronz arm around them both. 

"ihó! inâh!" whisper the girl, and held the babe up in the rosi 
flame of dawn. 

but kent trembl as he looked, and hi eye filled. On the pale green 
moss their shadow lay--thre shadows. but the shadow of the babe wa 
white as froth. 

becaus it wa the firstborn son, they name it chaské; and the girl 
sang as she cradl it there in the silken vestment of her hair; all 
day long in the sunshin she sang: 

wâ-wa, wâ-wa, wâ-we--yeá; 
kah-wéen, nee-zhéka ke-diaus-âi, 
ke-gâh nau-wâi, ne-mé-go s'weén, 
ne-bâun, ne-bâun, ne-dâun-i âis. 
e-w wâ-wa, wâ-we--yeá; 
e-w wâ-wa, wâ-we--yeá. 

out in the calm ocean, shinge-bis, the diver, listened, preen hi 
satin breast in silence. In the forest, ta-hinca, the red deer, turn 
her delic head to the wind. 

that night kent thought of the dead, for the first time sinc he had 
come to the key of grief. 

"aké-u! aké-u!" chirp sé-só-kah, the robin. but the dead never come 
again. 

"beloved, sit close to us," whisper the girl, watch hi troubl 
eyes. "ma-cânt maséca." 

but he look at the babe and it white shadow on the moss, and he onli 
sighed: "ma-cânt maséca, beloved! death sit watch us across the 
sea." 

now for the first time he knew more than the fear of fear; he knew 
fear. and with fear came grief. 

He never befor knew that grief lay hidden there in the forest. now he 
knew it. still, that happiness, etern reborn when two small hand 
reach up around hi neck, when feebl finger clutch hi hand--that 
happi that sé-só-kah understood, chirp to hi brood 
mate--that ta-mdóka knew, lick hi dappl fawns--that happi 
gave him heart to meet grief calmly, in dream or in the forest depths, 
and it help him to look into the hollow eye of fear. 

He often thought of the camp now; of bates, hi blanket mate; of dyce, 
whose wrist he had broken with a blow; of tully, whose brother he had 
shot. He even seem to hear the shot, the sudden report among the 
hemlocks; again he saw the haze of smoke, he caught a glimps of a tall 
form fall through the bushes. 

He rememb everi minut incid of the trial: bates' hand laid 
on hi shoulder; tully, red-beard and wild-eyed, demand hi 
death; while dyce spat and spat and smoke and kick at the blacken 
log-end project from the fire. He remembered, too, the verdict, and 
tully' terribl laugh; and the new jute rope that they strip off 
the market-s gum packs. 

He thought of these things, sometim wade out on the shoals, 
shell-tip fish spear poised: at such time he would miss hi fish. 
He thought of it sometim when he knelt by the forest stream listen 
for ta-hinca' splash among the cresses: at such moment the feather 
shaft whistl far from the mark, and ta-mdóka stamp and snort 
till even the white fisher, stretch on a rot log, flatten hi 
whisker and stole away into the forest' blackest depths. 

when the child wa a year old, hour for hour notch at sunset and 
sunrise, it prattl with the birds, and call to ne-kâ, the wild 
goose, who call again to the child from the sky: "northward! 
northward, beloved!" 

when winter came--ther is no frost on the island of grief--ne-kâ, the 
wild goose, pass high in the clouds, called: "southward! southward, 
beloved!" and the child answer in a soft whisper of an unknown 
tongue, till the mother shivered, and cover it with her silken hair. 

"O beloved!" said the girl, "chaské call to all thing living--to 
kaug, the porcupine, to wabóse, to kay-óshk, the gray gull--h calls, 
and they understand." 

kent bent and look into her eyes. 

"hush, beloved; it is not _that_ I fear." 

"then what, beloved?" 

"hi shadow. It is white as surf foam. and at night--i--i have seen----" 

"oh, what?" 

"the air about him aglow like a pale rose." 

"ma cânté maséca. the earth alon lasts. I speak as one dying--i know, 
O beloved!" 

her voic die away like a summer wind. 

"beloved!" he cried. 

but there befor him she wa changing; the air grew misty, and her hair 
waver like shred of fog, and her slender form swayed, and faded, and 
swerved, like the mist abov a pond. 

In her arm the babe wa a figur of mist, rosy, vagu as a breath on 
a mirror. 

"the earth alon lasts. inâh! It is the end, O beloved!" 

the word came from the mist--a mist as formless as the ether--a mist 
that drove in and crowd him, that came from the sea, from the clouds, 
from the earth at hi feet. faint with terror, he stagger forward 
calling, "beloved! and thou, chaské, O beloved! aké u! aké u!" 

far out at sea a rosi star glimmer an instant in the mist and went 
out. 

A sea bird screamed, soar over the wast of fog-smoth waters. 
again he saw the rosi star; it came nearer; it reflect glimmer in 
the water. 

"chaské!" he cried. 

He heard a voice, dull in the choke mist. 

"O beloved, I am here!" he call again. 

there wa a sound on the shoal, a flicker in the fog, the flare of a 
torch, a face white, livid, terrible--th face of the dead. 

He fell upon hi knees; he close hi eye and open them. tulli stood 
besid him with a coil of rope. 

* * * * * 

ihó! behold the end! the earth alon lasts. the sand, the opal wave on 
the golden beach, the sea of sapphire, the dust starlight, the wind, 
and love, shall die. death also shall die, and lie on the shore of 
the sky like the bleach skull there on the key to grief, polished, 
empty, with it teeth embed in the sand. 




A matter OF interest. 




A matter OF interest. 

He that know not, and know not that he know not, is a fool. shun 
him. 
He that know not, and know that he know not, is simple. teach him. 
He that knows, and know not that he knows, is asleep. wake him. 
He that knows, and know that he knows, is wise. follow him. 

_arabian proverb._ 


I. 

much as I dislik it, I am oblig to includ thi stori in a volum 
devot to fiction: I have attempt to tell it as an absolut true 
story, but until three month ago, when the indisput proof were 
place befor the british associ by professor jame holroyd, 
I wa regard as an impostor. now that the smithsonian institut 
in washington, the philadelphia zoölog society, and the natur 
histori museum of new york city, are convinc that the stori is 
truth and accur in everi particular, I prefer to tell it my own 
way. professor holroyd urg me to do this, although professor bruce 
stoddard, of columbia college, is now at work upon a pamphlet, to be 
publish the latter part of next month, describ scientif the 
extraordinari discoveri which, to the shame of the unit states, wa 
first accept and recognis in england. 

now, have no technic abil concern the affair in question, 
and have no knowledg of either compar anatomi or zoölogy, I 
am perhap unfit to tell thi story. but the stori is true; the 
episod occur under my own eyes--here, within a few hours' sail of 
the battery. and as I wa one of the first person to verifi what ha 
long been a theori among scientists, and, moreover, as the result of 
professor holroyd' discoveri is to be place on exhibit in madison 
squar garden on the twentieth of next month, I have decid to tell, 
as simpli as I am able, exactli what occurred. 

I first wrote out the stori on april 1, 1896. the north american 
review, the popular scienc monthly, the scientif american, nature, 
forest and stream, and the fossilifer magazin in turn reject it; 
some curtli inform me that fiction had no place in their columns. 
when I attempt to explain that it wa not fiction, the editor of 
these period either maintain a contemptu silence, or bluntli 
notifi me that my literari servic and opinion were not desired. 
but finally, when sever publish offer to take the stori as 
fiction, I cut short all negoti and decid to publish it myself. 
where I am known at all, it is my misfortun to be known as a writer 
of fiction. thi make it imposs for me to receiv a hear from a 
scientif audience. I regret it bitterly, becaus now, when it is too 
late, I am prepar to prove certain scientif matter of interest, 
and to produc the proofs. In thi case, however, I am fortunate, for 
nobodi can disput the exist of a thing when the bodili proof is 
exhibit as evidence. 

thi is the story; and if I write it as I write fiction, it is becaus 
I do not know how to write it otherwise. 

I wa walk along the beach below pine inlet, on the south shore 
of long island. the railroad and telegraph station is at west oyster 
bay. everybodi who ha travel on the long island railroad know the 
station, but few, perhaps, know pine inlet. duck shooters, of course, 
are familiar with it; but as there are no hotel there, and noth 
to see except salt meadow, salt creek, and a strip of dune and sand, 
the summer-squat public may probabl be unawar of it existence. 
the local name for the place is pine inlet; the map give it name as 
sand point, I believe, but anybodi at west oyster bay can direct you 
to it. captain mcpeek, who keep the west oyster bay house, drive duck 
shooter there in winter. It lie five mile southeast from west oyster 
bay. 

I had walk over that afternoon from captain mcpeek's. there wa a 
reason for my go to pine inlet--it embarrass me to explain it, 
but the truth is I medit write an ode to the ocean. It wa out 
of the question to write it in west oyster bay, with the whistl of 
locomot in my ears. I knew that pine inlet wa one of the loneliest 
place on the atlant coast; it is out of sight of everyth except 
leagu of gray ocean. rare one might make out fish smack 
drift across the horizon. summer squatter never visit it; 
sportsmen shun it, except in winter. therefore, as I wa about to do 
a bit of poetry, I thought that pine inlet wa the spot for the deed. 
So I went there. 

As I wa stroll along the beach, bite my pencil reflectively, 
tremend impress by the solitud and the solemn thunder of 
the surf, a thought occur to me: how unpleas it would be if I 
suddenli stumbl on a summer boarder. As thi joyless imposs 
flit across my mind, I round a bleak sand dune. 

A summer girl stood directli in my path. 

If I jumped, I think the young ladi ha pardon me by thi time. she 
ought to, becaus she also started, and said someth in a veri faint 
voice. what she said wa "oh!" 

she stare at me as though I had just crawl up out of the sea to bite 
her. I don't know what my own express resembled, but I have been 
given to understand it wa idiotic. 

now I perceived, after a few moments, that the young ladi wa 
frightened, and I knew I ought to say someth civil. So I said, "are 
there ani mosquito here?" 

"no," she replied, with a slight quiver in her voice; "I have onli seen 
one, and it wa bite somebodi else." 

I look foolish; the convers seem so futile, and the young 
ladi appear to be more nervou than before. I had an impuls to say, 
"do not run; I have breakfasted," for she seem to be medit a 
plung into the breakers. what I did say was: "I did not know anybodi 
wa here. I do not intend to intrude. I come from captain mcpeek's, 
and I am write an ode to the ocean." after I had said thi it seem 
to ring in my ear like, "I come from tabl mountain, and my name is 
truth james." 

I glanc timidli at her. 

"she' think of the same thing," said I to myself. "what an ass I 
must appear!" 

however, the young ladi seem to be a trifl reassured. I notic she 
drew a sigh of relief and look at my shoes. she look so long that 
it made me suspicious, and I also examin my shoes. they seem to be 
fairli respectable. 

"i--i am sorry," she said, "but would you mind not walk on the 
beach?" 

thi wa sudden. I had intend to retir and leav the beach to her, 
but I did not fanci be driven away so abruptly. 

"I wa about to withdraw, madam," said I, bow stiffly; "I beg you 
will pardon ani inconvenience----" 

"dear me!" she cried, "you don't understand. I do not--i would 
not think for a moment of ask you to leav pine inlet. I mere 
ventur to request you to walk on the dunes. I am so afraid that your 
footprint may obliter the impress that my father is studying." 

"oh!" said I, look about me as though I had been caught in the 
middl of a flower-bed; "realli I did not notic ani impressions. 
impress of what--if I may be permitted?" 

"I don't know," she said, smile a littl at my awkward pose. "if you 
step thi way in a straight line you can do no damage." 

I did as she bade me. I suppos my movement resembl the gait of 
a wet peacock. possibl they recal the delic manœuvr of the 
kangaroo. anyway, she laughed. 

thi serious annoy me. I had been at a disadvantage; I walk well 
enough when let alone. 

"you can scarc expect," said I, "that a man absorb in hi own 
idea could notic impress on the sand. I trust I have obliter 
nothing." 

As I said thi I look back at the long line of footprint stretch 
away in prospect across the sand. they were my own. how larg they 
looked! wa that what she wa laugh at? 

"I wish to explain," she said gravely, look at the point of her 
parasol. "I am veri sorri to be oblig to warn you--to ask you to 
forego the pleasur of stroll on a beach that doe not belong to me. 
perhaps," she continued, in sudden alarm, "perhap thi beach belong 
to you?" 

"the beach? oh, no," I said. 

"but--but you were go to write poem about it?" 

"onli one--and that doe not necessit own the beach. I have 
observed," said I frankly, "that the peopl who own noth write mani 
poem about it." 

she look at me seriously. 

"I write mani poems," I added. 

she laugh doubtfully. 

"would you rather I went away?" I ask politely. 

"i? why, no--i mean that you may do as you please--except pleas do not 
walk on the _beach_." 

"then I do not alarm you by my presence?" I inquired. My cloth 
were a bit ancient. I wore them shooting, sometimes. "mi famili is 
respectable," I added; and I told her my name. 

"oh! then you wrote 'cull cowslips' and 'fade fig-leaves,' and 
you imit maeterlinck, and you---- oh, I know lot of peopl that 
you know;" she cri with everi symptom of relief; "and you know my 
brother." 

"I am the author," said I coldly, "of 'cull cowslips,' but 'fade 
fig-leaves' wa an earlier work, which I no longer recognise, and I 
should be grate to you if you would be kind enough to deni that I 
ever imit maeterlinck. possibly," I added, "he imit me." 

"now, do you know," she said, "I wa afraid of you at first? papa is 
dig in the salt meadow nearli a mile away." 

It wa hard to bear. 

"can you not see," said I, "that I am wear a shoot coat?" 

"I do see--now; but it is so--so old," she pleaded. 

"it is a shoot coat all the same," I said bitterly. 

she wa veri quiet, and I saw she wa sorry. 

"never mind," I said magnanimously, "you probabl are not familiar with 
sport goods. If I knew your name I should ask permiss to present 
myself." 

"why, I am daisi holroyd," she said. 

"what! jack holroyd' littl sister?" 

"little!" she cried. 

"I didn't mean that," said I. "you know that your brother and I were 
great friend in paris----" 

"I know," she said significantly. 

"ahem! Of course," I said, "jack and I were inseparable----" 

"except when shut in separ cells," said miss holroyd coldly. 

thi unfeel allus to the unfortun termin of a 
latin-quart celebr hurt me. 

"the police," said I, "were too officious." 

"so jack says," repli miss holroyd demurely. 

We had unconsci move on along the sand hills, side by side, as we 
spoke. 

"to think," I repeated, "that I should meet jack' little----" 

"please," she said, "you are onli three year my senior." 

she open the sunshad and tip it over one shoulder. It wa white, 
and had spot and posi on it. 

"jack send us everi new book you write," she observed. "I do not 
approv of some thing you write." 

"modern school," I mumbled. 

"that is no excuse," she said severely; "anthoni trollop didn't do it." 

the foam spume from the breaker wa drift across the dunes, and the 
littl tip-up snipe ran along the beach and teeter and whistl and 
spread their white-bar wing for a low, straight flight across the 
shingle, onli to tip and skeep and sail on again. the salt sea wind 
whistl and curl through the crest waves, blow in perfum 
puff across thicket of sweet bay and cedar. As we pass through the 
crackl juicy-stem marsh weed myriad of fiddler crab rais 
their fore-claw in warn and back away, rustling, through the 
reeds, aggressive, protesting. 

"like million of pigmi ajax defi the lightning," I said. 

miss holroyd laughed. 

"now I never imagin that author were clever except in print," she 
said. 

she wa a most extraordinari girl. 

"I suppose," she observ after a moment' silence--"i suppos I am 
take you to my father." 

"delighted!" I mumbled. "h'm! I had the honour of meet professor 
holroyd in paris." 

"yes; he bail you and jack out," said miss holroyd serenely. 

the silenc wa too pain to last. 

"captain mcpeek is an interest man," I said. I spoke more loudli 
than I intended; I may have been nervous. 

"yes," said daisi holroyd, "but he ha a most singular hotel clerk." 

"you mean mr. frisby?" 

"I do." 

"yes," I admitted, "mr. frisbi is queer. He wa onc a bill-poster." 

"I know it!" exclaim daisi holroyd, with some heat. "he ruin 
landscap whenev he ha an opportunity. Do you know that he ha a 
passion for bill-posting? He has; he post bill for the pure pleasur 
of it, just as you play golf, or tennis, or billiards." 

"but he' a hotel clerk now," I said; "nobodi employ him to post 
bills." 

"I know it! He doe it all by himself for the pure pleasur of it. papa 
ha engag him to come down here for two weeks, and I dread it," said 
the girl. 

what professor holroyd might want of frisbi I had not the faintest 
notion. I suppos miss holroyd notic the bewilder in my face, for 
she laughed, and nod her head twice. 

"not onli mr. frisby, but captain mcpeek also," she said. 

"you don't mean to say that captain mcpeek is go to close hi 
hotel!" I exclaimed. 

My trunk wa there. It contain guarante of my respectability. 

"oh, no; hi wife will keep it open," repli the girl. "look! you can 
see papa now. he' digging." 

"where?" I blurt out. 

I rememb professor holroyd as a prim, spectacl gentleman, with 
close-cut, snowi beard and a cleric allure. the man I saw dig 
wore green goggles, a jersey, a batter sou'wester, and hip-boot 
of rubber. He wa delv in the muck of the salt meadow, hi face 
stream with perspiration, hi boot and jersey splash with 
unpleasant-look mud. He glanc up as we approached, shade hi 
eye with a sunburnt hand. 

"papa, dear," said miss holroyd, "here is jack' friend, whom you 
bail out of mazas." 

the introduct wa startling. I turn crimson with mortification. 
the professor wa veri decent about it; he call me by name at once. 

when he said thi he look at hi spade. It wa clear that he 
consid me a nuisanc and wish to go on with hi digging. 

"I suppose," he said, "you are still writing?" 

"A little," I replied, tri not to speak sarcastically. My output had 
rival that of "the duchess"--in quantity, I mean. 

"I seldom read--fiction," he said, look restlessli at the hole in 
the ground. 

miss holroyd came to my rescue. 

"that wa a charm stori you wrote last," she said. "papa should read 
it--you should, papa; it' all about a fossil." 

We both look narrowli at miss holroyd. her smile wa guileless. 

"fossils!" repeat the professor. "do you care for fossils?" 

"veri much," said I. 

now I am not perfectli sure what my object wa in lying. I look at 
daisi holroyd' dark-fring eyes. they were veri grave. 

"fossils," said I, "are my hobby." 

I think miss holroyd winc a littl at this. I did not care. I went on: 

"I have seldom had the opportun to studi the subject, but, as a boy, 
I collect flint arrow-heads----" 

"flint arrow-heads!" said the professor coldly. 

"yes; they were the nearest thing to fossil obtainable," I replied, 
marvel at my own mendacity. 

the professor look into the hole. I also looked. I could see noth 
in it. "he' dig for fossils," thought I to myself. 

"perhaps," said the professor cautiously, "you might wish to aid me 
in a littl research--that is to say, if you have an inclin for 
fossils." the double-entendr wa not lost upon me. 

"I have read all your book so eagerly," said I, "that to join you, 
to be of servic to you in ani research, howev difficult and trying, 
would be an honour and a privileg that I never dare to hope for." 

"that," thought I to myself, "will do it own work." 

but the professor wa still suspicious. how could he help it, when 
he rememb jack' escapades, in which my name wa alway blended! 
doubtless he wa satisfi that my influenc on jack wa evil. the 
contrari wa the case, too. 

"fossils," he said, worri the edg of the excav with hi 
spade, "fossil are not thing to be lightli considered." 

"no, indeed!" I protested. 

"fossil are the most interest as well as puzzl thing in the 
world," said he. 

"they are!" I cri enthusiastically. 

"but I am not look for fossils," observ the professor mildly. 

thi wa a facer. I look at daisi holroyd. she bit her lip and fix 
her eye on the sea. her eye were wonder eyes. 

"did you think I wa dig for fossil in a salt meadow?" queri 
the professor. "you can have read veri littl about the subject. I am 
dig for someth quit different." 

I wa silent. I knew that my face wa a trifl flushed. I long to 
say, "well, what the devil are you dig for?" but I onli stare into 
the hole as though hypnotized. 

"captain mcpeek and frisbi ought to be here," he said, look first at 
daisi and then across the meadows. 

I ach to ask him whi he had subpœna captain mcpeek and frisby. 

"they are coming," said daisy, shade her eyes. "do you see the speck 
on the meadows?" 

"it may be a mud hen," said the professor. 

"miss holroyd is right," I said. "A wagon and team and two men are 
come from the north. there is a dog besid the wagon--it' that 
miser yellow dog of frisby's." 

"good gracious!" cri the professor, "you don't mean to tell me that 
you see all that at such a distance?" 

"whi not?" I said. 

"I see nothing," he insisted. 

"you will see that i'm right, presently," I laughed. 

the professor remov hi blue goggl and rub them, glanc 
obliqu at me. 

"haven't you heard what extraordinari eyesight duck shooter have?" 
said hi daughter, look back at her father. "jack say that they can 
tell exactli what kind of a duck is fli befor most peopl could see 
anyth at all in the sky." 

"it' true," I said; "it come to anybody, I fancy, who ha had 
practice." 

the professor regard me with a new interest. there wa inspir in 
hi eyes. He turn toward the ocean. for a long time he stare at the 
toss wave on the beach, then he look far out to where the horizon 
met the sea. 

"are there ani duck out there?" he ask at last. 

"yes," said I, scan the sea, "there are." 

He produc a pair of binocular from hi coat-tail pocket, adjust 
them, and rais them to hi eyes. 

"h'm! what sort of ducks?" 

I look more carefully, hold both hand over my forehead. 

"surf ducks--scot and widgeon. there is one bufflehead among 
them--no, two; the rest are coots," I replied. 

"this," cri the professor, "i most astonishing. I have good eyes, 
but I can't see a bless thing without these binoculars!" 

"it' not extraordinary," said I; "the surf duck and coot ani novic 
might recognise; the widgeon and bufflehead I should not have been 
abl to name unless they had risen from the water. It is easi to tell 
ani duck when it is flying, even though it look no bigger than a black 
pin-point." 

but the professor insist that it wa marvellous, and he said that I 
might render him invalu servic if I would consent to come and camp 
at pine inlet for a few weeks. 

I look at hi daughter, but she turn her back--not exactli in 
disdain either. her back wa beauti moulded. her gown fit also. 

"camp out here?" I repeated, pretend to be unpleasantli surprised. 

"I do not think he would care to," said miss holroyd without turning. 

I had not expect that. 

"abov all things," said I, in a clear, pleasant voice, "I like to camp 
out." 

she said nothing. 

"it is not exactli camping," said the professor. "come, you shall see 
our conservatory. daisy, come, dear! you must put on a heavier frock; 
it is get toward sundown." 

At that moment, over a near dune, two horses' head appeared, follow 
by two human heads, then a wagon, then a yellow dog. 

I turn triumphantli to the professor. 

"you are the veri man I want," he muttered; "the veri man--th veri 
man." 

I look at daisi holroyd. she return my glanc with a defiant littl 
smile. 

"waal," said captain mcpeek, drive up, "here we be! git out, frisby." 

frisby, fat, nervous, and sentimental, hop out of the cart. 

"come!" said the professor, impati move across the dunes. I 
walk with daisi holroyd. mcpeek and frisbi followed. the yellow dog 
walk by himself. 


ii. 

the sun wa dip into the sea as we trudg across the meadow 
toward a high dome-shap dune cover with cedar and thicket of 
sweet bay. I saw no sign of habit among the sand hills. far as the 
eye could reach, noth broke the gray line of sea and sky save the 
squat dune crown with stunt cedars. 

then, as we round the base of the dune, we almost walk into the 
door of a house. My amaz amus miss holroyd, and I notic also 
a touch of malic in her pretti eyes. but she said nothing, follow 
her father into the house, with the slightest possibl gestur to me. 
wa it invitation, or wa it menace? 

the hous wa mere a light wooden frame, cover with some waterproof 
stuff that look like a mixtur of rubber and tar. over this--in 
fact, over the whole roof--wa pitch an awn of heavi sail-cloth. 
I notic that the hous wa anchor to the sand by chains, alreadi 
rust red. but thi one-stori hous wa not the onli build 
nestl in the south shelter of the big dune. A hundr feet away 
stood anoth structure--long, low, also built of wood. It had row on 
row of round porthol on everi side. the port were fit with heavi 
glass, hing to swing open if necessary. A singl big doubl door 
occupi the front. 

behind thi long, low build wa still another, a mere shed. smoke 
rose from the sheet-iron chimney. there wa somebodi move about 
insid the open door. 

As I stood gape at thi mushroom hamlet the professor appear at the 
door and ask me to enter. I step in at once. 

the hous wa much larger than I had imagined. A straight hallway ran 
through the centr from east to west. On either side of thi hallway 
were rooms, the door swing wide open. I count three door on each 
side; the three on the south appear to be bedrooms. 

the professor usher me into a room on the north side, where I found 
captain mcpeek and frisbi sit at a table, upon which were draw 
and sketch of articul anim and fishes. 

"you see, mcpeek," said the professor, "we onli want one more man, 
and I think i'v got him.--haven't i?" turn eagerli to me. 

"why, yes," I said, laughing; "thi is delightful. Am I invit to stay 
here?" 

"your bedroom is the third on the south side; everyth is ready. 
mcpeek, you can bring hi trunk to-morrow, can't you?" demand the 
professor. 

the red-fac captain nodded, and shift a quid. 

"then it' all settled," said the professor, and he drew a sigh of 
satisfaction. "you see," he said, turn to me, "I wa at my wit' end 
to know whom to trust. I never thought of you. jack' out in china, and 
I didn't dare trust anybodi in my own profession. all you care about is 
write vers and stories, isn't it?" 

"I like to shoot," I repli mildly. 

"just the thing!" he cried, beam at us all in turn. "now I can see 
no reason whi we should not progress rapidly. mcpeek, you and frisbi 
must get those box up here befor dark. dinner will be readi befor 
you have finish unloading. dick, you will wish to go to your room 
first." 

My name isn't dick, but he spoke so kindly, and beam upon me in such 
a fatherli manner, that I let it go. I had occas to correct him 
afterward, sever times, but he alway forgot the next minute. He 
call me dick to thi day. 

It wa dark when professor holroyd, hi daughter, and I sat down to 
dinner. the room wa the same in which I had notic the draw of 
beast and bird, but the round tabl had been extend into an oval, and 
neatli spread with dainti linen and silver. 

A fresh-cheek swedish girl appear from a further room, bear the 
soup. the professor ladl it out, still beaming. 

"now, thi is veri delightful!--isn't it, daisy?" he said. 

"very," said miss holroyd, with the faintest ting of irony. 

"very," I repeat heartily; but I look at my soup when I said it. 

"I suppose," said the professor, nod mysteri at hi daughter, 
"that dick know noth of what we'r about down here?" 

"I suppose," said miss holroyd, "that he think we are dig for 
fossils." 

I look at my plate. she might have spare me that. 

"well, well," said her father, smile to himself, "he shall know 
everyth by morning. you'll be astonished, dick, my boy." 

"hi name isn't dick," correct daisy. 

the professor said, "isn't it?" in an absent-mind way, and relaps 
into contempl of my necktie. 

I ask miss holroyd a few question about jack, and wa inform that 
he had given up law and enter the diplomat service--a what, I did 
not dare ask, for I know what our diplomat servic is. 

"in china," said daisy. 

"choo choo is the name of the city," ad her father proudly; "it' 
the terminu of the new trans-siberian railway." 

"it' on the yellow river," said daisy. 

"he' vice-consul," ad the professor triumphantly. 

"he'll make a good one," I observed. I knew jack. I piti hi consul. 

So we chat on about my old playmate, until freda, the red-cheek 
maid, brought coffee, and the professor light a cigar, with a littl 
bow to hi daughter. 

"of course, you don't smoke," she said to me, with a glimmer of malic 
in her eyes. 

"he mustn't," interpos the professor hastily; "it will make hi hand 
tremble." 

"no, it doesn't," said I, laughing; "but my hand will shake if I don't 
smoke. are you go to employ me as a draughtsman?" 

"you'll know to-morrow," he chuckled, with a mysteri smile at hi 
daughter.--"daisy, give him my best cigars; put the box here on the 
table. We can't afford to have hi hand tremble." 

miss holroyd rose, and cross the hallway to her father' room, 
return present with a box of promising-look cigars. 

"I don't think he know what is good for him," she said. "he should 
smoke onli one everi day." 

It wa hard to bear. I am not vindictive, but I decid to treasur up 
a few of miss holroyd' gentl taunts. My intimaci with her brother wa 
certainli a disadvantag to me now. jack had appar been talk 
too much, and hi sister appear to be thoroughli acquaint with my 
past. It wa a disadvantage. I rememb her vagu as a girl with 
long braids, who use to come on sunday with her father and take tea 
with us in our rooms. then she went to germani to school, and jack and 
I employ our sunday even otherwise. It is true that I regard 
her weekli visit as a speci of infliction, but I did not think I 
ever show it. 

"it is strange," said I, "that you did not recognis me at once, miss 
holroyd. have I chang so greatli in five years?" 

"you wore a point french beard in paris," she said--"a veri downi 
one. and you never stay to tea but twice, and then you onli spoke 
once." 

"oh!" said I blankly. "what did I say?" 

"you ask me if I like plums," said daisy, burst into an 
irresist rippl of laughter. 

I saw that I must have made the same sort of an ass of myself that most 
boy of eighteen do. 

It wa too bad. I never thought about the futur in those days. who 
could have imagin that littl daisi holroyd would have grown up 
into thi bewild young lady? It wa realli too bad. present the 
professor retir to hi room, carri with him an arm of drawings, 
and bid us not to sit up late. when he close hi door miss holroyd 
turn to me. 

"papa will work over those draw until midnight," she said, with a 
despair smile. 

"it isn't good for him," I said. "what are the drawings?" 

"you may know to-morrow," she answered, lean forward on the tabl 
and shade her face with one hand. "tell me about yourself and jack in 
paris." 

I look at her suspiciously. 

"what! there isn't much to tell. We studied. jack went to the law 
school, and I attended--er--oh, all sort of schools." 

"did you? sure you gave yourself a littl recreat occasionally?" 

"occasionally," I nodded. 

"I am afraid you and jack studi too hard." 

"that may be," said I, look meek. 

"especi about fossils." 

I couldn't stand that. 

"miss holroyd," I said, "I do care for fossils. you may think that I am 
a humbug, but I have a perfect mania for fossils--now." 

"sinc when?" 

"about an hour ago," I said airily. out of the corner of my eye I saw 
that she had flush up. It pleas me. 

"you will soon tire of the experiment," she said with a danger smile. 

"oh, I may," I repli indifferently. 

she drew back. the movement wa scarc perceptible, but I notic it, 
and she knew I did. 

the atmospher wa vagu hostile. one feel such mental condit 
and chang instantly. I pick up a chessboard, open it, set up the 
piec with elabor care, and began to move, first the white, then 
the black. miss holroyd watch me coldli at first, but after a dozen 
move she becam interest and lean a shade nearer. I move a black 
pawn forward. 

"whi do you do that?" said daisy. 

"because," said I, "the white queen threaten the pawn." 

"it wa an aggress move," she insisted. 

"pure defensive," I said. "if her white high will let the pawn 
alone, the pawn will let the queen alone." 

miss holroyd rest her chin on her wrist and gaze steadili at the 
board. she wa flush furiously, but she held her ground. 

"if the white queen doesn't block that pawn, the pawn may becom 
dangerous," she said coldly. 

I laughed, and close up the board with a snap. 

"true," I said, "it might even take the queen." after a moment' 
silenc I asked, "what would you do in that case, miss holroyd?" 

"I should resign," she said serenely; then realiz what she had said, 
she lost her self-possess for a second, and cried: "no, indeed! I 
should fight to the bitter end! I mean----" 

"what?" I asked, linger over my revenge. 

"I mean," she said slowly, "that your black pawn would never have the 
chance--never! I should take it immediately." 

"I believ you would," said I, smiling; "so we'll call the game yours, 
and--th pawn captured." 

"I don't want it," she exclaimed. "A pawn is worthless." 

"except when it' in the king row." 

"chess is most interesting," she observ sedately. she had complet 
recov her self-control. still I saw that she now had a certain 
respect for my defens powers. It wa veri sooth to me. 

"you know," said I gravely, "that I am fonder of jack than of anybody. 
that' the reason we never write each other, except to borrow things. I 
am afraid that when I wa a young cub in franc I wa not an attract 
personality." 

"on the contrary," said daisy, smiling, "I thought you were veri big 
and veri perfect. I had illusions. I wept often when I went home and 
rememb that you never took the troubl to speak to me but once." 

"I wa a cub," I said; "not selfish and brutal, but I didn't understand 
schoolgirls. I never had ani sisters, and I didn't know what to say to 
veri young girls. If I had imagin that you felt hurt----" 

"oh, I did--fiv year ago. afterward I laugh at the whole thing." 

"laughed?" I repeated, vagu disappointed. 

"why, of course. I wa veri easili hurt when I wa a child. I think I 
have outgrown it." 

the soft curv of her sensit mouth contradict her. 

"will you forgiv me now?" I asked. 

"yes. I had forgotten the whole thing until I met you an hour or so 
ago." 

there wa someth that had a ring not entir genuin in thi 
speech. I notic it, but forgot it the next moment. 

"tiger cub have stripes," said I. "selfish blossom in the cradle, 
and propheci is not difficult. I hope I am not more selfish than my 
brothers." 

"I hope not," she said, smiling. 

present she rose, touch her hair with the tip of one finger, and 
walk to the door. 

"good-night," she said, courtesi veri low. 

"good-night," said I, open the door for her to pass. 


iii. 

the sea wa a sheet of silver, ting with pink. the tremend arch of 
the sky wa all shimmer and glimmer with the promis of the sun. 
alreadi the mist above, fleck with cluster clouds, flush with 
rose colour and dull gold. I heard the low splash of the wave break 
and curl across the beach. A wander breeze, fresh and fragrant, 
blew the curtain of my window. there wa the scent of sweet bay in the 
room, and everywher the subtile, nameless perfum of the sea. 

when at last I stood upon the shore, the air and sea were all aglimm 
in a rosi light, deepen to crimson in the zenith. along the beach I 
saw a littl cove, shelv and all ashine, where shallow wave wash 
with a mellow sound. fine as dust gold the shingl glowed, and the 
thin film of water rose, receded, crept up again a littl higher, and 
again flow back, with the low hiss of snowi foam and gild bubbl 
breaking. 

I stood a littl while quiet, my eye upon the water, the invit of 
the ocean in my ears, vagu and sweet as the murmur of a shell. then I 
look at my bath suit and towels. 

"in we go!" said I aloud. A second later the propheci wa fulfilled. 

I swam far out to sea, and as I swam the water all around me turn to 
gold. the sun had risen. 

there is a fragranc in the sea at dawn that none can name. whitethorn 
abloom in may, sedg asway, and scent rush rustl in an inland 
wind recal the sea to me--i can't say why. 

far out at sea I rais myself, swung around, dived, and set out again 
for shore, strike strong stroke until the fleck foam flew. and 
when at last I shot through the breakers, I laugh aloud and sprang 
upon the beach, breathless and happy. then from the ocean came anoth 
cry, clear, joyous, and a white arm rose in the air. 

she came drift in with the wave like a white sea-sprite, laugh 
at me from her tangl hair, and I plung into the breaker again to 
join her. 

side by side we swam along the coast, just outsid the breakers, until 
in the next cove we saw the flutter of her maid' cap strings. 

"I will beat you to breakfast!" she cried, as I rested, watch her 
glide up along the beach. 

"done!" said i--"for a sea-shell!" 

"done!" she call across the water. 

I made good speed along the shore, and I wa not long in dressing, 
but when I enter the dining-room she wa there, demure, smiling, 
exquisit in her cool, white frock. 

"the sea-shel is yours," said I. "I hope I can find one with a pearl 
in it." 

the professor hurri in befor she could reply. He greet me veri 
cordially, but there wa an abstract air about him, and he call me 
dick until I recognis that remonstr wa useless. He wa not long 
over hi coffe and rolls. 

"mcpeek and frisbi will return with the last load, includ your 
trunk, by earli afternoon," he said, rise and pick up hi bundl 
of drawings. "I haven't time to explain to you what we are doing, 
dick, but daisi will take you about and instruct you. she will give 
you the rifl stand in my room--it' a good winchester. I have 
sent for an 'express' for you, big enough to knock over ani eleph 
in india.--daisy, take him through the shed and tell him everything. 
luncheon is at noon.--do you usual take luncheon, dick?" 

"when I am permitted," I smiled. 

"well," said the professor doubtfully, "you mustn't come back here 
for it. freda can take you what you want. Is your hand unsteadi after 
eating?" 

"why, papa!" said daisy. "do you intend to starv him?" 

We all laughed. 

the professor tuck hi draw into a capaci pocket, pull hi 
sea boot up to hi hips, seiz a spade, and left, nod to us as 
though he were think of someth else. 

We went to the door and watch him across the salt meadow until a 
distant sand dune hid him. 

"come," said daisi holroyd, "I am go to take you to the shop." 

she put on a broad-brim straw hat, a distractingli pretti 
combin of filmi cool stuffs, and led the way to the long low 
structur that I had notic the even before. 

the interior wa light by the numberless littl portholes, and I 
could see everyth plainly. I acknowledg I wa nonpluss by what I 
did see. 

In the centr of the shed, which must have been at least a hundr feet 
long, stood what I thought at first wa the skeleton of an enorm 
whale. after a moment' silent contempl of the thing I saw that 
it could not be a whale, for the frame of two gigant bat-lik wing 
rose from each shoulder. also I notic that the anim possess 
legs--four of them--with most unpleasant-look web claw fulli 
eight feet long. the boni framework of the head, too, resembl 
someth between a crocodil and a monstrou snap turtle. 
the wall of the shanti were hung with draw and blue prints. A 
man dress in white linen wa tinker with the vertebræ of the 
lizardlik tail. 

"where on earth did such a reptil come from?" I ask at length. 

"oh, it' not real!" said daisi scornfully; "it' papier-maché." 

"I see," said i--"a stage prop." 

"A what?" ask daisy, in hurt astonishment. 

"why, a--a sort of siegfri dragon--a what's-his-name--er, pfafner, or 
peffer, or----" 

"if my father heard you say such thing he would dislik you," said 
daisy. she look grieved, and move toward the door. I apologized--for 
what, I knew not--and we becam reconciled. she ran into her father' 
room and brought me the rifle, a veri good winchester. she also gave me 
a cartridg belt, full. 

"now," she smiled, "I shall take you to your observatory, and when we 
arriv you are to begin your duti at once." 

"and that duty?" I ventured, shoulder the rifle. 

"that duti is, to watch the ocean. I shall then explain the whole 
affair--but you mustn't look at me while I speak; you must watch the 
sea." 

"this," said I, "i hardship. I had rather go without the luncheon." 

I do not think she wa offend at my speech; still she frown for 
almost three seconds. 

We pass through acr of sweet bay and spear grass, sometim 
skirt thicket of twist cedars, sometim walk in the full 
glare of the morn sun, sink into shift sand where sun-scorch 
shell crackl under our feet, and sun-brown seawe glistened, 
bronz and iridescent. then, as we climb a littl hill, the sea wind 
freshen in our faces, and lo! the ocean lay below us, far-stretch 
as the eye could reach, glittering, magnificent. 

daisi sat down flat on the sand. It take a clever girl to do that and 
retain the respect defer due her from men. It take a grace 
girl to accomplish it triumphantli when a man is looking. 

"you must sit besid me," she said--a though it would prove irksom to 
me. 

"now," she continued, "you must watch the water while I am talking." 

I nodded. 

"whi don't you do it, then?" she asked. 

I succeed in wrench my head toward the ocean, although I felt sure 
it would swing gradual round again in spite of me. 

"to begin with," said daisi holroyd, "there' a thing in that ocean 
that would astonish you if you saw it. turn your head!" 

"I am," I said meekly. 

"did you hear what I said?" 

"yes--er--a thing in the ocean that' go to astonish me." vision of 
mermaid rose befor me. 

"the thing," said daisy, "i a thermosaurus!" 

I nod vaguely, as though anticip a delight introduct to 
a nautic friend. 

"you don't seem astonished," she said reproachfully. 

"whi should I be?" I asked. 

"pleas turn your eye toward the water. suppos a thermosauru should 
look out of the waves!" 

"well," said I, "in that case the pleasur would be mutual." 

she frowned, and bit her upper lip. 

"do you know what a thermosauru is?" she asked. 

"if I am to guess," said I, "I guess it' a jellyfish." 

"it' that big, ugly, horribl creatur that I show you in the shed!" 
cri daisi impatiently. 

"eh!" I stammered. 

"not papier-maché either," she continu excitedly; "it' a real one." 

thi wa pleasant news. I glanc instinct at my rifl and then at 
the ocean. 

"well," said I at last, "it strike me that you and I resembl a pair 
of andromeda wait to be swallowed. thi rifl won't stop a beast, 
a live beast, like that nibelungen dragon of yours." 

"yes, it will," she said; "it' not an ordinari rifle." 

then, for the first time, I noticed, just below the magazine, a 
cylindr attach that wa strang to me. 

"now, if you will watch the sea veri carefully, and will promis not to 
look at me," said daisy, "I will tri to explain." 

she did not wait for me to promise, but went on eagerly, a sparkl of 
excit in her blue eyes: 

"you know, of all the fossil remain of the great bat-lik and 
lizard-lik creatur that inhabit the earth age and age ago, 
the bone of the gigant saurian are the most interesting. I think 
they use to splash about the water and fli over the land dure the 
carbonifer period; anyway, it doesn't matter. Of course, you have 
seen pictur of reconstruct creatur such as the ichthyosaurus, the 
plesiosaurus, the anthracosaurus, and the thermosaurus?" 

I nodded, tri to keep my eye from hers. 

"and you know that the remain of the thermosauru were first 
discov and reconstruct by papa?" 

"yes," said I. there wa no use in say no. 

"I am glad you do. now, papa ha prove that thi creatur live 
entir in the gulf stream, emerg for occasion flight across an 
ocean or two. can you imagin how he prove it?" 

"no," said I, resolut point my nose at the ocean. 

"he prove it by a minut examin of the microscop shell 
found among the rib of the thermosaurus. these shell contain littl 
creatur that live onli in the warm water of the gulf stream. they 
were the food of the thermosaurus." 

"it wa rather slender ration for a thing like that, wasn't it? did he 
ever swallow bigger food--er--men?" 

"oh, yes. ton of fossil bone from prehistor men are also found in 
the interior of the thermosaurus." 

"then," said I, "you, at least, had better go back to captain 
mcpeek's----" 

"pleas turn around; don't be so foolish. I didn't say there wa a 
_live_ thermosauru in the water, did i?" 

"isn't there?" 

"why, no!" 

My relief wa genuine, but I thought of the rifl and look 
suspici out to sea. 

"what' the winchest for?" I asked. 

"listen, and I will explain. papa ha found out--how, I do not exactli 
understand--that there is in the water of the gulf stream the bodi of 
a thermosaurus. the creatur must have been aliv within a year or so. 
the impenetr scale armour that cover it bodi has, as far as papa 
knows, prevent it disintegration. We know that it is there still, or 
wa there within a few months. papa ha report and sworn deposit 
from steamer captain and seamen from a dozen differ vessels, 
all corrobor each other in essenti details. these stories, of 
course, get into the newspapers--sea-serp stories--but papa know 
that they confirm hi theori that the huge bodi of thi reptil is 
swing along somewher on the gulf stream." 

she open her sunshad and held it over her. I notic that she 
deign to give me the benefit of about one eighth of it. 

"your duti with that rifl is this: If we are fortun enough to see 
the bodi of the thermosauru come float by, you are to take good 
aim and fire--fir rapidli everi bullet in the magazine; then reload 
and fire again, and reload and fire as long as you have ani cartridg 
left." 

"A self-feed maxim is what I should have," I said with gentl 
sarcasm. "well, and suppos I make a siev of thi big lizard?" 

"do you see these ring in the sand?" she asked. 

sure enough, somebodi had driven heavi pile deep into the sand all 
around us, and to the top of these pile were attach steel rings, 
half buri under the spear grass. We sat almost exactli in the centr 
of a circl of these rings. 

"the reason is this," said daisy: "everi bullet in your cartridg 
is steel-tip and armour-piercing. To the base of each bullet is 
attach a thin wire of pallium. pallium is that new metal, a thread of 
which, drawn out into finest wire, will hold a ton of iron suspended. 
everi bullet is fit with minut coil of mile of thi wire. when 
the bullet leav the rifl it spin out thi wire as a shot from a 
life-saver' mortar spin out and carri the life line to a wreck 
ship. the end of each coil of wire is attach to that cylind under 
the magazin of your rifle. As soon as the shell is automat 
eject thi wire fli out also. A bit of scarlet tape is fix to 
the end, so that it will be easi to pick up. there is also a snap clasp 
on the end, and thi clasp fit those ring that you see in the sand. 
now, when you begin firing, it is my duti to run and pick up the wire 
end and attach them to the rings. then, you see, we have the bodi of 
the thermosauru full of bullets, everi bullet anchor to the shore by 
tini wires, each of which could easili hold a ton' strain." 

I look at her in amazement. 

"then," she ad calmly, "we have captur the thermosaurus." 

"your father," said I at length, "must have spent year of labour over 
thi preparation." 

"it is the work of a lifetime," she said simply. 

My face, I suppose, show my misgivings. 

"it must not fail," she added. 

"but--but we are nowher near the gulf stream," I ventured. 

her face brightened, and she frankli held the sunshad over us both. 

"ah, you don't know," she said, "what els papa ha discovered. would 
you believ that he ha found a loop in the gulf stream--a genuin 
loop--that swing in here just outsid of the breaker below? It is 
true! everybodi on long island know that there is a warm current off 
the coast, but nobodi imagin it wa mere a sort of backwat from 
the gulf stream that form a great circular mill-rac around the 
cone of a subterranean volcano, and rejoin the gulf stream off cape 
albatross. but it is! that is whi papa bought a yacht three year ago 
and sail about for two year so mysteriously. oh, I did want to go 
with him so much!" 

"this," said I, "i most astonishing." 

she lean enthusiast toward me, her love face aglow. 

"isn't it?" she said; "and to think that you and papa and I are the 
onli peopl in the whole world who know this!" 

To be includ in such a triolog wa veri delightful. 

"papa is write the whole thing--i mean about the currents. He also 
ha in prepar sixteen volum on the thermosaurus. He said thi 
morn that he wa go to ask you to write the stori first for some 
scientif magazine. He is certain that professor bruce stoddard, of 
columbia, will write the pamphlet necessary. thi will give papa time 
to attend to the sixteen-volum work, which he expect to finish in 
three years." 

"let us first," said I, laughing, "catch our thermosaurus." 

"we must not fail," she said wistfully. 

"we shall not fail," I said, "for I promis to sit on thi sand hill 
as long as I live--until a thermosauru appears--if that is your wish, 
miss holroyd." 

our eye met for an instant. she did not chide me, either, for not 
look at the ocean. her eye were bluer, anyway. 

"I suppose," she said, bend her head and absent pour sand 
between her fingers--"i suppos you think me a blue-stocking, or 
someth odious?" 

"not exactly," I said. there wa an emphasi in my voic that made her 
colour. after a moment she laid the sunshad down, still open. 

"may I hold it?" I asked. 

she nod almost imperceptibly. 

the ocean had turn a deep marin blue, verg on purple, that 
herald a scorch afternoon. the wind die away; the odour of cedar 
and sweet bay hung heavi in the air. 

In the sand at our feet an iridesc flower beetl crawled, it 
metal green and blue wing burn like a spark. great gnats, with 
filmy, glitter wings, danc aimlessli abov the young golden-rod; 
burnish crickets, inquisitive, timid, ran from under chip of 
driftwood, wave their antennæ at us, and ran back again. one by one 
the marbl tiger beetl tumbl at our feet, daze from the exert 
of an aërial flight, then scrambl and ran a littl way, or dart 
into the wire grass, where great brilliant spider eye them askanc 
from their gossam hammocks. 

far out at sea the white gull float and drift on the water, or 
sail up into the air to flap lazili for a moment and settl back 
among the waves. string of black surf duck passed, their strong wing 
tip the surfac of the water; singl wander coot whirl from 
the breaker into lone flight toward the horizon. 

We lay and watch the littl ring-neck run along the water' 
edge, now back away from the incom tide, now boldli wade 
after the undertow. the harmoni of silence, the deep perfume, the 
mysteri of wait for that someth that all await--what is it? 
love? death? or onli the miracl of anoth morrow?--troubl me with 
vagu restfulness. As sunlight cast shadows, happiness, too, throw a 
shadow, and the shadow is sadness. 

and so the morn wore away until freda came with a cool-look 
hamper. then delici cold fowl and lettuc sandwich and champagn 
cup set our tongu wag as onli veri young tongu can wag. daisi 
went back with freda after luncheon, leav me a case of cigars, with 
a banter smile. I dozed, half awake, keep a partli close eye 
on the ocean, where a faint gray streak show plainli amid the azur 
water all around. that wa the gulf stream loop. 

about four o'clock frisbi appear with a bamboo shelter tent, for 
which I wa unaffectedli grateful. 

after he had erect it over me he stop to chat a bit, but the 
convers bore me, for he could talk of noth but bill-posting. 

"you wouldn't ruin the landscap here, would you?" I asked. 

"ruin it!" repeat frisbi nervously. "it' ruin now; there ain't a 
place to stick a bill." 

"the snipe stick bills--in the sand," I said flippantly. 

there wa no humour about frisby. "do they?" he asked. 

I move with a certain impatience. 

"bills," said frisby, "give spice an' varieti to nature. they break the 
monotoni of the everlastin' green and what-you-may-call-its." 

I glare at him. 

"bills," he continued, "are not easi to stick, lemm tell you, sir. 
sign paintin' a soft snap when it come to bill-stickin'. now, I guess 
i'v stuck more bill in new york state than ennybody." 

"have you?" I said angrily. 

"yes, siree! I alway pick out the purtiest spots--kind fill chuck 
full of wood and brook and things; then I h'ist my paste-pot onto a 
rock, and I slather that rock with gum, and whoop she goes!" 

"whoop what goes?" 

"the bill. I past her onto the rock, with one swipe of the brush for 
the edg and a back-hand swipe for the finish--except when a bill is 
fold in two halves." 

"and what do you do then?" I asked, disgusted. 

"swipe twice," said frisbi with enthusiasm. 

"and you don't think it injur the landscape?" 

"injur it!" he exclaimed, convinc that I wa attempt to joke. 

I look wearili out to sea. He also look at the water and sigh 
sentimentally. 

"floatin' buoy with bill onto 'em is a idea of mine," he observed. 
"that damn ocean is monotonous, ain't it?" 

I don't know what I might have done to frisby--th rifl wa so 
convenient--if hi mean yellow dog had not waddl up at thi juncture. 

"hi, davy, sic 'em!" said frisby, expector upon a clamshel 
and hurl it seaward. the cur watch the flight of the shell 
apathetically, then squat in the sand and look at hi master. 

"kinder lost hi spirit," said frisby, "ain't he? I onc stuck a bill 
onto davy, an' it come off, an' the past sorter sicken him. He wa 
hell on rats--once!" 

after a moment or two frisbi took himself off, whistl cheer 
to davy, who follow him when he wa ready. the rifl burn in my 
fingers. 

It wa nearli six o'clock when the professor appeared, spade on 
shoulder, boot smear with mud. 

"well," he said, "noth to report, dick, my boy?" 

"nothing, professor." 

He wipe hi shine face with hi handkerchief and stare at the water. 

"mi calcul lead me to believe," he said, "that our prize may be 
due ani day now. thi theori I base upon the result of the report from 
the last sea captain I saw. I can not understand whi some of these 
captain did not take the carcass in tow. they all say that they tried, 
but that the bodi sank befor they could come within half a mile. the 
truth is, probably, that they did not stir a foot from their cours to 
examin the thing." 

"have you ever cruis about for it?" I ventured. 

"for two years," he said grimly. "it' no use; it' accid when a 
ship fall in with it. one captain report it a thousand mile from 
where the last skipper spoke it, and alway in the gulf stream. they 
think it is a differ specimen everi time, and the paper are teem 
with sea-serp fol-de-rol." 

"are you sure," I asked, "that it will swing in to the coast on thi 
gulf stream loop?" 

"I think I may say that it is certain to do so. I experi with 
a dead right whale. you may have heard of it come ashor here last 
summer." 

"I think I did," said I with a faint smile. the thing had poison the 
air for mile around. 

"but," I continued, "suppos it come in the night?" 

He laughed. 

"there I am lucky. everi night thi month, and everi day, too, 
the current of the loop run inland so far that even a porpois 
would strand for at least twelv hours. longer than that I have not 
experi with, but I know that the shore trend of the loop run 
across a long spur of the submerg volcan mountain, and that 
anyth heavier than a porpois would scrape the bottom and be carri 
so slowli that at least twelv hour must elaps befor the carcass 
could float again into deep water. there are chanc of it strand 
indefinitely, too, but I don't care to take those chances. that is whi 
I have station you here, dick, my boy." 

He glanc again at the water, smile to himself. 

"there is anoth question I want to ask," I said, "if you don't mind." 

"of cours not!" he said warmly. 

"what are you dig for?" 

"why, simpli for exercise. the doctor told me I wa kill myself 
with my sedentari habits, so I decid to dig. I don't know a better 
exercise. Do you?" 

"I suppos not," I murmured, rather red in the face. I wonder whether 
he'd mention fossils. 

"did daisi tell you whi we are make our papier-maché thermosaurus?" 
he asked. 

I shook my head. 

"we construct that from measur I took from the fossil remain 
of the thermosauru in the metropolitan museum. professor bruce 
stoddard made the drawings. We set it up here, all readi to receiv the 
skin of the carcass that I am expecting." 

We had start toward home, walk slowli across the darken dunes, 
shoulder to shoulder. the sand wa deep, and walk wa not easy. 

"I wish," said I at last, "that I knew whi miss holroyd ask me not to 
walk on the beach. it' much less fatiguing." 

"that," said the professor, "i a matter that I intend to discuss with 
you to-night." He spoke gravely, almost sadly. I felt that someth of 
unparallel import wa soon to be revealed. So I kept veri quiet, 
watch the ocean out of the corner of my eyes. 


iv. 

dinner wa ended. daisi holroyd light her father' pipe for him, and 
insist on my smoke as much as I pleased. then she sat down, and 
fold her hand like a good littl girl, wait for her father to 
make the revel which I felt in my bone must be someth out of 
the ordinary. 

the professor smoke for a while, gaze medit at hi daughter; 
then, fix hi gray eye on me, he said: 

"have you ever heard of the kree--that australian bird, half parrot, 
half hawk, that destroy so mani sheep in new south wales?" 

I nodded. 

"the kree kill a sheep by alight on it back and tear away 
the flesh with it hook beak until a vital part is reached. you 
know that? well, it ha been discov that the kree had prehistor 
prototypes. these bird were enorm creatures, who prey upon 
mammoth and mastodons, and even upon the great saurians. It ha 
been conclus prove that a few saurian have been kill by 
the ancestor of the kree, but the favourit food of these bird wa 
undoubtedli the thermosaurus. It is believ that the bird attack 
the eye of the thermosaurus, and when, as wa it habit, the mammoth 
creatur turn on it back to claw them, they fell upon the thinner 
scale of it stomach armour and final kill it. this, of course, 
is a theory, but we have almost absolut proof of it correctness. 
now, these two bird are known among scientist as the ekaf-bird and 
the ool-yllik. the name are australian, in which countri most of 
their remain have been unearthed. they live dure the carbonifer 
period. now it is not gener known, but the fact is, that in 
1801 captain ransom, of the british explor vessel gull, purchas 
from the nativ of tasmania the skin of an ekaf-bird that could not 
have been kill more than twenty-four hour previou to it sale. I 
saw thi skin in the british museum. It wa label "unknown bird, 
probabl extinct." It took me exactli a week to satisfi myself that it 
wa actual the skin of an ekaf-bird. but that is not all, dick, my 
boy," continu the professor excitedly. "in 1854, admir stuart, of 
our own navy, saw the carcass of a strang gigant bird float along 
the southern coast of australia. shark were after it, and, befor a 
boat could be lowered, these miser fish got it. but the good old 
admir secur a few feather and sent them to the smithsonian. I saw 
them. they were not even labelled, but I knew that they were feather 
from the ekaf-bird or it near relative, the ool-yllik." 

I had grown so interest that I had lean far across the table. 
daisy, too, bent forward. It wa onli when the professor paus for a 
moment that I notic how close togeth our head were--daisy' and 
mine. I don't think she realiz it. she did not move. 

"now come the import part of thi long discourse," said the 
professor, smile at our eagerness. "ever sinc the carcass of our 
derelict thermosauru wa first noticed, everi captain who ha seen 
it ha also report the presenc of one or more gigant bird in 
the neighbourhood. these birds, at a great distance, appear to 
be hover over the carcass, but on the approach of a vessel they 
disappeared. even in midocean they were observed. when I heard about it 
I wa puzzled. A month later I wa satisfi that neither the ekaf-bird 
nor the ool-yllik wa extinct. last monday I knew that I wa right. 
I found forty-eight distinct impress of the huge seven-to claw 
of the ekaf-bird on the beach here at pine inlet. you may imagin my 
excitement. I succeed in dig up enough wet sand around one of 
these impress to preserv it form. I manag to get it into a soap 
box, and now it is there in my shop. the tide rose too rapidli for me 
to save the other footprints." 

I shudder at the possibl of a clumsi misstep on my part 
obliter the impress of an ool-yllik. 

"that is the reason that my daughter warn you off the beach," he said 
mildly. 

"hang would have been too good for the vandal who destroy such 
priceless prizes!" I cri out in self-reproach. 

daisi holroyd turn a flush face to mine, and impuls laid her 
hand on my sleeve. 

"how could you know?" she said. 

"it' all right now," said her father, emphas each word with 
a gentl tap of hi pipe-bowl on the tabl edge; "don't be hard on 
yourself, dick, my boy. you'll do yeoman' servic yet." 

It wa nearli midnight, and still we chat on about the thermosaurus, 
the ekaf-bird, and the ool-yllik, eagerli discuss the probabl of 
the great reptile' carcass be in the vicinity. that alon seem to 
explain the presenc of these prehistor bird at pine inlet. 

"do they ever attack human beings?" I asked. 

the professor look startled. 

"gracious!" he exclaimed, "I never thought of that. and daisi run 
about out of doors! dear me! it take a scientist to be an unnatur 
parent!" 

hi alarm wa half real, half assumed; but all the same, he glanc 
grave at us both, shake hi handsom head, absorb in thought. 
daisi herself look a littl doubtful. As for me, my sensat were 
distinctli queer. 

"it is true," said the professor, frown at the wall, "that human 
remain have been found associ with the bone of the ekaf-bird--i 
don't know how intimately. It is a matter to be taken into most seriou 
consideration." 

"the problem can be solved," said I, "in sever ways. one is, to keep 
miss holroyd in the house----" 

"I shall not stay in!" cri daisi indignantly. 

We all laughed, and her father assur her that she should not be 
abused. 

"even if I did stay in," she said, "one of these bird might alight on 
master dick." 

she look saucili at me as she spoke, but turn crimson when her 
father observ quietly, "you don't seem to think of me, daisy." 

"of cours I do," she said, get up and put both arm around 
her father' neck; "but dick--as--a you call him--i so helpless and 
timid." 

My bliss smile froze on my lips. 

"timid!" I repeated. 

she came back to the table, make me a mock reverence. 

"do you think I am to be laugh at with impunity?" she said. 

"what are your other plans, dick, my boy?" ask the 
professor.--"daisy, let him alone, you littl tease!" 

"one is, to haul a lot of cast-iron boiler along the dunes," I said. 
"if these bird come when the carcass float in, and if they seem 
dispos to troubl us, we could crawl into the boiler and be safe." 

"why, that is realli brilliant!" cri daisy. 

"be quiet, my child! dick, the plan is sound and sensibl and perfectli 
practical. mcpeek and frisbi shall go for a dozen load of boiler 
to-morrow." 

"it will spoil the beauti of the landscape," said daisy, with a 
taunt nod to me. 

"and frisbi will probabl attempt to cover them with bill-posters," I 
added, laughing. 

"that," said daisy, "I shall prevent, even at the cost of my life." and 
she stood up, look veri determined. 

"children, children," protest the professor, "go to bed--you bother 
me." 

then I turn deliber to miss holroyd. 

"good-night, daisy," I said. 

"good-night, dick," she said, veri gently. 


V. 

the week pass quickli for me, leav but few definit impressions. 
As I look back to it now I can see the long stretch of beach burn 
in the fierc sunlight, the endless meadows, with the glimmer of 
water in the distance, the dunes, the twist cedars, the leagu of 
scintil ocean, rocking, rocking, alway rocking. In the starlit 
night the curlew came in from the sand-bar by two and threes; I 
could hear their faint call as I lay in bed thinking. all day long the 
littl ring-neck whistl from the shore. the plover answer them 
from distant lone inland pools. the great white gull drift like 
feather upon the sea. 

one morning, toward the end of the week, I, stroll along the dunes, 
came upon frisby. He wa bill-posting. I caught him red-handed. 

"this," said I, "must stop. Do you understand, mr. frisby?" 

He step back from hi work, lay hi head on one side, consid 
first me, then the bill that he had past on one of our big boilers. 

"don't like the colour?" he asked. "it goe well on them boilers." 

"colour! no, I don't like the colour either. can't you understand that 
there are some peopl in the world who object to see patent-medicin 
advertis scatter over a landscape?" 

"hey?" he said perplexed. 

"will you kindli remov that advertisement?" I persisted. 

"too late," said frisby; "it' sot." 

I wa too disgust to speak, but my disgust turn to anger when 
I perceiv that, as far as the eye could reach, our boilers, lie 
from three to four hundr feet apart, were ablaz with yellow and red 
posters, extol the "eureka liver pill company." 

"it don't cost 'em nothin'," said frisbi cheerfully; "I done it fur the 
fun of it. purty, ain't it?" 

"they are professor holroyd' boilers," I said, subdu a desir 
to beat frisbi with my telescope. "wait until miss holroyd see thi 
work." 

"don't she like yeller and red?" he demand anxiously. 

"you'll find out," said I. 

frisbi gape at hi handiwork and then at hi yellow dog. after a 
moment he mechan spat on a clamshel and request davi to "sic" 
it. 

"can't you comprehend that you have ruin our pleasur in the 
landscape?" I ask more mildly. 

"i'v got some green bills," said frisby; "I kin stick 'em over the 
yeller ones----" 

"confound it!" said I, "it isn't the colour!" 

"then," observ frisby, "you don't like them pills. i'v got some 
bill of the 'cropper bicycle,' and a few of 'bagley, the gents' 
tailor----'" 

"frisby," said I, "use them all--past the whole collect over your 
dog and yourself--then walk off the cliff." 

He sullenli unfold a green poster, swab the boiler with paste, 
laid the upper section of the bill upon it, and plaster the whole 
bill down with a thwack of hi brush. As I walk away I heard him 
muttering. 

next day daisi wa so horrifi that I promis to give frisbi an 
ultimatum. I found him with freda, gaze sentiment at hi work, 
and I sent him back to the shop in a hurry, tell freda at the same 
time that she could spend her leisur in provid mr. frisbi with 
sand, soap, and a scrub brush. then I walk on to my post of 
observation. 

I watch until sunset. daisi came with her father to hear my report, 
but there wa noth to tell, and we three walk slowli back to the 
house. 

In the even the professor work on hi volumes, the click of hi 
type-writ sound faintli behind hi close door. daisi and I play 
chess sometimes; sometim we play hearts. I don't rememb that we 
ever finish a game of either--w talk too much. 

our discuss cover everi topic of interest: we argu 
upon politics; we skim over literatur and music; we settl 
intern differences; we spoke vagu of human brotherhood. I say 
we slight no subject of interest--i am wrong; we never spoke of love. 

now, love is a matter of interest to ten peopl out of ten. whi it wa 
that it did not appear to interest us is as interest a question 
as love itself. We were young, alert, enthusiastic, inquiring. We 
eagerli absorb theori concern ani curiou phenomena in nature, 
as intellectu cocktail to stimul discussion. and yet we did not 
discuss love. I do not say that we avoid it. no; the subject wa too 
complet ignor for even that. and yet we found it veri difficult to 
pass an hour separated. the professor notic this, and laugh at us. 
We were not even embarrassed. 

sunday pass in piou contempl of the ocean. daisi read a littl 
in her prayer-book, and the professor threw a cloth over hi typewrit 
and stroll up and down the sands. He may have been lost in devout 
abstraction; he may have been look for footprints. As for me, my 
mind wa veri serene, and I wa more than happy. daisi read to me a 
littl for my soul' sake, and the professor came up and said someth 
cheerful. He also examin the magazin of my winchester. 

that night, too, daisi took her guitar to the sand and sang one or two 
armenian hymns. unlik us, the armenian do not take their pleasur 
sadly. one of their pleasur is evid religion. 

the big moon came up over the dune and stare at the sea until the 
surfac of everi wave trembl with radiance. A sudden still fell 
across the world; the wind die out; the foam ran noiselessli across 
the beach; the cricket' rune wa stilled. 

I lean back, drop one hand upon the sand. It touch anoth 
hand, soft and cool. 

after a while the other hand move slightly, and I found that my own 
had close abov it. present one finger stir a little--onli a 
little--for our finger were interlocked. 

On the shore the foam-froth bubbl and wink and glimmer in the 
moonlight. A star fell from the zenith, shower the night with 
incandesc dust. 

If our finger lay interlac besid us, her eye were calm and seren 
as always, wide open, fix upon the depth of a dark sky. and when her 
father rose and spoke to us, she did not withdraw her hand. 

"i it late?" she ask dreamily. 

"it is midnight, littl daughter." 

I stood up, still hold her hand, and aid her to rise. and when, at 
the door, I said good-night, she turn and look at me for a littl 
while in silence, then pass into her room slowly, with head still 
turn toward me. 

all night long I dream of her; and when the east whitened, I sprang 
up, the thunder of the ocean in my ears, the strong sea wind blow 
into the open window. 

"she is asleep," I thought, and I lean from the window and peer out 
into the east. 

the sea call to me, toss it thousand arms; the soar gulls, 
dipping, rising, wheel abov the sand-bar, scream and clamour 
for a playmate. I slip into my bath suit, drop from the window 
upon the soft sand, and in a moment had plung head foremost into the 
surf, swim beneath the wave toward the open sea. 

under the toss ocean the voic of the water wa in my ears--a low, 
sweet voice, intimate, mysterious. through sing foam and broad, 
green, glassi depths, by whisper sandi channel atrail with seaweed, 
and on, on, out into the vague, cool sea, I sped, rise to the top, 
sinking, gliding. then at last I flung myself out of water, hand 
raised, and the clamour of the gull fill my ears. 

As I lay, breath fast, drift on the sea, far out beyond the gull 
I saw a flash of white, and an arm wa lifted, signal me. 

"daisy!" I called. 

A clear hail came across the water, distinct on the sea wind, and at 
the same instant we rais our hand and move toward each other. 

how we laugh as we met in the sea! the white dawn came up out of the 
depths, the zenith turn to rose and ashes. 

and with the dawn came the wind--a great sea wind, fresh, aromatic, 
that hurl our voic back into our throat and lift the sheet 
spray abov our heads. everi wave, crown with mist, caught us in a 
cool embrace, cradl us, and slip away, onli to leav us to anoth 
wave, higher, stronger, crest with opalesc glory, breath 
incense. 

We turn togeth up the coast, swim lightli side by side, but our 
word were caught up by the wind and whirl into the sky. 

We look up at the drive clouds; we look out upon the pallid wast 
of waters; but it wa into each other' eye we looked, wondering, 
wistful, question the reason of sky and sea. and there in each 
other' eye we read the mystery, and we knew that earth and sky and 
sea were creat for us alone. 

drift on by distant sand and dunes, her white finger touch 
mine, we spoke, key our tone to the wind' vast harmony. and we 
spoke of love. 

gray and wide as the limitless span of the sky and the sea, the 
wind gather from the world' end to bear us on; but they were 
not familiar winds; for now, along the coast, the breaker curl and 
show a million fangs, and the ocean stir to it depths, uneasy, 
ominous, and the menac of it murmur drew us closer as we moved. 

where the dull thunder and the toss spray warn us from sunken 
reefs, we heard the harsh challeng of gulls; where the pallid surf 
twist in yellow coil of spume abov the bar, the sing sand 
murmur of treacheri and secret of lost soul agasp in the throe of 
silent undertows. 

but there wa a littl stretch of beach glimmer through the 
mountain of water, and toward thi we turned, side by side. around us 
the water grew warmer; the breath of the follow wave moisten our 
cheeks; the water itself grew gray and strang about us. 

"we have come too far," I said; but she onli answered: "faster, faster! 
I am afraid!" the water wa almost hot now; it aromat odour fill 
our lungs. 

"the gulf loop!" I muttered. "daisy, shall I help you?" 

"no. swim--clos by me! oh-h! dick----" 

her startl cri wa echo by another--a shrill scream, unutter 
horrible--and a great bird flap from the beach, splash and 
beat it pinion across the water with a thunder noise. 

out across the wave it blundered, rise littl by littl from the 
water, and now, to my horror, I saw anoth monstrou bird swing in 
the air abov it, squeal as it turn on it vast wings. befor I 
could speak we touch the beach, and I half lift her to the shore. 

"quick!" I repeated. "we must not wait." 

her eye were dark with fear, but she rest a hand on my shoulder, and 
we crept up among the dune grass and sank down by the point of sand 
where the rough shelter stood, surround by the iron-ring piles. 

she lay there, breath fast and deep, drip with spray. I had no 
power of speech left, but when I rose wearili to my knee and look 
out upon the water my blood ran cold. abov the ocean, on the breast 
of the roar wind, three enorm bird sailed, turn and wheel 
among each other; and below, drift with the gray stream of the gulf 
loop, a coloss bulk lay half submerged--a gigant lizard, float 
belli upward. 

then daisi crept kneel to my side and touch me, trembl from 
head to foot. 

"I know," I muttered. "I must run back for the rifle." 

"and--and leav me?" 

I took her by the hand, and we drag ourselv through the wire grass 
to the open end of a boiler lie in the sand. 

she crept in on her hand and knees, and call to me to follow. 

"you are safe now," I cried. "I must go back for the rifle." 

"the bird may--may attack you." 

"if they do I can get into one of the other boilers," I said. "daisy, 
you must not ventur out until I come back. you won't, will you?" 

"no-o," she whisper doubtfully. 

"then--good-by." 

"good-by," she answered, but her voic wa veri small and still. 

"good-by," I said again. I wa kneel at the mouth of the big iron 
tunnel; it wa dark insid and I could not see her, but, befor I wa 
consciou of it, her arm were around my neck and we had kiss each 
other. 

I don't rememb how I went away. when I came to my proper sens I wa 
swim along the coast at full speed, and over my head wheel one of 
the birds, scream at everi turn. 

the intox of that innoc embrace, the close impress of her 
arm around my neck, gave me a strength and reckless that neither 
fear nor fatigu could subdue. the bird abov me did not even frighten 
me; I watch it over my shoulder, swim strongly, with the tide now 
aid me, now stem my course; but I saw the shore pass quickli 
and my strength increased, and I shout when I came in sight of the 
house, and scrambl up on the sand, drip and excited. there wa 
nobodi in sight, and I gave a last glanc up into the air where the 
bird wheeled, still screeching, and hasten into the house. freda 
stare at me in amaz as I seiz the rifl and shout for the 
professor. 

"he ha just gone to town, with captain mcpeek in hi wagon," stammer 
freda. 

"what!" I cried. "doe he know where hi daughter is?" 

"miss holroyd is asleep--not?" gasp freda. 

"where' frisby?" I cri impatiently. 

"yimmie?" quaver freda. 

"yes, jimmie; isn't there anybodi here? good heavens! where' that man 
in the shop?" 

"he also iss gone," said freda, shed tears, "to buy papier-maché. 
yimmie, he iss gone to post bills." 

I wait to hear no more, but swung my rifl over my shoulder, and, 
hang the cartridg belt across my chest, hurri out and up the 
beach. the bird wa not in sight. 

I had been run for perhap a minut when, far up on the dunes, I 
saw a yellow dog rush madli through a clump of sweet bay, and at the 
same moment a bird soar past, rose, and hung hover just abov 
the thicket. suddenli the bird swooped; there wa a shriek and a yelp 
from the cur, but the bird grip it in one claw and beat it wing 
upon the sand, strive to rise. then I saw frisby--paste, bucket, and 
brush raised--fal upon the bird, yell lustily. the fierc creatur 
relax it talons, and the dog rush on, squeak with terror. the 
bird turn on frisbi and sent him sprawl on hi face, a sticki 
mass of past and sand. but thi did not end the struggle. the bird, 
croak wildly, flew at the prostrat billposter, and the sand whirl 
into a pillar abov it terribl wings. scarc know what I wa 
about, I rais my rifl and fire twice. A horrid scream echo each 
shot, and the bird rose heavili in a shower of sand; but two bullet 
were embed in that mass of foul feathers, and I saw the wire and 
scarlet tape uncoil on the sand at my feet. In an instant I seiz 
them and pass the end around a cedar tree, hook the clasp tight. 
then I cast one swift glanc upward, where the bird wheel screeching, 
anchor like a kite to the pallium wires; and I hurri on across 
the dunes, the shell cut my feet, and the bush tear my wet 
swim suit, until I drip with blood from shoulder to ankle. out 
in the ocean the carcass of the thermosauru floated, claw outspread, 
belli glisten in the gray light, and over him circl two birds. As 
I reach the shelter I knelt and fire into the mass of scales, and at 
my first shot a horribl thing occurred: the lizardlik head writhed, 
the slit yellow eye slide open from the film that cover them. 
A shudder pass across the undul body, the great scale belli 
heaved, and one leg feebli claw at the air. 

the thing wa still alive! 

crush back the horror that almost paralyz my hands, I plant shot 
after shot into the quiver reptile, while it writh and clawed, 
strive to turn over and dive; and at each shot the black blood 
spurt in long, slim jet across the water. and now daisi wa at my 
side, pale and determined, swiftli clasp each tape-mark wire to 
the iron ring in the circl around us. twice I fill the magazin 
from my belt, and twice I pour stream of steel-tip bullet into 
the scale mass, twist and shudder on the sea. suddenli the bird 
steer toward us. I felt the wind from their vast wings. I saw the 
feather erect, vibrating. I saw the spread claw outstretched, and I 
struck furious at them, cri to daisi to run into the iron shelter. 
backing, swing my club rifle, I retreated, but I trip across 
one of the taut pallium wires, and in an instant the hideou bird were 
on me, and the bone in my forearm snap like a pipestem at a blow 
from their wings. twice I struggl to my knees, blind with blood, 
confused, almost fainting; then I fell again, roll into the mouth of 
the iron boiler. 

* * * * * 

when I struggl back to conscious daisi knelt silent besid me, 
while captain mcpeek and professor holroyd bound up my shatter arm, 
talk excitedly. the pain made me faint and dizzy. I tri to speak 
and could not. At last they got me to my feet and into the wagon, and 
daisi came, too, and crouch besid me, wrap in oilskin to her 
eyes. fatigue, lack of food, and excit had combin with wound 
and broken bone to extinguish the last atom of strength in my body; 
but my mind wa clear enough to understand that the troubl wa over 
and the thermosauru safe. 

I heard mcpeek say that one of the bird that I had anchor to a cedar 
tree had torn loos from the bullet and wing it way heavili out 
to sea. the professor answered: "yes, the ekaf-bird; the other were 
ool-ylliks. i'd have given my right arm to have secur them." then 
for a time I heard no more; but the jolt of the wagon over the dune 
rous me to keenest pain, and I held out my right hand to daisy. she 
clasp it in both of hers, and kiss it again and again. 

* * * * * 

there is littl more to add, I think. professor bruce stoddard ha 
edit thi stori carefully. hi own scientif pamphlet will be 
publish soon, to be follow by professor holroyd' sixteen volumes. 
In a few day the stuf and mount thermosauru will be place on 
free public exhibit in the arena of madison squar garden, the onli 
build in the citi larg enough to contain the bodi of thi immens 
wing reptile. 

when my arm came out of splints, daisi and i---- but realli that 
ha noth to do with a detail scientif descript of the 
thermosaurus, which, I think, I shall add as an appendix to the book. 
If you do not find it there it will be becaus daisi and I have veri 
littl time to write about thermosaurians. 

but what I realli want to tell you about is the extraordinari 
adventur of captain mcpeek and frisby--how they produc a specimen 
of samia cynthia that dwarf a hundr of attacu atlas, and how the 
american line steamer st. loui foul the thing with her screw. 

the more I think of it the more determin I am to tell it to you. It 
will be difficult to prevent me. and that is not fiction either. 




envoi. 




_envoi._ 


_i._ 

_when shadow pass across the grass 
and april breez stir the sedge, 
along the brim river' edg 
I trail my line for silver trout, 
and smoke, and dream of you, my lass, 
and wonder whi we two fell out, 
and how the deuc it came about._ 

_ii._ 

_when swallow sheer the meadow-mer 
and thicket thrill with thrushes' hymns, 
along the mill-pond' reedi rim 
I trail my line for shine dace; 
but how can finni fish cheer 
A fellow, if he find no grace 
In your sweet eye and your dear face?_ 

_iii._ 

_let thrush wing their way and sing 
where cress freshen pebbl nooks; 
By silent rill and sing brook 
I pass my way alone, alas! 
with your dear name the woodland ring-- 
your name is murmur by the grass, 
By earth, by air, all-wher I pass._ 

_iv._ 

_the paint bream may swim the stream-- 
i'll cast no line to-day, pardi! 
In vain the river-rippl gleam, 
In vain the thrushes' minstrelsy. 
vain is the wind that whispers, "lo! 
thi fish are waiting--angler, go!"_ 

_v._ 

_will you forgiv if I forgive? 
life is too sad, I think, to live 
alone, and dream and smoke and fish; 
i'll say "forgive" first--if you wish?_ 

_vi._ 

_for at that word, the sorceri 
Of love shall chang the earth and sky 
To paradise, with cherubim 
instead of bird on everi limb._ 

_vii._ 

_river shall sing our rhapsody; 
the vault forest, tree by tree, 
high hung with tapestry, shall glow 
with golden pillar all a-row._ 

_viii._ 

_and down the gild forest aisl 
shi throng of violet shall smile 
and kiss your feet from tree to tree 
while blue-bel droop in courtesy._ 

_ix._ 

_and if the sun incarnadin 
the clouds--green leav shall be your screen; 
and if the cloud with jealousi 
should weep--we'l beg of some kind tree 
A moment' hospitality._ 

_x._ 

_good cheer is here, if you incline; 
moss-hidden spring shall bubbl wine 
while squirrel chuckle, rank on rank, 
and strawberri from everi bank 
shall blush to see how deep we drank._ 

_xi._ 

_wind of the west shall cool our eye 
while everi woodland creatur tri 
hi voic a little, so that he 
may know hi note more perfectli 
when cricket start the symphony._ 

_xii._ 

_through hazel glade and scent dell 
where brooklet ring a tinkl bell, 
the forest orchestra shall swell, 
until the sun-soak grass ring 
with cricket strum string on string._ 

_xiii._ 

_then, with your white hand daintili 
scarc touch mine, we'll leav our tree 
and rambl slowli toward the west 
where our high castle' flame crest, 
tower behind the set sun, 
fling out it banners, one by one, 
signal of fire, that day is done._ 

_xiv._ 

_deep in that palac we shall find 
how blind we are, how blind! how blind! 
and how he'll laugh, who hold the key 
To the great portal' mystery! 
and how hi joyou laugh will ring 
when you and I shall bid him fling 
the gate ajar for you and me!_ 

_xv._ 

_let shadow flee athwart the lea 
when dark decemb strip the hedg 
along the ici river' edge; 
yet, if you will forgiv me, lass, 
the world shall bloom like spring to me, 
snow turn to dew upon the grass 
and fagot blossom where you pass._ 

_xvi._ 

_swallow shall sheer the frozen mere, 
dead reed along the mill-pond' rim 
shall thrill with summer-thrushes' hymns, 
while summer breez blow apace, 
If you will but forgiv me, dear, 
and let me find a moment' grace, 
In your sweet eye and your dear face._ 

_r. W. c._ 


the end. 




correct 


page origin text correct 
ix [miss from contents] the key TO grief 185 
13 yvett ha gone to bannelec. yvett ha gone to bannalec. 
23 It wa crowd with britons, It wa crowd with bretons, 
29 doxen of similar red dozen of similar red 
93 the great moth date the great moth dart 
103 among the beach trees. among the beech trees. 
104 leav of beach and oak leav of beech and oak 
135 sacré garce! sacré garce! 
167 O frère jaques, O frère jacques, 
180 carv from red beach. carv from red beech. 
181 their is much lace there is much lace 
181 chisel in red beach. chisel in red beech. 





end of project gutenberg' the mysteri of choice, by robert william chamber 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the mysteri OF choic *** 

***** thi file should be name 46581-0.txt or 46581-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/5/8/46581/ 

produc by robert cicconetti and the onlin distribut 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi file wa 
produc from imag gener made avail by the 
internet archive/american libraries.) 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat inform page at www.gutenberg.org 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 
north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email 
contact link and up to date contact inform can be found at the 
foundation' web site and offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for forti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

