the project gutenberg ebook of the evil guest, by J. sheridan Le fanu 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the evil guest 

author: J. sheridan Le fanu 

releas date: decemb 3, 2003 [ebook #10377] 
[date last updated: januari 22, 2005] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the evil guest *** 




produc by suzann shell, beginn projects, mari meehan and the 
onlin distribut proofread team. 






the evil guest 

By J. sheridan lefanu 

1895 




"when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is 
finished, bringeth forth death." 




about sixti year ago, and somewhat more than twenti mile from the 
ancient town of chester, in a southward direction, there stood a large, 
and, even then, an old-fashion mansion-house. It lay in the midst of a 
demesn of consider extent, and richli wood with vener timber; 
but, apart from the somber majesti of these giant groups, and the 
varieti of the undul ground on which they stood, there wa littl 
that could be deem attract in the place. A certain air of neglect 
and decay, and an indescrib gloom and melancholy, hung over it. In 
darkness, it seem darker than ani other tract; when the moonlight fell 
upon it glade and hollows, they look spectral and awful, with a sort 
of churchyard loneliness; and even when the blush of the morn kiss 
it broad woodlands, there wa a melancholi in the salut that sadden 
rather than cheer the heart of the beholder. 

thi antique, melancholy, and neglect place, we shall call, for 
distinct sake, gray forest. It wa then the properti of the younger 
son of a nobleman, onc celebr for hi abil and hi daring, but 
who had long sinc pass to that land where human wisdom and courag 
avail naught. the repres of thi nobl hous resid at the 
famili mansion in sussex, and the cadet, whose fortun we mean to sketch 
in these pages, live upon the narrow margin of an encumb income, in 
a reserv and unsoci discontent, deep among the solemn shadow of the 
old wood of gray forest. 

the hon. richard marston wa now somewher between forti and fifti year 
of age--perhap nearer the latter; he still, however, retained, in an 
emin degree, the trait of manli beauty, not the less remark for 
it unquestion haughti and passion character. He had marri a 
beauti girl, of good family, but without much money, somewher about 
eighteen year before; and two children, a son and a daughter, had been 
the fruit of thi union. the boy, harri marston, wa at thi time at 
cambridge; and hi sister, scarc fifteen, wa at home with her 
parents, and under the train of an accomplish governess, who had 
been recommend to them by a nobl rel of mrs. marston. she wa a 
nativ of france, but thoroughli mistress of the english language, and, 
except for a foreign accent, which gave a certain pretti to all she 
said, she spoke it as perfectli as ani nativ englishwoman. thi young 
frenchwoman wa emin handsom and attractive. expressive, dark eyes, 
a clear oliv complexion, small even teeth, and a beautifully-dimpl 
smile, more perhap than a strictli classic regular of features, were 
the secret of her unquestion influence, at first sight, upon the 
fanci of everi man of tast who beheld her. 

mr. marston' fortune, never veri large, had been shatter by earli 
dissipation. natur of a proud and somewhat exact temper, he 
activ felt the mortifi consequ of hi poverty. the want of 
what he felt ought to have been hi posit and influenc in the counti 
in which he resided, fret and gall him; and he cherish a resent 
and bitter sens of everi slight, imaginari or real, to which the same 
fruit sourc of annoy and humili had expos him. He held, 
therefore, but littl intercours with the surround gentry, and that 
littl not of the pleasantest possibl kind; for, not be himself in a 
condit to entertain, in that style which accord with hi own idea 
of hi station, he declined, as far as wa compat with good breeding, 
all the proffer hospit of the neighborhood; and, from hi wild 
and neglect park, look out upon the surround world in a spirit of 
moros and defiance, veri unlike, indeed, to that of neighborli 
good-will. 

In the midst, however, of mani of the annoy attend upon crippl 
means, he enjoy a few of those shadowi indic of hereditari 
importance, which are all the more dearli prized, as the substanti 
accessori of wealth have disappeared. the mansion in which he dwelt 
was, though old-fashioned, impos in it aspect, and upon a scale 
unequivoc aristocratic; it wall were hung with ancestr portraits, 
and he manag to maintain about him a larg and toler respect 
staff of servants. In addit to these, he had hi extens demesne, 
hi deer-park, and hi unrival timber, wherewith to consol himself; 
and, in the conscious of these possessions, he found some imperfect 
assuag of those bitter feel of suppress scorn and resentment, 
which a sens of lost station and slight import engendered. mr. 
marston' earli habit had, unhappily, been of a kind to aggravate, 
rather than alleviate, the annoy incident to reduc means. He had 
been a gay man, a voluptuary, and a gambler. hi viciou tast had 
surviv the mean of their gratification. hi love for hi wife had been 
noth more than one of those vehement and headstrong fancies, which, in 
self-indulg men, sometim result in marriage, and which seldom 
outliv the first few month of that life-long connection. mrs. marston 
wa a gentle, noble-mind woman. after agoni or disappointment, which 
none ever suspected, she had at length learn to submit, in sad and 
gentl acquiescence, to her fate. those feelings, which had been the 
charm of her young days, were gone, and, as she bitterli felt, forever. 
for them there wa no recal they could not return; and, without 
complaint or reproach, she yield to what she felt wa inevitable. It 
wa imposs to look at mrs. marston, and not to discern, at a glance, 
the ruin of a surpassingli beauti woman; a good deal wasted, pale, and 
chasten with a deep, untold sorrow, but still possess the outlines, 
both in face and form, of that nobl beauti and matchless grace, which 
had made her, in happier days, the admir of all observers. but equal 
imposs wa it to convers with her, for even a minute, without 
hearing, in the gentl and melancholi music of her voice, the sad echo 
of those grief to which her earli beauti had been sacrificed, an undi 
sens of lost love, and happi departed, never to come again. 

one morning, mr. marston had walked, as wa hi custom when he expect 
the messeng who brought from the neighbor post offic hi letters, 
some way down the broad, straight avenue, with it doubl row of lofti 
tree at each side, when he encount the nimbl emissari on hi 
return. He took the letter-bag in silence. It contain but two 
letters--on address to "mademoisel de barras, chez M. marston," and 
the other to himself. He took them both, dismiss the messenger, and 
open that address to himself, read as follows, while he slowli 
retrac hi step toward the house:-- 

dear richard, 

I am a whimsic fellow, as you doubtless remember, and have late 
grown, they tell me, rather hippish besides. I do not know to which 
infirm I am to attribut a sudden fanci that urg me to pay you a 
visit, if you will admit me. To say truth, my dear dick, I wish to see a 
littl of your part of the world, and, I will confess it, en passant, to 
see a littl of you too. I realli wish to make acquaint with your 
family; and though they tell me my health is veri much shaken, I must 
say, in self-defense, I am not a troublesom inmate. I can perfectli take 
care of myself, and need no nurs or caudl whatever. will you 
present this, my petition, to mrs. marston, and report her decis 
thereon to me. seriously, I know that your hous may be full, or some 
other contretemp may make it impractic for me just now to invad 
you. If it be so, tell me, my dear richard, frankly, as my movement are 
perfectli free, and my time all my own, so that I can arrang my visit to 
suit your convenience. 

--yours, &c., 

wynston E. berkley 

p.s.--direct to me at ---- hotel, in chester, as I shall probabl be 
there by the time thi reach you. 

"ill-br and push as ever," quoth mr. marston, angrily, as he thrust 
the unwelcom letter into hi pocket. "thi fellow, wallow in wealth, 
without one nearer rel on earth than I, and associ more nearli 
still with me the--pshaw! not affection--th recollect of earli and 
intim companionship, leav me unaided, for year of desert and 
suffering, to the buffet of the world, and the troubl of all but 
overwhelm pecuniari difficulties, and now, with the cool confid of 
one entitl to respect and welcome, invit himself to my house. come 
here," he continued, after a gloomi pause, and still pace slowli 
toward the house, "to collect amus materi for next season' 
gossip--stori about the marri benedick--th bankrupt beau--th outcast 
tenant of a cheshir wilderness"; and, as he said this, he look at the 
neglect prospect befor him with an eye almost of hatred. "aye, to see 
the naked of the land is he coming, but he shall be disappointed. hi 
money may buy him a cordial welcom at an inn, but curs me if it shall 
purchas him a recept here." 

He again open and glanc through the letter. 

"aye, purpos put in such a way that I can't declin it without 
affront him," he continu doggedly. "well, then, he ha no one to 
blame but himself--affront he shall be; I shall effectu put an end 
to thi humor excursion. egad, it is rather hard if a man cannot keep 
hi poverti to himself." 

sir wynston berkley wa a baronet of larg fortune--a selfish, 
fashion man, and an inveter bachelor. He and marston had been 
schoolfellows, and the violent and implac temper of the latter had as 
littl impress hi companion with feel of regard, as the frivol 
and selfish of the baronet had won the esteem of hi relative. As 
boys, they had littl in common upon which to rest the basi of a 
friendship, or even a mutual liking. berkley wa gay, cold, and 
satirical; hi cousin--for cousin they were--wa jealous, haughty, and 
relentless. their neg disinclin to one another' society, not 
unnatur engend by uncongeni and unami dispositions, had for 
a time given place to actual hostility, while the two young men were at 
oxford. In some intrigue, marston discov in hi cousin a 
too-success rival; the consequ was, a bitter and furiou quarrel, 
which, but for the prompt and peremptori interfer of friends, marston 
would undoubtedli have push to a bloodi issue. time had, however, 
heal thi rupture, and the young men came to regard one anoth with 
the same feelings, and eventu to re-establish the same sort of cold 
and indiffer intimaci which had subsist between them befor their 
angri collision. 

under these circumstances, whatev suspicion marston might have felt on 
the receipt of the unexpected, and inde unaccount proposal, which had 
just reach him, he certainli had littl reason to complain of ani 
violat of earli friendship in the neglect with which sir wynston had 
hitherto treat him. In decid to declin hi propos visit, however, 
marston had not consult the impuls of spite or anger. He knew the 
baronet well; he knew that he cherish no good will toward him, and 
that in the project which he had thu unexpectedli broached, whatev 
indirect or selfish scheme might possibl be at the bottom of it, no 
friendli feel had ever mingled. He wa therefor resolv to avoid the 
troubl and the expens of a visit in all respect distast to him, 
and in a gentlemanlik way, but, at the same time, as the reader may 
suppose, with veri littl anxieti as to whether or not hi gay 
correspond should take offenc at hi reply, to decline, onc for all, 
the propos distinction. 

with thi resolution, he enter the spaciou and somewhat dilapid 
mansion which call him master; and enter a sit room, 
appropri to hi daughter' use, he found her there, in compani with 
her beauti french governess. He kiss hi child, and salut her 
young preceptress with formal courtesy. 

"mademoiselle," said he, "I have got a letter for you; and, rhoda," he 
continued, address hi pretti daughter, "bring thi to your mother, 
and say, I request her to read it." 

He gave her the letter he himself had just received, and the girl trip 
lightli away upon her mission. 

had he narrowli scrutinis the counten of the fair frenchwoman, as 
she glanc at the direct of that which he had just place in her 
hand, he might have seen certain transient, but veri unmistak 
evid of excit and agitation. she quickli conceal the letter, 
however, and with a sigh, the momentari flush which it had call to her 
cheek subsided, and she wa tranquil as usual. 

mr. marston remain for some minutes--five, eight, or ten, we cannot say 
precisely--pretti much where he had stood on first enter the chamber, 
doubtless await the return of hi messenger, or the appear of hi 
wife. At length, however, he left the room himself to seek her; but, 
dure hi brief stay, hi previou resolut had been removed. By what 
influenc we cannot say; but remov complet it unquestion was, 
and a final determin that sir wynston berkley should becom hi 
guest had fixedli taken it place. 

As marston walk along the passag which led from thi room, he 
encount mrs. marston and hi daughter. 

"well," said he, "you have read wynston' letter?" 

"yes," she replied, return it to him; "and what answer, richard, do 
you purpos give him?" 

she wa about to hazard a conjecture, but check herself, rememb 
that even so faint an evid of a disposit to advis might possibl 
be resent by her cold and imperi lord. 

"I have consid it, and decid to receiv him," he replied. 

"ah! I am afraid--that is, I hope--h may find our housekeep such as 
he can enjoy," she said, with an involuntari express of surprise; for 
she had scarc had a doubt that her husband would have prefer 
evad the visit of hi fine friend, under hi gloomi circumstances. 

"if our modest fare doe not suit him," said marston, with sullen 
bitterness, "he can depart as easili as he came. we, poor gentlemen, can 
but do our best. I have thought it over, and made up my mind." 

"and how soon, my dear richard, do you intend fix hi arrival?" she 
inquired, with the natur uneasi of one upon whom, in an 
establish whose pretens consider exceed it resources, the 
perplex care of housekeep devolved. 

"why, as soon as he pleases," repli he, "I suppos you can easili have 
hi room prepar by tomorrow or next day. I shall write by thi mail, 
and tell him to come down at once." 

have said thi in a cold, decis way, he turn and left her, as it 
seemed, not care to be teas with further questions. He took hi 
solitari way to a distant part of hi wild park, where, far from the 
likelihood of disturb or intrusion, he wa often wont to amus 
himself for the live-long day, in the sedentari sport of shoot 
rabbits. and there we leav him for the present, signifi to the 
distant inmat of hi hous the industri pursuit of hi unsoci 
occupation, by the drop fire that sullenly, from hour to hour, echo 
from the remot woods. 

mrs. marston issu her orders; and have set on foot all the necessari 
prepar for so unwont an event as a stranger' visit of some 
duration, she betook herself to her littl boudoir--th scene of mani an 
hour of patient but bitter suffering, unseen by human eye, and unknown, 
except to the just searcher of hearts, to whom belong mercy--and 
vengeance. 

mrs. marston had but two friend to whom she had ever spoken upon the 
subject nearest her heart--th estrang of her husband, a sorrow to 
which even time had fail to reconcil her. from her children thi grief 
wa care concealed. To them she never utter the semblanc of a 
complaint. anyth that could by possibl have reflect blame or 
dishonor upon their father, she would have perish rather than have 
allow them so much as to suspect. the two friend who did understand 
her feelings, though in differ degrees, were, one, a good and 
vener clergyman, the rev. doctor danvers, a frequent visitor and 
occasion guest at gray forest, where hi simpl manner and unaffect 
benign and tender of heart had won the love of all, with the 
except of it master, and command even hi respect. the second wa 
no other than the young french governess, mademoisel de barras, in 
whose readi sympathi and consolatori counsel she found no small 
happiness. the societi of thi young ladi had inde become, next to that 
of her daughter, her greatest comfort and pleasure. 

mademoisel de barra wa of a nobl though ruin french family, and a 
certain nameless eleg and digniti attested, spite of her fallen 
condition, the puriti of her descent. she wa accomplished--possess of 
that fine percept and sensitiveness, and that readi power of 
self-adapt to the peculiar and mood of others, which we term 
tact--and was, moreover, gift with a certain natur grace, and manner 
the most win imaginable. In short, she wa a fascin companion; 
and when the melancholi circumst of her own situation, and the sad 
histori of her onc rich and nobl family, were taken into account, with 
her strike attract of person and air, the combin of all these 
associ and impress render her one of the most interest 
person that could well be imagined. the circumst of mademoisel de 
barras' histori and descent seem to warrant, on mrs. marston' part, a 
closer intimaci and confid than usual subsist between parti 
mutual occupi such a relation. 

mrs. marston had hardli establish herself in thi littl apartment, 
when a light foot approached, a gentl tap wa given at the door, and 
mademoisel de barra entered. 

"ah, mademoiselle, so kind--such pretti flowers. pray sit down," said the 
lady, with a sweet and grate smile, as she took from the taper 
finger of the foreign the littl bouquet, which she had been at the 
pain to gather. 

mademoisel sat down, and gentli took the lady' hand and kiss it. A 
small matter will overflow a heart charg with sorrow--a chanc word, a 
look, some littl offic of kindness--and so it wa with mademoiselle' 
bouquet and gentl kiss. mrs. marston' heart wa touched; her eye 
fill with bright tears; she smile grate upon her fair and humbl 
companion, and as she smiled, her tear overflowed, and she wept in 
silenc for some minutes. 

"mi poor mademoiselle," she said, at last, "you are so very, veri kind." 

mademoisel said nothing; she lower her eyes, and press the poor 
lady' hand. 

appar to interrupt an embarrass silence, and to give a more 
cheer tone to their littl interview, the governess, in a gay tone, on 
a sudden said-- 

"and so, madame, we are to have a visitor, miss rhoda tell me--a 
baronet, is he not?" 

"yes, indeed, mademoiselle--sir wynston berkley, a gay london gentleman, 
and a cousin of mr. marston's," she replied. 

"ha--a cousin!" exclaim the young lady, with a littl more surpris in 
her tone than seem altogeth call for--"a cousin? oh, then, that is 
the reason of hi visit. do, pray, madame, tell me all about him; I am so 
much afraid of strangers, and what you call men of the world. oh, dear 
mrs. marston, I am not worthi to be here, and he will see all that in a 
moment; indeed, indeed, I am afraid. pray tell me all about him." 

she said thi with a simplic which made the elder ladi smile, and 
while mademoisel re-adjust the tini flower which form the bouquet 
she had just present to her, mrs. marston good-naturedli recount to 
her all she knew of sir wynston berkley, which, in substance, amount to 
no more than we have alreadi stated. when she concluded, the young 
frenchwoman continu for some time silent, still busi with her 
flowers. but, suddenly, she heav a deep sigh, and shook her head. 

"you seem disquieted, mademoiselle," said mrs. marston, in a tone 
of kindness. 

"I am thinking, madame," she said, still look upon the flower which 
she wa adjusting, and again sigh profoundly, "I am think of what 
you said to me a week ago; alas!" 

"I do not rememb what it was, my good mademoiselle--nothing, I am 
sure, that ought to griev you--at least noth that wa intend to 
have that effect," repli the lady, in a tone of gentl encouragement. 

"no, not intended, madame," said the young frenchwoman, sorrowfully. 

"well, what wa it? perhap you misunderstood; perhap I can explain what 
I said," repli mrs. marston, affectionately. 

"ah, madame, you think--you think I am unlucky," answer the young 
lady, slowli and faintly. 

"unlucky! dear mademoiselle, you surpris me," rejoin her companion. 

"I mean--what I mean is this, madame; you date unhappiness--if not it 
beginning, at least it great aggrav and increase," she answered, 
dejectedly, "from the time of my come here, madame; and though I know 
you are too good to dislik me on that account, yet I must, in your eyes, 
be ever connect with calamity, and look like an omin thing." 

"dear mademoiselle, allow no such thought to enter your mind. you do me 
great wrong, inde you do," said mrs. marston, lay her hand upon the 
young lady's, kindly. 

there wa a silenc for a littl time, and the elder ladi resumed:--"i 
rememb now what you allud to, dear mademoiselle--th increas 
estrangement, the widen separ which sever me from one 
unutter dear to me--th first and bitter disappoint of my life, 
which seem to grow more hopelessli incur day by day." 

mrs. marston paused, and, after a brief silence, the gover said:-- 

"I am veri superstiti myself, dear madame, and I thought I must have 
seem to you an inauspici inmate--in short, unlucky--a I have said; 
and the thought made me veri unhappy--so unhappy, that I wa go to 
leav you, madame--i may now tell you frankly--go away; but you have 
set my doubt at rest, and I am quit happi again." 

"dear mademoiselle," cri the lady, tenderly, and rising, as she spake, 
to kiss the cheek of her humbl friend; "never--nev speak of thi 
again. god know I have too few friend on earth, to spare the kindest 
and tenderest among them all. no, no. you littl think what comfort I 
have found in your warm-heart and readi sympathy, and how dearli I 
prize your affection, my poor mademoiselle." 

the young frenchwoman rose, with downcast eyes, and a dimpling, happi 
smile; and, as mrs. marston drew her affection toward her, and 
kiss her, she timidli return the embrac of her kind patroness. for a 
moment her grace arm encircl her, and she whisper to her, "dear 
madame, how happy--how veri happi you make me." 

had ithuriel touch with hi spear the beauti young woman, thu for a 
moment, as it seemed, lost in a tranc of gratitud and love, would that 
angel form have stood the test unscathed? A spectator, mark the 
scene, might have observ a strang gleam in her eyes--a strang 
express in her face--an influenc for a moment not angelic, like a 
shadow of some pass spirit, cross her visibly, as she lean over the 
gentl lady' neck, and murmured, "dear madame, how happy--how veri happi 
you make me." such a spectator, as he look at that gentl lady, might 
have seen, for one dreami moment, a lith and paint serpent, coil 
round and round, and hiss in her ear. 

A few minut more, and mademoisel wa in the solitud of her own 
apartment. she shut and bolt the door, and take from her desk the 
letter which she had that morn received, threw herself into an 
armchair, and studi the document profoundly. her actual revis and 
scrutini of the letter itself wa interrupt by long interv of 
profound abstraction; and, after a full hour thu spent, she lock it 
care up again, and with a clear brow, and a gay smile, rejoin her 
pretti pupil for a walk. 

We must now pass over an interv of a few days, and come at onc to the 
arriv of sir wynston berkley, which duli occur upon the even of 
the day appointed. the baronet descend from hi chais but a short 
time befor the hour at which the littl party, which form the famili 
at gray forest were wont to assembl for the social meal of supper. A few 
minut devot to the mysteri of the toilet, with the aid of an 
accomplish valet, enabl him to appear, as he conceived, without 
disadvantag at thi domest reunion. 

sir wynston berkley wa a particularli gentleman-lik person. He wa 
rather tall, and elegantli made, with gay, easi manners, and someth 
indefin aristocrat in hi face, which, however, wa a littl more 
worn than hi year would have strictli account for. but sir wynston 
had been a roué, and, spite of the cleverest possibl make up, the 
ravag of excess were veri traceabl in the live beau of fifty. 
perfectli well dressed, and with a manner that wa eas and gaieti 
itself, he wa at home from the moment he enter the room. Of course, 
anyth like genuin cordial wa out of the question; but mr. marston 
embrac hi rel with perfect good breeding, and the baronet 
appear determin to like everybody, and be pleas with everything. He 
had not been five minut in the parlor, chat gaili with mr. and mrs. 
marston and their pretti daughter, when mademoisel de barra enter 
the room. As she move toward mrs. marston, sir wynston rose, and, 
observ her with evid admiration, said in an undertone, inquiringly, 
to marston, who wa besid him-- 

"and this?" 

"that is mademoisel de barras, my daughter' governess, and mrs. 
marston' companion," said marston, drily. 

"ha!" said sir wynston; "I thought you were but three at home just now, 
and I wa right. your son is at cambridge; I heard so from our old 
friend, jack manbury. jack ha hi boy there too. egad, dick, it seem 
but last week that you and I were there together." 

"yes," said marston, look gloomili into the fire, as if he saw, in it 
smoke and flicker, the phantom of murder time and opportunity; "but I 
hate look back, wynston. the past is to me but a medley of ill-luck 
and wors management." 

"whi what an ungrat dog you are!" return sir wynston, gaily, 
turn hi back upon the fire, and glanc round the spaciou and 
handsome, though somewhat fade apartment. "I wa on the point of 
congratul you on the possess of the finest park and noblest 
demesn in cheshire, when you begin to grumble. egad, dick, all I can say 
to your complaint is, that I don't piti you, and there are dozen who may 
honestli envi you--that is all." 

In spite of thi cheer assurance, marston remain sullenli silent. 
supper, however, had now been served, and the littl parti assum their 
place at the table. 

"I am sorry, wynston, I have no sport of ani kind to offer you here," 
said marston, "except, indeed, some good trout-fishing, if you like it. I 
have three mile of excel fish at your command." 

"mi dear fellow, I am a mere cockney," rejoin sir wynston; "I am not a 
sportsman; I never tri it, and should not like to begin now. no, dick, 
what I much prefer is, abund of your fresh air, and the enjoy of 
your scenery. when I wa at rouen three year ago--" 

"ha!--rouen? mademoisel will feel an interest in that; it is her 
birth-place," interrupt marston, glanc at the frenchwoman. 

"yes--rouen--ah--yes!" said mademoiselle, with veri evid 
embarrassment. 

sir wynston appear for a moment a littl disconcert too, but 
ralli speedily, and pursu hi detail of hi do at that fair town 
of normandy. 

marston knew sir wynston well; and he rightli calcul that whatev 
effect hi experi of the world might have had in intensifi hi 
selfish or harden hi heart, it certainli could have had none in 
improv a charact origin worthless and unfeeling. He knew, 
moreover, that hi wealthi cousin wa gift with a great deal of that 
small cun which is avail for mask the littl scheme of 
frivol and worldli men; and that sir wynston never took troubl of ani 
kind without a suffici purpose, have it center in hi own person 
gratification. 

thi visit greatli puzzl marston; it gave him even a vagu sens of 
uneasiness. could there exist ani flaw in hi own titl to the estat of 
gray forest? He had an unpleasant, doubt sort of remembr of some 
apprehens of thi kind, when he wa but a child, have been 
whisper in the family. could thi realli be so, and could the 
baronet have been led to make thi unexpect visit mere for the 
purpos of person examin into the condit or a properti of 
which he wa about to becom the legal invader? the natur of thi 
suspicion affords, at all events, a fair gaug of marston' estim 
of hi cousin' character. and as he revolv these doubt from time to 
time, and as he thought of mademoisel de barras' transient, but 
unaccount embarrass at the mention of rouen by sir wynston--an 
embarrass which the baronet himself appear for a moment to 
reciprocate--undefined, glimmer suspicion of anoth kind flicker 
through the dark of hi mind. He wa effectu puzzled; hi 
surmis and conjectur baffled; and he more than half repent that he 
had acced to hi cousin' proposal, and admit him as an inmat of 
hi house. 

although sir wynston comport himself as if he were consciou of be 
the veri most welcom visitor who could possibl have establish himself 
at gray forest, he was, doubtless, fulli awar of the real feel with 
which he wa regard by hi host. If he had in realiti an object in 
prolong hi stay, and wish to make the postpon of hi departur 
the direct interest of hi entertainer, he unquestion took effectu 
measur for that purpose. 

the littl parti broke up everi even at about ten o'clock, and sir 
wynston retir to hi chamber at the same hour. He found littl 
difficulti in induc marston to amus him there with a quiet game of 
piquet. In hi own room, therefore, in the luxuri eas of dress 
gown and slipper he sat at card with hi host, often until an hour or 
two past midnight. sir wynston wa exorbitantli wealthy, and veri 
reckless in expenditure. the stake for which they played, although they 
gradual becam in realiti pretti heavy, were in hi eye a veri 
unimport consideration. marston, on the other hand, wa poor, and 
play with the eye of a lynx and the appetit of a shark. the eas and 
perfect good-humor with which sir wynston lost were not unimprov by hi 
entertainer, who, as may readili be supposed, wa not sorri to reap thi 
golden harvest, provid without the slightest sacrifice, on hi part, of 
pride or independence. if, indeed, he sometim suspect that hi guest 
wa a littl more anxiou to lose than to win, he wa also quit resolv 
not to perceiv it, but calmli persist in, night after night, give 
sir wynston, as he term it, hi revenge; or, in other words, treat 
him to a repetit of hi losses. all thi wa veri agreeabl to 
marston, who began to treat hi visitor with, at all events, more 
extern cordial and distinct than at first. 

An incident, however, occurred, which disturb these amic relat 
in an unexpect way. It becom necessari here to mention that 
mademoisel de barras' sleep apart open from a long corridor. 
It wa en suit with two dress rooms, each open also upon the 
corridor, but wholli unus and unfurnished. some five or six other 
apart also open at either side, upon the same passage. these 
littl local detail be premised, it so happen that one day marston, 
who had gone out with the intent of angl in the trout-stream which 
flow through hi park, though at a consider distanc from the 
house, have unexpectedli return to procur some tackl which he had 
forgotten, wa walk briskli through the corridor in question to hi 
own apartment, when, to hi surprise, the door of one of the desert 
dressing-rooms, of which we have spoken, wa cautious push open, and 
sir wynston berkley issu from it. marston wa almost besid him as he 
did so, and sir wynston made a motion as if about instinct to draw 
back again, and at the same time the keen ear of hi host distinctli 
caught the sound of rustl silk and a tipto tread hastili withdraw 
from the desert chamber. sir wynston look nearli as much confus as 
a man of the world can look. marston stop short, and scan hi 
visitor for a moment with a veri peculiar expression. 

"you have caught me peeping, dick. I am an inveter explorer," said the 
baronet, with an effectu effort to shake off hi embarrassment. "an 
open door in a fine old hous is a temptat which--" 

"that door is usual closed, and ought to be kept so," interrupt 
marston, drily; "there is noth whatev to be seen in the room but 
dust and cobwebs." 

"pardon me," said sir wynston, more easily, "you forget the view from 
the window." 

"aye, the view, to be sure; there is a good view from it," said marston, 
with as much of hi usual manner as he could resum so soon; and, at the 
same time, carelessli open the door again, he walk in, accompani 
by sir wynston, and both stood at the window together, look out in 
silenc upon a prospect which neither of them saw. 

"yes, I do think it is a good view," said marston; and as he turn 
carelessli away, he dart a swift glanc round the chamber. the door 
open toward the french lady' apart wa closed, but not actual 
shut. thi wa enough; and as they left the room, marston repeat hi 
invit to hi guest to accompani him; but in a tone which show that 
he scarc follow the mean of what he himself wa saying. 

He walk undecidedli toward hi own room, then turn and went down 
stairs. In the hall he met hi pretti child. 

"ha! rhoda," said he, "you have not been out today?" 

"no, papa; but it is so veri fine, I think I shall go now." 

"yes; go, and mademoisel can accompani you. Do you hear, rhoda, 
mademoisel goe with you, and you had better go at once." 

A few minut more, and marston, from the parlor-window, beheld rhoda and 
the eleg french girl walk togeth toward the woodlands. He 
watch them gloomily, himself unseen, until the crowd underwood 
conceal their reced figures. then, with a sigh, he turned, and 
reascend the great staircase. 

"I shall sift thi mysteri to the bottom," thought he. "I shall foil the 
conspirators, if so they be, with their own weapons; art with art; 
chican with chicane; duplic with duplicity." 

He wa now in the long passage, which we have just spoken of, and 
glanc back and befor him, to ascertain that no chanc eye discern 
him, he boldli enter mademoiselle' chamber. her write desk lay upon 
the table. It wa locked; and coolli take it in hi hands, marston 
carri it into hi own room, bolt hi chamber-door, and take two or 
three bunch of keys, he care tri nearli a dozen in succession, 
and when almost despair of success, at last found one which fit the 
lock, turned, and open the desk. 

sustain throughout hi dishonor task by some strong and angri 
passion, the sight of the open escritoir check and startl him for a 
moment. violat privilege, invad secrecy, base, perfidi espionag 
upbraid and stigmat him, as the intricaci of the outrag 
sanctuari open upon hi intrus gaze. He felt for a moment shock 
and humbled. He wa impel to lock and replac the desk where he had 
origin found it, without have effect hi medit treason; but 
thi hesit wa transient; the fieri and reckless impuls which had 
urg him to the act return to enforc it consummation. with a guilti 
eye and eager hands, he search the content of thi tini repositori of 
the fair norman' written secrets. 

"ha! the veri thing," he muttered, as he detect the ident letter 
which he himself had hand to mademoisel de barra but a few day 
before. "the handwrit struck me, ill-disguised; I thought I knew it; 
we shall see." 

He had open the letter; it contain but a few lines: he held hi 
breath while he read it. first he grew pale, then a shadow came over hi 
face, and then another, and another, darker and darker, shade upon shade, 
as if an exhal from the pit wa momentarili blacken the air about 
him. He said nothing; there wa but one long, gentl sigh, and in hi 
face a mortal sternness, as he fold the letter again, replac it, and 
lock the desk. 

Of course, when mademoisel de barra return from her accustom 
walk, she found everyth in her room, to all appearances, undisturbed, 
and just as when she left it. while thi young ladi wa make her 
toilet for the evening, and while sir wynston berkley wa worri 
himself with conjectur as to whether marston' evil looks, when he 
encount him that morn in the passage, exist onli in hi own 
fancy, or were, in good truth, veri grim and signific realities, 
marston himself wa stride alon through the wildest and darkest 
solitud of hi park, haunt by hi own unholi thoughts, and, it may 
be, by those other evil and unearthli influenc which wander, as we 
know, "in desert places." dark overtook him, and the chill of night, 
in these lone tracts. In hi solitari walk, what fear compani had 
he been keeping! As the shade of night deepen round him, the sens of 
the neighborhood of ill, the conscious of the foul fanci or which, 
where he wa now treading, he had been for hour the sport, oppress 
him with a vagu and unknown terror; a certain horror of the thought 
which had been hi comrad through the day, which he could not now 
shake off, and which haunt him with a ghastli and defiant pertinacity, 
scared, while they half-enrag him. He stalk swiftli homewards, like 
a guilti man pursued. 

marston wa not perfectli satisfied, though veri nearly, with the 
evid now in hi possession. the letter, the stolen perus of which 
had so agit him that day, bore no signature; but, independ of 
the handwriting, which seemed, spite of the constraint of an attempt 
disguise, to be familiar to hi eye, there existed, in the matter of the 
letter, short as it was, certain intern evidences, which, although not 
actual conclusive, raised, in conjunct with all the other 
circumstances, a power presumpt in aid of hi suspicions. He 
resolved, however, to sift the matter further, and to bide hi time. 
meanwhil hi manner must indic no trace of hi dark surmis and 
bitter thoughts. deception, in it two great branches, simul and 
dissimulation, wa easi to him. hi habitu reserv and gloom would 
divest ani accident and momentari disclosur of hi inward troubl of 
everyth suspici or unaccountable, which would have character 
such display and eccentr in anoth man. 

hi rapid and reckless ramble, a kind of physic vent for the paroxysm 
which had so agit him throughout the greater part of the day, had 
soil and disord hi dress, and thu had help to give to hi whole 
appear a certain air of haggard wildness, which, in the privaci of 
hi chamber, he hasten care and entir to remove. 

At supper, marston wa appar in unusu good spirits. sir wynston 
and he chat gaili and fluentli upon mani subjects, grave and gay. 
among them the inexhaust topic of popular superstit happen to 
turn up, and especi the subject of strang propheci of the fate 
and fortun of individuals, singularli fulfil in the event of their 
afterlife. 

"by-the-by, dick, thi is rather a nervou topic for me to discuss," said 
sir wynston. 

"how so?" ask hi host. 

"why, don't you remember?" urg the baronet. 

"no, I don't recollect what you allud to," repli marston, in all 
sincerity. 

"why, don't you rememb eton?" pursu sir wynston. 

"yes, to be sure," said marston. 

"well?" continu hi visitor. 

"well, I realli don't recollect the prophecy," repli marston. 

"what! do you forget the gypsi who predict that you were to murder me, 
dick--eh?" 

"ah-ha, ha!" laugh marston, with a start. 

"don't you rememb it now?" urg hi companion. 

"ah, whi yes, I believ I do," said marston; "but anoth propheci wa 
run in my mind; a gypsi prediction, too. At ascot, do you 
recollect the girl told me I wa to be lord chancellor of england, and 
a duke besides?" 

"well, dick," rejoin sir wynston, merrily, "if both are to be 
fulfilled, or neither, I trust you may never sit upon the woolsack 
of england." 

the parti soon after broke up: sir wynston and hi host, as usual, to 
pass some hour at piquet; and mrs. marston, as wa her wont, to, spend 
some time in her own boudoir, over note and accounts, and the worri 
detail of housekeeping. 

while thu engaged, she wa disturb by a respect tap at her door, 
and an elderli servant, who had been for mani year in the employ of 
mr. marston, present himself. 

"well, merton, do you want anything?" ask the lady. 

"yes, ma'am, please, I want to give warning; I wish to leav the service, 
ma'am;" repli he, respectfully, but doggedly. 

"to leav us, merton!" echo hi mistress, both surpris and sorri for 
the man had been long her servant, and had been much like and trusted. 

"yes, ma'am," he repeated. 

"and whi do you wish to do so, merton? ha anyth occur to make the 
place unpleas to you?" urg the lady. 

"no, ma'am--no, indeed," said he, earnestly, "I have noth to complain 
of--nothing, indeed, ma'am." 

"perhaps, you think you can do better, if you leav us?" suggest 
hi mistress. 

"no, indeed, ma'am, I have no such thought," he said, and seem on the 
point of burst into tears; "but--but, somehow--ma'am, there is 
someth come over me, lately, and I can't help, but think, if I stay 
here, ma'am--some--some--misfortun will happen to us all--and that is the 
truth, ma'am." 

"thi is veri foolish, merton--a mere childish fancy," repli mrs. 
marston; "you like your place, and have no better prospect befor you; 
and now, for a mere superstiti fancy, you propos give it up, and 
leav us. no, no, merton, you had better think the matter over--and if 
you still, upon reflection, prefer go away, you can then speak to 
your master." 

"thank you ma'am--god bless you," said the man, withdrawing. 

mrs. marston rang the bell for her maid, and retir to her room. "ha 
anyth occur lately," she asked, "to annoy merton?" 

"no, ma'am, I don't know of anything; but he is veri changed, indeed, of 
late," repli the maid. 

"he ha not been quarreling?" inquir she. 

"oh, no, ma'am, he never quarrels; he is veri quiet, and keep to himself 
always; he think a wonder deal of himself," repli the servant. 

"but, you said that he is much changed--did you not?" continu the lady; 
for there wa someth strang excit and unpleas in the man' 
manner, in thi littl interview, which struck mrs. marston, and alarm 
her curiosity. He had seem like one charg with some horribl 
secret--intolerable, and which he yet dare not reveal. 

"what," proceed mrs. marston, "i the natur of the chang of which 
you speak?" 

"why, ma'am, he is like one frightened, and in sorrow," she replied; "he 
will sit silent, and now and then shake hi head, as if he want to 
get rid of someth that is teas him, for an hour together." 

"poor man!" said she. 

"and, then, when we are at meals, he will, all on a sudden, get up, and 
leav the table; and jem boulter, that sleep in the next room to him, 
says, that, almost as often as he look through the littl window between 
the two rooms, no matter what hour in the night, he see mr. merton on 
hi knee by the bedside, pray or crying, he don't know which; but, 
ani way, he is not happy--poor man!--and that is plain enough." 

"it is veri strange," said the lady, after a pause; "but, I think, and 
hope, after all, it will prove to have been no more than a littl 
nervousness." 

"well, ma'am, I do hope it is not hi conscienc that is come against 
him, now," said the maid. 

"we have no reason to suspect anyth of the kind," said mrs. 
marston, gravely, "quit the reverse; he ha been alway a 
particularli proper man." 

"oh, indeed," respond the attendant, "good forbid I should say or 
think anyth against him; but I could not help tell you my mind, 
ma'am, mean no harm." 

"and, how long is it sinc you observ thi sad chang in poor merton?" 
persist the lady. 

"not, indeed, to say veri long, ma'am," repli the girl; "somewher 
about a week, or veri littl more--at least, as we remarked, ma'am." 

mrs. marston pursu her inquiri no further that night. but, although 
she affect to treat the matter thu lightly, it had, somehow, taken a 
pain hold upon her imagination, and left in her mind those 
undefin and omin sensations, which, in certain mental 
temperaments, seem to foreshadow the approach of unknown misfortune. 

for two or three days, everyth went on smoothly, and pretti much as 
usual. At the end of thi brief interval, however, the attent of mrs. 
marston wa recal to the subject of her servant' mysteri anxieti 
to leave, and give up hi situation. merton again stood befor her, and 
repeat the intim he had alreadi given. 

"really, merton, thi is veri odd," said the lady. "you like your 
situation, and yet you persist in desir to leav it. what am I 
to think?" 

"oh, ma'am," said he, "I am unhappy; I am tormented, ma'am. I can't tell 
you, ma'am; I can't inde ma'am!" 

"if anyth weigh upon your mind, merton, I would advis you to consult 
our good clergyman, dr. danvers," urg the lady. 

the servant hung hi head, and muse for a time gloomily; and then said 
decisively--"no, ma'am; no use." 

"and pray, merton, how long is it sinc you first entertain thi 
desire?" ask mrs. marston. 

"sinc sir wynston berkley came, ma'am," answer he. 

"ha sir wynston annoy you in ani way?" continu she. 

"far from it, ma'am," he replied; "he is a veri kind gentleman." 

"well, hi man, then; is he a respectable, inoffens person?" 
she inquired. 

"I never met one more so," said the man, promptly, and rais hi head. 

"what I wish to know is, whether your desir to go is connect with sir 
wynston and hi servant?" said mrs. marston. 

the man hesitated, and shift hi posit uneasily. 

"you need not answer, merton, if you don't wish it," she said kindly. 

"why, ma'am, yes, it ha someth to say to them both," he replied, with 
some agitation. 

"I realli cannot understand this," said she. 

merton hesit for some time, and appear much troubled. "it wa 
something, ma'am--someth that sir wynston' man said to me; and there 
it is out," he said at last, with an effort. 

"well, merton," said she, "I won't press you further; but I must say, 
that as thi communication, whatev it may be, ha caus you, 
unquestionably, veri great uneasiness, it seem to me but probabl that 
it affect the safeti or the interest of some person--i cannot say of 
whom; and, if so, there can be no doubt that it is your duti to acquaint 
those who are so involv in the disclosure, with it purport." 

"no, ma'am, there is noth in what I heard that could touch anybodi but 
myself. It wa noth but what other heard, without remark it, or 
think about it. I can't tell you anymore, ma'am; but I am veri 
unhappy, and uneasi in my mind." 

As the man said this, he began to weep bitterly. 

the idea that hi mind wa affect now serious occur to mrs. 
marston, and she resolv to convey her suspicion to her husband, and to 
leav him to deal with the case as to him should seem good. 

"don't agit yourself so, merton; I shall speak to your master upon 
what you have said; and you may reli upon it, that no surmis to the 
prejudic of your charact ha enter my mind," said mrs. marston, 
veri kindly. 

"oh, ma'am, you are too good," sob the poor man, vehemently. "you 
don't know me, ma'am; I never knew myself till lately. I am a miser 
man. I am frighten at myself, ma'am--frighten terribly. christ knows, 
it would be well for me I wa dead thi minute." 

"I am veri sorri for your unhappiness, merton," said mrs. marston; "and, 
especially, that I can do noth to allevi it; I can but speak, as I 
have said, to your master, and he will give you your discharge, and 
arrang whatev els remain to be done." 

"god bless you, ma'am," said the servant, still much agitated, and left 
her. 

mr. marston usual pass the earli part of the day in activ exercise, 
and she, suppos that he was, in all probability, at that moment far 
from home, went to "mademoiselle's" chamber, which wa at the other end 
of the spaciou house, to confer with her in the interv upon the 
strang applic thu urg by poor merton. 

just as she reach the door of mademoisel de barras' chamber, she 
heard voic within exert in evid excitement. she stop in 
amazement. they were those of her husband and mademoiselle. startled, 
confounded, and amazed, she push open the door, and entered. her 
husband wa sitting, one hand clutch upon the arm of the chair he 
occupied, and the other extended, and clenched, as it seemed, with the 
emphasi of rage, upon the desk that stood upon the table. hi face wa 
darken with the stormiest passions, and hi gaze wa fix upon the 
frenchwoman, who wa stand with a look half-guilty, half-imploring, 
at a littl distance. 

there wa something, to mrs. marston, so utterli unexpected, and even so 
shocking, in thi tableau, that she stood for some second pale and 
breathless, and gaze with a vacant stare of fear and horror from her 
husband to the french girl, and from her to her husband again. the three 
figur in thi strang group remain fixed, silent, and aghast, for 
sever seconds. mrs. marston endeavor to speak; but, though her lip 
moved, no sound escap her; and, from veri weakness, she sank, 
half-fainting, into a chair. 

marston rose, throwing, as he did so, a guilti and furiou glanc at the 
young frenchwoman, and walk a step or two toward the door; he 
hesitated, however, and turned, just as mademoiselle, burst into 
tears, threw her arm round mrs. marston' neck, and passion 
exclaimed, "protect me, madame, I implore, from the insult and 
suspicion of your husband." 

marston stood a littl behind hi wife, and he and the gover 
exchang a glanc of keen significance, as the latter sank, sobbing, 
like an injur child into it mother' embrace, upon the poor lady' 
tortur bosom. 

"madame, madame! he says--mr. marston says--i have presum to give you 
advice, and to meddle, and to interfere; that I am endeavor to make 
you despis hi authority. madame, speak for me. say, madame, have I ever 
done so?--say, madame, am I the caus of bitter and contumacy? ah, 
mon dieu! c'est trop--it is too much, madame. I shall go--i must go, 
madame. why, ah! why, did I stay for this?" 

As she thu spoke, mademoisel again burst into a paroxysm of weeping, 
and again the same signific glanc wa interchanged. 

"go; yes, you shall go," said marston, stride toward the window. "I 
will have no whisper or conspir in my house: I have heard of your 
confid and consultations. mrs. marston, I meant to have done thi 
quietly," he continued, address hi wife; "I meant to have given 
mademoisel de barra my opinion and her dismiss without your 
assistance; but it seem you wish to interpose. you are sworn friends, 
and never fail one another, of course, at a pinch. I take it for grant 
that I owe your presenc at our interview which I am resolv shall be, 
as respect mademoiselle, a final one, to a messag from that intrigu 
young lady--eh?" 

"I have had no message, richard," said mrs. marston; "I don't 
know--do tell me, for god' sake, what is all thi about?" and as 
the poor ladi thu spoke, her overwrought feel found vent in a 
violent flood of tears. 

"yes, madame, that is the question. I have ask him frequent what is 
all thi anger, all these reproach about; what have I done?" interpos 
mademoiselle, with indign vehemence, stand erect, and view 
marston with a flash eye and a flush cheek. "yes, I am call 
conspirator, meddler, intrigant. ah, madame, it is intolerable." 

"but what have I done, richard?" urg the poor lady, stun and 
bewildered; "how have I offend you?" 

"yes, yes," continu the frenchwoman, with angri volubility, "what ha 
she done that you call contumaci and disrespect? yes, dear madame, there 
is the question; and if he cannot answer, is it not most cruel to call me 
conspirator, and spy, and intrigant, becaus I talk to my dear madame, 
who is my onli friend in thi place?" 

"mademoisel de barras, I need no declam from you; and, pardon me, 
mrs. marston, nor from you either," retort he; "I have my inform 
from one on whom I can rely; let that suffice. Of cours you are both 
agre in a story. I dare say you are readi to swear you never so much as 
canvass my conduct, and my cold and estrangement--eh? these are the 
words, are not they?" 

"I have done you no wrong, sir; madam can tell you. I am no 
mischief-maker; no, I never wa such a thing. wa I, madame?" persist 
the governess--"bear wit for me?" 

"I have told you my mind, mademoisel de barras," interrupt marston; 
"I will have no altercation, if you please. I think, mrs. marston, we 
have had enough of this; may I accompani you hence?" 

So saying, he took the poor lady' passiv hand, and led her from the 
room. mademoisel stood in the center of the apartment, alone, erect, 
with heav breast and burn cheek--beautiful, thoughtful, guilty--th 
veri type of the fallen angelic. there for a time, her heart all 
confusion, her mind darkened, we must leav her; variou cours befor 
her, and as yet without resolut to choos among them; a lost spirit, 
born on the eddi of the storm; fearless and self-reliant, but with no 
star to guid her on her dark, malign, and forlorn way. 

mrs. marston, in her own room, review the agit scene through which 
she had just been so unexpectedli carried. the tremend suspicion 
which, at the first disclosur of the tableau we have described, smote 
the heart and brain of the poor ladi with the stun of a thunderbolt, had 
been, indeed, subsequ disturbed, and afterward contradicted; but 
the shock of her first impress remain still upon her mind and heart. 
she felt still through everi nerv the vibrat of that madden 
terror and despair which had overcom her sens for a moment. the 
surprise, the shock, the horror, outliv the obliter influenc of 
what followed. she wa in thi agit when mademoisel de barra 
enter her chamber, resolv with all her art to second and support the 
success of her prompt measur in the recent critic emergency. she had 
come, she said, to bid her dear madam farewell, for she wa resolv to 
go. her own room had been invaded, that insult and reproach might be 
heap upon her; how utterli unmerit mrs. marston knew. she had been 
call by everi foul name which appli to the spi and the maligner; she 
could not bear it. some one had evid been endeavor to procur her 
removal, and had but too effectu succeeded. mademoisel wa 
determin to go earli the next morning; noth should prevent or retard 
her departure; her resolut wa taken. In thi strain did mademoisel 
run on, but in a subdu and melancholi tone, and weep profusely. 

the wild and ghastli suspicion which had for a moment flash terribl 
upon the mind of mrs. marston, had fade away under the influenc of 
reason and reflection, although, indeed, much pain excit still 
remained, befor mademoisel de barra had visit her room. marston' 
temper she knew but too well; it wa violent, bitter, and impetuous; and 
though he care little, if at all, for her, she had ever perceiv that 
he wa angrili jealou of the slightest intimaci or confid by which 
ani other than himself might establish an influenc over her mind. that 
he had learn the subject of some of her most interest convers 
with mademoisel she could not doubt, for he had violent upbraid 
that young ladi in her presenc with have discuss it, and here now 
wa mademoisel herself take refug with her from gall affront and 
unjust reproach, incensed, wounded, and weeping. the whole thing wa 
consistent; all the circumst bore plainli in the same direction; the 
evid wa conclusive; and mrs. marston' thought and feel 
respect her fair young confidant quickli found their old level, and 
flow on tranquilli and sadli in their accustom channel. 

while mademoisel de barra wa thus, with the persev industri of 
the spider, repair the mesh which a chanc breath had shattered, she 
would, perhaps, have been in her turn shock and startled, could she 
have glanc into marston' mind, and seen, in what wa pass there, 
the real extent of her danger. 

marston wa walking, as usual, alone, and in the most solitari region of 
hi lone park. one hand grasp hi walk stick, not to lean upon it, 
but as if it were the handl of a battle-axe; the other wa buri in hi 
bosom; hi dark face look upon the ground, and he strode onward with a 
slow but energet step, which had the air of deep resolution. He found 
himself at last in a littl churchyard, lie far among the wild forest 
of hi demesne, and in the midst of which, cover with ivi and tuft 
plants, now ruddi with autumn tints, stood the ruin wall of a littl 
chapel. In the dilapid vault close by lay buri mani of hi 
ancestors, and under the littl wavi hillock of fern and nettles, slept 
mani an humbl villager. He sat down upon a worn tombston in thi lowli 
ruin, and with hi eye fix upon the ground, he surrend hi spirit 
to the stormi and evil thought which he had invited. long and motionless 
he sat there, while hi foul fanci and scheme began to assum shape 
and order. the wind rush through the ivi rous him for a moment, and 
as he rais hi gloomi eye it alight accident upon a skull, which 
some wanton hand had fix in a crevic of the wall. He avert hi 
glanc quickly, but almost as quickli refix hi gaze upon the impass 
symbol of death, with an express glower and contemptuous, and with 
an angri gestur struck it down among the weed with hi stick. He left 
the place, and wander on through the woods. 

"men can't control the thought that flit across their minds," he 
muttered, as he went along, "anymor than they can direct the shadow 
of the cloud that sail abov them. they come and pass, and leav no 
stain behind. what, then, of omens, and that wretch effigi of 
death? stuff--pshaw! murder, indeed! i'm incap of murder. I have 
drawn my sword upon a man in fair duel; but murder! out upon the 
thought, out upon it." 

He stamp upon the ground with a pang at onc of furi and horror. He 
walk on a little, stop again, and fold hi arms, lean against 
an ancient tree. 

"mademoisel de barras, _vou ête une traîtresse_, and you shall go. 
yes, go you shall; you have deceiv me, and we must part." 

He said thi with melancholi bitterness; and, after a pause, continued: 

"I will have no other revenge. no; though, I dare say, she will care but 
littl for this; veri little, if at all." 

"and then, as to the other person," he resumed, after a pause, "it is not 
the first time he ha act like a trickster. He ha cross me before, 
and I will choos an opportun to tell him my mind. I won't minc 
matter with him either, and will not spare him one insult syllabl 
that he deserves. He wear a sword, and so do I; if he pleases, he may 
draw it; he shall have the opportunity; but, at all events, I will make 
it imposs for him to prolong hi disgrac visit at my house." 

On reach home and hi own study, the servant, merton, present 
himself, and hi master, too deepli excit to hear him then, appoint 
the next day for the purpose. there wa no contend against marston' 
peremptori will, and the man reluctantli withdrew. here was, apparently, 
a matter of no imagin moment; whether thi menial should be 
discharg on that day, or on the morrow; and yet mighti thing were 
involv in the alternative. 

there wa a deeper gloom than usual over the house. the servant seem 
to know that someth had gone wrong, and look grave and mysterious. 
marston wa more than ever dark and moody. mrs. marston' dim and 
swollen eye show that she had been weeping. mademoisel absent 
herself from supper, on the plea of a bad headache. rhoda saw that 
something, she knew not what, had occur to agit her elders, and wa 
depress and anxious. the old clergyman, whom we have alreadi mentioned, 
had called, and stay to supper. dr. danver wa a man of consider 
learning, strong sense, and remark simplic of character. hi 
thought blue eye, and well-mark countenance, were full of gentl 
and benevolence, and elev by a certain natur dignity, of which 
puriti and goodness, without one debas shade of self-esteem and 
arrogance, were the anim spirit. mrs. marston love and respect 
thi good minist of god; and mani a time had sought and found, in hi 
gentl and earnest counsels, and in the overflow tender of hi 
sympathy, much comfort and support in the progress of her sore and 
protract earthli trial. most especi at one critic period in her 
histori had he endear himself to her, by interposing, and successfully, 
to prevent a formal separ which (a end forev the one hope that 
cheer her on, even in the front of despair) she would probabl not long 
have survived. 

with mr. marston, however, he wa far from be a favorite. there wa 
that in hi lofti and simpl puriti which abash and silent reproach 
the sensual, bitter, disappoint man of the world. the angri pride of 
the scorn man felt it own mean in the grand presenc of a simpl 
and humbl christian minister. and the veri fact that all hi habit had 
led him to hold such a charact in contempt, made him but the more 
unreason resent the involuntari homag which it exhibit in dr. 
danvers' person invari extort from him. He felt in thi good man' 
presenc under a kind of irrit restraint; that he wa in the 
presenc of one with whom he had, and could have, no sympathi whatever, 
and yet one whom he could not help both admir and respecting; and in 
these conflict feel were involv certain gloomi and humbl 
infer about himself, which he hated, and almost fear to 
contemplate. 

It wa well, however, for the indulg of sir wynston' convers 
propensities, that dr. danver had happen to drop in; for marston wa 
doggedli silent and sullen, and mrs. marston wa herself scarc more 
dispos than he to maintain her part in a conversation; so that, had it 
not been for the opportun arriv of the good clergyman, the supper must 
have been dispatch with a veri awkward and unsoci taciturnity. 

marston thought, and, perhaps, not erroneously, that sir wynston 
suspect someth of the real state of affairs, and he was, therefore, 
incens to perceive, as he thought, in hi manner, veri evid 
indic of hi be in unusu good spirits. thu disposed, the 
parti sat down to supper. 

"one of our number is missing," said sir wynston, affect a slight 
surprise, which, perhaps, he did not feel. 

"mademoisel de barras--i trust she is well?" said doctor danvers, 
look toward marston. 

"I suppos she is; I don't know," said marston, drily. 

"why! how should he know," said the baronet, gaily, but with someth 
almost impercept sarcast in hi tone. "our friend, marston, is 
privileg to be as ungal as he pleases, except where he ha the 
happi privileg to owe allegiance; but I, a gay young bachelor of fifty, 
am natur curious. I realli do trust that our charm french friend 
is not unwell." 

He address hi inquiri to mrs. marston, who, with some slight 
confusion, replied:-- 

"no; nothing, at least, serious; mere a slight headache. I am sure she 
will be quit well enough to come down to breakfast." 

"she is, indeed, a veri charm and interest young person," said 
doctor danvers. "there is a certain simplic about her which argu a 
good and kind heart, and an open nature." 

"veri true, indeed, doctor," observ berkley, with the same faint, but, 
to marston, exquisit provok approxim to sarcasm. "there is, as 
you say, a veri charm simplicity. don't you think so, marston?" 

marston look at him for a moment, but continu silent. 

"poor mademoiselle!--sh is, indeed, a most affection creature," said 
mrs. marston, who felt call upon to say something. 

"come, marston, will you contribut noth to the gener fund of 
approbation?" said sir wynston, who wa gift by natur with an amiabl 
talent for teasing, which he wa fond of exercis in a quiet way. "we 
have all, but you, said someth handsom of our absent young friend." 

"I never prais anybody, wynston; not even you," said marston, with an 
obviou sneer. 

"well, well, I must comfort myself with the belief that your silenc 
cover a great deal of good-will, and, perhaps, a littl admiration, 
too," answer hi cousin, significantly. 

"comfort yourself in ani honest way you will, my dear wynston," retort 
marston, with a degre of asperity, which, to all but the baronet 
himself, wa unaccountable. "you may be right, you may be wrong; on a 
subject so unimport it matter veri littl which; you are at perfect 
liberti to practic delusions, if you will, upon yourself." 

"by-the-bye, mr. marston, is not your son about to come down here?" ask 
doctor danvers, who perceiv that the alterc wa becoming, on 
marston' part, somewhat testy, if not posit rude. 

"yes; I expect him in a few days," repli he, with a sudden gloom. 

"you have not seen him, sir wynston?" ask the clergyman. 

"I have that pleasur yet to come," said the baronet. 

"A pleasur it is, I do assur you," said doctor danvers, heartily. "he 
is a handsom lad, with the heart of a hero--a fine, frank, gener lad, 
and as merri as a lark." 

"yes, yes," interrupt marston; "he is well enough, and ha done pretti 
well at cambridge. doctor danvers, take some wine." 

It wa strange, but yet mourn true, that the prais which the good 
doctor danver thu bestow upon hi son were bitter to the soul of the 
unhappi marston. they jar upon hi ear, and stung hi heart; for hi 
conscienc convert them into so mani latent insult and humili 
to himself. 

"your wine is veri good, marston. I think your claret are mani degre 
better than ani I can get," said sir wynston, sip a glass of hi 
favorit wine. "you countri gentlemen are sad selfish dogs; and, with all 
your grumbling, manag to collect the best of whatev is worth have 
about you." 

"we sometim succeed in collect a pleasant party," retort marston, 
with iron courtesy, "though we do not alway command the mean of 
entertain them quit as we would wish." 

It wa the habit of doctor danvers, without respect of person or 
places, to propose, befor take hi departur from whatev domest 
parti he chanc to be thrown among for the evening, to read some vers 
from that holi book, on which hi own hope and peac were founded, and 
to offer up a prayer for all to the throne of grace. marston, although 
he usual absent himself from such exercises, did not otherwis 
discourag them; but upon the present occasion, start from hi gloomi 
reverie, he himself wa the first to remind the clergyman of hi 
customari observance. evil thought loom upon the mind of marston, 
like measureless black mist upon a cold, smooth sea. they rested, grew, 
and darken there; and no heaven-s breath came silent to steal 
them away. under thi dread shadow hi mind lay waiting, like the deep, 
befor the spirit of god move upon it waters, passiv and awful. whi 
for the first time now did religion interest him? the unseen, 
intangible, wa even now at work within him. A dread power shook hi 
veri heart and soul. there wa some strange, ghastli wrestl go on 
in hi own immort spirit, a struggl that made him faint, which he had 
no power to determine. He look upon the holi influenc of the good 
man' prayer--a prayer in which he could not join--with a dull, 
superstiti hope that the words, invit better influence, though 
utter by another, and with other objects, would, like a spell, chase 
away the foul fiend that wa busi with hi soul. marston sate, look 
into the fire, with a counten of stern gloom, upon which the wayward 
light of the flicker hearth sport fitfully; while at a distant 
tabl doctor danver sate down, and, take hi well-worn bibl from hi 
pocket, turn over it leaves, and began, in gentl but impress 
tones, to read. 

sir wynston wa much too well bred to evinc the slightest disposit to 
aught but the most proper and profound attention. the faintest imagin 
gleam of ridicul might, perhaps, have been discern in hi features, 
as he lean back in hi chair, and, close hi eyes, compos himself 
to at least an attitud of attention. No man could submit with more 
cheer to an inevit bore. 

In these things, then, thou hast no concern; the judgment troubl thee 
not; thou hast no fear of death, sir wynston berkley; yet there is a 
heart beat near thee, the mysteri of which, could they glide out and 
stand befor thi face, would perchanc appal thee, cold, easi man of the 
world. aye, couldst thou but see with those cun eye of thine, but 
twelv brief hour into futurity, each syllabl that fall from that good 
man' lip unheed would peal through thi heart and brain like madden 
thunder. hearken, hearken, sir wynston berkley, perchanc these are the 
farewel word of thi better angel--th last plead of despis mercy! 

the parti broke up. doctor danver took hi leave, and rode homeward, 
down the broad avenue, between the gigant rank of elm that close it 
in. the full moon wa rise abov the distant hills; the mist lay 
like sleep lake in the lap of the hollows; and the broad demesn 
look tranquil and sad under thi chasten and silveri glory. the 
good old clergyman thought, as he pursu hi way, that here at least, 
in a spot so beauti and sequestered, the stormi passion and fell 
content of the outer world could scarc penetrate. yet, in that 
calm seclud spot, and under the cold, pure light which fell so 
holily, what a hell wa welter and glaring!--what a spectacl wa 
that moon to go down upon! As sir wynston wa leav the parlor for 
hi own room, marston accompani him to the hall, and said--"i shan't 
play tonight, sir wynston." 

"ah, ha! veri particularli engaged?" suggest the baronet, with a 
faint, mock smile. "well, my dear fellow, we must endeavor to make up 
for it tomorrow--eh?" 

"I don't know that," said marston, "and--in a word, there is no use, sir, 
in our masquerad with one another. each know the other; each 
understand the other. I wish to have a word or two with you in your room 
tonight, when we shan't be interrupted." 

marston spoke in a fierc and grate whisper, and hi countenance, more 
even than hi accents, betray the intens of hi bridl fury. sir 
wynston, however, smile upon hi cousin as if hi voic had been melody, 
and hi look all sunshine. 

"veri good, marston, just as you please," he said; "onli don't be later 
than one, as I shall be get into bed about that hour." 

"perhaps, upon second thoughts, it is as well to defer what I have to 
say," said marston, musingly. "tomorrow will do as well; so, perhaps, sir 
wynston, I may not troubl you tonight." 

"just as suit you best, my dear marston," repli the baronet, with a 
tranquil smile; "onli don't come after the hour I have stipulated." 

So saying, the baronet mount the stairs, and made hi way to hi 
chamber. He wa in excel spirits, and in high good-humor with 
himself: the object of hi visit to gray forest had been, as he now 
flatter himself, attained. He had conduct an affair requir the 
profoundest mysteri in it prosecution, and the nicest tactic in it 
management, almost to a triumphant issue. He had perfectli mask hi 
design, and complet outwit marston; and to a person who piqu 
himself upon hi clever diplomacy, and vaunt that he had never yet 
sustain a defeat in ani object which he had serious propos to 
himself, such a combin of success wa for the moment quit 
intoxicating. 

sir wynston not onli enjoy hi own superior with all the vaniti of a 
selfish nature, but he no less enjoyed, with a keen and malici relish, 
the intens mortif which, he wa well assured, marston must 
experience; and all the more acutely, becaus of the utter impossibility, 
circumstanc as he was, of hi take ani step to manifest hi 
vexation, without compromis himself in a most unpleas way. 

anim by these amiabl feelings, sir wynston berkley sate down, 
and wrote the follow short letter, address to mrs. gray, 
wynston hall:-- 

"mrs. gray, 

"on receipt of thi have the sit room and sever bedroom put in 
order, and thoroughli aired. prepar for my use the suit of three room 
over the librari and draw room; and have the two great wardrobes, and 
the cabinet in the state bedroom, remov into the larg dress room 
which open upon the bedroom I have named. make everyth as comfort 
as possible. If anyth is want in the way of furniture, drapery, 
ornament, &c., you need onli write to john skelton, esq., spring-garden, 
london, state what is required, and he will order and send them down. 
you must be expeditious, as I shall probabl go down to wynston, with two 
or three friends, at the begin of next month. 

"wynston berkley 

"p.s.--i have written to direct arkin and two or three of the other 
servant to go down at once. set them all to work immediately." 

He then appli himself to anoth letter of consider greater length, 
and from which, therefore, we shall onli offer a few extracts. It wa 
address to john skelton, esq., and began as follows.-- 

"mi dear skelton, 

"you are, doubtless, surpris at my long silence, but I have had noth 
veri particular to say. My visit to thi dull and uncomfort place wa 
(a you rightli surmise) not without it object--a littl bit of wick 
romance; the pretti demoisel of rouen, whom I mention to you more 
than once--la bell de barras--was, in truth, the attract that drew me 
hither; and I think (for, as yet, she affect hesitation), I shall have 
no further troubl with her. she is a fine creature, and you will admit, 
when you have seen her, well worth take some troubl about. she is, 
however, a veri know littl minx, and evid suspect me of be a 
sad, fickl dog--and, as I surmise, ha some plans, moreover, respect 
my moros cousin, marston, a kind of wick penruddock, who ha carri 
all hi london tast into hi savag retreat, a paradis of bog and 
bushes. there is, I am veri confident, a liaison in that quarter. the 
young ladi is evid a good deal afraid of him, and insist upon such 
precaut in our interviews, that they have been veri few, and far 
between, indeed. today, there ha been a fraca of some kind. I have no 
doubt that marston, poor devil, is jealous. hi situat is realli 
pitiabl comic--with an intrigu mistress, a saintli wife, and a devil 
of a jealou temper of hi own. I shall meet mari on reach town. ha 
claver (shabbi dog!) paid hi i.o.u. yet? tell the littl opera woman 
she had better be quiet. she ought to know me by thi time; I shall do 
what is right, but won't submit to be bullied. If she is troublesome, 
snap your finger at her, on my behalf, and leav her to her remedy. I 
have written to gray, to get thing at wynston in order. she will draw 
upon you for what money she requires. send down two or three of the 
servants, if they have not alreadi gone. the place is veri dusti and 
dingy, and need a great deal of brush and scouring. I shall see you 
in town veri soon. By the way, ha the claret I order from the dublin 
hous arriv yet? It is consign to you, and goe by the 'lizard'; pay 
the freightage, and get edward to pack it; ten dozen or so may as well 
go down to wynston, and send other wine in proportion. I leav detail 
to you...." 

some further direct upon other subject followed; and have 
subscrib the dispatch, and address it to the gentlemanlik scoundrel 
who fill the oner offic of factotum to thi proflig and 
exact man of the world, sir wynston berkley rang hi bell, and gave 
the two letter into the hand of hi man, with special direct to 
carri them himself in person, to the post offic in the neighbor 
village, earli next morning. these littl matter completed, sir wynston 
stir hi fire, lean back in hi easi chair, and smile blandli over 
the sunni prospect of hi imaginari triumphs. 

It here becom necessari to describe, in a few words, some of the local 
relat of sir wynston' apartments. the bedchamb which he occupi 
open from the long passag of which we have alreadi spoken--and there 
were two other smaller apart open from it in train. In the 
further of these, which wa enter from a lobby, commun by a back 
stair with the kitchen and servants' apartments, lay sir wynston' valet, 
and the intermedi chamber wa fit up as a dress room for the 
baronet himself. these circumst it is necessari to mention, that 
what follow may be clearli intelligible. 

while the baronet wa pen these record of viciou schemes--dir 
wast of wealth and time--irrevoc time!--marston pace hi studi in a 
veri differ frame of mind. there were a gloom and disord in the room 
accord with those of hi own mind. shelv of ancient tomes, darken 
by time, and upon which the dust of year lay sleeping--dark oaken 
cabinets, fill with pile of deed and papers, among which the nimbl 
spider were crawling--and, from the duski walls, sever stark, pale 
ancestors, look down coldli from their tarnish frames. An hour, and 
anoth hour passed--and still marston pace thi melancholi chamber, a 
prey to hi own fell passion and dark thoughts. He wa not a 
superstiti man, but, in the vision which haunt him, perhaps, wa 
someth which made him unusu excitable--for, he experienc a chill 
of absolut horror, as, stand at the farther end of the room, with hi 
face turn toward the entrance, he beheld the door noiselessli and 
slowli push open, by a pale, thin hand, and a figur dress in a loos 
white robe, glide softli in. He stood for some second gaze upon thi 
apparition, as it move hesitatingli toward him from the duski extrem 
of the larg apartment, befor he perceiv that the form wa that of 
mrs. marston. 

"hey, ha!--mrs. marston--what on earth ha call you hither?" he asked, 
sternly. "you ought to have been at rest an hour ago; get to your 
chamber, and leav me, I have busi to attend to." 

"now, dear richard, you must forgiv me," she said, draw near, and 
look up into hi haggard face with a sweet and touch look of 
timid and love; "I could not rest until I saw you again; your look 
have been all thi night so unlik yourself; so strang and terrible, 
that I am afraid some great misfortun threaten you, which you fear to 
tell me of." 

"mi looks! why, curs it, must I give an account of my looks?" repli 
marston, at onc disconcert and wrathful. "misfortune! what misfortun 
can befal us more? no, there is nothing, nothing, I say, but your own 
foolish fancy; go to your room--go to sleep--mi looks, indeed; pshaw!" 

"I came to tell you, dear richard, that I will do, in all respects, just 
as you desire. If you continu to wish it, I will part with poor 
mademoiselle; though, indeed, richard, I shall miss her more than you can 
imagine; and all your suspicion have wrong her deeply," said mrs. 
marston. her husband dart a sudden flash glanc of suspici 
scrutini upon her face; but it express wa frank, earnest, noble. He 
wa disarmed; he hung hi head gloomili upon hi breast, and wa silent 
for a time. she came nearer, and laid her hand upon hi arm. He look 
darkli into her upturn eyes, and a feel which had not touch hi 
heart for mani a day--an emot of pity, transient, indeed, but vivid, 
revisit him. He took her hand in his, and said, in gentler term than 
she had heard him use for a long time-- 

"no, indeed, gertrude, you have deceiv yourself; no misfortun ha 
happened, and if I am gloomy, the sourc of all my troubl is within. 
leav me, gertrude, for the present. As to the other matter, the 
departur of mademoisel de barras, we can talk of that tomorrow--now I 
cannot; so let us part. Go to your room; good night." 

she wa withdrawing, and he added, in a subdu tone--"gertrude, I am 
veri glad you came--veri glad. pray for me tonight." 

He had follow her a few step toward the door, and now stop short, 
turn about, and walk dejectedli back again-- 

"I am right glad she came," he muttered, as soon as he wa onc more 
alone. "wynston is provok and fiery, too. were I, in my present mood, 
to seek a tête-à-têt with him, who know what might come of it? blood; 
my own heart whispers--blood! i'll not trust myself." 

He strode to the studi door, lock it, and take out the key, shut it 
in the drawer of one of the cabinets. 

"now it will need more than accid or impuls to lead me to him. I 
cannot go, at least, without reflection, without premeditation. avaunt, 
fiend. I have baffl you." 

He stood in the center of the room, cower and scowl as he said 
this, and look round with a glanc half-defiant, half-fearful, as if he 
expect to see some dread form in the duski recess of the desol 
chamber. He sat himself by the smoulder fire, in somber and agit 
rumination. He wa restless; he rose again, unbuckl hi sword, which he 
had not loos sinc evening, and threw it hastili into a corner. He 
look at hi watch, it wa half-past twelve; he glanc at the door, and 
thenc at the cabinet in which he had place the key; then he turn 
hastily, and sate down again. He lean hi elbow on hi knees, and hi 
chin upon hi clench hand; still he wa restless and excited. onc more 
he arose, and pace up and down. He consult hi watch again; it wa now 
but a quarter to one. 

sir wynston' man have receiv the letters, and hi master' 
permiss to retir to rest, got into hi bed, and wa soon begin to 
dose. We have alreadi mention that hi and sir wynston' apart 
were separ by a small dress room, so that ani ordinari nois or 
convers could be heard but imperfectli from one to the other. the 
servant, however, wa startl by a sound of someth fall on the 
floor of hi master' apartment, and broken to piec by the violenc of 
the shock. He sate up in hi bed, listened, and heard some sentenc 
spoken vehemently, and gabbl veri fast. He thought he distinguish the 
word "wretch" and "god"; and there wa someth so strang in the tone 
in which they were spoken, that the man got up and stole noiselessli 
through the dress room, and listen at the door. 

He heard him, as he thought, walk in hi slipper through the room, 
and make hi customari arrang previous to get into bed. He 
knew that hi master had a habit of speak when alone, and conclud 
that the accident breakag of some glass or chimney-orna had 
elicit the volley of word he had heard. well know that, except at 
the usual hours, or in obedi to sir wynston' bell, noth more 
displeas hi master than hi presum to enter hi sleeping-apart 
while he wa there, the servant quietli retreated, and, perfectli 
satisfi that all wa right, compos himself to slumber, and wa soon 
begin to dose again. 

the adventur of the night, however, were not yet over. waking, as men 
sometim do, without ani ascertain cause; without a start or an 
uneasi sensation; without even a disturb of the attitud of repose, 
he open hi eye and beheld merton, the servant of whom we have spoken, 
stand at a littl distanc from hi bed. the moonlight fell in a clear 
flood upon thi figure: the man wa ghastli pale; there wa a blotch of 
blood on hi face; hi hand were clasp upon someth which they 
nearli concealed; and hi eyes, fix on the servant who had just 
awakened, shone in the cold light with a wild and lifeless glitter. thi 
specter drew close to the side of the bed, and stood for a few moment 
there with a look of agoni and menace, which startl the newly-awaken 
man, who rose upright, and said-- 

"mr. merton, mr. merton--in god' name, what is the matter?" 

merton recoil at the sound of hi voice; and, as he did so, drop 
someth on the floor, which roll away to a distance; and he stood 
gaze silent and horribl upon hi interrogator. 

"mr. merton, I say, what is it?" urg the man. "are you hurt? your face 
is bloody." 

merton rais hi hand to hi face mechanically, and sir wynston' man 
observ that it, too, wa cover with blood. 

"why, man," he said, vehemently, and actual freez with horror," you 
are all bloody; hand and face; all over blood." 

"mi hand is cut to the bone," said merton, in a harsh whisper; and 
speak to himself, rather than address the servant--"i wish it wa 
my neck; I wish to god I bled to death." 

"you have hurt your hand, mr. merton," repeat the man, scarc know 
what he said. 

"aye," whisper merton, wildli draw toward the bedsid again; "who 
told you I hurt my hand? It is cut to the bone, sure enough." 

He stoop for a moment over the bed, and then cower down toward the 
floor to search for what he had dropped. 

"why, mr. merton, what bring you here at thi hour?" urg the man, 
after a paus of a few seconds. "it is draw toward morning." 

"aye, aye," said merton, doubtfully, and start upright again, while 
he conceal in hi bosom what he had been in search of. "near morning, 
is it? night and morning, it is all one to me. I believ I am go 
mad, by--" 

"but what do you want? what did you come here for at thi hour?" 
persist the man. 

"what! aye, that is it; why, hi boot and spurs, to be sure. I 
forgot them. his--his--sir wynston' boot and spurs; I forgot to 
take them, I say," said merton, look toward the dress room, as 
if about to enter it. 

"don't mind them tonight, I say, don't go in there," said the man, 
peremptorily, and get out upon the floor. "I say, mr. merton, thi is 
no hour to be go about search in the dark for boot and spurs. 
you'll waken the master. I can't have it, I say; go down, and let it be 
for tonight." 

thu speaking, in a resolut and somewhat angri under-key, the valet 
stood between merton and the entranc of the dressing-room; and, sign 
with hi hand toward the other door of the apartment, continued-- 

"go down, I say, mr. merton, go down; you may as well quietly, for, I 
tell you plainly, you shall neither go a step further, nor stay here a 
moment longer." 

the man drew hi shoulder up, and made a sort of shiver moan, and 
clasp hi hand together, shook them, as it seemed, in great agony. He 
then turn abruptly, and hurri from the room by the door lead to 
the kitchen. 

"bi my faith," said the servant, "I am glad he is gone. the poor chap is 
turn crazy, as sure as I am a live man. i'll not have him prowl 
about here anymore, however; that I am resolv on." 

In pursuanc of thi determination, by no mean an imprud one, as it 
seemed, he fasten the door commun with the lower apart upon 
the inside. He had hardli done this, when he heard a step travers the 
stable-yard, which lay under the window of hi apartment. He look out, 
and saw merton walk hurriedli across, and into a stabl at the 
farther end. 

feel no veri particular curios about hi movements, the man hurri 
back to hi bed. merton' eccentr conduct of late had becom so 
gener remark and discuss among the servants, that sir wynston' 
man wa by no mean surpris at the odditi of the visit he had just had; 
nor, after the first few moment of doubt, befor the appear of blood 
had been account for, had he entertain ani suspicion whatev 
connect with the man' unexpect presenc in the room. merton wa in 
the habit of come up everi night to take down sir wynston' boots, 
whenev the baronet had ridden in the cours of the day; and thi 
attent had been civilli undertaken as a proof of good-wil toward the 
valet, whose duti thi somewhat soil and ungentlemanlik process would 
otherwis have been. So far, the natur of the visit wa explained; and 
the remembr of the friendli feel and good offic which had been 
mutual interchanged, as well as of the inoffens habit for which 
merton had earn a charact for himself, speedili calm the 
uneasiness, for a moment amount to actual alarm, with which the 
servant had regard hi appearance. 

We must now pass on to the morrow, and ask the reader' attent for a 
few moment to a differ scene. 

In contact with gray forest upon the northern side, and divid by a 
common boundary, lay a demesne, in mani respect present a veri 
strike contrast to it grander neighbor. It wa a compar modern 
place. It could not boast the tower timber which enrich and 
overshadow the vast and vari expans of it aristocrat rival; but, 
if it wa inferior in the advantag of antiquity, and, perhaps, also in 
some of those of nature, it superior in other respect wa 
striking, and important. gray forest wa not more remark for it 
wild and neglect condition, than wa newton park for the care and 
eleg with which it wa kept. No one could observ the contrast, 
without, at the same time, divin it cause. the proprietor of the one 
wa a man of wealth, fulli commensur with the extent and pretens 
of the resid he had chosen; the owner of the other wa a man of 
broken fortunes. 

under a green shade, which nearli met above, a veri young man, scarc 
one-and-twenty, of a frank and sensible, rather than a strictli 
handsom countenance, wa walking, follow by half a dozen dog of as 
mani breed and sizes. thi young man wa georg mervyn, the onli son 
of the present proprietor of the place. As he approach the great 
gate, the clank of a horse' hoof in quick motion upon the sequest 
road which ran outsid it, reach him; and hardli had he heard these 
sounds, when a young gentleman rode briskli by, direct hi look into 
the demesn as he passed. He had no sooner seen him, than wheel hi 
hors about, he rode up to the iron gate, and dismounting, threw it 
open, and let hi hors in. 

"ha! charl marston, I protest!" said the young man, quicken hi pace 
to meet hi friend. "marston, my dear fellow," he call aloud, "how glad 
I am to see you." 

there wa anoth entranc into newton park, open from the same road, 
about half a mile further on; and charl marston made hi way lie 
through this. thu the young peopl walk on, talk of a hundr 
thing as they proceeded, in the mirth of their hearts. 

between the father of the two young men, who thu walk so 
affection together, there subsist unhappili no friendli feelings. 
there had been sever slight disagr between them, touch their 
proprietari rights, and one of these had ripen into a formal and 
somewhat expens litigation, respect a certain right of fish 
claim by each. thi legal encount had termin in the defeat of 
marston. mervyn, however, promptli wrote to hi opponent, offer him 
the free use of the water for which they had thu sharpli contested, and 
receiv a curt and scarc civil reply, declin the propos 
courtesy. thi exhibit of resent on marston' part had been 
follow by some rather angri collisions, where chanc or duti happen 
to throw them together. It is but justic to say that, upon all such 
occasions, marston wa the aggressor. but mervyn wa a somewhat testi old 
gentleman, and had a certain pride of hi own, which wa not to be 
trifl with. thus, though near neighbors, the parent of the young 
friend were more than stranger to each other. On mervyn' side, 
however, thi estrang wa unalloy with bitterness, and simpli of 
that kind which the great moralist would have refer to "defens 
pride." It did not includ ani member of marston' family, and charles, 
as often as he desir it, which was, in truth, as often as hi visit 
could escap the special notic of hi father, wa a welcom guest at 
newton park. 

these detail respect the mutual relat in which the two famili 
stood, it wa necessari to state, for the purpos of make what follow 
perfectli clear. the young peopl had now reach the further gate, at 
which they were to part. charl marston, with a heart beat happili in 
the anticip of mani a pleasant meeting, bid him farewel for the 
present, and in a few minut more wa ride up the broad, straight 
avenue, toward the gloomi mansion which close in the hazi and somber 
perspective. As he move onward, he pass a laborer, with whose face, 
from hi childhood, he had been familiar. 

"how do you do, tom?" he cried. 

"at your service, sir," repli the man, uncovering, "and welcom 
home, sir." 

there wa someth dark and anxiou in the man' looks, which 
ill-accord with the welcom he spoke, and which suggest some 
undefin alarm. 

"the master, and mistress, and miss rhoda--ar all well?" he ask 
eagerly. 

"all well, sir, thank god," repli the man. 

young marston spur on, fill with vagu apprehensions, and observ 
the man still lean upon hi spade, and watch hi progress with the 
same gloomi and curiou eye. 

At the hall-door he met with one of the servants, boot and spurred. 

"well, daly," he said, as he dismounted, "how are all at home?" 

thi man, like the former, met hi smile with a troubl countenance, and 
stammered-- 

"all, sir--that is, the master, and mistress, and miss rhoda--quit well, 
sir; but--" 

"well, well," said charles, eagerly, "speak on--what is it?" 

"bad work, sir," repli the man, lower hi voice. "I am go off 
thi minut for--" 

"for what?" urg the young gentleman. 

"why, sir, for the coroner," repli he. 

"the coroner--th coroner! why, good god, what ha happened?" cri 
charles, aghast with horror. 

"sir wynston," commenc the man, and hesitated. 

"well?" pursu charles, pale and breathless. 

"sir wynston--he--it is he," said the man. 

"he? sir wynston? Is he dead, or who is?--who is dead?" demand the 
young man, almost fiercely. 

"sir wynston, sir; it is he that is dead. there is bad work, sir--veri 
bad, i'm afraid," repli the man. 

charl did not wait to inquir further, but, with a feel of mingl 
horror and curiosity, enter the house. 

He hurri up the stairs, and enter hi mother' sit room. she wa 
there, perfectli alone, and so deadli pale, that she scarc look like 
a live being. In an instant they were lock in one another' arms. 

"mother--mi dear mother, you are ill," said the young man, anxiously. 

"oh, no, no, dear charles, but frightened, horrified;" and as she said 
this, the poor ladi burst into tears. 

"what is thi horribl affair? someth about sir wynston. He is dead, I 
know, but is it--i it suicide?" he asked. 

"oh, no, not suicide," said mrs. marston, greatli agitated. 

"good god! then he is murdered," whisper the young man, grow 
veri pale. 

"yes, charles--horrible--dreadful! I can scarc believ it," repli 
she, shudder while she wept. 

"where is my father?" inquir the young man, after a pause. 

"why, why, charles, darling--whi do you ask for him?" she said, wildly, 
grasp him by the arm, as she look into hi face with a terrifi 
expression. 

"why--why, he could tell me the particular of thi horribl 
tragedy," answer he, meet her agon look with one of alarm 
and surprise, "a far as they have been as yet collected. how is he, 
mother--i he well?" 

"oh, yes, quit well, thank god," she answered, more collectedly--"quit 
well, but, of course, greatly, dread shocked." 

"I will go to him, mother; I will see him," said he, turn 
toward the door. 

"he ha been wretchedli depress and excit for some days," said mrs. 
marston, dejectedly, "and thi dread occurr will, I fear, affect 
him most deplorably." 

the young man kiss her tenderli and affectionately, and hurri down to 
the library, where hi father usual sat when he desir to be alone, or 
wa engag in business. He open the door softly. hi father wa 
stand at one of the windows, hi face haggard as from a night' 
watching, unkempt and unshorn, and with hi hand thrust into hi 
pockets. At the sound of the revolv door he started, and see hi 
son, first recoil a little, with a strange, doubt expression, and 
then rallying, walk quickli toward him with a smile, which had in it 
someth still more painful. 

"charles, I am glad to see you," he said, shake him with an agit 
pressur by both hands, "charles, thi is a great calamity, and what 
make it still worse, is that the murder ha escaped; it look badly, 
you know." 

He fix hi gaze for a few moment upon hi son, turn abruptly, and 
walk a littl way into the room then, in a disconcert manner, he 
added, hastili turn back-- 

"not that it signifi to us, of course--but I would fain have justic 
satisfied." 

"and who is the wretch--th murderer?" inquir charles. 

"who? why, everyon knows!--that scoundrel, merton," answer marston, in 
an irrit tone--"merton murder him in hi bed, and fled last night; 
he is gone--escaped--and I suspect sir wynston' man of be an 
accessory." 

"which wa sir wynston' bedroom?" ask the young man. 

"the room that old ladi mostyn had--th room with the portrait of grace 
hamilton in it." 

"I know--i know," said the young man, much excited. "I should wish 
to see it." 

"stay," said marston; "the door from the passag is bolt on the inside, 
and I have lock the other; here is the key, if you choos to go, but 
you must bring hugh with you, and do not disturb anything; leav all as 
it is; the juri ought to see, and examin for themselves." 

charl took the key, and, accompani by the awestruck servant, he made 
hi way by the back stair to the door open from the dressing-room, 
which, as we have said, interven between the valet' chamber and sir 
wynston's. after a momentari hesitation, charl turn the key in the 
door, and stood. 

"in the dark chamber of white death." 

the shutter lay partli open, as the valet had left them some hour 
before, on make the astound discovery, which the partial admit 
light revealed. the corps lay in the silk-embroid dress gown, and 
other habiliments, which sir wynston had worn, while take hi eas in 
hi chamber, on the preced night. the coverlet wa partial drag 
over it. the mouth wa gaping, and fill with clot blood; a wide gash 
wa also visibl in the neck, under the ear; and there wa a thicken 
pool of blood at the bedside, and quantiti of blood, doubtless from 
other wounds, had satur the bedcloth under the body. there lay sir 
wynston, stiffen in the attitud in which the struggl of death had 
left him, with hi stern, stoni face, and dim, terribl gaze turn up. 

charl look breathlessli for more than a minut upon thi mute and 
unchang spectacle, and then silent suffer the curtain to fall back 
again, and stepped, with the light tread of awe, again to the door. there 
he turn back, and paus for a minute, said, in a whisper, to the 
attendant-- 

"and merton did this?" 

"troth, i'm afeard he did, sir," answer the man, gloomily. 

"and ha made hi escape?" continu charles. 

"yes, sir; he stole away in the night-time," repli the servant, "after 
the murder wa done" (and he glanc fear toward the bed); "god 
know where he' gone." 

"the villain!" mutter charles; "but what wa hi motive? whi did he do 
all this--what doe it mean?" 

"I don't know exactly, sir, but he wa veri queer for a week and more 
befor it," repli the man; "there wa someth bad over him for a 
long time." 

"it is a terribl thing," said charles, with a profound sigh; "a terribl 
and shock occurrence." 

He hesit again at the door, but hi feel had sustain a terribl 
revuls at sight of the corpse, and he wa no longer dispos to 
prosecut hi purpos examin of the chamber and it contents; with 
a view to conjectur the probabl circumst of the murder. 

"observe, hughes, that I have move noth in the chamber from the place 
it occupi when we entered," he said to the servant, as they withdrew. 

He lock the door, and as he pass through the hall, on hi return, he 
encount hi father, and, restor the key, said-- 

"I could not stay there; I am almost sorri I have seen it; I am 
overpowered; what a determined, feroci murder it was; the place is all 
in a pool of gore; he must have receiv mani wounds." 

"I can't say; the particular will be elicit soon enough; those detail 
are for the inquest; as for me, I hate such spectacles," said marston, 
gloomily; "go now, and see your sister; you will find her there." 

He point to the small room where we have first seen her and her fair 
governess; charl obey the direction, and marston proceed himself to 
hi wife' sit room. 

the young man, dispirit and horrifi by the aw spectacl he had 
just contemplated, hurri to the littl studi occupi by hi sister. 
marston himself ascended, as we have said, the great staircas lead to 
hi wife' privat sit room. 

"mrs. marston," he said, entering, "thi is a hate occurrence, a 
dread thing to have taken place here; I don't mean to affect grief 
which I don't feel; but the thing is veri shocking, and particularli so, 
as have occur under my roof; but that cannot now be helped. I have 
resolv to spare no exertions, and no influence, to bring the assassin 
to justice; and a coroner' juri will, within a few hours, sift the 
evid which we have succeed in collecting. but my purpos in seek 
you now is, to recur to the convers we yesterday had, respect a 
member of thi establishment." 

"mademoisel de barras?" suggest the lady. 

"yes, mademoisel de barras," echo marston; "I wish to say, that, 
have reconsid the circumst affect her, I am absolut 
resolv that she shall not continu to be an inmat of thi house." 

He paused, and mrs. marston said-- 

"well, richard, I am sorry, veri sorri for it; but your decis shall 
never be disput by me." 

"of course," said marston, drily; "and, therefore, the sooner you 
acquaint her with it, and let her know that she must go, the better." 

have said this, he left her, and went to hi own chamber, where he 
proceed to make hi toilet with elabor propriety, in prepar for 
the scene which wa about to take place under hi roof. 

mrs. marston, meanwhile, suffer from a horribl uncertainty. she never 
harbored, it is true, one doubt as to her husband' perfect innoc of 
the ghastli crime which fill their hous with fear and gloom; but at 
the same time that she thoroughli and indignantli scout the possibl 
of his, under ani circumstances, be accessori to such a crime, she 
experienc a nervou and agon anxieti lest anyon els should 
possibl suspect him, howev obliqu and faintly, of ani particip 
whatev in the foul deed. thi vagu fear tortur her; it had taken 
possess of her mind; and it wa the more acut painful, becaus it 
wa of a kind which preclud the possibl of her dispel it, as 
morbid fear so often are dispelled, by take counsel upon it 
suggest with a friend. 

the day wore on, and strang face began to fill the great parlor. the 
coroner, accompani by a physician, had arrived. sever of the gentri 
in the immedi vicin had been summon as jurors, and now began to 
arriv in succession. marston, in a handsom and sober suit, receiv 
these visitor with a state and melancholi courtesy, befit the 
occasion. mervyn and hi son had both been summoned, and, of course, were 
in attendance. there be now a suffici number to form a jury, they 
were sworn, and immedi proceed to the chamber where the bodi of 
the murder man wa lying. 

marston accompani them, and with a pale and stern countenance, and in a 
clear and subdu tone, call their attent success to everi 
particular detail which he conceiv import to be noted. have thu 
employ some minutes, the juri again return to the parlor, and the 
examin of the wit commenced. 

marston, at hi own request, wa first sworn and examined. He depos 
mere to the circumst of hi parting, on the night previous, with 
sir wynston, and to the state in which he had seen the room and the bodi 
in the morning. He mention also the fact, that on hear the alarm in 
the morning, he had hasten from hi own chamber to sir wynston's, and 
found, on tri to enter, that the door open upon the passag wa 
secur on the inside. thi circumst show that the murder must 
have made hi egress at least through the valet' chamber, and by the 
back-stairs. marston' evid went no further. 

the next wit sworn wa edward smith, the servant of the late sir 
wynston berkley. hi evid wa a narr of the occurr we have 
alreadi stated. He describ the sound which he had overheard from hi 
master' room, the subsequ appear of merton, and the convers 
which had pass between them. He then proceed to mention, that it wa 
hi master' custom to have himself call at seven o'clock, at which 
hour he usual took some medicine, which it wa the valet' duti to 
bring to him; after which he either settl again to rest, or rose in a 
short time, if unabl to sleep. have measur and prepar the dose in 
the dress room, the servant went on to say, he had knock at hi 
master' door, and receiv no answer, had enter the room, and partli 
unclos the shutters. He perceiv the blood on the carpet, and on 
open the curtains, saw hi master lie with hi mouth and eye open, 
perfectli dead, and welter in gore. He had stretch out hi hand, and 
seiz that of the dead man, which wa quit stiff and cold; then, lose 
heart, he had run to the door commun with the passage, but found 
it locked, and turn to the other entrance, and ran down the 
back-stairs, cri "murder." mr. hughes, the butler, and jame carney, 
anoth servant, came immediately, and they all three went back into the 
room. the key wa in the outer door, upon the inside, but they did not 
unlock it until they had view the body. there wa a great pool of blood 
in the bed, and in it wa lie a red-handl case knife, which wa 
produced, and identifi by the witness. just then they heard mr. marston 
call for admission, and they open the door with some difficulty, for 
the lock wa rusty. mr. marston had order them to leav the thing as 
they were, and had use veri stern languag to the witness. they had then 
left the room, secur both doors. 

thi wit underw a sever and search examination, but hi 
evid wa clear and consistent. 

In conclusion, marston produc a dagger, which wa stain with blood, 
and ask the man whether he recogn it. 

smith at onc state thi to have been the properti of hi late master, 
who, when traveling, carri it, togeth with hi pistols, along with 
him. sinc hi arriv at gray forest, it had lain upon the 
chimney-piec in hi bedroom, where he believ it to have been upon the 
previou night. 

jame carney, one of marston' servants, wa next sworn and examined. He 
had, he said, observ a strang and unaccount agit and 
depress in merton' manner for some day past; he had also been 
sever time disturb at night by hi talk aloud to himself, and 
walk to and fro in hi room. their bedroom were separ by a thin 
partition, in which wa a window, through which carney had, on the night 
of the murder, observ a light in merton' room, and, on look in, had 
seen him dress hastily. He also saw him twice take up, and again lay 
down, the red-haft knife which had been found in the bed of the 
murder man. He knew it by the handl be broken near the end. He had 
no suspicion of merton have ani mischiev intentions, and lay down 
again to rest. He afterward heard him pass out of hi room, and go 
slowli up the back-stair lead to the upper story. shortli after thi 
he had fallen asleep, and did not hear or see him return. He then 
described, as smith had alreadi done, the scene which present itself in 
the morning, on hi accompani him into sir wynston' bedchamber. 

the next wit examin wa a littl irish boy, who describ himself 
as "a poor scholar." hi testimoni wa somewhat singular. He depos that 
he had come to the hous on the preced evening, and had been given 
some supper, and wa afterward permit to sleep among the hay in one 
of the lofts. He had, however, discov what he consid a snugger 
berth. thi wa an unus stable, in the further end of which lay a 
quantiti of hay. among thi he had lain down, and gone to sleep. He was, 
however, awaken in the cours of the night by the entranc of a man, 
whom he saw with perfect distinct in the moonlight, and hi 
descript of hi dress and appear talli exactli with those of 
merton. thi man occupi himself for sometim in wash hi hand and 
face in a stabl bucket, which happen to stand by the door; and, dure 
the whole of thi process, he continu to moan and mutter, like one in 
woeful perturbation. He said, distinctly, twice or thrice, "bi ----, I am 
done for;" and everi now and then he muttered, "and noth for it, after 
all." when he had done wash hi hands, he took someth from hi 
coat-pocket, and look at it, shake hi head; at thi time he wa 
stand with hi back turn toward the boy, so that he could not see 
what thi object might be. the man, however, put it into hi breast, and 
then began to search hurriedly, as it seemed, for some hide place for 
it. after look at the pavement, and poke at the chink of the wall, 
he suddenli went to the window, and forc up the stone which form the 
sill. under thi he threw the object which the boy had seen him examin 
with so much perplexity, and then he readjust the stone, and remov 
the evid of it have been recent stirred. the boy wa a littl 
frightened, but veri curiou about all that he saw; and when the man left 
the stabl in which he lay, he got up, and follow to the door, peep 
after him. He saw him put on an outside-coat and hat, near the yard 
gate; and then, with great caution, unbolt the wicket, constantli look 
back toward the house, and so let himself out. the boy wa uneasy, and 
sat in the hay, wide-awake, until morning. He then told the servant what 
he had seen, and one of the men have rais the stone, which he had not 
strength to lift, they found the dagger, which smith had identifi as 
belong to hi master. thi weapon wa stain with blood; and some 
hair, which wa found to correspond in color with sir wynston's, wa 
stick in the crevic between the blade and the handle. 

"it appear veri strang that one man should have employ two 
distinct instrument of thi kind," observ mervyn, after a pause. A 
silenc followed. 

"yes, strange; it doe seem strange," said marston, clear hi voice. 

"yet, it is clear," said anoth of the jury, "that the same hand did 
employ them. It is prove that the knife wa in merton' possess just 
as he left hi chamber; and proved, also, that the dagger wa secret by 
him after he quit the house." 

"yes," said marston, with a grisli sort of smile, and glanc 
sarcast at mervyn, while he address the last speaker--"i thank 
you for recal my attent to the facts. It certainli is not a veri 
pleasant suggestion, that there still remain within my household an 
undetect murderer." 

mervyn rumin for a time, and said he should wish to put a few more 
question to smith and carney. they were accordingli recalled, and 
examin in great detail, with a view to ascertain whether ani indic 
of the presenc of a second person have visit the chamber with merton 
wa discoverable. nothing, however, appeared, except that the valet 
mention the nois and the exclam which he had indistinctli heard. 

"you did not mention that before, sir," said marston, sharply. 

"I did not think of it, sir," repli the man, "the gentlemen were ask 
me so mani questions; but I told you, sir, about it in the morning." 

"oh, ah--yes, yes--i believ you did," said marston; "but you then said 
that sir wynston often talk when he wa alone; eh, sir?" 

"yes, sir, and so he used, which wa the reason I did not go into the 
room when I heard it," repli the man. 

"how long afterward wa it when you saw merton in your own room?" 
ask mervyn. 

"I could not say, sir," answer smith; "I wa soon asleep, and can't say 
how long I slept befor he came." 

"wa it an hour?" pursu mervyn. 

"I can't say," said the man, doubtfully. 

"wa it five hours?" ask marston. 

"no, sir; I am sure it wa not five." 

"could you swear it wa more than half-an-hour?" persist marston. 

"no, I could not swear that," answer he. 

"I am afraid, mr. mervyn; you have found a mare' nest," said marston, 
contemptuously. 

"I have done my duty, sir," retort mervyn, cynically; "which plainli 
requir that I shall have no doubt, which the evid of the wit 
can clear up, unsift and unsatisfied. I happen to think it of some 
moment to ascertain, if possible, whether more person than one were 
engag in thi atroci murder. you don't seem to think the question so 
import a one; differ men, sir, take differ views." 

"views, sir, in matter of thi sort, especi where they tend to 
multipli suspicions, and to implic others, ought to be support by 
someth more substanti than mere fancies," retort marston. 

"I don't know what you call fancies," repli mervyn, testily; "but here 
are two deadli weapons, a knife and a dagger, each, it would seem, 
employ in do thi murder; if you see noth odd in that, I can't 
enabl you to do so." 

"well, sir," said marston, grimly, "the whole thing is, as you term it, 
odd; and I can see no object in your pick out thi particular 
singular for long-wind criticism, except to cast scandal upon my 
household, by leav a hideou and vagu imput float among the 
member of it. sir, sir, thi is a foul way," he cried, sternly, "to 
gratifi a paltri spite." 

"mr. marston," said mervyn, rising, and thrust hi hand into hi 
pockets, while he confront him to the full as sternly, "the countri 
know in which of our heart the spite, if ani there be between us, is 
harbored. I owe you no friendship, but, sir, I cherish no malice, either; 
and against the worst enemi I have on earth I am incap of pervert 
an opportun like this, and inflict pain, under the pretenc of 
discharg a duty." 

marston wa on the point of retorting, but the coron interposed, and 
besought them to confin their attent strictli to the solemn inquiri 
which they were summon togeth to prosecute. 

there remain still to be examin the surgeon who had accompani the 
coroner, for the purpos of report upon the extent and natur of 
the injuri discover upon the person of the deceased. he, 
accordingly, deposed, that have examin the body, he found no less 
than three deep wounds, inflict with some sharp instrument; two of them 
had actual penetr the heart, and were, of course, suppos to caus 
instant death. besid these, there were two contusions, one upon the 
back of the head, the other upon the forehead, with a slight abras of 
the eyebrow. there wa a larg lock of hair torn out by the root at the 
front of the head, and the palm and finger of the right hand were cut. 
thi evid have been taken, the juri onc more repair to the 
chamber where the bodi lay, and proceed with much minut to examin 
the room, with a view to ascertain, if possible, more particularli the 
exact circumst of the murder. 

the result of thi elabor scrutini wa as follows:--th deceased, 
they conjectured, had fallen asleep in hi easi chair, and, while he wa 
unconscious, the murder had stolen into the room, and, befor attack 
hi victim, had secur the bedroom-door upon the inside. thi wa argu 
from the non-discoveri of blood upon the handle, or ani other part of the 
door. It wa suppos that he had then approach sir wynston, with the 
view either of robbing, or of murder him while he slept, and that the 
deceas had awaken just after he had reach him; that a brief and 
desper struggl had ensued, in which the assail had struck hi 
victim with hi fist upon the forehead, and have stun him, had 
hurriedli clutch him by the hair, and stab him with the dagger, 
which lay close by upon the chimneypiece, forc hi head violent 
against the back of the chair. thi part of the conjectur wa support 
by the circumst of there be discov a lock of hair upon the 
ground at the spot, and a good deal of blood. the carpet, too, wa 
tumbled, and a water-decanter, which had stood upon the tabl close by, 
wa lie in fragment upon the floor. It wa suppos that the murder 
had then drag the half-lifeless bodi to the bed, where, have 
substitut the knife, which he had probabl brought to the room in the 
same pocket from which the boy afterward saw him take the dagger, he 
dispatch him; and either hear some alarm--perhap the movement of 
the valet in the adjoin room, or from some other cause--h drop 
the knife in the bed, and wa not abl to find it again. the wound upon 
the hand of the dead man indic hi have caught and struggl to 
hold the blade of the weapon with which he wa assailed. the impress 
of a bloodi hand thrust under the bolster, where it wa sir wynston' 
habit to place hi purs and watch, when make hi arrang for the 
night, suppli the motiv of thi otherwis unaccount atrocity. 

after some brief consultation, the juri agre upon a verdict of will 
murder against john merton, a find of which the coron express hi 
entir approbation. 

marston, as a justic of the peace, had informations, embodi the 
princip part of the evid given befor the coroner, sworn against 
merton, and transmit a copi of them to the home office. A reward for 
the apprehens of the culprit wa forthwith offered, but for some 
month without effect. 

marston had, in the interval, written to sever of sir wynston' mani 
relations, announc the catastrophe, and request that step might 
immedi be taken to have the bodi removed. meanwhil undertak were 
busi in the chamber of death. the corps wa enclos in lead, and that 
again in cedar, and a great oak shell, cover with crimson cloth and 
goldhead nails, and with a gilt plate, record the age, title, &c. 
&c., of the deceased, wa screw down firmli over all. 

nearli a fortnight elaps befor ani repli to marston' letter wa 
received. A short epistl at last arriv from lord h----, the late sir 
wynston' uncle, deepli regret the "sad and inexplic occurrence," 
and adding, that the will, which, on receipt of the "distress 
intelligence," wa immedi open and read, contain no direct 
whatev respect the sepultur of the deceased, which had therefor 
better be complet as modestli and expediti as possible, in the 
neighborhood; and, in conclusion, he direct that the account of the 
undertakers, &c., employ upon the melancholi occasion, might be sent in 
to mr. skelton, who had kindli undertaken to leav london without ani 
delay, for the purpos of complet these last arrangements, and who 
would, in ani matter of busi connect with the deceased, repres 
him, lord h----, as executor of the late baronet. 

thi letter wa followed, in a day or two, by the arriv of skelton, a 
well-dressed, languid, impertin london tuft-hunter, a good deal faded, 
with a somewhat sallow and puffi face, charg with a pleasant 
combin at onc of meanness, insolence, and sensuality--just such a 
person as sir wynston' parasit might have been expect to prove. 

howev well dispos to impress the nativ with high notion of hi 
extraordinari refin and importance, he veri soon discov that, in 
marston, he had stumbl upon a man of the world, and one thoroughli 
vers in the way and charact of london life. after some ineffectu 
attempts, therefore, to overaw and astonish hi host, mr. skelton becam 
awar of the fruitless of the effort, and condescend to abat 
somewhat of hi pretensions. marston could not avoid invit thi 
person to pass the night at hi house, an invit which wa accepted, 
of course; and next morning, after a late breakfast, mr. skelton 
observed, with a yawn--"and now, about thi body--poor berkley!--what do 
you propos to do with him?" 

"I have no proposit to make," said marston, drily. "it is no affair of 
mine, except that the bodi may be remov without more delay. I have no 
suggest to offer." 

"h----' notion wa to have him buri as near the spot as may be," 
said skelton. 

marston nodded. 

"there is a kind of vault, is not there, in the demesne, a famili 
burial-place?" inquir the visitor. 

"yes, sir," repli marston, curtly. 

"well?" drawl skelton. 

"well, sir, what then?" respond marston. 

"why, as the wish of the parti is to have him buried--poor fellow!--a 
quietli as possible, I think he might just as well be laid there as 
anywher else!" 

"had I desir it, mr. skelton, I should myself have made the offer," 
said marston, abruptly. 

"then you don't wish it?" said skelton. 

"no, sir; certainli not--most peremptorili not," answer marston, with 
more sharp than, in hi earli days, he would have thought quit 
consist with politeness. 

"perhaps," repli skelton, for want of someth better to say, and with 
a callou sort of levity; "perhap you hold the idea--som peopl 
do--that murder men can't rest in their grave until their murder 
have expiat their guilt?" 

marston made no reply, but shot two or three lurid glanc from under hi 
brow at the speaker. 

"well, then, at all events," continu skelton, indol resum hi 
theme, "if you declin your assistance, may I, at least, hope for your 
advice? know noth of thi country, I would ask you whither you 
would recommend me to have the bodi conveyed?" 

"I don't care to advis in the matter," said marston; "but if I were 
directing, I should have the remain buri in chester. It is not more 
than twenti mile from this; and if, at ani futur time, hi famili 
should desir to remov the body, it could be effect more easili from 
thence. but you can decide." 

"egad! I believ you are right," said skelton, glad to be reliev of the 
troubl of think about the matter; "and I shall take your advice." 

In accord with thi declar the bodi was, within four-and-twenti 
hours, remov to chester, and buri there, mr. skelton attend on 
behalf of sir wynston' numer and afflict friend and relatives. 

there are certain heartach for which time bring no healing; nay, 
which grow but the sorer and fiercer as day and year roll on; of thi 
kind, perhaps, were the stern and bitter feel which now darken the 
face of marston with an almost perpetu gloom. hi habit becam even 
more unsoci than before. the societi of hi son he no longer seem to 
enjoy. long and solitari rambl in hi wild and extens demesn 
consum the listless hour or hi wake existence; and when the 
weather prevent this, he shut himself up, upon pretenc of business, 
in hi study. 

He had not, sinc the occas we have alreadi mentioned, refer to the 
intend departur of mademoisel de barras. truth to say, hi feel 
with respect to that young ladi were of a conflict and mysteri 
kind; and as often as hi dark thought wander to her (which, indeed, 
wa frequent enough), hi mutter exclam seem to impli some 
pain and horribl suspicion respect her. 

"yes," he would mutter, "I thought I heard your light foot upon the 
lobby, on that accurs night. fancy! well, it may have been, but 
assuredli a strang fancy. I cannot comprehend that woman. she baffl my 
scrutiny. I have look into her face with an eye she might well 
understand, were it inde as I sometim suspect, and she ha been calm 
and unmoved. I have watch and studi her; still--doubt, doubt, hideou 
doubt!--i she what she seems, or--a tigress?" 

mrs. marston, on the other hand, procrastin from day to day the 
pain task of announc to mademoisel de barra the stern messag 
with which she had been charg by her husband. and thu sever week 
had passed, and she began to think that hi silenc upon the subject, 
notwithstand hi see the young french ladi at breakfast everi 
morning, amount to a kind of tacit intim that the sentenc of 
banish wa not to be carri into immedi execution, but to be kept 
suspend over the unconsci offender. 

It wa now six or eight week sinc the hears carri away the remain 
of the ill-fat sir wynston berkley had driven down the duski avenue; 
the autumn wa deepen into winter, and as marston gloomili trod the 
wood of gray forest, the wither leav whirl drearili along hi 
pathway, and the gust that sway the mighti branch abov him were 
rude and ungenial. It wa a bleak and somber day, and as he broke into a 
long and picturesqu vista, deep among the most sequest woods, he 
suddenli saw befor him, and scarc twenti pace from the spot on which 
he stood, an apparition, which for some moment absolut froze him to 
the earth. 

travel-soiled, tattered, pale, and wasted, john merton, the murderer, 
stood befor him. He did not exhibit the smallest disposit to turn 
about and make hi escape. On the contrary, he remain perfectli 
motionless, look upon hi former master with a wild and sorrow 
gaze. marston twice or thrice essay to speak; hi face wa white as 
death, and had he beheld the specter of the murder baronet himself, he 
could not have met the sight with a counten of ghastlier horror. 

"take me, sir," said merton, doggedly. 

still marston did not stir. 

"arrest me, sir, in god' name! here I am," he repeated, drop hi 
arm by hi side; "i'll go with you wherev you tell me." 

"murderer!" cri marston, with a sudden burst of furiou horror, 
"murderer--assassin--miscreant--tak that!" 

and, as he spoke, he discharg one of the pistol he alway carri 
about him full at the wretch man. the shot did not take effect, and 
merton made no other gestur but to clasp hi hand together, with an 
agon pressure, while hi head sunk upon hi breast. 

"shoot me; shoot me," he said hoarsely; "kill me like a dog: better for 
me to be dead than what I am." 

the report of marston' pistol had, however, reach anoth ear; and it 
ring echo had hardli ceas to vibrat among the trees, when a stern 
shout wa heard not fifti yard away, and, breathless and amazed, charl 
marston sprang to the place. hi father look from merton to him, and 
from him again to merton, with a guilti and stupefi scowl, still 
hold the smoke pistol in hi hand. 

"what--how! good god--merton!" ejacul charles. 

"aye, sir, merton; readi to go to gaol, or wherev you will," said the 
man, recklessly. 

"A murderer; a madman; don't believ him," mutter marston, scarc 
audibly, with lip as white as wax. 

"do you surrend yourself, merton?" demand the young man, sternly, 
advanc toward him. 

"yes, sir; I desir noth more; god know I wish to die," respond he, 
despairingly, and advanc slowli to meet charles. 

"come, then," said young marston, seiz him by the collar, "come 
quietli to the house. guilti and unhappi man, you are now my prisoner, 
and, depend upon it, I shall not let you go." 

"I don't want to go, I tell you, sir. I have travel fifteen mile 
today, to come here and give myself up to the master." 

"accurs madman," said marston unconsciously, gaze at the prisoner; 
and then suddenli rous himself, he said, "well, miscreant, you wish to 
die, and, by ----, you are in a fair way to have your wish." 

"so best," said the man, doggedly. "I don't want to live; I wish I wa in 
my grave; I wish I wa dead a year ago." 

some fifteen minut afterwards, merton, accompani by marston and hi 
son charles, enter the hall of the mansion which, not ten week 
before, he had quit under circumst so guilti and terrible. when 
they reach the house, merton seem much agitated, and wept bitterli 
on see two or three of hi former fellow servants, who look on him 
in silenc as they passed, with a gloomi and fear curiosity. these, 
too, were succeed by others, peep and whispering, and upon one 
pretenc or anoth cross and re-cross the hall, and steal 
hurri glanc at the criminal. merton sate with hi face buri in hi 
hands, sobbing, and take no note of the humili scrutini of which 
he wa the subject. meanwhil marston, pale and agitated, made out hi 
committal, and have sworn in sever of hi labor and servant as 
special constables, dispatch the prison in their charg to the 
counti gaol, where, under lock and key, we leav him in safe custodi for 
the present. 

after thi event marston becam excit and restless. He scarc ate or 
slept, and hi health seem now as much scatter as hi spirit had 
been before. one day he glide into the room in which, as we have said, 
it wa mrs. marston' habit frequent to sit alone. hi wife wa there, 
and, as he entered, she utter an exclam of doubt joy and 
surprise. He sate down near her in silence, and for some time look 
gloomili on the ground. she did not care to question him, and anxious 
wait until he should open the conversation. At length he rais hi 
eyes, and, look full at her, ask abruptly--"well, what about 
mademoiselle?" 

mrs. marston wa embarrassed, and hesitated. 

"I told you what I wish with respect to that young ladi some time ago, 
and commiss you to acquaint her with my pleasure; and yet I find her 
still here, and appar as much establish as ever." 

again mrs. marston hesitated. she scarc knew how to confess to him 
that she had not convey hi message. 

"don't suppose, gertrude, that I wish to find fault. I mere want to 
know whether you had told mademoisel de barra that we were agre as 
to the necess or expediency, or what you please, of dispens 
henceforward with her services, I perceiv by your manner that you have 
not done so. I have no doubt your motiv wa a kind one, but my decis 
remain unaltered; and I now assur you again that I wish you to speak to 
her; I wish you explicitli to let her know my wish and yours." 

"not mine, richard," she answer faintly. 

"well, mine, then," he replied, roughly; "we shan't quarrel about that." 

"and when--how soon--do you wish me to speak to her on this, to both of 
us, most pain subject?" ask she, with a sigh. 

"today--thi hour--thi minute, if you can; in short the sooner the 
better," he replied, rising. "I see no reason for hold it back ani 
longer. I am sorri my wish were not compli with immediately. pray, 
let there be no further hesit or delay. I shall expect to learn thi 
even that all is arranged." 

marston have thu spoken, left her abruptly, went down to hi studi 
with a swift step, shut himself in, and throw himself into a great 
chair, gave a loos to hi agitation, which wa extreme. 

meanwhil mrs. marston had sent for mademoisel de barras, anxiou to 
get through her pain task as speedili as possible. the fair french 
girl quickli present herself. 

"sit down, mademoiselle," said mrs. marston, take her hand kindly, and 
draw her to the prie-dieu chair besid herself. 

mademoisel de barra sate down, and, as she did so, read the 
counten of her patro with one rapid glanc of her flash eyes. 
these eyes, however, when mrs. marston look at her the next moment, 
were sunk softli and sadli upon the floor. there wa a heighten color, 
however, in her cheek, and a quicker heav of her bosom, which 
indic the excit of an anticip and pain disclosure. the 
outward contrast of the two women, whose hand were so lovingli lock 
together, wa almost as strike as the moral contrast of their hearts. 
the one, so chastened, sad, and gentle; the other, so capabl of pride 
and passion; so darkli excitable, and yet so mysteri beautiful. the 
one, like a niob seen in the softest moonshine; the other, a venus, 
light in the glare of distant conflagration. 

"mademoiselle, dear mademoiselle, I am so much griev at what I have to 
say, that I hardli know how to speak to you," said poor mrs. marston, 
press her hand; "but mr. marston ha twice desir me to tell you, 
what you will hear with far less pain than it cost me to say it." 

mademoisel de barra stole anoth flash glanc at her companion, 
but did not speak. 

"mr. marston still persists, mademoiselle, in desir that we 
shall part." 

"est-il possible?" cri the frenchwoman, with a genuin start. 

"indeed, mademoiselle, you may well be surprised," said mrs. marston, 
encount her full and dilat gaze, which, however, drop again in 
a moment to the ground. "you may, indeed, natur be surpris and 
shock at this, to me, most sever decision." 

"when did he speak last of it?" said she, rapidly. 

"but a few moment since," answer mrs. marston. 

"ha," said mademoiselle, and remain silent and motionless for more 
than a minute. 

"madame," she cri at last, mournfully, "I suppose, then, I must go; but 
it tear my heart to leav you and dear miss rhoda. I would be veri happi 
if, befor departing, you would permit me, dear madame, onc more to 
assur mr. marston of my innocence, and, in hi presence, to call heaven 
to wit how unjust are all hi suspicions." 

"do so, mademoiselle, and I will add my earnest assur again; though, 
heaven knows," she said, despondingly, "I anticip littl success; but 
it is well to leav no chanc untried." 

marston wa sitting, as we have said, in hi library. hi agit had 
given place to a listless gloom, and he lean back in hi chair, hi 
head support by hi hand, and undisturbed, except by the occasion 
fall of the ember upon the hearth. there wa a knock at the chamber 
door. hi back wa toward it, and, without turn or moving, he call 
to the applic to enter. the door opened--clos again: a light tread 
wa audible--a tall shadow darken the wall: marston look round, and 
mademoisel de barra wa stand befor him. without know how or 
why, he rose, and stood gaze upon her in silence. 

"mademoisel de barras!" he said, at last, in a tone of cold surprise. 

"yes, poor mademoisel de barras," repli the sweet voic of the 
young frenchwoman, while her lip hardli move as the melancholi tone 
pass them. 

"well, mademoiselle, what do you desire?" he asked, in the same cold 
accents, and avert hi eyes. 

"ah, monsieur, do you ask?--can you pretend to be ignorant? have you not 
sent me a message, a cruel, cruel message?" 

she spoke so low and gently, that a person at the other end of the room 
could hardli have heard her words. 

"yes, mademoisel de barras, I did send you a message," he replied, 
doggedly. "A cruel one you will scarc presum to call it, when you 
reflect upon your own conduct, and the circumst which have provok 
the measur I have taken." 

"what have I done, monsieur?--what circumst do you mean?" ask she, 
plaintively. 

"what have you done! A pretti question, truly. ha, ha!" he repeated, 
bitterly, and then added, with suppress vehemence, "ask your own heart, 
mademoiselle." 

"I have asked, I do ask, and my heart answers--nothing," she replied, 
rais her fine melancholi eye for a moment to hi face. 

"it lies, then," he retorted, with a fierc scoff. 

"monsieur, befor heaven I swear, you wrong me foully," she said, 
earnestly, clasp her hand together. 

"did ever woman say she wa accus rightly, mademoiselle?" retort 
marston, with a sneer. 

"I don't know--i don't care. I onli know that I am innocent," continu 
she, piteously. "I call heaven to wit you have wrong me." 

"wrong you!--why, after all, with what have I charg you?" said he, 
scoffingly; "but let that pass. I have form my opinions, arriv at my 
conclusions. If I have not name them broadly, you at least seem to 
understand their natur thoroughly. I know the world. I am no novic in 
the art of women, mademoiselle. reserv your vow and attest for 
schoolboy and simpletons; they are sadli thrown away upon me." 

marston pace to and fro, with hi hand thrust into hi pockets, as he 
thu spoke. 

"then you don't, or rather you will not believ what I tell you?" said 
she, imploringly. "no," he answered, drili and slowly, as he pass her. 
"I don't, and I won't (a you say) believ one word of it; so, pray spare 
yourself further troubl about the matter." 

she rais her head, and dart after him a glanc that seem absolut 
to blaze, and at the same time smote her littl hand fast clench upon 
her breast. the words, however, that trembl on her pale lip were not 
uttered; her eye were again cast down, and her finger play with the 
littl locket that hung round her neck. 

"I must make, befor I go," she said, with a deep sigh and a melancholi 
voice, "one confidence--on last confidence: judg me by it. you cannot 
choos but believ me now: it is a secret, and it must even here be 
whispered, whispered, whispered!" 

As she spoke, the color fled from her face, and her tone becam so 
strang and resolute, that marston turn short upon hi heel, and 
stop befor her. she look in hi face; he frowned, but lower hi 
eyes. she drew nearer, laid her hand upon hi shoulder, and whisper for 
a few moment in hi ear. He rais hi face suddenly: it featur were 
sharp and fixed; it hue wa changed; it wa livid and moveless, like a 
face cut in gray stone. He stagger back a littl and a littl more, and 
then a littl more, and fell backward. fortunately, the chair in which he 
had been sit receiv him, and he lay there insens as a corpse. 
when at last hi eye opened, there wa no gleam of triumph, no shade of 
anger, noth percept of guilt or menace, in the young woman' 
countenance. the flush had return to her cheeks; her dimpl chin had 
sunk upon her full white throat; sorrow, shame, and pride seem 
struggl in her handsom face, and she stood befor him like a 
beauti penitent, who ha just made a strang and humbl shrift to 
her father confessor. 

next day, marston wa mount hi hors for a solitari ride through hi 
park, when doctor danver rode abruptli into the courtyard from the back 
entrance. marston touch hi hat, and said-- 

"I don't stand on form with you, doctor, and you, I know, will waiv 
ceremoni with me. you will find mrs. marston at home." 

"nay, my dear sir," interrupt the clergyman, sit firm in hi 
saddle, "mi busi lie with you today." 

"the devil it does!" said marston, with discont surprise. 

"truli it does, sir," repeat he, with a look of gentl reproof, for the 
profan of marston' ejaculation, far more than the rude of hi 
manner, offend him; "and I griev that your surpris should have 
somewhat carri you away--" 

"well, then, doctor danvers," interrupt marston, drily, and without 
heed hi conclud remark, "if you realli have busi with me, it 
is, at all events, of no veri press kind, and may be as well told 
after supper as now. so, pray, go into the hous and rest yourself: we 
can talk togeth in the evening." 

"mi hors is not tired," said the clergyman, pat hi steed' neck; 
"and if you do not object, I will ride by your side for a short time, and 
as we go, I can say out what I have to tell." 

"well, well, be it so," said marston, with suppress impatience, and 
without more ceremony, he rode slowli along the avenue, and turn off 
upon the soft sward in the direct of the wildest portion of hi wood 
demesne, the clergyman keep close besid him. they proceed some 
littl way at a walk befor doctor danver spoke. 

"I have been twice or thrice with that unhappi man," at length he said. 

"what unhappi man? unhappi is no distinguish singularity, is it?" 
said marston, sharply. 

"no, truly, you have well said," repli doctor danvers. "true it is that 
man is born unto troubl as the spark fli upward. I speak, however, of 
your servant, merton--a most unhappi wretch." 

"ha! you have been with him, you say?" repli marston, with evid 
interest and anxiety. 

"yes, sever times, and convers with him long and gravely," continu 
the clergyman. 

"humph! I thought that had been the chaplain' business, not yours, my 
good friend," observ marston. 

"he ha been unwell," repli dr. danvers; "and thus, for a day or two, 
I took hi duty, and thi poor man, merton, have known someth of me, 
prefer see me rather than a stranger; and so, at the chaplain' 
desir and his, I continu my visits." 

"well, and you have taught him to pray and sing psalms, I suppose; and 
what ha come of it all?" demand marston, testily. 

"he doe pray, indeed, poor man! and I trust hi prayer are heard with 
merci at the throne of grace," said hi companion, in hi earnest 
disregard the sneer tone of hi companion. "he is full of 
compunction, and admit hi guilt." 

"ho! that is well--wel for himself--wel for hi soul, at least; you are 
sure of it; he confesses; confess hi guilt?" 

marston put hi question so rapidli and excitedly, that the clergyman 
look with a slight express of surprise; and recov himself, he 
added, in an unconcern tone-- 

"well, well--it wa just as well he did so; the evid is too clear for 
doubt or mystification; he knew he had no chance, and ha taken the 
seemliest course; and, doubtless, the best for hi hope hereafter." 

"I did not question him upon the subject," said doctor danvers; "I even 
declin to hear him speak upon it at first; but he told me he wa 
resolv to offer no defense, and that he saw the finger of god in the 
fate which had overtaken him." 

"he will plead guilty, then, I suppose?" suggest marston, watch the 
counten of hi companion with an anxiou and somewhat sinist eye. 

"hi word seem to impli so much," answer he; "and have thu frankli 
own hi guilt, and avow hi resolut to let the law take it due 
cours in hi case, without obstruct or evasion, I urg him to 
complet the grand work he had begun, and to confess to you, or to some 
other magistr fully, and in detail, everi circumst connect with 
the perpetr of the dread deed." 

marston knit hi brows, and rode on for some minut in silence. At 
length he said, abruptly-- 

"in this, it seem to me, sir, you a littl exceed your commission." 

"how so, my dear sir?" ask the clergyman. 

"why, sir," answer marston, "the man may possibl chang hi mind 
befor the day of trial, and it is the hangman' office, not yours, my 
good sir, to fasten the halter about hi neck. you will pardon my 
freedom; but, were thi deposit made as you suggest, it would 
undoubtedli hang him." 

"god forbid, mr. marston," rejoin danvers, "that I should induc the 
unhappi man to forfeit hi last chanc of escape, and to shut the door 
of human merci against himself, but on thi he seem alreadi resolved; he 
say so; he ha solemnli declar hi resolut to me; and even against 
my warning, again and again reiter the same declaration." 

"that I should have thought quit enough, were I in your place, without 
invit a detail descript of the whole process by which thi 
detest butcheri wa consummated. what more than the simpl knowledg 
of the man' guilt doe ani mortal desire; guilty, or not guilty, is the 
plain question which the law asks, and no more; take my advice, sir, as a 
poor protest layman, and leav the act of the confession and 
inquisit to popish priests." 

"nay, mr. marston, you greatli misconc me; as matter stand, there 
exist among the coroner' jury, and thu among the public, some faint 
and unfound suspicion of the possibl of merton' have had an 
accessori or accomplic in the perpetr of thi foul murder." 

"it is a lie, sir--a malignant, d----d lie--th juri believ no such 
thing, nor the public neither," said marston, start in hi saddle, and 
speak in a voic of thunder; "you have been cram with lies, sir; 
malicious, unmeaning, vindict lies; lie invent to aspers my 
family, and tortur my feelings; suggest in my presenc by that 
scoundrel mervyn, and scout by the common sens of the jury." 

"I do assur you," repli doctor danvers, in a voic which seem 
scarc audible, after the stun and passion explos of 
marston' wrath, "I did not imagin that you could feel thu sore upon 
the point; nay, I thought that you yourself were not without such 
pain doubts." 

"again, I tell you, sir," said marston, in a tone somewhat calmer, but no 
less stern, "such doubt as you describ have no existence; your 
unsuspect ear ha been alarm by a vindict wretch, an old 
scoundrel who ha scarc a passion left but spite toward me; few such 
there are, thank god; few such villain as would, from a man' veri 
calamities, distil poison to kill the peac and charact of hi family." 

"I am sorry, mr. marston," said the clergyman, "you have form so ill an 
opinion of a neighbor, and I am veri sure that mr. mervyn meant you no 
ill in frankli express whatev doubt still rest on hi mind, after 
the evid wa taken." 

"he did--th scoundrel!" said marston, furious strike hi hand, in 
which hi whip wa clutched, upon hi thigh; "he did mean to wound and 
tortur me; and with the same object he persist in circul what he 
call hi doubts. meant me no ill, forsooth! why, my great god, sir, 
could ani man be so stupid as not to perceiv that the suggest of such 
suspicions--absurd, contradictory, incred as they were--wa 
precis the thing to exasper feel suffici troubl 
already, and not content with rais the question, where it wa scouted, 
as I said, as soon as named, the vindict slander proce to 
propag and publish hi pretend surmises--d----n him." 

"mr. marston, you will pardon me when I say that, as a christian 
minister, I cannot suffer a spirit so ill as that you manifest, and 
languag so unseemli as that you have just uttered, to pass unreproved," 
said danvers, solemnly. "if you will cherish those bitter and unchristian 
feelings, at least for the brief space that I am with you, command your 
fierce, unbecom words." 

marston wa about to make a sneer retort, but restrain himself, and 
turn hi head away. 

"the wretch man himself appear now veri anxiou to make some further 
disclosures," resum doctor danvers, after a pause, "and I recommend 
him to make them to you, mr. marston, as the most natur depositori of 
such a statement." 

"well, mr. danvers, to cut the matter short, as it appear that a 
confess of some sort is to be made, be it so. I will attend and 
receiv it. the judg will not be here for eight or ten week to come, 
so there is no great hurri about it. I shall ride down to the town, and 
see him in the jail some time in the next week." 

with thi assur marston part from the old clergyman, and rode on 
alon through the furz and fern of hi wild and somber park. 

after supper that even marston found himself alon in the parlor with 
hi wife. mrs. marston avail herself of the opportun to redeem her 
pledg to mademoisel de barras. she wa not awar of the strang 
interview which had taken place between him and the ladi for whom she 
pleaded. the result of her renew entreati perhap the reader ha 
anticipated. marston listened, doubted, listened, hesit again, put 
questions, ponder the answers; debat the matter inwardly, and at last 
gruffli consent to give the young ladi anoth trial, and permit her to 
remain some time longer. poor mrs. marston, littl suspect the 
dread future, overwhelm her husband with gratitud for grant to 
her entreati (a he had predetermin to do) thi fatal boon. not 
care to protract thi scene--eith from a disinclin to listen to 
express of affection, which had long lost their charm for him, and 
had becom even posit distasteful, or perhap from some instinct 
recoil from the warm express of gratitud from lip which, were the 
truth revealed, might justli have trembl with execr and 
reproach--h abruptli left the room, and mrs. marston, full of her good 
news, hastened, in the kind of her heart, to commun the fanci 
result of her advocaci to mademoisel de barras. 

It wa about a week after this, that marston wa one even surpris in 
hi studi by the receipt of the follow letter from dr. danvers:-- 

"mi dear sir, 

"you will be shock to hear that merton is most danger ill, and at 
thi moment in immin peril. He is thoroughli consciou of hi 
situation, and himself regard it as a merci interposit of 
provid to spare him the disgrac and terror of the dread fate, 
which he anticipated. the unhappi man ha twice repeat hi anxiou 
desire, thi day, to state some fact connect with the murder of the 
late sir wynston berkley, which, he says, it is of the utmost moment that 
you should hear. He say that he could not leav the world in peac 
without have made thi disclosure, which he especi desir to make 
to yourself, and entreat that you will come to receiv hi 
commun as earli as you can in the morning. thi is inde needful, 
as the physician say that he is fast sinking. I offer no apolog for 
ad my earnest solicit to those or the die man; and am, dear 
sir, your veri obedi servant, 

"j. danvers" 

"he regard it as a merci interposit of providence," mutter 
marston, as he close the letter, with a sneer. "well, some men have odd 
notion of merci and providence, to be sure; but if it pleas him, 
certainli I shall not complain for one." 

marston wa all thi even in better spirit than he had enjoy for 
months, or even years. A mountain seem to have been lift from hi 
heart. He join in the convers dure and after supper, listen 
with appar interest, talk with animation, and even laugh and 
jested. It is needless to say all thi flow not from the healthi cheer 
of a heart at ease, but from the excit and almost feverish sens of 
sudden relief. 

next morning, marston rode into the old-fashion town, at the further 
end of which the dingi and grate front of the jail look warningli out 
upon the rustic passengers. He pass the sentri and made hi inquiri 
of the offici at the hatch. He wa reliev from the necess of 
push these into detail, however, by the appear of the physician, 
who at that moment pass from the interior of the prison. 

"dr. danver told me he expect to see you here thi morning," said the 
medic man, after the customari salut had been interchanged. "your 
call, I believe, is connect with the prisoner, john merton?" 

"yes, sir, so it is," said marston. "i he in a condition, pray, to make 
a statement of consider length?" 

"far from it, mr. marston; he ha but a few hour to live," answer the 
physician, "and is now insensible; but I believ he last night saw dr. 
danvers, and told him whatev wa weigh upon hi mind." 

"ha!--and can you say where dr. danver now is?" inquir marston, 
anxious and hurriedly. "not here, is he?" 

"no; but I saw him, as I came here, not ten minut since, ride into the 
town. It is market-day, and you will probabl find him somewher in the 
high street for an hour or two to come," answer he. 

marston thank him, and, lost in abstraction, rode down to the littl 
inn, enter a sit room, and wrote a hurri line to dr. danvers, 
entreat hi attend there, as a place where they might convers 
less interruptedli than in the street; and commit thi note to the 
waiter, with the injunct to deliv it at once, and an intim of 
where dr. danver wa probabl to be found, he awaited, with intens and 
agit anxiety, the arriv of the clergyman. 

It wa not for nearli ten minutes, however, which hi impati 
magnifi into an eternity, that the well-known voic of dr. danver 
reach him from the littl hall. It wa in vain that marston strove to 
curb hi violent agitation: hi heart swell as if it would smother him; 
he felt, as it were, the chill of death pervad hi frame, and he could 
scarc see the door through which he momentarili expect the entranc 
of the clergyman. 

A few minut more, and dr. danver enter the littl apartment. 

"mi dear sir," said he, grave and earnestly, as he grasp the cold 
hand of marston, "I am rejoic to see you. I have matter of great 
moment and the strangest mysteri to lay befor you." 

"I dare say--i wa sure--that is, I suspect so much," answer 
marston, breath fast, and look veri pale. "I heard at the prison 
that the murderer, merton, wa fast dying, and now is in an unconsci 
state; and from the physician, that you had seen him, at hi urgent 
entreaty, last night. My mind misgiv me, sir, I fear I know not what. I 
long, yet dread, to hear the wretch man' confession. for god' sake 
tell me, doe it implic anybodi els in the guilt?" 

"no; no one specifically; but it ha thrown a hideou addit mysteri 
over the occurrence. listen to me, my dear sir, and the whole narrative, 
as he state it to me, shall be relat now to you," said dr. danvers. 

marston had close the door carefully, and they sate down togeth at the 
further end of the apartment. marston, breathless and ghastli pale; hi 
lip compressed--hi brow knit--and hi dark, dilat gaze fix 
immov upon the speaker. dr. danvers, on the other hand, tranquil and 
solemn, and with, perhaps, some shade of awe overcast the habitu 
sweet of hi countenance. 

"hi confess wa a strang one," renew dr. danvers, shake hi head 
gravely. "he said that the first idea of the crime wa suggest by sir 
wynston' man accident mentioning, a few day after their arrival, 
that hi master slept with hi bank-notes, to the amount of some hundr 
of pounds, in a pocketbook under hi pillow. He declar that as the man 
mention thi circumstance, someth mutter the infern suggest 
in hi ear, and from that moment he wa the slave of that one idea; it 
wa ever present with him. He contend against it in vain; he dread 
and abhor it; but still it possess him; he felt hi power of 
resist yielding. thi horribl stranger which had stolen into hi 
heart, wax in power and importunity, and torment him day and night. 
He resolv to fli from the house. He gave notic to you and mrs. 
marston of hi intend departure; but accid protract hi stay until 
that fatal night which seal hi doom. the influenc which had master 
him forc him to rise from hi bed, and take the knife--th discoveri of 
which afterward help to convict him--and led him to sir wynston' 
chamber; he entered; it wa a moonlight night." 

here the clergyman, glanc round the room, lower hi voice, and 
advanc hi lip so near to marston, that their head nearli touched. In 
thi tone and attitud he continu hi narr for a few minutes. At 
the end of thi brief space, marston rose up slowly, and with a movement 
backward, everi featur strung with horror, and saying, in a long 
whisper, the one word, "yes," which seem like the hiss of a snake 
befor he make hi last deadli spring. both were silent for a time. At 
last marston broke out with hoars vehemence. 

"dreadful--horrible--oh, god! god!--mi god! how frightful!" 

and throw himself into a chair, he clasp hi hand across hi 
eye and forehead, while the sweat of agoni liter pour down hi 
pale face. 

"truli it is so," said the clergyman, scarc abov hi breath; and, 
after a long interval--"horr indeed!" 

"well," said marston, rise suddenli to hi feet, wipe the dew of 
horror from hi face, and look wildli round, like one newli awok from 
a nightmare, "I must make the most of thi moment and startl 
disclosure. I shall spare no pain to come at the truth," said he, 
energetically. "meanwhile, my dear sir, for the sake of justic and of 
mercy, observ secrecy. leav me to sift thi matter; give no note 
anywher that we suspect. observ thi reserv and security, and with it 
detect will follow. breath but one word, and you arm the guilti with 
doubl caution, and turn licenti gossip loos upon the fame of an 
innoc and troubl family. onc more I entreat--i expect--i implor 
silence--silence, at least, for the present--silence!" 

"I quit agre with you, my dear mr. marston," answer dr. danvers. "I 
have not divulg one syllabl of that poor wretch' confession, save to 
yourself alone. you, as a magistrate, a rel of the murder 
gentleman, and the head of that establish among whom the guilt 
rests, are invest with an interest in detecting, and power of sift 
the truth in thi matter, such as none other possesses. I clearli see, 
with you, too, the inexpedi and folli of talking, for talking' 
sake, of thi affair. I mean to keep my counsel, and shall most 
assuredly, irrespect even of your request--which should, however, 
of course, have weight with me--maintain a strict and cautiou silenc 
upon thi subject." 

some littl time longer they remain together, and marston, buri in 
strang thoughts, took hi leave, and rode slowli back to gray forest. 

month pass away--a year, and more--and though no new charact 
appear upon the stage, the relat which had subsist among the old 
one became, in some respects, veri materi altered. A gradual and 
disagre chang came over mademoisel de barras' manner; her 
affection attent to mrs. marston becam less and less frequent; 
nor wa the chang mere confin to thi grow coldness; there wa 
someth of a posit and still more unpleas kind in the alter 
we have noted. there wa a certain independ and carelessness, 
convey in a hundr intang but signific littl incid and 
looks--a someth which, without be open to formal rebuk or 
remonstrance, yet bordered, in effect, upon impertinence, and even 
insolence. thi indescrib and provok self-assertion, impli in 
glances, tones, emphasis, and gener bearing, surpris mrs. marston far 
more than it irrit her. As often as she experienc one of these 
studi slight or insinu impertinences, she revolv in her own mind 
all the incid of their past intercourse, in the vain endeavor to 
recollect some one among them which could possibl account for the 
offens chang so manifest in the conduct of the young frenchwoman. 

mrs. marston, although she sometim rebuk these art affront by a 
grave look, a cold tone, or a distant manner, yet had too much digniti to 
engag in a petti warfar of annoyance, and had, in reality, no 
substanti and well-defin ground of complaint against her, such as 
would have warrant her either in take the young ladi herself to task, 
or in bring her conduct under the censur of marston. 

one evening, it happen that mrs. marston and mademoisel de barra had 
been left alon together. after the supper-parti had dispersed, they had 
been for a long time silent. mrs. marston resolv to improv the 
tate-à-tate, for the purpos of elicit from mademoisel an 
explan of her strang behavior. 

"mademoiselle," said she, "I have late observ a veri mark chang in 
your conduct to me." 

"indeed!" said the frenchwoman. 

"yes, mademoiselle; you must be yourself perfectli awar of that change; 
it is a studi and intent one," continu mrs. marston, in a gentl 
but dignifi tone. "although I have felt some doubt as to whether it 
were advisable, so long as you observ toward me the form of extern 
respect, and punctual discharg the duti you have undertaken, to open 
ani discuss whatev upon the subject; yet I have thought it better 
to give you a fair opportun of explain frankly, should you desir 
to do so, the feel and impress under which you are acting." 

"ah, you are veri obliging, madame," said she, coolly. 

"it is quit clear, mademoiselle, that you have either misunderstood me, 
or that you are dissatisfi with your situat among us: your conduct 
cannot otherwis be account for," said mrs. marston, gravely. 

"mi conduct--_ma foi!_ what conduct?" retort the handsom frenchwoman, 
confidently, and with a disdain glance. 

"if you question the fact, mademoiselle," said the elder lady, "it is 
enough. your ungraci manner and ungentl looks, I presume, aris from 
what appear to you a suffici and well-defin cause, of which, 
however, I know nothing." 

"I realli wa not aware," said mademoisel de barras, with a 
supercili smile, "that my look and my manner were subject to so 
strict a criticism, or that it wa my duti to regul both accord to 
so nice and difficult a standard." 

"well, mademoiselle," continu mrs. marston, "it is plain that whatev 
may be the caus of your dissatisfaction, you are resolv against 
confid it to me. I onli wish to know frankli from your own lips, 
whether you have form a wish to leav thi situation. If so, I entreat 
you to declar it freely." 

"you are veri obliging, indeed, madame," said the pretti foreigner, 
drily, "but I have no such wish, at least at present." 

"veri well, mademoiselle," repli mrs. marston, with gentl dignity; "I 
regret your want of candor, on your own account. you would, I am sure, be 
much happier, were you to deal frankli with me." 

"may I now have your permission, madame, to retir to my room?" ask 
the french girl, rising, and make a low courtesy--"that is, if madam 
ha noth further to censure." 

"certainly, mademoiselle; I have noth further to say," repli the 
elder lady. 

the frenchwoman made anoth and a deeper courtesy, and withdrew. mrs. 
marston, however, heard, as she wa design to do, the young ladi 
titter and whisper to herself, as she light her candl in the 
hall. thi scene mortifi and griev poor mrs. marston inexpressibly. 
she wa little, if at all, access to emot of anger and certainly, 
none such mingl in the feel with which she regard mademoisel de 
barras. but she had found in thi girl a companion, and even a confidant 
in her melancholi solitude; she had believ her affectionate, 
sympathetic, tender, and the disappoint wa as bitter as unimagined. 

the annoy which she wa fate to receiv from mademoisel de barra 
were destined, however, to grow in number and in magnitude. the 
frenchwoman sometim took a fancy, for some unrev purpose, to talk 
a good deal to mrs. marston, and on such occas would persist, 
notwithstand that lady' mark reserv and discouragement, in 
chat away, as if she were consciou that her convers wa the 
most welcom entertain possibl to her realli unwil auditor. No 
one of their interview did she ever suffer to close without in some way 
or other suggest or insinu someth mysteri and untold to the 
prejudic of mr. marston. those vagu and intang hints, the mean 
of which, for an instant legibl and terrific, seem in anoth moment 
to dissolv and disappear, tortur mrs. marston like the intrus of a 
specter; and this, along with the portent change, rather felt than 
visible, in mademoiselle' conduct toward her, invest the beauti 
frenchwoman, in the eye of her former friend and patroness, with an 
indefin charact that wa not onli repuls but formidable. 

mrs. marston' feel with respect to thi person were still further 
disturb by the half-convey hint and innuendo of her own maid, who 
never lost an opportun of insinu her intens dislik of the 
frenchwoman, and appear perpetu to be upon the veri verg of make 
some explicit charges, or some shock revelations, respect her, 
which, however, she as invari evaded; and even when mrs. marston onc 
or twice insist upon her explain her mean distinctly, she elud 
her mistress' desire, and left her still in the same uneasi uncertainty. 

marston, on hi part, howev much hi conduct might tend to confirm 
suspicion, certainli did noth to dissip the pain and undefin 
apprehens respect himself, which mademoisel de barras, with such 
malign and mysteri industry, labor to raise. hi spirit and temper 
were liabl to strang fluctuations. In the midst of that excit gaiety, 
to which, until lately, he had been so long a stranger, would sometim 
interven paroxysm of the blackest despair, all the ghastlier for the 
contrast, and with a sudden so abrupt and overwhelming, that one 
might have fanci him cross by the shadow of some terrif apparition. 
sometim for a whole day, or even more, he would withdraw himself from 
the societi of hi family, and, in moros and moodi solitude, take hi 
meal alon in hi library, and steal out unattend to wander among the 
thicket and glade of hi park. sometimes, again, he would sit for hour 
in the room which had been sir wynston's, and, with a kind of horribl 
resolution, often loiter there till after nightfall. In such hours, the 
servant would listen with curiou awe, as they heard hi step, pace 
to and fro, in that desert and inauspici chamber, while hi voice, 
in broken sentences, wa also imperfectli audible, as if maintain a 
mutter dialogue. these eccentr practic gradual invest him, in 
the eye of hi domestics, with a certain preternatur mystery, which 
enhanc the fear with which they habitu regard him, and wa 
subsequ confirm by hi give order to have the furnitur taken 
out of the omin suit of rooms, and the door nail up and secured. 
He gave no reason for thi odd and abrupt measure, and gossip of cours 
report that the direct had origin in hi have encount the 
specter of the murder baronet, in one of these strang and unseason 
visit to the scene of the fear catastrophe. 

In addit to all this, marston' conduct toward hi wife becam 
strang capricious. He avoid her societi more than ever; and when he 
did happen to exchang a few word with her, they were sometim harsh 
and violent, and at other remors gentl and sad, and thi without 
ani chang of conduct upon her part to warrant the wayward uncertainti 
of hi treatment. under all these circumstances, mrs. marston' 
unhappi and uneasi greatli increased. mademoisel de barras, 
too, upon sever late occasions, had begun to assum a tone of author 
and dictation, which justli offend the mistress of the establishment. 
meanwhil charl marston had return to cambridge; and rhoda, no longer 
enjoy happi walk with her brother, pursu her light and easi studi 
with mademoisel de barras, and devot her leisur hour to the love 
societi of her mother. 

one day mrs. marston, sit in her room with rhoda, had happen to 
call her own maid, to take down and care dust some richli bound 
volum which fill a bookcas in the littl chamber. 

"you have been crying, willett," said mrs. marston, observ that the 
young woman' eye were red and swollen. 

"indeed, and I was, ma'am," she replied, reluctantly, "and I could not 
help it, so I could not." 

"why, what ha happen to vex you? ha anyon ill-treat you?" said 
mrs. marston, who had an esteem for the poor girl. "come, come, you must 
not fret about it; onli tell me what ha vex you." 

"oh! ma'am, no one ha ill-us me, ma'am; but I can't but be vex 
sometimes, ma'am, and fret to see how thing is go on. I have 
one wish, just one wish, ma'am, and if I got that, i'd ask no more," 
said the girl. 

"and what is it?" ask mrs. marston; "what do you wish for? speak 
plainly, willett; what is it?" 

"ah! ma'am, if I said it, mayb you might not be pleased. don't ask me, 
ma'am," said the girl dust the book veri hard, and toss them down 
again with angri emphasis. "I don't desir anybody' harm, god knows; 
but, for all that, I wish what I wish, and that is the truth." 

"why, willett, I realli cannot account for your strang habit of late 
hinting, and insinuating, and alway speak riddles, and refus to 
explain your meaning. what do you mean? speak plainly. If there are ani 
dishonest practic go on, it is your duti to say so distinctly." 

"oh! ma'am, it is just a wish I have. I wish--; but it' no matter. If I 
could onc see the hous clear of that frenchwoman--" 

"if you mean mademoisel de barras, she is a lady," interrupt 
mrs. marston. 

"well, ma'am, I beg pardon," continu the woman; "ladi or no lady, it is 
all one to me; for I am veri sure, ma'am, she'll never leav the hous 
till there is someth bad come about; and--and--. I can't bring myself 
to talk to you about her, ma'am. I can't say what I want to tell you: 
but--but--. oh, ma'am, for god' sake, tri and get her out, ani way, no 
matter how; tri and get rid of her." 

As she said this, the poor girl burst into a passion agoni of tears, 
and mrs. marston and rhoda look on in silent amazement, while she for 
some minut continu to sob and weep. 

the parti were suddenli recal from their variou reveri by a knock 
at the chamber-door. It opened, and the subject of the girl' deprecatori 
entreati entered. there wa someth unusu excit and assur in 
mademoisel de barras' air and countenance; perhap she had a suspicion 
that she had been the topic of their conversation. At all events, she 
look round upon them with a smile, in which there wa someth 
supercilious, and even defiant; and, without wait to be invited, sate 
herself down, with a haughti air. 

"I wa about to ask you to sit down, mademoiselle, but you have 
anticip me," said mrs. marston, gravely. "you have someth to say 
to me, I suppose; I am quit at leisure, so pray let me hear it now." 

"thank you, thank you, madame," repli she, with a sharp, and even 
scorn glance; "I ought to have ask your permiss to sit; I forgot; 
but you have condescend to give it without my do so; that wa veri 
kind, veri kind, indeed." 

"but I wish to know, mademoiselle, whether you have anyth veri 
particular to say to me?" said mrs. marston. 

"you wish to know!--and why, pray madame?" ask mademoisel de 
barras, sharply. 

"because, unless it is someth veri urgent, I should prefer your 
talk to me some other time; as, at present, I desir to be alon with 
my daughter." 

"oh, ho! I ought to ask pardon again," said mademoiselle, with the same 
glance, and the same smile. "I find I am de trop--quit in the way. 
hélas! I am veri unfortun today." 

mademoisel de barra made not the slightest movement, and it wa 
evid that she wa resolv to prolong her stay, in sheer defianc of 
mrs. marston' wishes. 

"mademoiselle, I conclud from your silenc that you have noth veri 
press to say, and, therefore, must request that you will have the 
good to leav me for the present," said mrs. marston, who felt that 
the spirit of the french girl' conduct wa too appar not to have been 
understood by rhoda and the servant, and that it wa of a kind, for 
exampl sake, imposs to be submit to, or tolerated. 

mademoisel de barra dart a fieri and insol glanc at mrs. 
marston, and was, doubtless, upon the point of precipit the open 
quarrel which wa impending, by set her author at defiance; but 
she check herself, and chang her line of operations. 

"we are not alon madame," she said, with a heighten color, and a 
slight toss of the head. "I wa about to speak of mr. marston. I had 
something, not much, I confess, to say; but befor servant I shan't 
speak; nor, indeed, now at all. so, madame, as you desir it, I shall no 
further interrupt you. come, miss rhoda, come to the music-room, if you 
please, and finish your practic for today." 

"you forget, mademoiselle, that I wish to have my daughter with me at 
present," said mrs. marston. 

"I am veri sorry, madame," said the french lady, with the same heighten 
color and unpleas smile, and her finely-pencil brow just 
discern knit, so as to give a novel and menac express to her 
beauti face--"i am veri sorry, madame, but she must, so long as I 
remain account for her education, complet her allot exercis at 
the appoint hours; and noth shall, I assur you, with my consent, 
interfer with these duties. come, miss rhoda, preced me, if you please, 
to the music-room. come, come." 

"stay where you are, rhoda," said mrs. marston, firmli and gently, and 
betray no symptom of excitement, except in a slight tremor of her 
voice, and a faint flush upon her cheek--"stay where you are, my dear 
child. I am your mother, and, next to your father, have the first claim 
upon your obedience. mademoiselle," she continued, address the 
frenchwoman, calmli but firmly, "mi daughter will remain here for some 
time longer, and you will have the good to withdraw. I insist upon 
it, mademoisel de barras." 

"I will not leav the room, I assur you, madame, without my pupil," 
retort mademoiselle, with resolut insolence. "your husband, madame, 
ha invest me with thi authority, and she shall obey me. miss rhoda, I 
say again, go down to the music-room." 

"remain where you are, rhoda," said mrs. marston again. "mademoiselle; 
you have long been act as if your object were to provok me to part 
with you. I find it imposs ani longer to overlook thi grossli 
disrespect conduct; conduct of which I had, indeed, believ you 
absolut incapable. willett," she continued, address the maid, who 
wa evid burst with rage at the scene she had just witnessed, 
"your master is, I believe, in the library; go down, and tell him that I 
entreat him to come here immediately." 

the maid start on her mission with angri alacrity, dart a venom 
glanc at the handsom frenchwoman as she passed. 

mademoisel de barras, meanwhile, sate, listless and defiant, in her 
chair, and tap her littl foot with angri excit upon the floor. 
rhoda sate close by her mother, hold her hand fast, and look 
frightened, perplexed, and as if she were on the point of weeping. mrs. 
marston, though flush and excited, yet maintain her dignifi and 
grave demeanor. and thus, in silence, did they all three await the 
arriv of the arbit to whom mrs. marston had so promptli appealed. 

A few minut more, and marston enter the room. mademoiselle' 
express chang as he did so to one of deject and sorrow 
submission; and, as marston' eye light upon her, hi brow darken and 
hi face grew pale. 

"well, well--what is it?--what is all this?" he said, glanc with a 
troubl eye from one to the other. "speak, someone. mrs. marston, you 
sent for me; what is it?" 

"I want to know, mr. marston, from your own lips," said the lady, in 
reply, "whether rhoda is to obey me or mademoisel de barras?" 

"bah!--a question of women' prerogative," said marston, with mutter 
vehemence. 

"of a wife' and a mother' prerogative, richard," said mrs. marston, 
with gentl emphasis. "A veri simpl question, and one I should have 
thought need no deliber to decid it." 

"well, child," sad he, turn to rhoda, with angri irony, "pray what is 
all thi fuss about? you are a veri ill use young lady, I dare aver. 
pray what cruelti doe mademoisel de barra propos inflict upon 
you, that you need to appeal thu to your mother for protection?" 

"you quit mistak me, richard," interpos mrs. marston; "rhoda is 
perfectli passiv in the matter. I simpli wish to learn from you, in 
mademoiselle' presence, whether I or she is to command my daughter?" 

"command!" said marston, evad the direct appeal; "and pray what is all 
thi command about?--what do you want the girl to do?" 

"I wish her to remain here with me for a littl time, and mademoiselle, 
know this, desir her instantli to go to the music-room, and leav 
me. that is all," said mrs. marston. 

"and pray, is there noth to make her go to the music-room advis 
or necessary? ha she no music to learn, or studi to pursue? pshaw! 
mrs. marston, what need all thi nois about nothing? go, miss," he 
added, sharpli and peremptorily, address rhoda, "go thi moment to the 
music-room." 

the girl glide from the room, and mademoiselle, as she followed, shot a 
glanc at mrs. marston which wound and humbl her in the dust. 

"oh! richard, richard, if you knew all, you would not have subject me 
to thi indignity," she said; and throw her arm about hi neck, she 
wept, for the first time for mani a long year, upon hi breast. 

marston wa embarrass and agitated. He disengag her arm from hi 
neck, and place her gentli in a chair. she sob on for some time in 
silence--a silenc which marston himself did not essay to break. He 
walk to the door, appar with the intent of leav her. He 
hesit however, and returned; took a hurri turn through the room; 
hesit again; sat down; then return to the door, not to depart, but 
to close it carefully, and walk gloomili to the window, whenc he 
look forth, buri in agit and absorb thoughts. 

"richard, to you thi seem a trifl thing; but, inde it is not so," 
said mrs. marston, sadly. 

"you are veri right, gertrude," he said, quickly, and almost with a 
start; "it is veri far from a trifl thing; it is veri important." 

"you don't blame me, richard?" said she. 

"I blame nobody," said he. 

"indeed, I never meant to offend you, richard," she urged. 

"of cours not; no, no; I never said so," he interrupted, sarcastically; 
"what could you gain by that?" 

"oh! richard, better feel have govern me," she said, in a 
melancholi and reproach tone. 

"well, well, I suppos so," he said; and after an interval, he ad 
abstractedly, "thi cannot, however, go on; no, no--it cannot. sooner or 
later it must have come; better at once--bett now." 

"what do you mean, richard?" she said, greatli alarmed, she knew not why. 
"what are you resolv upon? dear richard, in merci tell me. I implor 
of you, tell me." 

"why, gertrude, you seem to me to fanci that, becaus I don't talk about 
what is passing, that I don't see it either. now thi is quit a 
mistake," said marston, calmli and resolutely--"i have long observ your 
grow dislik of mademoisel de barras. I have thought it over; thi 
fraca of today ha determin me; it is decisive. I suppos you now wish 
her to go, as earnestli as you onc wish her to stay. you need not 
answer. I know it. I neither ask nor care to whose fault I am to 
attribut these chang feelings--femal capric account suffici 
for it; but whatev the cause, the effect is undeniable; and the onli 
way to deal satisfactorili with it is, to dismiss mademoisel at once. 
you need take no part in the matter; I take it upon myself. tomorrow 
morn she shall have left thi house. I have said it, and am perfectli 
resolved." 

As he thu spoke, as if to avoid the possibl of ani further 
discussion, he turn abruptli from her, and left the room. 

the extrem agit which she had just undergon combin with her 
physic delicaci to bring on an hyster attack; and poor mrs. 
marston, with an ach head and a heavi heart, lay down upon her bed. 
she had swallow an opiate, and befor ten o'clock upon that night, an 
event one as it proved, she had sunk into a profound slumber. 

some hour after this, she becam in a confus way consciou of her 
husband' presenc in the room. He wa walking, with an agit mien, up 
and down the chamber, and cast from time to time look of great 
troubl toward the bed where she lay. though the presenc of her husband 
wa a strang and long unwont occurr there, at such an hour, and 
though she felt the strang of the visit, the power of the opiat 
overwhelm her so, that she could onli see thi apparit glide 
slowli back and forward befor her, with the passiv wonder and curios 
with which one await the issu of an interest dream. 

for a time she lay onc more in an uneasi sleep; but still, throughout 
even this, she wa consciou of hi presence; and when, a littl while 
after, she again saw him, he wa not walk to and fro befor the foot 
of the bed, but sit besid her, with one hand laid upon the pillow on 
which her head wa resting, the other support hi chin. He wa look 
steadfastli upon her, with a chang face, an express of bitter 
sorrow, compunction, and tenderness. there wa not one trace of 
sternness; all wa softened. the look wa what she fanci he might have 
turn upon her had she lain there dead, ere yet the love of their earli 
and ill-fat union had grown cold in hi heart. there wa someth in 
it which remind her of day and feel gone, never to return. and 
while she look in hi face with a sweet and mourn fascination, tear 
unconsci wet the pillow on which her poor head wa resting. unabl 
to speak, unabl to move, she heard him say--"it wa not your fault, 
gertrude--it wa not yours, nor mine. there is a destini in these thing 
too strong for us. past is past--what is done, is done forever; and even 
were it all to do over again, what power have I to mend it? no, no; how 
could I contend against the combin power of passions, circumstances, 
influences--in a word, of fate? you have been good and patient, while 
i--; but no matter. your lot, gertrude, is a happier one than mine." 

mrs. marston heard him and saw him, but she had not the power, nor even 
the will, herself to speak or move. He appear befor her passiv sens 
like the phantasm of a dream. He stood up at the bedside, and look on 
her steadfastly, with the same melancholi expression. for a moment he 
stoop over her, as if about to kiss her face, but check himself, 
stood erect again at the bedside, then suddenli turned; the curtain fell 
back into it place, and she saw him no more. 

with a strang mixtur of sweet and bitter feel thi vision rest 
upon the memori of mrs. marston, until, gradually, deep slumber again 
overcam her senses, and the incid and all it attend circumst 
fade into oblivion. 

It wa past eight o'clock when mrs. marston awok next morning. the sun 
wa shine richli and cheerili in at the windows; and as the remembr 
of marston' visit to her chamber, and the unwont manifest of 
tender and compunct which accompani it, returned, she felt 
someth like hope and happiness, to which she had long been a stranger, 
flutter her heart. the pleas reveri to which she wa yield was, 
however, interrupted. the sound of stifl sob in the room reach 
her ear, and, push back the bed-curtains, and lean forward to look, 
she saw her maid, willett, sit with her back to the wall, cri 
bitterly, and striving, as it seemed, to stifl her sob with her apron, 
which wa wrap about her face. 

"willet, willett, is it you who are sobbing? what is the matter with you, 
child?" said mrs. marston, anxiously. 

the girl check herself, dri her eye hastily, and walk briskli to 
a littl distance, as if engag in arrang the chamber, she said, with 
an affect of carelessness-- 

"oh, ma'am, it is nothing; noth at all, indeed, ma'am." 

mrs. marston remain silent for a time, while all her vagu 
apprehens returned. meantim the girl continu to shove the chair 
hither and thither, and to arrang and disarrang everyth in the room 
with a fidgeti industry, intend to cover her agitation. A few minutes, 
however, serv to weari her of this, for she abruptli stopped, stood by 
the bedside, and, look at her mistress, burst into tears. 

"good god! what is it?" said mrs. marston, shock and even terrified, 
while new alarm displac her old ones. "i miss rhoda--can it be--i 
she--i my darl well?" 

"oh, yes, ma'am," answer the maid, "veri well, ma'am; she is up, and 
out walk and know noth of all this." 

"all what?" urg mrs. marston. "tell me, tell me, willett, what ha 
happened. what is it? speak, child; say what it is?" 

"oh, ma'am! Oh my poor dear mistress!" continu the girl, and stopped, 
almost stifl with sobs. 

"willett, you must speak; you must say what is the matter. I implor of 
you--desir you!" urg the distract lady. still the girl, have made 
one or two ineffectu effort to speak, continu to sob. 

"willett, you will drive me mad. for mercy' sake, for god' sake, 
speak--tel me what it is!" cri the unhappi lady. 

"oh, ma'am, it is--it is about the master," sob the girl. 

"whi he can't--h ha not--oh, merci god! He ha not hurt himself," 
she almost screamed. 

"no, ma'am, no; not himself; no, no, but--" and again she hesitated. 

"but what? speak out, willett; dear willett have merci on me, and speak 
out," cri her wretch mistress. 

"oh, ma'am, don't be fretted; don't take it to heart, ma'am," said the 
maid, clasp her hand togeth in anguish. 

"anything, anything, willett; onli speak at once," she answered. 

"well, ma'am, it is soon said--it is easi told. the master, ma'am--th 
master is gone with the frenchwoman; they went in the travel coach 
last night, ma'am; he is gone away with her, ma'am; that is all." 

mrs. marston look at the girl with a gaze of stupefied, stoni terror; 
not a muscl of her face moved; not one heav respir show that 
she wa living. motionless, with thi fear look fix upon the girl, 
and her thin hand stretch toward her, she remained, second after 
second. At last her outstretch hand began to trembl more and more 
violently; and as if for the first time the knowledg of thi calam had 
reach her, with a cry, as though bodi and soul were parting, she fell 
back motionless in her bed. 

sever hour had pass befor mrs. marston wa restor to 
consciousness. To thi state of utter insensibility, one of silent, 
terrifi stupor succeeded; and it wa not until she saw her daughter 
rhoda stand at her bedside, weeping, that she found voic and 
recollect to speak. 

"mi child; my darling, my poor child," she cried, sob piteously, as 
she drew her to her heart and look in her face alternately--"mi 
darling, my darl child!" 

rhoda could onli weep, and return her poor mother' caress in silence. 
too young and inexperienc to understand the full extent and natur of 
thi dire calamity, the strang occurrence, the gener and appar 
constern of the whole household, and the spectacl of her mother' 
agony, had fill her with fear, perplexity, and anguish. scare and 
stun with a vagu sens of danger, like a young bird that, for the 
first time, cower under a thunderstorm, she nestl in her mother' 
bosom; there, with a sens of protection, and of boundless love and 
tenderness, she lay frightened, wondering, and weeping. 

two or three day passed, and dr. danver came and sate for sever hour 
with poor mrs. marston. To comfort and consol were, of course, out of 
hi power. the natur of the bereavement, far more terribl than 
death--it recent occurrence--th distract conscious of all it 
complic consequences--rend thi a hopeless task. she bow 
herself under the blow with the submiss of a broken heart. the hope to 
which she had clung for year had vanished; the worst that ever her 
imagin fear had come in earnest. 

one idea wa now constantli present in her mind. she felt a sad, but 
immov assurance, that she should not live long, and the thought, 
"what will becom of my darl when I am gone; who will guard and love 
my child when I am in my grave; to whom is she to look for tender 
and protect then?" perpetu haunt her, and superad the pang 
of a still wilder despair to the desol of a broken heart. 

It wa not for more than a week after thi event, that one day 
willett, with a certain air of anxiou mystery, enter the silent and 
darken chamber where mrs. marston lay. she had a letter in her hand; 
the seal and handwrit were mr. marston's. It wa long befor the 
injur wife wa abl to open it; when she did so, the follow 
sentenc met her eye:-- 

"gertrude, 

"you can be ignor neither of the natur nor of the consequ of the 
decis step I have taken: I do not seek to excus it. for the censur 
of the world, it meddl and mouth hypocrisy, I care absolut 
nothing; I have long set it at defiance. and you yourself, gertrude, when 
you deliber reconsid the circumst of estrang and 
cold under which, though beneath the same roof, we have live for 
years, without either sympathi or confidence, can scarcely, if at all, 
regret the ruptur of a tie which had long ceas to be anyth better 
than an irksom and gall formality. I do not desir to attribut to 
you the smallest blame. there wa an incompatibility, not of temper but 
of feelings, which made us stranger though call one anoth man and 
wife. upon thi fact I rest my own justification; our live togeth 
under these circumst was, I dare say, equal undesir by us both. 
It was, in fact, but a defer to the formal hypocrisi of the world. At 
all events, the irrevoc act which separ us forev is done, and I 
have now mere to state so much of my intent as may relat in 
anywis to your futur arrangements. I have written to your cousin, and 
former guardian, mr. latimer, tell him how matter stand between us. 
you, I told him, shall have, without opposit from me, the whole of 
your own fortun to your own separ use, togeth with whatev shall 
be mutual agre upon as reasonable, from my income, for your support 
and that of my daughter. It will be necessari to complet your 
arrang with expedition, as I purpos return to gray forest in 
about three weeks; and as, of course, a meet between you and those by 
whom I shall be accompani is wholli out of the question, you will see 
the expedi of lose no time in adjust everyth for your and my 
daughter' departure. In the details, of course, I shall not interfere. I 
think I have made myself clearli intelligible, and would recommend your 
commun at onc with mr. latimer, with a view to complet 
temporari arrangements, until your final plan shall have been decid 
upon. 

"richard marston" 

the reader can easili conceiv the feel with which thi letter wa 
perused. We shall not attempt to describ them; nor shall we weari hi 
patienc by a detail of all the circumst attend mrs. marston' 
departure. suffic it to mention that, in less than a fortnight after the 
receipt of the letter which we have just copied, she had forev left the 
mansion of gray forest. 

In a small house, in a sequest part of the rich counti of warwick, 
the resid of mrs. marston and her daughter wa for the present fixed. 
and there, for a time, the heart-broken and desol ladi enjoyed, at 
least, the privileg of an immun from the intrus of all extern 
trouble. but the blow, under which the feebl remain of her health and 
strength were gradual to sink, had struck too sure home; and, from 
month to month--almost from week to week--th progress of decay wa 
perceptible. 

meanwhile, though griev and humbled, and long to comfort hi unhappi 
mother charl marston, for the present absolut depend upon hi 
father, had no choic but to remain at cambridge, and to pursu hi 
studi there. 

At gray forest marston and the partner of hi guilt continu to live. 
the old servant were all gradual dismissed, and new one hire by 
mademoisel de barras. there they dwelt, shun by everybody, in a 
stricter and more desol seclus than ever. the novelti of the 
unrestraint and licenc of their new mode of life speedili pass away, 
and with it the excit and guilti sens of relief which had for a time 
produc a fals and hollow gaiety. the sens of secur prompt in 
mademoisel a hundr indulg which, in her former precari 
position, she would not have dream of. outbreak of temper, sharp and 
sometim violent, began to manifest themselv on her part, and renew 
disappoint and blacker remors to darken the soul of marston himself. 
often, in the dead of the night, the servant would overhear their bitter 
and fierc alterc ring through the melancholi mansion, and 
often the reckless use of terribl and mysteri epithet of crime. 
their quarrel increas in violenc and in frequency, and, befor two 
year had passed, feel of bitterness, hatred, and dread, alon seem 
to subsist between them. yet upon marston she continu to exercis a 
power and mysteri influence. there wa a dogged, apathet 
submiss on hi part, and a grow insol on hers, constantli more 
and more strikingli visible. neglect, disorder, and decay, too, were more 
than ever appar in the dreari air of the place. 

doctor danvers, save by rumor and conjecture, knew noth of marston 
and hi abandon companion. He had, more than once, felt a strong 
disposit to visit gray forest, and expostulate, face to face, with it 
guilti proprietor. thi idea, however, he had, upon consideration, 
dismissed; not on account of ani shrink from the possibl repuls and 
affront to which the attempt might subject him, but from a thorough 
convict that the endeavor would be utterli fruitless for good, while 
it might, veri obviously, expos him to pain misinterpret and 
suspicion, and leav it to be imagin that he had been influenced, if by 
no meaner motive, at least by the prompt of a coars curiosity. 

meanwhil he maintain a correspond with mrs. marston, and had even 
onc or twice sinc her departur visit her. latterly, however, thi 
correspond had been a good deal interrupted, and it interv had 
been suppli occasion by rhoda, whose letters, although she herself 
appear unconsci of the mourn event the approach of which they 
too plainli indicated, were pain record of the rapid progress of 
mortal decay. 

He had just receiv one of those omin letters, at the littl post 
offic in the town we have alreadi mentioned, and, full of the melancholi 
news it contained, dr. danver wa return slowli toward hi home. As 
he rode into a lone road, travers an undul tract of some three 
mile in length, the singularity, it may be, of hi costum attract the 
eye of anoth passenger, who was, as it turn out, no other than 
marston himself. for two or three mile of thi desol road, their way 
happen to lie together. marston' first impuls wa to avoid the 
clergyman; hi second, which he obeyed, wa to join company, and ride 
along with him, at all events, for so long as would show that he shrank 
from no encount which fortun or accid presented. there wa a spirit 
of bitter defianc in this, which cost him a pain effort. 

"how do you do, parson danvers?" said marston, touch hi hat with the 
handl of hi whip. 

danver thought he had seldom seen a man so chang in so short a time. 
hi face had grown sallow and wasted, and hi figur slightli stooped, 
with an appear almost of feebleness. 

"mr. marston," said the clergyman, gravely, and almost sternly, though 
with some embarrassment, "it is a long time sinc you and I have seen 
one another, and mani and pain event have pass in the interval. 
I scarc know upon what term we meet. I am prompt to speak to you, 
and in a tone, perhaps, which you will hardli brook; and yet, if we 
keep company, as it seem like we may, I cannot, and I ought not, to 
be silent." 

"well, mr. danvers, I accept the condition--speak what you will," said 
marston, with a gloomi promptitude. "if you exceed your privilege, and 
grow uncivil, I need but use my spurs, and leav you behind me preach 
to the winds." 

"ah! mr. marston," said dr. danvers, almost sadly, after a consider 
pause, "when I saw you close besid me, my heart wa troubl within me." 

"you look on me as someth from the nether world, and expect to see 
the cloven hoof," said marston, bitterly, and rais hi boot foot a 
littl as he spoke; "but, after all, I am but a vulgar sinner of flesh 
and blood, without enough of the preternatur about me to frighten an 
old nurse, much less to agit a pillar of the church." 

"mr. marston, you talk sarcastically, but you feel that recent 
circumstances, as well as old recollections, might well disturb and 
troubl me at sight of you," answer dr. danvers. 

"well--yes--perhap it is so," said marston, hastili and sullenly, and 
becam silent for a while. 

"mi heart is full, mr. marston; charg with grief, when I think of the 
sad histori of those with whom, in my mind, you must ever be associated," 
said doctor danvers. 

"aye, to be sure," said marston, with stern impatience; "but, then, you 
have much to consol you. you have got your comfort and your 
respectability; all the dearer, too, from the contrast of other people' 
misfortun and degradations; then you have your religion moreover--" 

"yes," interrupt danvers, earnestly, and hasten to avoid a sneer 
upon thi subject; "god be blessed, I am an humbl follow of hi 
graciou son, our redeemer; and though, I trust, I should bear with 
patient submiss whatev chastis in hi wisdom and good he 
might see fit to inflict upon me, yet I do prais and bless him for the 
merci which ha hitherto spare me, and I do feel that merci all the more 
profoundly, from the afflict and troubl with which I daili see 
other overtaken." 

"and in the matter of pieti and decorum, doubtless, you bless god also," 
said marston, sarcastically, "that you are not as other men are, nor even 
as thi publican." 

"nay, mr. marston; god forbid I should harden my sin heart with the 
wick pride of the pharisee. evil and corrupt am I alreadi over much. 
too well I know the vile of my heart, to make myself righteou in my 
own eyes," repli dr. danvers, humbly. "but, sinner as I am, I am yet a 
messeng of god, whose mission is one of author to hi 
fellow-sinners; and woe is me if I speak not the truth at all seasons, 
and in all place where my word may be profit heard." 

"well, doctor danvers, it seem you think it your duti to speak to me, 
of course, respect my conduct and my spiritu state. I shall save you 
the pain and troubl of open the subject; I shall state the case for 
you in two words," said marston, almost fiercely. "I have put away my 
wife without just cause, and am live in sin with anoth woman. come, 
what have you to say on thi theme? speak out. deal with me as roughli as 
you will, I will hear it, and answer you again." 

"alas, mr. marston! and do not these thing troubl you?" exclaim dr. 
danvers, earnestly. "do they not weigh heavi upon your conscience? ah, 
sir, do you not rememb that, slowli and surely, you are draw toward 
the hour of death, and the day of judgment?" 

"the hour or death! yes, I know it is coming, and I await it with 
indifference. but, for the day of judgment, with it book and trumpets! 
My dear doctor, pray don't expect to frighten me with that." 

marston spoke with an angri scorn, which had the effect of interrupt 
the convers for some moments. 

they rode on, side by side, for a long time, without speaking. At length, 
however, marston unexpectedli broke the silence-- 

"doctor danvers," said he, "you ask me some time ago if I fear the 
hour of death, and the day of judgment. I answer you truly, I do not 
fear them; nay death, I think, I could meet with a happier and a quieter 
heart than ani other chanc that can befal me; but there are other 
fears; fear that do troubl me much." 

doctor danver look inquiringli at him; but neither spoke for a time. 

"you have not seen the catastroph of the tragedi yet," said marston, 
with a stern, stoni look, made more horribl by a forc smile and 
someth like a shudder. "I wish I could tell you--you, doctor 
danvers--for you are honor and gentle-hearted. I wish I durst tell 
you what I fear; the only, onli thing I realli do fear. No mortal know 
it but myself, and I see it come upon me with slow, but unconquer 
power. oh, god--dread spirit--spar me!" 

again they were silent, and again marston resumed-- 

"doctor danvers, don't mistak me," he said, turn sharply, and fix 
hi eye with a strang express upon hi companion. "I dread noth 
human; I fear neither death, nor disgrace, nor eternity; I have no 
secret to keep--no exposur to apprehend; but I dread--i dread--" 

He paused, scowl darkly, as if stung with pain, turn away, mutter 
to himself, and gradual becam much excited. 

"I can't tell you now, sir, and I won't," he said, abruptli and fiercely, 
and with a counten darken with a wild and appal rage that wa 
wholli unaccountable. "I see you search me with your eyes. suspect 
what you will, sir, you shan't inveigl me into admissions. aye, 
pry--whisper--stare--question, conjecture, sir--i suppos I must endur 
the world' impertinence, but d----n me if I gratifi it." 

It would not be easi to describ dr. danvers' astonish at thi 
unaccount explos of fury. He wa resolved, however, to bear hi 
companion' violenc with temper. 

they rode on slowli for fulli ten minut in utter silence, except that 
marston occasion mutter to himself, as it seemed, in excit 
abstraction. danver had at first felt natur offend at the violent 
and insult tone in which he had been so unexpectedli and unprovokedli 
addressed; but thi feel of irrit wa but transient, and some 
fear suspicion as to marston' saniti flit through hi mind. In a 
calmer and more dog tone, hi companion now address him:-- 

"there is littl profit you see, doctor, in worri me about your 
religion," said marston. "it is but sow the wind, and reap the 
whirlwind; and, to say the truth, the longer you pursu it, the less I am 
in the mood to listen. If ever you are curs and persecut as I have 
been, you will understand how littl toler of gratuit vexat and 
contradict a man may become. We have squabbl over religion long 
enough, and each hold hi own faith still. continu to sun yourself in 
your happi delusions, and leav me untroubl to tread the way of my own 
dark and cheerless destiny." 

thu saying, he made a sullen gestur of farewell, and spur hi 
horse, cross the broken fenc at the roadside, and so, at a listless 
pace, through gap and by farm-roads, penetr toward hi melancholi 
and guilti home. 

two year had now pass sinc the decis event which had forev 
separ marston from her who had love him so devotedli and so fatally; 
two year to him of disappointment, abasement, and secret rage; two year 
to her of gentl and heart-broken submiss to the chasten hand of 
heaven. At the end of thi time she died. marston read the letter that 
announc the event with a stern look, and silently, but the shock he 
felt wa terrific. No man is so self-abandon to despair and 
degradation, that at some casual moment thought of amendment--som 
gleam of hope, howev faint and transient, from the distant 
future--wil not visit him. with marston, those thought had somehow ever 
been associ with vagu idea of a reconcili with the be whom 
he had forsaken--good and pure, and look at her from the dark and 
distanc of hi own fallen state, almost angel as she seemed. but she 
wa now dead; he could make her no atonement; she could never smile 
forgiv upon him. thi long-familiar image--th last that had 
reflect for him one ray of the lost peac and love of happier 
times--had vanished, and henceforward there wa befor him noth but 
storm and fear. 

marston' embarrass fortun made it to him an object to resum the 
portion of hi incom heretofor devot to the separ mainten of 
hi wife and daughter. In order to effect thi it became, of course, 
necessari to recal hi daughter, rhoda, and fix her resid onc more 
at gray forest. No more dread penalti could have been inflict upon 
the poor girl--no more agon ordeal than that she wa thu doom to 
undergo. she had idol her mother, and now ador her memory. she knew 
that mademoisel de barra had betray and indirectli murder the 
parent she had so devotedli loved; she knew that that woman had been the 
curse, the fate of her family, and she regard her natur with 
feel of mingl terror and abhorrence, the intens of which wa 
indescribable. 

the few scatter friend and relatives, whose sympathi had been move 
by the melancholi fate of poor mrs. marston, were unanim agre that 
the intend remov of the young and innoc daughter to the pollut 
mansion of sin and shame, wa too intoler revolt to be permitted. 
but each of these virtuou individu unhappili thought it the duti of 
the other to interpose; and with a run commentari of wonder and 
reprobation, and much virtuou criticism, event were suffer 
uninterruptedli to take their sinist and melancholi course. 

It wa about two month after the death of mrs. marston, and on a bleak 
and omin night at the wintri end of autumn, that poor rhoda, in deep 
mourning, and pale with grief and agitation, descend from a chais at 
the well-known door of the mansion of gray forest. whether from 
consider for her feelings, or, as wa more probable, from pure 
indifference, rhoda wa conducted, on her arrival, direct to her own 
chamber, and it wa not until the next morn that she saw her father. 
He enter her room unexpectedly, he wa veri pale, and as she thought, 
greatli altered, but he seem perfectli collected, and free from 
agitation. the mark and even shock chang in hi appearance, and 
perhap even the trifl though pain circumst that he wore no 
mourn for the belov be who wa gone, caus her, after a moment' 
mute gaze in hi face, to burst into an irrepress flood of tears. 
marston wait stoical until the paroxysm had subsided, and then take 
her hand, with a look in which a dog stern wa contend with 
someth like shame, he said:-- 

"there, there; you can weep when I am gone. I shan't say veri much to you 
at present, rhoda, and onli wish you to attend to me for one minute. 
listen, rhoda; the ladi whom you have been in the habit (here he slightli 
avert hi eyes) of call mademoisel de barras, is no longer so; she 
is married; she is my wife, and consequ you will treat her with the 
respect due to"--h would have said "a mother," but could not, and 
suppli the phrase by adding, "to that relation." 

rhoda wa unabl to speak, but almost unconsci bow her head in 
token of attent and submission, and her father press her hand more 
kindly, as he continued:-- 

"I have alway found you a duti and obedi child, rhoda, and 
expect no other conduct from you. mrs. marston will treat you with 
proper kind and consideration, and desir me to say that you can, 
whenev you please, keep strictli to yourself, and need not, unless 
you feel so disposed, attend the regular meal of the family. thi 
privileg may suit your present depress spirits, and you must not 
scrupl to use it." 

after a few word more, marston withdrew, leav hi daughter to her 
reflections, and bleak and bitter enough they were. 

some week pass away, and perhap we shall best consult our readers' 
eas by substitut for the formal precis of narrative, a few 
extract from the letter which rhoda wrote to her brother, still at 
cambridge. these will convey her own impress respect the scene 
and personag among whom she wa now to move. 

"the hous and place are much neglected, and the former in some part 
suffer almost to go to decay. the window broken in the last storm, 
nearli eight month ago, they tell me, are still unmended, and the roof, 
too, unrepaired. the pretti garden, near the well, among the lime trees, 
that our darl mother wa so fond of, is all but obliter with weed 
and grass, and sinc my first visit I have not had heart to go near it 
again. all the old servant are gone; new face everywhere. 

"I have been oblig sever times, through fear of offend my father, 
to join the parti in the draw room. you may conceiv what I felt at 
see mademoisel in the place onc fill by our dear mamma, I wa so 
choke with sorrow, bitterness, and indignation, and my heart so 
palpitated, that I could not speak, and I believ they thought I wa 
go to faint. mademoisel look veri angry, but my father pretend 
to show me, heaven know what, from the window, led me to it, and the 
air reviv me a little. mademoisel (for I cannot call her by her new 
name) is alter a good deal--more, however, in the charact than in the 
contour of her face and figure. certainly, however, she ha grown a good 
deal fuller, and her color is higher; and whether it is fanci or not, I 
cannot say, but certainli to me it seem that the express of her face 
ha acquir someth habitu lower and malicious, and which, I 
know not how, inspir me with an undefin dread. she has, however, 
been toler civil to me, but seem contemptu and rude to my father, 
and I am afraid he is veri wretched, I have seen them exchang such 
looks, and overheard such intemper and even appal alterc 
between them, as indic someth wors and deeper than ordinari 
ill-will. thi make me addit wretched, especi as I cannot 
help think that some mysteri caus enabl her to frighten and 
tyrannis over my poor father. I sometim think he absolut detest 
her; yet, though fieri alterc ensue, he ultim submit to thi 
bad and cruel woman. oh, my dear charles, you have no idea of the 
shocking, or rather the terrifying, reproach I have heard interchang 
between them, as I accid pass the room where they were 
sitting--such term as have sent me to my room, feel as if I were 
in a horrid dream, and made me cri and trembl for hour after I got 
there.... I see my father veri seldom, and when I do, he take but littl 
notic of me.... poor willett, you know, return with me. she 
accompani me in my walks, and is constantli drop hint about 
mademoiselle, from which I know not what to gather.... 

"I often fear that my father ha some secret and mortal ailment. He 
gener look ill, and sometim quit wretchedly. He came twice late 
to my room, I think to speak to me on some matter of importance; but he 
said onli a sentenc or two, and even these broken and incoherent. He 
seem unabl to command spirit for the interview; and, indeed, he grew 
so agit and strange, that I wa alarmed, and felt greatli reliev 
when he left me.... 

"I do not, you see, disguis my feelings, dear charles; I do not conceal 
from you the melancholi and anguish of my present situation. how 
intens I long for your promis arrival. I have not a creatur to whom 
I can say one word in confidence, except poor willett; who, though veri 
good-natured, and realli dear to me, is yet far from be a companion. I 
sometim think my intens anxieti to see you here is almost selfish; for 
I know you will feel as acut as I do, the terribl chang observ 
everywhere. but I cannot help long for your return, dear charles, and 
count the day and the veri hour till you arrive.... 

"be cautious, in write to me, not to say anyth which you would not 
wish mademoisel to see; for willett tell me that she know that she 
often examines, and even intercept the letter that arrive; and, though 
willett may be mistaken, and I hope she is, yet it is better that you 
should be upon your guard. ever sinc I heard this, I have brought my 
letter to the post offic myself, instead of leav them with the rest 
upon the hall table; and you know it is a long walk for me.... 

"I go to church everi sunday, and take willett along with me. No one from 
thi seem to think of do so but ourselves. I see the mervyn there. 
mrs. mervyn is particularli kind; and I know that she wish to offer me 
an asylum at newton park; and you cannot think with how much tender 
and delicaci she convey the wish. but I dare not hint the subject to my 
father; and, earnestli as I desir it, I could not but feel that I should 
go there, not to visit, but to reside. and so even in this, in mani 
respects, delight project, is mingl the bitter apprehens of 
dependence--someth so humiliating, that, kindli and delic as the 
offer is made, I could not bring myself to embrac it. I have a great 
deal to say to you, and long to see you."... 

these extract will enabl the reader to form a toler accur idea 
of the gener state of affair at gray forest. some particular must, 
however, be added. 

marston continu to be the same gloomi and joyless be as heretofore. 
sometim moodi and apathetic, sometim wayward and even savage, but 
never for a moment at ease, never social--an isolated, disdainful, 
ruin man. 

one day as rhoda sate and read under the shade of some closely-interwoven 
evergreens, in a lone and shelter part of the neglect 
pleasure-grounds, with her honest maid willett in attendance, she wa 
surpris by the sudden appear of her father, who stood unexpectedli 
befor her. though hi attitud for some time wa fixed, hi counten 
wa troubl with anxieti and pain, and hi sunken eye rest upon her 
with a fieri and fret gaze. He seem lost in thought for a while, and 
then, touch willett sharpli on the shoulder, said abruptly: 

"go; I shall call you when you are wanted. walk down that alley." and, 
as he spoke, he indic with hi walking-can the cours he desir 
her to take. 

when the maid wa suffici distant to be quit out of hearing, 
marston sate down besid rhoda upon the bench, and took her hand in 
silence. hi grasp wa cold, and altern relax and contract 
with an agit uncertainty, while hi eye were fix upon the 
ground, and he seem medit how to open the conversation. At last, 
as if suddenli awak from a fear reverie, he said--"you correspond 
with charles?" 

"yes, sir," she replied, with the respect formal prescrib by the 
usag of the time, "we correspond regularly." 

"aye, aye; and, pray, when did you last hear from him?" he continued. 

"about a month since, sir," she replied. 

"ha--and--and--wa there noth strange--nothing--noth mysteri and 
menac in hi letter? come, come, you know what I speak of." He stop 
abruptly, and stare in her face with an agit gaze. 

"no, indeed, sir; there wa not anyth of the kind," she replied. 

"I have been greatli shocked, I may say incensed," said marston 
excitedly, "bi a passag in hi last letter to me. not that it say 
anyth specific; but--but it amaz me--it enrag me." 

He again check himself, and rhoda, much surprised, and even shocked, 
said, stammeringly-- 

"I am sure, sir, that dear charl would not intent say or do 
anyth that could offend you." 

"ah, as to that, I believ so, too. but it is not with him I am 
indignant; no, no. poor charles! I believ he is, as you say, dispos to 
conduct himself as a son ought to do, respect and obediently. yes, 
yes, charl is veri well; but I fear he is lead a bad life, 
notwithstanding--a veri bad life. He is becom subject to influenc 
which never visit or torment the good; believ me, he is." 

marston shook hi head, and mutter to himself, with a look of almost 
craven anxiety, and then whisper to hi daughter-- 

"just read this, and then tell me is it not so. read it, read it, and 
pronounce." 

As he thu spoke, he place in her hand the letter of which he had 
spoken, and with the passag to which he invit her attent fold 
down. It wa to the follow effect:-- 

"I cannot tell you how shock I have been by a piec of scandal, as I 
must believ it, convey to me in an anonym letter, and which is of 
so veri delic a nature, that without your special command I should 
hesit to pain you by it recital. I trust it may be utterli false. 
inde I assum it to be so. It is enough to say that it is of a veri 
distress nature, and affect the ladi (mademoisel de barras) whom 
you have recent honor with your hand." 

"now you see," cri marston, with a shudder fierceness, as she 
return the letter with a blanch cheek and trembl hand--"now you 
see it all. are you stupid?--th stamp of the cloven hoof--eh?" 

rhoda, unabl to gather hi meaning, but, at the same time, with a heart 
full and trembl veri much, stammer a few frighten words, and 
becam silent. 

"it is he, I tell you, that doe it all; and if charl were not live 
an evil life, he could not have spread hi net for him," said marston, 
vehemently. "he can't go near anyth good; but, like a scoundrel, he 
know where to find a congeni nature; and when he does, he ha skill 
enough to practic upon it. I know him well, and hi art and hi smiles; 
aye, and hi scowl and hi grins, too. He goes, like hi master, up and 
down, and to and fro upon the earth, for ceaseless mischief. there is not 
a friend of mine he can get hold of, but he whisper in hi ear some 
damn slander of me. He is draw them all into a common understand 
against me; and he take an actual pleasur in tell me how the thing 
goe on--how, one after the other, he ha convert my friend into 
conspir and libelers, to blast my character, and take my life, and 
now the monster essay to lure my children into the hellish 
confederation." 

"who is he, father, who is he?" falter rhoda. 

"you never saw him," retort marston, sternly. 

"no, no; you can't have seen him, and you probabl never will; but if he 
doe come here again, don't listen to him. He is half-fiend and 
half-idiot, and no good come of hi mouth and muttering. avoid him, I 
warn you, avoid him. let me see: how shall I describ him? let me see. 
you remember--y rememb berkley--sir wynston berkley. well, he greatli 
resembl that dead villain: he ha all the same grins, and shrugs, and 
monkey airs, and hi face and figur are like. but he is a grimed, 
ragged, wast piec of sin, littl better than a beggar--a shrunken, 
malign libel on the human shape. avoid him, I tell you, avoid him: he 
is steep in lie and poison, like the veri serpent that betray us. 
bewar of him, I say, for if he onc gain your ear, he will delud you, 
spite of all your vigilance; he will make you hi accomplice, and 
thenceforth, inevitably, there is noth but mortal and implac 
hatr between us!" 

frighten at thi wild language, rhoda did not answer, but look up in 
hi face in silence. A fear transform wa there--a scowl so livid 
and maniacal, that her veri sens seem leav her with terror. 
perhap the sudden alter observ in her countenance, as thi 
spectacl so unexpectedli encount her, recal him to himself; for 
he added, hurriedly, and in a tone of gentler meaning-- 

"rhoda, rhoda, watch and pray. My daughter, my child! keep your heart 
pure, and noth bad can approach you for ill. no, no; you are good, and 
the good need not fear!" 

suddenli marston burst into tears, as he end thi sentence, and 
wept long and convulsively. she did not dare to speak, or even to 
move; but after a while he ceased, appear uneasy, half asham and 
half angry; and look with a horrifi and bewild glanc into 
her face, he said-- 

"rhoda, child, what--what have I said? My god! what have I been saying? 
did i--do I look ill? oh, rhoda, rhoda, may you never feel this!" 

He turn away from her without await her answer, and walk away 
with the appear of intens agitation, as if to leav her. He turn 
again, however, and with a face pallid and sunken as death, approach 
her slowly-- 

"rhoda," said he, "don't tell what I have said to anyone--don't, I 
conjur you, even to charles. I speak too much at random, and say more 
than I mean--a foolish, rambl habit: so do not repeat one word of it, 
not one word to ani live mortal. you and I, rhoda, must have our 
littl secrets." 

He end with an attempt at a smile, so obvious pain and 
fear-stricken that as he walk hurriedli away, the astound girl burst 
into a bitter flood of tears. what was, what could be, the mean of 
the shock scene she had then been forc to witness? she dare not 
answer the question. yet one ghastli doubt haunt her like her 
shadow--a suspicion that the malign and hideou light of mad wa 
alreadi glare upon hi mind. as, lean upon the arm of her 
astonish attendant, she retract her steps, the trees, the flowers, 
the familiar hall-door, the echo passages--everi object that met her 
eye--seem strang and unsubstantial, and she glide on among them in 
a horrid dream. 

time pass on: there wa no renew of the pain scene which dwelt so 
sensibl in the affright imagin of rhoda. marston' manner wa 
chang toward her; he seem shy, cowed, and uneasi in her presence, 
and thenceforth she saw less than ever of him. meanwhil the time 
approach which wa to wit the long expected, and, by rhoda, the 
intens pray for arriv of her brother. 

some four or five day befor thi event, mr. marston, having, as he 
said, some busi in chester, and further design to meet hi son 
there, took hi departur from gray forest, leav poor rhoda to the 
guardianship of her guilti stepmother; and although she had seen so 
littl of her father, yet the veri conscious of hi presenc had 
given her a certain confid and sens of security, which vanish at 
the moment of hi departure. fear-stricken and wretch as he had been, 
hi removal, nevertheless, seem to her to render the lone and 
inauspici mansion still more desol and omin than before. 

she had, with a vagu and instinct antipathy, avoid all contact and 
intercours with mrs. marston, or as, for distinct sake, we shall 
continu to call her, "mademoiselle," sinc her return; and she on her 
part had appear to acquiesc with a sort of scorn nonchalance, in 
the tacit understand that she and her former pupil should see and hear 
as littl as might be of one another. 

meanwhil poor willett, with her good-natur honesti and her 
inexhaust gossip, endeavor to amus and reassur her young 
mistress, and sometim even with some partial success. 

We must now follow mr. marston in hi solitari expedit to chester. 
when he took hi place in the stagecoach he had the whole interior of the 
vehicl to himself, and thu continu to be it solitari occup for 
sever miles. the coach, however, wa eventu hailed, brought to, and 
the door be opened, dr. danver got in, and took hi place opposit to 
the passeng alreadi establish there. the worthi man wa so busi in 
direct the disposit of hi luggag from the window, and in 
arrang the sundri small parcel with which he wa charged, that he 
did not recogn hi companion until they were in motion. when he did so 
it wa with no veri pleasur feeling; and it is probabl that marston, 
too, would have gladli escap the coincid which thu reduc them 
onc more to the temporari necess of a tate-à-tate. embarrass as 
each felt the situat to be, there was, however, no avoid it, and, 
after a recognit and a few forc attempt at conversation, they 
became, by mutual consent, silent and uncommunicative. 

the journey, though in point of space a mere trifle, was, in those 
slowcoach days, a matter of fulli five hours' duration; and befor it wa 
complet the sun had set, and dark began to close. whether it wa 
that the descend twilight dispel the pain constraint under which 
marston had seem to labor, or that some more pure spiritu and 
genial influenc had gradual dissip the repuls and distrust with 
which, at first, he had shrunk from a renew of intercours with dr. 
danvers, he suddenli accost him thus. 

"dr. danvers, I have been fifti time on the point of speak to 
you--confidenti of course--whil sit here opposit to you, what I 
believ I could scarc bring myself to hint to ani other man living; 
yet I must tell it, and soon, too, or I fear it will have told itself." 

dr. danver intim hi readi to hear and advise, if desired; and 
marston resum abruptly, after a pause-- 

"pray, doctor danvers, have you heard ani stori of an odd kind; ani 
surmises--i don't mean of a moral sort, for those I hold veri cheap--to 
my prejudice? inde I should hardli say to my prejudice; I mean--i ought 
to say--in short, have you heard peopl remark upon ani fanci 
eccentricities, or that sort of thing, about me?" 

He put the question with obviou difficulty, and at last seem to 
overcom hi own reluct with a sort of angri and excit 
self-contempt and impatience. doctor danver wa a littl puzzl by 
the interrogatory, and admitted, in reply, that he did not comprehend 
it drift. 

"doctor danvers," he resumed, sternli and dejectedly, "I told you, in the 
chanc interview we had some month ago, that I wa haunt by a certain 
fear. I did not defin it, nor do I think you suspect it nature. It is a 
fear of noth mortal, but of the immort tenant of thi body. My mind; 
sir, is begin to play me tricks; my guid mock and terrifi me." 

there wa a percept ting of horror in the look of astonish with 
which dr. danver listened. 

"you are a gentleman, sir, and a christian clergyman; what I have said 
and shall say is confid to your honor; to be held sacr as the 
confess of misery, and hidden from the coars gaze of the world. I 
have becom subject to a hideou delusion. It come at intervals. I do 
not think ani mortal suspect it, except, maybe, my daughter rhoda. It 
come and disappears, and come again. I kept my pleasant secret for a 
long time, but at last I let it slip, and commit myself fortunately, 
to but one person, and that my daughter; and, even so, I hardli think she 
understood me. I recollect myself befor I had disclos the grotesqu 
and infern chimera that haunt me." 

marston paused. He wa stoop forward, and look upon the floor of the 
vehicle, so that hi companion could not see hi countenance. A silenc 
ensued, which wa interrupt by marston, who onc more resumed. 

"sir," said he, "I know not why, but I have longed, intens longed, 
for some trustworthi ear into which to pour thi horrid secret; whi I 
repeat, I cannot tell, for I expect no sympathy, and hate compassion. It 
is, I suppose, the restless natur of the devil that is in me; but, be it 
what it may, I will speak to you, but to you only, for the present, at 
least, to you alone." 

doctor danver again assur him that he might repos the most entir 
confid in hi secrecy. 

"the human mind, I take it, must have either comfort in the past or hope 
in the future," he continued, "otherwis it is in danger. To me, sir, the 
past is intoler repulsive; one boundless, barren, and hideou 
golgotha of dead hope and murder opportunities; the future, still 
blacker and more furious, peopl with dread featur of horror and 
menace, and lose itself in utter darkness. sir, I do not exaggerate. 
between such a past and such a futur I stand upon thi miser 
present; and the onli comfort I still am capabl of feel is, that no 
human be piti me; that I stand aloof from the insult of compass 
and the hypocrisi of sympathet morality; and that I can safe defi 
all the respect scoundrel in christendom to enhance, by one 
feather' weight, the load which I myself have accumulated, and which I 
myself hourli and unaid sustain." 

doctor danver here introduc a word or two in the direct of their 
former conversation. 

"no, sir, there is no comfort from that quarter either," said marston, 
bitterly; "you but cast your seeds, as the parabl term your teaching, 
upon the barren sea, in wast them on me. My fate, be it what it may, 
is as irrevoc fixed, as though I were dead and judg a hundr 
year ago. 

"thi curs dream," he resum abruptly, "that everyday enslav me more 
and more, ha refer to that--that occurr about wynston 
berkley--h is the hero of the hellish illusion. At certain times, sir, 
it seem to me as if he, though dead, were still invest with a sort of 
spuriou life; go about unrecognized, except by me, in squalor and 
contempt, and whisper away my fame and life; labor with the 
malign industri of a fiend to involv me in the mesh of that special 
perdit from which alon I shrink, and to which thi emissari of hell 
seem to have predestin me. sir, thi is a monstrou and hideou 
extravagance, a delusion, but, after all, no more than a trick of the 
imagination; the reason, the judgment, is untouched. I cannot choos but 
see all the damn phantasmagoria, but I do not believ it real, and thi 
is the differ between my case and--and--madness!" 

they were now enter the suburb of chester, and doctor danvers, pain 
and shock beyond measur by thi unlooked-for disclosure, and not 
know what remark or comfort to offer, reliev hi temporari 
embarrass by look from the window, as though attract by the 
flash of the lamps, among which the vehicl wa now moving. marston, 
however, laid hi hand upon hi arm, and thu recal him, for a moment, 
to a forc attention. 

"it must seem strang to you, doctor, that I should trust thi curs 
secret to your keeping," he said; "and, truth to say, it seem so to 
myself. I cannot account for the impulse, the irresist power of which 
ha forc me to disclos the hate mysteri to you, but the fact is 
this, begin like a speck, thi one idea ha gradual darken and 
dilated, until it ha fill my entir mind. the solitari conscious 
of the gigant masteri it ha establish there had grown intolerable; I 
must have told it. the sens of solitud under thi aggress and 
tremend delus wa agony, hourli death to my soul. that is the 
secret of my talkativeness; my sole excus for plagu you with the 
dream of a wretch hypochondriac." 

doctor danver assur him that no apolog were needed, and wa onli 
restrain from ad the express of that piti which he realli felt, 
by the fear of irrit a temper so full of bitterness, pride and 
defiance. A few minut more, and the coach have reach it 
destination, they bid one anoth farewell, and parted. 

At that time there resid in a decent mansion about a mile from the town 
of chester, a dapper littl gentleman, whom we shall call doctor parkes. 
thi gentleman wa the proprietor and sole profession manag of a 
privat asylum for the insan and enjoy a high reputation, and a 
proportion amount of business, in hi melancholi calling. It wa about 
the second day after the convers we have just sketched, that thi 
littl gentleman, have visited, accord to hi custom, all hi 
domest patients, wa about to take hi accustom walk in hi somewhat 
restrict pleasur grounds, when hi servant announc a visitor. 

"A gentleman," he repeated; "you have seen him before--eh?" 

"no, sir," repli the man; "he is in the study, sir." 

"ha! a profession call. well, we shall see." 

So saying, the littl gentleman summon hi gravest look, and hasten 
to the chamber of audience. 

On enter he found a man dress well, but gravely, have in hi 
air and manner someth of high breeding. In counten striking, 
dark-featured, and stern, furrow with the line of pain or 
thought, rather than of age, although hi dark hair were larg 
mingl with white. 

the physician bowed, and request the stranger to take a chair; he, 
however, nod slightli and impatiently, as if to intim an 
intoler of ceremony, and, advanc a step or two, said abruptly-- 

"mi name, sir, is marston; I have come to give you a patient." 

the doctor bow with a still deeper inclination, and paus for a 
continu of the commun thu auspici commenced. 

"you are dr. parkes, I take it for granted," said marston, in the 
same tone. 

"your most obedient, humbl servant, sir," repli he, with the polit 
formal of the day, and anoth grave bow. 

"doctor," demand marston, fix hi eye upon him sternly, and 
significantli tap hi own forehead, "can you stay execution?" 

the physician look puzzled, hesitated, and at last request hi 
visitor to be more explicit. 

"can you," said marston, with the same slow and stern articulation, and 
after a consider pause--"can you prevent the maladi you profess to 
cure?--can you meet and defeat the enemi halfway?--can you scare away the 
spirit of mad befor it take actual possession, and while it is 
still onli hover about it threaten victim?" 

"sir," he replied, "in certain cases--in veri many, indeed--th enemy, as 
you well call it, may thu be met, and effectu worst at a distance. 
time interposition, in nineti case out of a hundred, is everything; 
and, I assur you, I hear your question with much pleasure, inasmuch as I 
assum it to have refer to the case of the patient about whom you 
desir to consult me; and who is, therefore, I hope, as yet mere 
menac with the misfortun from which you would save him." 

"i, myself, am that patient, sir," said marston, with an effort; "your 
surmis is right. I am not mad, but unequivoc menac with madness; 
it is not to be mistaken. sir, there is no misunderstand the 
tremend and intoler sign that glare upon my mind." 

"and pray, sir, have you consult your friend or your famili upon the 
cours best to be pursued?" inquir dr. parkes, with grave interest. 

"no, sir," he answer sharply, and almost fiercely; "I have no fanci to 
make myself the subject of a writ _de lunatico inquirendo_; I don't want 
to lose my liberti and my properti at a blow. the cours I mean to take 
ha been advis by no one but myself--i known to no other. I now 
disclos it, and the caus of it, to you, a gentleman, and my 
profession adviser, in the expect that you will guard with the 
strictest secreci my spontan revelations; thi you promis me?" 

"certainly, mr. marston; I have neither the disposit nor the right to 
withhold such a promise," answer the physician. 

"well, then, I will first tell you the arrang I propose, with your 
permission, to make, and then I shall answer all your questions, 
respect my own case," resum marston, gloomily. "I wish to place 
myself under your care, to live under your roof, reserv my full 
liberti of action. I must be free to come and to go as I will; and on the 
other hand, I undertak that you shall find me an amen and docil 
patient enough. In addition, I stipul that there shall be no attempt 
whatev made to commun with those who are connect with me: these 
term agre upon, I place myself in your hands. you will find in me, as 
I said before, a deferenti patient, and I trust not a troublesom one. 
I hope you will excus my adding, that I shall myself pay the charg of 
my sojourn here from week to week, in advance." 

the propos arrang wa a strang one; and although dr. park 
dimli foresaw some of the embarrass which might possibl aris 
from hi accept it, there wa yet so much that wa reason as 
well as advantag in the proposal, that he could not bring himself 
to declin it. 

the preliminari arrang concluded, dr. park proceed to hi more 
strictli profession investigation. It is, of course, needless to 
recapitul the detail of marston' torment fancies, with which the 
reader ha inde been alreadi suffici acquainted. doctor parkes, 
have attent listen to the narrative, and satisfi himself as to 
the physic health of hi patient, wa still sore puzzl as to the 
probabl issu of the aw struggl alreadi but too obvious commenc 
between the mind and it destroy in the strang case befor him. one 
satisfactori symptom unquestion was, the as yet transitori natur of 
the delusion, and the evid and energet tenac with which reason 
contend for her vital ascendancy. It wa a case, however, which for 
mani reason sore perplex him, but of which, notwithstanding, he wa 
disposed, whether rightli or wrongli the reader will speedili see, to 
take by no mean a decidedli gloomi view. 

have disburden hi mind of thi horribl secret, marston felt for a 
time a sens of relief amount almost to elation. with far less of 
apprehens and dismay than he had done so for month before, he that 
night repair to hi bedroom. there wa noth in hi case, doctor 
park believed, to warrant hi keep ani watch upon marston' actions, 
and accordingli he bid him good-night, in the full confid of meet 
him, if not better, at least not worse, on the ensu morning. 

He miscalculated, however. marston had probabl himself been consciou of 
some come crisi in hi hideou malady, when he took the decis step 
of place himself under the care of doctor parkes. certain it is, that 
upon that veri night the diseas broke forth in a new and appal 
development. doctor parkes, whose bedroom wa next to that occupi by 
marston, wa awaken in the dead of night by a howling, more like that 
of a beast than a human voice, and which gradual swell into an 
absolut yell; then came some horrid laughter and entreaties, thick and 
frantic; then again the same unearthli howl. the practic ear of doctor 
park recogn but too sure the terrif import of those sounds. 
spring from hi bed, and seiz the candl which alway burn in hi 
chamber, in anticip of such sudden and fear emergencies, he 
hurri with a palpit heart, and spite of hi long habitu to 
such scene as he expected, with a certain sens of horror, to the 
chamber of hi aristocrat patient. 

late as it was, marston had not yet gone to bed; hi candl wa still 
burning, and he himself, half dressed, stood in the center of the floor, 
shake and livid, hi eye burn with the preterhuman fire of 
insanity. As doctor park enter the chamber, anoth shout, or rather 
yell, thunder from the lip of thi demoniac effigy; and the mad-doctor 
stood freez with horror in the doorway, and yet exert what remain 
to him of presenc of mind, in the vain endeavor, in the flare light of 
the candle, to catch and fix with hi own practic eye the gaze of the 
maniac. second after second, and minut after minute, he stood 
confront thi fright slave of satan, in the momentari expect 
that he would close with and destroy him. On a sudden, however, thi 
brief agoni of suspens wa terminated; a chang like an awaken 
conscious of realities, or rather like the withdraw of some hideou 
and visibl influenc from within, pass over the tens and darken 
featur of the wretch being; a look of horrifi perplexity, doubt, 
and inquiry, supervened, and he at last said, in a subdu and sullen 
tone, to doctor parkes: 

"who are you, sir? what do you want here? who are you, sir, I say?" 

"who am I? why, your physician, sir; doctor parkes, sir; the owner of 
thi house, sir," repli he, with all the stern he could command, 
and yet white as a specter with agitation. "for shame, sir, for shame, to 
give way thus. what do you mean by creat thi causeless alarm, and 
disturb the whole household at so unseason an hour? for shame, 
sir; go to your bed; undress yourself thi moment; for shame." 

doctor parkes, as he spoke, wa reassur by the arriv of one of hi 
servants, alarm by the unmistak sound of violent frenzy; he 
signed, however, to the man not to enter, feel confident, as he did, 
that the paroxysm had spent itself. 

"aye, aye," mutter marston, look almost sheepishly; "doctor parkes, 
to be sure. what wa I think of? how cursedli absurd! and this," he 
continued, glanc at hi sword, which he threw impati upon a sofa 
as he spoke. "folly--nonsense! A fals alarm, as you say, doctor. I beg 
your pardon." 

As marston spoke, he proceed with much agit slowli to undress 
himself. He had, however, but commenc the process, when, turn 
abruptli to doctor parkes, he said, with a counten of horror, and in 
a whisper-- 

"bi ----, doctor, it ha been upon me wors than ever, I would have sworn 
I had the villain with me for hours--hours, sir--tortur me with hi 
damn sneer threats; till, by ----, I could stand it no longer, and 
took my sword. oh, doctor, can't you save me? can noth be done for 
me?" 

pale, cover with the dew of horror, he utter these last word in 
accent of such implor despair, as might have born across the 
dread gulf the prayer of dive for that one drop of water which never 
wa to cool hi burn tongue. 

when rhoda learn that her father, on leav gray forest, had fix no 
definit period for hi return, she began to feel her situat at home 
so pain and equivocal, that, have taken honest willett to counsel, 
she came at last to the resolut of accept the often convey 
invit of mrs. mervyn and sojourning, at all event until her 
father' return, at newton park. 

"mi dear young friend," said the kind lady, as soon as she heard rhoda' 
littl speech to it close, "I can scarc describ the gratif 
with which I see you here; the happi with which I welcom you to 
newton park; nor, indeed, the anxieti with which I constantli 
contempl your tri and pain posit at gray forest. inde I 
ought to be angri with you for have refus me thi happi so long; 
but you have made amend at last; though, indeed, it wa imposs to 
have defer it longer. you must not fancy, however, that I will consent 
to lose you so soon as you seem to have intended. no, no; I have found it 
too hard to catch you, to let you take wing so easily; besides, I have 
other to consult as well as myself, and persons, too, who are just as 
anxiou as I am to make a prison of you here." 

the good mrs. mervyn accompani these word with look so sly, and 
emphasi so significant, that rhoda wa fain to look down, to hide her 
blushes; and compassion the confus she herself had caused, the 
kind old ladi led her to the chamber which wa henceforward, so long as 
she consent to remain, to be her own apartment. 

how that day wa passed, and how fleetli it hour sped away, it is 
needless to tell. old mervyn had hi gentl as well as hi grim aspect; 
and no welcom wa ever more cordial and tender than that with which he 
greet the unprotect child of hi moros and repuls neighbor. It 
would be imposs to convey ani idea of the countless assidu and 
the secret delight with which young mervyn attend their rambles. 

the parti were assembl at supper. what a contrast did thi cheerful, 
happy--unutter happy--gathering, present, in the mind of rhoda, to 
the dull, drear, fear even which she had long been wont to pass at 
gray forest. 

As they sate togeth in cheer and happi intercourse, a chais drove 
up to the hall-door, and the knock had hardli ceas to reverberate, 
when a well-known voic wa heard in the hall. 

young mervyn start to hi feet, and merrili ejaculating, "charl 
marston! thi is delightful!" disappeared, and in an instant return 
with charl himself. 

We pass over all the embrac of brother and sister; the tear and smile 
of re-unit affection. We omit the cordial shake of hands; the kind 
looks; the question and answers; all these, and all the littl 
attent of that good old-fashion hospitality, which wa never weari 
of demonstr the cordial of it welcome, we abandon to the 
imagin of the good-natur reader. 

charl marston, with the advic of hi friend, mr. mervyn, resolv to 
lose no time in proceed to chester, whither it wa ascertain hi 
father had gone, with the declar intent of meet and accompani 
him home. He arriv in that town in the evening; and have previous 
learn that doctor danver had been for some time in chester, he at onc 
sought him at hi usual lodgings, and found the worthi old gentleman at 
hi solitari "dish" of tea. 

"mi dear charles," said he, greet hi young friend with earnest 
warmth, "I am rejoic beyond measur to see you. your father is in town, 
as you supposed; and I have just had a note from him, which has, I 
confess, not a littl agit me, referring, as it does, to a subject of 
pain and horribl interest; one with which, I suppose, you are 
familiar, but upon which I myself have never yet spoken fulli to ani 
person, except your father only." 

"and pray, my dear sir, what is thi topic?" inquir charles, with 
mark interest. 

"read thi note," answer the clergyman, place one at the same time in 
hi young visitor' hand. 

charl read as follows: 

"mi dear sir, 

"I have a singular commun to make to you, but in the strictest 
privacy, with refer to a subject which, mere to name, is to awaken 
feel of doubt and horror; I mean the confess of merton, with 
respect to the murder of wynston berkley. I will call upon you thi 
even after dark; for I have certain reason for not care to meet old 
acquaint about town; and if you can afford me half an hour, I 
promis to complet my intend disclosur within that time. let us be 
strictli private; thi is my onli proviso. 

"your with much respect, 

"richard marston" 

"your father ha been sore troubl in mind," said doctor danvers, as 
soon as the young man had read thi communication; "he ha told me as 
much; it may be that the discoveri he ha now made may possibl have 
reliev him from certain gall anxieties. the fear that unjust 
suspicion should light upon himself, or those connect with him, has, I 
dare say, torment him sorely. god grant, that as the providenti 
unfold of all the detail of thi mysteri crime come about, he 
mayb brought to recognize, in the just and terribl process, the hand of 
heaven. god grant, that at last hi heart may be softened, and hi spirit 
illumin by the bless influenc he ha so long and so sternli 
rejected." 

As the old man thu spake--a if in symbol answer to hi prayer--a 
sudden glori from the set sun stream through the funer pile of 
cloud which fill the western horizon, and flood the chamber where 
they were. 

after a silence, charl marston said, with some littl 
embarrassment--"it may be a strang confess to make, though, indeed, 
hardli so to you--for you know but too well the gloomi reserv with which 
my father ha uniformli treat me--that the exact natur of merton' 
confess never reach my ears; and onc or twice, when I approach 
the subject, in convers with you, it seem to me that the subject 
wa one which, for some reason, it wa pain to you to enter upon." 

"and so it was, in truth, my young friend--so it was; for that confess 
left behind it mani fear doubts, proving, indeed, noth but the one 
fact, that, morally, the wretch man wa guilti of the murder." 

charles, urg by a feel of the keenest interest, request dr. 
danver to detail to him the particular of the die man' narration. 

"willingly," answer dr. danvers, with a look of gloom, and heav a 
profound sigh--"willingly, for you have now come to an age when you may 
safe be entrust with secret affect your own family, and which, 
although, thank god, as I believ they in no respect involv the honor of 
anyon of it members, yet might deepli involv it peac and it 
secur against the assault of vagu and horribl slander. here, then, 
is the narrative: merton, when he wa consciou of the approach of death, 
qualified, by a circumstanti and detail statement, the absolut 
confess of guilt which he had at first sullenli made. In thi he 
declar that the guilt of design and intent onli wa his--that in 
the act itself he had been anticipated. He stated, that from the moment 
when sir wynston' servant had casual mention the circumst of hi 
master' usual sleep with hi watch and pocketbook under hi pillow, 
the idea of rob him had taken possess of hi mind. with the idea 
of rob him (under the peculiar circumstances, hi servant sleep in 
the apart close by, and the slightest alarm being, in all 
probability, suffici to call him to the spot) the idea of anticip 
resist by murder had associ itself. He had contend against 
these haunt and grow solicit of satan, with an earnest agony. 
He had intend to leav hi place, and fli from the mysteri 
temptat which he felt he want power to combat, but accid or fate 
prevent him. In a state of ghastli excit he had, on the memor 
night of sir wynston' murder, proceeded, as had afterward appear in 
evidence, by the back stair to the baronet' chamber; he had softli 
stolen into it, and gone to the bedside, with the weapon in hi hand. He 
drew hi breath for the decis stroke, which wa to bereav the 
(supposedly) sleep man of life, and when stretch hi left hand 
under the clothes, it rest upon a dull, cold corpse, and, at the same 
moment, hi right hand wa immers in a pool of blood. He drop the 
knife, recoil a pace or so. with a pain effort, however, he again 
grasp with hi hand to recov the weapon he had suffer to escape, 
and secured, as it afterward turn out, not the knife with which he had 
medit the commiss of hi crime, but the dagger which wa 
afterward found where he had conceal it. He wa now fulli aliv to the 
horror of hi situation; he wa compromis as fulli as if he had in veri 
deed driven home the weapon. To be found under such circumstances, would 
convict him as sure as if fifti eye had seen him strike the blow. He 
had noth now for it but flight; and in order to guard himself against 
the conting of be surpris from the door open upon the 
corridor, he bolt it; then grope under the murder man' pillow for 
the booti which had so fatal fascin hi imagination. here he wa 
disappointed. what further happen you alreadi know." 

charl listen with breathless attent to thi recital, and, after a 
pain interval, said-- 

"then the actual murder is, after all, unascertained. thi is, indeed, 
horrible; it wa veri natur that my father should have felt the danger 
to which such a disclosur would have expos the reput of our 
family, yet I should have prefer encount it, were it ten time as 
great, to the equivoc prudenc of suppress the truth with respect to 
a murder commit under my own roof." 

"he has, however, it would seem, arriv at some new conclusions," said 
dr. danvers, "and is now prepar to throw some unanticip light upon 
the whole transaction." 

even as they were talking, a knock wa heard at the hall-door, and 
after a brief and hurri consultation, it wa agreed, that, consid 
the strict condit of privaci attach to thi visit by mr. marston 
himself, as well as hi reserv and wayward temper, it might be better 
for charl to avoid present himself to hi father on thi occasion. A 
few second afterward the door opened, and mr. marston enter the 
apartment. It wa now dark, and the servant, unbidden, place candl 
upon the table. without answer one word to dr. danvers' greeting, 
marston sat down, as it seemed, in agit abstraction. remov hi hat 
suddenli (for he had not even made thi slight homag to the law of 
courtesy), he look round with a care-worn, fieri eye, and a pale 
countenance, and said-- 

"we are quit alone, dr. danvers--no one anywher near?" 

dr. danver assur him that all wa secure. after a long and agit 
pause, marston said-- 

"you rememb merton' confession. He admit hi intent to kill 
berkley, but deni that he wa the actual murderer. He spoke truth--no 
one knew it better than I; for I am the murderer." 

dr. danver wa so shock and overwhelm that he wa utterli 
unabl to speak. 

"aye, sir, in point of law and of morals, liter and honestly, the 
murder of wynston berkley. I am resolv you shall know it all. make 
what use of it you will--i care for noth now, but to get rid of the 
d----d, unsustain secret, and that is done. I did not intend to kill 
the scoundrel when I went to hi room; but with the just feel of 
exasper with which I regard him, it would have been wiser had I 
avoid the interview; and I meant to have done so. but hi candl wa 
burning; I saw the light through the door, and went in. It wa hi evil 
fortun to indulg in hi old strain of sardon impertinence. He 
provok me; I struck him--h struck me again--and with hi own dagger I 
stab him three times. I did not know what I had done; I could not 
believ it. I felt neither remors nor sorrow--whi should i?--but the 
thing wa horrible, astounding. there he sat in the corner of hi 
cushion chair, with the old fiendish smile on still. sir, I never 
thought that ani human shape could look so dreadful. I don't know how 
long I stay there, freez with horror and detestation, and yet 
unabl to take my eye from the face. did you see it in the coffin? sir, 
there wa a sneer of triumph on it that wa diabol and prophetic." 

marston wa fear agit as he spoke, and repeatedli wipe from hi 
face the cold sweat that gather there. 

"I could not leav the room by the back stairs," he resumed, "for the 
valet slept in the interven chamber. I felt such an appal antipathi 
to the body, that I could scarc muster courag to pass it. but, sir, I 
am not easili cowed--i master thi repugn in a few minutes--or, 
rather, I act spite of it, I knew not how; but instinct it 
seem to me that it wa better to lay the bodi in the bed, than leav it 
where it was, shewing, as it posit might, that the thing occur in 
an altercation. so, sir, I rais it, and bore it softli across the room, 
and laid it in the bed; and, while I wa carri it, it sway forward, 
the arm glide round my neck, and the head rest against my cheek--that 
wa a parodi upon a brotherli embrace! 

"I do not know at what moment it was, but some time when I wa carri 
wynston, or lay him in the bed," continu marston, who spoke rather 
like one pursu a horribl reverie, than as a man relat fact to a 
listener, "I heard a light tread, and soft breath in the lobby. A 
thunderclap would have stun me less that minute. I move softly, 
hold my breath, to the door. I believe, in moment of strong 
excitement, men hear more acut than at other times; but I thought I 
heard the rustl of a gown, go from the door again. I waited--it 
ceased; I wait until all wa quiet. I then extinguish the candle, and 
grope my way to the door; there wa a faint light in the corridor, and I 
thought I saw a head project from the chamber-door, next to the 
frenchwoman's--mademoiselle's. As I came on, it wa softli withdrawn, 
and the door not quit noiselessli closed. I could not be absolut 
certain, but I learn all afterward. and now, sir, you have the stori of 
sir wynston' murder." 

dr. danver groan in spirit, be wrung alik with fear and sorrow. 
with hand clasped, and head bow down, in an exceed bitter agoni of 
soul, he murmur onli the word of the litany--"lord, have merci upon 
us; christ, have merci upon us; lord, have merci upon us." 

marston had recov hi usual lower aspect and gloomi 
self-possess in a few moments, and wa now stand erect and defiant 
befor the humbl and afflict minist of god. the contrast wa 
terrible--almost sublime. 

doctor danver resolv to keep thi dread secret, at least for a 
time, to himself. He could not make up hi mind to inflict upon those 
whom he love so well as charl and rhoda the shame and agoni of such a 
disclosure; yet he wa sore troubled, for hi wa a conflict of duti 
and mercy, of love and justice. 

He told charl marston, when urg with earnest inquiry, that what he 
had heard that even wa intend sole for hi own ear, and gentli 
but peremptorili declin telling, at least until some futur time, the 
substanc of hi father' communication. 

charl now felt it necessari to see hi father, for the purpos of 
let him know the substanc of the letter respect "mademoiselle" 
and the late sir wynston which had reach him. accordingly, he 
proceeded, accompani by doctor danvers, on the next morning, to the 
hotel where marston had intim hi intent of pass the night. 

On their inquir for him in the hall, the porter appear much 
perplex and disturbed, and as they press him with questions, hi 
answer becam conflict and mysterious. mr. marston wa there--h had 
slept there last night; he could not say whether or not he wa then in 
the house; but he knew that no one could be admit to see him. He 
would, if the gentlemen wish it, send their card to (not mr. marston, 
but) the proprietor. and, finally, he conclud by beg that they 
would themselv see "the proprietor," and dispatch a waiter to appris 
him of the circumst of the visit. there wa someth odd and even 
sinist in all this, which, along with the whisper and the curiou 
glanc of the waiters, who happen to hear the errand on which they 
came, inspir the two companion with vagu misgivings, which they did 
not care mutual to disclose. 

In a few moment they were shown into a small sit room up stairs, 
where the proprietor, a fussi littl gentleman, and appar veri 
uneasi and frightened, receiv them. 

"we have call here to see mr. marston," said doctor danvers, "and the 
porter ha refer us to you." 

"yes, sir, exactly--precis so," answer the littl man, fidget 
excessively, and as it seemed, grow paler everi instant; "but--but, in 
fact, sir, there is, there ha been--in short, have you not heard of 
the--th accident?" 

He wound up with a prodigi effort, and wipe hi forehead when 
he had done. 

"pray, sir, be explicit: we are near friend of mr. marston; in fact, 
sir, thi is hi son," said doctor danvers, point to charl marston; 
"and we are both uneasi at the reserv with which our inquiri have been 
met. do, I entreat of you, say what ha happened?" 

"why--why," hesit the man, "I really--i would not for five 
hundr pound it had happen in my house. the--th unhappi 
gentleman has, in short--" 

He glanc at charles, as if afraid of the effect of the disclosur he 
wa on the point of making, and then hurriedli said--"h is dead, sir; he 
wa found dead in hi room, thi morning, at eight o'clock. I assur you 
I have not been myself ever since." 

charl marston wa so stun by thi sudden blow, that he wa upon the 
point of fainting. rallying, however, with a strong effort, he demand 
to be conduct to the chamber where the bodi lay. the man assented, but 
hesit on reach the door, and whisper someth in the ear of 
doctor danvers, who, as he heard it, rais hi hand and eye with a 
mute express of horror, and turn to charles, said-- 

"mi dear young friend, remain where you are for a few moments. I will 
return to you immediately, and tell you whatev I have ascertained. you 
are in no condit for such a scene at present." 

charles, indeed, felt that the fact wa so, and, sick and giddy, suffer 
doctor danvers, with gentl compulsion, to forc him into a seat. 

In silenc the vener clergyman follow hi conductor. with a 
palpit heart he advanc to the bedside, and twice essay to draw 
the curtain, and twice lost courage; but gather resolut at last, 
he pull the draperi aside, and beheld all he wa to see again of 
richard marston. 

the bedcloth were drawn so as nearli to cover the mouth. 

"there is the wound, sir," whisper the man, as with coars 
offici he drew back the bedcloth from the throat of the corpse, 
and exhibit a gash, as it seemed, nearli sever the head from the 
body. with sicken horror doctor danver turn away from the aw 
spectacle. He cover hi face in hi hands, and it seem to him as if a 
soft, solemn voic whisper in hi ear the mystic words, "whoso 
sheddeth man' blood, by man shall hi blood be shed." 

the hand which, but a few year before, had, unsuspected, consign a 
fellow-mort to the grave, had itself aveng the murder--marston had 
perish by hi own hand. 

natur ambiti and intriguing, the peril tendenc of such a 
spirit in mademoisel de barra had never been school by the mighti 
and benign principl of religion; of her accident acquaint at 
rouen with sir wynston berkley, and her subsequ introduction, in an 
evil hour, into the famili at gray forest, it is unnecessari to speak. 
the unhappi term on which she found marston live with hi wife, 
suggested, in their mutual alienation, the idea of found a doubl 
influenc in the household; and to conceiv the idea, and to act upon it, 
were, in her activ mind, the same. young, beautiful, fascinating, she 
well knew the power of her attractions, and determined, though probabl 
without one thought of transgress the limit of liter propriety, to 
bring them to bear upon the discontented, retir roué, for whom she 
care absolut nothing, except as the instrument, and in part the 
victim of her schemes. thu yield to the doubl instinct that sway 
her, she gratified, at the same time, her love of intrigu and her love 
of power. At length, however, came the hour which demand a sacrific to 
the evil influenc she had hitherto worship on such easi terms. she 
found that her power must now be secur by crime, and she fell. then 
came the arriv of sir wynston--hi murder--h elop with marston, 
and her guilti and joyless triumph. At last, however, came the blow, long 
suspend and terrific, which shatter all her hope and schemes, and 
drove her onc again upon the world. the catastroph we have just 
described. after it she made her way to paris. arriv in the capit of 
france, she speedili dissip whatev remain of the money and 
valuabl which she had taken with her from gray forest; and madam 
marston, as she now style herself, wa glad to place herself onc more 
as a gover in an aristocrat family. So far her good fortun had 
prevail in avert the punish but too well earn by her past 
life. but a day of reckon wa to come. A few year later franc wa 
involv in the uproar and conflagr of revolution. nobl famili 
were scattered, beggared, decimated; and their dependants, often drag 
along with them into the flame abyss, in mani instanc suffer the 
last dire extrem of human ill. It wa at thi aw period that a 
retribut so fright and extraordinari overtook madam marston, that 
we may hereaft ventur to make it the subject of a separ narrative. 
until then the reader will rest satisfi with what he alreadi know of 
her history; and meanwhil bid a long, and as it may possibl turn out, 
an etern farewel to that beauti embodi of an evil and 
disastr influence. 

the conclud chapter in a novel is alway brief, though seldom so short 
as the world would have it. In a tale like this, the "wind up" must be 
proportion contracted. We have scarc a claim to so mani line as 
the formal novelist may occupi pages, in the distribut of poetic 
justice, and the final group of hi charact into that effect 
tableau upon which, at last, the curtain grace descends. we, too, 
may be all the briefer, inasmuch as the reader ha doubtless anticip 
the littl we have to say. It amounts, then, to this:--within two year 
after the fear event which we have just recorded, an allianc had 
drawn together, in nearer and dearer union, the inmat of gray forest 
and newton park. rhoda had given her hand to young mervyn, of ulterior 
consequ we say nothing--th nurseri is abov our province. and now, 
at length, after thi christma journey through somewhat stern and gloomi 
scenery, in thi long-def flood of golden sunshin we bid thee, 
gentl reader, a fond farewell. 


the end 



[transcriber' note: "tate-à-tate" is [sic] twice in the origin book.] 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of the evil guest, by J. sheridan Le fanu 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the evil guest *** 

***** thi file should be name 10377-8.txt or 10377-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/3/7/10377/ 

produc by suzann shell, beginn projects, mari meehan and the 
onlin distribut proofread team. 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is," with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectori of the same number as the ebook' 
ebook number, often in sever format includ plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edit of our ebook replac the old file and take over 
the old filenam and etext number. the replac older file is renamed. 
version base on separ sourc are treat as new ebook receiv 
new filenam and etext numbers. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to novemb 2003, with ebook number below #10000, 
are file in directori base on their releas date. If you want to 
download ani of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may util the follow address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post sinc novemb 2003, with etext number over #10000, are 
file in a differ way. the year of a releas date is no longer part 
of the directori path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
ident to the filename). the path to the file is made up of singl 
digit correspond to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
exampl an ebook of filenam 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filenam 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

An altern method of locat ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.al 

