the project gutenberg ebook of uncanni tales, by variou 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: uncanni tale 

author: variou 

editor: C. arthur pearson 

releas date: septemb 13, 2008 [ebook #26606] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook uncanni tale *** 




produc by david clarke, stephen blundel and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi 
file wa produc from imag gener made avail 
by the internet archive/american libraries.) 









uncanni tale 


london 
C. arthur pearson, limit 
henrietta street, w.c. 
1916 




content 


page 

I. the unknown quantiti 7 

ii. the armless man 19 

iii. the tomtom clue 33 

iv. the case OF sir alist moeran 43 

V. the kiss 63 

vi. the goth 73 

vii. the last ascent 88 

viii. the terror BY night 97 

ix. the tragedi AT the "loup noir" 113 




uncanni stori 




I 

the unknown quantiti 


professor william jame maynard wa in a singularli happi and content 
mood as he stroll down the high street after a long and satisfactori 
interview with the solicitor to hi late cousin, whose sole heir he was. 

It wa exactli a month by the calendar sinc he had murder thi 
cousin, and everyth had gone most satisfactorili since. the fortun 
wa prove quit as larg as he had expected, and not even an inquest 
had been held upon the dead man. the coron had decid that it wa not 
necessary, and the professor had agre with him. 

At the funer the professor had been the princip mourner, and the 
local paper had comment sympathet on hi evid emotion. thi 
had been quit genuine, for the professor had been fond of hi relative, 
who had alway been veri good to him. but still, when an old man remain 
obstin healthy, when hi doctor can say with confid that he is 
good for anoth twenti year at least, and when he stand between you 
and a larg fortun which you need, and of which you can make much 
better use in the caus of scienc and the pursuit of knowledge, what 
altern is there? It becom necessari to take steps. therefore, the 
professor had taken steps. 

look back to-day on that day a month ago, and the critic preced 
week, the professor felt that the step he had taken had been as 
judici as successful. He had set himself to solv a problem in higher 
mathematics. He had found it easier to solv than mani he wa oblig to 
grappl with in the cours of hi studies. 

A policeman salut as the professor passed, and he acknowledg it with 
the charm old world courtesi that made him so popular a figur in the 
town. across the way wa the doctor who had certifi the caus of 
death. the professor, pass benevol on, wa glad he had now 
enough money to carri out hi projects. He would be abl to publish at 
onc hi great work on "the secondari variat of the differenti 
calculus," that hitherto had languish in manuscript. It would make a 
sensation, he thought; there wa more than one gener accept theori 
he had challeng or contradict in it. and he would put in hand at 
onc hi great, hi long project work, "A histori of the higher 
mathematics." It would take twenti year to complete, it would cost 
twenti thousand pound or more, and it would breath into mathemat 
the new, vivid life that bergson' work have breath into 
metaphysics. 

the professor thought veri kindli of the dead cousin, whose money would 
provid for thi great work. He wish greatli the dead man could know 
to what high use hi fortun wa designed. 

come toward him he saw the wife of the vicar of hi parish. the 
professor wa a regular church-goer. the vicar' wife saw him, too, and 
beamed. she and her husband were more than a littl proud of have so 
well known a man in their congregation. she held out her hand and the 
professor wa about to take it when she drew it back with a startl 
movement. 

"oh, I beg your pardon!" she exclaimed, distressed, as she saw him rais 
hi eyebrows. "there is blood on it." 

her eye were fix on hi right hand, which he wa still hold out. 
In fact, on the palm a small drop of blood show distinctli against the 
firm, pink flesh. surprised, the professor took out hi handkerchief and 
wipe it away. He notic that the vicar' wife wa wear white kid 
gloves. 

"oh, I beg your pardon!" she said again. "it--it startl me somehow. I 
thought you must have cut yourself. I hope it' not much?" 

"some scratch, I suppose," he said. "it' nothing." 

the vicar' wife, still slightli discomposed, launch out into some 
parochi matter she had wish to mention to him. they chat a few 
moment and then parted. the professor took an opportun to look at 
hi hand. He could detect no sign of ani cut or abrasion, the skin 
seem whole everywhere. He look at hi handkerchief. there wa still 
visibl on it the stain where he had wipe hi hand, and thi stain 
seem certainli blood. 

"odd!" he mutter as he put the handkerchief back in hi pocket. "veri 
odd!" 

hi thought turn again to hi project "A histori of the higher 
mathematics," and he forgot all about the incid till, as it happen 
that day month, the first of the month by the calendar, when he wa 
sit in hi studi with an emin colleagu to whom he wa explain 
hi great scheme. 

"if you are abl to carri it out," the colleagu said slowly, "your book 
will mark an epoch in human thought. but the cost will be tremendous." 

"I estim it at twenti thousand pounds," answer the professor 
calmly. "I am fulli prepar to spend twice as much. you know I have 
recent inherit forti thousand pound from a relative?" 

the emin colleagu nod and look veri impressed. 

"it is magnificent," he said warmly, "magnificent." He added: "you'v 
cut yourself, do you know?" 

"cut myself?" the professor echoed, surprised. 

"yes," answer the emin colleague, "there is blood upon your 
hand--your right hand." 

In fact a spot of blood, slightli larger than that which had appear 
before, show plainli upon the professor' right hand. He wipe it away 
with hi handkerchief, and went on talk eagerly, for he wa deepli 
interested. He did not think of the matter again till just as he wa 
get into bed, when he notic a red stain upon hi handkerchief. He 
frown and examin hi hand carefully. there wa no sign of ani wound 
or cut from which the blood could have come, and he frown again. 

"veri odd!" he muttered. 

A calendar hang on the wall remind him that it wa the first of the 
month. 

the day passed, the incid fade from hi memory, and four week 
later he came down one morn to breakfast in an unusu good temper. 
there wa a certain theori he had work on the night befor he meant to 
write to a friend about. It seem to him hi demonstr had been 
realli brilliant, and then, also, he wa alreadi plan out with great 
success the detail of the scheme for hi great work. 

He wa make an excel breakfast, for hi appetit wa alway good, 
and, need some more cream, he rang the bell. the maid appeared, he 
show her the empti jug, and as she took it she drop it with a 
sudden cry, smash it to piec on the floor. veri pale, she stammer 
out: 

"beg pardon, sir, your hand--ther is blood upon your hand." 

In fact, on the professor' right hand there show a drop of blood, 
percept larger thi time than before. the professor stare at it 
stupidly. He wa sure it had not been there a moment before, and he 
notic by the head of the newspap at the side of hi plate that 
thi wa the first of the month. 

with a hasti movement of hi napkin he wipe the drop of blood away. the 
maid, still apologising, began to pick up the piec of the jug she had 
broken; but the professor had no further appetit for hi breakfast. He 
silenc her with a gesture, and, leav a piec of toast half-eaten on 
hi plate, he got up and went into hi study. 

all thi wa trivial, absurd even. yet somehow it disturb him. He got 
out a magnifi glass and examin hi hand under it. there wa noth 
to account for the presenc of the drop of blood he and the maid had 
seen. It occur to him that he might have cut himself in shaving; but 
when he look in the mirror he could find no trace of even the 
slightest wound. 

He decid that, though he had not been awar of it, hi nerv must be 
a littl out of order. that wa disconcerting. He had not taken hi 
nerv into consider for the simpl reason that he had never known 
that he possess any. He made up hi mind to treat himself to a holiday 
in switzerland. one or two difficult ascent might brace him up a bit. 

three day later he wa in switzerland, and a few day later again he 
wa on the summit of a minor but still difficult peak. It had been an 
exhilar climb, and he had enjoy it. He said someth laughingli 
to the head guid to the effect that climb wa good sport and a fine 
test for the nerves. the head guid agreed, and ad polit that if 
the nerv of monsieur the professor had shown sign of fail on the 
lower glacier, for example, they might all have been in difficulties. 
the professor thrill with pleasur at the head guide' impli praise. 
He wa glad to know on such good author that hi nerv were all 
right, and the incid that had driven him there began to fade in hi 
memory. 

nevertheless, he found himself watch the calendar with a certain 
interest, and when he woke on the morn of the first day of the next 
month he glanc quickli at hi right hand. there wa noth there. 

He dress and spent, as he had planned, a quiet day, busi with hi 
correspondence. hi spirit rose as the day passed. He wa still 
watchful, but more confident; and, after dinner, though he had meant to 
go straight to hi room, he agre to join in a suggest game of 
bridge. they were cut for partner when one of the ladi who wa to 
take part in the game drop with a littl cri the card she had just 
lifted. 

"oh, there is blood upon your hand," she cried, "on your right hand, 
professor!" 

upon the professor' right hand there show now a drop of blood, larger 
still then those other three had been. yet the veri moment befor it had 
not been there. the professor put down hi card without a word, and 
left the room, go straight upstairs. 

the drop of blood wa still stand on hi hand. He soak it up 
care with some cotton-wool he had, and wa not surpris to find 
beneath no sign or trace of ani cut or wound. the cotton-wool he made up 
care into a parcel and address it to an analyt chemist he 
knew, inclos with it a short note. 

He rang the bell, sent the parcel to the post, and then he got out pen 
and paper and set himself to solv thi problem, as in hi life he had 
solv so mani others. 

onli thi time it seem somehow as though the data were insufficient. 

idli hi pen trace upon the paper in front of him a larg _x_, the sign 
of the unknown quantity. 

but how, in thi case, to find out what wa the unknown quantity? hi 
hand, hi firm and steadi hand, shook so that he could no longer hold 
hi pen. He rang the bell again and order a stiff whisky-and-soda. He 
wa a man of almost ascet habits, but to-night he felt that he need 
some stimulant. 

neither did he sleep veri well. 

the next day he return to england. almost at onc he went to see hi 
friend, the analyt chemist, to whom he had sent the parcel from 
switzerland. 

"mammalian blood," pronounc the chemist, "probabl human--rath a 
curiou thing about it, too." 

"what' that?" ask the professor. 

"why," hi friend answered, "I wa abl to identifi the distinct 
bacillus----" He name the rare bacillu of an unusu and obscur 
disease. and thi diseas wa that from which the professor' cousin had 
died. 

the professor wa a man interest in all phenomena. In other 
circumst he would have observ keenli that which now occurred, 
when the hair of hi head underw a curiou involuntari stiffen and 
bristl process that in popular but suffici accur terms, might 
be describ as "stand on end." but at the moment he wa in no state 
for scientif observations. 

He got out of the hous somehow. He said he did not feel well, and hi 
friend, the chemist, agre that hi holiday in switzerland did not seem 
to have done him much good. 

the professor went straight home and shut himself up in hi study. It 
wa a fine room, rang all round with books. On the shelv nearest to 
hi hand stood volum on mathematics, the theori of mathematics, the 
studi of mathematics, pure mathematics, appli mathematics. but there 
wa not ani one of these book that told him anyth about such a thing 
as this. though, it is true, there were mani refer in them, here 
and there, to _x_, the unknown quantity. 

the professor took hi pen and wrote a larg _x_ upon the sheet of paper 
in front of him. 

"an unknown quantity!" he muttered. "an unknown--quantity!" 

the day pass peacefully. noth wa out of the ordinari except that 
the professor develop an odd trick of continu glanc at hi 
right hand. He wash it a good deal, too. but the first of the month 
wa not yet. 

On the last day of the month he told hi housekeep that he wa feel 
a littl unwell. she wa not surprised, for she had thought him look 
ill for some time past. He told her he would probabl spend the next day 
in bed for a thorough rest, and she agre that that would be a veri 
good idea. when he wa in hi own room and had undressed, he bandag 
hi right hand with care, tie it up care and thoroughli with 
three or four of hi larg linen handkerchiefs. 

"whatev comes, shall now show," he said to himself. 

He stay in bed accordingli the next day. hi housekeep wa a littl 
uneasi about him. He ate noth and hi eye were strang bright and 
feverish. she overheard him onc mutter someth to himself about 
"the unknown quantity," and that made her think that he had been work 
too hard. 

she decid he must see the doctor. the professor refus peremptorily. 
He declar he would be quit well again in the morning. the 
housekeeper, an old servant, agreed, but sent for the doctor all the 
same; and when he had come the professor felt he could not refus to see 
him without appear peculiar. and he did not wish to appear peculiar. 
So he saw the doctor, but declar there wa noth much the matter, he 
mere felt a littl unwel and out of sort and tired. 

"you have hurt your hand?" the doctor asked, notic how it wa 
bandaged. 

"I cut it slightly--a trifle," the professor answered. 

"yes," the doctor answered, "I see there is blood on it." 

"what?" the professor stammered. 

"there is blood upon your hand," the doctor repeated. 

the professor looked. In fact, a deep, wide stain show crimson upon 
the bandag in which he had swath hi hand. yet he knew that the 
moment befor the linen had been fair and white and clean. 

"it is nothing," he said quickly, hide hi hand beneath the bed 
clothes. 

the doctor, a littl puzzled, took hi leave, but had not gone ten 
yard when the housekeep flew scream after him. It seem she had 
heard a fall, and when she had gone into the professor' bedroom she had 
found him lie there dead upon the hearthrug. there wa a razor in hi 
hand, and there wa a ghastli gash across hi throat. 

the doctor went back at a run, but there wa noth he or ani man could 
do. one thing he noticed, with curiosity, wa that the bandag had been 
torn away from the dead man' hand and that oddli enough there seem to 
be on the hand no sign of ani cut or wound. there wa a larg solitari 
drop of blood on the palm, at the root of the thumb; but, of course, 
that wa no great wonder, for the wound the dead man had dealt himself 
had bled freely. 

appar death had not been quit instantaneous, for with a last 
effort the professor seem to have trace an _x_ upon the floor in hi 
own blood with hi forefinger. the doctor mention thi at the 
inquest--th coron had decid at onc that in thi case an inquest 
wa certainli necessary--and he suggest that it show the professor 
had work too hard and wa suffer from overwork which had disturb 
hi mental balance. 

the coron took the same view, and in hi short address to the juri 
adduc the incid as proof of a pass mental disturbance. 

"veri probably," said the coroner, "there wa some problem that had 
worri him, and that he wa still endeavour to work out. As you are 
aware, gentlemen, the sign _x_ is use to symbolis the unknown 
quantity." 

An appropri verdict wa accordingli returned, and the professor wa 
duli inter in the same famili vault as that in which so short a time 
previous hi cousin had been laid to rest. 




II 

the armless man 


I first met bob master in the hotel at a place call fourteen streams, 
not veri far from kimberley. 

I had for some month been tri to find gold or diamond by dig 
hole in the veldt. but sinc thi ha littl or noth to do with the 
story, I pass by my mine adventur and come back to the hotel. I came 
to it veri readili that afternoon, for I wa veri thirsty. 

A tall man stand at the bar turn hi head as I enter and said 
"good-day" to me. I return the compliment, but took no particular 
notic of him at first. 

suddenli I heard the man say to the barman: 

"i'm readi for anoth drink." 

that surpris me, becaus hi glass wa still three-quart full. but 
I wa still more startl by the action of the barman who lift up the 
glass and held it whilst the man drank. 

then I saw the reason. the man had no arms. 

you know the easi way in which englishmen chum togeth anywher out of 
england, whilst in their nativ countri noth save a formal 
introduct will make them acquainted? I made some remark to master 
which led to anoth from him, and in five minutes' time we were 
chat on all sort of topics. 

I learnt that masters, bound for england, had come in to fourteen 
stream to catch the train from kimberley, and, have a few hour to 
wait, had stroll up to the collect of tin hut call itself a 
town. 

I wa go down to kimberley too, so of cours we went together, and 
were quit old friend by the time we reach that city. 

We had a wash and someth to eat, and then we walk round to the 
post-office. I use to have my letter address there, _post 
restante_, and call in for them when I happen to be in kimberley. 

I found sever letters, one of which alter the whole cours of my 
life. thi wa from messrs. harvey, filson, and harvey, solicitors, 
lincoln' inn fields. It inform me that the sudden death of my cousin 
had so affect my uncle' health that he had follow hi onli son 
within the month. the senior branch of the famili be thu extinct the 
whole of the entail estat had devolv on me. 

the first thing I did wa to send off two cablegram to say that I wa 
come home by the first avail boat, one to the solicitors, the 
other to nanci milward. 

master and I arrang to come home togeth and eventu reach cape 
town. there we had consider troubl at the ship office. It wa 
just about the time of year when peopl who live in africa to make 
money, come over to england to spend it, and in consequ the boat 
were veri crowded. master demand a cabin to himself, a luxuri which 
wa not to be had, though there wa one that he and I could share. He 
made a tremend fuss about do this, and I thought it veri strange, 
becaus I had assist him in mani way which hi mutil render 
necessary. however, he had to give way in the end, and we embark on 
the castl liner. 

On the voyag he told me how he had lost hi arms. It seem that he had 
been sent up countri on some govern job or other, and had had the 
ill-fortun to be captur by the natives. they treat him quit well 
at first, but gave him to understand that he must not tri to escape. I 
suppos that to most men such a warn would be a direct incit to 
make the attempt. master made it and failed. they cut off hi right arm 
as a punishment. He wait until the wound wa heal and tri again. 
again he failed. thi time they cut off hi other arm. 

"good lord," I cried. "what devils!" 

"weren't they!" he said. "and yet, you know, they were quit 
good-temp chap when you didn't cross them. I wasn't go to be 
beaten by a lot of nake nigger though, and I made a third attempt. 

"I succeed all right that time, though, of course, it wa much more 
difficult. I realli don't know at all how I manag to worri through. 
you see, I could onli eat plant and leav and such fruit as I came 
across; but i'd learnt as much as I could of the local botani in the 
intervals." 

"wa it worth while?" I asked. "I think the first failur and it result 
would have satisfi me." 

"yes," he said slowly, "it wa worth while. you see, my wife wa wait 
for me at home, and I want to see her again veri badly--y don't 
know how badly." 

"I think I can imagine," I said. "becaus there is a girl wait for me 
too at home." 

"I saw her befor she died," he continued. 

"died?" I said. 

"yes," he answered. "she wa die when I reach home at last, but I 
wa with her at the end. that wa something, wasn't it?" 

I do hate peopl to tell me thi sort of thing. not becaus I do not 
feel sorri for them; on the contrary, I feel so sorri that I absolut 
fail to find word to express my sympathy. I tried, however, to show it 
in other ways, by the attent I paid him and by anticip hi 
everi wish. 

yet there were mani thing that were astonish about hi actions, 
thing that I wonder now I did not realis must have been imposs for 
him to do for himself, and that yet were done. but he wa so 
surprisingli dexter with hi lips, and feet too, when he wa in hi 
cabin that I suppos I put them down to that. 

I rememb wake up one night and look out of my bunk to see him 
stand on the floor. the cabin wa onli faintli lit by a moonbeam 
which found it way through the porthole. I could not see clearly, but I 
fanci that he walk to the door and open it, and close it behind 
him. He did it all veri quickly, as quickli as I could have done it. As 
I say, I wa veri sleepy, but the sight of the door open and shut 
like that woke me thoroughly. sit up I shout at him. 

He heard me and open the door again, easily, too, much more easili 
than he seem to be abl to shut it when he saw me look at him. 

"hullo! awake, old chap?" he said. "what is it?" 

"er--nothing," I said. "or rather I suppos I wa onli half awake; but 
you seem to open that door so easili that it quit startl me." 

"one doe not alway like to let other see the shift to which one ha 
to resort," wa all the answer he gave me. 

but I worri over it. the thing bother me, becaus he had made no 
attempt to explain. 

that wa not the onli thing I noticed. 

two or three day later we were sit togeth on deck. I had offer 
to read to him. I notic that he got up out of hi chair. suddenli I 
saw the chair move. It gave me a great shock, for the chair twist 
appar of it own volition, so that when he sat down again the 
sunlight wa at hi back and not in hi eyes, as I knew it had been 
previously. but I reason with myself and manag to satisfi myself 
that he must have turn the chair round with hi foot. It wa just 
possibl that he could have done so, for it had one of those light 
wicker-work seats. 

We had a love voyag for three-quart of the way, and the sea wa as 
calm as ani duck-pond. but that wa all alter when we pass cape 
finisterre. I have done a lot of knock about on the ocean one way and 
another, but I never saw the bay of biscay deserv it reput 
better. 

i'd much rather see what is go on than be coop up below, and after 
lunch I told bob I wa go up on deck. 

"i'll onli stay there for a bit," I said. "you make yourself comfort 
down here." 

I fill hi pipe, put it in hi mouth, and gave him a match; then I 
left him. 

I made my way up and down the deck for a time, clutch hold of 
everyth handy, and rather enjoy it, though the wave drench me to 
the skin. 

present I saw master come out of the companion-way and make hi way 
veri skil toward me. Of cours it wa fear danger for him. 

I stagger toward him, and, put my lip to hi ear, shout to him 
to go below at once. 

"oh, I shall be all right!" he said, and laughed. 

"you'll be drowned--drowned," I screamed. "there wa a wave just now 
that--well, if I hadn't been abl to cling on with both hand like grim 
death, I should have gone overboard. Go below." 

He laugh again and shook hi head. 

and then what I dread happened. A vast mountain of green water lift 
up it bulk and fell upon us in a raven cataract. I clutch at 
masters, but tri to save him and myself handicap me badly. the 
strength of that mass of water wa terrible. It seem to snatch at 
everyth with giant hands, and drag all with it. It toss a hen-coop 
high, and carri it through the rails. 

I felt the grip of my right hand loosen, and the next instant wa 
carried, still clutch master with my left, toward that gap in the 
bulwark. 

I manag to seiz the end of the broken rail. It held us for a moment, 
then gave, and for a moment I hung sheer over the vessel' side. 

In that instant I felt finger tighten on my arm, tighten till they bit 
into the flesh, and I wa pull back into safety. 

togeth we stagger back, and got below somehow. I wa trembl like 
a leaf, and the sweat drip from me. I almost scream aloud. 

It wa not that I wa frighten of death. i'v seen too much of that in 
mani part of the earth to dread it greatly. It wa the thought of those 
finger tighten on me where no finger were. 

master did not speak a word, nor did I, until we found ourselv in the 
cabin. 

I tore the wet cloth off me and turn my arm to the mirror. I knew I 
could not have been mistaken when I felt them. 

there on the upper arm, abov the line of sunburn that one get from 
work with sleev roll up, there on the white skin show _the red 
mark of four slender finger and a thumb_! I sat down suddenli at sight 
of them, and pull open a drawer, found a flask of neat brandy, and 
gulp it down, empti it in one gulp. 

then I turn to him and point to the marks. 

"in god' name, how came these here?" I said. "what--what happen up 
there on deck?" 

He look at me veri gravely. 

"I save you," he said, "or rather I didn't, for I could not. but _she_ 
did." 

"what do you mean?" I stammered. 

"let me get these cloth off," he said, "and some dri one on; and i'll 
tell you." 

word fail to describ my feel as I watch the cloth come off him 
and dri one go on just as if hand were arrang them. 

I sat and shuddered. I tri to close my eyes, but the weird, unnatur 
sight drew them as a lodestone. 

"i'm sorri that you should have had thi shock," he said. "I know what 
it must have been like, though it wa not so bad for me when they seem 
to come, for they came gradual as time went on." 

"what came gradually?" I asked. 

"why, these arms! they'r what i'm tell you about. you ask me to 
tell you, I thought?" 

"did i?" I said. "I don't know what i'm say or asking. I think i'm 
go mad, quit mad." 

"no," he said, "you'r as sane as I am, onli when you come across 
someth strange, uniqu for that matter, you are natur terrified. 
well, it wa like this. I told you about my adventur with the nigger 
up country. that wa quit true. they cut off both my arms--you can see 
the stump for that matter. and I told you that I came home to find my 
wife dying. her heart had alway been weak, i'd known that, and it had 
gradual grown more feeble. there must have been, inde there was, a 
strang sort of telepathi between us. she had had fear attack of 
heart failur on both occas when the nigger had mutil me, I 
learnt on compar notes. 

"but I had known too, somehow, that I must escap at all costs. It wa 
the knowledg that made me tri again after each failure. I should have 
gone on tri to escap as long as I had lived, or rather as long as 
she had lived. I knelt besid her bed and she put out her arm and laid 
them round my neck. 

"'so you have come back to me befor I go,' she said. 'I knew you must, 
becaus I call you so. but you have been long in coming, almost too 
long. but I knew I had to see you again befor I died.' 

"I broke down then. I wa sore tried. No arm even to put round her! 

"'darling, stay with me for a little, onli for a littl while!' I 
sobbed. 

"she shook her head feebly. 'it is no use, my dear,' she said, 'I must 
go.' 

"'i'll come with you,' I said, 'i'll not live without you.' 

"she shook her head again. 

"'you must be brave, bob. I shall be watch you afterward just as 
much as if I still live on earth. If onli I could give you my arms! A 
poor, weak woman' arms, but better than none, dear.' 

"she die some week later. I spent all the time at her bedside, I 
hardli left her. her arm were round me when she died. shall I ever feel 
them round me again? I wonder! you see, they are mine now. 

"they came to me gradually. It wa veri strang at first to have arm 
and hand which one couldn't see. I use to keep my eye shut as much as 
possible, and tri to fanci that I had never lost my arms. 

"I got use to them in time. but I have alway been care not to let 
peopl see me do thing that they would know to be imposs for an 
armless man. that wa what took me to africa again, becaus I could get 
lost there and do thing for myself with these hands." 

"'and they twain shall be one flesh,'" I muttered. 

"yes," he said, "I think the explan must be someth of that sort. 
there' more than that in it, though; these arm are other than flesh." 

He sat silent for a time with hi head bow on hi chest. then he spoke 
again: 

"I got sick of be alon at last, and wa come back when I met you 
at fourteen streams. I don't know what I shall do when I do get home. I 
can never rest. I have--what do they call it--_wanderlust_?" 

"doe she ever speak to you from that other world?" I ask him. 

He shook hi head sadly. 

"no, never. but I know she live somewher beyond thi world of ours. 
she must, becaus these arm live. So I tri alway to act as if she 
watch everything. I alway tri to do the right thing, but, anyway, 
these arm and hand would do good of their own accord. just now up on 
the deck I wa veri frightened. i'd have save myself at ani cost 
almost, and let you go. but I could not do that. the hand clutch you. 
It is her will, so much stronger and purer than mine, that still 
persists. It is onli when she doe not exert it that I control these 
arms." 

that wa how I learnt the strangest tale that ever a man wa told, and 
knew the miracl to which I owe my life. 

It may be that bob master wa a coward. He alway said that he was. 
person I do not believ it, for he had the sweetest natur I ever 
met. 

He had nowher to go to in england and seem to have no friends. So I 
made him come down with me to englehart, that dear old countri seat of 
my famili in the western shire which wa now mine. 

nanci live in that country, too. 

there wa no reason whi we should not get marri at once. We had wait 
long enough. 

I can see again the old, ivy-grown church where nanci and I were wed, 
and bob master stand by my side as best man. 

I rememb feel in hi pocket for the ring, and as I did so, I felt a 
hand grasp mine for a moment. 

then there wa the recept afterwards, and speech-making--th usual 
sort of thing. 

later nanci and I drove off to the station. 

We had not said good-by to bob, for he'd insist on drive to the 
station with the luggage; said he wa go to see the last of us there. 

He wa wait for us in the yard when we reach it, and walk with us 
on to the platform. 

We stood there chat about one thing and another, when I notic that 
nanci wa not talk much and seem rather pale. I wa just go to 
remark on it when we heard the whistl of the train. there is a sharp 
curv in the perman way outsid the station, so that a train is on 
you all of a sudden. 

suddenli to my horror I saw nanci sway backward toward the edg of the 
platform. I tri vainli to catch her as she reel and fell--right in 
front of the oncom train. I sprang forward to leap after her, but 
hand grasp me and flung me back so violent that I fell down on the 
platform. 

It wa bob master who took the place that should have been mine, and 
leapt upon the metals. 

I could not see what happen then. the station-mast say he saw nanci 
lift from befor the engin when it wa right upon her. He say it wa 
as if she wa lift by the wind. she wa quit close to masters. "near 
enough for him to have lift her, sir, if he'd had arms." the two of 
them stagger for a moment, and togeth fell clear of the train. 

nanci wa littl the wors for the aw accident, bruised, of course, 
but poor master wa unconscious. 

We carri him into the waiting-room, laid him on the cushion there, 
and sent hot-foot for the doctor. 

He wa a good countri practitioner, and, I suppose, knew the ordinari 
routin of hi work quit well. He fuss about, hum and haw a lot. 

"yes, yes," he said, as if he were tri to persuad himself. "shock, 
you know. he'll be better presently. lucky, though, that he had no 
arms." 

I notic then, for the first time, that the sleev of the coat had 
been shorn away. 

"doctor," I said, "how is he? surely, if he isn't hurt he would not look 
like that. what exactli do you mean by shock?" 

"hum--er," he hesitated, and appli hi stethoscop to masters' heart 
again. 

"the heart is veri weak," he said at length. "veri weak. he' alway 
veri anæmic, I suppose?" 

"no," I answered. "he' anyth but that. he's----good lord, he' 
bleed to death! put ligatur on hi arms. put ligatur on hi 
arms." 

"pleas keep quiet, mr. riverston," the doctor said. "it must have been 
a dread experi for you, and you are natur veri upset." 

I rave and curs at him. I think I should have struck him, but the 
other held me. they said they would take me away if I did not keep 
quiet. 

bob master open hi eye presently, and saw them hold me. 

"pleas let him go," he said. "it' all right, old man. it' no use your 
argu with them, they would not understand. I could never explain to 
them now, and they would never believ you. besides, it' all for the 
best. yes, the train went over them and i'm armless for the second time. 
but--not for long!" 

I knelt by hi side and sobbed. It all seem so dreadful, and yet, I 
don't think that then I would have tri to stay hi passing. I knew it 
wa best for him. 

He look at me veri affectionately. 

"i'm so sorri that thi should happen on your wedding-day," he said. 
"but it would have been so much wors for you if _she_ had not helped." 

hi voic grew fainter and die away. 

there wa a paus for a time, and hi breath came in great sigh sobs. 

then suddenli he rais himself on the cushion until he stood upright 
on hi feet, and a smile broke over hi face--a smile so sweet that I 
think the angel in paradis must look like that. 

hi voic came strong and loud from hi lips. 

"darling!" he cried. "darling, your arm are round me onc again! I 
come! I come!" 

* * * * * 

"one of the most extraordinari case I have ever met with," the doctor 
told the coron at the inquest. "he seem to have all the symptom of 
excess hæmorrhage." 




iii 

the tomtom clue 


I had just settl down for a comfort even over the fire in a 
saddle-bag chair drawn up as close to the hearth as the fender would 
allow, with a plenti suppli of literatur and whisky, and pipe and 
tobacco, when the telephon bell rang loudli and insistently. with a 
sigh I rose and took up the receiver. 

"that you?" said a voic I recognis as that of jack bridges. "can I 
come round and see you at once? it' most important. no, I can't tell 
you now. i'll be with you in a few minutes." 

I hung the receiv up again, wonder what busi could fetch jack 
bridg round at that time of the even to see me. We had been the 
greatest of pal at school and at the 'varsity, and had kept the 
friendship up ever since, despit my intermitt wander over the 
face of the globe. but dure the last few day or so jack had becom 
engag to miss glanville, the daughter of old glanville, of south 
african fame, and as a love-sick swain I natur expect to see veri 
littl of him, until after the wed at ani rate. 

At thi time of the evening, accord to my idea of engag couples, 
he should be sit in the stall at some theatre, and not run 
round to see bachelor friend with cynic view on matrimony. 

I had not arriv at a satisfactori solut when the door open and 
jack walk in. one glanc at hi face told me that he wa in trouble, 
and without a word I push him into my chair and hand him a drink. 
then I sat down on the opposit side of the fire and wait for him to 
begin, for a man in need of sympathi doe not want to be worri by 
questions. 

He gulp down half hi whiski and sat for a moment gaze into the 
fire. 

"jim, old man," he said at length, "i'v had aw news." 

"not connect with miss glanville?" I asked. 

"in a way, yes. it' broken off, but there' wors than that--far worse. 
I can hardli realis it; I feel numb at present; it' too horrible. 
you rememb that when you and I were at winchest togeth my father 
wa kill dure the matabel war?" 

I nodded. 

"well," continu jack, "I heard to-day that he wa not kill by the 
matabele, but wa hang in bulawayo for murder. In other words, I am 
the son of a murderer." 

"hang for murder!" I exclaim in horror. "sure there' some 
mistake?" 

"no," groan jack, "it' true enough. i'v seen the newspap cut 
of the time, and i'm the son of a murderer, who wa also a forger, a 
thief, and a card-sharper. old glanvil told me thi evening. It wa 
then that our engag wa broken off." 

"your mother?" I asked. "have you seen her?" 

jack nodded. 

"poor littl woman!" he groaned. "she ha known all along, and her one 
aim and object in life ha been to keep the aw truth from me. that 
wa whi I wa told he die an honour death dure the war. i'v 
often wonder whi the littl mother wa alway so sad, and so weigh 
down by trouble. now I know. good god, what her life must have been!" 

He rose from hi chair and pace up and down the room for a minute; then 
he stop and stood in front of me, hi face work with emotion. 

"but I don't believ it, jim," he said, and there wa a ring in hi 
voice. "I don't believ it, and neither doe the littl mother. it' 
imposs to reconcil the big, bluff man with the heart of a child, 
that I rememb as my father, with murder, forgery, or ani other crime. 
and yet, accord to glanvil and the old newspap he show me, 
richard bridg wa one of the most unscrupul ruffian in south 
africa. In my heart of heart I know he didn't do it, and though on the 
face of it there' no doubt, i'm go to tri and clear hi name. I am 
sail for south africa on friday." 

"sail for south africa!" I exclaimed. "what about your work?" 

"mi work can go hang!" repli jack heatedly. "I want to wipe away the 
stain from my father' name, and I mean to do it somehow. that' whi 
i'v run round to see you, old pal, for I want you to come with me. 
know rhodesia as you do, you'r just the man to help me. say you'll 
come?" he pleaded. 

It seem quit the forlornest hope I had ever heard of, but jack' 
distress wa so acut that I hadn't the heart to refuse. 

"all right, jack," I said, "i'm with you. but don't foster ani vain 
hopes. remember, it' twenti year ago. It will be a pretti tough job to 
prove anyth after all these years." 

dure the voyag out we had ampl time to go through the small amount 
of inform about the long-forgotten case that jack had been abl to 
collect from the famili solicitors. 

In the year 1893, richard bridges, who wa a mine engin of some 
standing, had made a trip to rhodesia with a view to gold and diamond 
prospecting. He had been accompani by a friend, thoma symes, who, so 
far as we could ascertain, wa an ex-nav officer; and the two, after a 
short stay at bulawayo, had gone northward across the guai river into 
what wa in those day a practic unknown land. In a littl over a 
year' time bridg had return alone--hi companion have been, so he 
stated, kill by the matabele, and for six month or so he led a 
dissolut life in bulawayo and the district, which end ultim in 
hi execut for murder. there wa no doubt whatev about the murder, 
or the variou theft and forgeri that he wa accus of, as he had 
made a confess at hi trial, and we seem to be on a wild-goos 
chase of the worst varieti so far as I could see; but jack, confid of 
hi father' innocence, would not hear of failure. 

"it' imposs to make surmis at thi stage," he said. "on the face 
of it there appear to be littl room for doubt, but no one who knew my 
father could possibl connect him with ani sort of crime. somehow or 
other, jim, i'v got to clear hi name." 

My memori went back to a tall, sunburnt man with a kindli manner who had 
come down to the school one day and put up a gloriou feed at the tuck 
shop to jack and hi friends. afterwards, at hi son' urgent request, 
he had bare hi chest to show us hi tattoo of which jack had, 
boy-like, often boast to us. I recal how we had gaze admiringli at 
the skil work pictur of nelson with hi empti sleev and close 
eye and the inscript underneath: "england expect that everi man thi 
day will do hi duty." jack had explain with consider pride that 
thi did not constitut all, as on hi father' back wa a wonder 
represent of the _victory_, and on other part of hi bodi a lion, 
a snake, and other _fauna_, but richard bridg had protest laughingli 
and refus to undress further for our delectation. 

We reach bulawayo, but no one in the citi appear to recal the case 
at all; indeed, bulawayo had grown out of all recognit sinc richard 
bridg had pass through it on hi prospect trip. It wa difficult 
to know where to start. even the polic could not help, and had no 
knowledg of where the murder had been buried. No one but an old 
saloon-keep and a coupl of miner could recollect the execut even, 
and they, so far as they could remember, had never met richard bridg 
in the flesh, though hi unsavouri reput wa well known to them. 

In despair, jack suggest a trek up countri toward barotseland, which 
wa the district that bridg and syme had propos to prospect, 
though, accord to all accounts, syme had been murder by the 
matabel befor they reach the guai river. 

for the next month we trek steadili northwards, have veri fair 
sport; but, as I expected, extract no inform whatev from the 
nativ about the two prospector who had pass that way year before. 
At length, jack becam more or less reconcil to failure, and realis 
the futil of further search suggest a return to bulawayo. As our 
donkey caravan wa begin to suffer sever from the fly, I 
concurred, and we start to travel slowli back to bulawayo, shoot by 
the way. 

one night after a particularli hard trek we inspan at an old _kraal_, 
the paint wall of which told that at one time it had serv as a 
royal residence, and as I had shot an eland cow that afternoon, which 
provid far more meat than we could consume, we invit the induna and 
hi tribe to the feast. not to be outdon in hospitality, the old chief 
produc the kaffir beer of the country, a liquid which ha noth to 
recommend it beyond the fact that it intox rapidly. 

A meat feast and a beer drink is a great event in the averag kaffir' 
life, and as the even wore on a gener jollif start to the 
thump of tomtom and the squeak of kaffir fiddles. there wa one veri 
drunk old barotse, who sat close to me, and, accompani himself with 
thump on hi tomtom, sang in one drone key a song about a man who 
kept snake and lion insid him, and from whose chest the evil eye 
look out. At least, so far as I could gather that wa roughli the gist 
of the song; but as hi tomtom wa particularli larg and most obnoxi 
I polit took it away from him, and jack and I use it as a tabl for 
our gourd of kaffir beer, which we were pretend to consum in larg 
quantities. 

A gourd, however, is a top-heavi sort of drink vessel, and in a veri 
short time I had succeed in spill half a pint or so of my drink on 
the parchment of the drum. not wish to spoil the old gentleman' 
plaything, which he evid valu abov all things, I mop up the 
beer with my handkerchief, and in do so remov from the parchment a 
portion of the accumul filth of ages. 

"hullo!" said jack, take the instrument from me and hold it up to 
the firelight. "there' a pictur of some sort here. It look like a man 
in a cock hat." 

He rub it hard with hi pocket handkerchief, and the polish 
brought more of the pictur to light, till, plain enough in place and 
fade in others, there stood out, the portrait of a man in an 
old-fashion naval uniform with star on hi breast, and underneath 
some letter in the form of a scroll. 

"that' not nativ work," I exclaimed. "these are english letters," for 
I could distinctli make out the word "man" follow by a "t" and an "h." 
"rub it hard, jack." 

the greas on the parchment refus to give way to further polishing, 
however, and rememb a bottl of ammonia I kept for insect bites, I 
mix some with kaffir beer and pour it on the head of the tomtom. one 
touch of the handkerchief wa suffici onc the strong alkali got to 
work, and out came the grand old face of nelson and underneath hi 
motto: 

"england expect that everi man thi day will do hi duty." 

jack drop the drum as if it had bitten him. 

"what doe it mean?" he gasped. "mi father had thi on hi chest. I 
rememb it well!" 

I was, however, too busi with the revers end of the drum to heed him. 
On the other side the ammonia brought out a pictur of the _victory_, 
with the head of a roar lion below it. 

"good god!" exclaim jack. "mi father had that on hi back. quick, jim, 
rub hard! there should be the famili crest to the right--an eagl with a 
snake in it talon and R. B. underneath." 

I rub in the spot indicated, and out came the crest and initi 
exactli as jack had describ them. there wa someth horribl uncanni 
and gruesom in find the tattoo mark of the dead man on the 
parchment of a barots tomtom two hundr mile north of the zambesi, 
and for a moment I wa too overcom with astonish to grasp exactli 
what it meant. then it came to my mind in a flash that the parchment wa 
noth els than human skin, and richard bridges' skin at that. I put 
it down with sudden reverence, and, beckon to it owner, demand it 
full history. At first he show sign of fear, but promis him a 
waist length of cloth if he told the truth, he squat on hi ham 
befor us and began. 

"many, mani moon ago, befor the white men came to trade across the big 
water as they do now, two white baas came into thi countri to look 
for white stone and gold. one baa wa bigger than the other, and on 
hi chest and on hi bodi were pictur of birds, and beasts, and 
strang things. On hi chest wa a great inkoo with one eye covered, 
and on hi back a hut with tree grow straight up into the air from 
it. On hi loin wa a lion of great fierceness, and coil round hi 
waist wa a hiss mamba (snake). We were sore afraid, for the white 
baa told us he wa bewitched, and that if harm came to either he would 
uncov the close eye of the great inkoo upon hi chest, which wa the 
evil eye, and command him to blast the barots and their land for ever. 

"so the white men were suffer to come and go in peace, for we dread 
the evil eye of the great inkoos. they toiled, these white baases, 
dig in the hillsid and search the riverbed; and then one day it 
came to pass that they quarrel and fought, and the baa with the 
pictur wa slain. We knew then that hi medicin wa bad medicine, 
otherwis the white baa without the pictur could not have kill him. 
So we were wroth and made to slay the other baas, but he shot us down 
with a fire stick and return to hi own countri in haste. then did I 
take the skin from the dead baas, for I love him for hi pictures, and 
I made them into a tomtom. I have spoken." 

"good heavens!" exclaim jack when I had translat the story. "then my 
father wa kill here in barotseland, and it wa symes, hi murderer, 
who went back to bulawayo. It wa that fiend symes, also, who took my 
father' name, probabl to draw ani money that might have been left 
behind, and who, as richard bridges, wa hang for murder. poor old 
dad," he ad brokenly, "murdered, and hi bodi mutil by savages! 
but how glad I am to know that he die an honest man!" 

with the evid at hand it wa easi to prove the ident of the 
murder of twenti year ago, and, have settl the matter 
satisfactorili and clear the dead man' name, jack and I return to 
england, where a few week later I had to purchas wed garment in 
order that I might play the part of best man at jack' wedding. 




IV 

the case OF sir alist moeran 


"ethne?" My aunt look at me with rais brow and smiled. "mi dear 
maurice, hadn't you heard? ethn went abroad directli after christmas, 
with the wilmotts, for a trip to egypt. she' have a gloriou time!" 

I am afraid I look as blank as I felt. I had onli land in england 
three day ago, after two years' servic in india, and the one thing I 
had been look forward to wa see my cousin ethn again. 

"then, sinc you did not know she wa away, you, of course, have not 
heard the other news?" went on my aunt. 

"no," I answer in a wooden voice. "i'v heard nothing." 

she beamed. "the dear child is engag to a sir alist moeran, whom she 
met in luxor. everyon is delighted, as it is a splendid match for her. 
ladi wilmott speak most highli of him, a man of excel famili and 
position, and perfectli charm to boot." 

I believ I murmur someth suitable, but it wa absurd to pretend to 
be overjoy at the news. the gall part of it wa that aunt linda 
knew, and wa chuckling, so to speak, over my discomfiture. 

"if you are go up to wimberley park," she went on sweetly, "you will 
probabl meet them both, as your uncl bob ha ask us all there for 
the februari house-party. He cabl an invit to sir alist as soon 
as he heard of the engagement. wasn't it good of him?" 

I repli that it was; then, have heard quit enough for one day of 
the charm of ethne' _fiancé_, I took my leave. 

that night, after curs myself for a churl, I wrote and wish her 
good luck. the next morn I receiv a letter from uncl bob ask me 
to go to wimberley; and earli in the follow week I travel up to 
cumberland. I receiv a warm welcom from the old general. As a boy I 
use to spend the greater part of my holiday with him, and be 
childless himself, he regard me more or less as a son. 

On februari 16th ethne, her mother, and sir alist moeran arrived. I 
motor to the station to meet them. the even wa cold and raw and so 
dark that it wa almost imposs to distinguish peopl on the badli 
light littl platform. however, as I grope my way along, I recognis 
ethne' voice, and thu directed, hurri toward the group. As I did so 
two gleaming, golden eye flash out at me through the darkness. 

"hullo!" I thought. "so she' cart along the faith pincher!" but 
the next moment I found I wa mistaken, for ethn wa hold out both 
hand to me in greeting. there wa no dog with her, and in the bustl 
that followed, I forgot to seek further for the solut of those two 
fieri lights. 

"it wa good of you to come, maurice," ethn said with unmistak 
pleasure, then, turn to the man at her side, "alister, thi is my 
cousin, captain kilvert, of whom you have heard me speak." 

We murmur the usual formal in the usual manner, but as my finger 
touch his, I experienc the most curiou sensat down the region of 
my spine. It took me back to burma and a certain veri uncomfort 
night that I onc pass in the jungle. but the impress wa so 
fleet as to be indefinable, and soon I wa busi get everyon 
settl in the car. 

So far, except that he possess an except charm voice, I had 
no chanc of form an opinion of my cousin' _fiancé_. It wa 
half-past seven when we got back to the house, so we all went straight 
up to our room to dress for dinner. 

everyon wa assembl in the drawing-room when sir alist moeran came 
in, and I shall never forget the effect hi appear made. 
convers ceas entir for an instant. there wa a kind of 
breathless pause, which wa almost audibl as my uncl rose to greet 
him. In all my life I had never seen a handsom man, and I don't 
suppos anyon els there had either. It wa the most startling, 
arrest style of beauti one could possibl imagine, and yet, even as I 
stare at him in admiration, the word "black!" flash into my mind. 

black! I pull myself up sharply. We english, who have live out in the 
east, are far too prone to stigmatis thu anyon who show the smallest 
trace of be a "half breed"; but in sir alister' case there wa not 
even a suspicion of this. He wa no darker than score of men of my own 
nationality, and besides, he belonged, I knew, to a veri old scottish 
family. yet, tri as I would to strangl the idea, all through the 
even the same horrible, unaccount notion clung to me. 

that he wa the person of the gather there wa not the slightest 
doubt. men and women alik seem attract by him, for hi 
individu wa on a par with hi looks. 

sever time dure dinner I glanc at ethne, but it wa easi to see 
that all her attent wa taken up by her lover. yet, oddli enough, I 
wa not jealou in the ordinari way. I saw the folli of imagin that I 
could stand a chanc against a man like moeran, and, moreover, he 
interest me too deeply. hi knowledg of the east wa extraordinary, 
and later, when the ladi had retired, he relat mani curiou 
experiences. 

"might I ask," said my uncle' friend, major faucett, suddenly, "whether 
you were in the service, or had you a govern appoint out there?" 

sir alist smiled, and under hi moustach I caught the gleam of 
strong, white teeth. 

"a a matter of fact, neither. I am almost asham to say I have no 
profession, unless I may call myself an explorer." 

"and whi not?" put in uncl bob. "provid your explor were to 
some purpos and of benefit to the commun in general, I consid you 
are do someth worth while." 

"exactly," sir alist replied. "from my earliest boyhood I have alway 
had the strangest hanker for the east. I say strange, becaus to my 
parent it wa inexplicable, neither of them have the slightest 
lean in that direction, though to me it seem the most natur 
desir in the world. I wa like an alien in a foreign land, long to 
get home. I recollect, as a child, my nurs thought me a beastli uncanni 
kid becaus I love to lie in bed and listen to the cat howl and 
fight outside. I use to put my head half under the blanket and 
imagin I wa in my lair in the jungle, and those were the jackal and 
panther prowl around outside." 

"I suppos you'd been read adventur books," uncl bob said, with a 
laugh. "I play at much the same game when I wa a youngster, onli in 
my case it wa redskins." 

"possibly," sir alist answer with a slight shrug, "onli mine wasn't 
a game that I play with ani other boys, it wa a gnaw desire, which 
simpli had to be satisfied; and the opportun came. when I wa 
fourteen, the father of a school friend of mine, who wa go out to 
india, ask me to go out with him and the boy for the trip. Of course, 
I went." 

"I wonder," the major remarked, "that you ever came back onc you got 
there, sinc you were so fright keen." 

"I wa certain I should return," he repli grimly. 

A paus follow hi last words, then uncl bob rose and led the way to 
the drawing-room, where for the remaind of the even sir alist wa 
chiefli monopolis by the ladies. 

* * * * * 

"well, maurice," uncl bob said, when on the follow even I wa 
sit in hi studi have my usual before-dinn chat with him, "and 
how do you like ethne' futur husband?" 

I hesitated. "i--i realli don't know," I replied. 

"come, boy," he said, with hi whimsic smile, "whi not be frank and 
own to a veri natur jealousy?" 

"because," I answer simply, "the feel sir alist moeran inspir 
in me is not jealousy, curious enough. it' someth else, someth 
indefin that come over me now and again. dog don't like him, and 
that' alway a bad sign, to my thinking." 

My uncle' bushi eyebrow went up slightly. 

"when did you make thi discovery?" 

"thi morning," I replied. "you know I took him and ethn round the 
place. well, the first thing I notic wa that mike refus to come 
with us, although both ethn and I call him. As we pass through the 
hall he slunk away into the library. I thought it a bit strange, as he' 
usual so frantic to go out with me. still, I didn't attach ani 
signific to the matter until later, when we visit the kennels. I 
don't know why, but one take it for grant that a man is keen on dog 
somehow and----" 

"isn't sir alister?" 

"they are not keen on him, anyhow," I answer grimly. "they had heard 
my voic as we approach and were all bark with delight, but 
directli we enter the place there wa a dead silence, save for a few 
omin growl from argo. It wa a most extraordinari sight. they all 
bristl up, so to speak, snif the air though on the scent of 
something. I let bess and fritz loose, but instead of jump up, as 
they usual do, they hung back and show the white of their eye in a 
way i'v never seen before. I actual had to whistl to them sharpli 
sever time befor they came, and then it wa in a slink manner, 
take good care to put ethn and me between themselv and moeran, and 
look askanc at him the whole while." 

"h'm!" murmur the gener with pucker brows. "that wa certainli 
odd, veri odd!" 

"it was," I agreed, warm to the subject, "but there' odder still to 
come. I dare say you'll think it all my fancy, but the minut those 
anim put their head up and snif in that peculiar way, I 
distinctli smelt the musky, savag odour of wild beasts. you know it 
well, anyon who ha been through a jungl does." 

uncl bob nodded. "I know it, too; 'musky' is the veri word--th smell 
of sun-warm fur. jove, how it carri me back! I rememb once, year 
ago, come upon a litter of lion cubs, in a cave, when I wa out in 
africa----" 

"yes! yes!" I cri eagerly. "and that is what I smelt thi morning. 
those dog smelt it, too. they felt that there wa someth alien, 
abnorm in their midst." 

"that someth being--sir alist moeran?" 

I felt myself flush up under hi gaze. I got up and walk about the 
room. 

"I don't understand it," I said doggedly. "I tell you plainly, uncl 
bob, I don't understand. My impress of the man last night wa 
'black,' but he' not black, I know that perfectli well, no more than 
you or I are, and yet I can't get over the behaviour of those hounds. 
It wasn't onli one of 'em, it wa the whole lot. they seem to regard 
him as their natur enemy! and that smell! i'm sure ethn detect it 
too, for she kept glanc about her in a startled, mystifi way." 

"and sir alister?" queri the general. "do you mean to say he did not 
notic anyth amiss?" 

I shrug my shoulders. "he didn't appear to. I call attent myself 
to the singular attitud of the hounds, and he said quit casually: 
'dog never do take to me much.'" 

uncl bob gave a short laugh. "our friend is evid not sensitive." 
He paus and rub hi chin thoughtfully, then added: "it certainli is 
rather curious, but, for heaven' sake, boy, don't get imagin all 
sort of things!" 

thi nettl me and made me wish I had held my tongue. I wa quit awar 
that my stori might have sound somewhat fantast from a stranger; 
still, he ought to have known me better than to accus me of 
imagination. I abruptli chang the subject, and shortli after left the 
room. 

but I could not banish from my mind the incid of the morning. I could 
not forget the appeal face of those dogs. ethn and sir alist had 
left me there and return to the hous together, and, after their 
departure, those poor, dumb beast had gather round me in a way that 
wa absolut pathetic, lick and fondl my hands, as though 
apologis for their previou misconduct. still, I understood. that 
bristl up their spine wa precis the same sensat I had 
experienc when I first met sir alist moeran. 

As I wa slowli mount the stair on my way up to dress, I heard 
someon run up after me, and turn round to find ethn besid me. 

"maurice," she said, rather breathlessly, "tell me, you did not punish 
fritz and bess for not come at onc when you call them thi 
morning?" 

"no," I answered. 

she gave a nervou littl laugh. "i'm glad of that. I thought 
perhaps----" she stop short, then rush on, "you know how queer 
mother is about cats--can't bear one in the room, and how they alway 
fli out directli she come in? well, dog are the same with alister. 
he--h told me so himself. It seem funni to me, and I suppos to you, 
becaus we'r so fond of all kind of animals; but I don't realli see 
whi it should be ani more extraordinari to have an antipathi for dog 
than for cats, and no one think anyth of it if you dislik cats." 

"that is so," I said thoughtfully. 

"anyway," she went on, "it is not our own fault if a certain anim doe 
not instinct take to us." 

"of cours not," I repli stoutly. "you'r sure not worri about 
it, are you?" 

she hasten to assur me that she wa not, but I could see that my 
indors her opinion wa a great relief to her. she had been afraid 
that I should think it unnatural. I did for that matter, but I could 
not, of course, tell her so. 

that night sir alist and I sat up late talk after the other men had 
retired. We had got on the subject of india and had been compar note 
as to our differ adventures. from thi we went on to discuss 
peril situat and escapes, and it wa then that he narrat to me 
a veri curiou incident. 

"it happen when I wa onli twenty-one," he said, "the year after my 
father died. I think I told you that as soon as ever I becam my own 
master, I pack up and wa off to the east. I had a friend with me, a 
boy who had been my best pal at school. they use to call us 'black and 
white.' He wa fair and girlish-looking, and hi name wa buchanan. He 
wa just as keen on india as I was, and purpos write a book 
afterward on our experiences. 

"our intent wa to explor the wildest, most savag districts, and as 
a start we select the provinc of orissa. the forest there are 
wonderful, and it is there, if anywhere, that the almost extinct indian 
lion is still to be found. We engag two sturdi hillmen to accompani us 
and push our way downward from calcutta over mountains, river and 
through some of the densest jungl i'v ever traversed. It wa on the 
outskirt of one of the latter that the tragedi took place. We had 
pitch our tent one even after a long, tire day, and turn in 
earli to sleep, buchanan and I in one, and the two bhil in the other." 

sir alist paus for a few moments, toy with hi cigar in an 
abstract manner, then continu in the same clear, even voice: 

"when I awok next morning, I found my friend lie besid me dead, and 
blood all round us! hi throat wa torn open by the teeth of some wild 
beast, hi breast wa horribl maul and lacerated, and hi eye were 
wide, stare open, and their express wa awful. He must have die a 
hideou death and known it!" 

again he stopped, but I made no comment, onli wait with breathless 
interest till he went on. 

"I call the two men. they came and looked, and for the first time I 
saw terror written on their faces. their nostril quiver as though 
scent something; then 'tiger!' they gasp simultaneously. 

"one of them said he had heard a stifl scream in the night, but had 
thought it mere some anim in the jungle. the whole thing wa a 
mystery. how I came to sleep undisturb through it all, how I escap 
the same fate, and whi the tiger did not carri off hi prey----" 

"you are sure it wa a tiger?" I put in. 

"I think there wa no doubt of it," sir alist replied. "the bhil 
swore the teeth-mark were unmistakable, and not onli that, but I saw 
anoth case seven year later. the bodi of a young woman wa found in 
the compound outsid my bungalow, done to death in precis the same 
way. and sever of the nativ testifi as to there be a tiger in 
that vicinity, for they had found three or four young goat destroy in 
similar fashion." 

"who wa the girl?" I asked. 

moeran slowli turn hi lucent, amber eye upon me as he answered. "she 
wa a german, a sort of nurseri gover at the english doctor's. He 
wa natur fright upset about it, and a regular panic sprang up 
in the neighbourhood. the nativ got a superstiti scare--thought 
one of their god wa wroth about someth and demand sacrifice; but 
the white peopl were simpli out to kill the tiger." 

"and did they?" I queri eagerly. 

sir alist shook hi head. "that I can't say, as I left the place veri 
soon afterward and went up to the mountains." 

A long silenc followed, dure which I stare at him in mute 
fascination. then an unaccount impuls made me say abruptly: 
"moeran, how old are you?" 

hi finely-mark eyebrow went up in surpris at the irrelev of my 
question, but he smiled. 

"funni you should ask! It so happen that it' my birthday to-morrow. I 
shall be thirty-five." 

"thirty-five!" I repeated. then with a shiver I rose from my seat. the 
room seem to have turn suddenli cold. 

"come," I said, "let' go to bed." 

* * * * * 

next night at dinner I propos sir alister' health, and we all drank 
to him and hi "bride-to-be." they had that day definit settl the 
date of their marriag for two month ahead; ethn wa look radiant 
and everyon seem in the best of spirits. 

We danc and romp and play rowdi game like a pack of children. 
noth wa too silli for us to attempt. while a one-step wa in full 
swing some would-b wag suddenli turn off all the lights. It wa then 
that for a moment I caught sight of a pair of glowing, fieri eye 
shine through the darkness. instantli my thought flew back to that 
meet at the station, when I had fanci that ethn had her dog in her 
arms. A chill, sinist feel crept over me, but I kept my gaze fix 
steadili in the same direction. the next minut the light went up, and 
I found myself stare straight at sir alist moeran. hi arm wa round 
ethne' waist and she wa smile up into hi face. almost immedi 
they took up the danc again, and I and my partner follow suit. but 
all my gaieti had departed. An indefin oppress seiz me and 
clung to me for the rest of the evening. 

As I emerg from my room next morn I saw old giles, the butler, 
hurri down the corridor toward me. 

"oh, mr. maurice--captain kilvert, sir!" he burst out, constern in 
everi line of hi usual stolid countenance. "A dread thing ha 
happened! how it' come about I can't for the life of me say, and how 
we'r go to tell the general, the lord onli knows!" 

"what?" I asked, seiz him by the arm. "what is it?" 

"the dawg, sir," he answer in a hoars whisper, "mike--in the 
study----" 

I wait to hear no more, but strode off down the stairs, gile hobbl 
besid me as fast as he could, and togeth we enter the study. 

In the middl of the floor lay the bodi of mike. A horribl forebod 
grip me, and I quickli knelt down and rais the dog' head. hi neck 
wa torn open, bitten right through to the windpipe, the blood still 
drip from it into a dark pool on the carpet. 

A cold, numb sensat stole down my spine and made my leg grow 
suddenli weak. bead of perspir gather on my forehead as I 
slowli rose to my feet and face giles. 

"what' the mean of it, sir?" he asked, pass hi hand across hi 
brow in utter bewilderment. "that dawg wa as right as possibl when I 
shut up last night, and he couldn't have got out." 

"no," I answer mechanically, "he couldn't have got out." 

"look like some wild beast had attack him," mutter the old man, in 
awe tones, as he bent over the lifeless body. "d'ye see the teeth 
marks, sir? but it' not possible--not possible." 

"no," I said again, in the same wooden fashion. "it' not possible." 

"but how'r we go to account for it to the general?" he cri 
brokenly. "oh, mr. maurice, sir, it' dreadful!" 

I nodded. "you'r right, giles! still, it isn't your fault, nor mine. 
leav the matter to me. i'll break it to my uncle." 

It wa a most unenvi task, but I did it. poor uncl bob! I shall 
never forget hi face when he saw the mutil bodi of the dog that for 
year had been hi faith companion. He almost wept, onli rage and 
resent against the murder were so strong in him that they thrust 
grief for the time into the background. the mysterious, incomprehens 
manner of the dog' death onli ad to hi anger, for there wa 
appar no one on whom to wreak hi vengeance. 

the news caus gener concern throughout the house, and ethn wa 
fright upset. 

"oh, alister, isn't it awful?" she exclaimed, tear stand in her 
pretti blue eyes. "poor, darl mike!" 

"yes," he answer rather absently. "it' most unfortunate. valuabl 
dog, too, wasn't it?" 

I walk away. the man' calm, handsom face fill me suddenli with 
unspeak revulsion. the atmospher of the room seem to becom heavi 
and noisome. I felt compel to get out into the open to breathe. 

I found the gener tramp up and down the drive in the rain, hi chin 
sunk deep into the collar of hi overcoat, hi hat pull low down over 
hi eyes. I join him without speaking, and in silenc we pace side by 
side for anoth quarter of an hour. 

"uncl bob," I said abruptli at last, "take my advice. have one of the 
hound indoor to-night--princep, he' a good watch-dog." 

the gener stop short in hi walk and look at me. 

"you'v someth on your mind, boy. what is it?" 

"this," I answer grimly. "whoever, or whatev kill mike wa in the 
hous last night, or got in, after gile shut up. It may still be there 
for all we know. In the dark, dark deed are done, and--well, I think 
it' wise to take precautions." 

"good god, maurice, if there is ani creatur in hiding, we'll soon have 
it out! i'll have the place search now. but the thing' impossible, 
absurd!" 

I shrug my shoulders. "then mike die a natur death?" 

"natural?" he echo fiercely. "don't talk rubbish!" 

"in that case," I said quietly, "you'll agre to let one of the dog 
sleep in." 

He gave me a long, troubled, search look, then said gruffly: "veri 
well, but don't make ani fuss about it. women are such nervou be 
and we don't want to upset anyone." 

"you needn't be afraid of that," I replied, "i'll manag it all right." 

there wa no further talk of mike that day. the visitors, see how 
distress the gener was, by tacit consent avoid the subject, but 
everyon felt the dampen effect. 

that night, befor I retir to my room, I took a lantern, went out to 
the kennel and brought in princep, a pure-br irish setter. He wa a 
dog of except intelligence, and when I spoke to him, explain the 
reason of hi presenc indoors, he seem to know instinct what wa 
requir of him. 

As I pass the studi I notic a light come from under the door. 
somewhat surprised, I turn the handl and look in. My uncl wa 
seat befor hi desk in the act of load a revolver. He glanc up 
sharpli as I entered. 

"oh, it' you, is it? got the dog in?" 

"yes," I replied, "i'v left him in the librari with the door open." 

He regard the revolv pensiv for a few moments, then laid it down 
in front of him. 

"you'v no theori as to this--thi business?" 

I shook my head, I could offer no explanation. yet all the while there 
lurked, deep down in my heart, a hideou suspicion, a suspicion so 
monstrou that had I voic it, I should probabl have been consid 
mad. and so I held my peac on the subject and mere wish my uncl 
good-night. 

It wa about one o'clock when I got into bed, but my brain wa far too 
agit for sleep. someth I had heard year ago, some old wives' 
tale about a man' life chang everi seven years, kept din in my 
head. I wa strive to rememb how the stori went, when a slight sound 
outsid caught my ear. In a second I wa out of bed and had silent 
open the door. As I did so, someon pass close by me down the 
corridor. 

cautiously, with beat heart, I crept out and followed. however, I 
almost exclaim aloud in my amazement, for the light from a window fell 
full on the figur ahead of me, and I recognis my cousin ethne. she 
wa sleep-walking, a habit she had had from her childhood, and which 
appar she had never outgrown. 

for some minut I stood there, undecid how to act, while she pass 
on down the stairs, out of sight. To wake her I knew would be wrong. I 
knew, also, that she had walk thu a score of time without come to 
ani harm. there was, therefore, no reason whi I should not return to my 
room and leav her to her wandering, yet still I remain root to the 
spot, all my sens strained, alert. and then suddenli I heard princep 
whine. A seri of low, stertor growl followed, growl that made my 
blood run cold! with swift, noiseless steps, I stole along to the 
minstrel' galleri which overlook that portion of the hall that 
commun with the library. As I did so, there aros from immedi 
below me a success of sharp snarls, such as a dog give when he is 
in deadli fear or pain. 

A shaft of moonlight fell across the polish floor, and by it aid I 
wa just abl to distinguish the form of princep crouch against the 
wainscoting. He wa breath heavily, hi head turn all the while 
toward the opposit side of the room. I look in the same direction. 
out of the dark gleam two fiery, golden orbs, two eye that move 
slowli to and fro, backward and forwards, as though the thing were 
prowl round and round. now it seem to crouch as though readi to 
spring, and I could hear the savag growl as of some beast of prey. 

As I watched, horrified, fascinated, a _portière_ close by wa lifted, 
and the white-rob figur of ethn appeared. all heedless of danger she 
came on across the hall, and the thing, with soft, stealthi tread, came 
after her. I knew then that there wa not an instant to be lost, and 
like a flash I dart along the galleri and down the stairs. but ere I 
gain the hall a pierc scream rent the air, and I wa just in time 
to see ethn born to the ground by a great, dark form, which had sprung 
at her like a tiger. 

half frantic, I dash forward, snatch as I did so a rapier from the 
wall, the onli weapon handy. but befor I reach the spot, a voic from 
the studi doorway called: "stop!" and the next moment the report of a 
pistol rang out. 

"good god!" I cried. "who have you shot?" 

"not the girl," answer the grim voic of my uncle, "you may trust my 
aim for that! I fire at the eye of the thing. here, quick, get light 
and let' see what ha happened." 

but my one and onli thought wa for ethne. move across to the dark 
mass on the floor, I stretch out my hand. My finger touch a smooth, 
fabric-lik cloth, but the smell wa the smell of fur, the musky, 
sun-warm fur of the jungle! with sicken repugnance, I seiz the 
thing by it two broad shoulder and roll it over. then I care 
rais ethn from the ground. At that moment gile and a footman 
appear with candles. In silenc my uncl took one and came toward me, 
the servant with scared, blanch counten following. 

the light fell full upon the dead, upturn face of sir alist moeran. 
hi upper lip wa drawn back, show the strong, white teeth. the two 
front one were tip with blood. instantli my eye turn to ethne' 
throat, and there I saw deep, horribl marks, like the mark of a 
tiger' fangs; but, thank god, they had not penetr far enough to do 
ani seriou injury! My uncle' shot had come just in time to save her. 

"mere fainted, hasn't she?" he ask anxiously. 

I nodded. My relief at find thi wa so, wa too great for words. 

"heaven be praised!" I heard him mutter. then lift my beautiful, 
unconsci burden in my arms, I carri her upstair to her room. 

* * * * * 

can I explain, can anyon explain, the mysteri vagari of atavism? I 
onli know that there are amongst us, rare instanc fortunately, but 
exist nevertheless--men with the soul of beasts. they may be 
cognis of the fact or otherwise. In the case of sir alist I feel 
sure it wa the latter. He had probabl no more idea than I what 
far-reaching, evil strain it wa that came out in hi blood and turn 
him, everi seven years, practic into a vampire. 




V 

the kiss 


the quiet of the desert build incircl the little, glow room as 
the velvet incircl the jewel in it case. occasion faint sound 
came from the distance--th movement of cleaner at work, a rais 
voice, the slam of a door. 

the man sat at hi desk, as he had sat through the busi day, but he had 
turn sideway in hi seat, the better to regard the other occup of 
the room. 

she wa not beautiful--had no need to be. her call to him had been the 
saner call of mind to mind. that he desired, besides, the pass 
benedict of her hands, the fragranc of her corn-gold hair, the sight 
of her slenderness: thi she had guess and glori in. till now, he 
had touch her physic self neither in word nor deed. to-night, she 
knew, the barrier would be down; to-night they would kiss. 

her quiet eyes, held by hi dure the spell that had bound them 
speechless, did not flinch at the break of it. 

"the lord made the world and then He made thi rotten old office," the 
man said quietly. "into it He put you--and me. what, befor that day, 
ha gone to the make and mar of me, and the make and perfect 
of you, is not to the point. It is enough that we have realised, heart, 
and soul, and body, that you are mine and I am yours." 

"yes," she said. 

He fell silent again, hi eye on her hungrily. she felt them and long 
for hi touch. but there came onli hi voice. 

"I want you. the first moment I saw you I want you. I thought then 
that, whatev the cost, I would have you. that wa in the earli day of 
our talk here--befor you made it so courag clear to me that it 
would never be possibl for you to ignor my marriag and come to me. 
that is still so, isn't it?" 

she move slightly, like a dreamer in pain, as again she face the creed 
she had hate through mani a sleepless night. 

"it is so," she agreed. "and becaus it is so, you are go away 
to-morrow." 

"yes." 

they look at each other across the foot or two of interven space. 
It wa a look to bridg death with. but even beneath their suffering, 
her eye voic the tremul wait of her lips. 

At last he found words. 

"you are the most wonder woman in the world--th pluckiest, the most 
complet understanding; you have the widest charity. I suppos I ought 
to thank you for it all; I can't--that' not my way. I have alway 
demand of you, demand enormously, and receiv my measur press 
down and run over. now I am go to ask thi last thing of you: 
will you, of your goodness, go away--upstairs, anywhere--and come back 
in ten minutes' time? By then I shall have clear out." 

she look at him almost incredulously, lip parted. suddenli she seem 
a child. 

"you--i----" she stammered. then rise to her feet, with a superb 
simplicity: "but, you must kiss me befor you go. you must! you--simpli 
_must_." 

for the space of a flame moment it seem that in one stride he would 
have cross to her side, caught and held her. 

"for god' sake----!" he muttered, in almost ludicr fear of himself. 
then, with a big effort, he regain hi self-control. 

"listen," he said hoarsely. "I want to kiss you so much that I daren't 
even get to my feet. Do you understand what that means? think of it, 
just for a moment, and then realis that _I am not go to kiss you_. 
and I have kiss mani women in my time, too, and shall kiss more, no 
doubt." 

"but it' not becaus of that----?" 

"that i'm hold back? no. neither is it becaus I funk the tortur of 
kiss you onc and let you go. it' becaus i'm afraid--for 
_you_." 

"for me?" 

"listen. you have unfold your belief to me and, though I don't hold 
them--don't attempt to live up to your lights--th realis of them 
ha given me a rever for you that you don't dream of. I have put you 
in a shrine and knelt to you; everi time you have sat in that chair and 
talk with me, I have worship you." 

"it would not alter--al that," the girl said faintly, "if you kiss 
me." 

"I don't believ that; neither do you--no, you don't! In your heart of 
heart you admit that a woman like you is not kiss for the first and 
last time by a man like me. suppos I kiss you now? I should awaken 
someth in you as yet half asleep. you'r young and puls with life, 
and there are--thank heaven!--few layer of that damnabl young-girl 
shyness over you. the world would call you primitive, I suppose." 

"but I don't----" 

"oh, lord, you must see it' all or nothing! you sure understand that 
after I had left you you would not go against your morality, perhaps, 
but you would adjust it, in spite of yourself, to meet your desires! I 
cannot--safely--kiss you." 

"but you are go away for good!" 

"for good! child, do you think my go will be your safeguard? If you 
want me so much that you came to think it wa right and good to want 
me, wouldn't you find me, send for me, call for me? and I should come. 
god! I can see the look in your eye now, when the want had been 
satisfied, and you could not drug your creed ani more." 

her breath came in a long sigh. then she tri to speak; tri again. 

"it is so, isn't it?" he asked. 

she nodded. speech wa too difficult. with the movement a strand of the 
corn-gold hair came tumbl down the side of her face. 

"then, that be the case," said the man, with infinit gentleness, hi 
eye on the little, tumbl lock, "I shall not attempt so much as to 
touch your hand befor you leav the room." 

At the door she turned. 

"tell me onc again," she said. "you _want_ to kiss me?" 

He grip the arm of hi chair; from where she stood, she could see 
the vein stand out on hi hands. 

"I want to kiss you," he said fiercely. "I want to kiss you. If there 
were ani way of cut off to-morrow--al the to-morrows--with the 
danger they hold for us--i would kiss you. I would kiss you, and kiss 
you, and kiss you!" 


II 

where her feet took her dure the thousand, thousand year that wa hi 
go she could never afterward say; but she found herself at last at 
the top of the great building, at an open window, lean out, with the 
rain beat into her eyes. 

far below her the light waver and later she rememb that echo of 
a far-off tumult had reach her as she sat. but her ear held onli the 
memori of a man' footsteps--th eager tread that had never linger so 
much as a second' space on it way to her; that had often stumbl 
slightli on the threshold of her presence; that she had heard and 
welcom in her dreams; that would not come again. 

the raindrop lay like tear upon her face. 

she brush them aside, and, rising, put up her hand to feel the wet 
lie heavi on her hair. the cold of her limb surpris her 
faintly. downstair she went again, the echo mock everi step. 

she close the door of the room behind her and idli clear a scrap of 
paper from a chair. mechan her hand went to the litter on hi 
desk and she had straighten it all befor she realis that there wa 
no longer ani need. to-morrow would bring a voic she did not know; 
would usher a stranger into her room to take her measur from behind a 
barrier of formality. for the rest there would be work, and food, and 
sleep. 

these thing would make life--lif that had been love. 

she put on her hat and coat. the room seem smaller somehow and 
shabbier. the shade light that had invited, now mere irritated; the 
whimsic disord of book and paper spoke onli of an uncomplet 
task. gone wa the glamour and the promis and the good comradeship. He 
had taken them all. she face to-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow 
empty-handed--in her heart the memori of word that had sear and 
heal in a breath, and the dead dream of a kiss. her throat ach with 
the pain of it. 

and then suddenli she heard him come back! 

she stiffened. for one instant, mind and body, she wa rigid with the 
sheer wonder of it. then, as the atmospher of the room surg back, 
tens with vitality, her mind leapt forward in welcome. He wa come 
back, come back! the word hammer themselv out to the rhythm of 
the eager tread that never linger so much as a second' space on it 
way to her, that stumbl slightli on the threshold of her presence. 

By some queer, reflex twist of memory, her hand brush imaginari 
raindrop from her face and stray uncertainli to where the wet had 
lain on her hair. 

the door open and close behind him. 

"i'v come back. i'v come back to kiss you. dear--_dear_!" 

her outflung hand check him in hi stride toward her. word came 
stammer to her lips. 

"why--but--thi isn't--i don't understand! all you said--it wa true, 
surely? It wa cruel of you to make me know it wa true and then come 
back!" 

"let me kiss you--let me, let me!" He wa overwhelm her, ignor her 
resistance. "I must kiss you, I must kiss you." He said it again and 
again. 

"no, no, you shan't--you can't play with me! you said you were afraid 
for me, and you made me afraid, too--of my weakness--of the danger--of 
my long for you----" 

"let me kiss you! yes, you shall let me; you _shall_ let me." hi arm 
held her, hi face touch hers. 

"aren't you afraid ani more? ha a miracl happened--may we kiss in 
spite of to-morrow?" 

inch by inch she wa relaxing. all thought wa slip away into a 
great white light that held no to-morrows, nor ani fear of them, nor of 
herself, nor of anything. the light crept to her feet, rose to her 
heart, her head. through the radianc came hi words. 

"yes, a miracle. oh, my dear--mi littl child! i'v come back to kiss 
you, littl child." 

"kiss me, then," she said against hi lips. 


iii 

hazili she wa awar that he had releas her; that she had rais her 
head; that against the rough tweed of hi shoulder there lay a long, 
corn-gold hair. 

she laugh shakili and her hand went up to remov it; but he caught her 
finger and held them to hi face. and with the movement and hi look 
there came over her in a wave the shame of her surrender, a shame that 
wa yet a glory, a diadem of pride. she turn blindli away. 

"please," she heard herself saying, "let me go now. I want to be alone. 
I want to--pleas don't tell me to-night. to-morrow----" 

she wa at the door, grope for the handle. behind her she heard hi 
voice; it wa veri tender. 

"I shall alway kneel to you--in your shrine." 

then she wa outside, and the chilli passag were cool her burn 
face. she had left him in the room behind her; and she knew he would 
wait there long enough to allow her to leav the building. almost 
immediately, it seemed, she wa downstair in the hall, had reach the 
entrance. 

she confront a group of white-faced, silent men. 

"why, is anyth the matter? what ha happened? o'dell?" 

the porter stood forward. He clear hi throat twice, but for all that, 
hi word were bare audible. 

"yes, miss carryll. good-night, miss. you'd best be go on, miss, if 
you'll excuse----" 

behind o'del stood a policeman; behind him again, a grave-ey man 
stoop to an unusu task. It arrest her attent like the flash of 
red danger. 

"whi is the door of your room be locked, o'dell?" she knew her 
curios wa indecent, but some power premonit wa stir in 
her, and she could not pass on. "ha there been an accident? who is in 
there?" 

then, almost under her feet, she saw a dark pool lie sluggishli 
against the tiles; nearer the door another--on the pavement outsid 
another--and yet another. she gasped, drew back, felt horribl sick; 
and, as she turned, she caught o'dell' mutter asid to the policeman. 

"young lady' 'i seccereterry--must be the last that seen 'im alive. 
all told, 'tain't more'n 'arf-an-'our sinc 'e left. 'good-night, 
o'dell,' sez 'e. 'miss carryll' still working--don't lock 'er in,' sez 
'e. would 'ave 'i joke. must 'ave gone round the corner an' slap inter 
the car. wish to god the amberlance----" 

her cri cut into hi word as she flung herself forward. her finger 
wrench at the key of the lock door and turn it, in spite of the 
detain hand that seem light as leav upon her shoulder, and as 
easili shaken off. unhearing, unheeding, she forc her way into the 
glare of electr light flood the littl room--beat down on to the 
tabl and it sheet burden. befor she reach it, knowledg had 
drop upon her like a mantle. 

her face wa grey as the one from which she drew the merci coverings, 
but her eye went fearlessli to that which she sought. 

against the rough tweed of the shoulder lay a long, corn-gold hair. 




VI 

the goth 


young cargil smile as mrs. lardner finish her account. 

"and do you realli think that the fact that the poor chap wa drown 
had anyth to do with it?" he asked. "why, you admit yourself that he 
wa known to have been drink just befor he fell out of hi boat!" 

"you may say what you like," return hi hostess impressively, "but 
sinc first we came to live at tryn yr wylfa onli four peopl besid 
poor robert have defi the fates, and each of them wa drown within 
the year. 

"they were all tourists," she ad with someth suspici like 
satisfaction. 

"I am not a superstiti man myself," supplement the major. "but you 
can't get away from the facts, you know, cargill." 

cargil said no more. He perceiv that they had live long enough in 
retir in the littl welsh villag to have acquir a pride in it 
legend. 

the legend and the mountain are the two attract of tryn yr 
wylfa--th offici guidebook devot an equal amount of space to each. 
It will tell you that the bay, across which the quarry' tramp steamer 
now sail, wa onc dri land on which stood a village. deep in the water 
the remain of thi villag can still be seen in clear weather. but 
whosoev dare to look upon them will be drown within the year. A 
local public give full detail of those who have looked--and 
perished. 

the legend had receiv an unexpect boom in the drown of roberts, 
which had just occurred. robert wa a fisherman who had recent come 
from the south. one calm day in februari he had row out into the bay 
in fulfil of a drunken boast. He wa drown three day befor 
midsummer. 

after dinner young cargil forgot about it. He forgot almost everyth 
except betti lardner. but, oddli enough, as he walk back to the hotel 
it wa just betti lardner who made him think again of the legend. He wa 
in love, and, be veri young, want to do someth insan heroic. 
To defi the fate by look on the sunken villag wa an obviou outlet 
for heroism. 

He must have thought a good deal about it befor he fell asleep, for he 
rememb hi resolut on the follow morning. 

after breakfast he saunter along the brief strip of asphalt which the 
villag believ to be a promenade. He wa not actual think of the 
legend; to be precise, he wa think of betti lardner, but he wa 
suddenli remind of it by a boatman press him for hi custom. 

"yes," he said abruptly. "I will hire your boat if you will row me out 
to the sunken village. I want to look at it." 

the welshman eye him suspiciously, perceiv that he wa not joking, 
and shook hi head. 

"come," persist cargill, "I will make it a sovereign if you care to do 
it." 

"thank you, but indeed, no, sir," repli the welshman. "not if it wass 
a hundr sofereigns!" 

"sure you are not afraid?" 

"it iss not fit," retort the welshman, turn on hi heel. 

It wa probabl thi opposit that made young cargil decid that it 
would be realli worth while to defi the legend. 

He did not approach the onli other boatman. He consid the question 
of swimming. the knowledg that the distanc there and back wa nearli 
five mile did not render the feat impossible, for he wa a champion 
swimmer. 

but he soon thought of a better way. He went back to the hotel and 
sought out bissett. bissett wa a fellow member of the middl temple, as 
contentedli briefless as himself. and bissett possess a motor-boat. 

bissett wa not exactli keen on the prospect. 

"don't you think it is rather a silli thing to do?" he reasoned. "of 
cours it' all rot in a way--it must be. but isn't it just as well to 
treat that sort of thing with respect?" 

eventu he agre to take the motor-boat to within a few hundr 
yard of the spot. they would tow a dinghy, in which young cargil could 
finish the journey. 

It took young cargil half-an-hour to find the spot. but he did find it, 
and he did look upon, and actual see, all that remain of the sunken 
village. 

He felt vagu asham of himself when he return to dri land. He 
notic that sever of the villag gave him unfriendli glances; and 
he resolv that he would say noth of the matter to the lardners. 

they were have tea on the lawn when he drop in. He thought that 
mrs. lardner' welcom wa a trifl chilly. after tea betti execut a 
quit deliber manœuvr to avoid have him for a partner at tennis. 
but he ran her to earth later, when they were pick up the balls. 

"how _could_ you?" wa all she said. 

"i--i didn't know you knew," he stammer weakly. 

"of cours everybodi knows! It wa all over the villag befor you 
returned. 

"can't you see what that legend meant to us?" she went on. "it wa a 
thing of beauty. and now you have spoilt it. it' like burn down the 
tree of the fairi glen. you--you _goth_!" 

"but suppos I am drown befor the year is out--lik roberts?" he 
suggest jocularly. 

"then I will forgiv you," she said. and to cargil it sound exactli 
as if she meant what she said. 

A few day later he return to town. for six month he thought littl 
about the legend. then he wa remind of it. 

He had been spend a week-end at brighton. On the return journey he 
had a first-class smoker in the rear of the train to himself. toward 
the end of the hour he doze and dreamt of the day he had look on the 
sunken village. He wa awaken when the train made it usual stop on 
the bridg outsid victoria. 

It had been a pleasant dream, and he wa still tri to preserv the 
illus when hi eye fell lazili on the window, and he notic that 
there wa a dens fog. 

"bit rough on the legend that I happen to be a londoner!" he mused. 
"it isn't easi to drown a man in town!" 

He stood up with the object of remov hi dressing-cas from the rack. 
but befor he reach it there wa the shriek of a whistle, a violent 
shock, and he wa hurl heavili into the opposit seat. 

It wa not a collis in the newspap sens of the word. No one wa 
hurt. A local train, creep along at four mile an hour, had simpli 
miss it signal in the fog and bump the brighton train. 

young cargill, in common with most other passeng put hi head out of 
the window. He saw nothing--except the parapet of the bridge. 

"bi god!" he muttered. "if that other train had been go a littl 
faster----" 

He could just hear the river gurgl beneath him. 

He had got over hi fright by the time he reach victoria. 

"just a common-plac accident," he assur himself, as he drove in a 
taxi-cab to hi chambers. "that' the worst of it! If I happen to be 
drown in the ordinari way they'd swear it wa the legend. I suppose, 
for that reason, I had better not take ani risks. anyhow, I needn't go 
near the sea until the year is out!" 

the superstiti would doubtless affirm that the fate had sent him one 
warn and, anger at hi refus to accept it, had determin to 
drive home the lesson of hi own impotence. for when he arriv at hi 
chamber he found a cablegram from pari await him. 

"hullo, thi must be from uncl peter!" he exclaimed, as he tore open 
the envelope. 

"_fear uncl dying. come at once.--machell._" 

machel wa the elder cargill' secretary, and young cargil wa the old 
man' heir. 

It wa not until he wa in the boat-train that he realis that he wa 
about to cross the sea. 

It wa a coincidence--an odd coincidence. when the ship toss in an 
unusu rough cross he wa prepar to admit to himself that it wa 
an uncanni coincidence. 

He stay a week in pari for hi uncle' funeral. when he made the 
return journey the channel wa like the proverbi mill pond. but it wa 
not until the ship had actual put into dover that he laugh at the 
failur of the fate to take the opportun to drown him. 

He laughed, to be exact, as he wa step down the gangway. At the end 
of the gangway the fold of the rug which he wa carri on hi arm, 
caught in the railings. He turn sharpli to free it and step back, 
cannon into an offic of the dock. It threw him off hi balanc on 
the edg of the dockside. 

even if the offici had not grab him, it is highli probabl that he 
could have save himself from fall into the water, becaus the 
gangway rail wa in easi reach; and if you rememb that he wa a 
champion swimmer, you will agre that it is still more probabl that he 
would not have been drowned, even if he had fallen. 

but the incid made it impression. hi thought revert to it 
constantli dure the next few days. then he told himself that hi 
attend at the last rite of hi uncl had made him morbid, and wa 
more or less success in dismiss the affair from hi mind. 

He had mani friend in common with the lardners. earli in februari he 
wa invit for a week' hunt to a hous at which betti lardner wa 
also a guest. 

she had not forgotten. she did her best to avoid him, and succeed 
remark well, in spite of the fact that their hostess, know 
someth of young cargill' feelings, made sever effort to throw 
them together. 

one day at the end of the hunt he came alongsid of her and they walk 
their hors home together. when he wa sure that they were out of 
earshot he asked: 

"you haven't forgiven me yet?" 

"you know the conditions," she repli banteringly. 

"you leav me no altern to suicide," he protested. 

"that would be cheating," she said. "you must be drown honestly, or 
it' no good." 

then he made a foolish reply. He thought her humour forc and it 
annoy him. rememb that he wa exasperated. He had look forward to 
meet her, and now she wa treat him with studi cold over 
what still seem to him a compar trifl matter. 

"I am afraid," he said, "that that is hardli like to occur. the fact 
of my be a townsman instead of a drunken boatman doesn't give your 
legend a fair chance!" 

less than an hour afterward he wa have hi bath befor dress for 
dinner. the water wa delici hot, and the room wa full of steam. 
As he lay in the bath a drowsi stole over him. enjoy the keen 
physic pleasur of it, he thought what a wholli delight thing wa a 
hot bath after a day' hard hunting. hi mind, border on sleep, dwelt 
lazili on hot bath in general. and then with a startl sudden 
came the thought that, befor now, men had been drown in their baths! 

with a shock he realis that he had almost fallen asleep. He tri to 
rous himself, but a faint had seiz him. that steam--h could not 
breathe! He wa certain he wa go to faint. 

with a desper effort of the will he hurl himself out of the bath 
and threw open the window. 

It must have been the bath episod that first arous the sensat of 
posit fear in cargill. for it wa almost a month later when he 
surpris the secretari of that swim club of which he wa the main 
pillar by hi refus to take part in ani event for the come season. 

He wa begin to take precautions. 

late one night, when taxi-cab were scarce, he found that hi quickest 
way to reach home would be by mean of one of the tubes. He wa in the 
descend lift when he suddenli rememb that that particular tube 
ran beneath the river. suppos an accid should occur--a leakage! 
after all such a thing wa within the bound of possibility. instantli 
there rose befor him the vision of a black torrent roar through the 
tunnel. 

without wait for the lift to ascend he rush to the staircase, and 
sweat with terror gain the street and bribe a loafer to find him a 
cab. 

He made an effort to take himself serious in hand after that. more 
than one acquaint had late told him that he wa look "nervy." 
In the last few week hi sane and normal self seem to have shrunk 
within him. but it wa still capabl of assert itself under 
favour conditions. It would talk aloud to the rest of him as if to a 
separ individual. 

"look here, old man, thi superstiti nonsens is becom an 
obsess to you," it said one fine april morning. "yes, I mean what I 
say--an obsession! you must pull yourself togeth or you'll go stark 
mad, and then you'll probabl go and throw yourself over the embankment. 
that legend is all bosh! you'r in the twentieth century, and you'r not 
a drunken fisherman----" 

"hullo, young cargill!" 

the door burst open and stranack, ooz health and sanity, glare at 
him. 

"jove! what a wreck you look!" continu stranack. "you'v been 
froust too much. i'm glad I came. the car' outside, and we'll run 
down to kingston, take a skiff and pull up to molesey." 

the river! young cargil felt the blood sing in hi ears. 

"i'm afraid I can't manag it. i--i'v got an appoint thi 
afternoon," he stammered. 

stranack perceiv that he wa lying, and wondered. for a few minut 
he gossiped, while young cargil wa repeat to himself: 

"you must pull yourself together. it' becom an obsession. you must 
pull yourself together." 

He wa vagu consciou that stranack wa about to depart. stranack wa 
alreadi in the doorway. hi chanc of kill the obsess wa slip 
from him! A special effort and then: 

"stop!" cri cargill. "i--i'l come with you, stranack." 

oddli enough, he felt much better when they were actual on the river. 
He had never been afraid of water, as such. and the familiar scenery, 
togeth with the wholesom exercis of sculling, act as a tonic to 
hi nerves. 

they pull abov molesey lock. when they were returning, stranack said: 

"you'll take her through the lock, won't you?" 

It wa a needless remark, and if stranack had not made it all might have 
been well. As a fact, it set cargil ask himself whi he should not 
take her through the lock. He wa admit to be a much better boatman 
than stranack, and everyon knew that it requir a certain amount of 
skill to manag a lock properly. lock were danger if you play the 
fool. befor now peopl had been drown in locks. 

the rest wa inevitable. He lost hi head as the lower gate swung open, 
and broke the rule of the river by push out in front of a launch. the 
launch wa alreadi under way, and young cargil tri to avoid it 
better, thrust with hi boat-hook at the side of the lock. the thrust 
wa nervou and ill-calculated, and the next instant the skiff had 
blunder under the bow of the launch. 

It happen veri quickly. the skiff wa forced, broadsid on, against 
the lock gates, and wa splinter like firewood. cargil fell 
backwards, struck hi head heavili against the gates--and sank. 

He return to conscious in the lock-keeper' lodge. He had been 
under water a danger long time befor stranack, who had suffer no 
more than a wetting, had found him. It had been touch and go for hi 
life, but artifici respir had succeeded. 

He soon went to piec after that. 

from one of the window of hi chamber the river wa just visible. one 
morn he deliber pull the blind down. the action wa important. 
It signifi that he had definit given up pretend that he had the 
power of shake off the obsession. 

but if he could not shake it off, he could at least keep it temporarili 
at bay. He start a guerilla campaign against the obsess with the 
aid of the brandi bottle. He wa rare drunk, and as rare sober. 

He wa sober the day he wa compel to call on an aunt who live in 
the still prosper outskirt of paddington. It wa one of hi good 
day and, in spite of hi sobriety, he had himself in veri good control 
when he left hi aunt. 

In hi search for a cab it becam necessari for him to cross the canal. 
On the bridg he paus and, grip the parapet, made a surpris 
attack upon hi enemy. 

some children, play on the tow path, help him considerably. their 
delight saniti in the presenc of the water wa worth more to him 
than the brandy. He wa posit win the battle, when one of the 
children fell into the water. 

for an instant he hesitated. then, as on the night of the tube episode, 
panic seiz him. the next instant the man who wa probabl the best 
amateur swimmer in england, wa run with all hi might away from the 
canal. 

when he reach hi chamber he waited, with the assist of the 
brandy, until hi man brought him the last edit of the even paper. 
A tini paragraph on the back sheet told him of the tragedy. 

An hour later hi man found him face downward on the hearthrug and, 
wrongli attribut hi condit wholli to the brandy, put him to bed. 

He wa in bed about three weeks. the doctor, who wa also a person 
friend, wa shrewd enough to suspect that the brandi wa the effect, 
rather than the caus of the nerv trouble. 

about the first week in june cargil wa allow to get up. 

"you'v got to go away," said the doctor one morning. "you are probabl 
awar that your nerv have gone to pieces. the sea is the place for 
you!" 

the gasp that follow wa scarc audible, and the doctor miss it. 

"you went to tryn yr wylfa about thi time last year," continu the 
doctor. "go there again! Go for long walk on the mountains, and put up 
at a temper hotel." 

He went to tryn yr wylfa. 

the train journey of six hour knock him up for anoth week. By the 
time he wa strong enough for the promenad it wa the fourteenth of 
june. He notic the date on the hotel calendar, and realis that the 
fate had anoth ten day in which to drown him. 

He did not call on the lardners. He felt that he couldn't--aft the 
canal episode. four of the ten day had pass befor betti lardner ran 
across him on the promenade. 

she notic at onc the chang in him, and wa kinder than she had ever 
been before. 

"next saturday," he said, "i the anniversary!" 

for answer she smile at him, and he might have smile back if he had 
not rememb the canal. 

she met him each morn after that, so that she wa with him on the day 
when he made hi atonement. 

there had been a violent storm in the earli morning. It had driven one 
of the quarri steamer on to the long sand-bank that lie submerg 
between tryn yr wylfa and puffin island. the gale still lasted, and the 
steamer wa in momentari danger of becom a complet wreck. 

there is no lifeboat servic at tryn yr wylfa. It wa imposs to 
launch an ordinari boat in such a sea. 

colonel denbigh, the owner of the quarri and local magnate, who had been 
superintend what feebl effort had been made to effect a rescue, 
answer gloomili when betti lardner ask him if there were ani hope. 

"it' a terribl thing," he jerked. "first time there ha been a wreck 
hereabouts. it' hopeless tri to launch a boat----" 

"suppos a fellow were to swim out to the wreck with a life-lin in 
tow?" 

It wa young cargil who spoke. 

the colonel glare at him contemptuously. 

"he would need to be a pretti fine swimmer," he returned. 

"I don't want to blow my own trumpet, but I am consid to be one of 
the best amateur swimmer in the country," repli cargil calmly. "if 
you will tell your men to get the line ready, I will borrow a bath 
suit from somewhere." 

they both stare at him in amazement. 

"but you are still an invalid," cri betti lardner. "you----" 

she stop short and regard him with fresh wonder. somehow he no 
longer look an invalid. 

mechan she walk by hi side to the littl bath office. 
suddenli she clutch hi arm. 

"jack," she said, "have you forgotten the--th legend?" 

"betty," he replied, "have you forgotten the crew?" 

while he wa undress the attend ask him some trivial question. 
He did not hear the man. hi thought were far away. He wa think of 
a group of children play on the bank of a canal. 

To the accompani of the colonel' protest they fix a belt on him, 
to which wa attach the life-line. 

He walk along the slope wooden project that is use as a land 
stage for pleasur skiffs, walk until the water splash over him. 
then he dive into the boil surf. 

thu it wa that he earn betti lardner' forgiveness. 




vii 

the last ascent 


the extraordinari rapid with which a success airman may achiev 
fame wa well shown in the case of my friend, radcliff thorpe. one week 
known mere to a few friend as a clever young engineer, the next hi 
name wa on the lip of the civilis world. hi first success wa 
follow by a seri of remark feats, of which hi flight abov the 
atlantic, hi race with the torpedo-boat-destroy across the north 
sea, and hi sensat display dure the militari manœuvr on 
salisburi plain, impress hi name and person firmli upon the 
fickl mind of the public, and explain the tremend excit caus 
by hi inexplic disappear dure the great aviat meet at 
attercliffe, near london, toward the end of the summer. 

few people, I suppose, have forgotten the facts. for some time 
previous he had been devot himself more especi to ascend to 
as great a height as possible. He held all the record for height, and 
it wa known that at attercliff he meant to endeavour to eclips hi 
own achievements. 

It wa a love day, not a breath of wind stirring, not a cloud in the 
sky. We saw him start. We saw him fli up and up in great sweep 
spirals. We saw him climb higher and ever higher into the azur space. 
We watch him, those of us whose eye could bear the strain, as he 
dwindl to a dot and a speck, till at last he pass beyond sight. 

It wa a stir thing to see a man thu storm, as it were, the wall 
of heaven and probe the veri mysteri of space. I rememb I felt quit 
annoy with someon who wa take a cinematograph record. It seem 
such a sordid, business-lik thing to be do at such a moment. 

present the aeroplan came into sight again and wa greet with a 
sudden roar of cheering. 

"he is do a glide down," someon cri excitedly, and though someon 
els declar that a glide from such a height wa unthink and 
impossible, yet it wa soon plain that the first speaker wa right. 

down through unimagin thousand of feet, straight and swift swept 
the machine, make such a sweep as the eagl in it pride would never 
have dared. peopl held their breath to watch, expect everi moment 
some catastrophe. but the machin kept on an even keel, and in a few 
moment I join with the other in a wild rush to the field at a littl 
distanc where the machine, like a mighti bird, had alight easili and 
safely. 

but when we reach it we doubt our own eyes, our own sanity. there 
wa no sign anywher of radcliff thorpe! 

No one knew what to say; we look blankli at our neighbours, and one 
man got down on hi hand and knee and peer under the bodi of the 
machin as if he suspect radcliff of hide there. then the chairman 
of the meeting, lord fallowfield, made a curiou discovery. 

"look," he said in a high, shaken voice, "the steer wheel is jammed!" 

It wa true. the steer wheel had been care fasten in one 
position, and the lever control the plane had also been fix so as 
to hold them at the right angl for a downward glide. that wa strang 
enough, but in face of the mysteri of radcliffe' disappear littl 
attent wa paid it. 

where, then, wa it pilot? that wa the question that wa fill 
everybody' mind. He had vanish as utterli as vanish the mist one 
see rise in the sunshine. 

It wa suppos he must have fallen from hi seat, but as to how that 
had happened, how it wa that no fragment of hi bodi or hi cloth 
wa ever found, abov all, how it wa that hi aeroplan had returned, 
the engin cut off, the plane secur in correct position, no even 
moder plausibl explan wa ever put forward. 

the loss to aeronaut wa felt to be severe. from childhood radcliff 
had shown that, in addit to this, he had a mark aptitud for 
drawing, usual held at the servic of hi profession, but now and 
again exercis in produc sketch of hi friends. 

among those who knew him privat he wa fairli popular, though not, 
perhaps, so much so as he deserved; certainli he had a way of talk 
"shop" which wa a trifl tire to those who did not figur the world 
as one vast engin problem, while with women he wa apt to be 
brusqu and short-mannered. 

My surprise, then, can be imagin when, call one afternoon on him 
and have to wait a little, I had notic lie on hi desk a crayon 
sketch of a woman' face. It wa a veri love face, the featur almost 
perfect, and yet there wa about it someth unearthli and spectral 
that wa curious disturbing. 

"smitten at last?" I ask jestingly, and yet awar of a certain odd 
discomfort. 

when, he saw what I wa look at he went veri pale. 

"who is it?" I asked. 

"oh, just--someone!" he answered. 

He took the sketch from me, look at it, frown and lock it away. As 
he seem unwil to pursu the subject, I went on to talk of the 
busi I had come about, and I congratul him on hi flight of the 
day befor in which he had broken the record for height. As I wa go 
he said: 

"bi the way, that sketch--what did you think of it?" 

"why, that you had better be careful," I answered, laughing; "or you'll 
be fall from your high estat of bachelordom." 

He gave so violent a start, hi face express so much of apprehens 
and dismay, that I stare at him blankly. recov himself with an 
effort, he stammer out: 

"it' not--i mean--it' an imaginari portrait." 

"then," I said, amaz in my turn, "you'v a jolli sight more 
imagin than anyon ever credit you with." 

the incid remain in my mind. As a matter of fact, practic 
radcliff thorpe, absorb in question of strain and ease, hi head 
full of cylind and wheel and ratchet and the lord know what else, 
would have seem to me the last man on earth to creat that haunting, 
strange, unearthli face, human in form, but not in expression. 

It wa about thi time that radcliff began to give so much attent to 
the make of veri high flights. hi favourit time wa in the earli 
morning, as soon as it wa light. then in the chill dawn he would rise 
and soar and wing hi flight high and ever higher, up and up, till the 
eye could no longer follow hi ascent. 

I rememb he made one of these strange, solitari flight when I wa 
spend the week-end with him at hi cottag near the attercliff 
aviat grounds. 

I had come down from town somewhat late the night before, and I rememb 
that just befor we went to bed we went out for a few minut to enjoy 
the beauti of a perfect night. the moon wa shine in a clear sky, not 
a sound or a breath disturb the sublim quietude; in the south one 
wondrou star gleam low on the horizon. neither of us spoke; it wa 
enough to drink in the beauti of such rare perfection, and I notic how 
radcliff kept hi eye fix upward on the dark blue vault of space. 

"are you long to be up there?" I ask him jestingly. 

He start and flushed, and he then went veri pale, and to my surpris I 
saw that he wa shivering. 

"you are get cold," I said. "we had better go in." 

He nod without answering, and, as we turn to go in, I heard quit 
plainli and distinctli a low, strang laugh, a laugh full of a honey 
sweet that yet thrill me with great fear. 

"what' that?" I said, stop short. 

"what?" radcliff asked. 

"someon laughed," I said, and I stare all round and then upwards. "I 
thought it came from up there," I said in a bewild way, point 
upwards. 

He gave me an odd look and, without answering, went into the cottage. He 
had said noth of have plan ani flight for the next morning; but 
in the earli morning, the chill and grey dawn, I wa rous by the 
drum of hi engine. At onc I jump up out of bed and ran to the 
window. 

the machin wa rais itself lightli and easili from the ground. I 
watch him wing hi god-lik way up through the still, soft air till he 
wa lost to view. then, after a time, I saw him emerg again from those 
immens of space. He came down in one long majest sweep, and 
alight in a field a littl way away from the house, leav the 
aeroplan for hi mechan to fetch up presently. 

"hullo!" I greet him. "whi didn't you tell me you were go up?" 

As I spoke I heard plainli and distinctly, as plainli as ever I heard 
anyth in my life, that low, strang laugh, that I had heard before, 
so silveri sweet and yet somehow so horrible. 

"what' that?" I said, stop short and stare blankli upwards, for, 
absurd though it seems, that weird sound seem to come float down 
from an infinit height abov us. 

"not high enough," he mutter like a man in an ecstasy. "not high 
enough yet." 

He walk away from me then without anoth word. when I enter the 
cottag he wa seat at the tabl sketch a woman' face--th same 
face I had seen in that other sketch of his, spectral, unreal, and 
lovely. 

"what on earth----?" I began. 

"noth on earth," he answer in a strang voice. then he laugh and 
jump up, and tore hi sketch across. 

He seem quit hi old self again, chatti and pleasant, and with hi 
old passion for talk "shop." He launch into a long explan of 
some scheme he had in mind for secur automat balancing. 

I never told anyon about that strange, mock laugh, in fact, I had 
almost forgotten the incid altogeth when someth brought everi 
detail back to my memory. I had a letter from a person who sign 
himself "georg barnes." 

barnes, it seemed, wa the oper who had taken the pictur of that 
last ascent, and as he understood I had been mr. thorpe' greatest 
friend, he want to see me. certain express in the letter arous 
my curiosity. I replied. He ask for an appoint at a time that wa 
not veri convenient, and final I arrang to call at hi hous one 
evening. 

It wa one of those smart littl six-room villa of which so mani have 
been put up in the london suburb of late. barn wa buy it on the 
instal system, and I quit won hi heart by compliment him on it. 
but for that, I doubt if anyth would have come of my visit, for he 
wa plainli nervou and ill at eas and veri repent of ever have 
said anything. but after my compliment to the hous we got on better. 

"it' on my mind," he said; "I shan't be easi till someon els knows." 

We were in the front room where a good fire wa burning--in my honour, I 
guessed, for the apart had not the air of be much used. On the 
tabl were some photographs. barn show them me. they were 
enlarg from those he had taken of poor radcliffe' last ascent. 

"they'v been shown all over the world," he said. "million of peopl 
have seen them." 

"well?" I said. 

"but there' one no one ha seen--no one except me." 

He produc anoth print and gave it to me. I glanc at it. It seem 
much like the others, have been appar one of the last of the 
series, taken when the aeroplan wa at a great height. the onli thing 
in which it differ from the other wa that it seem a trifl 
blurred. 

"A poor one," I said; "it' misty." 

"look at the mist," he said. 

I did so. slowly, veri slowly, I began to see that that misti appear 
had a shape, a form. even as I look I saw the featur of a human 
countenance--and yet not human either, so spectral wa it, so unreal and 
strange. I felt the blood run cold in my vein and the hair bristl on 
the scalp of my head, for I recognis beyond all doubt that thi face 
on the photograph wa the same as that radcliff had sketched. the 
resembl wa absolute, no one who had seen the one could mistak the 
other. 

"you see it?" barn muttered, and hi face wa almost as pale as mine. 

"there' a woman," I stammered, "a woman float in the air by hi 
side. her arm are held out to him." 

"yes," barn said. "who wa she?" 

the print slip from my hand and flutter to the ground. barn 
pick it up and put it in the fire. wa it fanci or, as it flare up, 
and burnt and wa consumed, did I realli hear a faint laugh float 
downward from the upper air? 

"I destroy the negative," barn said, "and I told my boss someth 
had gone wrong with it. No one ha seen that photograph but you and me, 
and now no one ever will." 




viii 

the terror BY night 


maynard disincumb himself from hi fishing-creel, stab the butt 
of hi rod into the turf, and settl down in the heather to fill a 
pipe. all round him stretch the undul moor, purpl in the late 
summer sunlight. To the southward, low down, a faint haze told where the 
sea lay. the stream at hi feet sang it queer, croon moor-song as it 
rambl onward, chuckl to meet a bed of pebbl somewher out of 
sight, whisper mysteri to the rush that fring it bank of 
peat, deepen to a sudden contralto as it pour over granit boulder 
into a scum-fleck pool below. 

for a long time the man sat smoking. occasion he turn hi head to 
watch with keen eye the fret movement of a fli hover abov the 
water. then a sudden dimpl in the smooth surfac of the stream arrest 
hi attention. A few concentr rippl widened, travel toward him, 
and were absorb in the current. hi lip curv into a littl smile 
and he reach for hi rod. In the clear water he could see the origin 
of the ripples; a small trout, unconsci of hi presence, wa wait 
in it hover for the next tit-bit to float downstream. present it rose 
again. 

"the odd are ten to one in your favour," said the man. "let' see!" 

He drop on one knee and the cast leapt out in featheri coils. once, 
twice it swished; the third time it alight like thistledown on the 
surface. there wa a tini splash, a laugh, and the littl greenheart 
rod flick a trout high over hi head. It wa the merest 
baby--half-an-ounce, perhaps--and it fell from the hook into the herbag 
some yard from the stream. 

"littl ass!" said maynard. "that wa meant for your big brother." 

He recov hi cast and began to look for hi victim. without avail he 
search the heather, and as the fate second sped, at last laid down 
hi rod and drop on hand and knee to probe among the grass-stems. 

for a while he hunt in vain, then the sunlight show a golden sheen 
among some stones. maynard gave a grunt of relief, but as hi hand 
close round it a tini flutter pass through the fingerling; it gave a 
final gasp and wa still. knit hi brow in almost comic vexation, 
he hasten to restor it to the stream, hold it by the tail and 
strive to impart a life-lik wriggl to it limpness. 

"buck up, old thing!" he murmur encouragingly. "oh, buck up! you'r 
all right, realli you are!" 

but the "old thing" wa all wrong. In fact, it wa dead. 

stand in the wet shingle, maynard regard the speckl atom as it 
lay in the palm of hi hand. 

"A matter of seconds, my son. one instant in all etern would have 
made just the differ between life and death to you. and the high 
god deni it you!" 

On the opposit side of the stream, set back about thirti pace from the 
brink, stood a granit boulder. It wa as high as a man' chest, roughli 
cubic in shape; but the weather and cling moss had round it 
edges, and in place segment had crumbl away, give foothold to 
clump of fern and starri moor-flowers. On three side the surround 
ground rose steeply, form an irregular horsesho mound that open to 
the west. perhap it wa the queer amphitheatr effect of thi 
set that connect up some whimsic train of thought in maynard' 
brain. 

"it would seem as if the god had claim you," he mused, still hold 
the corpse. "you shall be a sacrifice--a burnt sacrific to the god of 
wast places." 

He laugh at the conceit, half-asham of hi own childishness, and 
cross the stream by some boulders, he brush away the earth and weed 
from the top of the great stone. then he retrac hi step and gather 
a hand of bleach twig that the winter flood had left strand 
along the margin of the stream. these he arrang method on the 
clear space; on the top of the tini pyre he place the troutlet. 

"there!" he said, and smile grave struck a match. A faint column of 
smoke curl up into the still air, and as he spoke the lower rim of the 
set sun met the edg of the moor. the even seem suddenli to 
becom incred still, even the voic of the stream ceas to be a 
sound distinct. A wagtail bob in the shallow fled into the waste. 
overhead the smoke trembl upwards, a faint stain against a cloudless 
sky. the still seem almost acute. It wa as if the moor were 
waiting, and hold it breath while it waited. then the twig upon hi 
altar crackled, and the pale flame blaze up. the man step back with 
artist appreci of the effect. 

"to be realli impressive, there ought to be more smoke," he continued. 

round the base of the stone were clump of small flowers. they were 
crimson in colour and had thick, fleshi leaves. hastily, he snatch a 
hand and pile it on the fire. the smoke darken and rose in a thick 
column; there wa a curiou pungenc in the air. 

far off the church-bel in some unseen hamlet struck the hour. the 
distant sound, come from the world of men and every-day affairs, 
seem to break the spell. An ousel flutter across the stream and 
dabbl in a puddl among some stones. rabbit began to show themselv 
and frisk with lengthen shadow in the clear spaces. maynard look at 
hi watch, half-mind of a train to be caught somewher mile away, 
and then, held by the peac of run water, stretch himself against 
the slope ground. 

the glow world seem peopl by tini folk, live out their timid, 
inscrut live around him. A water-rat, pass bright-ey upon hi 
law occasion, paus on the border of the stream to consid the 
stranger, and wa lost to view. A stagnant pool among some reed caught 
the reflect of the sunset and chang on the instant into raw gold. 

maynard pluck a grass stem and chew it reflectively, stare out 
across the purpl moor and lazili watch the western sky turn from 
glori to glory. over hi head the smoke of the sacrific still curl 
and eddi upwards. then a sudden sound sent him on to one elbow--th 
thud of an approach horse' hoofs. 

"moor ponies!" he muttered, and, rising, stood expect besid hi 
smoke altar. 

then he heard the sudden jingl of a bit, and present a hors and 
rider climb into view against the pure sky. A young girl, breeched, 
boot and spur like a boy, drew rein, and sat look down into the 
hollow. 

for a moment neither spoke; then maynard acknowledg her presenc by 
rais hi tweed hat. she gave a littl nod. 

"I thought it wa somebodi swaling--burn the heather." she consid 
the ember on the stone, and then her grey eye travel back to the 
spare, tweed-clad figur besid it. 

He smile in hi slow way--a rather attract smile. 

"no. i'v just conclud some pagan rite in connect with a small 
trout!" He nod grave at the stone. "that wa a burnt sacrifice." 
with whimsic serious he told her of the trout' demis and high 
destiny. 

for a moment she look doubtful; but the inflect of breed in hi 
voice, the wholesome, lean face and humor eyes, reassur her. A 
smile hover about the corner of her mouth. 

"oh, is that it? I wonder ..." 

she gather the rein and turn her horse' head. 

"forgiv me if I drag you out of your way," said maynard, never swift 
to conventionality, but touch by the tire shadow in her eyes. the 
faint droop of her mouth, too, betray intens fatigue. "you look 
fagged. I don't want to be a nuisanc or bore you, but I wish you'd let 
me offer you a sandwich. i'v some milk here, too." 

the girl look round the rag moor, brood in the twilight, and 
half hesitated. then she forc a wan littl smile. 

"I am tired, and hungry, too. have you enough for us both?" 

"lots!" said maynard. To himself he added: "and what' more, my child, 
you'll have a littl faint affair in a few minutes, if you don't have 
a feed." 

"come and rest for a minute," he continu aloud. 

He spoke with pleasant, imperson kindliness, and as he turn to hi 
satchel she slip out of the saddl and came toward him, lead her 
horse. 

"drink that," he said, hold out the cup of hi flask. she drank with 
a wri littl face, and coughed. "I put a littl whiski in it," he 
explained. "you need it." 

she thank him and sat down with the bridl link over her arm. the 
colour crept back into her cheeks. maynard produc a packet of 
sandwich and a pasty. 

"i'v been moon about the moor all the afternoon and lost myself 
twice," she explain between frank mouthfuls. "i'm hopelessli late for 
dinner, and i'v still got mile to go." 

"do you know the way now?" he asked. 

"oh, yes! It won't take me long. My famili are sensible, too, and don't 
fuss." she look at him, her long-lash eye a littl serious. "but 
you--how are you go to get home? it' get late to be out on the 
moor afoot." 

maynard laughed. 

"oh, i'm all right, thanks!" He snif the warm septemb night. "I 
think I shall sleep here, as a matter of fact. i'm a gipsi by instinct-- 

"'give to me the life I love, 
let the lave go by me, 
give the jolli heaven above----'" 

He broke off, arrest by her unsmil eyes. she wa silent a moment. 

"peopl don't as a rule sleep out--about here." the word came jerkily, 
as if she were forc a natur tone into her voice. 

"no?" He wa accustom to be question on hi unconvent mode 
of life, and wa prepar for the usual expostulations. she look 
abruptli toward him. 

"are you superstitious?" 

He laugh and shook hi head. 

"I don't think so. but what ha that got to do with it?" 

she hesitated, flush a little. 

"there is a legend--peopl about here say that the moor here is haunted. 
there is a thing that hunt peopl to death!" 

He laugh outright, wonder how old she was. seventeen or eighteen, 
perhaps. she had said her peopl "didn't fuss." that meant she wa left 
to herself to pick up all these old wives' tales. 

"really! ha anyon been caught?" 

she nodded, unsmiling. 

"yes; old georg toms. He wa one of dad' tenants, a big purple-fac 
man, who drank a lot and never took much exercise. they found him in a 
ditch with hi cloth all torn and cover with mud. He had been run to 
death; there wa no wound on hi body, but hi heart wa broken." her 
thought recur to the stone against which they leant, and hi quaint 
conceit. "you were rather rash to go offer burnt sacrific about 
here, don't you think? dad say that stone is the remain of an old 
phœnician altar, too." 

she wa smile now, but the serious linger in her eyes. 

"and I have probabl invok some terribl heathen deity--ashtoreth, or 
pugm, or baal! how awful!" he added, with mock gravity. 

the girl rose to her feet. 

"you are laugh at me. the peopl about here are superstitious, and I 
am a celt, too. I belong here." 

He jump up with a quick protest. 

"no, i'm not laugh at you. pleas don't think that! but it' a littl 
hard to believ in activ evil when all around is so beautiful." He 
help her to mount and walk to the top of the mound at her stirrup. 
"tell me, is there ani charm or incantation, in case----?" hi eye were 
twinkling, but she shook her fair head soberly. 

"they say iron--cold iron--i the onli thing it cannot cross. but I must 
go!" she held out her hand with half-shi friendliness. "thank you for 
your nice to me." her eye grew suddenli wistful. "really, though, I 
don't think I should stay there if I were you. please!" 

He onli laughed, however, and she move off, shake her impati 
hors into a canter. maynard stood look after her till she wa 
swallow by the dusk and surround moor. then, thoughtfully, he 
retrac hi step to the hollow. 

* * * * * 

A cloud lay across the face of the moon when fear awok maynard. He 
roll on to one elbow and stare round the hollow, fill with 
inexplic dread. He wa ordinarili a courag man, and had no 
nerv to speak of; yet, as hi eye follow the line of the ridg 
against the sky, he experienc terror, the elementary, nauseat 
terror of childhood, when the skin tingles, and the heart beat at a 
suffoc gallop. It wa veri dark, but momentarili hi eye grew 
accustom to it. He wa consciou of a queer, pungent smell, horribl 
anim and corrupt. 

suddenli the utter silenc broke. He heard a rattl of stones, the 
splash of water about him, realis that it wa the brook beneath hi 
feet, and that he, maynard, wa run for hi life. 

neither then nor later did reason assert herself. He ran without 
question or amazement. hi brain--th part where human reason hold 
normal sway--wa domin by the pure primit instinct of flight. 
and in that sudden rout of courag and self-respect one consciou 
thought alon remained. whatev it wa that wa even then at hi heels, 
he must not see it. At all cost it must be behind him, and, resist 
the sudden terrifi impuls to look over hi shoulder, he unbutton 
hi tweed jacket and disengag himself from it as he ran. the faint 
haze that had gather round the full moon dispersed, and he saw the 
moor stretch befor him, grey and still, glisten with dew. 

He wa of frugal and temper habits, a wiri man at the height of hi 
physic powers, with lean flank and a deep chest. 

At oxford they had said he wa built to run for hi life. He wa run 
for it now, and he knew it. 

the ground slope upward after a while, and he tore up the incline, 
breath deep and hard; down into a shallow valley, leap gors 
bushes, crash through whortl and meadowsweet, stumbl over 
peat-cut and the work of forgotten tin-mines. An idiot 
popular tune race through hi brain. He found himself tri to frame 
the words, but they broke into incoher prayers, still to the same 
grotesqu tune. 

then, as he breast the flank of a boulder-strewn tor, he seem to 
hear snuffl breath behind him, and, redoubl hi efforts, 
step into a rabbit hole. He wa up and run again in the twinkl 
of an eye, limp from a twist ankl as he ran. 

He sprint over the crest of the hill and thought he heard the sound 
almost abreast of him, away to the right. In the dri bed of a 
watercours some stone were dislodg and fell with a rattl in the 
still of the night; he bore away to the left. A moment later there 
wa someth nearli at hi left elbow, and he smelt again the nameless, 
fœtid reek. He doubled, and the ghastli truth flash upon him. the 
thing wa play with him! He wa be hunt for sport--th sport of 
a horror unthinkable. the sweat ran down into hi eyes. 

He lost all count of time; hi wrist watch wa smash on hi wrist. He 
ran through a reel eternity, sob for breath, stumbling, tripping, 
fight a leaden weariness; and ever the same unreason terror urg 
him on. the moon and rag skylin swam about him; the blood drum 
deafeningli in hi ears, and hi eyebal felt as if they would burst 
from their sockets. He had nearli bitten hi swollen tongu in two 
fall over an unseen peat-cutting, and blood-fleck foam gather on 
hi lips. 

god, how he ran! but he wa no longer among bog and heather. He wa 
running--shambl now--along a road. the lope pursuit of that 
nameless, shapeless someth sound like an echo in hi head. 

He wa near a village, but saw noth save a red mist that swam 
befor him like a fog. the road underfoot seem to rise and fall in 
wavelik undulations. still he ran, with sob gasp and limb that 
swerv under hi weight; at hi elbow hung death unnamable, and the 
fear of it urg him on while everi instinct of hi exhaust bodi 
call out to him to fling up hi hand and end it. 

out of the mist ahead rose the rough outlin of a build by the 
roadside; it wa the villag smithy, half workshop, half dwelling. the 
road here skirt a patch of grass, and the moonlight, glisten on the 
dew, show the dark circular scar of the turf where, for a generation, 
the smith' peat fire had heat the great iron hoop that tyre the 
wheel of the wains. one of these wa even then lie on the ground with 
the turv place in readi for fire in the morning, and in the 
throb dark of maynard' conscious a voic seem to speak 
faintly--th voic of a girl: 

"_there' a thing that hunt peopl to death. but iron--cold iron--it 
cannot cross._" 

the sweat of death wa alreadi on hi brow as he reel sideways, 
plung blindli across the uneven tuft of grass. hi feet caught in 
some obstruct and he pitch forward into the sanctuari of the huge 
iron tyre--a spasm of cramp twist hi limb up under him. 

As he fell a great black rose around him, and with it the bewild 
clamour of awaken dogs. 

* * * * * 

dr. stanmor came down the flag path from the smith' cottage, 
pull on hi gloves. A big car wa pass slowli up the villag 
street, and as it came abreast the smithi the doctor rais hi hat. 

the car stopped, and the driver, a fair-hair girl, leant sideway from 
her seat. 

"good-morning, dr. stanmore! what' the matter here? noth wrong with 
ani of matthew' children, is there?" 

the doctor shook hi head gravely. 

"no, ladi dorothy; they'r all at school. thi is no one belong to 
the family--a stranger who wa taken mysteri ill last night just 
outsid the forge, and they brought him in. it' a most queer case, and 
veri difficult to diagnose--that is to say, to give a diagnosi in 
keep with one' professional--er--conscience." 

the girl switch off the engine, and took her hand from the 
brake-lever. someth in the doctor' manner arrest her interest. 

"what is the matter with him?" she queried. "what diagnosi have you 
made, profession or otherwise?" 

"shock, ladi dorothy; sever exhaust and shock, heart strained, 
superfici lesions, bruises, scratches, and so forth. mental he is in 
a great state of excit and terror, laps into delirium at 
times--that is realli the most seriou feature. In fact, unless I can 
calm him I am afraid we may have some brain troubl on top of the other 
thing. it' most mysterious!" 

the girl nod gravely, hold her underlip between her white teeth. 

"what doe he look like--in appearance, I mean? Is he young?" 

the shadow of a smile cross the doctor' eyes. 

"yes, ladi dorothy--quit young, and veri good-looking. He is a man of 
remark athlet build. He is calmer now, and I have left matthew' 
wife with him while I slip out to see a coupl of other patients." 

ladi dorothi rose from her seat and step down out of the car. 

"I think I know your patient," she said. "in fact, I had taken the car 
to look for him, to ask him to lunch with us. Do you think I might see 
him for a minute? If it is the person I think it is I may be abl to 
help you diagnos hi illness." 

togeth they walk up the path and enter the cottage. the doctor led 
the way upstair and open a door. A woman sit by the bed rose and 
drop a curtsey. 

ladi dorothi smile a greet to her and cross over to the bed. 
there, hi face grey and drawn with exhaustion, with shadow round hi 
close eyes, lay maynard; one hand lie on the counterpan open and 
close convulsively, hi lip moved. the physician eye the girl 
interrogatively. 

"do you know him?" he asked. 

she nodded, and put her firm, cool hand over the twitch fingers. 

"yes," she said. "and I warn him. tell me, is he veri ill?" 

"he requir rest, care nursing, absolut quiet----" 

"all that he can have at the manor," said the girl softly. she met the 
doctor' eye and look away, a faint colour ting her cheeks. "will 
you go and telephon to father? I will take him back in the car now if 
he is well enough to be moved." 

"yes, he is well enough to be moved," said the doctor. "it is veri kind 
of you, ladi dorothy, and I will go and telephon at once. will you stay 
with him for a littl while?" 

He left the room, and they heard hi feet go down the narrow stairs. the 
cottag door open and closed. 

the two women, the old and the young, peasant and peer' daughter, 
look at each other, and there wa in their glanc that complet 
understand which can onli exist between women. 

"do 'ee mind old jarg toms, my lady?" 

ladi dorothi nodded. 

"I know, I know! and I warn him! they won't believe, these men! they 
think becaus they are so big and strong that there is noth that can 
hurt them." 

"'twa th' iron that save un, my lady. 'twa insid one of john' new 
tyre as wa lyin' on the ground that us found un. dog barkin' waken 
us up. but it'd ha' had un, else----" A sound downstair sent her fli 
to the door. "'ti the kettle, my lady. john' dinner spilin', an' I 
forgettin'." 

she hurri out of the room and close the door. 

the sound of their voic seem to have rous the occup of the bed. 
hi eyelid flutter and opened; hi eye rest full on the girl' 
face. for a moment there wa no conscious in their gaze; then a 
whimsic ghost of a smile crept about hi mouth. 

"go on," he said in a weak voice. "say it!" 

"say what?" ask ladi dorothy. she wa suddenli awar that her hand wa 
still on his, but the twitch finger had close about her in a calm, 
firm grasp. 

"say 'I told you so'!" 

she shook her head with a littl smile. 

"I told you that cold iron----" 

"cold iron save me." He told her of the iron hoop on the ground outsid 
the forge. "you save me last night." 

she disengag her hand gently. 

"I save you last night--sinc you say so. but in future----" 

someon wa come up the stairs. maynard met her eye with a long look. 

"I have no fear," he said. "I have found someth better than cold 
iron." 

the door open and the doctor came in. He glanc at maynard' face and 
touch hi pulse. 

"the case is yours, ladi dorothy!" he said with a littl bow. 




IX 

the tragedi AT the "loup noir" 


the boy at the corner of the tabl flick the ash of hi cigar into the 
fire. 

"spiritu is all rot!" he declared. 

"I don't know," the host reflect thoughtfully. "one hear queer 
stori sometimes." 

"which remind me----" start the bore. 

but befor he could proceed ani further the littl french judg 
ruthlessli cut him short. 

"bah!" contempt and genial were mingl in hi tone. "who are we, 
poor ignor worms, that we should dare to say 'is' or 'i not'? your 
shakespeare, he wa right! 'there are more thing in heaven and earth, 
horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy!'" 

the face of the four englishmen instantli assum that peculiarli 
stolid express alway call forth by the mention of shakespeare. 

"but spiritualism----" start the host. 

again the littl french judg broke in: 

"I who you speak, I myself know of an experience, of the most 
remarkable, to thi day unexplain save by spiritualism, occultism, 
what you will! you shall hear! the case is one I conduct 
profession some two year ago, though, of course, the event which I 
now tell in their proper sequence, came out onli in the trial. I string 
them togeth for you, yes?" 

the bore, who fierc resent ani stori except hi own, gave vent to 
a discont grunt; the other three prepar to listen carefully. from 
the drawing-room, whither the ladi had retir after dinner, sound 
the far-away strain of a piano. the littl french judg held out hi 
glass for a crème de menthe; hi eye were sparkl with suppress 
excitement; he gaze deep into the shine green liquid as if see 
therein a move panorama of pictures, then he began: 

On a duski autumn evening, a young man, tall, olive-skinned, tramp 
along the road lead from pari to longchamps. He is walk with a 
quick, even swing. now and again a hidden anxieti darken hi face. 

suddenli he branch off to the left; the path here is steep and muddy. 
He stop in front of a blur circl of yellow light; by thi can one 
faintli perceiv the outlin of a building. abov the narrow doorway 
hang a creak sign which announc to all it may concern that thi is 
the "loup noir," much sought after for it near to the racecours 
and for it excel _ménage_. 

"_voilà!_" mutter our friend. 

On entering, he is met by the burli innkeeper, a shrewd enough fellow, 
who ha seen someth of life befor settl down in longchamps. the 
young man glanc past him as if seek some other face, then 
recollect himself demand shelter for the night. 

"I greatli fear----" began the innkeeper, then pauses, struck by an 
idea. "holà, gaston! have monsieur and madam from number fourteen yet 
departed?" 

"yes, monsieur; alreadi earli thi morning; you were at the market, so 
mademoisel settl the bill." 

"mademoisel jehane?" the stranger look up sharply. 

"mi niece, monsieur; you have perhap heard of her, for I see by your 
easel you are an artist. she is suppos to be of a rare beauty; I think 
it myself." jean potin keep up a run flow of talk as he conduct 
hi visitor down the long bare passages, past blister yellow doors. 

"it is a doubl room I must give you, vacated, as you heard, but thi 
veri morning. they were go to stay longer, monsieur and madam 
guillaumet, but of a sudden she chang her mind. oh, she wa of a 
temper!" potin rais express eye heavenwards. "it is ever so when 
may wed with december." 

"he wa much older than hi wife, then?" queri the artist, polit 
feign an interest he is far from feeling. 

"_mai non, parbleu!_ It wa she who wa the older--bi some fifteen 
years; and not a beauty. but rich--h knew what he wa about, give hi 
smooth cheek for her smooth louis!" 

left alone, lou arnaud proce to unpack hi knapsack; he linger over 
it as long as possible; the task await him below is no pleasant one. 
final he descends. the small smoki _sall à manger_ is full of people. 
there is much talk and laughter go on; the clatter of knive and 
forks. At the desk near the door, a young girl is busi with the 
accounts. her veri pale gold hair, part and drawn loos back over 
the ears, cast a faint shadow on her pure, white skin. arnaud, as he 
choos a seat, look at her critically. 

"bah, she is insignificant!" he thinks. "what can have possess 
claude?" 

suddenli she rais her eyes. they meet hi in a long, steadi gaze. then 
onc again the lid are lowered. 

the artist set down hi glass with a hand that shakes. He is not 
imaginative, as a rule, but when one see the soul of a mock devil 
look out, dark and compelling, from the face of a madonna, one is 
disconcerted. 

He wonder no more what had possess claude. On hi way to the door a 
few moment later, he paus at her desk. 

"monsieur wish to order breakfast for to-morrow morning?" 

"monsieur wish to speak with you." 

she smile demurely. mani have wish to speak with her. arnaud divin 
her thoughts. 

"mi name is lou arnaud!" he add meaningly. 

"ah!" she ponder on thi for an instant; then: "it is a warm night; if 
you will seat yourself at one of the littl tabl in the courtyard at 
the back of the house, I will tri to join you, when these pig have 
finish feeding." she indic with contempt the noisili eat crowd. 

they sit long at that table, for the man ha much to tell of hi young 
brother claude; of the ruin she ha made of hi life; of the littl 
green devil that lurk in a glass of absinthe, and clutch their victim, 
and drag him down deeper, ever deeper, into the great, green abyss. 

but she onli laughs, thi jehan of the wanton eyes. 

"but what do you want from me? I have no need of thi claude. He 
weari me--now!" 

arnaud spring to hi feet, catch her roughli by the wrist. He love 
hi young brother much. hi voic is raised, attract the notic of 
two or three group who take coffe at the iron tables. 

"you had need of him once. you never left him in peac till you had 
suck him of all that make life good. If I could----" 

jean potin appear in the doorway. 

"jehane, what are you do out here? you know I do not permit it that 
you speak with the visitors. pardon her, monsieur, she is but a child." 

"A child?" the artist' brow is black as thunder. "she ha wreck a 
life, thi child you speak of!" 

He stride past the amaz innkeeper, up the narrow flight of stairs, 
and down the passag to hi room. 

sit on the edg of the huge curtain four-post bed, he ponder on 
the event of the evening. 

but hi thought are not all of claude. that girl--that girl with her 
pale face and her pale hair, and eye the grey of a storm cloud befor 
it breaks, she haunt him! her soft murmur voic ha stolen into hi 
brain; he hear it in the drip, drip of the rain on the sill outside. 

soon heavi feet are heard troop up the stairs; door are heard to 
bang; cheeri voic wish each other good-night. then gradual the 
sound die away. they keep earli hour at the "loup noir"; it is not yet 
ten o'clock. 

still arnaud remain sit on the edg of the bed; the dark plush 
canopi overhead repel him, he doe not feel inclin for sleep. 
jehane! what a pictur she would make! He _must_ paint her! 

obsess by thi idea, he unpack a roll of canvas, spread it on the 
tripod easel, and prepar crayon and charcoal; he will start the 
pictur as soon as it is day. He will paint her as circe, mock at her 
grovel herd of swine! 

He creep into bed and fall asleep. 

* * * * * 

softli the rain patter against the window-pane. 

A distant clock boom out eleven strokes. 

lou arnaud rais hi head. then noiselessli he slide out of bed on the 
chill wooden boarding. As in a tranc he cross the room, seiz 
charcoal, and feverishli work at the blank canva on the easel. 

for twenti minut hi hand never falters, then the charcoal drop from 
hi nerveless fingers! grope hi way with half-clos eye back to the 
bed, he fall again into a heavy, dreamless slumber. 

* * * * * 

the earli morn sun chase away the raindrop of the night before. 
sign of activ are abroad in the inn; the swish of brooms; the noisi 
clatter of pails. A warm aroma of coffe float up the stair and under 
the door of number fourteen, awak arnaud to pleasant thought of 
breakfast. He is partli dress befor hi eye light on the canva he 
had prepared. 

"_nom de dieu!_" 

He fall back against the wall, stare stupefi at the pictur befor 
him. It is the pictur of a girl, crouch in a kneel position, all 
the agoni of death show clearli in her upturn eyes. At her throat, 
cruelly, relentlessli do their murder work, are a pair of 
hands--ugly, podgi hands, but with what power behind them! 

the face is the face of jehane--a distorted, terrifi jehane! arnaud 
recoils, cover hi eye with hi hands. who could have drawn thi 
unspeak thing? He look again closely; the style is hi own! there 
is no mistak those bold, black lines, that peculiar way of indic 
muscl beneath the tightli stretch skin--it _is_ hi own work! 
anywher would he have known it! 

A knock at the door! jean potin enters, radiat cheerfulness. 

"breakfast in your room, monsieur? We are busi thi morning; I share in 
the work. permit me to move the tabl and the easel--_sacré-bleu!_" 

suddenli hi rosi lip grow stern. "thi is jehane. did she sit for 
you--and when? you onli came last night. what devil' work is this?" 

"that is what I would like to find out; I know no more about it than you 
yourself. when I awok thi morn the pictur wa there!" 

"did you draw it?" suspiciously. 

"yes. At least, no! yes, I suppos I did. but i----" 

potin clench hi fist: "I will have the truth from the girl herself! 
there is someth here I do not like!" roughli he push past the 
artist and mount to jehane' room. 

she is not there, neither is she at her desk. nor yet down in the 
village. they search everywhere; there is a hue and cry; peopl rush to 
and fro. 

then suddenli a shout; and a silence, a dread silence. 

someth is carri slowli into the "loup noir." someth that wa 
found huddl up in the shadow of the wall that border the courtyard. 
someth with ugli purpl patch on the white throat. 

It is jehane, and she is dead; strangl by a pair of hand that came 
from behind. 

the stori of the pictur is rapidli pass from mouth to mouth. peopl 
look strang at lou arnaud; they rememb hi loud, strain voic and 
threaten gestur on the preced night. 

final he is arrest on the charg of murder. 

* * * * * 

I wa the judge, gentlemen, on the occas of the arnaud trial. 

the prison is question about the picture. He know nothing; can tell 
noth of how it came there. hi fellow-artist testifi to it be 
hi work. from them also leak out the tale of hi brother claude, of 
the latter' infatu and ruin. No need now to explain the quarrel in 
the courtyard. the accus ha good reason to hate the dead girl. 

the avocat for the defenc doe hi best. the pictur is produc in 
court; it creat a sensation. 

If onli lou arnaud could complet it--could sketch in the owner of those 
merciless hands. He is hand the charcoal; again and again he tries--in 
vain. 

the hand are not hi own; but that is a small point in hi favour. whi 
should he have incrimin himself by draw hi own hands? but again, 
whi should he have drawn the pictur at all? 

there is nobodi els on whom fall a shadow of suspicion. I sum up 
impartially. the juri convict on circumstanti evidence, and I sentenc 
the prison to death. 

A short time must elaps between the sentenc and carri it into 
force. the avocat for the defenc obtain for the prison a slight 
concession; he may have pictur and charcoal in hi cell. perhap he can 
yet free himself from the web which ha inmesh him! 

arnaud tri to blot out thought by sketch in and eras again 
fanci figur twist into a peculiar position; he cannot adjust the 
pose of the unknown murderer. So in despair he give it up. 

one morning, three day befor the execution, the innkeep come to 
visit him and find him lie face downward on the narrow pallet. 
despit hi own grief, he is sorri for the young man; nor is he 
convinc in hi shrewd bourgeoi mind of the latter' guilt. 

"you _must_ draw in the second figure," he repeat again and again. "it 
is your last, your onli chance! think of the face you saw at the 'loup 
noir.' Do none of them recal anyth to you? you quarrel with 
jehan in the garden about your brother. then you went to your room. oh, 
what did you think in your room?" 

"I thought of your niece," respond arnaud wildly. "how veri beauti 
she was, and what a model she would make. then I prepar a blank 
canva for the morning, and went to bed. when I woke up the pictur wa 
there." 

"and you rememb noth more--noth at all?" insist jean potin. 
"you fell asleep at once? you heard no sound?" 

against the bar window of the cell the rain patter softly. A distant 
clock boom out eleven strokes. 

someth in the artist' brain seem to snap. He rais hi head. He 
slide from the bed. As in a tranc he cross the cell, seiz a piec 
of charcoal, and feverishli work at the pictur on the easel! 

not dare to speak, jean potin watch him. the figur behind the hand 
grow and grow beneath arnaud' fingers. 

A woman' figure! 

then the face: a coarse, malign face, distort by evil passions. 

"ah!" 

It is a cri of recognit from the breathless innkeeper. It break the 
spell. the charcoal drops, and the prisoner, pass hi hand across hi 
eyes, gaze bewild at hi own work. 

"who? what?" 

"but I know her! It is the woman in whose room you slept! she wa 
stay at the 'loup noir' the veri night befor you arrived, and she 
left that morning. she and her husband, monsieur guillaumet. but it is 
incred if _she_ should have----" 

I will be short with you, gentlemen. madam guillaumet wa trace to her 
flat in paris. arnaud' avocat confront her with the now complet 
picture. she wa confounded--babbl like a mad woman--confessed! 

A repriev for further inquiri wa grant by the state. final arnaud 
wa cleared, and allow to go free. 

the motiv for the murder? A woman' jealousy. monsieur and madam 
guillaumet had been marri onli ten months. her age wa forty-nine; hi 
twenty-seven. everi second of their marri life wa to her weight 
with intoler suspicions; how soon would thi young husband, so dear 
to her, forsak her for another, now that hi debt were paid? It prey 
upon her mind, distort it, unbalanc it; each glance, each movement 
of hi she exagger into an intrigue. 

On their way to pari they stay a few day at the "loup noir"; charl 
guillaumet wa interest in racing. also, he becam interest in a 
certain mdlle. jehane. madame, quick to see, insist on an instant 
departure. 

the even of the day of their departur she miss her husband, and 
found he had taken the car. where should he have gone? back to the inn, 
of course, onli half-an-hour' run from paris. she hire anoth car and 
follow him, drive it herself. It wa not a pleasant journey. the 
first car she discov forsaken, about half-a-mil distant from the 
inn. her own car she left besid it, and trudg the remain distanc 
on foot. 

the rest wa easy. 

find no sign of guillaumet in front of the house, she stole round to 
the back. there she found a door in the wall of the courtyard--a door 
that led into the lane. that door wa slightli ajar. she slip in and 
crouch down in the shadow. 

yes, there they were, her husband and jehane; the latter wa laughing, 
lure him on--and she wa young; oh, so young! 

the woman watched, fascinated. 

charl bade jehan good-bye, promis to come again. He kiss her 
tenderly, pass through the gate; hi step were heard muffl along 
the lane. 

jehan blew him a kiss, and then fasten the littl door. 

A distant clock boom out eleven strokes, and a pair of hand stole 
round the girl' throat, buri themselv deep, deep in the white 
flesh. 

* * * * * 

"and the husband, wa he an accessori after the fact?" inquir the boy. 

"possibl he guess at the deed, yes; but, be a weakling, said 
noth for fear of implic himself. It wasn't proved." 

the host move uneasili in hi chair. 

"do you mean to tell me that the mysteri of the pictur ha never been 
clear up?" he asked. "could arnaud have actual seen the murder from 
hi window, and fix it on the canvas?" 

the littl french judg shook hi head. 

"did I not tell you that hi window face front?" he replied. "no, that 
point ha not yet been explained. It is beyond us!" 

He made a sweep gesture, knock over hi liqueur glass; it fell 
with a crash on the parquet floor. 

the bore woke with a start. 

"and did they marry?" he queried. 

"who should marry?" 

"that artist-chap and the girl--what wa her name?--jehane." 

"monsieur," quoth the littl french judg veri gentli and ironically, "I 
griev to state that wa impossible, jehan be dead." 

the boy at the corner of the tabl stood up and threw the stump of hi 
cigar into the fire. 

"I think spiritu is all rot!" he declared. 




miller, son, & compy., limited, 
printers, 
fakenham and london. 




some notabl sixpenni book 

To be had of all booksellers, or post free (inland) 8d. each; four 
volum for 2s. 5d., or six for 3s. 6d. from the publisher, 17, 
henrietta street, london, w.c. 


the mysteri OF modern london. 

By georg R. sims, 
_author of "the devil in london," &c._ 

"full of fascin interest and romance. those who are interest 
in the curiou will find here much that is piquant and 
stimulating."--_daili news._ 

"i as fascin as it titl and it author' name would lead one 
to expect."--_t.p.' weekly._ 


seventi year A showman 

MY adventur IN camp and caravan the world over. 
By "lord" georg sanger. 
_illustrated._ 

In thi volum the famou showman relat mani excit experi 
of hi earli day on the road, and recal the trial and triumph 
of a career more interest than mani a work of fiction. 


queen OF frailti 

By C. L. mccluer stevens, 
author of "the secret histori of the mormons." 
illustr pictur wrapper. 

thi volum contain biographi of the follow famou women: nell 
gwyn, the marchio of brinvilliers, the wick countess of 
shrewsbury, the duchess of kendal (the maypol duchess), hannah 
lightfoot, elizabeth chudleigh (the bigam duchess), jeann de 
valois, ladi hamilton, jeann du barry, mari ann clarke, the ladi 
with the camelias, lola montez, cora pearl, adah menken. 


the secret histori OF the mormon 

A true narr OF the most extraordinari 
religi impostur OF modern times. 
By C. L. mccluer stevens. 


fifti year A fighter 

the life stori OF jem mace. 
(_formerli champion of the world._) 
told BY himself. 
_illustrated._ 

A record of the last of the old prizefighters, who fought to a 
finish mani battl in the old prize ring. A list of the notori 
champion mace met and vanquish would fill mani pages, but he ha 
here set on record the romanc of as wonder a life as wa ever 
lived. 


confess OF A poacher 

By J. connell. 
_with illustr by S. T. dadd._ 

_field_: "the book is veri remarkable, instruct in it 
disclosur of the dubiou way of poachers, and an intend reader 
cannot but be interest and amused." 




_book TO make US merry_ 

price 1/- each net. (postage, 3d. extra.) 

_in stiff pictori paper boards._ 


the amus series. 

after-dinn sleights. By lang neil. with mani photographs, show 
trick in actual operation. 

card trick without sleight OF hand OR apparatus. By L. widdop. 
illustrated. 

conjur with coins. includ trick by nelson down and other emin 
performers. fulli illustr with photograph and diagrams. 

fun ON the billiard table. A collect of 75 amus tricks. By 
stancliffe. with photographs. 

hand shadows. the complet art of shadowgraphy. By loui nikola. fulli 
illustrated. 

indoor game for children and young people. edit by E. M. baker. 
illustrated. 

modern card manipulation. By C. lang neil. enlarg edition. with mani 
photographs, show trick in operation. 

the new book OF puzzles. up-to-d and original. By A. cyril pearson. 
with upward of 100 illustrations. 

the pearson puzzl book. A collect of over 100 of the best puzzles. 
edit by J. K. benson. 

pearson' book OF fun, mirth and mystery. edit by mr. X. 

pearson' humor recit and reader. 

play for amateur actors. contain nine origin plays. six for 
adults, two for children, and one for scouts. 

play and display for scout entertainments. thi volum contain six 
long plays, also sever shorter plays, and recitations. 

practic stroke AT billiards. for tabl of all sizes. from the match 
play of john robert and other lead players. 

recit for children. select by jean belfrage. with three origin 
play for children. 

simpl conjur trick that anybodi can perform. By will goldston. 

trick for everyone. By david devant. illustr with 134 photographs. 




transcriber' note: 

minor typograph error have been correct without note. dialect 
spell have been retained. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of uncanni tales, by variou 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook uncanni tale *** 

***** thi file should be name 26606-0.txt or 26606-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/6/0/26606/ 

produc by david clarke, stephen blundel and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi 
file wa produc from imag gener made avail 
by the internet archive/american libraries.) 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
