the project gutenberg ebook of see and hearing, by georg W. E. russel 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and most 
other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 
whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term of 
the project gutenberg licens includ with thi ebook or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the unit states, you'll have 
to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use thi ebook. 


title: see and hear 

author: georg W. E. russel 

releas date: septemb 9, 2014 [ebook #46821] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook see and hear *** 




produc by giovanni fini, chri curnow and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









see and hear 




see 
and hear 

BY 

georg W. E. russel 

author OF "collect and recollections," etc. 

london 
E. grant richard 

1907 




TO 
walter sydney sichel 

1868-1907 

"_ay, there are some good thing in life, that fall not away with 
the rest,_ 
_and of all best thing upon earth, I hold that a faith friend is 
the best._" 

--owen meredith. 




content 


chap. page 

I. the coron 1 

ii. secret societi 10 

iii. the irish peerag 17 

iv. omit silhouett 25 

V. doctor and doctor 31 

vi. mourn 39 

vii. will 46 

viii. pension 54 

ix. the season AS IT wa 62 

X. the season AS IT IS 69 

xi. the sin OF societi 76 

xii. oxford 83 

xiii. school for shepherd 90 

xiv. pilgrimag 97 

xv. the public school 105 

xvi. school and boarding-hous 113 

xvii. squar 121 

xviii. sunday IN london 128 

xix. A suburban sunday 135 

xx. wine and water 143 

xxi. dinner 151 

xxii. dinner 158 

xxiii. luncheon 166 

xxiv. tea 174 

xxv. supper 182 

xxvi. inn and hotel 190 

xxvii. travel 198 

xxviii. accomplish 207 

xxix. cider 214 

xxx. the garter 221 

xxxi. sheriff 229 

xxxii. publish 237 

xxxiii. handwrit 245 

xxxiv. autograph 252 

xxxv. more autograph 259 

xxxvi. christma 266 

xxxvii. new year' day 274 

xxxviii. pet 283 

xxxix. purpl and fine linen 289 

xl. prelaci and palac 297 

xli. horror 304 

xlii. social chang 312 

xliii. social grace 319 

xliv. public _v._ retic 326 

xlv. town _v._ countri 333 

xlvi. home 341 

xlvii. hospit 348 

xlviii. ostent 354 

xlix. principl and prejudic 360 

L. cultur 367 

li. religion 374 

lii. superstit 381 

liii. the remnant 388 




I 

the coron 


and so the great act draw near--th "high midsumm pomp" of 
patriot and regal and religion--th "one far-off divin event" to 
which the whole social creation ha move sinc the day wa appoint 
and the prepar began. A thousand pen will pictur the coron 
as it actual occurs. write in advance, I can onli contempl it as 
a magnific ideal, and describ it as it strike not the eye and ear 
but the heart, the imagination, and the histor sense. 

first and foremost and abov all else, the coron is a religi 
act. It is imbed in the veri heart of the great christian servic of 
the holi eucharist. litani and introit and gospel and creed lead up to 
it, and it in turn lead on to _te deum_ and offertori and consecr 
and communion. but though (or perhap because) it is thu suprem 
and conspicu religious, the coron is nation and secular 
and histor as well. other nation do not crown their sovereigns. 
some have no crown to give, and other are in doubt about the 
right recipients; in some, revolut have shatter the immemori 
landmarks, or the sharp sword of civil war ha sever the sacr 
thread of succession, or the state itself is a mushroom growth of 
yesterday, with no root and fibr strike deep down to the bedrock 
of the nation life. 

but here in england we crown our king as we have crown them for 
a thousand years, and our act of crown is the august symbol of a 
nation' stori and a people' will. for befor ever the minist of 
god approach the altar, befor the sacr emblem of sovereignti are 
hallowed, befor the christian' mysteri begin, befor the etern 
spirit is invok and the consecr unction bestowed, the english 
peopl play it part, and, through the mouth of it chief citizen 
assert it fundament place in the system of the kingli commonwealth. 

"sirs, I here present unto you king edward, the undoubt king of thi 
realm; wherefor all you who are come thi day to do your homage, are 
you will to do the same?" and, as the king stand up and turn and 
show himself four time to the assembl freemen, they "signifi their 
willing and joy by loud and repeat acclamations, all with one 
voic cri out, 'god save king edward.'" 

and here I borrow from one[1] who touch as no other live man can 
touch these dramat solemn of our nation life (for I know he 
will consent to the borrowing), and I say that thi is as nobl as it 
is intelligible. "it embodi the splendid liberti with which a free 
peopl assert it claim to have noth impos upon it in the dark, 
no tyrann rule set over it which it ha not measur and consid 
and acknowledg in the open light of heaven." and then the whole great 
compani fall to prayer, and the archbishop, who ha hitherto play 
hi part as the first citizen of england and the greatest subject of 
the crown, take up a still higher function, and goe up, vest to 
the altar and begin the servic of the eucharist, and, as a priest, 
invok the suprem sanction of the eternal. and then the majest 
cours of the rite is broken off in the veri centre, and, with everi 
act and featur and ceremoni which can most forcibl express the 
solemn of the transaction, the archbishop demand of the king, in 
the face of god and the church and the people, whether he will promis 
to rule england in due obedi to law and with sacr regard to 
justice, mercy, and religion. and the king give hi promise, and, 
kneel at the altar, confirm it with an oath upon the holi gospel. 

[1] H. S. holland, d.d. 

"thi free intercours that pass between ruler and rule is no 
child' play, no mere pretti ceremonial; it is the act of men in solemn 
earnest pledg their troth the one to the other. the act is broad 
and deep and strong as the nation life. It embodi the experi of 
centuries. It ha in it the stern breath of conflict and the anxiou 
determin of secur peace. the great charter is behind it, and 
the memori of runnymed and whitehall. It seal a concentr 
purpose. king and peopl look each other in the face, and speak their 
mind out and give their word." and then, and not till then, the 
archbishop will go forward with hi hallow offic and perform the 
symbol acts, and pronounc the benedict of the highest upon the 
coven between king and commonwealth. He anoint with the sacr 
unction and gird with the kingli sword. He deliv the sceptr of 
empir and the emblemat orb which, "set under the cross," remind the 
king "that the whole world is subject to the power and empir of christ 
our redeemer." and then the crown, of pure gold enrich with gem each 
one of which is a history, is set upon the sovereign' head, and the 
archbishop bless and the onlook acclaim. 

"blow, trumpets; all your exult blow!" 

as king edward vii. take hi seat on the throne of the confessor and 
the conqueror, of the plantagenet and the tudors, and receiv by the 
mouth of all that is greatest in church and state the proud homag of a 
self-govern people. 

and then, onc again, the splendid trap of sovereignti are laid 
aside, and the king, uncrowned, kneel down like the lowliest son of 
adam befor the mercy-seat of the christian covenant, and the great 
action of the eucharist is resumed, and the memori of the upper 
chamber at jerusalem are renew at the altar of westminster. the word 
is spoken and the deed is done. A great cloud of prayer and aspir 
and intercess float up from the vast concours of assembl 
worshippers; and, in the midst of them, the crown and anoint king, 
kneel by her who must aid him to bear hi burden, seek through the 
divinely-appoint medium supernatur strength for a more than human 
task. from a full heart and with the solemnest intent a unit nation 
says, "god save king edward." 

* * * * * 

the scene is chang from westminst abbey to a dining-room in 
belgravia, and the date from saturday, 9th august, to sunday, 3rd. 
thirti guests, male and female, are gather round a too-bounti 
board; and, amidst the rich fume of mayonnais and quail and 
whitebait and champagne-cup, there rise the mingl voic of the great 
"coron chorus." 

_enthusiast young lady._ "I can think of noth but the coronation. 
where are you go to see it from?" 

_faceti young man._ "oh! from hurlingham. that' quit near enough. 
the whole thing is such a fright bore. you know what they say london 
is just now. all board and no lodging." 

_new peeress._ "I realli envi the duchesses. they have such good place 
in the front row. I shall be poke away under the galleri quit at the 
back. I don't believ I shall see a thing. but, after all, one will be 
abl to say one ha been there." 

_faceti young man._ "oh! you could say that anyhow. it' not good 
enough to get up at four in the morn for the sake of say that. 
charley fitzbattleax think just the same as I do about it, but of 
course, as he' a peer, he' bound to go. he' a bad hand at get up 
early, so he' go to sit up play bridg all night, and then have 
hi bath and go straight to the show." 

_stout peeress._ "our creation is rather old, so I have got a veri good 
place, but the chair are too dreadful. such stiff backs, and onli nine 
inch to sit on, and horrid wicker seat which will make mark on our 
velvet." 

_thrifti peeress._ "well, I realli don't know where I shall have my 
luncheon. It seem monstrou to have to pay two guinea at the hous 
of lord for a sandwich and a glass of claret. the waterman in dean' 
yard have most kindli ask me to go to luncheon with them, and it 
would be an immens saving. but they are strict teetotallers, and I 
feel that, after all those hour in the abbey, I shall want someth 
more support than lemonade. So I am rather divided. I dread the idea 
of a teetot luncheon, but two guinea for a glass of claret and a 
sandwich is rather much." 

_nervou peeress._ "I am so terrifi of be faint in the abbey. I 
am go to take chocol and meat lozeng in my coronet, and some 
brandi and water in my smelling-bottle." 

_chorus_ (confusedly). "oh no, port wine is the thing. no--rum and 
milk. My doctor say whisky. whisky? Oh no; sal volatil is much the 
best, and plasmon biscuits. not sandwiches--i hate sandwiches. cold 
chicken. but can we eat in church? isn't it rather odd? oh, the abbey 
isn't exactli a church, you know. isn't it? I should have thought it 
was. well--no--our vicar tell me that it wa never consecrated. how 
veri curious! At least it wa onli consecr by the angels, not by 
the bishop. well, of cours that make a difference. still, I don't 
like the idea of eat and drink in it. So I shall have some pâté 
de foie gra and champagn in the carriage, and eat till the veri 
moment I get to the abbey, and begin again the veri moment I get out." 

_live young lady._ "i'm not afraid of be faint--onli of be 
bore in that long wait. I shall take someth to read while mamma is 
stuf herself with her sandwiches." 

_faceti young man._ "what a good idea! shall you take _modern 
society_ or the _pink 'un_?" 

_grave young lady_ (intervening). "neither, I hope. peopl seem to 
forget that after all it is a religi service. If one must read, 
I think 'john inglesant' or one of miss yonge' book would be more 
suitabl than a newspaper." 

_live young lady._ "well, really, it is so difficult to think of it 
as a religi service. It seem to me more like a play. I saw one 
of the rehearsals, and certainli it wa as funni as a pantomime. but 
still, of course, one wouldn't wish to do anyth that wa unsuitable; 
so I think I shall take a 'guide-book to the abbey' and learn all the 
histori while we are waiting. one hear so much about it just now, and 
it seem stupid not to know. I never can rememb whether st. edward 
wa edward the confessor or edward the sixth. Do you know?" 

_faceti young man._ "oh, ask me an easier one. those old josser 
were all pretti much of a muchness. I tell you i'm not take any. the 
whole thing is utterli out of date. whi couldn't he write hi name in a 
book, or send a crier round with a bell to say he' come to the throne?" 

_the host._ "mi dear freddi Du cane, I don't agre with you the least. 
I am bound to say quit honestli that all my life I have hope that 
I might live to see a coronation, and I am honestli thank that I 
have got a place. It is all the thing that interest me most roll 
into one--pag and histori and patriot and a great religi 
ceremony. I am a liberal; therefor I like the recognit and the 
oath. I am a ritualist; therefor I like the vestment and the unction 
and the oblat of the golden pall. abov all I am an englishman, 
and I like to see my sovereign take up the duti of sovereignti at 
the altar of 'that royal and nation sanctuari which ha for so mani 
centuri enshrin the vari memori of hi august ancestor and the 
manifold glori of hi free and famou kingdom.' those word are dean 
stanley's. Do you know hi account of the coron in hi 'memori 
of westminst abbey'? If you will let me, I will show it to you after 
luncheon. peopl ought at least to know what the servic is befor they 
presum to make stupid joke about it." 

curtain. 




II 

secret societi 


when lord scamperdal wa angri with mr. spong for ride over hi 
hound he call him "a perpendicular puseyit pig-jobber"; and the 
alliter wa felt to emphas the rebuke. If ani home ruler is 
irrit by sir robert anderson he may reliev hi feel by call 
him a "preach polit policeman," and each word in the titl 
will be true to life. sir robert combin in hi singl person the 
charact of barrister, detective, and theologian. He began life at 
the irish bar, wa for mani year head of the crimin investig 
depart in london, then becam assist commission of police, and 
all the while gave what leisur he could spare from track dynamit 
and intercept burglar to the composit of such work as "the 
gospel and it ministry," "A handbook of evangel truth," and 
"daniel in the critic' den." 

A career so diversifi wa sure to produc some interest 
reminiscences, and the book[2] which sir robert ha just publish 
is as full of mysteri and adventure, violenc and strategy, plot and 
counterplot, as the romanc which thrill our youth. In those day 
some boy thought soldier the one life worth living; some, in fancy, 
ran away to sea. some love tale of piracy, and were peculiarli at 
home in a smugglers' cave. other snatch a fear joy from ghost 
and bogies. other enjoy brazilian forest and african jungles, 
hand-to-hand encount with gorilla and hair-breadth 'scape from 
watch tigers. the present writer thought noth so delight 
as secret societies, and would have given hi littl all to know a 
password, a sign, or a secret code. perhap thi idiosyncrasi wa 
due to the fact that in the mid 'sixti everi paper teem with 
allus to fenianism, just then a veri activ forc in the polit 
world; and to smith minus, in the fourth form at harrow, there wa 
someth unspeak attract in the thought of be a "head 
centre," a "director," or an "execut offic of the irish republican 
brotherhood," or even in the paler glori of write the mystic letter 
"f.b." or "c.o." after hi undistinguish name. It is in hi account 
of the earlier day of fenian that sir robert anderson is so 
intens interesting. He trace it, from it origin in the abort 
rebellion of 1848 and that "battl of limerick" which thackeray sang, 
to it formal inaugur in 1860, and it subsequ activ at 
home and abroad; and the narr begins, quit thrillingly, with the 
biographi of the famou spi henri le caron, who play so strike a 
part befor the commiss on parnel and crime. those who wish to 
learn these incid in our recent history, or as much of them as at 
present can properli be disclosed, must read sir robert' book for 
themselves. I will not attempt even to epitom it; and, indeed, I 
onli mention it becaus of the "sidelights" which it throws, not on 
home rule, but on the part which secret societi have play in the 
fortun of modern europe. 

[2] "sidelight on the home rule movement." By sir robert anderson, 
k.c.b., ll.d. 

As far as I know, the onli englishman--if englishman he could properli 
be called--who regard the secret societi as formid realiti 
wa lord beaconsfield. As long ago as 1844--long befor he had offici 
experi to guid him--h wrote, with regard to hi favourit sidonia 
(in draw whom he drew himself):-- 

"the catalogu of hi acquaint in the shape of greeks, armenians, 
moors, secret jews, tartars, gipsies, wander poles, and carbonari 
would throw a curiou light on those subterranean agenc of which 
the world in gener know so little, but which exercis so great an 
influenc on public events." 

those were the day when disraeli, a geniu whom no one treat 
seriously, wa utter hi inmost thought through the medium of 
romanc to which fanci contribut at least as much as fact. then 
came twenti year of constant activ in politics--that pursuit which, 
as bacon says, is of all pursuit "the most immers in matter,"--and, 
when next he took up the novelist' pen, he wa a much older and more 
experienced, though he would scarc be a wiser, man. In 1870 he 
startl the world with "lothair"; and those who had the hardihood 
to fight their way through all the fashion flummeri with which 
the book begin found in the second and third volum a profoundli 
interest contribut to the histori of europ between 1848 and 
1868. one of the charact say that "the onli strong thing in europ 
are the church and the secret societies"; and the book is a vivid 
narr of the struggl for life and death between the tempor power 
of the papaci and the insurrectionari movement inspir by garibaldi. 
everi chapter of the book contain a portrait, and everi incid is 
drawn from someth which had come under the author' notic between 
1866 and 1869, when he wa the lead personag in the tori govern 
and the fenian were make open and secret war on english rule. He 
wa describ the men whom he knew and the thing which he had seen, 
and thi fact make the book so extraordinarili vivid, and won for 
it froude' enthusiast praise. everi one could recogn capel and 
man and antonelli and lord bute, and all their diplomat and 
fashion allies; it requir some knowledg of the insurrectionari 
movement to see in "captain bruges" a portrait of gener cluseret, 
commander-in-chief of everi insurg armi in europ or america, or in 
theodora the nobl charact of jessi white-mario, whose career of 
romant devot to the caus of freedom close onli in thi year.[3] 

[3] 1906. 

"madr natura" in italy, fenian in america and england, the "mari 
anne" societi of france, and the mysteri allianc between all 
these subterranean forces, are the theme of "lothair," and the 
state trial of the time throw a good deal of light upon them all. 
even more mysterious, much harder to trace, and infinit more 
endur were the oper of the carbonari--- begin with a 
hand of charcoal-burn in the forest of northern italy, and 
spread thence, alway by woodland ways, to the centr and north of 
europe. they promot the french revolut of 1830 and 1848. even 
loui napoleon alli himself with them in hi earlier machin 
against loui philipp and the republic; and in the franco-german 
war of 1870 they render incalcul servic to the german troop 
by guid them through the fast of the ardennes. It is one 
of the characterist of the secret societi that they attack the 
establish order, without, apparently, care much what that order 
represents. their gener fought against england in canada and in 
ireland; against the northern state in america; against russia in the 
danubian principalities. It is not to be suppos that in 1870 the 
carbonari had much sympathi with the militari absolut of prussia; 
but prussia wa attack the french empire, and that wa enough for 
the carbonari. 

Of course, as a gener rule, the secret societi of the contin 
were anti-monarch and anti-christian; but he who love these 
mysteri combin can find plenti to interest him in the histori 
of organ which were neither republican nor atheistic. noth 
could be more devotedli monarch and orthodox than the "cycl 
of the white rose." thi society, profoundli "secret," wa found 
about the year 1727. It had for it object to unit all the cavali 
and nonjur famili of north wale and cheshire, with a view to 
concert action when next the exil stuart should claim their own. 
the headquart were alway at wynnstay, and the ladi of wynnstay wa 
alway patroness. the badg wa a white rose in enamel, and the list 
of member wa print in a circle, so that if it should fall into 
the hand of govern no one should appear as ringlead or chief. 
the cycl wa for some fifti year a real and definit organ 
for polit ends; but, as year went on and the hope of the 
jacobit perished, the cycl degener into a mere dining-club, 
and it expir in 1850. it last member was, I believe, the rev. sir 
theophilu puleston, who live to see the second jubile of queen 
victoria; and the last ladi patro die in 1905. 

anoth secret societi which onc meant practic mischief of no 
common kind wa that of the orangemen. though orangemen are nowaday 
vocifer loyal, their forerunn are grossli misrepres if it 
is not true that, under the grand-mastership of the duke of cumberland, 
afterward king ernest of hanover, they organ a treason 
conspiraci to prevent queen victoria from succeed to the throne of 
her ancestor and to put her uncl in her place. for sidelight on thi 
rather dark passag of modern histori the curiou reader is refer to 
"tale of my father," by "a. M. f.," and to a sensat render of 
the same story, call "god save the queen." 

My space is failing, and I must forbear to enlarg on the most familiar 
and least terrifi of all "secret societies." I hold no brief for the 
"grand orient of france," even though piu ix. may onc have belong 
to thi or a similar organization; but I must profess that english 
freemason are the most respectable, most jovial, and most benevol 
of mankind; and I trust that they will accept in it true intent 
cardin manning' ambigu word defenc of their craft, "english 
freemasonri is a goos club." 




iii 

the irish peerag 


dryasdust is proverbi a bore, and hi form are protean. thu there 
are the jacobit dryasdusts, who affirm that queen victoria had no 
higher digniti than that of dowag princess albert of saxe-coburg, 
and deni that ani act of sovereignti transact in thi countri 
ha been valid sinc that dark morn when jame ii., make the 
best of hi way to the old kent road, drop the great seal into 
the thames. then there are the constitut dryasdusts, who deni 
the exist of a cabinet or a prime minister, and insist that the 
privi council is the onli ministeri bodi known to the law; and the 
ecclesiast dryasdusts, who affirm that the church of england is 
realli free becaus the bishop are freeli elect by the chapter of 
their respect cathedrals, act under licenc from a sovereign 
who, have been anointed, is a _persona mixta_--part layman, part 
ecclesiastic. At the height of the south african war I chanc to meet 
an herald dryasdust, who moan like a mandrak over the announc 
that the duke of norfolk had just set out, with hi yeomanry, for 
the scene of action. "you mean," I said, "that a valuabl life is 
needlessli imperilled?" "not at all," repli dryasdust, with a face 
as long as a fiddle-case. "A far more import consider than the 
duke' life is involved. As earl-marsh he is suprem command of 
the forc of the crown when engag in actual warfare, and the moment 
he set hi foot on african soil lord robert becom subject to hi 
command. there is no way out of that constitut necessity, and I 
regard the outlook as veri serious." and so inde it would have been, 
had dryasdust been right. 

I am led to thi train of reflect by the fact that an emin 
genealogist ha late tri to frighten the reader of a sunday 
paper by broach the theori that all the act of parliament pass 
within the last twenti year may have been invalid. He doe not commit 
himself to the statement that they are invalid, but he insist that 
they may be, and he ground hi content on a claus of the act of 
union. concern thi claus he says, follow sir william anson, 
that it requir that "the number of irish peers, not entitl by 
the possess of other peerag to an hereditari seat in the hous 
of lord of the unit kingdom, shall never fall below one hundred." 
now it seem that dure the last twenti year the number ha fallen 
below a hundred; therefor the hous of lord ha not been properli 
constituted, and therefor it part in legisl ha been null and 
void. It is a startl theory, and like most startl theories, will 
probabl turn out to be nonsense; but the histori of the irish peerage, 
apart from ani consequ which may be deduc from it, is full of 
interest, and not wholli free from scandal. the irish peerage, as it 
stand to-day, compris 175 members; of these, 28 sit in the hous of 
lord as repres peers, elect for life by their brethren; 82 
sit there becaus they hold english as well as irish peerages; and the 
remainder, be mere irish peer and not representatives, do not 
sit in the hous of lords, but are elig for the hous of commons. 
In thi respect their state is more graciou than that of the scotch 
peers, who cannot be elect to the hous of commons, and therefore, 
unless they can get themselv chosen to be repres peer of 
scotland, are exclud from parliament for ever. still, though a seat 
in the hous of lord is a desir possession, a mere titl ha it 
charms. 

It use to be said that when mr. smith the banker, who live in 
whitehall, ask georg iii. for the _entrée_ of the hors guards, the 
king replied, "I can't do that; but I wish to make you an irish peer." 
however, the true version of the stori seem to be that which is given 
in the "life of the marqui of granby." 

"in 1787 the owner of rutland hous desir to increas the privat 
_entrée_ into hyde park to the dimens of a carriag entrance, 
and ask charles, fourth duke of rutland, to support the necessari 
applic to the king. the duke, who wa then viceroy of ireland, 
replied, 'you will let me know whether ye applic is to be made to 
lord orford, who is ye ranger of ye park, or to ye king himself: in ye 
latter case I would write to lord sydney att ye same time; if it be 
to the king a greater object might be easier accomplish than thi 
trifle, as I know he is veri particular about hi parks; at least he is 
so about st. jame park, for he made a man an irish peer to keep him 
in good humour for have refus him permiss to drive hi carriag 
through ye hors guards.'" 

lord palmerston, himself an irish peer, use to say that an irish 
peerag wa the most conveni of all dignities, as it secur 
it owner social preced while it left him free to pursu a 
parliamentari career. At the same time, greatli as he enjoy hi 
position, palmerston never would take the oath or compli with 
the legal formal necessari to entitl him to vote for the 
irish repres peers; and the reason for thi refus wa 
characterist alik of an adroit politician and of the unscrupul 
age in which he lived. An irish peer who ha prove hi right to 
vote for the repres peers, is elig for elect as a 
representative, and palmerston fear that hi polit opponents, 
wish to get him out of the hous of common into the compar 
obscur and impot of the hous of lords, would elect him a 
repres peer in spite of himself, and so effectu termin 
hi polit activities. In the day immedi succeed palmerston 
a conspicu ornament of the irish peerag wa the second marqui 
of abercorn. He had no need to troubl himself about repres 
arrangements, for he sat in the hous of lord as a peer of great 
britain, but hi hereditari connexion with the north of ireland, 
hi great estat there, and the polit influenc which they 
gave him, made him, in a veri real sense, an irish peer. He wa 
lord-lieuten from 1866 to 1868, and dure hi viceroyalti disra 
(who subsequ drew hi portrait in "lothair") confer upon him 
the rare honour of an irish dukedom. It wa rumour that he wished, in 
consider of hi 80,000 acr in tyron and donegal, to becom the 
duke of ulster, but wa remind that ulster wa a royal title, born 
alreadi by the duke of edinburgh. Be that as it may, he stuck to hi 
scotch title, and becam duke of abercorn. down to that time the duke 
of leinster had been the sole irish duke, and went by the nicknam of 
"ireland' only." To him, as an old friend, the newli creat duke of 
abercorn wrote a mock apolog for have invad hi monopoly; but the 
duke of leinster wa equal to the occasion, and wrote back that he wa 
quit content to be henceforward the premier duke of ireland. when, 
six month later, disra wa driven out of office, he confer an 
irish baroni on a faith supporter, colonel m'clintock, who wa made 
lord rathdonnell; and it wa gener understood that, by arrang 
between the leader on both sides, no more irish peerag were to 
be created. thi understand held good till mr. georg curzon, 
proceed to india as viceroy and contempl a possibl return to 
parliament when hi term of offic expired, persuad lord salisburi to 
make him lord curzon of kedleston in the peerag of ireland. 

but, after all, the irish peerag of to-day is to a great extent the 
product of the irish union. "there is no crime record in history--i 
do not except the massacr of st. bartholomew--which will compar for a 
moment with the mean by which the union wa carried." the student of 
men and moods, have no clue to guid him, would probabl attribut 
thi outburst to mr. gladston at some period between hi first and 
second home rule bills; and he would be right. for my own part, I can 
scarc follow the allus to st. bartholomew, but beyond doubt the 
measur employ by the english govern in order to secur the 
union were both cruel and base. It is the base with which we are 
just now concerned. In order to carri the union it wa necessari to 
persuad the irish hous of lord and commons, and to captur the 
whole machineri of briberi and terror which direct the irish 
parliament. As that blameless publicist sir T. erskin may tranquilli 
observes, "corrupt interest could onli be overcom by corruption." the 
polici of out-corrupt the corruptest wa pursu with energi and 
resolution. each patron of irish borough who wa readi to part with 
them receiv £7500 for each seat. lord downshir got £52,000 for seven 
seats; lord eli £45,000 for six. the total amount paid in compens 
for the surrend of elector power wa £1,260,000. In addit to 
these pecuniari inducements, honour were lavishli distribut as 
bribes. five irish peer were call to the hous of lords, twenti were 
advanc a step in the peerage, and twenty-two new peer were created. 
It would be invidious, and perhap actionable, to attach proper name 
to the amaz histori of corrupt by titl which are narrat in 
the privat correspond of the viceroy, lord cornwallis, and the 
publish memoir of sir jonah barrington. even that sound loyalist 
mr. lecki wa constrain to admit that "the major of irish titl 
are histor connect with memori not of honour but of shame." 
On the 22nd januari 1799 one member of the irish hous of common took 
hi bribe in the brief interv between hi speech for, and hi vote 
against a resolut affirm the right of the irish nation to an 
independ legislature. anoth aspir to the peerag "made and sang 
song against the union in 1799, and made and sang song for it in 
1800." He got hi deserts. A third secur £30,000 for hi surrend 
boroughs, a peerag for himself, and for hi brother in holi order an 
archbishopr so wealthi that it fortun owner becam a peer, and 
subsequ an earl, on hi own account. the scandal tale might 
be indefinit prolonged; but enough ha been said to show whi it is 
difficult to shed tear when these strangely-engend peerag sink 
below the prescrib number of a hundred. 




IV 

omit silhouett 


last year[4] I ventur to submit for public inspect a small 
collect of social silhouettes. from time to time dure the last few 
month I have receiv sever kind enquiri about omit portraits. 
for instance, there is the undertaker. perhap a friend will write: 
"dicken made capit fun out of mr. mould and the 'hollow _elm_ tree.' 
couldn't you tri your hand at someth of the same kind?" anoth 
writes, perhap a littl bluntly: "whi don't you give us the barrister? 
He must be an aw easi type to do." A third says, with subtler 
tact: "I feel that, sinc thackeray left us, your is the onli pen 
which can properli handl the actor"--or the painter, or the singer, 
or the bellringer, or the beadle, as the case may be. now, to these 
enquiries, conceived, as I know them all to be, in the friendliest 
spirit, my answer vari a little, accord to the type suggested. 
with regard to the barrister, I state quit earli in my seri that I 
did not propos to deal with him, becaus he had been drawn repeatedli 
by the master-hand of fiction, and becaus the laps of year had 
wrought so littl chang in the type that serjeant snubbin, and 
fitz-roy timmins, and sir thoma underwood, and mr. furnival, and mr. 
chaffanbrass were portrait which need no retouching. I must, indeed, 
admit that the growth of hair upon the chin and upper lip is a mark 
departur from type, and that a moustach k.c. is as abnorm a be 
as a beard woman or a three-head nightingale; but the variat is 
pure external, and the true inward of the barrist remain what 
it wa when dicken and thackeray and trollop drew him. so, again, 
with regard to the famili solicitor; as long as men can studi the 
method of mr. tulkinghorn (of lincoln' inn fields) and mr. putney 
gile (of the same learn quarter) they may leav mr. jerom K. jerom 
in undisturb possess of hi stage-lawyer, who "dress in the 
costum of the last gener but seven, never ha ani offic of hi 
own, and (with the aid of a crimson bag) transact all hi busi at 
hi clients' houses." 

[4] 1906. 

when I am ask whi I do not describ the painter, my repli is partli 
the same. We have got gaston phoebus, and clive newcome, and claud 
mellot, and the goodli compani of trilby, and we shall not easili 
improv upon those portraits, whether highli finish or mere 
sketched. but in thi case I have anoth reason for reticence. I 
know a good mani painters, who about thi time of year bid me to their 
studios. I have experienc befor now the delic irrit of the 
artist genius, and I know that a reverenti retic is my safest 
course. conversely, my reason for not describ the actor is that I 
realli do not know him well enough. An actor off the stage is about as 
exhilar an object as a theatr by daylight. the brillianc and the 
glamour have departed; the savour of sawdust and orange-peel remains. 
let us render all honour to the histrion when hi foot is on hi nativ 
boards; but if we are wise we shall eschew in privat life the societi 
of mr. and mrs. vincent crummles, nor open our door too wide to the 
tribe of costigan and fotheringay. 

the mention of that great actress' name (for did not emili costigan, 
afterward ladi mirabel, figur as "miss fotheringay" on the provinci 
stage?) remind me that, accord to some of my critics, women 
play too rare and too seclud a part in my seri of "typic 
developments." It is onli too true, and no one know as well as the 
author the amount of brillianc and interest which ha been forfeit 
thereby. but realli it is a sacr awe that ha made me mute. even 
to-day, as I write, I am smart under a rebuk recent administ 
to me, at a public gathering, by an outrag matron. thi ladi belong 
to the polit section of her tribe; hold man, poor man! in proper 
contempt; and clamour on sir henri campbell-bannerman' doorstep for 
that suffrag which is to make her truli free. At present she esteem 
herself littl better than a squaw, and ha been heard to declare, in 
moment of expans eloquence, that she wa not creat to be the toy 
of man--a declar in which her hearer most heartili concurred. 
well, thi stern guardian of her sex' right recent took me to 
task in a public place for the leviti with which I had critic a 
gather of polit ladies, and my nerv ha scarc ralli from 
the sudden onslaught. had I been more myself I might even yet have 
tri my unskil hand at femal portraiture. perhaps, in the spirit 
of that cambridg professor who call william ii. "quit the nicest 
emperor I know," I might have begun in the most illustri circles, 
and have sketch the stone-lay and bazaar-open activ of 
royal princesses. or, yield preced to the church, I might 
have discours of episcop ladi and have trace the influenc 
of a tradit receiv from the beatifi mrs. proudie. "_we_ had 
a veri nice ordin thi trinity," say one ladi of thi class. 
"the bishop and I were much disappoint by the poor respons of the 
laiti to our appeal," wrote another. when in may 1899 the archbishop 
were play at a court for the trial of ritualism, episcop ladi 
sat knit by the judgment-seat, and stare at the incrimin 
clergymen, as the _tricoteuses_ of the french revolut may have 
stare at the victim of the guillotine, or as miss squeer peer 
through the keyhol at the flagel of smike. Or again, on a 
lowlier rung of the ecclesiast ladder, I might have drawn the 
parochi worker--th woman of waterproof and gingham, the distributor 
of tracts, the disciplinarian of the sunday school, the presid 
spirit of mothers' meetings. At a gener elect thi type of ladi 
vari her activities--canvass for the conserv candidate, and 
tell the gape washerwomen that mr. lloyd-georg wish to convert 
the welsh cathedr into music-hal for the eisteddfod. Of all 
parochi worker the highest type is the deaconess; and not long ago, 
in a parish with which I am conversant, the deaco and the curat 
use to do their parochi round on a doubl bicycle, to the infinit 
amus of the gutter-children and the seriou perturb of the 
sever orthodox. there wa a pictur worthi of the pen and pencil of 
thackeray, but it fade all too soon into the blur commonplac of 
matrimony. 

the deaco may be call the marin of the church' army, with one 
foot on sea and one on shore--onli half a worldling, yet not quit 
a nun. with ladi of the last-nam type, my acquaint ha been 
prolong and intimate. Of their excel and devot it would be 
impertin to speak; but I may say without offenc that some of the 
ablest, most agreeable, and most amus women I have known I have 
encount in the cloister. but, alas! even into the cloister the 
serpent of polit guil will wend hi sinuou way; nor could I, 
though her friend, commend the action of sister g---- m---- when, in 
order to prevent a patient in a convalesc home from vote for a 
radic candidate, she kept hi trouser under lock and key till the 
poll wa over. 

"old age," it ha been bitterli said, "when it can no longer set a bad 
example, give good advice;" and when, as sometim happens, I am ask 
to hortat my younger fellow-citizens, one of my most emphat lesson 
is a rever for womanhood, even in it least ideal aspects. this, I 
declar to be an essenti attribut of the ideal character--of that 
manhood, at onc beauti and good, to which the philosoph have 
taught us to aspire; and, lest I should seem to be violat my own 
oft-rep precept, I tear myself from a fascin theme. 


V 

doctor and doctor 


sydney smith, who wa fond of quack hi parishioners, and had a poor 
opinion of "profession and graduat homicides," observ that "the 
sixth command is suspend by one medic diploma from the north of 
england to the south." personally, I have experienc the attent 
of the faculti north, south, east, and west, and I began in london. 
In my first appear on thi planet I wa person conduct by 
a smart gentleman, who came straight from a dinner-party, in a larg 
white cravat and turquois studs. those stud still exist, and have 
descended, with the practice, to hi grandson. may they beam on birth 
more propiti than my own. 

My knowledg of the first act of life' drama is necessarili 
traditional. but, as I approach the second, memori begin to operate. I 
seem to rememb a black silhouett of a gentleman in an elbow-chair, 
with a pigtail and knee-breeches; and thi icon wa rever as 
the like of "old doctor p----." thi "old dr. p.'s" son, "tom 
p----," wa a sturdi stripl of seventi odd, who had never use 
a stethoscope, and dismiss a rival practition who talk about 
heart-sound as "an alarmist." To these succeed a third gener 
of the same drug-stain dynasty, repres to me by a gentleman 
in shini black, who produc a larg gold watch when he felt one' 
pulse, and said "hah!" when he look at one' tongue. these three 
generations, for someth more than a century, monopol all the 
best practic of loamshire, were immens respected, and accumul a 
great deal of money. echo of the dialogu between doctor and patient 
still haunt the ear of memory:-- 

_nervou and dyspept lady._ "do you know, dr. p., I felt so veri 
uncomfort after luncheon--quit a sensat of sink through the 
floor. Of cours I had some brandi and water--about half and half--at 
once, but I feel that I ought to have a littl champagn at dinner. 
noth help me so much." 

dr. P. "your ladyship is no inconsider physician. I wa about to 
make the same suggestion. but pray be care that it is a dri wine." 

all thi wa veri comfort and friendly, and tend to promot the 
best relat between doctor and patient. I do not recollect that the 
doctor wa suppos to effect cures; but hi presenc at a deathb 
creat the pleasant sens that all had been done which could be done, 
and that the patient wa die with the digniti proper to hi station. 
It may be remarked, in passing, that the two elder gener did all 
their rounds, earli and late, summer and winter, on horseback; while 
the third subsid into a brougham drawn by a pair of hors afflict 
with stringhalt, and presum bought cheap on account of that 
infirmity. 

So much for the men. what wa their method? To my infant palat the 
oil of castor and cod were as familiar as mother' milk. I dwelt 
in a land flow with rhubarb and magnesia. the live leech wa a 
household pet. "two nocturn in blue and an arrang in black," as 
the æsthete said, were of frequent occurrence. but other part of the 
system were more palatable. I seem to have drunk beer from my earliest 
infancy. A glass of port wine at eleven, with a teaspoon of bark in 
it, wa the recogn tonic, and brandi (which the doctor, who love 
periphrasis, alway call "the domest stimulant") wa administ 
whenev one look squeamish, while mull claret wa "exhibited" as a 
soporific. the notion of pour all thi stuff down a child' throat 
sound odd to a gener rear on apollinari and barley-water, but 
it had thi one advantage--that when one grew up it wa imposs to 
make one drunk. 

from childhood we pass on to schooldays. wild hors should not drag 
from me the name of the seminari where I wa educated, for it medic 
arrang left a good deal to be desired. there were three doctor 
in thi place, and they share the care of some six hundr boys. dr. 
A. wa certainli veri old, and wa reput to be veri good, insomuch 
that hi admir said that, if they were dying, they should wish 
to have dr. A. with them, as he wa better than ani clergyman. if, 
however, they were so carnally-mind as to wish to recover, they sent 
for dr. b., a bluff gentleman, who told hi patient that they were 
not half as ill as they thought, and must pull themselv together--a 
prescript which, if there wa noth the matter, answer 
admirably. the third wa a grievou gentleman, who took a dark view of 
life, and, sit by my sick-bed, would inform me of the precari 
condit of a schoolfellow, who, to use hi own phrase, wa "slip 
through hi fingers," and "had no more constitut than a fly." 
regard thi triumvir in the light of my subsequ experience, I 
cannot affect surpris that there were fifteen death among the boy 
dure the five year that I wa in the school. 

from the anonym school I proceed to an anonym university, where 
the medic world wa domin by the bland majesti of sir omicron pie 
(the name is trollope's, but it will serve). who that ever saw them can 
forget that state bearing, that jove-lik brow, that sublim air of 
omnisci and omnipotence? who that ever heard it, that even flow of 
melliflu eloqu and copiou narrative? who that ever experienc 
it, the underli kind of heart? 

A nervou undergradu is usher into the consulting-room, and the 
great man advanc with a patern smile. 

"mr. bumpstead? ah! I think I wa at school with your good father. no? 
then it must have been your uncle. you are veri like him. We ran a 
neck-and-neck race at the university. I won the gold medal, and he wa 
_proximè_. In those day I littl thought of settl down in oxbridge. 
I had destin myself for a london practice; but sir thoma watson--y 
have heard of 'watson' style'? He wa the cicero of medicine--well, 
watson said, 'no, my dear pie, it won't do. In ten year you will be at 
the head of the profession, and will have made £100,000. but, mark my 
words, _the blade will wear out the scabbard_. you are not justifi in 
risk your life.' I wa disappointed, of course. all young men like 
the idea of fame. but I saw that watson wa right, and I came here, and 
found my life' work. the medic school wa then in a veri decay 
condition, and I have made it what it is. whi am I tell you all 
this----?" 

(_enter the butler._) "please, sir omicron, you'v an appoint at 
battle-ax castl at four o'clock, and the carriag is at the door." 

_sir O. p._ "ah! well. I must tell you the rest anoth day. let me 
see, what wa the matter? palpitation? let me listen for a moment. It 
is as I thought--onli a littl function irritability. lead a sensibl 
life; avoid excess; cultiv the philosoph temper. take thi 
prescription, and come again next week. thank you, thank you." 

fortifi by four year of sir omicron' care, I came up to london 
somewher between 1870 and 1880. the practic of the west end wa then 
divid between three men--sir A. b., sir C. d., and sir E. F. 

sir A. B. wa bluff and brutal, fashion himself on the tradit of 
abernethy, and rule hi patient by sheer terrorism. He had an immens 
influenc over hyster women and weak-mind men, and peopl who 
might otherwis have resent hi ursin manner were reconcil to it 
by the knowledg that he offici inspect the most illustri 
tongu in the kingdom. 

hi princip rival wa sir C. d., who rule by love. "well, my dear 
sir, there is not much the matter. A day or two' hunt will set you 
right. you don't ride? ah! well, it doesn't much matter. A fortnight at 
mont carlo will do just as well. all you want is chang of scene and 
plenti of amusement." 

"a to your ladyship' diet, it should be light and nutritious. I 
should recommend you to avoid beefsteak and boil mutton. A littl 
turtl soup, some devil whitebait, and a slice of a turkey _truffe_ 
would be the sort of dinner to suit you. If the insomnia is at all 
urgent, I have found a light supper of pâté de foie gra work wonders." 

sir E. F. oper on a theolog system. hi discours on the 
relat between natur and reveal religion profoundli impress 
those who heard it for the first time, and hi tractat on medic 
mission in india ran into a third edition. In hi waiting-room one 
found, instead of last month' _punch_ or the christma number of 
_madame_, devot work inscrib "from hi grate patient, 
the author." In hi consulting-room a sacr pictur of larg 
dimens crown the mantelpiece, and sign portrait of bishop 
whom he had deliv from dyspepsia adorn the walls. ritualist 
clergi frequent him in great numbers, and--what wa better 
still--recommend their congreg to the "belov physician." 
ecclesiastically-mind laymen delight in him, and came away with a 
comfort conviction, syllogist arranged, that (1) one' first 
duti is to maintain one' health; (2) whatev one like is healthy; 
therefor (3) one' first duti is to like exactli as one likes. 

A water-drink adher of mr. gladston onc saw that emin man 
crown a banquet of champagn with a glass of undeni port. "oh! 
mr. gladstone," he exclaim in the bitter of hi soul, "what would 
sir E. F. say if he could see you mix your liquors?" the great 
man' defenc wa readi to hi hand: "sir E. F. assur me that, if 
I let fifteen minut elaps between two kind of wine, there is no 
mixture." 

somehow these live oracl of sir E. f.'s, with which I wa alway 
come in contact, left on my mind a dim impress that he must have 
been relat to the doctor who attend littl nell and prescrib the 
remedi which the landladi had alreadi applied: "everybodi said he 
wa a veri shrewd doctor indeed, and knew perfectli well what people' 
constitut were, which there appear some reason to suppos he did." 




VI 

mourn 


My infant mind wa "suckl in a creed outworn," in the form of a 
book called, by a strang misnomer, a "book of use knowledge." It 
wa there stated, if my memori serv me, that "the chines mourn in 
yellow, but king and cardin mourn in purple." In what do modern 
english peopl mourn? that is the subject of to-day' enquiry. 

lord acton, in one of hi most impress passages, speak of england 
as live under "institut which incorpor tradit and prolong 
the reign of the dead." but the veri notion of "prolong the reign 
of the dead" is an anachron in an age which forget it friend the 
moment it ha buri them. "out of sight, out of mind" is an adag 
which nowaday verifi itself with startl rapidity. mourn is as 
much out of date as suttee; and, as to the widow' cap, the admir 
signora vesey neroni in "barchest towers" wa onli a littl in 
advanc of her age when she exclaimed, "the death of twenti husband 
should not make me undergo such a penance. It is as much a relic of 
pagan as the sacrific of a hindoo woman at the burn of her 
husband' body. If not so bloody, it is quit as barbar and quit as 
useless." 

In day gone by, a death in a famili extinguish all festivity. 
engag were cancelled, social plan were laid aside, and the 
mourner went into retreat for a twelvemonth. men wore black trousers; 
women swath themselv in black crape. "mourn jewellery"--hid 
combin of jet and bogwood--twinkl and jingl round the neck 
of the bereaved, and widow wrote on letter-pap which wa virtual 
black, with a small white space in the middl of the sheet. harri 
foker, we know, honour hi father' memori by have hi brougham 
paint black; and I have known a ladi who, when she lost her husband, 
had her boudoir line with black velvet, after the fashion of lord 
glenallan in "the antiquary." 

but nowaday peopl shrink (with amiabl considerateness) from thu 
inflict their grief on their friends; and if (a we must in chariti 
assume) they feel emotion, they studious conceal it in their own 
bosoms. the ball follow the funer with a celer and a frank 
joyous which suggest a wake; and the keen pursuer of pleasur 
protest, with quit a religi air, that for their own part they would 
think it absolut wick to sorrow as those without hope. weedless 
widows, becomingli "gowned," as ladies' paper say, in pale grey or 
black and white, sacrific to proprieti by forswear the opera or the 
racecours for twelv month or so, but find a littl fresh air on the 
river or at hurlingham absolut necessari for health; and, if they 
dine out quietli or even give a littl danc at home, are care to 
protest that they have lost all pleasur in life, but must struggl 
to keep up for the sake of the dear children. surely, as master 
shallow says, "good phrase are, and ever were, veri commendable." 
the old-fashion manifest of mourn were no doubt overdone, 
but the modern disregard of the dead seem to me both heartless and 
indecent. 

the suprem exemplar of mourn was, of course, queen victoria. dure 
her reign, and in her person practice, the custom of mourn reach 
it highest point of persist and solemnity. In 1844 ladi lyttelton, 
who wa gover to the present king and hi sister the princess 
royal, wrote from court, "we are such a 'boundless contigu of shade' 
just now." the immedi caus of that shade wa the death of princ 
albert' father; and although in queen victoria' life there wa a fair 
allow of sunshine, still, as ecclesiast said, "the cloud return 
after the rain"; and, in a famili where cousinship is recogn to the 
third and fourth generation, the "shade" of mourn must constantli 
recur. the late duke of beaufort, head of the most numer famili in 
the peerage, alway wore a black band round hi white hat, because, 
as he said, one of hi cousin wa alway dead and he would not be 
want in respect for the deceased; and, similarly, a maid of honour 
onc said to me, "I never see the queen' jewels, becaus she is almost 
alway in mourn for some german princ or princess, and then she 
onli wear black ornaments." Of course, in a case where there wa thi 
natur predisposit to mourn observance, the suprem loss of a 
husband meant a final renunci of the world and it gaieties. I 
suppos it is no exagger to say that from her bereav in 1861 
to her death in 1901 queen victoria live in unbroken communion with 
the unseen but unforgotten. the necessari busi of the state wa 
not, even for a week, laid aside; but pomp and ceremoni and public 
appear are profoundli distast to shatter nerv and broken 
hearts. yield to the urgent advic of her ministers, queen victoria 
emerg from four years' seclus to open the new parliament in 1866; 
and her reward wa reap in the follow december, when a peculiarli 
rancor politician rebuk her at a great meet of reform in st. 
james' hall for a lack of popular sympathies. It wa then that, on the 
spur of the moment, john bright, who himself had known so well what 
bereav meant, utter hi chivalr defenc of the absent and 
lone sovereign:-- 

"I am not accustom to stand up in defenc of those who are 
possessor of crowns. but I could not sit and hear that observ 
without a sensat of wonder and of pain. I think there ha been, 
by mani persons, a great injustic done to the queen in refer to 
her desol and widow position. and I ventur to say this--that a 
woman, be she the queen of a great realm or be she the wife of one of 
your labour men, who can keep aliv in her heart a great sorrow for 
the lost object of her life and affection, is not at all like to be 
want in a great and gener sympathi with you." 

admir and reverend as wa thi abid sorrow, contemporari 
observ felt that it outward manifest were not alway 
harmonious. the mausoleum at frogmor is not a "poem in stone," and the 
monument of gilt opposit the albert hall ha suppli the frivol 
with an appropri pun. landseer, who, when onc he forsook hi stag 
and deerhounds, wa sure the most debas painter of a hideou age, 
attain hi worst in a pictur of the slope at windsor _circa_ 1862. 
under an inki sky, in the forefront of a sunless landscape, stand a 
black pony, and on it back is a ladi dress in the deepest weeds, 
with a black riding-skirt and a black bonnet. A retain in subfusc 
kilt hold the pony' head, a dingi terrier look on with melancholi 
eyes, and, in the distant background, two darkly-clad princess shiver 
on a garden-seat. the onli spot of colour in the scene is a red 
despatch-box, and the whole form the highest tribut of english art to 
a nation disast and a queenli sorrow. 

black, and intens black, were all the trap of courtli 
woe--black crape, black gloves, black feathers, black jewellery. the 
state-rob were worn no longer; the state-coach stood unus in the 
coach-house. the footmen wore black band round their arms. It wa 
onli by slow degrees, and on occas of high and rare solemnity, 
that white lace and modest plume and diamond and decor were 
permit to enliven the firmament of courtli woe. but we of the 
twentieth centuri live in an age of æsthetic revival, and, though 
perhap we do not mourn so heartily, we certainli mourn more prettily. 
one ladi at least there is who know how to combin the sincer of 
sorrow with it becom manifestation; and queen alexandra in mourn 
garb is as delight a vision as wa queen alexandra in her cloth 
of wrought gold, when she knelt befor the altar of westminst abbey 
and bow her head to receiv her diamond crown. 

queen victoria' devot to the memori of those whom she had lost 
had one definit consequ which probabl she littl contemplated. 
the annual service, conduct in the royal mausoleum at frogmor on 
the anniversari of the princ consort' death, accustom english 
peopl to the idea, which sinc the reform had becom strang 
unfamiliar, of devot commemor of the departed. To the 
queen' religi instincts, deepli ting as they had been by princ 
albert' lutheranism, such commemor were entir natural; for 
german protestant ha alway cherish a much liveli sens of 
the relat between the live and the depart than wa realiz by 
english puritanism. the exampl set in high quarter quickli spread. 
memori servic becam an establish form of english mourning. 
begin with simpl prayer and hymns, they gradual develop into 
memori eucharists. the splendid, wail music of the _di iræ_ 
wa felt to be the christian echo of the _domine, refugium_; and the 
common instinct of mourn human found it appropri express 
when, over the coffin of princ henri of battenberg, the choir of st. 
george' chapel sang the russian hymn of supplication, "give rest, O 
christ, to thi servant with thi saints." 




vii 

will 


If there is ani one still left who know hi "christian year," he 
will rememb that kebl extol "a sober standard of feeling" as a 
special virtu of the english prayer-book. I have alway thought that 
thi "sober standard" is peculiarli well exemplifi by the rubric 
about will-mak in the order for the visit of the sick: "if the 
sick person hath not befor dispos of hi goods, let him then be 
admonish to make hi will and to declar hi debts, what he oweth and 
what is owe unto him, for the better discharg of hi conscienc 
and the quiet of hi executors. but men should often be put in 
remembr to take order for the settl of their tempor estat 
whilst they are in health." there is someth in these direct 
which is curious english and commonplac and unrhapsodical, and 
therefor exactli congruou with the temper of a peopl who have never 
set a high valu on unpract religions. To thi gener duti of 
will-mak there may, of course, be exceptions. thu dr. pusey in hi 
old age, when hi famili wa reduc to one and he had no possess 
left except hi books, said: "in a case like mine, the law is the best 
willmaker." A pietist admirer, who had caught the word imperfectly, 
in relat them substitut "lord" for "law"; but the substitut 
did not realli affect the sense. In case where no great interest are 
involv and the requir of justic are not altogeth clear, we 
can wise leav the eventu fate of our possess to "god' scheme 
for govern the universe, by men miscal chance." 

there is, I believe, a certain school of econom reform who would 
wholli abolish the prerog of will-making, and would decre that 
whatev a man leav behind him should pass automat to hi 
children, or, fail them, to the state. On the social and fiscal 
result of such a system I forbear to speculate; but, as a sincer 
friend to literatur in all it branches, I would ask, if that were 
law, what would becom of the novelist and the playwrights? the law 
of stageland ha been codifi for us by the labori care of mr. 
jerom K. jerome, and among it best-establish principl seem to 
be these: If a man die without leav a will, then all hi properti 
goe to the nearest villain; but, if a man die and leav a will, 
then all hi properti goe to whoever can get possess of that will. 
here are the raw materi of dramat litig enough to hold the 
stage for a century; and ill would it fare with the embarrass 
playwright if a mechan process of law were substitut for the 
strang possibl of will-making, with it startl caprices, 
it incalcul miscarriages, and it eventu triumph of injur 
innocence. then again, as to fiction. foul fall the day when our 
fiction-writ shall be unabl to traffic ani longer in testamentari 
mystification. how would their predecessor have fare if they had 
labour under such a disability? I am by natur too cautiou to 
"intromit with" the mysteri of scotch law, and in the romanc of 
the belov sir walter the complic of entail and of will-mak 
are curious intertwined. certainli it wa under the provis of an 
entail that harri bertram recov the estat of ellangowan, and I am 
inclin to think that it wa an entail which prompt the countess of 
glenallan to her hideou crime; but it wa by will that miss margaret 
bertram devis the land of singleside, and it wa under old sir 
hildebrand' will that franci osbaldiston succeed to osbaldiston 
hall. 

even greater are the oblig of our english novelist to the 
testamentari law. miss edgeworth made admir use of it in "almeria." 
had englishmen no power of make wills, the "wick lord hertford" 
could not have execut the notori instrument which gave such 
unbound delight to the scandalmong of 1842-1843, and then lord 
beaconsfield could not have drawn hi hogarth-lik pictur of the 
read of lord monmouth' will in "coningsby." thackeray did not 
traffic veri much in wills, though, to be sure, jo sedley left £1000 
to becki sharp, and the opportun discoveri of lord ringwood' will in 
the pocket of hi travelling-carriag simplifi philip' career. the 
insolv swindler dr. firmin, who had rob hi son and abscond 
to america, left hi will "in the tortoiseshel secretair in the 
consulting-room, under the pictur of abraham offer up isaac." 
dicken wa a great will-maker. We know that if dick swivel had 
been a steadier youth he would have inherit more than £150 a year 
from hi aunt rebecca. that loyal-heart lover mr. barkis, in spite 
of all rebuffs, made the obdur peggotti hi residuari legatee. mr. 
finch left "a beauti will," and madelin bray wa the subject 
of a veri complic one. mr. dorrit' unexpect fortun accru 
to him, I think, as heir-at-law; but the litig in jarndyc _v._ 
jarndyc arose, as all the world knows, out of a disput will; and the 
thellusson will case, on which dicken relied, in later year suppli 
henri kingsley with the plot of "reginald hetherege." perhap dickens' 
best piec of will-mak is given in the case of mr. spenlow, who, 
be a practition in doctors' commons, spoke about hi own will with 
"a serenity, a tranquillity, a calm sunset air" which quit affect 
david copperfield; and then shatter all poor david' hope by die 
intestate. 

anthoni trollop made good use of a will and a codicil in the plot of 
"orley farm." georg eliot, whose disagre charact alway seem a 
good deal nearer life than her hero and heroines, made mr. casaubon 
behav veri characterist in the odiou will by which he tri to 
prevent dorothea from marri will ladislaw; and her pictur of the 
disappoint which fell upon the compani when peter featherstone' 
will wa read is perhap her best achiev in the way of humour. 
"nobodi present had a farthing; but mr. trumbul had the gold-head 
cane," which, consid as an acknowledg of hi profession 
servic to the deceased, he wa ungrat enough to call "farcical." 

the law of settlement and entail is no part of our present study; but 
it may be remark in pass that the legal opinion on the base fee 
by which harold transom in "felix holt" held the transom estat wa 
written, at georg eliot' request, by a young chanceri barrister, who 
still survives, a brilliant figur in the world of letters. 

thi is enough, and perhap more than enough, about will in fiction; 
but will in real life are fulli as interesting. the late sir charl 
butt, who presid over the divorc court and the probat court, onc 
told me that, though the aspect of human natur which is exhibit in 
divorc is not ideal beautiful, it is far less repuls than that 
which is disclos by probate. none of the stori which one ha read 
about forg wills, forc wills, will made under pressure, will made 
under misrepresentation, are too strang to be true. A centuri ago the 
daughter of a great landown in the north of england succeed to hi 
wealth under circumst which, to put it mildly, caus surprise. In 
later life she had a public quarrel with a high-born but intemper 
dame, who conclud the colloquy by observing, with mordant emphasis, 
"well, at ani rate I didn't hold my die father' hand to make him 
sign a will he never saw, and then murder the butler to prevent hi 
telling." "ouida," or miss braddon, or some other novelist of high life 
might, I think, make someth of thi scene. 

spite wills--wil which, by rehears and revok previou 
bequests, mortifi the survivor when the testat is no longer in 
a posit to do so _viva voce_--form a veri curiou branch of the 
subject. lord kew wa a veri wealthi peer of strict principl and 
peculiarli acrid temper, and, have no wife or children to annoy, he 
"took it out," as the say is, of hi brothers, nephews, and other 
expect kinsfolk. one gem from hi collect I recall, in some such 
word as these: "bi a previou will I had left £50,000 to my brother 
john; but, as he ha sent hi son to oxford instead of cambridge, 
contrari to my express wish, I reduc the legaci to £500." may the 
earth lie light on that benevol old despot! eccentr of 
bequest, again, might make a pleasant chapter. the present writer, 
though not yet in totter age, can recal an annuit whose claim to 
£20 a year wa found (in part) on the skill with which he had tie 
hi master' pigtail, and that master die in 1830. the proverbi 
longev of annuit wa illustr in the case of a grey parrot, 
for whose mainten hi depart mistress left £10 a year. the bird 
wa not veri young when the annuiti began to accrue; and, as year went 
on and friend drop off, he began to feel the loneli of hi 
lot. with a tender of heart which did them infinit credit, the 
good coupl to whose care the bird had been left import a companion 
exactli like himself to cheer hi solitude. befor long one of the 
parrot died, and the mourner remark that these younger bird had 
not half the constitut of the older generation. so, as long as they 
lived, the parrot lived, and the pension live also. 

let my close word on will bear the author of a great name. To a 
retail of news who inform him that lord omnium, recent deceased, 
had left a larg sum of money to charities, mr. gladston repli with 
characterist emphasis: "thank him for nothing! He wa oblig to 
leav it. He couldn't carri it with him." 




viii 

pension 


"there is no live in thi countri under twenti thousand a year--not 
that that suffices, but it entitl one to ask a pension for two or 
three lives." thi wa the verdict of horac walpole, who, as sir 
georg trevelyan antithet says, "live in the countri and on 
the countri dure more than half a century, do for the countri 
less than half a day' work in half a year." talleyrand said that no 
one could conceiv how enjoy a thing exist wa capabl of 
be who had not belong to the _ancienn noblesse_ of franc befor 
the revolution; but realli the younger son of an import minister, 
general, courtier, or prelat under our english georg had a good 
deal to be thank for. It is pleasant to note the innoc candour 
with which, in walpole' manli declaration, one enorm is made to 
justifi another. A father who held great offic in church or state or 
law gave, as a matter of course, all hi most desir prefer to 
hi sons. these prefer enabl the son to live in opul at the 
public charge, their duti be perform by deputy. the clerk of 
the roll and the clerk of the hanap had no person contact with the 
mysteri articl to which they are attached. the clerk of the irons, 
the surveyor of the meltings, and the account of slop live far 
remot from such "low-thoughtéd cares." the writer of thi book deduc 
hi insignific be from a gentleman who divid with a brother 
the lucr sinecur of scaveng of dublin, though neither ever 
set foot in that fragrant city. A nephew of lord-chancellor thurlow 
(who surviv till 1874) drew pension for abolish offic to the 
amount of £11,000 a year; and a son of archbishop moor wa princip 
registrar of the prerog court of canterburi from hi boyhood till 
the abolit of hi court in 1858, when he wa pension off with 
£10,000 a year. 

when the sand of life were run in the glass, it wa customari 
for a filial placeman to obtain further pension for hi son and 
daughters, on the obviou plea that it wa cruel to cast young men 
and women, who had been rear in comfort on the merci of a rough 
world. thu the golden chain of royal bounti held at least three live 
together. the grandfath wa first lord of the treasuri or chancellor 
of the exchequ or paymaster-general, and into hi person profit it 
would be invidious, even indecent, to enquire. He might make hi eldest 
son, while still a boy at eton, clerk of the estreats, and hi second, 
befor he took hi degre at cambridge, usher of the exchequer. thu 
lord-chancellor erskin made hi son secretari of present when 
he wa eighteen, and charl grevil wa appoint secretari of 
jamaica (where he never set hi foot) befor he wa twenty. and then 
when, after fifti or sixti year of blameless enjoyment, the amiabl 
sinecurist wa near hi last quarter-day, a benevol treasuri 
interven to save hi maiden daughter or orphan niec from pecuniari 
embarrassment. It wa of such "near and dear relations" of a public man 
that sydney smith affirm that their "eating, drinking, washing, and 
cloth cost everi man in the unit kingdom twopenc or threepenc 
a year"; and, to the critic who deprec thi commerci way of 
regard the situation, he replied, with characterist vigour: "I 
have no idea that the sophia and carolin of ani man breath are to 
eat nation veal, to drink public tea, to wear treasuri ribands, and 
then that we are to be told that it is coars to animadvert upon thi 
piti and eleemosynari splendour. If thi is right, whi not mention 
it? If it is wrong, whi should not he who enjoy the eas of support 
hi sister in thi manner bear the shame of it?" In thu write of 
the pension list as it stood in 1807, the admir sydney wa at onc 
the successor of burk and the forerunn of lord grey. In 1780 burk 
had address all the resourc of hi geniu to the task of restor 
the independ of parliament by econom reform. It was, as mr. 
morley says, the number of sinecur place and unpublish pension 
which "furnish the minist with an irresist lever." burk found 
that "in sweep away those factiti place and secret pension he 
would be rob the court of it chief implement of corrupt and 
protect the repres against hi chief motiv in sell hi 
country." hi power of oratori wa reinforc by a minut knowledg 
of all the shadi and shabbi abuses, all the manifold and complic 
corruptions, which had accumul under the protect of the royal 
name. the reformer' triumph wa signal and complete. vast number of 
sinecur were swept away, but some remained. the pension list wa 
close curtailed, but pension were still conferred. No public servant 
ever more richli earn a provis for hi old age and decrepitud 
than burk himself; but when, broken by year and sorrows, he accept 
a pension from the crown, a whig duke of fabul wealth, just thirti 
year old, had the temer to charg him with a discredit 
departur from hi former principl of econom reform. the duke wa a 
booby: but hi foolhardi enrich english literatur with "A letter 
to a nobl lord on the attack made on mr. burk and hi pension." To 
read that letter, even after the laps of 110 years, is to realiz 
that, in spite of all corrupt and all abuse, pecuniari reward for 
polit servic need not be dishonour or unreasonable. 

but corrupt and abus there were, and in suffici quantiti 
to justifi all the bitter fun which "peter plymley" pour upon the 
cannings, the jenkinsons, and the percevals. the reform of the pension 
list becam a cardin object of reform radicals; and politician 
like joseph hume, publicist like albani fonblanque, pursu it with 
incess perseverance, 

"till grey went forth in 'thirty-two to storm corruption' hold." 

In 1834 the first reform parliament overhaul the whole system and 
brought some curiou transact into the light of day. wherea up 
to that time the pension list amount to £145,000 a year, it wa now 
reduc to £75,000; and it benefit were restrict to "servant of 
the crown and public, and to those who by their use discoveri 
in scienc or attain in literatur and the art had merit the 
graciou consider of their sovereign and the gratitud of their 
country." vest interest were, of course, respected; for had we 
not even compens the slaveholders? two year ago one of these 
beneficiari surviv in a seren old age, and, for all I know, 
there may be other still spare to us, for, as mr. G. A. sala truli 
remarked, it never is safe to say that ani one is dead, for if you do 
he is sure to write from the countri and say he is onli ninety-seven 
and never wa better. 

A typic repres of the unreform system wa john wilson 
croker (1780-1857), whose literari effort macaulay trounced, and whose 
polit utter were thu describ by lord beaconsfield:-- 

"there never wa a fellow for give a good hearti kick to the peopl 
like rigby. himself sprung from the dreg of the populace, thi wa 
disinterested. what could be more patriot and magnanim than hi 
jeremiad over the fall of the montmor and the crillions, or 
the possibl catastroph of the perci and the seymours? the truth 
of all thi hullabaloo wa that rigbi had a sli pension which, by 
an inevit associ of ideas, he alway connect with the 
mainten of an aristocracy. all hi rigmarol dissert on the 
french revolut were impel by thi secret influence; and, when he 
moan like a mandrak over nottingham castl in flames, the rogu had 
an eye all the while to quarter-day." 

It wa an evil day for those who love to grow rich upon the public 
money when mr. gladston becam the control of the nation purse. 
one of hi first act wa to revis the system of polit pensions, 
which by an act of 1869 wa reconstitut as it stand to-day. there 
are now three class of person entitl to pension for servic 
render in polit office; and the scale is arrang on that curiou 
principl which also regul the "tips" to servant in a privat 
house--that the larger your wage is, the larger your gratuiti shall 
be. thu a minist who ha drawn £5000 a year is entitl after four 
years' servic to a pension of £2000 a year; he who ha drawn £3000 
a year for six year is entitl to £1200 a year; while he who ha 
labour for ten year for the modest remuner of £1000 a year must 
be content with a pittanc of £800 a year. _qui habet, dabitur ei_; but 
with thi restriction--that onli four pension of ani one class can run 
concurrently. 

politician who had been brought up in the "spaciou days" and gener 
method of the older dispens were by no mean enamour of what 
they use to call "gladstone' cheesepar economies." sir william 
gregori use to relat how, when, as a child, he ask lord melbourn 
for a fine red stick of offici sealing-wax, that genial minist 
thrust it into hi hand, togeth with a bundl of quill pens, saying, 
"you can't begin too early. all these thing belong to the public, and 
your busi in life must be to get out of the public all you can." 
An emin statesman, train in these traditions, had drawn from veri 
earli day a pension for an abolish offic in chancery. In due cours 
he becam a cabinet minister, and, when he fell from that high estate, 
he duli pocket hi £2000 a year. later he came into a veri larg 
income, but thi he obligingli save for hi nephew and nieces, live 
meanwhil on hi twofold pension. 

I will conclud with a pleasant anecdote. until half-way through the 
last centuri it wa customari to give a speaker on retir from the 
hous of common a pension of £2000 a year for two lives. It is relat 
that in 1857 mr. speaker shaw-lefevre, on hi elev to the peerag 
as lord eversley, said that he could not endur the thought of impos 
a burden on posterity, and would therefor take £4000 a year for hi 
own life instead of £2000 a year for two. thi public-spirit action 
wa highli commended, and, as he live till 1888, virtu was, as it 
ought alway to be, it own reward. 




IX 

the season AS IT wa 


the subject is worthi to be celebr both in vers and in prose. 
exactli sixti year ago bulwer-lytton, in hi anonym satir "the new 
timon," thu describ the nocturn aspect of the west end in that 
choic period of the year which to us london is pre-emin "the 
season":-- 

"o'er royal london, in luxuri may, 
while lamp yet twinkle, dawn creep the day. 
home from the hell the pale-ey gamest steals; 
home from the ball flash jade beauty' wheels; 
from field suburban roll the earli cart; 
So rest the revel--so awak the mart." 

twenty-four year later lord beaconsfield, in "lothair," gave a vivid 
sketch of the same scene as beheld by daylight:-- 

"town wa begin to blaze. brougham whirl and bright barouch 
glanced, troop of social cavalri canter and caracol in morn 
rides, and the bell of pranc ponies, lash by delic hands, 
gingl in the laugh air. there were stoppag in bond street--which 
seem to cap the climax of civilization, after crowd club and 
swarm parks." 

It is curiou that of the two descript the earlier need much less 
revis than the later. lamp still "twinkle" (though, to be sure, 
they are electric, wherea when bulwer-lytton wrote ga had bare 
oust oil from it last fast in grosvenor square). "hells," 
though more euphemist named, still invit the domiciliari visit 
of our much-aspers police. "beauty" danc even more vigor 
than in 1846, for waltz and kitchen-lanc and washington post 
have supersed the decor quadril which our mother loved. and 
still the market-garden of acton and eal and hounslow send their 
"tower squadrons" of waggon laden heavens-high with the fruit and 
veget for to-morrow' luncheon. In thi merri month of may 1906 
an observer, stand at hyde park corner "when the night and morn 
meet," see london substanti as bulwer-lytton saw it. 

but, when we turn to lord beaconsfield' description, the chang 
wrought by six-and-thirti year are curious marked. "bright 
barouch glanced." In the present day a barouche, the handsomest and 
gracefullest of all open carriages, is as rare as an auk' egg or an 
origin folio of shakespeare. onli two or three survive. one, richli 
dight in royal crimson, bear the queen, beauti as cleopatra in her 
barge. In another, almost imperi purple, ladi londonderri sit 
enthroned; a third, pale blue as the forget-me-not, carri ladi 
carysfort; but soon the tale of barouch ends. victoria and landau 
and "clarences" and "sociables" make the common throng of carriages, 
and their serri rank give way to the impetu onrush of the noxiou 
motor or the milder impact of the electr brougham. 

"troop of social cavalry" were, when lord beaconsfield wrote 
"lothair," the characterist glori of rotten row; but hors and 
horsemanship alik have waned. men take their constitut canter 
in costum ancient confin to rat-catching, and the gener 
aspect of rotten row suggest the idea of mount infantri rather 
than of "cavalry." alongsid the ride forti year ago ladi drove 
their pony-phaetons--a pretti practic and a pretti carriage; but 
both have utterli disappeared, and the onli bell that "gingl in the 
laugh air" are the warn signal of the petrol fiend, as, bent 
on destruction, he swoop down from marbl arch to piccadilly. doe a 
captiou critic gaze enquiringli on the unfamiliar verb to "gingle"? 
It wa thu that lord beaconsfield wrote it in "lothair"; even as 
in the same high romanc he describ a ladi with a rich bunch of 
"stephanopolis" in her hand. It is not for the ephemer scribbler to 
correct the orthographi of the immort dead. As to "stoppag in bond 
street," they were isol and noteworthi incid in 1870; in 1906, 
thank to the admiss of omnibus into the narrow thoroughfare, they 
are occurr as regular as the postman' knock or the policeman' 
mail tread. 

We have seen the aspect in which the london season present itself 
to two great men of yore. let me now descend to a more person level. 
We will imagin ourselv transport back to the year 1880, and to 
the month of may. A young gentleman--som five-and-twenti summers, as 
mr. G. P. R. jame would have said, have pass over hi fair head--i 
stand near the step of st. george' hospit between the hour of 
eleven and midnight. He is smartli dress in even clothes, with a 
white waistcoat, a gardenia in hi button-hole, and a silver-crutch 
stick in hi hand. He is smoke a cigarett and ponder the question 
where he shall spend hi evening, or, more strictly, the earli hour of 
next day. He is in a state of seren content with himself and the 
world, for he ha just eaten an excel dinner, where plovers' egg 
and asparagu have remind him that the season ha realli begun. To 
the pleasure-seek london these symptom of return summer mean 
more, far more, than the dogros in the hedgerow or the first note of 
the nightingal in the copse. sinc dinner he ha just look in at an 
even party, which bore him badly, and ha "cut" two other where he 
wa not so like to be missed. and now aris the vital question of 
the balls. I use the plural number, for there will certainli be two, 
and probabl three, to choos from. here, at st. george' hospital, 
our youth is at the centr of the world' social concourse. A swift 
and unbroken stream of carriag is pour down from grosvenor squar 
and mayfair to belgrav squar and eaton squar and chesham place, and 
it meet as it goe the ascend process which begin in belgravia 
and end in portman square. to-night there is a royal ball at grosvenor 
house, certainli the most state event of the season; a littl dance, 
exquisit gay and bright, in piccadilly; and a gorgeou entertain 
in prince' gate, where the aspir distil is struggling, with 
enorm outlay, into social fame. all these have solicit the honour 
of our young friend' presence, and now is the moment of decision. It 
doe not take long to repudi prince' gate; there will be the best 
band in london, and ortolan for supper, but there will be no one there 
that one ever saw before, and it is too sicken to be call "mi boy" 
by that bow-window bounder, the master of the house. there remain 
grosvenor hous and piccadilly, and happili these can be combin in 
a harmoni perfection. grosvenor hous shall come first, for the 
arriv of the princ and princess is a pageant worth seeing--th most 
graciou host and the most beauti hostess in london usher the 
royal guests, with courtli pomp, into the great gallery, wall with 
the canvas of rubens, which serv as the dancing-room. then the fun 
begins, and the bright hour fli swiftly, till one o'clock suggest 
the tender thought of supper, which is serv on gold plate and sèvre 
china in a garden-t of gobelin tapestry. and now it is time for a 
move; and our youth, extric himself from the undesir attent 
of the linkmen, pop into a hansom and speed to piccadilly, where he 
find delight of a differ kind--no royalty, no pomp, no ceremony; 
but a warm welcome, and all hi intim friends, and the nicest girl 
in london eager for a valse. 

As day begin to peep, he drink hi crown tumbler of champagne-cup, 
and stroll home under the opalesc dawn, snif the fragranc 
from pyramid of strawberri as they roll toward covent garden, and 
exchang a friendli "good night" with the policeman on the beat, who 
seem to think that "good morning" would be a more suitabl greeting. 
So to bed, with the cheer conscious of a day' work well done, 
and the even more exhilar prospect of an unbroken success 
of such days, full of feast and danc and ride and polo and 
lawn-tennis, till august stifl the season with it dust and drive 
the revel to homburg or the moors. 

but I awake, and lo! it is a dream, though a dream well found on 
reality. for I have been describ the london season as it wa when 
the world wa young. 

"when all the world is old, lad, 
and all the tree are brown; 
and all the sport is stale, lad, 
and all the wheel run down; 
creep home, and take your place there, 
the spent and maim among: 
god grant you find one face there, 
you love when all wa young." 




X 

the season AS IT IS 


that delic critic, the late mr. william cory, observ in one of hi 
letter that virgil' 

"sunt lacrymæ rerum, et mentem mortalia tangunt" 

ha it modern equival in wordsworth' 

"men are we, and must griev when even the shade 
Of that which onc wa great is pass away." 

the full luxuri of that grief is reserv for those who, a decad 
hence, shall moral on "the london season," for the thing which now 
we so describ will then have utterli perished, and it name will 
onli arous a tender and regret emotion. even now we have seen it 
glori fade, and soon it will have share the fate of those venetian 
splendour which wordsworth mourned. but in the meantim it still 
exists, though in a vastli differ form from that which it wore in 
mid-victorian years. just now I wa describ some of the chang 
which have occur sinc the distant day when bulwer-lytton and lord 
beaconsfield describ london in may; and, follow humbl in their 
wake, I endeavour to depict it as it wa when I had my part in it. 
but chang onli yield place to change. society, like the individu 
who compos it, pass onward in perpetu vicissitude. As shelley 
says, "naught may endur but mutability." So the london season of 
1906 differ as notabl from the season of 1880 as the season of 1880 
from that of 1846. let me catalogu some of the chang and tri to 
account for them. In the first place, the season is much less exactli 
circumscrib by dates. In day gone by, it began with the open of 
parliament, which wa alway about the 7th of february, and it lasted, 
with it regular intermiss for easter and whitsuntide, till the 
last week of july. then societi transport itself in turn to goodwood, 
to cowes, and to a german watering-plac or a scotch moor, accord 
to it physic condition, and it wa darkli rumour that, if peopl 
found themselv compel by domest or financi reason to remain 
in london dure august, they sought to escap detect by keep 
the window front the street close shuttered, and live in their 
back room in unbroken contempl of the lead and the mews. If you 
chanc to meet a man in piccadilli in september, you might be sure 
that he would be wear countri cloth and would assur you that he 
wa onli "pass through" between doncast and scotland. nowaday 
the season ha no particular limits. london is nearli as full in 
decemb as it is in may. dinner and play and supper at restaur 
are as frequent, and, bar the fogs, as bright, at christma as at 
midsummer. even in septemb clubland is not deserted; and there are 
peopl bold enough to defi the world by return from their summer 
exodu as earli as october. the reason for the change, as for mani 
other like it, is the reduct of territori incomes. 1880 may be 
taken as, roughly, the last of the good year for agriculture. the 
incess rain of 1879 had even then begun to tell their tale. tenant 
were ask for big reductions, and farm hitherto eagerli sought were 
becom unlettable. I know a landown on a great scale who, a year or 
two later, onli pocket 10 per cent. of hi incom from land, wherea 
five year befor he would have thought an abat of 10 per cent. 
disastrous. all thi ha told increasingli on social life, for peopl 
found themselv unabl to keep both a countri hous and a london hous 
go at the same time, and, be driven to choos between the two, 
often decid to let the countri hous and it shoot and make london 
their headquart for the whole year. so, by degrees, autumn fade 
impercept into winter, winter into spring, and spring into summer. 
each season in it turn found peopl dwell peaceabl in their urban 
habitations, entertain and be entertained; and so "_the_ season" 
lost it sharp edges. the meet of parliament brought no percept 
chang in the aspect of the town. "high midsumm pomps" were no longer 
so "high" as in former years, but, _per contra_, there wa much more 
gaieti in the autumn and winter and earli spring. 

anoth caus which ha contribut to the effac of the ancient 
time-mark is that the court tend to disregard them. under the present 
reign, windsor castl ha becom as much a social centr as buckingham 
palace. there are banquet in st. george' hall in december, as well 
as garden-parti on the the slope in june; and so, under the action 
of royal influence, the social season melt into one another, like the 
hue of the prism. then, again, the practic of the "weekend," import 
from lancashir and sanction by westminster, help to denud the 
town in summer; for the "end" tend natur to prolong itself till 
it overlap the beginning, and friday-to-tuesday parties, tread on 
the heel of whitsuntid and to be follow in quick success by 
ascot, make mish-mash of what wa aforetim "an entir and perfect 
chrysolite"--a complet and continu whole. 

In describ my hero of 1880 as he survey hi evening' amus 
and chose the most rewarding, I took for grant that he had at least 
three ball to choos from. nowaday he is lucki if he ha one. here 
again, and conspicuously, agricultur depress ha made it mark. 
In the year between 1870 and 1880, dure an unbroken spell of good 
trade and good harvests, rich peopl struggl with one anoth for a 
vacant night on which to entertain their friends. for example, ladi 
A. had just brought out a daughter, and wish to give a ball for her 
benefit. say that she set her affect on monday the 28th of may. 
befor she issu her card she took counsel with all her friends, 
for in those day ball-giv mother were a sort of limit company, 
and all knew one another. she found that mrs. B. had mental fix 
on tuesday, 29th, and, if mrs. C. had thought of monday, she would be 
so kind as to take wednesday, 30th. So all wa amic agreed; there 
would be no clashing, which would be such a piti and would spoil both 
balls; and the card were duli issued. directli afterwards, as if move 
by some occult and fiendish impulse, the duchess of d---- pounc on 
monday, 28th, for a royal ball at d---- house, or, wors still becaus 
more peril tempting, for a "veri small dance," to which all the 
nicest young men would go, and where they would stay till three. In the 
face of such mortif as these, the emul hospit of the 
aspir distil were of no account; for the "nice men" would either 
disregard them, or, have look in for half-an-hour, would come on to 
spend the night at the hous where they felt themselv at home. 

the hero of 1880, if onli he wa well connected, well mannered, and 
suffici well known, might fairli reckon on dine six night out 
of the seven at a host' expense. indeed, if he wa at all popular, he 
could safe afford to declin the invit which old mr. wellbor 
issu six week in advanc and reserv himself for a liveli meal 
at shorter notice. not so to-day. our young friend, if he ha a 
constitut object to pay for hi own dinner, must take what 
he can get in the way of invitations, and not be too particular about 
the cook or the company. here the caus of chang is not decreas 
of wealth. As long as there is a balanc at the bank, and even when 
there is none, peopl will dine; and dinner-giv is the last form of 
hospit which societi will let die. but nowaday dinner are made 
ancillari to bridge. If our friend cannot afford to lose £50 in an 
even he will not be ask to dine at a hous which reckon itself 
as belong to "the mode"; or if, for old acquaintance' sake, he is 
allow to find a place at the dinner-table, he is compel to sit all 
the even by the least attract daughter of the house, or to listen 
to some fogey, too fossil for bridge, discours on the iniqu 
of mr. birrell' bill. "tobacco," said lord beaconsfield, "i the tomb 
of love." If he were with us now, he would pronounc that bridg is the 
extinguish of hospitality. 

yet onc again I note a startl discrep between the season 
as it wa and the season as it is. then a young man who want air 
and exercis in the afternoon play tenni at lord's, or skate 
at prince's, or took a gallop in richmond park, or, if he wa veri 
adventur and up-to-date, sped out to hampton court or windsor on a 
bone-shak bicycl six feet high. all these recreat are possibl 
to him to-day; but all have yield to motoring. dress in the most 
unbecom of all known costumes, hi express eye conceal by 
goggles, and hi grace proport swath in oilskin, he urg 
hi mad career to brighton or stratford or salisburi plain. No doubt 
he ha the most fascin companion in the world, for girl are 
enthusiast motorists; but I fanci that edwin and angelina present 
a more attract appear when, neatli dress and beauti 
mounted, they rode in the cool of the even along the shadi side of 
rotten row. 

however, I am a kind of social "old mortality" rummag among the 
tomb of what ha been and can be no more, and I fanci that old 
mortality' opinion on youth and beauti would have been justli 
disregarded. 




XI 

the sin OF societi 


In the year 1870 a flame of religi zeal wa suddenli kindl in 
the west end of london. In that year the rev. georg howard wilkinson 
(now bishop of st. andrews) wa appoint vicar of st. peter's, eaton 
square. the church in the belgravian district wa as dri as tinder; 
it caught fire from mr. wilkinson' fervour, and the fire soon becam 
a conflagration. thi is matthew arnold' descript of the great 
preacher at the height of hi power: "he wa so evid sincere, more 
than sincere, burnt up with sorrow, that he carri everi one with 
him, and half the church wa in tears. I do not much believ in good 
be done by a man unless he can give _light_, and wilkinson' fire is 
veri turbid; but hi power of heating, penetrating, and agit is 
extraordinary." thi descript belong to the year 1872, but it might 
have been written with equal truth at ani date between 1870 and 1883. 
In all my experi of preach (which is long, wide, and varied) I 
have never seen a congreg domin by it minist so absolut 
as the congreg of st. peter' wa domin by mr. wilkinson. I 
say "congregation" advisedly, for I should think that at least half 
the seathold belong to other parishes. the smartest carriag in 
london block the approach to the church. the great dame of grosvenor 
squar and carlton hous terrac rub shoulder with the opul 
inhabit of tyburnia and south kensington, cabinet minist fought 
for place in the gallery, and m.p.' were no more account of than 
silver in the day of solomon. 

and thi wa not a mere assemblag of hearers. the congreg of st. 
peter' were pre-emin givers. £4000 a year wa the regular product 
of the alms-bags, let alon the innumer sum sent privat to the 
vicar. "I want a thousand pounds." thi simpl but emphat statement 
from the pulpit one sunday wa succeed on the follow sunday by 
the quiet announcement, "I have got a thousand pounds." what wa the 
secret of thi attraction? It wa entir personal. It did not in the 
least depend on theolog bias. mr. wilkinson belong to no party. 
He had begun life as an evangelical, and he retain the unction and 
fervour which were characterist of that school at it best; but he 
wa feel hi way toward a higher churchmanship, and had discard 
most of hi earlier shibboleths. the fabric wa frankli hideous, and 
the well-meant attempt to make it look less like a barn and more 
like a church onli result in someth between a mosqu and a 
synagogue. there wa no ritualism. the music wa too elabor for the 
choir, and the curat were feebl beyond all description. the vicar 
wa everything; and even he had none of the gift which are commonli 
suppos to make a popular preacher. He wa not the least flummeri or 
flowery. He wa reserv and dignifi in manner, and hi languag wa 
quit unadorned. hi voic wa a monoton moan, occasion rise 
into a howl. He wa conspicu free from the tendenc to prophesi 
smooth things, and he even seem to take a delight in rub the 
pungent lotion of hi spiritu satir into the sore place of the 
hearers' conscience. If jeremiah had prophesi in a surplice, he would 
have been like the prophet of belgravia; and as for savonarola, hi 
sermon, as paraphras in chapter xxiv. of "romola," might have been 
delivered, with scarc a word altered, from the pulpit of st. peter's. 

and here we touch the pith and core of mr. wilkinson' preaching. He 
rebuk the sin of societi as no one had ventur to rebuk them sinc 
the day of whitefield and the wesleys. the tractarian movement, so 
heart-searching, so conscience-stir at oxford, had succumb in 
the fashion part of london to the influenc which surround it, 
and had degener into a sort of easy-go ceremonialism--partli 
antiquarian, partli worldly, and wholli ineffect for spiritu 
reviv or moral reformation. into thi dead sea of lethargi and 
formal mr. wilkinson burst like a gunboat. He scatter hi fire 
left and right, aim high and aim low, blaze and bombard without 
fear or favour; sent some craft to the bottom, set fire to others, 
and cover the sea with wreckage. In less metaphor language, he 
rebuk the sin of all and sundry, from duchess to scullery-maids, 
premier to pageboys, octogenarian rake to damsel in their teens. 
then, as now, societi love to be scolded, and the more mr. wilkinson 
thunder the more it crowd to hi feet. "pay your bills." "get up 
when you are called." "don't stay till three at a ball and then say 
that you are too delic for earli services." "eat one dinner a day 
instead of three, and tri to earn that one." "give up champagn for 
the season, and what you save on your wine-merchant' bill send to 
the mission field." "you are sixty-f year old and have not been 
confirmed. never too late to mend. join a confirm class at once, 
and tri to remedy, by good exampl now, all the harm you have done your 
servant or your neighbour by fifti years' indifference." "sell that 
diamond cross which you carri with you into the sin-pollut atmospher 
of the opera, give the proce to feed the poor, and wear the onli 
real cross--th cross of self-disciplin and self-denial." 

these are echoes--faint, indeed, but not, I think, unfaithful--of 
thirti year ago, and they have suddenli been awok from their long 
slumber by the sermon which father vaughan ha just been preach at 
the jesuits' church in farm street, mayfair. the good father, exalt 
hi own church, perhap a littl unduly, at the expens of the anglican 
church in the district, observ complac that "farm street, in 
spite of it extension, wa all too small" for it congregation. for my 
own part, I do not belong to that fold, and I never wander to strang 
church for the pleasur of have my ear tickled; so I onli know 
father vaughan' utter as they reach me through the newspapers. A 
report in the third person alway tend to enfeebl rhetoric; but, in 
spite of that hindrance, father vaughan' style seem to lack noth 
in the way of emphasi or directness. here is a fragment of hi sermon 
preach on sunday the 10th of june 1906:-- 

"it wa no easi task for the votari of pleasur when sunday came 
round to all of a sudden forget their class distinctions, their 
privileg sets, their social successes, their worldli goods, and to 
rememb that they were go into the presenc of him befor whom man 
and woman were not what they happen to have, but what they happen 
to be--that the debutant beauti might be befor god less than her 
maid who wait up half the night for her, nay, less than the meanest 
scullery-maid below stairs; while the millionair with mean to buy up 
whole countri might be in god' sight far less pleas and veri much 
more guilti than the lowest groom in hi stabl yard." 

not less vigor wa the allocut of june 17. 

"if dives, who wa buri in hell, were to revisit the earth he would 
most sure have the _entrée_ to london' smartest set to-day. He 
would be liter pelt with invitations. and whi not? dives, so 
well groom and turn out, with such a well-lin larder and so 
well-stock a cellar, would be the veri ideal host to cultivate. He 
would 'do you so well,' you would meet the 'right peopl at hi place,' 
and you could alway bring your 'latest friend.' besides, what a good 
time one would have at hi house-parties, where there would be no fear 
of be bore or dull!"[5] 

[5] here I seem to catch an echo of dr. pusey' sermon on "whi did 
dive lose hi soul?" 

and yet again:-- 

"it wa well when the winning-card fell into their hands, for then 
there wa just a chanc of some dressmak or tradesman be paid 
someth on account befor becom bankrupt. with such exampl of 
the misus of wealth befor their eyes, it wa a wonder there were not 
more socialist than there actual were." 

all the memori of my youth have been reviv by father vaughan. 
instead of 1906, 1876; instead of the gothic gloom of farm street, the 
tawdri glare of st. peter's, eaton square; instead of a jesuit father 
in the pulpit, a vigor protest who renounc the pope and all hi 
work and glori in the anglican of the church of england. grant 
those differences, which after all are more incident than essential, 
and the sermon exactli reproduc those stir day when the present 
bishop of st. andrew "shook the arsenal" of fashion, "thunder over" 
london, and achieved, as hi admir said, the suprem distinct of 
spoil the london season. 

I am convinc that the higher critic of a later age, collat 
the wilkinsonian tradit with such fragment as remain of father 
vaughan' discourses, will come to the conclus that "wilkinson" 
never exist (except in wordsworth' ode to the spade), but wa a 
kind of heroic figur conceiv by a much later generation, which 
had quiver under the rhetor of a real person or person call 
vaughan; and the opinion of the learn will be sharpli divid on such 
question as whether vaughan wa one or many; if one, whether he wa 
a priest, a cardinal, a head master, or an independ minister; or 
whether he wa all four at differ stage of hi career. 




xii 

oxford 


"once, my dear--but the world wa young then-- 
magdalen elm and triniti limes,-- 
lissom the oar and back that swung then, 
eight good men in the good old times-- 
careless we and the choru flung then. 
under st. mary' chimes! 

"still on her spire the pigeon hover; 
still by her gateway flit the gown; 
ah, but her secret? you, young lover, 
drum her old one forth from town, 
know you the secret none discover? 
tell it--when _you_ go down." 

what matthew arnold did for the interpret of oxford through the 
medium of prose, that mr. quiller-couch ha done through the medium 
of verse. In the poem from which I have just quot two stanza he 
conveys, as no one els ha ever convey it in poetry, the tender and 
elus charm of that incompar place. 

"know you her secret none can utter-- 
her of the book, the tripl crown?" 

It is a hard question, and suscept of some veri prosaic and 
therefor inappropri answers. the true answer can, I think, onli be 
given by those for whom oxford lies, half hid, in the enchant past: 
"tell it--when _you_ go down." 

some part of the spell which oxford exercis on those who are 
subject to her influenc are in no sens secret. We perceiv them 
from the day when we first set foot within her precincts, and the sens 
of them abid with us for ever. 

"if less insens than sodden clay 
In a sea-river' bed at ebb of tide," 

all son of oxford must realiz her materi beauty, her histor 
pre-eminence, her contribut to thought and culture, her influenc on 
the religi life of england. 

"ah, but her secret? you, young lover." 

there is noth secret about all this; it is palpabl and manifest; 
and yet it doe not exhaust the spell. someth there is that remain 
undiscovered, or at best half-discovered--felt and guess at, but 
not clearli apprehended--until we have pass away from the "dream 
spires"--th cloister and the garden and the river--to that sterner 
life for which these mysteri enchant have been prepar us. 

"know you the secret none discover?" 

If you do, that is proof that time ha done it work and ha brought 
to the test of practic result the influenc which were shape 
your mind and, still more potently, your heart, between eighteen and 
twenty-two. what that "secret" is, let an unworthi son of oxford tri to 
tell. 

To begin with a negative, it is not the secret of nirvana. there are 
misguid critic abroad in the land who seem to assum that life 
live easili in a beauti place, amid a societi which includ all 
knowledg in it comprehens survey, and far remot from the human 
tragedi of poverti and toil and pain, must necessarili be calm. and 
so, as regard the actual work and warfar of mankind, it may be. the 
bitter cri of starv poplar doe not veri readili penetr to the 
well-spread tabl of an oxford common-room. In a laburnum-clad villa 
in the park we can afford to reason veri temper about life in 
citi where five famili camp in one room. but when we leav the 
actual of life and come to the region of thought and opinion, 
all the pent energi of oxford seeth and stirs. the hebrew word for 
"prophet" comes, I believe, from a root which signifi to bubbl 
like water on the flames; and in thi fervenc of thought and feel 
oxford is characterist prophetic. It is a tradit that in 
some year of the passion-torn 'forti the subject for the newdig 
prize poem wa cromwell, wherea the subject for the correspond 
poem at cambridg wa plato. In that select oxford wa true to 
herself. for a centuri at least (even if we leav out of sight her 
earlier convulsions) she ha been the battle-field of contend 
sects. her air ha resound with party-cries, and the dead bodi 
of the controversi slain have lain thick in her streets. all the 
oppos forc of church and state, of theolog and politics, of 
philosophi and science, of literari and social and econom theory, 
have contend for masteri in the place which matthew arnold, with rare 
irony, describ as "so unruffl by the fierc intellectu life of 
our century, so serene!" everi succeed gener of oxford men ha 
born it part in these ever-recur strifes. To hold aloof from them 
would have been poltroonery. passion convinc (at twenty) that 
we had sworn ourselv for life to each caus which we espoused, we 
have plead and plan and denounc and persuaded; have struck the 
shrewdest blow which our strength could compass, and devis the most 
danger pitfal which wit could suggest. noth came of it all, and 
noth could come, except the ruin of our appoint studi and the 
result disloc of all subsequ life. but we were obey the 
irresist impuls of the time and the place in which our lot wa 
cast, and we were readi to risk our all upon the venture. 

"never we wince, though none deplor us, 
We who go reap that we sowed; 
citi at cockcrow wake befor us-- 
hey, for the lilt of the london road! 
one look back, and a rous chorus! 
never a palinode!" 

It is when we have final sung that choru and have travel a 
few mile upon that road, that we learn the secret which we never 
discov while as yet oxford held us in the thick of the fight. We 
thought then that we were the most desper partizans; we ask no 
quarter, and gave none; push our argument victori to their 
uttermost consequences, and made short work of a fallen foe. but, 
when all the old battle-cri have die out of our ears, we begin to 
perceiv human voices. all at onc we realiz that a great part of 
our old content wa onli sound and furi and self-deception, and 
that, though the caus for which we strove may have been absolut 
right, our oppon were not necessarili villains. In a word, we have 
learnt the secret of oxford. all the time that we were fight and 
fuming, the higher and subtler influenc of the place were mould 
us, unconsci though we were, to a more graciou ideal. We had realli 
learnt to distinguish between intellectu error and moral obliquity. 
We could differ from anoth on everi point of the polit and 
theolog compass, and yet in our heart acknowledg him to be the 
best of all good fellows. without surrend a singl conviction, we 
came to see the virtu of so state our belief as to persuad and 
propitiate, instead of offend and alienating. We had attain to 
that temper which, in the sphere of thought and opinion, is analog 
to the crown virtu of christian charity. 

"tell it--when _you_ go down." 

late it ha been my privileg to address a consider gather 
of oxford undergraduates, all keenli aliv to the interest and 
controversi of the present hour, all devotedli loyal to the tradit 
of oxford as each understood it, and all with their eye eagerli fix 
on "the wist limit of the world." with such an audienc it wa 
inevit to insist on the grace and benedict which oxford can 
confer, and to dwell on mr. gladstone' dogma that to call a man a 
"typic oxford man" is to bestow the highest possibl praise. 

but thi wa not all. someth more remain to be said. It wa for 
a speaker who had travel for thirti year on "the london road" to 
state as plainli as he could hi own deepest oblig to the place 
which had decid the cours and complexion of hi life. and, when it 
wa difficult to express that oblig in the pedestrian prose of 
an after-dinn speech, he turn for succour to the poet who sang of 
"the secret none discover." wherev philosoph insight is combin 
with literari geniu and person charm, one say instinctively, "that 
man is, or ought to be, an oxford man." chiefest among the great name 
which oxford ought to claim but cannot is the name of edmund burke; 
and the "secret" on which we have been discours seem to be convey 
with lumin precis in hi descript of the ideal character: 
"it is our busi ... to bring the disposit that are love in 
privat life into the servic and conduct of the commonwealth; so to be 
patriot as not to forget we are gentlemen; to cultiv friendship 
and to incur enmities; to have both strong, but both selected--in the 
one to be placable, in the other immovable." whoso ha attain to that 
ideal ha learnt the "secret" of oxford. 




xiii 

school for shepherd 

"the hungri sheep look up, and are not fed." 


whi not? becaus the shepherd are so imperfectli train for their 
business. this, at ani rate, is the testimoni of a canon (sometim 
examin chaplain to a bishop) who at the diocesan confer at eli 
the other day declar that the clergi were "not qualifi to provid 
instruct in church doctrin for the laiti becaus they were not 
properli trained"; and further testifi that "nonconformist minist 
were much better trained" than the english clergy. thi testimoni from 
a superior shepherd is rather startl for the sheep, and it suggest 
some interest comparisons. It is, I take it, unquestion that 
nonconformist minist and roman cathol priest alik have much 
more of a technic educ than is thought necessari for their 
anglican brothers. they are, so to say, caught early, and their studi 
from seventeen or eighteen onward are direct steadili toward 
their appoint work in life. A roman seminarist learn hi latin 
and greek as subsidiari to higher studies; he spends, I believe, 
two year in philosophi and four in theology, and is harass by 
incess examinations. the train of the youth who aspir to the 
nonconformist ministri is of much the same kind. "moral theology," in 
other word the scienc of the confessional, he natur doe not 
learn; but, on the other hand, he is sedul train for the work of 
public speak and preaching. "if you can't preach," said spurgeon to 
hi student at stockwell, "it is a clear proof that god doesn't mean 
you to be a preacher, and you must choos some other occupation." 

vastli differ is the train of the english curate. privat school, 
public school, and university: cricket, football, rowing: elementari 
greek and latin, and a smatter of law or history--thes constitut 
hi "atmosphere," hi moral and mental discipline, between the age 
of ten and twenty-three. even more remark is hi theolog 
equipment. In ninety-nin case out of a hundred, he know absolut 
noth about the church of which he is to be a minister, her 
doctrines, history, or practic system. He ha been envelop from 
hi youth up by a hazi atmospher of undogmat religion. I well 
rememb that an undergradu friend of mine, who came to oxford 
from dr. temple' sixth form at rugby, declin to believ that there 
are two sacraments. that there wa a religi ceremoni call "the 
sacrament," for which some peopl stay after the ordinari service, 
he wa well aware, as also that infant were ceremoni sprinkled; 
but that thi latter ceremoni wa a sacrament he could not be induc 
to believe. dure hi last year at oxford he inform himself better 
on thi and some similar topics, and a year afterward wa preaching, 
with great acceptance, to a fashion congregation. from what I knew 
of my friend' theolog attainments, I should imagin that the 
bishop' examin could not have been a veri terrifi process; 
but forti year earlier it must have been even less formidable. the 
hon. and rev. georg spencer (uncl of the present lord spencer) wa 
destin from an earli age for the famili live in northamptonshire. 
He hunt and shot, and danced, and travel on the continent, and 
held a commiss in the yeomanry. after two year at triniti college, 
cambridge, he took a "nobleman' degree," and, when he near the 
canon age of twenty-three, he wrote to the bishop of peterborough' 
examin chaplain offer himself for ordin and ask advic as 
to hi preparation. the examiner--ah, would that there were more like 
him!--wrot back:-- 

"it is imposs that I should ever entertain ani idea of subject a 
gentleman with whose talent and good qualiti I am so well acquaint 
as I am with your to ani examin except as a matter of form, for 
which a vers in the greek testament and an articl of the church of 
england return into latin will be ampli sufficient." 

thi reassur letter wa written on the 12th of octob 1822, and on 
the 22nd of decemb next ensu georg spencer wa ordain deacon 
and a year later priest. "on the even befor the ordination, whilst 
the bishop and variou clergymen and their ladi and the candid 
amus themselv with a rubber of whist, mr. spencer refus to play." 
and the refus wa considered, as perhap it was, noteworthy. 

the movement which issu from oxford in 1833 introduc some 
improv into the method of conduct ordinations, as into other 
depart of the church' work. the examin became, though not 
yet veri serious, at least a littl less farcical, and some attempt wa 
made in charg and sermon to urg upon the candid the graviti of 
what they were undertaking. but, accord to the late bishop woodford, 
"the evenings, dure which they were left to themselves, becam 
even of social enjoyment, if not of boister merriment, in which 
the featur of an old colleg supper-parti were reproduced, rather 
than interv of solemn thought and retirement." 

bishop samuel wilberforc rais the standard of what wa expect 
in the way of scriptur and theolog knowledge; he made the 
examin a reality; he laid special stress on sermon-writing; and 
he made the ember week a season of spiritu retir in which men 
about to take the most decis step in life might be brought face to 
face with the respons involv in their decision. the exampl 
set by wilberforc wa followed, sooner or later, by everi bishop on 
the bench; the requir have been raised, and the system ha been 
develop and improved; but the credit of initi belong to that 
epoch-mak episcopate, which began in 1845 and ended, through a fals 
step made by a hors on the surrey downs, on the 19th of juli 1873. 

It soon becam appar to those who had the spiritu interest of 
the church at heart that someth more than twelv months' book-work 
and a week of religi retir wa requir to wean the ordinari 
b.a. from the puerilities--if noth worse--of hi undergradu 
life, and to equip him for a life of pastorship and teachership. the 
sens of thi need gave rise to the creation of theolog colleges, 
where a man who look forward to holi order might, after take hi 
ordinari degre at oxford or cambridge, appli himself to the studi 
more special necessari for hi chosen work, and--even more import 
still--might acquir the habit of method and self-disciplin 
life. the idea took shape in such foundat as the theolog 
colleg of wells, cuddesdon, sarum, and ely, the _scholæ cancellarii_ 
at lincoln, and the clergi school at leeds. fight their way through 
all manner of strang misrepresent about monastic and 
mediævalism, they have in the cours of year attain to recognition, 
popularity, and appar stability. the bishop patron them warmly, 
and incumb who desir curat not wholli ignor of their craft 
are increasingli unwil to engag one who ha not pass through a 
theolog college. that the broad result of the train given in 
these seminari is a gener increas in cleric effici I cannot 
doubt, but perhap a layman may be permit to point out some curiou 
gap and laps in that train which go some way toward make 
clergymen less esteemed, and therefor less influential, than they 
ought to be. 

1. the clergi are not taught to be courteous. If they are courteou by 
natur and habit, well and good; but a rough undergraduate, destitut 
of sympathi and tact and ignor of social usage, pass through a 
theolog colleg and come out as rough as he enter it. A bear in 
holi order is as destruct as a bull in a china shop. 

2. the clergi are not taught to manag money; they muddl their public 
accounts; they beg money for one object and use it for another; they 
seldom acknowledg what they receiv by post; and they have absolut 
no notion of cut their coat accord to their cloth. "spend and 
beg, and the money will come from somewhere" is their simpl and 
suffici creed. 

3. the clergi are not taught business. they have not the faintest 
notion of conduct a public meeting. they lose their way in 
the agenda-pap of the most insignific committee. they break 
appoint at their will and pleasure. they seldom answer letters, 
and are frankli astonish when their correspond are annoyed. 

4. the clergi are not taught the scienc of citizenship. outsid their 
strictli profession studi (and, in some cases, the record of 
athleticism) they are the most ignor set of young men in the world. 
they work hard and play hard, but they never read. they know noth 
of books, noth of history, noth of the constitut under which 
they live, of the principl and record of polit parties, of the 
need for social reform or the mean of secur it. they have a vagu 
but cling notion that radic are infidels, and that dissenters, if 
they got their deserts, would have their head punched. 

sixti year ago an italian critic said that, in spite of all their 
defects, the english clergi were "un clero colto e civile." could as 
much be said to-day? 




xiv 

pilgrimag 


I use the word in someth wider than chaucer' sense, and yet in a 
sens not wholli differ from his. for, though we no longer make an 
annual visit to the shrine of st. thoma of canterbury, still we all 
feel bound, at least onc a year, to go somewher and do someth 
quit out of our normal course. perhaps, like chaucer' friends, we 
"long" to do thi in april, but the claim of busi are gener 
too strong for us; so we have to content ourselv with admir the 
peep of greeneri which begin to invad the soot of our urban gardens, 
and, if we are of a cultur habit, we can alway quot browning' 
thrush or strain the kalendar so as to admit wordsworth' daffodils. 

thi notion of a yearli pilgrimag as a necess of rightly-ord 
life seem to have fallen into a long abeyance. "dan chaucer" (for I 
love to be on easi term with great men) describ the social custom 
of the fourteenth century, and then the pilgrimag seem to have been 
an establish institution: "tom hughes" describ those of the 
eighteenth, and thi is what, write in 1862, he say about the annual 
pilgrimag of hi own time:-- 

"I have been credibl informed, and am inclin to believe, that the 
variou board of director of railway compani agre togeth some 
ten year back to buy up the learn profess of medicine, bodi and 
soul. To thi end they set apart sever million of money, which they 
continu distribut judici among the doctors, stipul 
onli thi one thing--that they shall prescrib chang of air to everi 
patient who can pay, or borrow money to pay, a railway fare, and see 
their prescript carri out. If it be not for this, whi is it that 
none of us can be well at home for a year together? It wasn't so twenti 
year ago--not a bit of it. the brown did not go out of the counti 
onc in five years." 

the browns, as we all know, stood in mr. hughes' vocabulari for the 
upper middl class of england--th class to which the clergy, the 
smaller squires, and the profession men belong; the class which 
in chaucer' time contain the "man of lawe," the "marchande," the 
"franklyne," and the "doctor of phisyke"; and, although mr. hughes, 
who ought to know, say that in the earlier part of queen victoria' 
reign they were a stay-at-hom class, they are now the most regular and 
the most zealou of pilgrims. It wa the majest misfortun of the 
duke in "lothair" to have so mani hous that he had no home. peopl 
so circumstanc do not need to go on pilgrimages. after the autumn in 
a scotch castle, the winter in a countri hous in the midlands, the 
spring in anoth in the southern counties, and the season in grosvenor 
square, peopl are glad of a littl rest, and seek it in some "proud 
alcove" on the thame or a sea-girt villa at cowes. unless their liver 
drive them to carlsbad or their heart to nauheim, they do not travel, 
but display what lord beaconsfield call "the sustain splendour of 
their state lives" in the mani mansion which, in the aggregate, 
repres to them the idea of home. I might perhap on anoth occas 
sketch the grand tour of europe, on which, for educ purposes, 
the earl of fitzurs use to send hi eldest son, young lord cubley; 
compressed, with hi tutor and doctor, into a travelling-carriage, with 
a valet and a courier in the rumble. the duke of argyll' autobiographi 
ha just told us what thi kind of pilgrimag wa like; but to-day I am 
deal with the present rather than the past. 

It is the peopl with one hous who go on pilgrimag nowadays--th 
impoverish squire, the smoke-dri clergyman, the exhaust merchant, 
the harri editor. To these must be ad all the inhabitants, male 
and female, of lodging-land and flat-land,--al "the dim, common 
populations" of stuccovia and suburbia. there are mysteri law 
of associ which connect class with localities. tradesmen love 
margate; to clerk scarborough is dear. the semit financi ha long 
claim brighton for hi own. costermong go hop-pick in kent; 
artizan disport themselv on the nigger-haunt pier of southend. 
govern by some mysteri law of their being, schoolmast make 
straight for the alps. there they live the strenuou life and brave 
the peril ascent; climb and puff and pant all day; rush in, veri 
untidi and not veri clean, to _tabl d'hôte_; and season their meal 
with the "shop" of st. winifred' or the gay banter of rosslyn 
common-room. It is agreeabl to watch the forc cordiality, the thin 
tutori humour, with which they greet some quit irrespons pupil 
who happen to have stray into the same hotel; and I have often 
had occas to admir the precoci dexter with which the pupil 
extric himself from thi dread companionship. Of mr. gladston it 
wa said by hi detractor that he had someth of the schoolmast 
in hi composition; and thi trait wa aptli illustr when, dure 
the summer holiday some fifti year ago, he met the late duchess of 
abercorn in a countri hous accompani by her schoolboy son, lord 
georg hamilton. not mani morn had elaps befor mr. gladston 
said to the boy' mother, "duchess, don't you think it a piti that your 
son should spend hi holiday in entir idleness? I should be happi 
to give him an hour' homer everi morning." the offer wa accepted, 
and the foundat of lord george' lifelong hostil to the liber 
leader wa secur laid. It is the nervou dread of some such aw 
possibl which suppli wing to the boy' feet and lie to hi 
tongu when he encount dr. grimston or basil ward in a swiss hotel. 

while the schoolmast limit hi aspir to the alps, the oxford 
or cambridg don, have a longer vacat at hi command, take a 
more extend view, and urg hi adventur pilgrimag along road 
less trite. A few year ago an oxford don resolv to strike out what 
wa then a quit new line, and spend hi long vacat in portugal. 
consciou of insuffici acquaint with the portugues language, 
he repair to mr. parker' excel shop in the turl and enquir 
for a portugues phrase-book. after some research, that never-fail 
booksel produc "the new guid of the convers in portugues 
and english." the book had an instant and a deserv success. the 
prefac set forth that "a choic of familiar dialogues, clean of 
gallic and despoil phrases, it wa miss yet to studiou 
portugues and brazilian youth; and also to person of other nation 
that wish to know the portugues language." To suppli thi felt want 
pedro carolino compil hi hand-book for "the accept of the 
studiou persons, and especi of the youth, at which we dedic 
him particularly." among those studiou person wa our pilgrim-don, 
who natur turn in the first instanc to a dialogu head 


"for TO travel 

when do you start? 

As soon as I shall have to finish a busi at cadiz. 

have you alreadi arrest a coach? 

yes, sir, and veri cheap. 

have you great deal of effects? 

two trunk and one portmanteau. 

you may prepar all for to-morrow. We shall start at the coolness. 

the way, is it good? 

veri good. 

At which inn shall stop us? 

In that of the sun, it is the best. the account mount is little. the 
supper, the bed, and the breakfast shall get up at thirti franks. 

that seem to me a littl dear." 

the next dialogu follow in the natur order:-- 


"for TO breakfast 

john, bring us some thing for to breakfast. 

yes, sir; there is some sausag and some meat pies. will you that I 
bring the ham? 

yes, bring him, we will cut a steak. 

put an napp cloth upon thi table. 

give us some plates, ani knifes, and some forks, rins the glasses. 

I have eaten with satisfact some pudding, sausages, and some ham. I 
shall take some tea. 

still a not her cup? 

I thank you it is enough." 

breakfast over, the travel engag a guid and start out 


"for TO see the town 

We won't to see all that is it remarqu here. 

come with me, if you please. I shall not folget noth what can to 
merit your attention. here we are near to cathedraly. will you come in 
there? 

We will first go to see him in oudside, after we shall go in there for 
to look the interior." 

A day of sight-se conclud happili with the ever-welcom dialogue-- 


"for TO dine 

give us a rice soup. 

what wine do you like best? 

bourgogn wine. 

give us some beef and potatoes, a beefsteak to the english. 

what you shall take for dessert? 

give us some holland chees and some prunes. 

I will take a glass of brandi at the cherries. 

gentlemen, don't forget the waiter." 

parsimoni is a bond which make the whole world kin, and it is 
interest to find embed in 182 closely-print page of "despoil 
phrases" two such characterist specimen of sound english as "that 
seem to me a littl dear" and "don't forget the waiter." 




XV 

the public school 


"gentlemen," said dr. blimber to hi pupil on the eve of the holidays, 
"we will resum our studi on the twenty-fifth of next month." but 
that adjournment, I think, wa for christmas, and we are now in what 
matthew arnold' delici schoolboy call "the glad season of sun 
and flowers." veri soon, in dr. farrar' romant phrase, "the young 
life which usual play like the sunshin over st. winifred' will be 
pour unwont bright into mani happi english homes." or, to take 
mr. snawley' darker view of the same event, we shall be in the thick 
of one of "those ill-judg come home twice a year that unsettl 
children' mind so." 

the associ of the moment, so differ in their effect on 
differ natures, have awok the spirit of propheci in the late head 
master of eton, dr. warre, who, project hi soul into futurity, 
see dark day come for the "public schools" as that phrase ha been 
hitherto understood. It wa clear, said dr. warre, after distribut 
the prize at shrewsbury, "that ere long the public school would 
have to justifi not onli their _curriculum_, but, it might be, their 
veri existence. the spirit of the age seem to be inclin toward 
utilitarianism, and it wa now tend to undervalu the human 
and the cultur that attend them, and to demand what it appreci 
as a use and practic training--_i.e._ someth capabl of make 
boy breadwinn as soon as they left school. He did not say that 
view would ultim prevail, but the trend of public opinion in that 
direct would necessit on the part of public school a period of 
self-criticism, and veri probabl a reorgan of _curricula_. but 
there wa anoth problem to be face which would becom more seriou 
as the centuri wax older, and that wa a new phase of competition. As 
secondari educ expanded, secondari day-school would be provid 
regardless of expense, and it wa idl to think thi would have no 
effect upon great public schools. what would be weigh in the balance, 
however, wa the valu of the corpor life and aggreg influenc of 
the public school upon the format of character." 

when ex-head master begin to see vision and old etonian to dream 
dreams, the ordinari citizen, with hi tradit belief in the virtu 
and perman of public schools, must rub hi eye in astonishment. 
what is go to happen next? Is eton to abandon "taste" and take to 
"use knowledge"? Is harrow to close it board hous and becom a 
villag day school onc more? are wykeham' "seventi faith boys" (a 
the late lord selborn call them in hi first attempt at verse) no 
longer to "tund" or be "tunded"? Is westminst to forswear it latin 
play, and replac the "phormio" and the "trinummus" with "box and cox" 
and "ici on parl français"? 

these enquiries, and other like them, are forc on our attent 
by such subvers discours as dr. warre's; and that incurs of 
rampant boyhood which begin with the begin of august reinforc 
the eloqu of the ex-head master. the retreat of the ten thousand, 
which use to worri us in our youth, wa not half so formid an 
affair as the advanc of the ten thousand, schoolboy though they be, 
who just now overrun the land. there they are, an armi ever increas 
in number and maintain at an immens expense. whatev commerci 
and agricultur depress may have effect in other quarters, it 
did not touch the school of england. the greater school are full to 
overflowing; provinci school have doubl and trebl their numbers; 
and everi elizabethan and edwardian foundat in the kingdom ha woke 
from slumber and celebr at least a tercentenary. and all thi is 
not done for nothing. privat schoolmast take shoot in scotland; 
the proprietor of boarding-hous at the public school buy villa 
in the riviera, and build pineri and vineri at home; meanwhil the 
british parent eye hi diminish incom and hi increas rates, 
and ask himself, in the secreci of hi own heart, what tommi is realli 
get in return for the £200 a year expend on hi education. the 
answer take variou forms. perhap tommi is follow the "grand, old 
fortifi classic curriculum" which suffic for lord lumpington, 
and enabl the rev. esau hittal to compos hi celebr "long and 
short on the calydonian boar." In thi case the parent says, with 
rawdon crawley, "stick to it, my boy; there' noth like a good 
classic education--nothing," but he gener is too diffid about 
hi own accomplish to subject hi son to a veri search test. 
perhap one boy in a hundr learn enough latin and greek at school to 
fit him for a good place in the classic tripo or a "first in mods." 
this, if he is meant to be a schoolmaster, is a definit and tangibl 
result from hi father' investment; if he is intend for ani other 
profess the advantag is not so clear. If he is to be a soldier, no 
doubt there is the "armi class" or the "modern school," where, indeed, 
he is exempt from greek, is taught some mathematics, and acquir 
some veri english french and german; but, in spite of these privileges, 
he gener requir a year' resid at a crammer' befor he ha 
a chanc for sandhurst. for the ordinari life of the profess the 
public school make no prepar whatever. tommi may have acquir 
"taste," but he is no more qualifi to be, as dr. warr says, a 
"bread-winner" than he wa the day he began school-life. 

matthew arnold, in hi delight essay on "an eton boy," says, with 
regard to that boy' prowess as master of the beagles:-- 

"the age barbarian will, upon this, admiringli mumbl to us hi stori 
how the battl of waterloo wa won in the play field of eton. 
alas! disast have been prepar in those play field as well as 
victories--disast due to an inadequ mental training, to want of 
application, knowledge, intelligence, lucidity." 

with "taste" we commonli hear "tone" combin in the eulog of 
public schools. the parent, who know (though he would not for the 
world admit) that tommi ha learnt noth at st. winifred' or 
rosslyn which will ever enabl him to earn a penny, fall back upon 
the impalp consol that there is "a veri nice tone about the 
school." certainli eton impart manner to those who have not acquir 
them at home, and in thi respect radley is like unto it. but, take 
the public school as a whole, it can scarc be deni that, howev 
faith they cultiv the ingenu arts, they suffer youth to be 
extrem brutal. If thi be urged, the parent will shift hi ground 
and say, "well, I like boy to be natural. I don't wish my son to be 
a lord chesterfield. charact is everything. It is the religi 
and moral influenc of a public school that I think so valuable." As 
to the religion taught in public schools, it is, as mr. T. E. page 
of charterhous recent said with artless candour, exactli the same 
commod as will probabl be offer by the counti council when the 
educ bill ha becom law; and it is worth note that, though 
bishop shrink with horror at the prospect of thi religion be 
offer to the poor, they are perfectli content that it should be 
cram down the throat of their own sons. As to the moral acquir 
at public schools, a clergyman who wa success an eton boy and 
an eton master wrote twenty-f year ago: "the master of mani 
school are sit on a volcano, which, when it explodes, will fill 
with horror and alarm those who do not know what boys' school are, or 
know it, shut their eye and stop their ears." It must be admit 
that the british parent, dwell on the slope of that volcano, 
regard it chronic menac and it period activ with the most 
singular composure. 

In year gone by harrow, like most other place where there wa a 
public school access to day boys, wa a favourit resort of widow 
ladi whose husband had serv in the indian armi or civil service. 
these "indian widows," as he call them, so pester dr. vaughan, 
then head master, that he said in the bitter of hi soul: "befor 
I came to harrow I thought 'suttee' an abomination; but now I see that 
there is a great deal to be said for it." It is easi enough to see whi 
head master dislik the home board system. It defeat the curiou 
polici by which assist master pay themselv out of their boarders' 
stomachs, and it bring all the arrang of teach and disciplin 
under the survey, and perhap criticism, of the parents; but, in spite 
of magisteri objections, the home board system is probabl the 
onli and certainli the most efficaci method of cope with those 
moral evil which all schoolmast not wil blind acknowledge, and 
which the best of them strenuous combat. In that extens of day 
school which dr. warr forese lie the best hope of a higher tone in 
public education. 

the british parent know the weak of the public school system. He 
know that he get a veri doubt return for hi money--that hi son 
learn noth use and veri littl that is ornamental; is unsuit 
fed, and, when ill, insuffici attended; expos to moral risk 
of a veri grave type; and withdrawn at the most impress season of 
life from the sanctifi influenc of motherhood and home. He know 
all this, and, know it, in ninety-nin case out of a hundr he 
send all hi boy to a public school. why? partli becaus everi one 
goe to a public school and he ha no wish to be eccentr or faddish; 
partli becaus the boy are tiresom at home and he want peace; partli 
because, in exist conditions, he doe not know how to get them 
educ while they are under hi roof. but the strongest reason is 
none of these. He send hi son to eton or harrow becaus he wa there 
himself, ha felt the glamour and learnt the spell; becaus some of hi 
happiest memori hover round the play field or the hill; becaus 
there he first knew what friendship meant and first tast the romanc 
of life. 

"I may have failed, my school may fail; 
I tremble, but thu much I dare: 
I love her. let the critic rail, 
My brethren and my home are there." 




xvi 

school and boarding-hous 


"ani two meal at a boarding-hous are togeth less than one squar 
meal." thi pleas postul was, I believe, in the first instanc 
evolv from the bitter experi of a hungri mathematician who, at 
thi season of the year, sought chang of air and scene at margat or 
hern bay. but to-day I use the word "boarding-house" in that more 
restrict sens which signifi a master' hous for the accommod 
of boy at a public school. My reason for discuss the subject is 
that a stray sentenc in my last chapter, about the profit deriv 
from such boarding-houses, caus dire offence. I am the most docil 
creatur alive, and the rebuk which I have incur caus me, as the 
french say, to make a return upon myself. I subject my conscienc 
to sever cross-examination. I ask whether what I had written wa 
wholli or even approxim true, or entir false; and whether, if 
true, it wa offens or indelicate. here is the sentenc in all it 
ungloss brutality: "the proprietor of boarding-hous at the public 
school buy villa in the riviera and build pineri and vineri at 
home." now, of course, a schoolmast is noth if not critical, and, 
in superintend the studi of hi young friends, he rightli insist 
on the most scrupul accuraci of phrase and figure. not for the 
constru boy is the plea, dear to biblic critics, that "the wider 
diverg is the higher unity." the calcul boy must not, if he 
valu hi peace, mistak infer for demonstration. woe betid the 
excuse-mak boy if he protest that he ha spent an hour over hi 
lesson when hi tutor can show that he could onli have spent fifty-f 
minutes. thi chines exact is all veri well in the schoolroom, but 
tend to becom a bore in the intercours of social life. An assist 
master, stung into activ by my recent strictur on public schools, 
ha swoop down upon me with all the fierc alacr which he would 
display in detect a fals quantiti or an erron deduction. 
"villa in the riviera! who buy villa in the riviera? give, name, 
date, and place by return of post, or--writ out five hundr lines." 
"what do you mean by pineri and vineries? I and my colleagu at st. 
winifred' onli grow cucumbers; and the composition-master, though he 
ha larg privat means, get hi grape from the stores. retract and 
apologize, or be for ever fallen." 

now really, when I read all thi virtuou indignation, I am 
irresist remind of the bishop in "littl dorrit," who, when all 
the guest were extol mr. merdle' wealth, spoke pensiv about 
"the good of thi world," and "tri to look as if he were rather poor 
himself." In vain I protest that I meant no injuri allus to 
mont carlo, and propos to substitut "mansion in the isl of wight" 
for "villa in the riviera." the substitut avail me nothing. 
"you say 'mansions.' Do you realli know more than one? and how do you 
know that the schoolmast who bought it did not marri a wife with 
a fortune? you cannot investig hi marriag settlements, so your 
illustr count for nothing." In the same conciliatori spirit, I 
urg that "pineri and vineries" wa a picturesqu phrase invent 
by lord randolph churchil to describ the amen of a comfort 
countri house, not of the largest order; but my pedagogu wa not to be 
pacified. "if you didn't mean pineri and vineries, you shouldn't have 
said so. It creat a bad impress in the parents' minds. Of cours 
no reason person could object to one' have gardens, or stabling, 
or a moder shooting, or a share of a salmon river; but parent don't 
like the notion that we are live in luxury. they have a nasti way of 
contrast it with the nonsens which their boy tell them about tough 
meat and rancid butter." 

At thi point I began to see some resembl between my correspond 
and matthew arnold' critic in the _quarterly_ of octob 1868--"one 
of the eton under-masters, who, like demetriu the silversmith, 
seem alarm for the gain of hi occupation." for, in spite of 
all correct and deductions, I cannot help regard public 
schoolmast as a well-paid race. Of course, it is true that their 
incom are not compar to those of success barrist or 
surgeons, or even minist of state; but, on the other side, their 
work is infinit easier; their earn begin from the day on which 
they embark on their profession; and no revolut of the wheel of 
state can shake them from their well-cushion seats. I am quit 
will to admit that, on the figur suppli by my correspondent, 
he and hi colleagu at st. winifred' are not make so much money 
as their predecessor made twenti or thirti year ago. but, as far 
as I can understand, thi diminut of incom doe not aris from 
diminut of charges, but onli from the fact that the forc of public 
opinion ha driven schoolmast to recognize, rather more fulli than 
in day gone by, some primari need of boy-nature. when the royal 
commiss of 1862 wa enquir into the board arrang of a 
famou school, one of the commission wa astonish to find that, 
in spite of the liber charg for board, the boy got noth but 
tea and bread and butter for breakfast. appar wish to let the 
master down easy, he suggest that perhap egg also were provided. 
To thi suggest the witness' answer wa monumental: "eggs, indeed, 
are not provided, but in some hous a larg machin for boil egg 
is brought in everi day; so that, if the boy bring their eggs, they 
are boil for them." sure the master who first conceiv thi 
substitut of hardwar for food deserv a perman place among 
social economists; but "the bigot of thi iron time," though they may 
not actual "have call hi harmless art a crime," have resolv 
that, when a father pay £200 a year for hi boy' schooling, the 
boy shall have someth more substanti than bread and butter for 
breakfast. thi reform alone, accord to my correspondent, knock 
some hundr a year off each house-master' income. 

then, again, as regard sanitation. here, certainli not befor it wa 
wanted, reform ha made it appearance, and the injur house-mast 
ha had to put hi hand in hi pocket. when I wa at a public school, 
in that golden age of profit to which my correspond look back so 
wistfully, the sanitari arrang were such as to defi descript 
and stagger belief. In one pupil-room there wa onli the thick of 
the board floor between the cesspool and the feet of the boy as 
they sat at lessons. In my own house, contain forti boarders, there 
were onli two baths. In another, three and even four boy were coop 
together, by day as well as by night, in what would, in an ordinari 
house, be regard as a smallish bedroom. now all thi is changed. 
drainag is reconstructed; bath are multiplied; to each boy is secur 
a suffici air-spac at lesson and in sleep. the sanitari engin 
is let loos everi term-- 

"what pipe and air-shafts! what wild ecstasy!" 

but the "ecstasy" is confin to the bosom of the engin as he draw 
up hi littl account, and the house-mast moans, like mr. mantalini, 
over the "demnit total." 

yet anoth such deduct must be born in mind. volum of nonsens 
have been written about the fag system. sentiment writer have 
gush over the beauti relat which it establish between 
fag-mast and fag. some, greatli daring, have liken it to the 
relat of elder and younger brothers. others, more histor 
minded, have tri to connect it with the usag of chivalri and the 
servic render by the page to the knight. As a matter of fact, it 
was, as "jacob omnium," himself an old etonian, point out fifti year 
ago, "an affair of the breech pocket." As long as younger boy could 
be compel (bi whatev methods) to clean lamp and brush cloth and 
toast sausag and fill tub for elder boy it wa obviou that fewer 
servant were required. one of the most brilliant etonian now live 
ha said that "to see a littl boy performing, with infinit pain and 
hopeless inadequacy, the function of a domest servant, might have 
move democritu to tear and heraclitu to laughter." that fag 
ha it uses, more especi in the case of spoilt boy brought up 
in purse-proud homes, few public schoolmen will deny; but the british 
parent tend increasingli to draw a distinct between the duti of a 
fag and those of a footman; and the wages-bil becom an increasingli 
import item in the house-master' expenditure. 

what, then, is the conclus of the whole matter? It is, as I have 
repeatedli said, that a boarding-school, whether public or private, 
is not the ideal method of educ boys; but, pend that great 
increas of day-school for the son of the upper class which dr. 
warr foresees, it is the onli method practic avail for the 
great major of english parents. whether the instruct impart 
in the public school is or is not worth the amount which it cost is 
a matter of opinion; and, indeed, as long as the parent (who, after 
all, ha to pay) is satisfied, no one els need troubl himself about 
the question. As to domest arrang and provis for health and 
comfort, it may be frankli conced that the schoolboy of to-day is 
much better off than hi father or even hi elder brother was; and that 
the improv in hi lot have tend to diminish the profit on 
which the house-mast use to grow rich. 

* * * * * 

_p.s._--have the terror of the ferul befor my eyes, let me hasten 
to say, with all possibl explicitness, that in my account of my 
correspond with the outrag schoolmaster, I have aim at give a 
gener impress rather than a verbal transcript. 




xvii 

squar 


all true lover of lewi carrol will rememb that hiawatha, when he 
went a-photographing, "pull and push the joint and hinges" of hi 
camera, 

"till it look all squar and oblongs, 
like a complic figur 
In the second book of euclid." 

but it is not of squar in the mathemat sens that I speak to-day, 
but rather of those enclos spaces, most irregularli shape and 
proportioned, which go by the name of "squares" in london. 

It is in sultri august that the valu of these space is most clearli 
perceived; for now the better-dispos owner fling open the gate of 
their squar and suffer them to become, at least temporarily, the 
resting-plac of the age and decrepit, and the playground of the 
children. To extend these benefit more wide and to secur them in 
perpetu are object for which civic reform have long striven; and 
dure the present session of parliament[6] (for, as dryasdust would 
remind us, parliament is not prorogu but onli adjourned) two act 
have been pass which may do someth at least toward attain the 
desir ends. one of these act provid that, in case where "open 
space and burial grounds" are vest in trustees, the truste may 
transfer them to the local authorities, to be maintain for the use 
and servic of the public. the other forbid for all time the erect 
of build on certain squar and garden which belong to privat 
owners, those owner have consent to thi curtail of their 
powers. the conjunct of "burial grounds" with "open spaces" in the 
purview of the former act ha a rather lugubri sound; but in realiti 
it point to one of the happiest chang which recent year have 
brought to london. 

[6] august 1906. 

"A hemmed-in churchyard, pestifer and obscene, whenc malign 
diseas are commun to the bodi of our dear brother and 
sister who have not departed--here, in a beastli scrap of ground 
which a turk would reject as a savag abomin and a caffr would 
shudder at, they bring 'our dear brother here departed' to receiv 
christian burial. with hous look on, on everi side, save where a 
reek littl tunnel of a court give access to the iron gate--with 
everi villaini of life in action close on death and everi poison 
element of death in action close on life,--her they lower our dear 
brother down a foot or two; here sow him in corruption, to be rais 
in corruption; an aveng ghost at mani a sick-bedside; a shame 
testimoni to futur age that civil and barbar walk thi 
boast island together." 

when dicken wrote that hideou description, worthi to be illustr 
by hogarth in hi most realist mood, he did not exaggerate--h could 
not exaggerate--th obscen of burial-ground in crowd cities. 
to-day they are green with turf and bright with flowers, and brighter 
still with the unconquer merriment of childhood at play among the 
dim memori of the forgotten dead. what is true of the particular 
spot which dicken describ is true all over london; and the 
resting-plac of the depart have been made oas of life and health 
in thi arid wilder of struggl and stifl humanity. 

though so much ha been done in the way of make the churchyard 
avail for public uses, compar littl ha been done with the 
squares; and philosoph of the school erron call cynic 
might account for thi differ by the fact that, wherea the 
churchyard were gener in the hand of offici trustees, such as 
rectors, churchwardens, overseers, or vestries, the princip squar 
of london are the privat properti of individu owners. even the 
london squar and enclosur act, just passed, illustr the same 
principle. the preambl of the act set forth that in respect of everi 
squar or enclosur with which it deal the consent of the owner ha 
been obtained. In each case, therefore, the owner ha consent to 
legisl which will prevent himself or hi successor from build 
on what are now open spaces, and, so far, each owner concern ha 
shown himself a patriot citizen and a well-wish to posterity. but, 
when we come to examin the schedul of properti to which the act 
applies, it is interest to compar the number belong to privat 
person with the number belong to public bodies. the act appli 
to sixty-four properties; of these fifty-f belong to public bodi 
such as district councils, governor of hospitals, and ecclesiast 
commissioners, and nine to privat persons, among whom it is pleasant 
to reckon one liber m.p., sir john dickson-poynder, and, by way of 
balance, one conserv peer, lord camden. 

A further studi of the schedul reveal the instruct fact that, 
with two except in the citi of westminst and one in the borough 
of kensington, none of the schedul properti lie within area 
which could by ani stretch of term be call wealthy, fashionable, 
or aristocratic. public author in such district as camberwel 
and lewisham--priv owner in islington and woolwich--hav willingli 
surrend their right for the benefit of the community; but none of 
the great ground landlord have follow suit. the owner of belgrav 
squar and grosvenor squar and portman squar and cavendish squar 
and berkeley square--_the_ squares, _par excellence_, of fashion 
london--hav kept their seigniori right untouched. pascal told us 
of some veri human but veri unregener children who said "thi dog 
belong to _me_," and "that place in the sun is _mine_," and pascal' 
comment was, "behold, the begin and the imag of all usurp 
upon earth!" similarly, the human but unregener landown of 
fashion london say, as they survey their possessions, "thi squar 
belong to _me_," "that place in the shade is _mine_," while the 
august sun beat down on the malodor street, and totter pauper 
peer wist at the bench under the plane trees, and street-boy 
flatten their nose against the iron rail and madli yearn for 
cricket-pitch so smooth and green. 

although these fashion squar are so sedul guard against 
the intrus of outsiders, they are veri littl use by those who have 
the right of entrance. "liveri servant and dog not admitted" is a 
legendari inscript which, in it substance, still operates. here and 
there a nurs with a babi in her arm haunt the shade, or a parcel of 
older children play lawn-tenni or croquet to an accompani of chaff 
from enviou street-boys. but, as a gener rule, for twenti hour out 
of the twenty-four and for ten month out of the twelv the squar 
are absolut vacant; and one of the most reason reform which I 
could conceiv would be to convert them from privat pleasure-ground 
to public gardens, and to throw the cost of maintain them in order 
and beauti on the london counti council. 

As I said before, some square-own have, without wait for legal 
compulsion, taken tent step toward thi reform. the truste 
of lincoln' inn fields, the largest and the shadiest of all london 
squares, have made them over to the counti council, and, in the hot 
month of declin summer, the juvenil popul of holborn and 
st. gile play their breathless game where babington wa hang and 
russel beheaded. It wa there that, on the 20th of juli 1683, sir 
ralph verney, ride out from london to hi home in buckinghamshire, 
"saw the scaffold make readi against lord russell' execut 
to-morrow--god help him, and save the country." 

but if onc we leav the util and amen of the london squar 
and begin to meddl with their antiquities, we shall soon overflow all 
reason limits. bloomsburi squar still reek (at least for those 
who know their "barnabi rudge") with the blood which wa shed in the 
gordon riots. grosvenor square--th last district of london which clung 
to oil-lamp in hopeless resist to the innov of gas--embodi 
the more recent memori of the cato street conspiracy. In berkeley 
squar (from what is now lord rosebery' house) sarah child eloped, 
and annex the name and the banking-hous of child to the earldom 
of jersey. In portman squar mrs. montagu presid over her court of 
bluestock and feast the chimney-sweep on may-day. In manchest 
square, under the roof which now hous the wallac collection, the 
dazzl beauti of isabella ladi hertford stir the fatuou passion 
of georg iv. In cavendish square, under the portico of harcourt house, 
late demolished, disra said good-by for ever to hi confeder 
lord georg bentinck. In hanov square, chantrey' state statu of 
william pitt ha look down on a centuri of aristocrat weddings, 
ascend and descend the step of st. george' church. sir georg 
trevelyan, comment on a valentin written by macaulay for ladi mari 
stanhope, a great-niec of pitt's, declar that "the allus to the 
statu in hanov squar is one of the happiest touch that can be 
found in macaulay' writings," and that is a suffici justif 
for quot it:-- 

"prophet rage my bosom swells; 
I tast the cake, I hear the bells! 
from conduit street the close array 
Of chariot barricad the way 
To where I see, with outstretch hand, 
majestic, thi great kinsman stand, 
and half unbend hi brow of pride, 
As welcom so fair a bride." 




xviii 

sunday IN london 


It is the middl of august, and there is nobodi in london--except, of 
course, some four million of peopl who do not count. there is nobodi 
in london; and, most special and noticeably, there is nobodi in 
church. Be it far from me to suggest that the countri cousin and the 
transatlant brother, who flood london in august and september, are 
person of indevout habits. but they have their own method and place 
of devot (of which I may speak anon), and do not affect the parish 
churches, with which I am now concerned. I have excel opportun 
of judging; for, year in year out, in tropic heat or arctic cold, 
my due feet never fail to walk the round of our stuccovian churches, 
and I can testifi that in august and septemb vacanc and depress 
reign unchallenged. seat are empty. galleri are locked. collect 
sink to vanishing-point. the vicar of st. ursula's, stucco gardens, 
accompani by hi second wife, is sit under a white umbrella 
at dieppe, watch the aquat gambol of hi twofold family. the 
senior curat is climb in the alps. the junior curate, who stroke 
hi colleg boat last year and wa ordain at trinity, offici in 
agoni of self-consci shyness which would draw tear from a stone. 
A temporari organist elicit undreamt-of harmonies. the organ-blow is 
get hi health in the hopfields. the choirboy are let loose-- 

"on brighton' shingli beach, on margate' sand, 
their voic out-pip the roar of the sea." 

the congreg repres the mere dreg and remnant of stuccovia' 
social prime. poor we have none, and our rich are fled to scotland 
or norway, homburg or marienbad. the seat are spars tenant by 
"stern-fac men" (like those who arrest eugen aram), whom busi 
keep in london when their heart are on the moors; over-burden 
mothers, with herd of restless schoolboy at home for the holiday and 
crave for more ardent delight than stucco garden yield; decay 
spinster of the type of volumnia dedlock, who, have exhaust the 
hospit patienc of their ever-diminish band of friends, are 
forc to the horrid necess of spend the autumn in london. the 
onli cheer face in the church belong to the pewopener, who, be 
imped in the discharg of her function by arthrit rheumatism, is 
happiest when congreg are smallest and there are no week-day 
servic to "molest her ancient solitari reign." 

* * * * * 

evensong is over. the organist is struggl with an inconceiv tune 
from "the english hymnal" (for at st. ursula' we are noth if not 
up to date). the curate, sickli o'er with that indescrib horror 
which in hi boat day he would have describ as "the needle," 
is furtiv reperus hi manuscript befor mount the pulpit, 
and doe not detect my craven flight as I slip through the baiz door 
and disappear. It is characterist of st. ursula' that, even when 
empty, it is fusty; but thi need surpris no one, for the architect 
wa strong on a "scientif system of ventilation," and that, as we 
all know, mean veri littl ventil and an overwhelm amount of 
system. 

however, my courag flight ha deliv me from asphyxiation, and, 
befor return to my modest sunday supper of paysandu ox-tongu and 
sardines, I think that I will reinflat my lung by a stroll round hyde 
park. there is a love red in the western sky over the serpentin 
bridge, but it is still broad daylight. the sere and yellow turf of the 
park is cover by some of those four million who do not count and 
do not go to church, but who, apparently, are fond of sermons. At the 
end of each hundr yard I come upon a preacher of some religious, 
social, or polit gospel, and round each is gather a crowd of 
listen who follow hi utter with interest attention. when I 
think of st. ursula' and the pavid curat and my graceless flight, I 
protest that I am cover with shame as with a garment. but the wrong 
done in the church can be repair in the park. I have miss one 
sermon, but I will hear another. unluckily, when these compuncti 
visit seiz me I wa stand by a rostrum of heterodoxy. for 
all I know the preacher may have follow among my readers; so, as I 
would not for the world wound even the least orthodox susceptibilities, 
I forbear to indic the theori which he enounced. As he spoke, I 
seem to live a former life over again; for I had onc befor been 
present at an exactli similar preaching, in company, either bodili 
or spiritual, with my friend mr. jame payn, and hi comment on the 
scene reviv themselv in my memory, even as the remot associ 
of ellangowan reawok in the conscious of harri bertram when he 
return from hi wanderings, and gazed, bewildered, on hi forgotten 
home. (henceforward it is payn that speaks.) the preacher of heterodoxi 
wa entir without enthusiasm, nor did hi oratori borrow ani 
meretrici attract from the muse. It wa a curiou farrago of 
logic without reason and premiss without facts, and wa certainli 
the least popular, though not the least numer attended, of 
all the compet sermon in the park. suddenli the preacher gave 
express to a statement more monstrou than common, on which an 
old ladi in the crowd, who had heretofor been listen with great 
complacency, exclaim in horror, "i'm sure _this_ ain't true gospel," 
and immedi decamped. Up to that point, she had appar been 
listen under the impress that the preacher belong to her own 
blameless persuasion, and wa in the blankest ignor of all that he 
had been drive at. 

but sunday in london ha religi attract to offer besid those 
purvey by st. ursula' and hyde park. I said at the outset that the 
countri cousin and the transatlant brother have their own method 
and place of devotion--their mecca is st. paul' cathedral. one of 
the pleasantest way of spend a sunday even in london is to join 
the pilgrim-throng. the great west door of the cathedr are flung 
wide open, as if to welcom the archbishop of canterburi or the lord 
mayor, and all at onc we find ourselves, hush and awestruck, in 
the illimit perspective. even the staunchest believ in gothic 
as the onli religi architectur may admit, with disloyalti to 
hi faith, that everi year st. paul' becom more like a place of 
christian worship and less like a glorifi council-hal or an imperi 
senate-house. and it is seen at it best in twilight. the shadow 
temper the garish splendour of mosaic and gold and electricity, and 
enhanc the domin sens of vast and grandeur. and prayer ascend 
on the wing of music and sweet boy-voic ring, and the distant 
altar, with it gleam lights, focus the mean and purpos of 
the whole. and then the great "communion of hymns" unit us all, 
american and english, london and countryman, as citizen of a citi 
not built with hands, patriot of a countri which is not mark on the 
terrestri globe. bernard of cluni and william cowper and john kebl 
all contribut of their best. "brief life is here our portion" seem to 
utter the real heart' desir of a tired-look mechan who stand by 
my side. "hark, my soul!" seem to commun it own intens to the 
veri tone and look of the peopl who are sing it. "sun of my soul" 
is an even prayer which sound just as natur and as fit in the 
inmost heart of london' crowd and grind and pressur as in the sweet 
solitud of the hursley fields. In the pulpit a pale preacher, himself 
half worn-out befor hi prime by ten years' battl in a slum, is 
extol the cross as the test and strength and glori of human life-- 

"while at hi feet the human ocean lay, 
and wave on wave roll into space away." 

A human stream indeed, of all sort and conditions--old men and 
maidens, young men and children, rich and poor, english and foreigners, 
sightseer and citizens, dapper clerk and toil-stain citizen 
and red-coat soldiers--al interested, and all at ease, and all 
at home at what bishop lightfoot call "the centr of the world' 
concourse"--und the cross-crown dome of st. paul's. 




xix 

A suburban sunday 


"it seem to the writer of thi histori that the inhabit of london 
are scarc suffici sensibl of the beauti of it environs.... 
with the except of constantinople, there is no citi in the world 
that can for a moment enter into competit with it. for himself, 
though in hi time someth of a rambler, he is not asham in thi 
respect to confess to a legitim cockney taste; and for hi part he 
doe not know where life can flow on more pleasantli than in sight of 
kensington gardens, view the silver thame wind by the bower of 
rosebank, or inhal from it terrac the refin air of grace 
richmond. In exactli ten minut it is in the power of everi man to 
free himself from all the tumult of the world and find himself in a 
sublim sylvan solitud superior to the cedar of lebanon and inferior 
onli in extent to the chestnut forest of anatolia." 

the judici critic will have littl difficulti in assign thi 
vivid passag to the too-graph pen of lord beaconsfield; but he 
will also recogn the fact that a descript written in 1837 
need some modif when appli to 1906. the central solitud of 
london--kensington gardens--i still veri much as it was. just now, it 
dark foliag and duski glade suggest all the romant associ 
of gustav doré' forests, with a tall trooper of the life guard 
and a bash nursery-maid, for a red cross knight and an enchant 
princess. If we go further afield and climb the upland of highgat 
and hampstead, we look down upon a boundless and beauti citi dimli 
visibl through a golden haze. but the differ between the environ 
of london now and the same environ when lord beaconsfield describ 
them is that they are now unit to the centr by an unbroken network 
of gaslit streets. the enorm increas in the popul of london, 
which everi year bring with it, fill up the gap and spaces, and 
the metropoli is now a solid whole, with it circumfer extend 
further and further everi day into what a year ago wa country. In 
other words, the suburb are get further off, and what are suburb 
to-day will be town to-morrow; but still there are suburbs, and a 
sunday spent in them is an interest experience. 

yesterday the well-known stuffi of st. ursula's, combin with the 
kind hospit of some suburban friends, drove me to spend my sunday 
about ten mile from stucco square. It is a characterist of peopl 
who live in suburb to believ that their lot is cast in a primæval 
solitude, and that, though the dome of st. paul' is plainli visibl 
from their back gardens, the travel who ventur to approach them 
need explicit and intric direct about rout and train and 
chang and stations. the station for my friend' place wa call by 
a name intens suggest of rurality--not exactli "rosebank," but 
rosebank will serve. reader of archbishop temple' life will rememb 
that a clergyman, excus himself for live a long way from hi 
church, urg that it wa onli three mile as the crow flies, therebi 
draw down on himself the implac reply, "but you ain't a crow." 
In the same way I found that, though rosebank is onli ten mile from 
stucco squar "a the crow flies," a human be seek to approach it 
must first make a consider journey to a central terminus, must then 
embark in a train which a tortois might outstrip, must chang twice, 
and must burrow through a sulphur tunnel; and must even then run a 
consider risk of be carri through rosebank station, which all 
self-respect train seem to ignore. 

face by these difficulties, I again took counsel with lord 
beaconsfield. "''ti the gondola of london,' exclaim lothair, 
as he leapt into a hansom, which he had previous observ to be 
well-horsed." My gondoli wa readi with hi terms--a veri liber 
payment, sever hours' rest, hi dinner and tea, and someth extra 
for put up hi horse. grant these preliminaries, he would "do 
the job on 'i 'ead." It would "be a littl 'oliday to 'im." I in vain 
suggest that the opportun of attend divin servic twice at 
rosebank church might be regard as part payment of hi charge; he 
replied, with startl emphasis, that he didn't go into the countri 
to go to church--not if he knew it; that, if I want him, I must take 
him on the term proposed; and, further, that I mustn't mind start 
early, for he want to get hi hors down cool. 

the gondoli had hi own way; and, while the sparrow were still 
twitter and the housemaid were take in the milk and the sunday 
paper, I wa well on my road to rosebank. thi much I will conced 
to the curios of readers--that my road led me out of london in a 
south-easterli direction, by the horseferry, where jame ii. drop 
the great seal into the thames, along the old kent road, of which a 
modern minstrel sang; past kennington common, now a "park," where the 
gallant jacobit of '45 underw the hideou doom of treason, where 
the iron-shutt window still commemor the chartist rise of 
'48, and where sackvil main took hi sunday walk with mrs. sackvil 
and old mrs. chuff. On past the "hamlet of dulwich," where mr. pickwick 
spent the last year of hi honour life, to chislehurst, where 
napoleon iii. hid hi exil head, and north cray, where the tragedi 
of lord londonderry' death is not yet forgotten, and shooters' hill, 
where jerri cruncher stop the coach with the terrifi messag 
of "recal to life." now, as reader are sometim unduli literal, 
and as I would not willingli involv ani one in an hour' fruitless 
puzzl over a map, let me say that thi itinerari is rather gener 
than particular, and that, although the gondoli pursu an extrem 
deviou cours and murmur when I suggest straighter paths, we 
did not touch all the above-ment place in our morning' drive. 
but evermor we tend south-eastwards, and evermor the hous grew 
impercept less dignified. stone and stucco we had left behind us on 
the northern side of the river, and now it wa a boundless contigu 
of brick--yellow brick, rather grimy,--smal hous with porticos, 
slip of dusti garden between the front door and the road, and here 
and there a row of waysid trees. but everywher gas, and everywher 
_omnibi_ (a the classic ladi said,) and everywher electr trams. 
church of everi confess and everi architectur line the way, 
vari with public-hous of mani signs, municip build of 
startl splendour (for borough council have a flamboy taste), 
and swim bath and public libraries, and here and there a privat 
lunat asylum frown behind suggest solemn gates. 

now we are in a long and featureless street, with semi-detach hous 
on either hand, and a malodor cab-stand and a four-fac clock. 
"which way for rosebank?" shout the gondolier. "the first to your left 
and then turn sharp to the right," bellow a respons policeman. We 
follow the direct given, and suddenli we are there--not at rosebank, 
but quit out of even greater london. the street end abruptly. tram 
and train and ga and shop are left behind, and all at onc we are in 
the country. the road is line with hedgerows, dusti indeed, but still 
alive. elm of respect dimens look down upon big fields, with 
here and there an oak, and cow rest under it. At one turn of the 
road there is a recogniz odour of late-cut hay, and in the middl 
distanc I distinctli perceiv a turnip-field, out of which a covey of 
partridg might rise without surpris ani one. We pull up and gaze 
around. look where I will, I cannot see a house, nor even a cottage. 
sure my friend have not play a practic joke on me and ask me 
to spend a day in an imaginari paradise. the gondoli look at hi 
perspir horse, and mop hi own brow, and gaze contemptu on 
the landscape. "I should call thi the world' end if I wa arst," he 
says. "blow'd if they'v even got a public 'ouse." suddenli the sound 
of a shrill bell burst on the ear. the gondolier, who is a humorist, 
say "muffins." 

I jump out of the gondola, and pursu the welcom tinkl round a sharp 
angl in the road. there I see, perch on the brow of a sandi knoll, 
a small tin building, which a belfri and a cross proclaim to be a 
church. insid I discov the oldest inhabit pull the muffin-bel 
with cheer assiduity. He is more than readi to talk, and hi whole 
discours is as countrifi as if he live a hundr mile from chare 
cross. "yes, thi is a main lone place. there ain't mani peopl live 
about 'ere. why, ten year ago it wa all fields. now there are some 
houses--not many. He live in one himself. how far off? well, a matter 
of a mile or so. He wa born on the squire' land; hi father work 
on the farm. yes, he' live here all hi life. rememb it befor 
there wa a crystal palace, and when there wa no railway or nothing. 
He hasn't often been in the train, and ha onli been up to london two 
or three times. who goe to the church? well--not many, except the 
squire' famili and the school-children. whi wa it built? oh, the 
squir want to get some rich folk to live round about. he' readi 
to part with hi land for building; and there' go to be a row of 
hous built just in front of the church. He reckon the peopl will be 
more like to come now that there' a church for them to go to." and 
now the "ten-minutes" bell begin with liveli measure; the oldest 
inhabit show me to a seat; and, on the stroke of eleven, a shrill 
"amen" is heard in the vestry, and there enter a modest process of 
surplic schoolboy and a clergyman in a green stole. hi son and 
daughters, the wife of the oldest inhabitant, and the sister of the 
choristers, from the congregation, eke out by myself and my friend 
from rosebank, who arriv a littl flush and complain that they have 
been wait for me. the "servic is fulli choral," as they say in 
account of fashion weddings; the clergyman preach against the 
educ bill, and a collect (of copper) is made to defray the 
expens of a meet at the albert hall. It is pleasant to see that, 
even in these seclud districts, the watch-dog of the church are on 
the alert. 




XX 

wine and water 


the second and third word are ad to the titl in defer to the 
weather. one must be a harden toper if, with the thermomet at 93 
in the shade, one can find comfort in the thought of undilut wine. 
rather I would take pattern from thackeray' friend the bishop, with 
hi "round episcop apron." "he put water into hi wine. let us 
respect the moder of the establish church." but water is an 
after-thought, incident and ephemeral. It wa on wine that I wa 
medit when the mercuri rush up and put more temper thought 
into my head, and it wa sir victor horsley who set me on think 
about wine. sir victor ha been discours at ontario about the 
mischief of alcohol, and the perenni controversi ha reviv in all 
it accustom vigour. onc everi five year some lead light of 
the medic profess declar with much solemn that alcohol is 
a poison, that wine is the foundat of death, and that gingerb 
or toast-and-wat or zoedon or kopp or some kindr potion is the 
true and the sole elixir of life. sir oracl alway choos august or 
septemb for the deliveri of hi dogma, and immedi there ensu 
a correspond which suitabl replac "ought women to propose?" "do 
We believe?" and "what is wrong?" enthusiast teetotal fill the 
column of the press with letter which in their dimens rival the 
enorm gooseberri and in their demand on our credul exceed the 
sea serpent. To these repli the advoc of alcohol, with statist 
account of patriarch who alway breakfast on half-and-half, and 
near and dear relat who were rescu from the jaw of death by a 
time exhibit of gin and bitters. and so the game goe merrili on 
till octob recal us to common sense. 

thu far, the gem of thi autumn' correspond is, I think, the 
follow instanc contribut by an oppon of sir victor horsley:-- 

"A british offic lay on hi camp-b in india suffer from cholera. 
hi medic attend had conclud that noth more could be done 
for him, and that hi seizur must end fatally. hi friend visit him 
to shake hi hand and to offer their sympathet good-byes, includ 
hi dearest regiment chum, who, decid to keep hi emot down by 
assum a cheer demeanour, remarked, 'well, old chap, we all must 
go sometim and somehow. Is there anyth you would like me to get 
you?' hardli abl to speak, the suffer indicated, 'i'll take a drop 
of champagn with you, as a last friendli act, if I can get it down.' 
with difficulti he took a little, and still live to tell the story." 

sinc the "affect instanc of colonel snobley" we have had noth 
quit so rich as that--unless, indeed, it wa the thrill of loyal 
rejoic which ran round the nation when, just befor christma 1871, 
it wa announc that our present sovereign, then in the throe of 
typhoid, had call for a glass of beer. then, like true britons, 
rear on malt and hops, we felt that all wa well, and address 
ourselv to our christma turkey with the comfort assur that 
the princ of wale had turn the corner. rear on malt and hops, 
I said; but mani other ingredi went to the system on which some 
of us were reared. "that poor creature, small beer" at meal-time, wa 
reinforc by a glass of port wine at eleven, by brandi and water 
if ever one look squeamish, by mull claret at bedtim in cold 
weather, by champagn on all occas of domest festivity, and by 
hot elderberri wine if one had a cold in the head. poison? quotha. It 
wa like fontenelle' coffee, and, even though some of us have not yet 
turn eighty, at ani rate we were not cut off untim nor hurri 
into a drunkard' grave. and then think of the men whom the system 
produced! thackeray (who knew what he wa talk about) said that 
"our intellect ripen with good cheer and throw off surpris crop 
under the influenc of that admir liquid, claret." but all claret, 
accord to dr. johnson, would be port if it could; and a catena of 
port wine-drink could contain some of the most famou name of the 
last century. mr. gladstone, to whom the other pleasur of the tabl 
meant nothing, wa a stickler for port, a believ in it, a judg of 
it. the onli feebl speech which, in my hearing, he ever made wa 
made after dine at an otherwis hospit hous where wine wa not 
suffer to appear. lord tennyson, until vanquish by sir andrew 
clark, drank hi bottl of port everi day, and drank it undecanted, 
for, as he justli observed, a decant hold onli eight glasses, but a 
black bottl nine. mr. browning, if he could have hi own way, drank 
port all through dinner as well as after it. sir mose montefiore, who, 
as hi kinsfolk said, got up to par--or, in other words, complet 
hi hundr years,--had drunk a bottl of port everi day sinc he 
came to man' estate. dr. charl sumner, the last prince-bishop of 
winchester, so come and benign that he wa call "the beauti of 
holiness," lent ecclesiast sanction to the same tradit by not 
onli drink port himself but distribut it with graciou generos 
to impoverish clergy. but, if I were to sing all the prais of port, 
I should have no room for other wines. 

sherry--but no. just now it is a point of literari honour not to 
talk about sherry;[7] so, dante-like, I do not reason about that 
particular wine, but gaze and pass on--onli remarking, as I pass, 
that mr. ruskin' handsom patrimoni wa made out of sherry, and that 
thi circumst lent a peculiar zest to hi utter from the 
professori chair at oxford about the immor of capit and "the 
sweet poison of misusèd wine." An enthusiast clergyman who wore 
the blue ribbon had been urg on archbishop benson hi own strong 
convict about the wicked of wine-drinking. that courtli prelat 
listen with tranquil sympathi till the orat stop for breath, 
and then observed, in suavest accents, "and yet I alway think that 
good claret tast veri like a good creatur of god." there are mani 
who, in the depth of their conscience, agre with hi grace; and they 
would drink claret and noth but claret if they could get it at 
dinner. far distant are the day when lord alvanley said, "the littl 
wine I drink I drink at dinner,--but the great deal of wine I drink I 
drink after dinner." nowaday no one drink ani after dinner. the king 
kill after-dinn drink when he introduc cigarettes. but, for 
some inexplic reason, men who have good claret will not produc it 
at dinner. they wait till the air is poison and the palat deaden 
with tobacco, and then complain that nobodi drink claret. the late 
lord granvil (who had spent so mani year of hi life in take the 
chair at public dinner that hi friend call him pére La chaise) 
onc told me that, where you are not sure of your beverages, it wa 
alway safest to drink hock. So littl wa drunk in england that it 
wa not worth while to adulter it. sinc those day the still wine 
of mosel have flood the country, and it is difficult to repress the 
convict that the princip vineyard must belong to the medic 
faculty, so persist and so univers do they prescrib those 
rather dispirit vintages. 

[7] A correspond on sherri had just been run in the daili press. 

but, after all said and done, when we in the twentieth centuri say 
wine, we mean champagne, even as our father meant port. and in 
champagn we have seen a silent but epoch-mak revolution. I well 
rememb the champagn of my youth; a liquid esteem more preciou 
than gold, and dribbl out into saucer-shap glass half-way through 
dinner on occas of high ceremony. It wa thick and sticky; in 
colour a sort of brick-dust red, and it scarc bubbled, let alon 
foam or sparkling. 

"how sad, and bad, and mad it was,-- 
and oh! how it wa sweet!" 

nowadays, we are told, more champagn is drunk in russia than is grown 
in france. and the "foam grape," which tennyson glorified, is so 
copious dilut that it rank onli immedi abov small beer in 
the scale of alcohol strength. mr. finching, the wine-merch in 
"littl dorrit," thought it "weak but palatable," and lord st. jerom 
in "lothair" wa esteem by the young men a "patriot," "becaus he 
alway gave hi best champagn at hi ball suppers." such patriot as 
that, at ani rate, is not the refug of a scoundrel. 

_wine and water._ I return to my beginnings, and, as I ponder the 
innocu theme, all sort of apt citat come crowd on the ear of 
memory. bard of everi age and clime have sung the prais of wine, but 
song in prais of water are more difficult to find. onc on a time, 
when a maid of honour had perform a rather mild air on the piano, 
queen victoria ask her what it wa called. "A german drinking-song, 
ma'am." "drinking-song! one couldn't drink a cup of tea to it." A 
kindr feebl seem to have beset all the poet who have tri to 
hymn the prais of water; nor wa it overcom till some quit recent 
singer, who had not forgotten hi pindar, thu improv on the immort 
_ariston men hudor_:-- 

"pure water is the best of gift 
that man to man can bring; 
but what am I, that I should have 
the best of anything? 

"let princ revel at the pump, 
let peer enjoy their tea;[8] 
but whisky, beer, or even wine 
Is good enough for me." 

[8] some comment read--"peer with the pond make free." 




xxi 

dinner 

"we may live without poetry, music, and art; 
We may live without conscienc and live without heart; 
We may live without friends; we may live without books; 
but civil man cannot live without cooks. 

"he may live without lore--what is knowledg but grieving? 
He may live without hope--what is hope but deceiving? 
He may live without love--what is passion but pining? 
but where is the man that can live without dining?" 


the poet who wrote those feel line act up to what he professed, 
and would, I think, have been interest in our present subject; for he 
it wa who, in the mellow glori of hi literari and social fame, said: 
"it is mani year sinc I felt hungry; but, thank goodness, I am still 
greedy." In my youth there use to be a stori of a high sheriff who, 
have sworn to keep the juri in a trial for feloni lock up without 
food or drink till they had agre upon their verdict, wa told that 
one of them wa faint and had ask for a glass of water. the high 
sheriff went to the judg and request hi directions. the judge, 
after due reflection, rule as follows: "you have sworn not to give the 
juri food or drink till they have agre upon their verdict. A glass of 
water certainli is not food; and, for my own part, I shouldn't call it 
drink. yes; you can give the man a glass of water." 

In a like spirit, I suppos that most of us would regard wine as being, 
if not of the essence, at least an insepar accident, of dinner; but 
the subject of wine ha been so freeli handl in a previou chapter 
that, though it is by no mean exhausted, we will to-day treat it onli 
incidentally, and as it present itself in connexion with the majest 
theme of dinner. 

the great lord holland, fame in memoirs, wa greater in noth than 
in hi qualiti of host; and, like all the truli great, he manifest 
all hi noblest attribut on the humblest occasions. thus, he wa onc 
entertain a schoolboy, who had come to spend a whole holiday at 
holland house, and, in the open of hi heart, he told the urchin 
that he might have what he like for dinner. "young in years, but in 
sage counsel old," as the divin milton says, the westminst boy 
demanded, not sausag and strawberri cream, but a roast duck with 
green peas, and an apricot tart. the delight host brush away a tear 
of sensibility, and said, "mi boy, if in all the import question 
of your life you decid as wise as you have decid now, you will be 
a great and a good man." the propheci wa verified, and sure the 
incid deserv to be embalm in verse; but, somehow, the poet 
alway seem to have fought shi of dinner. byron, as might be expected, 
come nearest to the proper inspir when he write of 

"A roast and a ragout, 
and fish, and soup, by some side dish back'd." 

but even thi is tepid. owen meredith, in the poem from which I have 
alreadi quoted, give some portion of a menu in metre. sydney smith, as 
we all know, wrote a recip for a salad in heroic couplets. prior, I 
think, describ a citi feast, bring in "swan and bustard" to rhyme 
with "tart and custard." the late mr. mortim collin is believ to 
have been the onli writer who ever put "cutlet" into a verse. when 
roger wrote "the rich relic of a well-spent hour" he wa not--though 
he ought to have been--think of dinner. shakespear and spenser, 
and milton and wordsworth, and shelley and tennyson deal onli with 
fragment and fring of the great subject. they mention a joint or a 
dish, a vintag or a draught, but do not harmon and co-ordin even 
such slight knowledg of gastronomi as they may be suppos to have 
possessed. In fact, the subject wa too great for them, and they wise 
left it to the more adequ medium of prose. among the prose-poet who 
have had the true feel for dinner, thackeray stand supreme. when 
he describ it facetiously, as in "the littl dinner at timmins's" or 
"A dinner in the city," he is good; but he is far, far better when he 
treat a seriou theme seriously, as in "memori of gormandizing" and 
"greenwich whitebait." 

I assign the first place to thackeray becaus hi eulog is more 
finished, more careful, more delicate; but sir walter had a fine, free 
style, a certain broad of effect, in describ a dinner which 
place him high in the list. those venison pasti and spatchcock 
eel and butt of rhenish wine and stoup of old canari which figur 
so larg in the histor novel still make my mouth water. the 
dinner which rob roy gave baili nicol jarvie, though of necess 
cold, wa well conceived; and, bar the solan goose, I should have 
deepli enjoy the banquet at which the antiquari entertain sir 
arthur wardour. the imaginari feast which caleb balderston prepar 
for the lord keeper wa so good that it deserv to be real. dickens, 
the suprem expon of high tea, knew veri littl about dinner, though 
I rememb a good meal of the _bourgeois_ type at the hous of the 
patriarch in "littl dorrit." lord lytton dismiss even a bad dinner 
all too curtli when he said that "the soup wa cold, the ice wa hot, 
and everyth in the hous wa sour except the vinegar." jame payn 
left in hi one unsuccess book, "meliboeu in london," the best 
account, becaus the simplest, of a fish-dinn at greenwich; in that 
special depart he is run close by lord beaconsfield in "tancred"; 
but it is no disgrac to be equal or even surpass by the greatest 
man who ever describ a dinner. with lord beaconsfield gastronomi wa 
an instinct; it breath in everi page of hi letter to hi sister. He 
found a roast swan "veri white and good." He dine out "to meet some 
truffles--veri agreeabl company." At sir robert peel' he report 
"the second cours realli remarkable," and note the startl fact 
that sir robert "boldli attack hi turbot with hi knife." It wa 
he, I believe, who said of a rival chancellor of the exchequ that 
hi soup wa made from "defer stock." 'twere long to trace the 
same gener enthusiasm for dinner through all lord beaconsfield' 
novels. He knew the kitchen of the past as well as of the present. 
ladi annabel' bill of fare in "venetia" is a monument of culinari 
scholarship. Is there anyth in fiction more move than the agoni of 
the _chef_ at lord montacute' come of age? "it wa onli by the most 
desper person exert that I rescu the _soufflés_. It wa an 
affair of the bridg of arcola." and, if it be object that all these 
scene belong to a rather remot past, let us take thi vignett of 
the fashion solicitor in "lothair," mr. putney giles, as he sit 
down to dinner after a day of excit work: "it is a pleasent thing 
to see an opul and prosper man of business, sanguin and full 
of health and a littl overworked, at that royal meal, dinner. how 
he enjoy hi soup! and how curiou in hi fish! how critic in hi 
_entrée_, and how nice in hi welsh mutton! hi exhaust brain ralli 
under the glass of dri sherry, and he realiz all hi dream with the 
aid of claret that ha the true flavour of the violet." "doctors," 
said thackeray, who knew and love them, "notori dine well. 
when my excel friend sangrado take a bumper, and saying, with a 
shrug and a twinkl of hi eye, _video meliora proboque, deteriora 
sequor_, toss off the wine, I alway ask the butler for a glass of 
that bottle." that tradit of medic gastronomi date from a remot 
period of our history. "culina," by far the richest cookery-book ever 
composed, wa edit and given to the world in 1810 by a doctor--"a. 
hunter, m.d., f.r.s." dr. william kitchen die in 1827, but not 
befor hi "cook' oracle" and "peptic precepts" had secur him an 
undi fame. In our own days, sir henri thompson' "octaves" were the 
most famou dinner in london, both as regard food and wine; and hi 
"food and feeding" is the best guide-book to greedi I know. but 
here I feel that I am descend into details. "dear bob, I have seen 
the mahogani of mani men." but to-day I am treat of dinner rather 
than of dinners--of the abstract idea which ha it real exist in 
a higher sphere,--not of the concret form in which it is embodi 
on thi earth. perhap further on I may have a word to say about 
"dinners." 




xxii 

dinner 


_sero sed serio._ It is the motto of the hous of cecil; and the late 
lord salisbury, long detain by busi at the foreign offic and 
at length sit down to hi well-earn dinner, use to translat 
it--"unpunctual, but hungry." such a formula may suitabl introduc 
the subject of our present meditations; and, although that subject is 
not temporari or ephemeral, but rather belong to all time, still at 
thi moment it is special opportune. sir jame crichton-brown ha 
been frighten us to death with dark tale of physic degeneration, 
and he ha been heartless enough to do so just when we are reel 
under the effect of sir victor horsley' attack on alcohol. burke, in 
oppos a tax on gin, plead that "mankind have in everi age call 
in some materi assist to their moral consolation." these modern 
men of scienc tell us that we must by no mean call in gin or ani of 
it more genteel kinsfolk in the great famili of alcohol. water hardli 
seem to meet the case--besides, it ha typhoid germ in it. tea and 
coffe are "nerve-stimulants," and must therefor be avoid by a 
neurot generation. physic degeneracy, then, must be stave off with 
food; food, in a sound philosophi of life, mean dinner; and dinner, 
the ideal or abstraction, reveal itself to man in the concret form of 
dinners. 

have thu formul my theme, I part company, here and now, with 
poet and romancist and all that dreami crew, and betak myself, like 
mr. gradgrind, to facts. In loftier phrase, I pursu the histor 
method, and narrate, with the accuraci of freeman, though, alas! 
without the brillianc of froude, some of the actual dinner on which 
mankind ha lived. creasi wrote of the "fifteen decis battl of 
the world"--th fifteen decis dinner of the world would be a far 
more interest theme; but the gener catalogu unrol it scroll, 
and "fifteen" would have to be multipli by ten or a hundr befor 
the tale wa told. A friend of mine had a piou habit of past into 
an album the _menu_ of everi dinner at which he had enjoy himself. 
studi the album retrospectively, he use to put an asterisk against 
the most memor of these records. there were three asterisk against 
the _menu_ of a dinner given by lord lyon at the british embassi at 
paris. "_quail and roman punch_," said my friend with tear in hi 
voice. "you can't get beyond that." thi evid had been one of the 
fifteen decis dinner of hi gastronom world. did not the poet 
young exclaim, in one of hi most pietist "night thoughts," 

"the undevout gastronom is mad"? 

or, ha an unintend "g" crept into the line? 

I treasur among my relic the "bill of fare" (for in those day we 
talk english) of a tavern dinner for seven persons, triumphantli 
eaten in 1751. includ veget and dessert, and exclud 
beverages, it compris thirty-eight items; and the total cost wa 
£81, 11s. 6d. (without count the waiter). twenti year later than 
the date of thi heroic feast dr. johnson, who certainli could do most 
thing which requir the use of a pen, vaunt in hi overween 
pride that he could write a cookery-book, and not onli this, but "a 
better book of cookeri than ha ever yet been written; it should be a 
book on philosoph principles." the philosoph principl must 
have been those of the stoic school if they could induc hi reader or 
hi guest to endur patient such a dinner as he gave poor bozzi on 
easter-day, 1773--"a veri good soup, a boil leg of lamb and spinach, 
a veal pie, and a rice pudding." one is glad to know that the soup 
wa good; for, as sir henri thompson said in "food and feeding," "the 
_rationale_ of the initi soup ha been often discussed," and the best 
opinion is that the function of the soup is to fortifi the digest 
against what is to come. A man who is to dine on boil lamb, veal 
pie, and rice pud need all the fortifi he can get. with some 
of us it would inde be a "decisive" dinner--th last which we should 
consum on thi planet. 

true enjoyment, as well as true virtue, lie in the golden mean; 
and, as we round the corner where the eighteenth centuri meet the 
nineteenth, we begin to encount a system of dine less proflig 
elabor than the tavern dinner of 1751, and yet less poison 
crude than dr. johnson' easter dinner of 1773. the first earl of 
dudley (who die in 1833) disdain kickshaws, and, with manli 
simplicity, demand onli "a good soup, a small turbot, a neck of 
venison, duckl with green pea (or chicken with asparagus), and an 
apricot tart." even more meagr wa the repast which macaulay deem 
suffici for hi own want and those of a friend: "elli came to 
dinner at seven. I gave him a lobster curry, woodcock, and maccaroni." 
from such frugality, border on asceticism, it is a relief to turn to 
the more bounteou hospit of sir robert peel, of whose dinner the 
youth disra wrote: "it wa curious sumptuous; everi delicaci of 
the season, and the second course, of dri salmon, olives, caviare, 
woodcock pie, _foiegras_, and everi combin of cure herring, &c., 
wa realli remarkable." yes, indeed! "on dine remarquabl chez 
vous." 

after all, the social life of the capit natur take it tone 
and manner from the august centr round which it moves. If the court 
dine well, so do those who frequent it. the leg of mutton and appl 
dumpl which satisfi the simpl tast of georg iii. read now 
like a horrid dream. perhaps, as the digest and the brain are so 
close connected, they help to drive him mad. hi son ate more 
reasonably; and, in a later generation, gastronom scienc in high 
place wa quicken by the thought intellig of princ albert 
direct the practic skill of francatelli and moret. here is a 
brief abstract or epitom of queen victoria' dinner on the 21st of 
septemb 1841. It begin modestli with two soups; it goe on, more 
daringly, to four kind of fish; four also are the joints, follow 
(not, as now, preceded) by eight _entrées_. then come chicken and 
partridges; vegetables, savouries, and sweet to the number of fifteen: 
and, lest ani one should still suffer from the pang of unsati 
desire, there were thought place on the sideboard roast beef, 
roast mutton, haunch of venison, hash venison, and _riz au consommé_. 
but those were famou days. fifty-four year had sped their course, 
and her majesty' christma dinner in the year 1895 show a lament 
shrinkage. three soup inde there were, but onli one fish, and that 
a fri sole, which can be produc by kitchen less than royal. To 
thi succeed a beggarli array of four _entrées_, three joints, and 
two sort of game; but the _menu_ recov itself a littl in seven 
sweet dishes; while the sideboard display the "boar' head, baron of 
beef, and woodcock pie," which suppli the thrifti journalist with 
appropri copi at everi christma of her majesty' long reign. 

when lord derbi and mr. disra had succeed in "dish the 
whigs" by establish household suffrage, they and their colleagu 
went with a light heart and a good conscienc to dine at the ship 
hotel, greenwich, on the 14th of august 1867. that was, in some 
senses, a "decisive" dinner, for it seal the destruct of the 
old conservat and inaugur the reign of tori democracy. the 
triumphant minist had turtl soup, eleven kind of fish, two 
_entrées_, a haunch of venison, poultry, ham, grouse, leverets, five 
sweet dishes, and two kind of ice. elimin the meat, thi is veri 
much the same sort of dinner as that at which cardin wiseman wa 
entertain by hi co-religionist when he assum the archbishopr 
of westminster, and I rememb that hi life, by mr. wilfr ward, 
record the dismay with which hi "maigre" fare inspir more ascet 
temperaments. "he kept the tabl of a roman cardinal, and surpris 
some puseyit guest by four cours of fish in lent." there is 
someth veri touch in the exculpatori languag of hi friend and 
discipl father faber--"th dear cardin had a lobster-salad side to 
hi character." 

ever sinc the day of burns, the "chiel amang ye takin' notes" ha 
been an unpopular character, and not without reason, as the follow 
extract shows. mr. john evelyn denison (afterward lord eversley) wa 
speaker of the hous of common in 1865, and on the eve of the open 
of the session he dined, accord to custom, with lord palmerston, 
then prime minist and leader of the house. lord palmerston wa in hi 
eighty-first year and gouty. polit issu of the gravest import 
hung on hi life. the speaker, like a _rusé_ old politician as he was, 
kept a cold grey eye on palmerston' perform at dinner, regard 
it, rightly, as an index to hi state of health; and thi wa what he 
report about hi host' capacities: "hi dinner consist of turtl 
soup, fish, patties, fricandeau, a third _entrée_, a slice of roast 
mutton, a second slice, a slice of hard-look ham. In the second 
course, pheasant, pudding, jelly. At dessert, dress orang and half 
a larg pear. He drank seltzer water only, but late in the dinner one 
glass of sweet champagne, and, I think, a glass of sherri at dessert." 
thi wa one of the "decisive" dinners, for palmerston die in the 
follow october. the onli wonder is that he live so long. the dinner 
which kill the duke of wellington wa a cold pie and a salad. 

"I am not one who much or oft delight" to mingl the seriou work of 
dinner with the frivol of literature; but other people, more prone 
to levity, are fond of construct bill of fare out of shakespeare; 
and our nation bard is so copiou in good eat and drink that a 
dozen _menus_ might be bodi forth from hi immort page. the most 
elabor of these attempt took place in new york on the 23rd of 
april 1860. the bill of fare lie befor me as I write. It contain 
twenty-four items, and an appropri quotat is annex to each. the 
princip joint wa roast lamb, and to thi is attach the tag-- 

"innoc 
As is the suck lamb." 

when the late professor thorold rogers, an excel shakespearean, 
saw thi citation, he exclaimed, "that wa an opportun missed. they 
should have put-- 

'so young, and so untender!'" 




xxiii 

luncheon 

"munch on, crunch on, take your nuncheon, 
breakfast, dinner, supper, luncheon!" 


So sings, or says, robert brown in hi ditti of the pie piper, 
and it is to be remark that he wa not driven to invent the word 
"nuncheon" by the necess of find a rhyme for "luncheon," for 
"puncheon" wa readi to hi hand, and "nuncheon" wa not a creation, 
but an archaism, defin by johnson as "food eaten between meals." 
let no one who perpend the amaz dinner eaten by our forefath 
accus those good men of gluttony. let us rather bethink ourselv 
of their earli and unsatisfi breakfasts, their live of strenuou 
labour, their ignor of five o'clock tea; and then thank the 
good and the grace which on our birth have smiled, and have given 
us more frequent meal and less ponder dinners. lord john russel 
(1792-1878) publish anonym in 1820 a book of essay and sketch 
"bi a gentleman who ha left hi lodgings." On the usag of polit 
societi at the time no one wa better qualifi to speak, for woburn 
abbey wa hi home, and at bowood and holland hous he wa an habitu 
guest; and thi is hi testimoni to the dine habit of society: "the 
great inconveni of a london life is the late hour of dinner. To 
pass the day _impransus_ and then to sit down to a great dinner at 
eight o'clock is entir against the first dictat of common sens 
and common stomachs. women, however, are not so irrat as men, and 
gener sit down to a substanti luncheon at three or four; if men 
would do the same, the meal at night might be lighten of mani of it 
weighti dish and convers would be no loser." So far, luncheon 
(or nuncheon) would seem to be exclus a ladies' meal; and yet 
dr. kitchen could not have been prescrib for ladi onli when he 
gave hi surpris direct for a luncheon "about twelve," which 
might "consist of a bit of roast poultry, a basin of beef tea or egg 
poach or boil in the shell, fish plainli dressed, or a sandwich; 
stale bread, and half a pint of good home-brew beer, or toast and 
water, with about one fourth or one-third part of it measur of wine, 
of which port is preferred, or one-seventh of brandy." 

In miss austen' books, luncheon is dismiss under the cursori 
appel of "cold meat," and madeira and water seem to have been 
it accompaniment; but more prodig method soon began to creep in. 
the repast which sam weller pronounc "a weri good notion of a lunch" 
consist of veal pie, bread, knuckl of ham, cold beef, beer, and cold 
punch; and let it be observ in pass that, had he use the word 
"lunch" in polit society, the omiss of the second syllabl would 
have been sever reprehend by a gener which still spoke of 
the "omnibus" and had onli just discontinu "cabriolet." the verb "to 
lunch" wa even more offens than the substant from which it wa 
derived; and lord beaconsfield, describ the season of 1832, say 
that "ladi were luncheon on perigord pie, or cours in whirl 
britskas." To perigord pie as a luncheon dish for the luxuri and 
eupept may be ad venison pasties-- 

"now broach me a cask of malvoisie, 
bring pasti from the doe," 

said the duchess in "coningsby." "that ha been my luncheon--a poetic 
repast." and ladi st. jerome, when she took lothair to a picnic, fed 
him with lobster sandwich and chablis. fiction is ever the mirror of 
fact; and a ladi still living, who publish her memoir onli a year or 
two ago, rememb the ladi holland who patron macaulay "sit at 
a beauti luncheon of cold turkey and summer salad." 

but, in spite of all these instances, luncheon wa down to 1840 or 
thereabout a kind of clandestin and unoffici meal. the ladi 
want someth to keep them up. It wa nicer for the children than 
have their dinner in the nursery. papa would be kept at the hous 
by an impend division, and must get a snack when he could--and so 
on and so forth. If a man habitu sate down to luncheon, and ate 
it through, he wa contemn as unvers in the scienc of feeding. 
"luncheon is a reflect on breakfast and an insult to dinner;" and 
moreov it stamp the eater as an idler. No one who had anyth to 
do could find time for a squar meal in the middl of the day. when mr. 
gladston wa at the board of trade, hi onli luncheon consist of an 
abernethi biscuit which mrs. gladston brought down to the offic and 
forc on the reluct vice-president. 

but after 1840 a chang set in. princ albert wa notori fond of 
luncheon, and queen victoria humour him. they dine late, and the 
luncheon at the palac becam a veri real and fulli recogn meal. 
At it the queen sometim receiv her friends, as wit the royal 
journal--"mamma came to luncheon with her ladi and gentleman." It could 
not have been pleasant for the "ladi and gentleman," but it establish 
the practice. 

"sunday luncheon" wa alway a thing apart. for some reason not 
altogeth clear, but either becaus devot long sustain make 
a strong demand on the nervou system or becaus a digest nap 
wa the best way of employ sunday afternoon, men who ate no 
luncheon on week-day devour roast beef and yorkshir pud on 
sunday and had their appropri reward. bishop wilberforce, whose 
frank self-commun are alway such delight reading, wrote in 
hi diari for sunday, octob 27, 1861: "preach in york minster. 
veri larg congregation. back to bishopthorpe. sleepy, _eheu_, at 
afternoon service; _must_ eat no luncheon on sunday." when luncheon 
had onc firmli establish itself, not mere as a meal but as an 
institution, sunday luncheon in london becam recogn centr of 
social life. where there wa even a moder degre of intimaci a 
guest might drop in and be sure of mayonnaise, chicken, and welcome. I 
well rememb an occas of thi kind when I saw social presenc of 
mind exemplified, as I thought and think, on an heroic scale. luncheon 
wa over. It had not been a particularli bounteou meal; the guest 
had been many; the chicken had been eaten to the drumstick and the 
cutlet to the bone. noth remain but a huge trifle, of chromat 
and threaten aspect, on which no one had ventur to embark. coffe 
wa just coming, when the servant enter with an anxiou expression, 
and murmur to the hostess that monsieur petitpois--a newli arriv 
french attaché--had come and seem to expect luncheon. the hostess 
grasp the situat in an instant, and issu her command with a 
promptitud and a direct which the duke of wellington could not 
have surpassed. "clear everyth away, but leav the trifle. then show 
M. petitpoi in." enter petitpois. "delight to see you. quit right. 
alway at home at sunday luncheon. pray come and sit here and have some 
trifle. It is our nation sunday dish." poor young petitpois, actuat 
by the same principl which made the prodig desir the husks, fill 
himself with sponge-cake, jam, and whip cream; and went away look 
rather pale. If he kept a journal, he no doubt note the english sunday 
as one of our most curiou institutions, and the trifl as it crown 
horror. 

cardin manning, as all the world knows, never dined. "I never eat and 
I never drink," said the cardinal. "I am sorri to say I cannot. I like 
dinner societi veri much. you see the world, and you hear thing which 
you do not hear otherwise." certainli that cardin wa a fictiti 
personage, but he wa drawn with fidel from cardin manning, who 
ate a veri comfort dinner at two o'clock, call it luncheon, and 
maintain hi principle. there have alway been some hous where 
the luncheon were much more famou than the dinners. dinner, after 
all, is someth of a ceremony: it requir forethought, care, and 
organization. luncheon is more of a scramble, and, in the case of a 
numer and scatter family, it is the pleasantest of reunions. 
"when all the daughter are marri nobodi eat luncheon," said lothair 
to hi solicitor, mr. putney giles: but mr. putney giles, "who alway 
affect to know everything, and gener did," repli that, even 
though the daughter were married, "the famou luncheon at creci hous 
would alway go on and be a popular mode of their all meeting." when 
lord beaconsfield wrote that passag he wa think of chesterfield 
house, may fair, some twenti year befor lord burton bought it. 
mr. gladstone, who thought modern luxuri rather disgusting, use to 
complain that nowaday life in a countri hous meant three dinner a 
day, and if you reckon sandwich and poach egg at five o'clock 
tea, nearli four. indeed, the onli differ that I can perceiv 
between a modern luncheon and a modern dinner is that at the former 
meal you don't have soup or a print _menu_. but at a luncheon at the 
mansion hous you have both; so it is well for lord mayor that their 
reign are brief. 

one touch of person reminisc may close thi study. while yet the 
old bailey stood erect and firm, as grim in aspect as in association, 
I use often, through the courtesi of a civic official, to share the 
luncheon of the judg and the aldermen, eaten dure an interv in 
the trial, in a gloomi chamber behind the bench. I still see, in my 
mind' eye, a learn judge, long sinc gone to hi account, stuf 
cold beef and pigeon pie, and quaf london stout, black as erebu 
and heavi as lead. after thi repast he went back into court (where 
he never allow a window to be opened) and administ what he 
call justic through the long and letharg afternoon. No one who 
had wit the perform could doubt the necess for a court of 
crimin appeal. 




xxiv 

tea 


few, I fear, are the reader of mrs. sherwood. yet in "the fairchild 
family" she gave us some pictur of english countri life at the end 
of the eighteenth and the begin of the nineteenth centuri which 
neither jane austen nor mrs. gaskel ever beat, and at least one scene 
of horror which is still unsurpassed. I cannot say as much for "henri 
milner, or the stori of a littl boy who wa not brought up accord 
to the fashion of thi world." no, indeed--veri far from it. and henri 
now recur to my mind onli because, in narrat hi history, mrs. 
sherwood archli introduc a sentenc which may serv as a motto for 
thi meditation. like bismarck (though unlik him in other respects), 
she wa fond of parad scrap of a rather bald latinity; and, in thi 
particular instance, she combin simpl scholarship with staid humour, 
make her hero exclaim to a tea-mak lady, "non possum viver sine 
te." the play on _te_ and _tea_ will be remark as veri ingenious. 
bar the latin and the jest, I am at one with mrs. sherwood 
in the sentiment, "mi heart leap up when I behold" a teapot, like 
wordsworth' when he beheld a rainbow; and the mere mention of tea in 
literatur stir in me thought which lie too deep for words. thu I 
look forward with the keenest interest to 

the book OF tea 

BY okakura-kakuzo 

which the publish promis at an earli date. solemn indeed, as befit 
the subject, is the preliminari announcement:-- 

"thi book in prais of tea, written by a japanese, will sure find 
sympathet reader in england, where the custom of tea-drink ha 
becom so import a part of the nation daili life. mr. kakuzo show 
that the english are still behind the japanes in their devot to 
tea. In england afternoon tea is various regard as a fashion 
and luxuri aid to conversation, a conveni way of pass the 
time, or a rest and refresh paus in the day' occupation, but in 
japan tea-drink is ennobl into teaism, and the english cup of tea 
seem trivial by comparison." 

thi is the right view of tea. the wrong view wa late forc into 
sad promin in the coroner' court:-- 

danger OF tea-drink 

"in sum up at a hackney inquest on saturday, dr. wynn westcott, the 
coroner, comment on the fact that deceased, a woman of twenty-nine, 
had die suddenli after a meal of steak, tomatoes, and tea. one of 
the most injudici habits, he said, wa to drink tea with a meat 
meal. tea check the flow of the gastric juic which wa necessari to 
digestion. He wa sorri if that went against teetot doctrines, but if 
peopl must be teetotal they had best drink water and not tea with 
their meals." 

My present purpos is to enquir whether the right or the wrong view 
ha more larg predomin in english histori and literature. 
if, after the manner of a german commentator, I were to indulg in 
"prolegomena" about the history, statistics, and chemic analysi 
of tea, I should soon overflow my limits; and I regard a pain 
well-known couplet in which "tea" rhyme with "obey" as belong to 
that class of quotat which no self-respect writer can again 
resuscitate. perhap a shade, though onli a shade, less hackney is 
cowper' tribut to the divin herb:-- 

"now stir the fire, and close the shutter fast, 
let fall the curtains, wheel the sofa round, 
and, while the bubbl and loud-hiss urn 
throw up a steami column, and the cups, 
that cheer but not inebriate, wait on each, 
So let us welcom peac even in." 

but thi realli leav the problem unsolved. cowper drank tea, and 
drank it in the evening; but whether he "had anyth with it," as the 
phrase is, remain uncertain. bread and butter, I think, he must have 
had, or toast, or what thackeray scoff at as the "blameless muffin"; 
but I doubt about eggs, and feel quit sure that he did not mingl meat 
and tea. So much for 1795, and I fanci that the practic of 1816 (when 
"emma" wa published) wa not veri different. when mrs. bate went to 
spend the even with mr. woodhous there wa "vast deal of chat, and 
backgammon, and tea wa made downstairs"; but, though the passag is 
a littl obscure, I am convinc that the "biscuit and bake apples" 
were not serv with the tea, but came in later with the ill-fat 
"fricasse of sweetbread and asparagus." lord beaconsfield, who wa 
born in 1804, thu describ the even meal at "hurstley"--a place 
drawn in detail from hi earli home in buckinghamshire: "then they 
were summon to tea.... the curtain were drawn and the room lighted; 
an urn hissed; there were pile of bread and butter, and a pyramid of 
butter toast." and, when the famili from the hall went to tea at 
the rectory, they found "the tea-equipag a pictur of abund and 
refinement. such pretti china, and such variou and delici cakes! 
white bread, and brown bread, and plum cakes, and seed cakes, and 
no end of cracknels, and toasts, dri or buttered." still here is no 
mention of anim foods, and even dr. wynn westcott would have found 
noth to condemn. the same refin tradit meet us in "cranford," 
which, as we all know from it refer to "pickwick," describ the 
social custom of 1836-7. mrs. jameson wa the queen of societi in 
cranford, and, when she gave a tea-party, the herb wa reinforc onli 
by "veri thin bread and butter," and miss barker wa thought rather 
vulgar--"a tremend word in cranford"--becaus she gave seed cake as 
well. even in "pickwick" itself, though that immort book doe not 
pretend to depict the manner of polit society, the tea serv in the 
sanctum of the "marqui of granby" at dork wa flank by noth 
more substanti than a plate of hot butter toast. 

impressive, therefore, almost startling, is the abrupt transit 
from these ill-support tea (which, accord to dr. wynn westcott, 
were hygien sound) to the feast, defiant of all gastronom 
law, which mrs. snagsbi spread for mr. and mrs. chadband--"dainti new 
bread, crusti twists, cool fresh butter, thin slice of ham, tongue, 
and german sausage, delic littl row of anchovi nestl in 
parsley, new-laid egg brought up warm in a napkin, and hot butter 
toast." german sausag wash down with tea! what, oh what, would 
the coron say? and what must be the emot of the waiter at the 
hous of commons, with their tradit of bellamy' veal pie and 
mr. disraeli' port, when they see the labour member sit down to a 
refect of tea and brawn? but, it may be urged, medic scienc is 
alway shift it ground, and what is the elixir of life to-day may 
be label poison to-morrow. thu thackeray, use hi keenest art to 
stigmat the unwholesom greedi of a citi dinner, describ the 
surfeit guest adjourn after dinner to the tea room, and there 
"drink slop and eat butter muffin until the greas trickl 
down their faces." thi wa written in 1847; but in 1823 the great dr. 
kitchener, both physician and gastronomer, pronounc thus--"tea after 
dinner assist digestion, quench thirst, and therebi exhilar the 
spirits," and he suggest as an accept altern "a littl warm 
milk, with a teaspoon of rum, a bit of sugar, and a littl nutmeg." 
truli our forefath must have had remark digestions. 

"these be black vespers' pageants." I have spoken so far of tea in the 
evening. when did peopl begin to drink tea in the morning? I seem to 
rememb that, in our earlier romancist and dramatists, coffe is the 
beverag for breakfast. certainli it is so--and inimit describ 
as well--in lord beaconsfield' account of a yorkshir breakfast in 
"sybil." At holland house, which wa the veri ark and sanctuari of 
luxury, macaulay in 1831 breakfast on "veri good coffe and veri 
good tea, and veri good eggs, butter kept in the midst of ice, and 
hot rolls." here the two liquid are proffered, but meat is rigidli 
excluded, and dr. wynn westcott' law of life observed. but nine 
year later the charact of breakfast had altered, and alter in an 
unwholesom direction. the increas practic of go to scotland 
for the shoot season had familiar englishmen with the more 
substanti fare of the scotch breakfast, and sinc that time the 
unhallow combin of meat and tea ha been the law of our english 
breakfast-table. sir thoma in the "ingoldsbi legends," on the morn 
of hi mysteri disappearance, had eaten for breakfast some bacon, an 
egg, a littl broil haddock, and a slice of cold beef. 

"and then--let me see!--h had two, perhap three, 
cup (with sugar and cream) of strong gunpowd tea, 
with a spoon in each of some choic _eau de vie_, 
which with nine out of ten would perhap disagree." 

the same trait may be rememb in the case of mrs. finching, who, 
though she had cold fowl and broil ham for breakfast, "measur out 
a spoon or two of some brown liquid that smelt like brandi and put 
it into her tea, say that she wa oblig to be care to follow 
the direct of her medic man, though the flavour wa anyth but 
agreeable." 

time passes, and the subject expands. We have spoken of tea in the 
morn and tea in the evening. To these must be added, if the topic 
were to be treat with scientif completeness, that earli cup which 
open our eyes, as each new day dawns, on thi world of opportun 
and wonder, and that last dread draught with which the iron nerv 
of mr. gladston were compos to sleep after a late night in the 
hous of commons. but I have no space for these divagations, and must 
crown thi imperfect studi of tea with the true, though surprising, 
statement that I myself--_moi qui vou parle_--hav known the inventor 
of five o'clock tea. thi wa anna maria stanhope, daughter of the 
third earl of harrington and wife of the seventh duke of bedford. she 
die at an advanc age--roug and curl and trim to the last--in 
1857; but not befor her life' work wa accomplish and five o'clock 
tea establish among the perman institut of our free and 
happi country. sure she is worthier of a place in the positivist 
kalendar of those who have benefit human than hippocrates, harvey, 
or arkwright; and yet sir algernon west write thu in hi book of 
"recollections": "late in the 'forti and in the 'fifties, five 
o'clock tea were just come into vogue, the old duchess of bedford' 
being, as I considered, veri dreari festivities." such is gratitude, 
and such is fame. 




xxv 

supper 

"S is the supper, where all went in pairs; 
T is the twaddl they talk on the stairs." 


though the merri muse of dear "c. S. c." may thu serv to introduc 
our subject, the repast which he ha in view is onli a veri special 
and peculiar--on had almost said an unnatural--form of supper. the 
ball supper, eaten anywher between 12 o'clock and 2 a.m., is clearli 
a thing apart from the supper which, in day of earli dinner, made 
england great. yet the ball supper had it charms, and they have been 
celebr both in prose and in verse. byron knew all about them:-- 

"i'v seen some ball and revel in my time, 
and stay'd them over for some silli reason." 

one of those reason wa the prospect of sup with bessi rawdon,[9] 
the onli girl he ever saw 

"whose bloom could after danc dare the dawn." 

In her societi a fresh zest wa ad to "the lobster salad, and 
champagne, and chat" which the poet love so well. 

[9] afterward ladi william russell. 

fifti year had passed, and a ball supper wa (and for all I know may 
still be) much the same. "the bright moment flew on. suddenli there 
wa a mysteri silenc in the hall, follow by a kind of suppress 
stir. everi one seem to be speak with bate breath, or, if moving, 
walk on tiptoe. It wa the supper-hour-- 

'soft hour which wake the wish and melt the heart.' 

'what a perfect family!' exclaim hugo bohun as he extract a coupl 
of fat littl bird from their bed of aspic jelly. 'everyth they 
do in such perfect taste! how safe you were here to have ortolan for 
supper!'" but, after all, ball supper are frivolities, and colleg 
supper scarc more serious; although a modern bard ha endeavour 
to give them a classic sanction by make young horac at the 
univers of athen thu address himself to hi new acquaint 
balbus:-- 

"A friend ha sent me half-a-dozen brace 
Of thrush and blackbird from a moor in thrace. 
these we will have for supper, with a dish 
Of lobster-patti and a cuttle-fish." 

and we may be sure that a meal where horac wa host wa not 
unaccompani by wine and song. 

but the supper which I have in mind is the substanti meal which, 
dure the eighteenth centuri and the first quarter of the nineteenth, 
form the nightli complement to the compar earli dinner. "high 
tea" such as dicken love and described--"bagman' tea," as I wa 
taught to call it,--becam popular as tea becam cheaper. you dined, 
say, at one, and drank tea (and ate accompaniments) at seven. but 
supper, eaten at nine or ten o'clock, wa a more substanti affair, 
and the poison of tea, so much deprec by our modern coroners, wa 
never suffer to pollut it. In the account of a supper in 1770 I 
have read thi exhilar item: "A turtl wa sent as a present to 
the compani and dress'd in a veri high _gout_, after the west indian 
manner;" and such a dish, eaten at bedtime, of cours requir vinou 
assistance. A forefath of my own note in hi diari for 1788, "the 
man who superintend mrs. cazalan' of new cavendish street supper 
ha a salari of £100 a year for hi trouble;" and one may rest assur 
that mrs. cazalan' guest drank someth more exhilar than tea 
at her famou supper-table. "guy mannering" depict the habit of 
scotch societi at the close of the eighteenth century; and counsellor 
pleydell, come hungri from a journey, suggest that a brace of wild 
duck should be ad to the "light famili supper." these he ate 
"without prejudic to a subsequ tart," and with these viand he 
drank ale and burgundy, moral thus: "I love the _coena_, the 
supper of the ancients, the pleasant meal and social glass that wash 
out of one' mind the cobweb that busi or gloom have been spin 
in our brain all day." On the point of precedent, the counsellor, or 
rather sir walter scott, is at issu with lord john russell, who said, 
in protest against dinner at eight o'clock: "some learn persons, 
indeed, endeavour to support thi practic by precedent, and quot the 
roman supper; but those supper were at three o'clock in the afternoon, 
and ought to be a subject of contempt instead of imit in grosvenor 
square." supper at three in the afternoon! I must leav thi startl 
statement to the investig of dryasdust. At the same period as 
that at which the whig essayist, not yet statesman, wa protest 
against late dinners, sydney smith wa bewail the effect of supper 
on the mind and temper:-- 

"mi friend sup late; he eat some strong soup, then a lobster, then 
some tart, and he dilut these escul varieti with wine. the next 
day I call upon him. He is go to sell hi hous in london and retir 
into the country. He is alarm for hi eldest daughter' health. hi 
expens are hourli increasing, and noth but a time retreat can 
save him from ruin. all thi is lobster; and, when over-excit natur 
ha had time to manag thi testac incumbrance, the daughter 
recovers, the financ are in good order, and everi rural idea is 
effectu exclud from the mind." 

I take due note of the word _wine_, but I believ it wa usual mix 
with water. Of mr. pitt, not a model of abstemiousness, it is record 
that he drank "a good deal of port wine and water at supper"; and mr. 
woodhouse, whom hi worst enemi never accus of excess, recommend 
mrs. goddard to have "_half_ a glass of wine, a _small_ half-glass, 
in a tumbler of water," as an accompani to the minc chicken and 
scallop oysters. dr. kitchener, who wa a practis physician as 
well as a writer on gastronomy, recommend for supper "a biscuit, or 
a sandwich, or a bit of cold fowl, and a glass of beer, or wine, and 
toast and water"; or for "such as dine veri late, gruel or a littl 
bread and cheese, or powder cheese, and a glass of beer." they vaunt 
that medicin is a progress science, but where is the practition 
to-day who would ventur on these heroic prescript of 1825? 

I am accus of quot too often from lord beaconsfield; and, though 
I demur to the word "too," I admit that I quot from him veri often, 
becaus no writer whom I know scan so care and note so exactli 
the social phenomena of the time in which he lived. here is hi 
descript of supper in the year 1835:-- 

"when there were card there wa alway a littl supper--a lobster, 
and a roast potato, and that sort of easi thing, with curiou drinks; 
and, on fit occasions, a bottl of champagn appeared." 

the supper cook by the illustri ude at crockford' game hous 
(now the devonshir club) were famou for their luxuri splendour; 
and, be free to all comers, were use as bait to inveigl ingenu 
youth into the gambling-room; for you could scarc eat a man' supper 
night after night and never give him hi chanc of revenge. but supper 
to be eaten amid the frantic excit of a game hous were, of 
necessity, rather stimul than substantial. for substanti supper 
we must turn to the life of a class rather less exalt than that 
which lost it fortun at "crocky's". dickens' suppers, which may be 
taken to repres the sup habit of the middl class in 1837, are 
substanti enough, but rather unappetizing. old mr. wardle, though the 
most hospit of men, onli gave mr. pickwick "a plenti portion 
of a gigant round of cold beef"--which most peopl would think an 
indigest supper. mrs. bardell' system wa even more culpable, 
accord to dr. wynn westcott, for she gave her friend a littl warm 
supper of "petito and toast cheese," with "a quiet cup of tea." I 
do not exactli know what petito are, but I am sure that when stew 
in tea they must be poisonous. when mr. and mrs. kenwigs, in honour of 
their wedding-day, made a supper for their uncle, the collector, they 
arrang the feast more hygienically, for their "pair of boil fowls, 
larg piec of pork, apple-pie, potatoes, and greens" were reinforc 
by a bowl of punch; and there is a quit delici supper in the "old 
curios shop," where a stew, worthi to rank with that which meg 
merrili forc on the reluct dominie, is wash down with a pint 
of mull ale. 

thackeray, though he excel at a dinner, knew also, at least in hi 
earlier and bohemian days, what wa meant by a supper. mr. archer, the 
journalist in "pendennis," who wa so fond of vaunt hi imaginari 
acquaint with great people, thu describ hi even repast at 
apsley house:-- 

"the duke know what I like, and say to the groom of the chambers: 
'martin, you will have some cold beef, not too much done, and a pint 
bottl of pale ale, and some brown sherri readi in my studi as usual.' 
the duke doesn't eat supper himself, but he like to see a man enjoy a 
hearti meal, and he know that I dine early." 

but all thi is fifti year ago and more. Do peopl eat supper 
nowadays? Of cours the young and frivol eat ball-suppers, and 
supper after the theatr is a recogn featur of london life. but 
doe ani one eat supper in hi own house? To be sure, a tray of wine 
and water still appear in some hous just as the parti is break 
up, and it is call a "supper tray," but is onli the thin and pallid 
ghost of what wa onc a jolli meal. 

one more form of supper remain to be recorded. In the circl in which 
I wa rear it wa customari to observ one day in the year as a kind 
of festiv of the church missionari societi or the societi for the 
propag of the gospel, accord as the principl of the incumb 
were low or high. the arrang compris a special servic in 
church, with a sermon by that mysteri stranger "the deput from 
the parent society"; an even meet in the town hall; and a supper 
at the rectori or the squire' house. bidden to such a festival, a 
friend of the missionari caus wrote thu to the ladi who had invit 
him: "I greatli regret that I cannot attend the service, and I veri 
much fear that I shall not be in time for the meeting. but, d.v., I 
will be with you at supper." 




xxvi 

inn and hotel 


"anchovi and sack after supper" wa honest falstaff' notion of an 
apt sequence. but anchovies, even in their modern extens of "hor 
d'oeuvres," will not make a chapter; and sack, in the form of sherry, 
ha been exhaust discussed. I must therefor betak myself from 
falstaff to touchstone, whose enumer of "dinner and supper and 
sleeping-hours" may serv my present need. 

where to dine? where to sup? where to sleep? moment question 
these; and at thi instant they are in the thought and on the lip 
of thousand of my fellow-creatur as they journey through or 
toward london. octob in london is a season with mark and special 
characteristics. restaur are crowded; bond street is block by 
shop ladies; seat at the theatr must be book ten day in 
advance. 

thi octob "season" is the product of mani forces. the genuin 
londoners, who have been away, for health or sport or travel, in august 
and septemb now come back with a rush, and hasten to make up for 
their long exil by feverish activ in the pursuit of pleasure. but 
the london by no mean have the town to themselves. the countri 
cousin are present in great force. they live labori but delight 
day in examin the winter fashions; they get all their meal at 
prince' or the carlton; and they go to the play everi night. To these 
must be ad the americans, who, have shot our grous and stalk 
our deer and drunk of our medic springs, are now pass through 
london on their way to liverpool. As a rule, they buy their cloth 
in paris, and leav the product of bond street and grafton street 
to the british consumer. but their propens to theatre-parti and 
supper endear them to manag and restaurant-keepers; and on sunday 
they can be detect at st. paul' or the abbey, render the hymn 
with that peculiar inton for which chaucer' "prioresse" wa so 
justli admired. even a few belat french and german tourist are still 
wander disconsol among "the shed of the pine umbrage" in 
the parks, or gaze with awe at the grim front of buckingham palace. 
where do all these pilgrim stay? We know where they dine and sup; but 
where do they spend what touchston call their "sleeping-hours"? I 
onli know that they do not spend them in inns, for inn as I understand 
the word have ceas to exist. they went out with "the road." 

It ha been remark by not unfriendli critic that the author of these 
quiet medit seem to live a good deal in the past, and peopl in 
whom the chronolog sens is miss are apt to think me a great 
deal older than I am. thu when I have recal among my earliest 
recollect the fire which destroy covent garden theatr (in 1856), 
I have been thought to be babbl of druri lane, which wa burnt down 
in 1812; and so, when I say that in earli life I travel a great deal 
upon the road, I shall probabl be accus of have been born befor 
railway were invented. what is true enough is that a prejudic against 
railway linger long after they were in gener use; some peopl 
thought them dangerous, some undignified, and I believ that there 
were some who even thought them wick becaus they are not mention 
in the bible. "I suppos you have heard of ladi vanilla' trip from 
birmingham?" say ladi marney in "sybil." "have you not, indeed? 
she came up with ladi laura, and two of the most gentlemanlik men 
sit opposit her; never met, she says, two more intellig men. 
she beg one of them at wolverhampton to chang seat with her, and 
he wa most polit will to compli with her wishes, onli it wa 
necessari that hi companion should move at the same time, for they 
were chain together--two gentlemen sent to town for pick pocket 
at shrewsburi races." "A countess and a felon!" said lord mowbray. 
"so much for public conveyances." To these social peril were ad 
terror of tunnels, terror of viaducts, terror of fire which would 
burn you to an ash in your lock carriage, terror of robber who were 
suppos to travel first-class for the express purpos of chloroform 
well-dress passeng and then steal their watches. haunt by 
these and similar fears, some old-fashion peopl travel by road 
till well into the 'sixties. from my home in the south midland we took 
a whole day in get to london, forti mile off; two to leamington, 
three to winchester; and those who still travel in thi leisur 
mode were the last patron of the inn. 

It wa gener a broad-browed, solid, comfortable-look hous in 
the most central part of a countri town. not seldom the sign wa taken 
from the armori bear of the local magnate. there were a landlord 
and a landlady, who came out bow when the carriag drove up, and 
conduct the travel to their rooms, while the "imperials" were 
taken down from the roof of the carriage. (could one buy an "imperial" 
nowaday if one want it? the most recent refer to it which I 
can recal occur in the first chapter of "tom brown' school days.") 
veri often the room of the inn were distinguish not by numbers, 
but by name or token deriv from the situation, or the furniture, 
or from some famou travel who had slept in them--th bow room, 
the peacock room, or the wellington room. the landlord had gener 
been a butler, but sometim a coachman. anyhow, he and hi wife had 
"live in the best families" and "knew how thing ought to be done." 
the furnitur wa solid, dark, and handsome--mahogani predominating, 
here and there reliev with rosewood. there wa old silver on the 
table, and the wall were cover with sport or coach prints, 
view of neighbour castles, and portrait of the nobil whom 
the landlord had served. the bedroom were dark and stuffi beyond 
belief, with bedstead like classic templ and deep feather-b into 
which you sank as into a quicksand. the food wa like the furniture, 
heavi and handsome. there wa "gunpowd tea"--green if you ask for 
it,--lusci cream, and realli new-laid eggs. the best bottl of 
claret which I ever encount emerged, quit accidentally, from the 
cellar of a villag inn close to the confluenc of the greta and the 
tees, in a district hallow by the associ of rokebi and mr. 
squeers. when, next morning, you had paid your bill--not, as a rule, a 
light one--th landlord and ladi escort you to the door, and polit 
express a hope that you would honour them on your return journey. 
then "hey, for the lilt of the london road!" and the montfort arms, or 
the roebuck, or the marqui of granby, is onli a pleasant memori of an 
unreturn day. 

what in the countri wa call an inn wa call in london a "famili 
hotel." It wa commonli found in dover street, or albemarl street, or 
bolton street, or some such byway of piccadilly; and in it aspect, 
character, and gener arrang it wa exactli like the countri inn, 
onli of necess darker, dingier, and more airless. respectability, 
mahogany, and horse-hair held it in their iron grip. here counti 
families, come up from the draw room, or the academy, or the 
exhibition, or the derby, spent cheer week in summer. here in the 
autumn they halt on their return from doncast or aix. here the boy 
slept on their way back to eton or cambridge; hither the subaltern 
returned, like a home pigeon, from india or the cape. 

but the famili hotel, like the countri inn, ha seen it day. when 
the _times_ wa incit the inhabit of rome to modern their 
city, matthew arnold, write in miss story' album, made airi fun of 
the suggestion. He repres "the _times_, that bright apollo," 
proclaim salvat to the "armless cupid" imprison in the 
vatican:-- 

"'and what,' cri cupid, 'will save us?' 
say apollo: '_modern rome!_ 
what inns! your street too, how narrow! 
too much of palac and dome!' 

"'o learn of london, whose pauper 
are not push out by the swells! 
wide streets, with fine doubl trottoirs; 
and then--th london hotels!'" 

between the "inns" of my youth and these "hotels" of to-day the 
differ is so great that they can scarc be recogn as 
belong to the same family. under the old dispens all wa solid 
comfort, ponder respectability, and the staid courtesi of the 
antiqu world; under the new it is all glare and glitter, show and 
sham; the moral of the tuileri and the manner of greenwich fair. 
the build is someth between a palac and a barrack, with a hall 
of marble, a staircas of alabaster, a winter garden full of bird and 
fountains, and a band which deafen you while you eat your refin but 
exigu dinner. among these sumptuos the visitor is no longer 
a person but a number. As a number he is receiv by the gigant 
"suisse" who, resplend in green and gold, watch the approach to 
the palace; as a number he is regist by a dictatori "secretary," 
enshrin in a bureau; as a number he is shot up, like a parcel, to 
hi airi lodg on the seventh floor; as a number he order hi 
meals; as a number he pay hi bill. the whole busi is a microcosm 
of state socialism: bureaucraci is supreme, and the individu is 
lost in the machine. but, though the courtesi and the human 
and even the decenc of the old order have vanish so completely, 
the exact remain much the same as they were. there is, indeed, no 
courtli landlord to bow, like a plumper sir charl grandison, over 
the silver salver on which you have laid your gold; but there are 
gilt-edg porters, and moustach lift-men, and a regiment of buttoni 
boy who float round the depart guest with well-tim assiduity; and 
the suiss at the door, as he eye our modest luggag with contemptu 
glare, look quit prepared, if need be, to extort hi guerdon by 
physic force. 

the british inn, whatev were it shortcom in practice, ha been 
glorifi in some of the best vers and best prose in the english 
language. It will, methinks, be a long time befor even the most 
impression geniu of the "bodley head" pen a panegyr of the 
london hotel. 




xxvii 

travel 


the octob season, of which I late spoke, is practic over. 
"the misti autumn sunlight and the sweep autumn wind" are yield 
place to cloud and storm. In a week' time london will have assum 
it winter habit, and alreadi peopl are settl down to their winter 
way of living. the last foreign ha fled. the countri cousin have 
finish their shop and have return to the pursuit of the 
pheasant and the fox. the true londoners--th peopl who come back to 
town for the "first note of the muffin-bel and retreat to the countri 
for the first note of the nightingale"--hav resum the placid of 
their normal life. dinner-parti have hardli begun, but there are 
plenti of littl luncheons; the curtain are drawn about four, and 
there are three good hour for bridg befor one need think of go 
to dress for dinner. and now, just when london is begin to wear 
onc again it most attract aspect, at onc sociabl and calm, some 
pervers people, disturb of the public peace, must need throw 
everyth into confus by go abroad. 

their motiv are mani and various. with some it is health: "I feel 
that I _must_ have a littl sunshine, I have been so rheumat all thi 
autumn," or "mi doctor tell me that, with my tendenc to bronchitis, 
the fog are realli dangerous." with some it is sheer restlessness: 
"well, you see, we were here _all_ the summer, except just whitsuntid 
and ascot and goodwood; so we have had about enough of london. and our 
home in loamshir is so fear lone in winter that it quit get 
on my nerves. So I think a littl run will do us all good; and we shall 
be back by the new year, or februari at latest." with some, again, 
economi is the motiv power; "what with two son to allowance, and two 
still at school; and one girl to be marri at easter, and one just 
come out, as well as a most expens gover for the young ones, I 
assur you it is quit difficult to make two end meet. We have got an 
excel offer for eaton place from novemb to may, and some friend 
on the riviera have repeatedli ask us to pay them a long visit; and, 
when that' done, one can live _en pension_ at montreux for next to 
nothing." other are lure abroad by the love of gambling, though thi 
is not avowed: "I do so love mont carlo--not the gambling, but the 
air, and, even if one doe lose a franc or two at the tables, I alway 
say that we should lose much more at home, with christma presents, 
and workhous treats, and all those tiresom thing one ha to do." 

It is not a joke--for I never joke about religion--it is a liter 
fact that in my youth the propheci in the book of daniel that "mani 
shall run to and fro, and knowledg shall be increased" wa interpret 
as point to an enlarg of the human mind through increas 
facil of travel. I do not guarante the exegesis, but I note the 
fact. A hundr year ago, if parent wish to enlarg their son' 
understand by send him on the "grand tour" of europe, they set 
asid twelv month for the fulfil of their purpose. young hope 
set out in a travelling-carriag with a tutor (or bear-leader), a 
doctor, and a valet. the bear-leader' wa a recogn and lucr 
profession. In a diari for 1788, which lie befor me as I write, 
I read: "mr. coxe, the traveller, ha been particularli lucki as a 
pupil-lead about europe. after lord herbert, he had mr. whitbr at 
£800 per ann., and now ha mr. portman, with £1000 per ann." patrick 
brydone, scholar, antiquary, and _virtuoso_, whose daughter marri the 
second earl of minto, wa "pupil-leader" (or bear-leader) to william 
beckford. sydney smith wa dug out of hi curaci on salisburi plain in 
order to act as bear-lead to the grandfath of the present lord st. 
aldwyn. charl richard sumner, who, as last of the prince-bishop 
of winchester, drew £40,000 a year for forti years, began life as 
bear-lead to lord mount-charles, eldest son of that ladi conyngham 
whom georg iv. admired; and he owe hi first prefer in the church 
to the amiabl complais with which he rescu hi young charg from 
a matrimoni entanglement. that wa earli in the nineteenth century; 
but forti year later the bear-lead wa still an indispens 
adjunct to the grand tour of illustri youth. the late duke of 
argyl ha told us how he made hi travel sandwich insid hi 
father' chariot between hi preceptor and hi physician. when the 
marqui of montacut made hi pilgrimag to the holi land he wa even 
more liber attended; for, in addit to hi bear-leader, colonel 
grouse, he took hi father' doctor, Mr groby, to avert or cure the 
fevers, and hi father' chaplain, the rev. mr. bernard, to guid hi 
research into the theolog of syria. perhap lord montacut exist 
onli in lord beaconsfield' rich imagination; but thackeray, who never 
invent but alway describ what he saw, drew a delight portrait 
of "the rev. bare leader," who, "have a great natur turn and 
like toward the aristocracy," consent to escort viscount talboy 
when that beer-lov young nobleman made hi celebr journey down 
the rhine. 

but, though a special divin alway hedged, as it still hedges, 
the travel of an eldest son, the more modest journey of hi 
parent were not accomplish without consider form and fuss. 
lord and ladi proudflesh or mr. and mrs. goldmor travel all over 
europ in their own carriage. It wa plant bodili on the deck of the 
steamer, so that it privileg occup could endur the torment 
of the cross in dignifi seclusion; and, when onc the solid 
shore of the contin wa safe reached, it wa drawn by an endless 
success of post-horses, ridden by postillions, with the valet and 
maid (like those who pertain to sir leicest and ladi dedlock) 
"affection in the rumble." the insid of the carriag wa a miracl 
of ingenuity. space wa econom with the most care art, and all 
the applianc of travel--looking-glass and luncheon-baskets, lamp 
and maps, newspap and books--wer bestow in their peculiar and 
appropri corners. I possess a "dine equipage" which made the 
tour of europ not onc but often in the servic of a diplomatist. 
It is shape someth like a larg egg, and cover with shagreen. 
It contain a tumbler, a sandwich-box, and a silver-handl knife, 
fork, and spoon; the handl of each of these tool unscrews, and in 
their hollow interior the diplomatist carri hi salt, sugar, and 
pepper. On the roof of the carriag wa the more substanti luggage. A 
travelling-bath, though not unknown, wa rather an except luxury, 
and, accord to our modern notions, it wa pain small. A silver 
tub which suffic for the ablut of the great duke of marlborough 
through the campaign which chang the face of europ now serv as a 
rose-bowl at the banquet of spencer house. 

the trunks, which were strap to the roof of the travelling-carriage, 
were of a peculiar form--veri shallow, and so shape as to fit into one 
anoth and occupi everi inch of space. these were call imperials, 
and just now I refer to tom hughes' undeserv strictur on them. 
the passag fit neatli into our present subject: "I love vagabonds, 
onli I prefer poor to rich ones. courier and ladies' maids, imperi 
and travelling-carriages, are an abomin unto me--i cannot away 
with them." To me, on the contrary, the veri word "imperial" (when 
divest of polit associations) is pleasant. It appeal to the 
histor sense. It carri us back to napoleon' campaigns, and to 
that wonder hous on wheels--hi travelling-carriage--now enshrin 
at madam tussaud's. It even titil the gastronom instinct by 
recal that masterli method of cook a fowl which bear the name 
of marengo. the great napoleon had no notion of fight hi battl 
on an empti stomach, so, wherev he was, a portabl kitchen, in 
the shape of a travelling-carriage, wa close at hand. the cook and 
hi _marmitons_ travel inside, with the applianc for make a 
charcoal fire at a moment' notice, while the imperi on the roof 
contain the due suppli of chickens, eggs, bread, and bordeaux. In 
the prepar of a meal under such condit time wa money--nay, 
rather, it wa empire. the highest honour were bestow on the most 
expediti method, and the method call after marengo took exactli 
twenti minutes. 

here is testimoni much more recent. ladi dorothi nevill, in the 
volum of "reminiscences" which she ha late given to the world, 
thu describ her youth journey between her london and her 
norfolk homes: "it took us two long day to get to wolterton, and 
the cost must have been considerable. We went in the famili coach 
with four post-horses, whilst two 'fourgons' convey the luggage." 
but travel abroad wa a still more majest ceremonial: "we were 
a larg party--six of ourselves, as well as two maids, a footman, 
and french cook; nor must I forget a wonder courier, cover with 
gold and braid. He preced our cavalcad and announc the immin 
arriv of a great english milord and hi suite. We had two fourgon 
to hold the _batteri de cuisine_ and our six beds, which had to be 
unpack and made up everi night. We had, besid the famili coach and 
a barouche, six saddl horses, and two attend grooms." 

travel in those brave day of old wa a dignified, a leisurely, and 
a comfort process. how differ is travel in these degener 
times! for the young man rejoic in hi strength it means, as tom 
hugh said forti year ago, "get over a coupl of thousand mile 
for three-pound-ten; go round ireland, with a return ticket, in 
a fortnight; drop your copi of tennyson on the top of a swiss 
mountain, or pull down the danub in an oxford racing-boat." for 
those who have reach matur year it may mean a coupl of night 
in paris, just to see the first perform of a new play and to 
test the merit of the latest restaurant, or it may mean a week in 
new york to studi the bear of the presidenti elect and to 
gather fresh view of the silver question. dr. lunn kindli invit the 
more serious mind to a confer at grindelwald, where we can 
combin the delight of alpin sceneri and undenomin religion; 
and "the son of a well-known member of the hous of lords" offer to 
conduct us person through "A lion and rhinocero hunt parti in 
somaliland," or "A scientif expedit to central africa, to visit 
the suppos cradl of the human race and the site of the garden of 
eden." noth of travelling-carriag and imperi here! No "maid and 
valet affection in the rumble." all the pomp and circumstance, all 
the eas and calm, of travel have vanished, and with them all sens 
of independ and responsibility. the modern travel is shot 
like a bullet through a tunnel, or haul like a parcel up a hill. He 
certainli see the world at veri littl cost, but he see it under 
wonder uncomfort conditions. 




xxviii 

accomplish 


A pictori critic, commend the water-colour paint of mr. arthur 
rich, say that, after examin hi firm and seriou work, "it is 
imposs to think that there is anyth trivial in the art of 
aquarelle--that it is, as ha been said, 'a thing aunt do.'" 

_A thing aunt do._ I linger on the words, for they suggest deep 
thoughts. mani and mysteri are the trick of language--not least 
so the subtl law by which certain relationship inevit suggest 
peculiar traits. thu the grandmoth stand to all time as the type 
of benevol feebleness; the stepmoth wa brand by classic 
antiqu as unjust; and thackeray' mrs. gashleigh and mrs. chuff are 
the typic mothers-in-law. the father is commonli the "heavi father" 
of fiction and the drama. the mother is alway quot with affection, 
as in "mother-wit," our mother-country, and our mother-tongue. "A 
brother," ever sinc the day of solomon, "i born for adversity," 
and a brother-offic impli a loyal friend. A sister is the type of 
innocence, with just a faint ting or _nuance_ of piti contempt, 
as when the vainglori briton speak of the "sister country" across 
st. george' channel, or the hubrist oxonian snigger at the "sister 
university" of cambridge. eldest and younger son again, as I have 
befor now had occas to point out, convey two quit differ set 
of ideas, and thi discrep ha not escap the notic of the social 
poet, who observ that-- 

"acr and kine and tenement and sheep 
enrich the eldest, while the younger son 
monopol the talent and the duns." 

"mi uncle," in colloqui phrase, signifi the merchant who transact 
hi busi under the sign of the three golden balls; and to these 
express relationship must be ad auntship. "A thing aunt do," 
say the pictori critic; and the contumeli phrase is not of 
yesterday, for in 1829 a secularly-mind friend complain that young 
mr. william gladstone, then an undergradu at christ church, had 
"mix himself up so much with the st. mari hall and oriel set, who 
are really, for the most part, onli fit to live with maiden aunt and 
keep tame rabbits." To paint in water-colour and to keep tame rabbit 
are pursuit which to the superfici gaze have littl in common, 
though both are, or were, characterist of aunts, and both are, in 
some sense, accomplishments, demand natur taste, acquir skill, 
patience, care, a delic touch, and a watch eye. perhap these 
were the particular accomplish in which the tradit aunt 
"specialized," though she had never heard that bad word; but, if she 
chose to diffus her energi more widely, the world wa all befor her 
where to choose; and, by a singular revers of the law of progress, 
there were more "accomplishments" to solicit her attent a hundr 
year ago than there are to-day. 

when the most fascin of all heroines, Di vernon, anticip 
poster by devot her attent to politics, field sports, 
and classic literature, she enumerated, among the more feminin 
accomplish which she had discarded, "sew a tucker, work 
cross-stitch, and make a pudding"; and she instanced, among the 
symbol of orthodox feminin "a shepherdess wrought in worsted, a 
broken-back spinet, a lute with three strings, rock-work, shell-work, 
and needle-work." We clear the centuri with a fli leap, and 
find ourselv in the compani of a model matron, with surround 
substanti unchanged: "mrs. bayham-badg wa surround in the 
drawing-room by variou object indic of her paint a little, 
play the piano a little, play the guitar a little, play the 
harp a little, sing a little, work a little, read a little, 
write poetri a little, and botan a little. If I add to the 
littl list of her accomplish that she roug a little, I do 
not mean that there wa ani harm in it." miss volumnia dedlock' 
accomplishments, though belong to the same period, were slightli 
different: "display in earli life a pretti talent for cut 
ornament out of colour paper, and also sing to the guitar in the 
spanish tongu and propound french conundrum in countri houses, 
she pass the twenti year of her exist between twenti and forti 
in a suffici agreeabl manner. laps then out of date, and 
be consid to bore mankind by her vocal perform in the 
spanish language, she retir to bath." perhap she had been educ 
by miss monflathers, "who wa at the head of the head board and day 
establish in the town," and whose gloss on the didact ditti of 
the busi bee so confound the emissari from the waxworks. 

"in books, or work, or health play 

is quit right as far as genteel children are concerned, and in 
their case 'work' mean paint on velvet, fanci needle-work, or 
embroidery." Do even aunt paint on velvet, or cut ornament out of 
colour paper, in thi "so-cal twentieth century"? I know no 
more pathet passag in the literatur of art than that in which 
mrs. gaskel enumer miss matty' qualif for the work of 
teaching:-- 

"I ran over her accomplishments. onc upon a time I had heard her say 
she could play 'ah! vou dirai-j maman?' on the piano; but that wa 
long, long ago; that faint shadow of music acquir had die 
out year before. she had also onc been abl to trace pattern veri 
nice for muslin embroidery, but that wa her nearest approach to the 
accomplish of drawing, and I did not think it would go veri far. 
miss matty' eye were fail her, and I doubt if she could discov 
the number of thread in a worsted-work pattern, or rightli appreci 
the differ shade requir for queen adelaide' face, in the loyal 
wool-work now fashion in cranford." 

the allus to queen adelaide' face fix the narr between 1820 
and 1830, and georg eliot wa depict the same unenlighten period 
when she describ the accomplish provid by ladies' school as 
"certain small tinkl and smearings." probabl all of us can recal 
an aunt who tinkl on the piano, or a first cousin onc remov who 
smear on bristol board. ladi dorothi nevill, whose invinc forc 
and evergreen memori carri down into the reign of king edward vii. the 
tradit of queen charlotte' court, is a singularli accomplish 
aunt, and she ha just made thi remark confession: "at differ 
time I have attempt mani kind of amateur work, includ book 
illumination, leather-working, wood-carving, and, of late years, a kind 
of old-fashion paper-work, which consist in arrang littl slip 
of colour paper into decor designs, as wa done at the end of 
the eighteenth century. when completed, thi work is made up into 
boxes, trays, or mount for pictures." sure in thi accomplish 
miss volumnia dedlock live again. and then ladi dorothy, laps 
into reminisc vein, make thi rather half-heart apolog for the 
domest artistri of bygon days: "year ago ladi use to spend much 
more of their time in artist work of some kind or other, for there 
were not then the mani distract which exist to-day. indeed, in 
the countri some sort of work wa a posit necessity; and though, 
no doubt, by far the greater portion of what wa done wa absolut 
hideous, useless, and horrible, yet it serv the purpos of pass 
away mani an hour which otherwis would have been given up to 
insuffer boredom." 

yes, the fashion of the world succeed one anoth in perpetu change; 
but boredom is etern the enemy, and the paramount necess of 
escap from it beget each year some new and strang activity. the 
aunt no longer paint in water-colour or keep tame rabbits, flatten 
fern in an album, or trace crude design with a hot poker on a deal 
board. to-day she urg the impetu bicycle, or, in more extrem 
cases, direct the murder motor; lectur on polit or platonics, 
iceland art, or kamschatkan literature. perhap she ha a caus or 
a mission plead for the legal enforc of vegetarian boots, or 
tear down the knocker of a statesman who refus her the suffrage. 
perhap her enthusiasm are less altruistic, and then she may pillag 
her friend at bridge, or suppli the _new york sewer_ with a weekli 
column of classi cuttings. "are you the _daili mail_?" incauti 
chirp a literari ladi to an unknown friend who had rung her up on the 
telephone. "no, i'm not, but I alway thought you were," wa the reply; 
and so, in truth, she was. 




xxix 

cider 


An ingeni correspond of mine ha late been visit the 
brewers' exhibition, and ha come away from it full of cider. I mean 
"full" in the intellectu rather than the physic sense--ful of 
the subject, though unvers in the beverage. He remind me that 
charl lamb had hi catalogu of "book which are no books--_biblia 
a-biblia_," among which he reckon court calendars, directories, 
pocket-books, draughtboard bound and letter on the back, scientif 
treatises, almanacs, statut at large, and paley' moral philosophy. 
My correspond suggest that, in a like spirit, a brewer must have 
hi catalogu of drink which are no drinks--_pota a-pota_--and that 
among them, if onli the secret thought of hi heart were known, 
he must reckon cider. yet at the brewers' exhibit there wa a 
literatur of cider, and that innocent-sound beverag wa quot at 
a price per bottl at which claret is not asham to be sold. that the 
men of malt and hop should thu offici recogn the exist 
of ferment apple-juic strike my friend as an economi of truth; a 
suppression, or at least an evasion, of a deep-seat and absolut 
belief. they cannot realli regard cider as a drink, and yet they give 
it a place alongsid that manli draught which ha made old england what 
she is. I, on the other hand, who alway like to regard the action 
of my fellow-men in the most favour light, prefer to think that 
the brewer have been employ some portion of that enforc leisure, 
which the decay of their industri must have brought, in studi 
english literature, and that they have thu been made acquaint with 
the name and fame of cider. 

_biblia a-biblia_ set me think of lamb, and when onc one begin 
recal "elia" one drift along, in a kind of wake reverie, from 
one pleasant fantasi to another. _biblia a-biblia_ led me on to "dream 
children," and dream children to dream riddles--a reveri of my own 
childhood, when we use to ask one anoth a pleas conundrum which 
play prettili on _in cider_ and _insid her_. but it made light of an 
illustri name and had better be forgotten. 

few, I fear, are the reader of john philips, but, if such there be, 
they will no doubt recal the onli poem which, as far as I know, ha 
ever been devot to the prais of apple-wine. philip wa a patriot 
son of herefordshire, and in hereford cathedr he lie buri under 
bunch of marbl appl which commemor hi poetic achievement:-- 

"what soil the appl loves, what care is due 
To orchats, timeliest when to press the fruits, 
thi gift, pomona! in miltonian verse, 
adventurous, I presum to sing; of vers 
nor skill'd nor studious; but my nativ soil 
invit me, and the theme as yet unsung." 

"orchats" is good; but how far these line can be justli call 
miltonian is a question which my reader can decid for themselves. At 
ani rate, the poem contain more than four thousand line exactli like 
them, and they had the remark fortun to be translat into italian 
under the titl of "il sidro." philip wa a cavali in all hi tast 
and sympathies: but even the puritans, whom he so cordial detested, 
admit the merit of cider. macaulay, with hi characterist love 
of irrelev particularity, insist on the fact that, through all 
the commot of the great rebellion and the civil war, "the cream 
overflow the pail of cheshir and the apple-juic foam in the 
press of herefordshire." nor wa it onli in hi purpl prose that the 
great rhetorician glorifi the juic of the apple. mani a reader who 
ha forgotten all about john philip will recal macaulay' rhyme on 
the garrul countri squir who had a habit of detain peopl by the 
button, and who wa especi addict to the societi of bishops:-- 

"hi grace archbishop manners-sutton 
could not keep on a singl button. 
As for right reverend john of chester, 
hi waistcoat open at the breast are. 
our friend ha fill a mighti trunk 
with trophi torn from bishop monk, 
and he ha realli tatter foulli 
the vestment of good bishop howley. 
No button could I late discern on 
the garment of archbishop vernon, 
and never had hi finger merci 
upon the garb of bishop percy; 
while button fli from bishop ryder 
like cork that spring from bottl cyder." 

from macaulay and bottl cyder (or cider) the transit is easi to 
that admir delin of life and manners, mrs. sherwood; she 
wa pretti much a contemporari of macaulay's, and wa a nativ of 
worcestershire, which in it cider-bear qualiti is not far remov 
from herefordshire, belov of philips. few but fit is the audienc to 
which mrs. sherwood still appeals; yet they who were nurtur on "the 
fairchild family" still renew their youth as they perus the adventur 
of lucy, emily, and littl henry: "the farmer and hi wife, whose name 
wa freeman, were not peopl who live in the fear of god, neither did 
they bring up their children well; on which account mr. fairchild had 
often forbidden lucy, emily, and henri to go to their house." however, 
go they did, as soon as their parents' back were turned; and mrs. 
freeman "gave them each a larg piec of cake and someth sweet to 
drink, which, she said, would do them good." but it turn out to be 
cider, and did not do them good, for, "a they were never use to drink 
anyth but water, it made them quit drunk for a littl while." 

the mention of worcestershir as a cider-grow counti aptli 
introduc my unfail friend lord beaconsfield, for, though he is 
less precis than I could wish in prais of cider, he compliment it 
indirectli in hi pretti descript of "a fair child, long-haired, 
and blush like a worcestershir orchard befor harvest-time." once, 
indeed, the lover of disraelitish romanc seem to find himself on 
the track of cider. harri coningsbi is overtaken by a thunderstorm in 
a forest, and, take refug in a sylvan inn, make friend with a 
mysteri stranger. the two travel agre to dine together, when 
thi emin natur dialogu ensues. "'but cere without bacchus,' 
said coningsby, 'how doe that do? think you, under thi roof, we could 
invok the god?' 

"'let us swear by hi bodi that we will try,' said the stranger. 

"alas! the landlord wa not a priest of bacchus. but then these 
enquiri led to the finest perri in the world." If onli the perri had 
been cider, thi quotat had been more apposite; but the themes, 
though not identical, are cognate. 

We have trace the prais of cider in poetri and in romance, but it 
also ha it place in biography, and even in religi biography. one 
of the most delight portrait of a saint which wa ever drawn is 
mrs. oliphant' "life of edward irving." In the autumn of 1834--the 
last autumn of hi life--that prophet and man of god made a kind of 
apostol journey through shropshire, herefordshire, and wales. from 
kington, in herefordshire, he wrote to hi wife: "mi dinner wa ham and 
eggs, a cold fowl, an appl tart, and cheese; a tumbler of cider, and 
a glass of sicilian tokay." and he add a tender refer to "ginger 
wine in a long-neck decanter." It is alway satisfactori to find the 
good thing of thi life not reserv exclus for bad people. 

sydney smith, though a canon of st. paul's, wa scarc a saint 
and not at all a prophet; and through the study-window of hi 
beauti parsonag in somersetshire, he gaze on the glori of the 
cider-vintag with an eye more mundan than that of edward irving. In 
1829 he wrote from comb florey--"th sacr valley of flowers," as he 
love to call it: "I continu to be delight with the country. the 
harvest is got in without ani rain. the cider is such an enorm crop 
that it is sold at ten shill a hogshead; so a human creatur may 
lose hi reason for a penny." 

cider is, I believe, still drunk at oxford; and memori retain grate 
recollect of cider-cup beauti as a liquid topaz, with a cluster 
of blue flower float on it breast. but the cider-cellar of 
london--plac of, I fear, ill-regul conviviality--have, as far as 
I know, long sinc close their doors. yet they, too, have their secur 
place in literature. the "young lion" of the _daili telegraph_, who 
look forward to succeed dr. W. H. russel as war correspond of 
the _times_, thrill with excit at the prospect of inocul 
the lead journal with "the divin mad of our new style--th 
style we have form upon sala. It blend the airi epicurean of 
the _salons_ of augustu with the full-bodi gaieti of our english 
cider cellar." but that wa written in 1870, and the style and the 
cellar alik are thing of the past. the offici historian of cider 
excel in that "dri light" which is the grace of history, and grave 
tell us that "cider (_zider_, german) when first made in england wa 
call wine." with a proper reluct to commit himself to what is 
anteced incredible, he add that "the earl of manchester, when 
ambassador in franc (1699), _i said_ to have pass off cider for 
wine." It is more plausibl state that in later day the innocu 
appl ha been art mingl with the "foam grape of eastern 
france," and ha been drunk in england as champagne. the hock-cup at 
buckingham palac is justli vaunt as one of the chief glori of 
our ancient polity. It is certainli the most delect drink that 
ever refresh a thirsti soul; and the art of concoct it is a 
state-secret of the most aw solemnity. but there never wa a secret 
which did not sooner or later elud it guardians; and I have heard 
that a royal cellarer, in an expans moment, onc reveal the spell. 
german wine and english cider togeth constitut the kingli cup, 

"and, blended, form, with art strife, 
the strength and harmoni of life." 




xxx 

the garter 

"breath there a man, with soul so dead, 
who never to himself hath said---- 


I should uncommonli like to be a knight of the garter?" If such 
there be, let him forswear thi column and pass on to the cotton 
market or the educ bill. here we cater for those in whom the 
histor instinct is combin with picturesqu sensibility, and who 
love to trace the stream of the nation life as it flow through 
long-descend rites. lord acton wrote fine of "institut 
which incorpor tradit and prolong the reign of the dead." No 
institut fulfil thi ideal more absolut than the order of the 
garter. one need not alway "commenc with the deluge"; and there is no 
occas to consult the live oracl of mrs. markham for the stori of 
the drop garter and the chivalr motto. It is enough to rememb 
that the order link the last enchant of the middl age with the 
twentieth century, and that for at least four hundr year it ha 
play a real, though hidden, part in the secret strategi of english 
statecraft. 

We are told by travel that the emperor of lilliput reward hi 
courtier with three fine silken thread of about six inch long, one 
of which wa blue, one red, and one green. the method by which these 
reward were obtain is thu describ by an eye-witness: "the emperor 
hold a stick in hi hands, both end parallel to the horizon, while 
the candidates, advanc one by one, sometim leap over it, sometim 
creep under it, backward and forwards, sever times, accord as 
the stick is elev or depressed. whoever show the most agil and 
perform hi part best of leap and creep is reward with the 
blue colour silk, the next with the red, and so on." 

to-day we are not concern with the red silk, wise invent by 
sir robert walpol for the benefit of those who could not aspir to 
the blue; nor with the green, which illustr the continu and 
separ politi of the northern kingdom. the blue silk suppli us 
with all the materi we shall need. In it wider aspect of the blue 
ribbon, it ha it secur place in the art, the history, and the 
literatur of england; though perhap the dryasdust of futur age 
will be perplex by the manichæan associ which will then have 
gather round it. "when," they will ask, "and by what process, did 
the ensign of a high chivalr order which origin at a banquet 
becom the symbol of total abstin from ferment drinks?" even so, 
a high-ton damsel from the state of maine, regard the blue ribbon 
which girt lord granville' white waistcoat, congratul him on the 
bold with which he display hi colours, and then shrank back in 
astonish horror as he rais hi claret-glass to hi lips. In one 
of the prettiest of histor novel ami robsart is repres as 
examin with childish wonder the variou badg and decor which 
her husband wears, while leicester, amus by her simplicity, explain 
the signific of each. "the embroid strap, as thou callest it, 
around my knee," he said, "i the english garter, an ornament which 
king are proud to wear. see, here is the star which belong to it, and 
here is the diamond george, the jewel of the order. you have heard how 
king edward and the countess of salisbury----" "oh, I know all that 
tale," said the countess, slightli blushing, "and how a lady' garter 
becam the proudest badg of english chivalry." 

there are certain famili which may be style "garter families," so 
constant--almost unbroken--ha been the tradit that the head of 
the famili should be a knight companion of the most nobl order. such 
is the hous of beaufort; is there not a great saloon at badminton 
wall entir with portrait of duke of beaufort in their flow 
mantl of garter-blue? such is the hous of bedford, which ha worn 
the garter from the reign of henri viii. till now; such the hous 
of norfolk, which contriv to retain it garters, though it often 
lost it head, in time of civil commotion. the duke of devonshire, 
again, have been habitu garter-wearers; and the fourteenth earl of 
derby, though he refus a dukedom, wa proud to accept an extra garter 
(rais the number of knight abov the statutori twenty-five), which 
queen victoria gave him as a consol for hi evict from the 
premiership in 1859. _punch_, then, as now, no respect of persons, 
had an excel cartoon of a blubber child, to whom a graciou ladi 
soothingli remarks, "did he have a nasti tumble, then? here' someth 
pretti for him to play with." the percys, again, were pre-emin 
a garter family; sixteen head of the hous have worn blue silk. So 
far as the male line wa concerned, they came to an end in 1670. the 
eventu heiress of the hous marri sir hugh smithson, who acquir 
the estat and assum the name of the histor percys. having, in 
virtu of thi great alliance, been creat earl of northumberland, sir 
hugh beg georg iii. to give him the garter. when the king demurred, 
the aspir exclaimed, in the bitter of hi heart, "I am the first 
northumberland who ever wa refus the garter." To which the king 
replied, not unreasonably, "and you are the first smithson who ever 
ask for it." however, there are form of polit pressur to which 
even king must yield, and peopl who had "borough influence" could 
gener get their way when georg iii. want some trustworthi vote 
in the hous of commons. So sir hugh smithson die a duke and a k.g., 
and sinc hi day the perci have been continu gartered. 

but it is in the sphere of rank just below that of the "garter 
families" that the blue silk of swift' imagin exercis it 
most potent influence. men who are place by the circumst of 
their birth far beyond the temptat of mere cupidity, men who are 
justli satisfi with their social posit and have no special wish 
to be transmogrifi into marquis or dukes, are found to desir the 
garter with an almost passion fondness. mani a curiou vote in a 
stand-or-fal division, mani an unexpect declar at a polit 
crisis, mani a transfer of local influenc at an import elect ha 
been dictat by calcul about a possibl garter. It wa thi view 
of the decor which inspir lord melbourn when, to the suggest 
that he should take a vacant garter for himself, he replied, "but 
whi should I? I don't want to bribe myself." thi same light-heart 
statesman disput with lord palmerston the credit of have said, "the 
great beauti of the garter is that there' no d---- d nonsens of merit 
about it;" but it wa undoubtedli palmerston who declin to pay the 
customari fee to the dean and chapter of windsor, and on be grave 
told that, unless he paid, hi banner could not be erect in st. 
george' chapel, repli that, as he never went to church at windsor or 
anywher else, the omiss would not much affect him. 

what made the recent chapter of the garter peculiarli excit to 
such as have æsthetic as well as histor mind wa the fact that, 
for once, the knight might be seen in the full splendour of their 
magnific costume. No other order ha so elabor a paraphernalia, 
and everi detail smack delici of the antiqu world. the long, 
sweep mantl of garter-blu is worn over a surcoat and hood of 
crimson velvet. the hat is trim with ostrich feather and heron' 
plumes. the enamel collar swing majest from shoulder to 
shoulder; from it depend the imag of st. georg trampl down 
the dragon; and round the left knee run the garter itself, set 
forth the motto of the order in letter of gold. It is a truli regal 
costume; and those who saw lord spencer so array at the coron 
of king edward might have fanci that they were gaze on an anim 
vandyke. these full splendour of the order are seldom seen, but some 
modif of them appear on state occasions. the king wa marri 
in the mantl of the garter, worn over a field-marshal' uniform; and a 
similar practic is observ at ceremoni in st. george' chapel. the 
statut of the order bind everi knight, on hi chivalr obedience, 
to wear the badge--th "george," as it is technic called--at all 
time and places. In obedi to thi rule the marqui of abercorn, 
who die in 1818, alway went out shoot in the blue ribbon from 
which, in ordinari dress, the badg depends. but those were the 
day when peopl play cricket in tall hat and attend the hous 
of common in knee-breech and silk stockings. princ albert, whose 
conscienc in ceremoni matter wa even pain acute, alway 
wore hi blue ribbon over hi shirt and below hi waistcoat; and in 
hi ancient photograph it can be dimli trace cross hi chest in 
the neighbourhood of hi shirt studs. but to-day one chiefli see it 
at dinners. A tradit of the order requir a knight dine with 
a brother-knight to wear it, and after dinner one may meet it at an 
even party. the disus of knee-breeches, except in royal company, 
make it practic imposs to display the actual garter; unless 
one choos to follow the exampl of the seventh duke of bedford, who, 
be of a skinni habit and feel the cold intensely, yet desir to 
display hi garter, use to wear it buckl round the trouser of hi 
left leg. lord beaconsfield, in hi later years, use to appear in the 
even with a most magnific star of the garter which had belong 
to the wick lord hertford, thackeray' steyn and hi own monmouth. 
It wa a constel of pick diamonds, surround st. george' 
cross in rubies. after lord beaconsfield' death it wa expos for 
sale in a jeweller' window, and eventu wa broken up and sold 
piecemeal. there wa an opportun missed. lord roseberi ought to have 
bought it, and kept it by him until he wa entitl to wear it. 

In picture-galleri one can trace the evolut of the blue ribbon 
through sever shade and shapes. In pictur of the tudor and stuart 
period it is a light blue ribbon, worn round the neck, with the georg 
hanging, like a locket, in front. In georgian pictur the ribbon is 
much darker, and is worn over the left shoulder, reach down to the 
right thigh, where the georg is displayed. I have heard that the 
alter of posit wa due to the duke of monmouth, who, when a 
littl boy, accident thrust hi right arm through the ribbon, with 
a childish grace which fascin hi father. the chang of colour wa 
due to the fact that the exil king at st. germain' affect still 
to bestow the order, and the english ribbon wa made darker, so as to 
obviat all possibl confus between the realiti and the counterfeit. 
Of late years, thi reason have ceas to operate, the king ha 
return to the lighter shade. 

the last common who wore the garter wa sir robert walpole. sir 
robert peel refus it. It is the onli honour which, I think, mr. 
gladston could have accept without loss of dignity. for he truli wa 
a knight _san peur et san reproche_, worthi to rank with those to 
whom, in the purer day of chivalry, the cross of st. georg wa not 
the reward of an intrigu but the symbol of a faith. 




xxxi 

sheriff 


the late mr. evelyn philip shirley, of ettington, the most enthusiast 
and cultur of english antiquaries, wa onc describ the procedur 
observ on the rare occas of a "free conference" between the hous 
of parliament. "the lords," he said, "sit with their hat on their 
heads. the common stand, uncovered, at the bar; and the carpet is 
spread not on the floor but on the table, illustr the phrase 'on 
the _tapis_.' those are the thing which make life realli worth living." 

I cannot profess to equal mr. shirley in culture, but I yield to no man 
in enthusiasm for antiquarian rites. like burke, I "piousli believ 
in the mysteri virtu of wax and parchment." with mr. gladstone, I 
say that "the principl which give us ritual in religion give us the 
ceremoni of courts, the costum of judges, the uniform of regiments, 
all the languag of heraldri and symbol, all the hierarchi of rank and 
title." 

My antiquarian enthusiasm for the garter must not be allow to brush 
asid the more obviou topic of the sheriffs. that just now[10] is a 
topic which, as the french say, palpit with actuality. novemb 
is the sheriffs' month; in it they bloom like chrysanthemums--doomed, 
alas! to as brief a splendour. the sheriff of london and 
middlesex--thos gloriou satellit who revolv round the lord mayor 
of london as the cardin round the pope--ar alreadi installed. their 
state carriag of dazzl hue, and their liveri stiff with gold 
bullion, have flung their radianc (a the late mr. J. R. green would 
have said) over the fog and filth of our autumn climate. 

"who asketh whi the beauti wa made? 
A wan cloud drift o'er the wast of blue, 
the thistledown that float along the glade, 
the lilac bloom of april--fair to view, 
and naught but fair are these; and such I ween are you. 
yes, ye are beautiful. the young street boy 
joy in your beauty----" 

but I am becom rhapsodical, and with less excus than "c. S. c.," 
whose poetic fire wa kindl by the sight of the beadl in the 
burlington arcade. 

[10] novemb 1896. 

On monday the 12th of november, be the morrow of st. martin, the 
chancellor of the exchequer, in cloth of wrought gold and figur 
silk, attend the ghost of what wa onc the court of exchequer, 
nomin three gentlemen of good estat to serv the offic of high 
sheriff for each of the counti of england. Be it remark in pass 
that the robe of black and gold which the chancellor wear on thi 
occas is that which mr. gladstone' statu in the strand represents, 
and which, as a matter of fact, he wore at the open of the law 
court in decemb 1882, when, to the astonish of the unlearned, he 
walk in process among the judges. 

earli in the new year--on "the morrow of the purification" to wit--th 
lord presid of the council submit the name of the nomin 
sheriffs, duli engross on parchment, to the king, who then, with a 
silver bodkin, "pricks" the name of the gentleman who in each counti 
seem the fittest of the three for the august and peril offic of 
high sheriff. 

I love to handl great thing greatly; so I have refresh my memori 
with the constitut lore of thi high theme. the etymolog of 
"sheriff" I find to be (on the indisput author of dr. dryasdust) 
"scirgeréfa--th 'reeve' or fiscal offic of a shire." In the saxon 
twilight of our nation histori thi reeve, not yet develop into 
sheriff, rank next in hi counti to the bishop and the ealdorman, 
or earl. In those day of rudimentari self-government, the reev wa 
elect by popular vote, but edward ii., who seem to have been a 
bureaucrat befor hi time, abolish the form of elect except as 
regard the cities, and from hi time onward the high sheriff of a 
counti ha been a nomin officer. until the day of the tudors, 
the high sheriff wield great and miscellan powers. He wa the 
militari head of the county. He command the "poss comitatus," in 
which at hi bid everi male over fifteen wa forc to serve; 
and he was, in all matter of civil and crimin jurisdiction, the 
execut and minist of the law. 

_quomodo ceciderunt fortes!_ henri viii. at one fell swoop termin 
the sheriff' militari power and made the new-fangl lord-lieuten 
command of the local forces; and success act of parliament have, 
by increas the power of court and magistracies, reduc the civil 
power of the sheriff to a dismal shadow of it former greatness. still, 
in the person of hi unromant representative, the "bound bailiff," 
he watch the execut of civil process in the case of those who, to 
use a picturesqu phrase, have "outrun the constable"; still, with all 
the pantomim pomp of coach and footmen, trumpet and javelin-men, 
he conduct the judg of assiz to and from the court; and still he 
must be present in court when the capit sentenc is pronounced. I 
believ I am right in state that there is no such document as a 
"death-warrant" known to english jurisprudence. the onli warrant for 
the execut of a felon is the verbal sentenc of the judg pronounc 
in open court; and, as the high sheriff is respons for the due 
execut of that sentence, he must be present when it is pronounced, 
in order that he may know, by the evid of hi own eyes, that the 
person brought out for execut is the person on whom the sentenc wa 
pronounced. It is probabl that mani of my reader recollect the first 
lord tollemache, a man who combin singular gift of physic strength 
with a delic humanitarianism. He had been high sheriff of cheshir 
in veri earli life, and, till he wa elev to the peerage, it wa 
possibl that hi turn might come round again. contempl thi 
contingency, he said that if he were again charg with the execut 
of a capit sentence, he should, on hi own authority, offer the 
condemn man a dose of chloroform, so that, if he chose, he might go 
unconsci to hi doom. 

the duti connect with the capit sentenc are, of course, 
infinit the most tri of those which befal a high sheriff; but 
even in other respect hi lot is not an unmix pleasure. If he is a 
poor man, the expens of conduct the assiz with proper digniti 
is considerable. A sensit man doe not like to hear invidi 
comparison between hi carriages, horses, and liveries, and those 
of hi predecessor in office. He winc under the imput of an 
unworthi economy; and, if hi equipag wa conspicu unequ to 
the occasion, the judg have been known to express their displeasur 
by sarcasms, protests, and even fines. the fine power of a judg 
on circuit is a mysteri prerogative. I have no notion whether it 
is restrain by statutori limitations, by what process the fine is 
enforced, or into whose pocket it find it way. some year ago the 
high sheriff of surrey publish a placard at the guildford assiz 
set forth that the public were exclud from the court by the 
judge' order and in defianc of law, and warn hi subordin 
offic against give effect to the order for exclusion. the judg 
pronounc the placard "a pain contumaci contempt of the 
court," and fine the high sheriff £500. My memori doe not recall, 
and the record do not state, whether the mulct offic paid up or 
climb down. 

If the high sheriff ha a friend or kinsman in holi orders, the assiz 
afford an excel opportun of bring him to public notic in the 
capac of sheriff' chaplain; for the chaplain preach befor the 
judg at the open of the assize, and, if he is ambiti of fame, 
he can gener contriv to make someth of the occasion. but few 
chaplains, I should think, have emul the courag of sydney smith, 
who at the york assiz in 1824 rebuk the beset sin of bench and 
bar in two remark vigor sermon on these suggest themes--"th 
judg that smite contrari to the law" and "the lawyer that tempt 
christ." 

broadly, I suppos it may be said that the peopl who realli enjoy 
be high sheriff are not those who, by virtu of long hereditari 
connexion with the soil, are to the manner born; but rather those who 
by commerci industri have accumul capital, and have invest it 
in land with a view to found a family. To such, the hospit 
paid and the defer received, the quaint splendour of the assize, 
and the undisput preced over the gentlemen of the county, are 
joy not lightli to be esteemed. when lothair wa arrang the 
splendid ceremoni for hi famou come of age, he said to the 
duchess, "there is no doubt that, in the county, the high sheriff take 
preced of everi one, even of the lord-lieutenant; but how about 
hi wife? I believ there is some tremend question about the lady' 
precedence. We ought to have written to the heralds' college." the 
duchess gracious gave mrs. high sheriff the benefit of the doubt, 
and the ceremoni went forward without a hitch. On the night of the 
great banquet lothair look round, and then, "in an audibl voice, 
and with a stateli becom such an incident, call upon the high 
sheriff to lead the duchess to the table. although that emin man had 
been think of noth els for days, and dure the last half-hour 
had felt as a man feels, and can onli feel, who know that some public 
function is momentarili about to fall to hi peril discharge, he wa 
taken quit aback, chang colour, and lost hi head. but lothair' 
band, who were wait at the door of the apart to preced the 
process to the hall, strike up at thi moment "the roast beef 
of old england," reanim hi heart, and, follow lothair and 
preced all the other guest down the galleri and through mani 
chambers, he experienc the proudest moment in a life of struggle, 
ingenuity, vicissitude, and success." 




xxxii 

publish 


there is a passag in selden' "table-talk" which, if I recollect it 
aright, may be paraphras in some such form as this: the lion, reek 
of slaughter, met hi neighbour the sheep, and, after exchang 
the time of day with her, ask her if hi breath smelt of blood. 
she repli "yes," whereupon he snap off her head for a fool. 
immedi afterward he met the jackal, to whom he address the same 
question. the jackal answer "no," and the lion tore him in piec for 
a flatterer. last of all he met the fox, and ask the question a third 
time. the fox repli that he had a cold in hi head, and could smell 
nothing. _moral_: "wise men say littl in danger times." the bear 
of thi aphor on my present subject is suffici obvious; the 
"times"--not _times_--ar "dangerous" alik for author and publishers, 
and "wise men" will "say little" about current controversies, lest they 
should have their head snap off by mr. luca and mr. graves, or be 
torn in piec by mr. moberley bell. 

thu warned, I turn my thought to publish as they have exist in 
the past, and more particularli to their relat with the author 
whose work they have given to the world. how happi those relat 
may be, when maintain with tact and temper on both sides, is well 
illustr by an anecdot of that indefatig penwoman, "the 
gorgeou ladi blessington." think herself injur by some delay 
on the part of her publishers, messrs. sander & otley, she sent her 
son-in-law, the irrepress count d'orsay, to remonstrate. the count 
wa receiv by a dignifi gentleman in a stiff white cravat, whom 
he proceed to assail with the most vigor invective, until the 
cravat gentleman could stand it no longer and roundli declar that 
he would sacrific ladi blessington' patronag sooner than subject 
himself to person insult. "personal?" exclaim the live count. 
"there' noth person in my remarks. If you'r sanders, then d---- 
otley; if you'r otley, then d---- sanders." 

It is to be fear that a similar imprec ha often form itself 
in the heart, though it may not have issu from the lips, of a baulk 
and disillus author. though notori the most long-suff 
of a patient race, the present writer ha befor now felt inclin to 
borrow the vigor invect of count d'orsay. some six month befor 
american copyright was, after long negotiation, secur for english 
authors, messrs. popgood and groolli (I borrow the name from sir frank 
burnand) arrang with me for the public of a modest work. It wa 
quit readi for publication, but the experienc publish point 
out the desir of keep it back till the new law of copyright 
came into force, for there wa a rich harvest to be reap in america; 
and all the american profits, after, say, five thousand copi were 
sold, were to be mine alone. A year later I receiv a cheque, 18s. 
6d., which, I imagine, bore the same relat to the american profit 
as mrs. crupp' "one cold kidney on a cheese-plate" bore to the remain 
of david copperfield' feast. On enquiri I wa soothingli inform by 
popgood and groolli that the exact number of copi sold in america wa 
5005, and that the chequ repres (a per agreement) the royalti 
on the copi sold, over and abov the first five thousand. that the 
publish should have so accur estim the american sale seem 
to me a remark instanc of commerci foresight. 

not much more amiabl are the feel of the author toward the 
publish who declin hi wares; and I have alway felt that 
washington irv must have had a keen and legitim satisfact in 
prefix to hi immens popular "sketch-book" the flummeri in which 
old john murray wrap up hi refus of the manuscript:-- 

"I entreat you to believ that I feel truli oblig by your kind 
intent toward me, and that I entertain the most unfeign respect 
for your most tast talents. If it would not suit me to engag in 
the public of your present work, it is onli becaus I do not see 
that scope in the natur of it which would enabl me to make those 
satisfactori account between us which I realli feel no satisfact in 
engaging." 

now, surely, as justic shallow says, good phrase are, and ever were, 
veri commendable. while murray dealt in good phrases, hi rival longman 
express himself through the more tangibl medium of good cheques. 
He wa the london publisher, and appar the financier, of the 
_edinburgh review_, and, accord to sydney smith' testimony, hi 
fiscal system wa simplic itself. "I use to send in a bill in these 
words, 'messrs. longman & co. to the rev. sydney smith. To a veri wise 
and witti articl on such a subject; so mani sheets, at forty-f 
guinea a sheet,' and the money alway came." here is anoth passag 
from the financi deal of the same great house, which dure the 
last fifti year ha caus mani a penman' mouth to water. On the 
7th of march 1856 macaulay wrote in hi diary: "longman came, with a 
veri pleasant announcement. He and hi partner find that they are 
overflow with money, and think that they cannot invest it better 
than by advanc to me, on the usual term of course, part of what 
will be due to me in december. We agre that they shall pay twenti 
thousand pound into williams' bank next week. what a sum to be gain 
by one edit of a book! I may say, gain in one day. but that wa 
harvest-day. the work had been near seven year in hand." 

after that gloriou instance, all tale of profit from book seem flat 
and insignificant. As a rule, we have to reckon our make on a far 
more modest scale. "sir," said an enthusiast ladi to mr. zangwill, 
"I admir 'the children of the ghetto' so much that I have read it 
eight times." "madam," repli mr. zangwill, "I would rather you had 
bought eight copies." even so, with our exigu profit on eight copi 
duli sold, our state is more graciou than that of more deserv men. 
here is a touch vignett from a book of travels, which wa popular 
in my youth: "at _tabl d'hôte_ there is a charm old gentleman who 
ha translat æschylu and euripid into english verse; he ha been 
compliment by the greatest scholar of the day, and hi publish 
have just sent him in hi bill for printing, and a letter to know what 
the deuc they shall do with the first thousand." 

such are the joy of publish at one' own risk. hardli more 
exhilar is the experi of knock at all the door in 
paternost row, or albemarl street, or waterloo place, and implor 
the stony-heart publish to purchas one' modest wares. old john 
murray' sooth formula about "most tast talents" ha been 
reproduced, with suitabl variations, from that time to this. No one 
experienc it often than the late mr. shorthouse, whose one good 
book--"john inglesant"--mad the round of the trade, until at length 
messrs. macmillan recogn it strang power. In their hands, as 
everi one knows, the book prosper exceedingly, and the publish 
who had reject it were consum by remorse. In thi connexion my 
friend mr. jame payn use to tell a stori which outweigh a great 
mani acrid wittic about "barabba wa a publisher" and napoleon' 
one meritori action in hang a bookseller. payn wa "reader" 
to smith and elder, and in that capac declin the manuscript of 
"john inglesant." some year afterward thi fact wa state in print, 
togeth with an estim of what hi error had cost hi firm. payn, 
who wa the last man to sit down patient under a calumny, told the 
late mr. georg smith that he felt bound in self-respect to contradict 
a stori so derogatori to hi literari judgment. "if I were you," 
repli mr. smith, "I wouldn't do that, for, as a matter of fact, 
you did reject the manuscript, and we have lost what macmillan have 
gained. I never told you, becaus I knew it would annoy you; and I onli 
tell you now to prevent you from contradict 'an ower true tale.'" 
payn use to say that, in all the annal of business, consider 
forbear had never been better exemplified. against thi stori 
of hi failur to perceiv merit payn wa wont to set hi discoveri 
of mr. anstey guthrie. the manuscript of "vice versa," bear the 
unknown name of "f. anstey," came in ordinari cours into hi hands. He 
glanc at the first page, turn over, read to the end, and then ran 
into mr. smith' room saying, "we'v got the funniest thing that ha 
been written sinc dickens' 'christma carol.'" and the public gave 
unequivoc evid that it concur in the verdict. 

let a "smooth tale of love" close these reminisc of publishers. 
some forti year ago, when all young and ardent spirit had caught the 
sacr fire of italian freedom from garibaldi and swinburn and mrs. 
browning, a young lady, nurtur in the straitest of tori homes, wa 
inspired--it is hardli too strong a word--to write a book of ballad 
in which the hero and the deed of the italian revolut were 
glorified. she knew full well that, if she were detected, her father 
would have a stroke and her mother would lock her up in the spare 
bedroom. so, in send her manuscript to a publisher, she pass 
herself off as a man. her vigor and vehement style, her strong grasp 
of the polit situation, and her enjoy of battl and bloodshed, 
contribut to the illusion; her poem were publish anonymously; 
other volum followed; and for sever year the publish address 
hi contributor as "esquire." At length it chanc that both publish 
and poetess were staying, unknown to each other, at the same seasid 
place. her letter, written from--let us say--brighton, reach him 
at brighton; so, instead of answer by post, he went to the hotel 
and ask for mr. talbot, or whatev great tori name you prefer. the 
porter said, "there is no mr. talbot stay here. there is a miss 
talbot, and she may be abl to give you some information." So miss 
talbot wa produced; the secret of the authorship wa disclosed; and 
the negoti took an entir new turn, which end in make the 
poetess the publisher' wife. 




xxxiii 

handwrit 


when "the book of snobs" wa appear week by week in _punch_, 
thackeray deriv constant aid from suggest correspondents. "'whi 
onli attack the aristocrat snobs?' say one estim gentleman. 'are 
not the snobbish snob to have their turn?' 'pitch into the univers 
snobs!' write an indign correspond (who spell _elegant_ with 
two _l_'s)." 

similarly, if I may compar small thing with great, I am happi in the 
possess of an unknown friend who, from time to time, suppli me 
with refer to current topic which he think suitabl to my gentl 
method of criticism. My friend (unlik thackeray' correspondent) can 
spell _elegant_, and much longer word too, with faultless accuracy, 
and is altogether, as I judge, a person of much culture. It is thi 
circumstance, I suppos (for he ha no earthli connexion with the 
army), which make him feel so keenli about a cut from a newspap 
which he ha just sent us:-- 

"in a report just issu by the war offic on the result of 
examin for promot mani offic are said to be handicap 
by their bad handwriting. some show of 'want of intelligence, small 
power of expression, poor penmanship--in fact, appear to suffer from 
defect education.' 

"on the other hand, the work of non-commiss offic show 
intellig and power of concis expression, while penmanship is good. 

"but the percentag of failur among the offic show a larg 
decrease--from 22 per cent. in novemb 1904 to 13 per cent. in may 
last. the improv is particularli notic among lieutenants. It 
is apparent, say the report, that a seriou effort is be made by 
the commiss rank to master all the text-book and other aid to 
efficiency." 

"this," say my correspondent, "i a shame disclosure. cannot you 
say someth about it in print?" inclin natur to the more 
favour view of my fellow-creatures, I prefer to reflect, not on the 
"poor penmanship" and "defect education" of my militari friends, 
but on their manli effort after self-improvement. there is someth 
at onc pathet and edifi in the pictur of these worthi men, each 
of whom ha probabl cost hi father £200 a year for educ ever 
sinc he wa ten year old, make their "seriou effort to master the 
text-book and other aid to efficiency," in the humbl hope that their 
write may some day rival that of the non-commiss officers. 

It wa not ever thus. these laudable, though lowly, endeavour after 
cultur are of recent growth in the british army. fifti year ago, if 
we may trust contemporari evidence, the uneduc subaltern developed, 
by a natur process, into the uneduc general. 

"I have always," said thackeray in 1846, "admir that dispens 
of rank in our countri which set up a bud cornet, who is shave 
for a beard (and who wa flog onli last week becaus he could 
not spell), to command great whisker warrior who have face all 
danger of climat and battle." _becaus he could not spell._ the 
same infirm accompani the cornet into the higher grade of 
hi profession--wit captain rawdon crawley' memorandum of hi 
avail effects: "mi double-barril by manton, say 40 guineas; my 
duell pistol in rosewood case (same which I shot captain marker) 
£20." and, even when the cornet had blossom into a general, hi 
educ wa still far from complete: "A man can't help be a fool, 
be he ever so old, and sir georg tufto is a greater ass at sixty-eight 
than he wa when he enter the armi at fifteen. He never read a book 
in hi life, and, with hi purple, old, gouti fingers, still write a 
schoolboy hand." 

but do soldier write a wors hand than other people? I rather doubt 
it, and certain I am that sever of my friends, highli place in 
church and polit and law, would do veri well to appli themselv for 
a season to those "text-book and other aid to efficiency" by which 
the zealou subaltern seek to complet hi "defect education." 

mr. gladston wa accustom to say that in public life he had known 
onli two perfect things--sir robert peel' voic and lord palmerston' 
writing. the former we can know onli by tradition; the latter survives, 
for the instruct of mankind, in folio of volumin despatches, 
all written in a hand at onc grace in form and absolut clear 
to read. "the wayfar men" of diplomacy, though sometim "fools," 
could not "err" in the interpret of palmerston' despatches. the 
same excel of caligraphi which palmerston himself practis he 
rightli requir from hi subordinates. If a badli written despatch 
came into hi hands, he would embellish it with scath rebukes, and 
return it, through the office, to the offend writer. the recipi 
of one of these admonit thu recal it terms, "tell the gentleman 
who copi thi despatch to write a larger, rounder hand, to join the 
letter in the words, and to use blacker ink." 

If lord palmerston stood easili first among the penmen of hi time, 
the credit of write the worst hand in england wa divid among at 
least three claimants. first there wa lord houghton, whose strange, 
tall, upright strokes, all exactli like each other except in so far 
as they lean in differ directions, lord tennyson liken to 
"walking-stick gone mad." then there wa my dear friend mr. jame 
payn, who describ hi own hand onli too faith when he wrote 
about "the wander of a centiped which had just escap from the 
inkpot and had scrawl and sprawl over the paper," and whose closest 
friend alway implor him to correspond by telegraph. and, finally, 
there wa the "bad eminence" of dean stanley, whose lifelong indulg 
in hieroglyph inflict a perman loss on literature. the dean, 
as all reader of hi biographi will remember, had a mark turn for 
light and grace versification. the album and letter-casket of 
hi innumer friend were full of these "occasional" verses, in 
which domestic, political, and ecclesiast event were prettili 
perpetuated. after hi death hi sister, mrs. vaughan, tri to 
collect these fugit piec in a memori volume, but an unforeseen 
difficulti occurred. In mani case the recipi of the poem were 
dead and gone, and no live creatur could deciph the dean' 
writing. So what might have been a pretti and instruct volum 
perish untimely. 

jane maxwell, duchess of gordon, the brilliant dame who rais the 
gordon highland and who play on the tori side the part which the 
duchess of devonshir play among the whigs, had, like our english 
subalterns, a veri imperfect education; but with great adroit she 
cover her defici with a cloak of seem humour. "whenever," she 
wrote to sir walter scott, "I come to a word which I cannot spell, I 
write it as near as I can, and put a note of exclam after it; so 
that, if it' wrong, my friend will think that I wa make a joke." 
A respect member of the present cabinet who share duchess jane' 
orthograph weak cover hi retreat by draw a long, involut 
line after the initi letter of each word. let the reader write, say, 
the word "aluminium" on thi principle; and he will see how veri easili 
imperfect spell in high place may be concealed. 

with soldier thi chapter began, and with a soldier it shall 
end--th most illustri of them all, arthur, duke of wellington. 
let it be record for the encourag of our modern subaltern 
that the duke, though he spell much better than captain crawley, 
wrote quit as badli as sir georg tufto; but that circumst did 
not--a is sometim the case--en him to interpret by sympathi the 
hieroglyph of other people. Is there ani one left, "in a lancashir 
garden" or elsewhere, who recal the honour name of jane loudon, 
authoress of "the lady' companion to her flower garden"? mrs. loudon 
wa an accomplish lady, who wrote not onli on floriculture, but on 
arboricultur and landscap gardening, and illustr what she wrote. 
In one of her work she desir to insert a sketch of the "waterloo 
beeches" at strathfieldsaye--a picturesqu clump plant to commemor 
our deliver from the corsican tyrant. accordingli she wrote to the 
duke of wellington, request leav to sketch the beeches, and sign 
herself, in her usual form, "j. loudon." the duke, who, in spite of 
extrem age and percept not quit so clear as they had onc been, 
insist on conduct all hi own correspondence, repli as follows:-- 

"f.m. the duke of wellington present hi compliment to the bishop of 
london. the bishop is quit at liberti to make a sketch of the breech 
which the duke wore at waterloo, if they can be found. but the duke 
is not awar that they differ in ani way from the breech which he 
gener wears." 




xxxiv 

autograph 


from handwrit in gener to autograph in particular the transit 
is natural, almost inevitable. My recent reflect on the imperfect 
penmanship of the british offic sent me to my collect of letters, 
and the sight of these autographs--old friend long sinc hidden 
away--set me on an interest enquiry. wa there ani affin between 
the write and the character? could one, in ani case, have guess who 
the writer was, or what he did, mere by scrutin hi manuscript? 
I make no pretens to ani skill in the art or scienc of caligraphy; 
and, regard my letter mere as an amateur or non-expert, I must 
confess that I arriv at a mix and dubiou result. some of the 
autograph are characterist enough; some seem to impli qualiti for 
which the writer wa not fame and to suppress other for which he wa 
notorious. 

let us look care at the first letter which I produc from my 
hoard. the line are level, and the word are clearli divided, although 
here and there an abbrevi tell that the hand which wrote thi 
letter had mani letter to write; the capitals, of which there are 
plenty, are long and twirling, though the intermedi letter are 
rather small, and the signatur is follow by an emphat dash which 
seem to say more explicitli than word that the writer is one who 
cannot be ignored. thi is the autograph of queen victoria in those 
distant day when she said, "they seem to think that I am a schoolgirl, 
but I will teach them that I am queen of england." 

surround and succeed queen victoria I find a cluster of minor 
royalties, but a studi of their autograph doe not enabl me to 
gener about royal writing. some are scrawl and some are 
cramped; some are infantin and some foreign. here is a level, firm, 
and rapid hand, in which the exig of a copiou correspond 
seem to have soften the stiff of a militari gait. the letter is 
date from "the hors guards," and the signatur is 

"your veri truly, 
george." 

but here again we cannot generalize, for noth can be more dissimilar 
than the duke' hurried, high-should charact and the exquisit 
piec of penmanship which lie alongsid of them. thi is written in 
a leisur and cultiv hand, with due space between word and 
paragraphs, like the write of a scholar and man of letters; it is 
date may 29, 1888, and bear the signatur of 

"your affection cousin, 
albemarle," 

the last survivor but one of waterloo. 

but soldier are not much in my way, and my militari signatur are 
few. My collect is rich in politicians. here comes, first in date 
though in noth else, that duke of bedford who negoti the 
treati of fontainebleau and got trounc by juniu for hi pains. It 
is written in 1767, just as the writer is "set out from woburn 
abbey to consult hi shropshir oculist" (whi shropshire?), and ha 
the small, cramp charact which is common to so mani condit 
of shorten sight. (I find exactli the same in a letter of lord 
chancellor hatherley, 1881.) thirty-nin year pass, and william pitt 
write hi last letter from "putney hill, the 1st of january, 1806, 2 
p.m.," the write as clear, as steady, and as beauti form as if 
the "sun of austerlitz" had never dawned. and now the statesmen pass 
me in rapid success and in fine disregard of chronolog order. 
lord russel write a graceful, fluent, rather feminin hand; charl 
villiers' write is of the same family; and the great lord derby' 
a perfect specimen of the "italian hand," delic as if drawn with a 
crow-quill, and slant into allur tail and loops. lord brougham' 
wa a vile scrawl, with half the letter tumbl backwards. john 
bright' is small, neat, and absolut clear; nor is it fanci to 
surmis that mr. chamberlain copi mr. bright, and were they not both 
short-sight men? and lord goschen' writing, from the same cause, is 
smaller still. the duke of argyl wrote a startl and imperi hand, 
worthi of a highland chief whose ancestor not so long ago exercis 
the power of life and death; lord iddesleigh a neat and orderli hand, 
becom a privat secretari or perman official. lord granville' 
and mr. forster' write had thi in common, that they look 
most surprisingli candid and straightforward. the present duke of 
devonshire' write suggest noth but vanity, self-consciousness, 
and ostentation. We all can judge, even without be caligraphists, 
how far these suggest conform to the facts. By far the most 
pleas autograph of all the statesmen is lord beaconsfield's, 
artist form and highli finished--in hi own phrase, "that form 
of scriptur which attracts." with the utmost possibl loyalti to a 
lost leader, I would submit that mr. gladston wrote an uncommonli bad 
hand--not bad in point of appearance, for it wa neat and come even 
when it wa hurried; but bad morally--a kind of caligraph imposture, 
for it look quit remark legible, and it is onli when you come to 
close quarter with it and tri to deciph an import passag that 
you find that all the letter are practic the same, and that the 
interpret of a word must depend on the context. 

from my pile of statesmen' autograph I extract yet another, and I 
lay it side by side with the autograph of a great author and a great 
ecclesiastic. all three are veri small, exquisit neat, veri littl 
slanted, absolut legible. well as I knew the three writers, I doubt 
if I could tell which wrote which letter. they were cardin manning, 
mr. froude, and lord rosebery. will the expert in caligraphi tell 
me if, in thi case, similar of write bodi forth similar 
of gift or qualities? anoth veri close similar may be observ 
between the write of lord halsburi and that of lord brampton (better 
known as sir henri hawkins), which, but for the fact that lord brampton 
use the long "s" and lord halsburi doe not, are pretti nearli 
identical. 

If there is one truth which can be deduc more confid than 
anoth from my collect of autographs, it is that there is no 
such thing as "the literari hand." everi varieti of write which a 
"reader's" fever brain could conceiv is illustr in my bundl 
of literari autographs. _senior priores._ samuel roger wa born in 
1763, and die in 1855. A note of his, written in 1849, and beginning, 
"pray, pray, come on tuesday," is by far the most surpris piec of 
caligraphi in my collection. It is so small that, except under the 
eye of earli youth, it requir a magnifying-glass; yet the symmetri 
of everi letter is perfect, and, when suffici enlarged, it might 
stand as a model of beauti and readabl writing. I take a bound of 
sixti years, and find some of the same characterist reproduc by 
my friend mr. quiller-couch; but between the "pleasur of memory" and 
"green bays" there roll a sea of literature, and it ha been navig 
by some strang craft in the way of handwriting. I have spoken on 
anoth occas of dean stanley, lord houghton, and jame payn; 
specimen of their enorm surround me as I write, and I can adduce, 
I think, an equal heinou instance. here is sydney smith, write in 
1837 to "dear john," the hero of the reform act, "no bodi wish better 
for you and your than the inhabit of comb florey." perhap so; 
but they convey their benedict through a veri irrit medium, 
for sydney smith' write is of the immor type, pleas to the 
eye and superfici legible, but, when onc you have lost the clue, 
a labyrinth. perhap it is due to thi circumst that hi book 
abound, beyond all others, in uncorrect misprints. 

but there are other fault in write besid ugli and 
illegibility. A great man ought not to write a poor hand. yet noth 
can be poorer than ruskin's--mean, ugly, insignificant--onli redeem 
by perfect legibility. goldwin smith's, though clear and shapely, is 
characterless and disappointing. some great scholars, again, write 
disappoint hands. jowett' is a spiteful-look angular, littl 
scratch, perfectli easi to read; westcott' come but not clear; 
lightfoot' an open, scrambl scrawl, someth like the late lord 
derby's. these great men cannot excus their defici in penmanship 
by plead that they have had to write a great deal in their lives. 
other befor them have had to do that, and have emerg from the trial 
without a stain on their caligraphy. for example--"albany, decemb 
3, 1854," is the head of an ideal beauti sheet, everi letter 
perfectli formed, all space duli observed, and the whole evid 
maintain it beauti in spite of breakneck speed. the signatur is 

"ever your truly, 
T. B. macaulay." 

here is a letter address to me onli last year by a man who wa 
born in 1816. In my whole collect there is no clearer or prettier 
writing. As a devote of fine penmanship, I make my salut to sir 
theodor martin. 




xxxv 

more autograph 


My suggest friend ha suddenli been multipli a hundredfold. 
handwrit is a subject which appar make a wide appeal. 
each post bring me correct or corrobor of what I wrote 
last saturday. fresh instanc of enorm in the way of illeg 
write are adduc from all quarters; nor are there want acrid 
critic who suggest that reform should begin at home, and that "the 
author of collect and recollections" would do well to consult 
a writing-master, or to have hi copi type befor it goe to the 
printers. waiv these personalities, I turn again to my letter-case, 
and here let me say in pass that I commit a fear indiscret 
when I spoke of my "collection" of autographs. that fatal word brought 
down an avalanch of "collectors," who, hail me as a man and a 
brother, propos all sort of conveni exchanges. A gentleman who 
cherish a postcard from mr. rudyard kipl would exchang it for an 
unpublish letter of shelley; and a maiden-ladi at weston-super-mare, 
whose great-aunt correspond with eliza cook, will refus no 
reason offer. 

but all these handsom proposit must be brush aside, for I have 
no collect of autographs, if "collection" impli ani art or system 
in the way in which they have been brought together, or ani store of 
saleabl duplicates. mine are simpli letter address to myself or 
to my kinsfolk, plu just a veri few which have come into my hand in 
connexion with public business; but, such as they are, they are full of 
memori and morals. 

whi did veri old peopl write so well? I have alreadi describ the 
write of samuel rogers, of the waterloo lord albemarle, and of sir 
theodor martin. pretti well for octogenarian penmanship; but I can 
enlarg the gallery. A bundl of octogenarian letter lie befor me 
as I write. oliv wendel holm send a tribut to matthew arnold. 
charl villier accept an invit to dinner. lord norton invit 
me to stay at hams. archdeacon denison complain of "hi first attack 
of gout at eighty-five." mr. leveson-gow at eighty-six thank 
me for a review of hi first book. I protest that there is not an 
ungrac line--scarc a misshap letter--in ani of these five 
manuscripts. here is a small, elegant, and "taily" hand, rather like an 
old-fashion lady's. the signatur is 

"your sincerely, 
eversley," 

better known as mr. shaw-lefevre, the most authorit speaker 
the hous of common ever had. note that thi wa written in hi 
eighty-eighth year, and he live to buy a new pair of gun after he wa 
ninety. here is a strong, clear, well-defin writing, set forth 
with precis and emphasi the reason whi the last duke of cleveland, 
then in hi eighty-fifth year, will not give more than £5 for an 
object which he ha been ask to help. the write of the belov 
and honour duke of rutland, alway grace and regular, becom 
markedli smaller, though not the least less legible, till he die at 
eighty-seven. there is no more vigorous, even dashing, signatur in 
my store than "g. J. holyoake," written in juli 1905. close to the 
imperi purpl of the agitator' ink nestles, in piquant contrast, 
a small half-sheet of rose-pink paper bear a duchess' coronet 
and cypher. the write is distinct and ornamental; the letter wa 
written in 1880, and the writer wa born in 1792. but the mere fact 
of attain to eighti or nineti year will not absolut guarantee, 
though it seem to promote, legibl of writing. My vener 
friend dean randall, who wa born in 1824, end a letter, which 
certainli need some such apology, with a disarm allus to the 
"dread scrawl" of hi "ancient ms."; and four side of tantal 
hieroglyphics, drawn appar with a blunt stick, are shown by 
extern evid to be a letter from canon carter of clewer when he 
had touch hi ninetieth birthday. 

On similarity, approach to identity, between the write of veri 
dissimilar person I have alreadi remarked, and a further illustr 
come to light as I turn over my papers. here are two letter in the 
grace and legibl script of the earli nineteenth century, with long 
s's, and capit for all the substantives. both are evid the 
handiwork of cultiv gentlemen; and both the writers, as a matter 
of fact, were clergymen. but there the resembl stops. the one wa 
"jack" russell, the well-known sport parson of exmoor; the other 
wa andrew jukes, the deepest and most influenti mystic whom the 
latter-day church ha seen. 

when I prais grace in write I mean natur and effortless 
grace, such as wa display in the write of the late duke of 
westminster. but, if we admir write artifici fashion and 
coerc into grace like a clip yew, it would be difficult 
to excel the penmanship of the late georg augustu sala, who wa an 
engrav befor he wa an author; or that of sir A. conan doyle, who 
handl a pen as dexter as in hi surgic day he wield the 
lancet. I prais just now the late duke of westminster' writing, 
and of him one might say what scott said, in a differ sense, of 
byron--that he "manag hi pen with the careless and neglig eas of 
a man of quality"; but there is anoth kind of grace than that--th 
grace which is partli the result of mental clear and partli of a 
cultur eye. here are two specimen of such writing, the letter so 
alluringli fashion that they look, as some one said, like someth 
good to eat; and space with a care which at onc make read easy, 
and testifi to clear think in the writer. both are the write of 
scholars, and both of men who wrote a vast deal in their lives--bishop 
creighton and dean vaughan. It must have been a joy to read their 
proofs. the late dean farrar wa the onli public-school master I ever 
knew who took pain with hi pupils' write and encourag them to add 
grace to legibility. hi own writing, small, upright, and characterful, 
wa veri pretti when he took time and pains; but the specimen which 
lie befor me show sad sign of the havoc wrought by incess 
write against time. 

grace and legibl are the two chief glori of penmanship, but other 
attribut are not without their effect. A dash scrawl, if onli 
it is easi to read, suggest a soar superior to convent 
restraints, and rather bespeak a hero. here are two scrawls, and each 
is the work of a remark person. one is sign "your truly, jos. 
cowen," and I dare say that some of my reader would see in it the 
index to a natur at onc impetu and imperious. but mr. cowen' 
scrawl wa crowquill-work and copperpl compar with it next-door 
neighbour. "accept the enclosed, dear mr. russell," cover the whole 
of one side of a sheet of letter-paper; the ink is blue; the paper 
is ribbed; the signature, all wreath in gigant flourish and 
curl tails, is "laura thistlethwaite," and the enclos is one of 
the evangelist address of that gift preacher who onc wa laura 
bell. odd incongru keep turn up. As I pass from the evangel 
lady-orator, I come to father ignatius, an evangel orat with a 
difference, but with a like tendenc to scrawl. lord leighton' write 
is also a scrawl, and, it must be confessed, an egotist scrawl, and 
a veri bad scrawl to read. An illeg scrawl, too, is the write 
of richard holt hutton, but hi is not a vainglori or command 
scrawl, but rather humbl and untidy. "henri irving" is a signatur 
quit culpabl illegible, but "squir bancroft" is just irregular 
enough to be interest though not unreadable. 

_per contra_, I turn to one of the most legibl signatur in my 
possession. the write is ugli and the letter are ill-formed, look 
rather like the work of a hand which ha onli late learn to write 
and find the act a difficulty. but it is as clear as print, and it 
show no adventiti ornament or self-assert twirls. the 
signatur is 

"your most sincerely, 
randolph S. churchill." 

In thi case, if in no other, the oracl of caligraphi are set at 
naught. here is a fine, twisty, twirl hand, all tail and loops, 
but not at all unsightly. the signatur read like "lincoln," and onli 
a care studi would detect that the "l" of "lincoln" is preced 
by a circular flourish which look like part of the L but is realli 
a capit C. It is the signatur of that great scholar, christoph 
wordsworth, bishop of lincoln; and I rememb that, in day of 
ecclesiast strife, it wa onc imput to that apostol man for 
vaniti that he sign hi name "lincoln" like a tempor peer. from 
that day he defin the "c" more carefully. 

To the last letter which I bring to light to-day a differ kind of 
interest attaches. It is date 

"dingl bank, liverpool, 
_april 13, 1888_." 

the write is small and clear, with the upstrok and downstrok 
rather long in comparison with the level letters; but some small blur 
and blot show that the letter wa written in unusu haste. It end 
with these words: "smalley ha written a letter full of shriek and 
curs about my innoc article; the american will get their notion 
of it from that, and I shall never be abl to enter america again. 

"ever yours, 
M. a." 

thi wa the last letter which matthew arnold ever wrote, and it close 
a friendship which had been one of the joy and glori of my life. 




xxxvi 

christma 


"christmas, now," as mr. brook in "middlemarch" might have said--"i 
went a good deal into that kind of thing at one time; but I found it 
would carri me too far--ov the hedge, in fact." that, I imagine, 
pretti well repres the attitud of the adult world toward the 
feast which close the year. We all love it when we were young. now, 
it is all veri well for onc in a way; it might pall if frequent 
repeated; even recur onli annually, it must be observ temper 
and enjoy moderately. anyth resembl excess would carri one 
too far--"ov the hedge, in fact." but, within these recogn 
and salutari limits, christma is an institut which I would not 
willingli let die. In the day of my youth a jewish ladi caus me 
not a littl constern by remark that it seem veri odd for 
christian to celebr the feast of redempt with gluttoni and 
drunkenness. she lived, I am bound to say, in a veri unregener 
villag in a remark savag part of the country, and as, of course, 
she did not go to church, I dare say that gluttoni and drunken 
were the form of christma observ which most obtrud themselv 
on her notice. even cardin newman seem to have remark the same 
phenomenon in hi youth, though he satir it more delicately. 
"benef clergymen use to go to rest as usual on christmas-eve, 
and leav to ringers, or sometim to carollers, the observ which 
wa paid, _not without creatur comforts_, to the sacr night." 
now all that is changed. church of all confess vie with one 
anoth in the frequenc and hearti and picturesqu equip 
of their religi services. even the _daili telegraph_ preach 
christma sermons; and I veri much question whether the populac 
get more drunk at christma than at easter. but, though we may have 
learnt to celebr the festiv with rite more devout and less 
bibulous, we have not yet escap my jewish friend' reproach of 
gluttony. the christma dinner of the british home is still a thing 
imagin boggl at. the dread pleasantri of the aged--their 
sorri gibe about the doctor and the draught; hoari chestnut about 
littl boy who stood up to eat more--remain among the most terribl 
memori of the christma dinner. and they were quit in keep 
with the dinner itself. I say noth against the turkey, which (a 
my medic friend well know) wa found, by practic experi in 
the case of alexi st. martin, to be the most easili digest of all 
anim foods, except venison; but surely, as a nation, we eat quit 
beef enough in the cours of the year without make christma an 
annual orgi of carnivor excess. I protest that the veri sight of 
the butchers' shop at thi season of the year is enough to upset 
a delic balanc organization. rightli said the shah, in that 
immort diari which he kept dure hi visit to england in 1873--"meat 
is good, but it should not be hung up in windows." macaulay use to 
say that thackeray, in hi famou descript of the clapham sect in 
"the newcomes," made one blunder--h repres them as dissenters, 
whereas, in fact, they were rather dog church-people. the onli 
except to the rule wa a baptist lady, who, live on clapham 
common, testifi against the superstit of the establish church 
by eat roast veal and apple-pi on christmas-day instead of more 
orthodox dainties. churchman though I am, I protest that I think the 
baptist ladi wa right: and I believ that the puritan were wiser than 
they knew when they denounc plum-pud and minc pie as invent 
of the evil one. yet the love of these vindict viand is one of the 
root-instinct of our english nature. forty-eight year ago the british 
armi wa keep it christma in the crimea, amid all the horror and 
hardship of a peculiarli grim campaign. An english sister of mercy, 
who wa nurs under miss nightingal in the hospit at scutari, 
thu describ the melancholi festivity: "the 'roast beef of old 
england' wa out of the question, but with the aid of a good deal of 
imagination, it seem possibl at least to secur the plum pudding. 
I think I might with safeti affirm that as the doctor left the ward 
everi man drew from under hi pillow a small portion of flour and fat, 
with an egg and some plums, and began to concoct a christma pudding. 
I assist mani to make the pudding, whom noth short of a miracl 
would enabl to eat it; still they must have the thing. for some 
day previous I had been ask for piec of linen, which, without 
dream of the use to which they were to be applied, I supplied. thu 
were the pud cloth provided." 

It can scarc be conceiv that these unhappi soldiers, madden by 
wound and fever or perish by frost-bit and gangrene, can have had 
much physic enjoy in christma pud made of materi which 
had been conceal under their sick pillows; in such circumst 
the valu of the pud is spiritu and symbolic. A few christmas 
ago I wa assist (in the liter sense) at a dinner for starv 
"dockers." A more broken, jaded, and deject crew it would be 
difficult to picture. they had scarc enough energi to eat and drink, 
but lumber slowli through their meal of meat-pi and coffe without 
a smile and almost without a word. all at onc an unrehears featur 
wa introduc into the rather cheerless programme, and a huge plum 
pudding, wreath with holli and flame blue with burnt brandy, wa 
born into the hall. A deep gasp of joy burst from the assembl 
guests, and the whole compani rose as one man and greet the joyou 
vision with "auld lang syne." the eat wa yet to come, so the 
exhilar wa pure moral. the pud spoke at onc to memori and 
to hope. 

there are other adjunct of christma which must by no mean be 
overlooked--christma presents, for instance, and christma amusements. 
As to christma presents, I regard them as definit mean of grace. 
for weeks--sometim months--befor christma return we concentr 
our thought on our friend instead of ourselves. We reflect on 
people' like and dislikes, habits, tastes, and occupations. We tax 
our ingenu to find gift suitabl for the recipients, and buy 
object which we think frankli hideou in the hope of gratifi our 
unsophist friends. happili the age of ormolu and malachit ha 
passed. We no longer buy blotting-book made unus by littl knob 
of enamel on the cover; nor gilt-pap weight which cost a hundr 
time more than the overweight letter of a lifetim could amount 
to. christma gift of thi type belong to an unreturn past, and, 
as walter pater said of the wedding-pres which he wa expect to 
admire, "veri rich, veri handsome, veri expensive, i'm sure--but they 
mustn't make ani more of them." nor will they. the standard of popular 
tast in the matter of nick-nack ha improv as conspicu as in 
that of furniture; and the fanci shops, when spread for the christma 
market, display a realli larg choic of present which one can buy 
without sacrif self-respect, and give without the appear of 
insult. 

but christma presents, even at a moder rate of charge, may, if one 
ha a larg circl of acquaintance, carri one over the hedge, as mr. 
brook said; and here is the scope and function of the christma card. 
few peopl have bought more christma card in a lifetim than the 
present writer; and, out of a vast experience, he would offer one word 
of friendli counsel to the card-sender. Do not accumul the card 
which you receiv thi christma and distribut them among your friend 
next christmas, for, if you do, as sure as fate you will one day return 
a card to the sender; and old friendship and profit connexion 
have been sever by such miscarriages. 

Of christma amus I can say little. My notion of them is chiefli 
deriv from "happi thoughts," where byng suggest some "christmassi 
sort of thing" to amus hi guests, and fail to gratifi even hi 
half-aunt. My infanc wa spent in the country, remot from danc and 
theatres, pantomim and panoramas. "the classic wall of old drury" 
never welcom me on box night. certainli a christma tree and a 
stock full of present appeal to that acquisit instinct which 
is fulli as strong in infanc as in old age; but, though exceedingli 
young in my time, I never wa young enough to be amus by a snow-man 
or danger excit by blind man' buff. look back, like 
tennyson' "many-wint crow," on these christmas of infancy, I 
have sometim ask myself whether I lost much by my aloof from 
the normal merriment of youth. mr. anstey guthri know the secret 
heart of english boyhood more accur than most of us, and when I 
read hi descript of a christma parti I am inclin to be thank 
that my lot wa cast a good mani mile beyond the cab-radius. 

"whi couldn't you come to our parti on twelfth-night? We had great 
larks. I wish you'd been there." 

"I had to go to young skidmore' instead," said a pale, 
spiteful-look boy with fair hair, care part in the middle. 
"it wa like hi cheek to ask me, but I thought i'd go, you know, just 
to see what it wa like." 

"what wa it like?" ask one or two near him, languidly. 

"oh, aw slow! they'v a poki littl hous in brompton somewhere, 
and there wa no dancing, onli boshi game and a conjuror, without ani 
presents. and, oh! I say, at supper there wa a big cake on the table, 
and no one wa allow to cut it, becaus it wa hired. they'r so 
poor, you know. skidmore' pater is onli a clerk, and you should see 
hi sisters!" 

all my sympathi are with skidmore, and I think that the fair-hair 
boy wa an unmitig beast, and cad, and snob. but there is an aw 
verisimilitud about "boshi game and a conjuror," and I bless the fate 
which allow me to grow up in ignor of christma parties. 




xxxvii 

new year' day 


On the 1st of januari 1882, matthew arnold wrote to hi sister: "I 
think the begin of a new year veri animating--it is so visibl an 
occas for break off bad habit and carri into effect good 
resolutions." thi wa splendid in a man who had just enter hi 
sixtieth year, and we all should like to share the sentiment; but it 
is not alway easi to feel "animated," even by the most signific 
anniversaries. sometim they onli depress; and the effect which they 
produc depend so veri larg on the physic condit in which 
they find us. suppose, for instance, that one is a fox-hunter, in the 
prime of life and the pride of health, with a good string of hors 
which have been eat their head off dure a prolong frost. As 
one wake on new year' morning, one hear a delici drip from 
the roof, and one' servant, come in with tea and letters, announc 
a rapid thaw. then "the begin of a new year" is "animating" 
enough; and, while we wash and shave, we pledg ourselves, like 
matthew arnold, to "break off bad habit and carri into effect good 
resolutions." We rememb with shame that we miss three capit days' 
hunt last novemb becaus we let our friend seduc us to their 
shooting-parties; and we resolv thi year to make up for lost time, to 
redeem wast opportunities, and not willingli to lose a day between 
thi and christmas. such resolut are truli "animating"; but we 
cannot all be young or healthi or fox-hunters, and then the anniversari 
take a differ colour. perhap one is cower over one' 
study-fire, with "an air of romanc struggl through the commonplac 
effect of a swell face" (like miss hucklebuckl in "the owlet"), 
or mumbl the minc remain of our christma turkey as pain 
as father diggori in "ivanhoe," who wa "so sever afflict by 
toothach that he could onli eat on one side of hi face." not for us, 
in such circumstances, are "animating" vision of wide pastures, and 
negoti fences, and too-fresh hunter pull one' arm off, and 
the chime of the "dappl darl down the roar blast." rather 
doe our new year' fanci lightli turn to thought of dentistri and 
doctoring. We ask ourselv whether the time ha not come when art must 
replac what natur ha withdrawn; and, if we form a resolution, it is 
noth more heroic than that we will henceforward wear golosh in 
damp weather and a quilt overcoat in frost. 

but, it may be urged, matthew arnold wa not a fox-hunt (at least not 
after hi oxford days), and yet he contriv to feel "animated" by new 
year' day. In hi case anim wa connect with books. 

"I am glad," he wrote, "to find that in the past year I have at least 
accomplish more than usual in the way of read the book which at 
the begin of the year I put down to be read. I alway do this, and 
I do not expect to read all I put down, but sometim I fall much too 
short of what I proposed, and thi year thing have been a good deal 
better. the import of reading, not slight stuff to get through the 
time but the best that ha been written, forc itself upon me more 
and more everi year I live. It is live in good company, the best 
company, and peopl are gener quit keen enough, or too keen, about 
do that; yet they will not do it in the simplest and most innoc 
manner by reading. If I live to be eighty, I shall probabl be the onli 
person left in england who read anyth but newspap and scientif 
publications." 

We have not quit come to that yet, but we are not far off it, and I 
should fear that the number of even educ peopl who occupi new 
year' day in lay down a cours of seriou studi for the next twelv 
month is lament small. but hunt and health and book are not 
the onli topic for new year' meditation. there is also money, which 
not seldom obtrud itself with a disagre urgency. We cast our eye 
over that littl parchment-bound volum which onli "fortune' favour 
sons, not we" can regard with ani complacency; and we observe, not for 
the first time, that we have been spend a good deal more than we 
ought to spend, and are not far from the peril edg of an overdrawn 
account. thi is "animating" indeed, but onli as a sudden stab of 
neuralgia is animating; and we immedi begin to consid method of 
relief. but where are our retrench to begin? that is alway the 
difficulty. I rememb that after the cattl plagu of 1865, by which 
he had been a princip sufferer, the first lord tollemach wa veri 
full of fiscal reforms. "I ought to get rid of half my servants; but 
they are excel people, and it would be veri wrong to caus them 
inconvenience. horses, too--i realli have no right to keep a stud. 
but noth would ever induc me to sell a horse, and it seem rather 
heartless to kill old friends. then, again, about houses--i ought 
to leav st. james' square, and take a hous in brompton. but the 
brompton hous are so small that they realli would not accommod 
my family, and it would not be right to turn the boy into lodgings." 
and so on and so forth, with a magnific list of contempl 
reforms, which went unfulfil till thing had right themselv 
and retrench wa no longer necessary. In the same spirit, though 
on a veri differ scale, the inhabit of stuccovia contempl 
the financi futur which lie ahead of new year' day. We must 
economize--that is plain enough. but how are we to begin? 

I must have a new frock-coat veri soon, and shall want at least three 
tweed suit befor the autumn. economi bid me desert savil row and 
tri aaronson in new oxford street. "budge," say the fiend. "budg 
not," repli self-respect. aaronson is remark for a fit "that 
never wa on sea or land," and, though hi garment are undeni 
cheap, they are also nasty, and are worn out befor they are paid 
for. Or perhap our conscienc prick us most sever in the matter 
of wine. We will buy no more pommeri and greno at 98s. a dozen, but 
will slake our modest thirst with a dri silleri at 31s. but, after 
all, health is the first consider in life, and, unfortunately, 
these cheap wine never agre with us. the doctor hold them directli 
respons for our last attack of eczema or neuritis, and say 
impressively, "drink good wine, or none at all--bad wine is poison 
to you." _drink none at all._ that is veri "animating," but somehow 
our enfeebl will is unequ to the requir resolve; we hold 
spirit-drink in detestation; and so, after all, we are driven back 
to our pommery. "surely," as lamb said, "there must be some other world 
in which our unconquer purpose" of retrench shall be realized. 

travel, again. mani peopl spend too much in travel. can we curtail 
in that direction? for my own part, I am a londoner, and am content 
with life as it is afford by thi wonder world miscal a city. 
but the famili ha claims. some of them suffer from "liver," and whoso 
know what it is to dwell with liverish patient will not lightli run 
the risk of keep them from carlsbad. other can onli breath on 
high alps, and others, again, requir the sunshin of the riviera or 
the warmth of the italian lakes. So all the way of retrench seem 
barred. cloth and wine and travel must cost as much as they cost 
last year, and the onli way of escap seem to lie in the step of 
the princ consort, who, when parliament reduc hi incom from the 
propos fifti thousand a year to thirty, patient observ that he 
should have to give less in subscriptions. 

To the spendthrift, or even to the more modest practition who 
mere live up to hi income, the new year, as we have seen, offer 
few opportun for resolut of reform; but I fanci that the 
skinflint, and hi cousin the screw, find it full of suggest 
possibilities. I rememb a gentleman of "gripe and penuri 
tendencies" (the phrase is mr. gladstone's) tell me when I wa a 
schoolboy that he had resolv to spend noth with hi tailor in 
the year then dawning. He announc it with the air befit a great 
self-surrender, but I thought, as I look at hi clothes, that he wa 
realli onli continu the well-establish practic of a lifetime. the 
screw, of course, is of no one place or age; and here is an excel 
citat from the diari of a screw--mr. thoma turner--who flourish 
in sussex in the eighteenth century: "thi be new year' day, myself 
and wife at church in the morning. collection. My wife gave 6d. but, 
they not ask me, I gave nothing. oh! may we increas in faith and 
good works, and maintain the good intent we have thi day taken 
up." those who have tri it say that hoard is the purest of human 
pleasures; and I dare say that by the end of the year good mr. turner' 
banking-book wa a phantom of delight. 

all these reflections, and other like unto them, came whirl on 
my mind thi new year' eve; and, just as I wa begin to reduc 
them to form and figure, the shrill ting-t of the church-bel 
pierc the silenc of the night. _watch-night._ those who are not the 
friend of the english church denounc her as hidebound, immovable, 
and unreceptive. here is the--or an--answ to the charge. she ha 
borrowed, originally, from the swedenborgian and more immedi 
from the wesleyans, a religi observ which, though unrecogn 
in prayer-book or kalendar, now divid with the harvest festiv the 
honour of be the most popular servic in the church of england. 

"among the prompt of what may be called, in the truest sens of 
the term, natur religion, none sure is more instruct than that 
which lead men to observ with peculiar solemn the entranc upon 
a new year of life. It is, if noth else, the make a step in the 
dark. It is the entranc upon a new epoch in existence, of which the 
manifold "chang and chances" prevent our forecast the issue. true, 
the line of demarc is pure arbitrary; yet there are few, even of 
the most thoughtless, who can set foot across the line which separ 
one year from anoth without feel in some degre the signific 
of the act. It would seem that thi pass season of thought 
wa one of those opportun which no form of religion could afford 
to miss. and yet, for a long time, that which may perhap without 
offenc be term ecclesiastic sternli refus to recogn thi 
occasion. the line wa rigidli drawn between the civil new year and the 
church' new year. We were told that advent wa the begin of our 
sacr year, and that the even befor the first sunday in advent wa 
the time for those seriou thought and good resolut which rightli 
accompani a new year." 

yes-so we were taught; and there wa a great deal to be said, 
ecclesiastically, for the teaching. only, unfortunately, no one 
believ it. We went to bed quit unmov on saturday evening, decemb 
1, 1906. No era seem to have close for us, no era to have opened: 
there wa noth to remember, noth to anticipate; noth to 
repent and noth to resolve. It is otherwis to-night.[11] the 
"church-go bell" doe not tingl in vain. old men and maidens, young 
men and children are crowd in. I involv myself in an ulster and a 
comforter, and join the pilgrim-throng. 

[11] decemb 31, 1906. 




xxxviii 

pet 


My suggest friend ha taken to postcards, and hi style, never 
diffuse, ha becom as curt as that of mr. alfr jingle. "whi not 
pets?" he writes; and the suggest give pause. 

when mrs. topham-sawy accept the invit to the littl dinner at 
timmins's, she conclud her letter to rosa timmins: "with a hundr 
kiss to your dear littl _pet_." she said _pet_, we are told, 
"becaus she did not know whether rosa' child wa a girl or a boy; and 
mrs. timmin wa veri much pleas with the kind and graciou natur of 
the repli to her invitation." My mind misgav me that my friend might 
be use the word _pet_ in the same sens as mrs. topham-sawyer, and 
invit me to a discuss of the crêche or the nursery. As my view 
of childhood are form on those of herod and solomon, I hasten to 
declin so unsuit a task, whereupon my friend, for all reply, sent 
me the follow excerpt from an even paper:-- 

"the westminst cat exhibition, which will be held in the royal 
horticultur society' hall, vincent square, westminster, on januari 
10 and 11, will afford an opportun to all who love the domest cat 
to aid in improv it lot through the agenc of our dumb friends' 
league, which it is desir to benefit, not onli by their presenc 
on the occasion, but by contribut suitabl specimen to the 'gift 
class' which will form part of the show, and be offer for sale in aid 
of the leagu dure the time the exhibit is open. children will 
be invited, for the first time, to enter into the competit with 
their pet for suitabl prizes, and thus, it is hoped, increas their 
interest in and affect for domest pets." 

here I felt myself on more familiar ground. for I, too, have been 
young. I have traffick in squirrel and guinea-pigs, have invest 
my all in an angora rabbit, and have undergon disciplin for bring 
a dormous into school. these are, indeed, among the childish thing 
which I put away when I becam a fifth form boy; but their memori 
is sweet--sweeter, indeed, than wa their actual presence. for the 
cat, with which my friend seem chiefli to concern himself, I have 
never felt, or even professed, ani warm regard. I leav her to dick 
whittington and shakespeare, who did so much to popular her; to gray 
and matthew arnold and "c. S. c.," who have drawn her more sinist 
traits. gray remarks, with refer to "the pensiv selima" and her 
hopeless struggl in the tub of goldfish, that "a favourit ha no 
friend." archbishop benson render the line 

"delicia dominæ cetera turba fugit." 

I join the unfriendli throng, and pass to other themes. 

the pet-keep instinct, strong in infanc but suppress by the iron 
tradit of the public school, not seldom reassert itself in the 
freedom of later life. "the pet of history" would be a worthi theme 
for a roman lectur at oxford; and, if the purview were expand 
so as to includ the pet of literature, it would be a fit subject 
for the brilliant pen of mr. freder harrison. We might conveni 
adopt a wordsworthian classification, such as "pet belong to the 
period of childhood," "juvenil pets," "pet and the affections," 
"pet of the fancy," and "pet of the imagination." In the last-nam 
class a promin place would be assign to heavenli una' milk-whit 
lamb and to mary' snowy-fleec follower. "pet of the fancy" has, I 
must confess, someth of a pugilist sound, but it might fairli be 
held to includ the tame eagl which loui napoleon, when resid in 
carlton gardens, use to practis in the basement for the part which it 
wa to play in hi descent on boulogne. under "pet and the affections" 
we should recal chaucer' "prioresse"-- 

"of smale hound hadd sche, that sche fedd 
with rostud fleissh, and mylk, and wastel bredde." 

the pet of tradit would begin with st. john' tame partridge, and 
would includ an account of st. franci preach to the birds. the 
pet of histori would no doubt involv some refer to the bruce' 
spider and sir isaac newton' diamond and the duc d'enghien' spaniel; 
and, if so belittl a titl as "pet" may be appli to so majest an 
anim as the horse, we should trace a long line of equin celebr 
from bucephalu and sorrel to marengo and copenhagen. the pet of 
literatur are, of course, a boundless host--charg like white 
surrey, and courser like roland; hound like keeldar and falcon like 
cheviot--to say noth of mrs. merdle' parrot, or miss tox' canary, 
or mr. kipling' appal monkey, who murder hi owner' wife. 

wordsworth alon is respons for a whole menageri of pets--for a 
white doe, for a greyhound call dart, for "prince," "swallow," and 
"littl music," let alon the anonym dog who wa lost with hi 
master on helvellyn. the gentl cowper had hi disgust hare and 
hi murder spaniel beau. byron' onli friend wa a newfoundland dog 
call boatswain. the hors of fiction are a splendid stud. ruksh 
lead the process in poetry, and rosinant in prose. A true lover 
of scott can enumer twenti differ horses, of strongli mark 
individu and appropri names. whoso know not widderin and hi 
gallop from the bushrang ha yet to read one of the most thrill 
scene in fiction; and I think that to thi imaginari stud may be 
fairli ad the arabian mare which lord beaconsfield thought he 
had ridden for thirti mile across countri in the strongly-enclos 
neighbourhood of southend. 

among the pet of real life an honour place belong to sir walter 
scott' deerhounds--wer not their name bran and maida?--and to lord 
shaftesbury' donkey coster. love in life and honour in death were 
matthew arnold' dachshund geist and max, hi retriev rover, hi 
cat atossa, and, abov all, hi canari matthias, commemor in one 
of the most beauti of elegiac poems. with bismarck--not, one would 
have thought, a natur lover of pets--i histor associ a 
boarhound, or "great dane." lord beaconsfield characterist love 
a peacock. the even of mr. gladstone' day wa cheer by the 
companionship of a small black pomeranian. sir henri hawkin wa not 
better known to the crimin class than hi fox-terri jack; and all 
who pass ladi burdett-coutts' hous saw hang in the dining-room 
window a china cockatoo-th imag or simulacrum of a depart bird 
which live to a prodigi age and use to ask the most inconveni 
questions. 

the greatest patro of pet in real life wa queen victoria, and her 
book have secur for these favourit a perman place. noble, the 
collie, will be rememb as long as "leav from the journal of our 
life in the highlands" is read; and I can myself recal the excit 
which flutter the highest circl when a black terrier, called, I 
think, sharp, kill a rat which had climb up the ivi into the window 
of the queen' sitting-room at windsor. 

there are certain pets, or famili of pets, which stand on their own 
tradit digniti rather than on associ with individuals. all 
cheshir know the mastiff of lyme, tall as donkey and peaceabl as 
sheep. the clumber spaniel and the gordon setter are at least as 
famou as the duke who own them. perhap the most fascin pet in 
the canin world is associ with the great victori of blenheim; and 
the willoughbi pug preserv from oblivion a name which ha been merg 
in the earldom of ancaster. 

In the day of my youth one wa constantli hearing--and especi in 
the whiggish circl where I wa reared--two name which may easili 
puzzl posterior critics. these were "bear ellis" and "poodl byng." 
they were pre-emin unsentiment persons. "bear" elli (1781-1863) 
wa so call becaus he wa chairman of the hudson' bay company, and 
"poodle" byng (1784-1871) becaus hi hair, while yet he boast such 
an appendage, had been crispli curled. but the dryasdust of the future, 
ponder over the social and polit record of queen victoria' 
earlier reign, will undoubtedli connect these prefix with pet-keep 
tendencies, and will prais the human influenc of an animal-lov 
court which induc harden men of the world to join the rank of "our 
dumb friends' league." 




xxxix 

purpl and fine linen 


dean _versus_ bishop--it is an antinomi as old as the histori of 
cathedr institutions. the dean, with a good hous and a thousand 
a year, ha alway murmur against the bishop, with a better hous 
and five time that income; and, as he is gener master of hi 
cathedral, he ha befor now contriv to make hi murmur sensibl 
as well as audible. Of late year these spiritu strife (which 
beauti link the post-reform to the pre-reform church) 
have been vote disedifying, and, if they continu to exist, they 
oper surreptiti and out of public view. but, though dean have 
ceas from clamouring, they retain their right to criticize, and the 
dean of norwich ha just been exercis that right with a good deal of 
vivacity. I cull the follow extract from a secular newspaper:-- 

simpl life for bishop 

"dean lefroy at a meet of the gener diocesan committe to make 
arrang for the church congress at great yarmouth in octob ... 
comment on the inordin expens of found bishoprics, and said 
that episcopaci in canterburi provinc cost £142,000 per annum, and 
in york £44,000. He believ that £2000 a year and a resid would 
be welcom to most bishops. the upkeep of larg palac swallow 
up the bishops' incomes. preserv the palaces, but give bishop the 
opportun of live more simply. the surplu might go to poor and 
starv clergy." 

one can pictur the temper gratitud with which the bishops, and the 
ladi of the episcop household, and the domest chaplains--thos 
"amiabl young gentlemen who make themselv agreeabl in the 
drawing-room of the mitre"--must regard thi oblig invit 
to "live more simply." there is a good deal of human natur even in 
apostol bosoms, and a man who ha enjoy an offici incom of 
£5000 a year doe not as a rule regard with enthusiasm a reduct to 
£2000. the bishop in "littl dorrit," when the guest at mr. merdle' 
banquet were extol their host' opulence, "tri to look as if 
he wa rather poor himself"; and hi successor at the present day 
take great pain to assur the public that they are not overpaid. 
the _locu classicus_ on the subject of episcop incom is to be 
found in the rev. hubert handley' book call "the fatal opul 
of bishops," and wa origin suppli by the artless candour of 
the present bishop of london, who in the year 1893 publish in the 
_oxford hous chronicle_ a statist statement by an unnam bishop. 
thi prelat had onli a beggarli incom of £4200, and must therefor 
be the occup of one of those compar cheap and humbl see 
which the exig of the church have late call into being. out 
of thi pittanc he had to pay £1950 for a removal, furniture, and 
repair to the episcop residence. this, to the lay mind, seem a good 
deal. hospit he set down as cost £2000 a year; but somehow one 
feel as if one could give luncheon to the countri clergy, and satisfi 
even the crave appetit of ordinands, at a less cost. "stables," 
say the good bishop, "are almost a necessity, and in some respect 
a saving;" but here the haughti disregard of detail make critic 
difficult. "robes, £100." thi item is plain enough and absurd enough. 
the pervert ingenu of fallen man ha never devis a costum 
more hideou or less express than the episcop "magpie"; and I am 
confid that mrs. bishop' maid could have stitch togeth the 
necessari amount of lawn and black satin at a less cost than £100. but 
thi exactli illustr the plan on which these episcop incom are 
alway defend by their apologists. We are told precis what the 
bishop expend on each item of charge. but we are not told, and are 
quit unabl to divine, whi each of those item should cost so much, 
or whi some of them should ever be incurred. the bishop of london (then 
mr. winnington-ingram) thu sum up the statement of hi episcop 
friend in the background: "it amount to this--a bishop' incom is 
a trust-fund for the dioces which head ministers. It would make no 
differ to him person if three-quart of it were taken away, 
so long as three-quart of hi liabil were taken away too; and 
it is quit arguabl that thi would be a better arrangement." 

certainli it is "quit arguable"; but is it equal certain that the 
chang "would make no differ to the bishop personally"? I doubt it. 
marri men, men with larg famili and plenti of servants, natur 
prefer larg hous to small, provid that there is an incom to 
maintain them. men who enjoy the comfort and pretti of life 
prefer an incom which enabl them to repair and furnish and beautifi 
their hous to an incom which involv fade wallpap and batter 
paint. men of hospit instinct are happier in a system which 
enabl them to spend £2000 a year on entertain than they would be 
if they were compel to think twice of the butcher' bill and thrice 
of the wine-merchant's. men who like horses--and few englishmen do 
not--natur inclin to regard "stabl as a necessity," and even 
as "in some respects"--what respects?--"a saving." If their incom 
were reduc to the figur suggest by dean lefroy, they would find 
themselv under the bitter constraint (a milton call it) of do 
without a "necessity," and must even forgo an outlay which is "in some 
respect a saving." 

again, the anonym bishop return hi outlay in subscript at a 
fraction over £400 a year. I do not presum to say whether thi is much 
or littl out of an incom of £4000. At ani rate it is a tithe, and 
that is a respect proportion. but, suppos that our bishop is a 
man of gener disposition, who love to reliev distress and feel 
impel to give a lift to everi good caus which ask hi aid, he is 
of necess a happier man while he draw £4000 a year than he would be 
if cut down by reform dean to £2000. 

I venture, then, with immens defer to that admir divin who 
is now bishop of london, to dissent emphat from hi judgment, 
record in 1895, that the diminut of episcop incomes, if 
accompani by a correspond diminut of episcop charges, would 
"make no differ to the bishop personally." I conceiv that it would 
make a great deal of difference, and that, though spiritu salutary, 
it would be, as regard tempor concerns, one of those experi 
which one would rather tri on one' neighbour than on oneself. 

An ingeni clergyman who share dean lefroy' and mr. handley' view 
on episcop incomes, and had an inconveni love of statistics, 
made a studi at the probat offic of the personalti left by english 
bishop who die between 1855 and 1885. the averag wa £54,000, and 
the total personalti someth more than two million sterling. "thi 
wa exclus of ani real estat they may have possessed, and exclus 
of ani sum invest in polici of life-assur or otherwis settl 
for the benefit of their families." myself no lover of statist or 
of the extraordinarili ill-ventil will-room at somerset house, 
I am unabl to say how far the episcop accumul of the last 
twenti year may have affect the total and the average. It is onli 
fair to rememb that sever of the bishop who die between 1855 and 
1885 date from the happi day befor the ecclesiast commiss 
curtail episcop incomes, and may have had ten, or fifteen, or 
twenti thousand a year. On the other hand, it is to be born in mind 
that, sinc sir william harcourt' budget, the habit of "dodg the 
death-duties" ha enorm increased, and ha made it difficult to 
know what a testator, episcop or other, realli possessed. but it 
is scarc possibl to doubt that, if the public were permit to 
examin all the episcop pass-books, we should find that, in spite 
of the exact of upholster and furniture-removers, butcher and 
bakers, robe-mak and horse-dealers, the pecuniari lot of an english 
bishop is, to borrow a phrase of miss edgeworth's, "vastli put-up- 
with." 

just after mr. bright had been admit to the cabinet, and when the 
more timid and more plausibl member of hi parti hope that he 
would begin to curb hi adventur tongue, he attend a banquet 
of the fishmongers' compani at which the archbishop and bishop 
were entertained. the archbishop of york (dr. thomson) said in an 
after-dinn speech that the bishop were the most liber element 
in the hous of lords, see that they were the onli peer creat 
for life. thi statement mr. bright, speak later in the evening, 
character as an excess of hilarity; "though," he added, "it is 
possibl that, with a bishop' income, I might have been as merri 
as ani of them, with an inexhaust sourc of rejoic in the 
generosity, if not in the credulity, of my countrymen." To thi 
outrag salli the assembl prelat could, of course, onli repli 
by look as dignifi (and as poor) as they could; and no doubt the 
gener opinion of the episcop bench is that they are an overwork 
and ill-remuner set of men. 

yet there have been apostles, and successor of the apostles, who 
work quit as hard and were paid consider less, and yet succeed 
in win and retain the affection rever of their own and of 
succeed generations. bishop wilson of sodor and man lived, we are 
told, on an incom which "did not exceed £300 a year." By far the most 
dignifi ecclesiast with whom I wa ever brought in contact--a true 
"princ of the church" if ever there wa one--wa cardin manning, and 
hi offici incom wa bound by a figur which even the reform 
spirit of dean lefroy would reject as miser insufficient. "it is 
pleasant," wrote sydney smith, "to loll and roll and accumulate--to 
be a purple-and-fine-linen man, and to be call by some of those 
nicknam which frail and ephemer be are so fond of heap upon 
each other,--but the best thing of all is to live like honest men, and 
to add someth to the caus of liberality, justice, and truth." It 
is no longer easi for a bishop to "loll and roll"--th bicycl and the 
motor-car are enemi to tranquil ease--and, if dean lefroy' precept 
and bishop gore' exampl are heeded, he will find it equal difficult 
to "accumulate." 




XL 

prelaci and palac 


that delici prelat whom I have alreadi quoted, but whose name 
and see are unkindli withheld from us by the bishop of london, thu 
justifi hi expenditur on hospitality: "_palace_, I am told, is from 
_palatium_, 'the open house,' and there is almost daili entertain 
of clergi and laiti from a distance." I will not presum to question 
the episcop etymology; for, whether it be sound or unsound, the 
practic result is equal good. We have apostol author for 
hold that bishop should be given to hospitality, and it is 
satisfactori to know that the travel-worn clergi and laiti of the 
anonym dioces are not sent empti away. but would not the boil 
beef and rice pud be equal accept and equal sustain 
if eaten in some apart less majest than the banqueting-hal of 
a palace? would not the ecclesiast commission be do a good 
stroke of busi for the church if they sold everi episcop palac 
in england and provid the evict bishop with moderate-s and 
commodi houses? 

these are question which often present themselv to the lay mind, 
and the answer usual return to them involv some veri circuit 
reasoning. the bishops, say their henchmen, must have larg incom 
becaus they have to live in palaces; and they must live in palaces--i 
hardli know why, but appar becaus they have larg incomes. such 
reason doe not alway convinc the reformer' mind, though it is 
repeat in each succeed gener with appar confid in 
it validity. after all, there is noth veri revolutionari in the 
suggest that episcop palac should be, in the strictest sens 
of the word, confiscated. sixty-four year ago dr. hook, who wa not 
exactli an iconoclast, wrote thu to hi friend samuel wilberforce: 
"I realli do not see how the church can fairli ask the state to give 
it money for the purpos of give a church education, when the money 
is to be suppli by dissent and infidel and all class of the 
people, who, accord to the principl of the constitution, have a 
right to control the expenditure. the state can only, if consistent, 
give an infidel education; it cannot employ public money to give 
a church education, becaus of the dissenters; nor a protest 
education, becaus of the papists; and have not jews, turks, and 
infidel as much a right as heret to demand that the educ 
should not be christian?" thi strike me as veri wholesom doctrine, 
and, though enounc in 1843, necessari for these times. and, when he 
turn to way and means, dr. hook is equal explicit: "if we are to 
educ the peopl in church principles, the educ must be out of 
church funds. We want not proud lords, haughti spiritu peers, to be 
our bishops. offer four thousand out of their five thousand a year for 
the educ of the people. let farnham castl and winchest hous 
and ripon palac be sold, and we shall have fund to establish other 
bishoprics.... you see I am almost a radical, for I do not see whi our 
bishop should not becom as poor as ambros or augustine, that they 
may make the peopl realli rich." It is not surpris that samuel 
wilberforce, who had alreadi climb up sever rung of the ladder of 
promotion, and as he himself tell us, "had often talked" of further 
elevation, met dr. hook' suggest with solemn repudiation. "I _do_ 
think that we want spiritu peers." "I see no reason whi the bishops' 
palac should be sold, which would not appli equal to the hall of 
our squir and the palac of our princes." "to impoverish our bishop 
and sell their palac would onli be the hopeless career of revolution." 

the real reason for sell the episcop palac is that, in plain 
terms, they are too big and too costli for their present uses. they 
afford a plausibl excus for pay the bishop more highli than they 
ought to be paid; and yet the bishop turn round and say that even the 
comfort incom which the ecclesiast commiss ha assign 
them are unequ to the burden of maintain the palaces. the late 
bishop thorold, who wa both a wealthi and a liber man, thu bemoan 
hi hard fate in have to live at farnham castle: "it will give some 
idea of what the furnish of thi hous from top to bottom meant if 
I mention that the stairs, with the felt beneath, took just a mile and 
100 yard of carpet, with 260 brass stair-rods; and that, independ 
of the carpet in the great hall, the carpet use elsewher absorb 
1414 yards--a good deal over three-quart of a mile. As to the entir 
amount of roof, which in an old hous requir constant watching, 
independ of other part of the building, it is found to be, on 
measurement, 32,000 superfici feet, or one acr and one-fifth." what 
is true of farnham is true, _mutati mutandis_, of bishopthorp with 
it hundr rooms, and auckland castl with it park, and rose castl 
with it woodlands, and lambeth with it tower and guard-room and 
galleri and gardens. even the smaller palaces, such as the "moat 
grange" of wells, are not maintain for nothing. "mi incom goe in 
pelargoniums," growl bishop stubbs, as he survey the conservatori 
of cuddesdon. "it take ten chap to keep thi place in order," 
ejacul a younger prelat as he skip across hi tennis-ground. 

Of cours the root of the mischief is that these palac were built 
and enlarg in the day when each see had it own income, and when 
the incom of such see as durham and winchest ran to twenti or 
thirti thousand a year. the poor sees--and some were veri poor--had 
palac proport to their incomes, and veri unpalati they were. 
"but now," as berti stanhop said to the bishop of barchest at mrs. 
proudie' even party, "they'v cut them all down to pretti nearli 
the same figure," and such build as suitabl accommod the 
princ retinu of archbishop harcourt (who kept one valet on purpos 
to dress hi wigs) and bishop sumner (who never went from farnham 
castl to the parish church except in a coach-and-four) are "a world 
too wide for the shrunk shanks" of their present occupants. 

In the palac of eli there is a magnific gallery, which onc wa 
the scene of a memor entertainment. when bishop spark secur 
a residentiari canonri of eli for hi eldest son, the event wa so 
complet in the ordinari cours of thing that it pass without 
special notice. but, when he plant hi second son in a second 
canonry, he was, and rightly, so elat by the achiev that he 
entertain the whole counti of cambridg at a ball in hi gallery. but 
in those day eli wa worth £11,000 a year, and we are not like to 
see a similar festival. until recent year the archbishop of canterburi 
had a suburban retreat from the care of lambeth, at addington, near 
croydon, where one of the ugliest mansion in christendom stood in one 
of the prettiest parks. archbishop temple, who wa a genuin reformer, 
determin to get rid of thi second palac and take a modest hous 
near hi cathedral. when he ask the ecclesiast commission to 
sanction thi arrangement, they demurred. "do you think," they asked, 
"that your successor will wish to live at canterbury?" "no, _I don't_" 
repli the archbishop, with indescrib emphasis, "_and so i'm 
determin they shall_." 

If everi bishop who is saddl with an inconveni larg hous were 
in earnest about get rid of it, the ecclesiast commiss could 
soon help him out of hi difficulty. palac of no architectur or 
histor interest could be thrown into the market, and follow the 
fate of riseholme, onc the abod of the bishop of lincoln. those 
palac which are interest or beautiful, or in ani special sens 
heirloom of the church, could be convert into diocesan colleges, 
train colleges, home for invalid clergymen, or hous of rest for 
such as are overwork and broken down. By thi arrang the church 
would be no loser, and the bishops, accord to their own showing, 
would be greatli the gainers. £5000 a year, or even a beggarli four, 
will go a long way in a villa at edgbaston or a red-brick hous in 
kennington park; and, as the bishop will no longer have palac to 
maintain, they will no doubt gladli accept still further reduct at 
the hand of reform like dean lefroy. 

It would be a sad piti if these contempl reduct close the 
_palatium_ or "open house" against the hungri flock; but, if they onli 
check the more mundan procliv of prelacy, no harm will be done. 
one of the most spendidli hospit prelat who ever adorn the 
bench wa archbishop thomson of york, and thi is bishop wilberforce' 
comment on what he saw and heard under the archiepiscop roof: "dinner 
at archbishop of york's. A good mani bishops, both of england and 
ireland, and not one word said which _implied_ we were apostles." 
perhap it will be easier to keep that fact in remembrance, when to 
apostol success is ad the grace of apostol poverty. 




xli 

horror 


the subject is suggest to me by the notice-board outsid the court 
theatre. there I learn that "the campden wonder" ha run it course. A 
"horror" of the highest excel ha been on view for four weeks; and 
I, who might have revel in it, have made, _per viltate_, the great 
refusal. I leav the italic qualiti untranslated, becaus I am not 
quit sure of the english equival which would exactli suit my case. 
"vileness" is a littl crude. "cowardice" is ignominious. "poor of 
spirit "i an evangel virtue. "defici of enterprise" and "an 
impair nervou system" would, at the best, be paraphras rather than 
translations. On the whole, I think the nearest approxim to the 
fact of my case is to say that my refus to profit by mr. masefield' 
horror wa due to decadence. _fuimus._ there ha been a period when 
such a tale as the "campden wonder" would have attract me with an 
irresist fascin and grip me with a grasp of iron. but I am 
not the man I was; and I am begin to share the apprehens of the 
age ladi who told her doctor that she fear she wa break up, for 
she could no longer relish her murders. 

youth, and earli youth, is inde the golden age of horrors. To a 
well-constitut child battl and murder and sudden death appeal far 
more power than ani smooth tale of love. We snatch a fear joy 
from the lurid convers of servant and neighbours. We gaze, with 
a kind of panic-stricken rapture, at the stain on the floor which 
mark the place where old mr. yellowboy wa murder for hi money; 
and run veri fast, though with a backward gaze, past the tree on which 
young rantipol hang himself on be cut off with a shill by hi 
uncl mr. wormwood scrubbs. In some privileg famili the children 
are not left to depend on circumjac gossip, but are dogmat 
instruct in hereditari horrors. thi happi lot wa mine. My father' 
uncl had been murder by hi valet; and from a veri tender age I 
could have point out the hous where the murder took place--it went 
cheap for a good mani year afterwards,--and could have describ the 
murder strip himself nake befor he perform the horrid act, 
and the bath of blood in which the victim wa found, and the devic 
employ to creat an impress of suicid instead of murder. I could 
have repeat the magnific peror in which the murderer' 
advoc exhort the juri to spare hi client' life (and which, 
forti year later, wa boldli plagiar by mr. montagu william in 
defend dr. lamson). the murderer, benjamin franci courvoisi by 
name, long occupi a conspicu place in madam tussaud' admir 
collection. I can distinctli recal a kind of social emin among 
my schoolfellow which wa confer by the fact that I had thi 
relationship with the chamber of horrors; and I wa consciou of a 
pain descent when courvoisi laps out of date and wa boil 
down into mr. cobden or cardin wiseman or some other more recent 
celebrity. then, again, all literatur wa full of horrors; and, though 
we should have been depriv of jam at tea if we had been caught 
read a murder trial in the _daili telegraph_, we were encourag to 
drink our fill of shakespear and scott and dicken and other great 
master of the horrible. from De quincey we learn that murder may 
be regard as a fine art, and from an anonym poet we acquir the 
immort vers which narrat the latter end of mr. william weare. 
shakespeare, as hi french critic often remind us, reek of blood and 
slaughter; the word "murder" and it deriv occupi two column of 
mrs. cowden clarke' closely-print pages. scott' absolut masteri 
over hi art is nowher more strikingli exemplifi than in hi use of 
murder mechanisms. "the heart of midlothian" begins, continues, and 
end with murder. "rob roy" contain a murder-scen of lurid beauty. 
the murder attack on the bridegroom in "the bride of lammermoor" 
is a haunt horror. not all the dryasdust in england and germani 
combin will ever displac the tradit of ami robsart and the 
conceal trap-door. front-de-boeuf' die agoni is to thi hour 
a glimps of hell. greatest of the great in humour, dicken fell not 
far behind the greatest when he turn hi hand to horrors. one shed 
few tear for mr. tulkinghorn, and we consign jona chuzzlewit to the 
gallow without a pang. but is there in fiction a more thrill scene 
than the arrest of the murder on the moonlit tower-stair in "barnabi 
rudge," or the grim escap of sike from the vengeanc of the mob in 
"oliv twist"? for deliberate, minute, and elabor horror commend 
me to the scene at the limekiln on the marsh where pip await hi 
horribl fate at the hand of the crazi savag dolg orlick. 

but it wa not onli the great master of fiction who suppli us with 
our luxuri of horror. the pictur of the young man who had murder 
hi brother, hang on a gibbet in blackgrov wood, is paint with 
a gruesom fidel of detail which place mrs. sherwood high among 
literari artists; and the incid connect with the death of old 
prue would entitl mrs. beecher stow to claim kinship with zola. 

It is curiou to reflect that miss braddon, the most cheer and 
wholesome-mind of all live novelists, first won her fame by 
imagin the murder possibl of a well, and establish it 
by that unrival mystif which confound the murder and 
the murder in "henri dunbar." nor will the younger gener of 
authoress consent to be left behind in the race of horrors. In old 
day we were well satisfi if we duli work up to our predestin 
murder just befor the end of the third volume. to-day ladi ridley 
give us, in the first chapter of "A daughter of jael," one of the most 
delic and suggest piec of murder-writ which I, a confirm 
lover of the horrible, can call to mind. 

To a soul earli satur with literari horror the experi of life 
is a curiou translat of fanci into fact. incid which have 
hitherto appear visionari and imagin now take the charact 
of substanti reality. We discov that horror are not confin 
to book or to a picturesqu past, but are go on all round us; 
and the discoveri is fraught with an uneasi joy. when I recal the 
illus of my infanc and the fact which displac them, I feel 
that I fall miser below the ideal of childhood present in the 
famou "ode on the intim of immortality." My "daili travel 
further from the east" is mark by memori of dread deeds, and 
the "vision splendid" which attend me on my way is a vivid success 
of peculiarli startl murders. In the dawn of conscious these 
vision have "someth of celesti light" about them--they are 
spiritual, impalpable, ideal. At length the youth perceiv them die 
away, "and melt into the light of common day"--veri common day indeed, 
the day of the old bailey and the _polic news_. By a curiou chain 
of coincidences, I wa earli made acquaint with the histori of 
that unfriendli friend john tawell, who murder hi sweetheart with 
prussic acid, and wa the first crimin to be arrest by mean of 
the electr telegraph. heroic wa the defenc set up by sir fitzroy 
kelly, who tri to prove that an inordin love of eat apples, 
pip and all, account for the amount of prussic acid found in the 
victim' body. kelli live to be lord chief baron of the exchequer, but 
the profession nicknam of "apple-pip kelly" stuck to him to the end. 
I know the hous where tawel lived; I have sat under the apple-tre 
of which hi victim ate; and I have stood, the centr of a roar 
elect crowd, on the exact spot outsid the court-hous at aylesburi 
where he expiat hi crime. 

tawel belongs, if I may so say, to a pre-nat impression. but, 
as the 'sixti of the last centuri unrol their record, each page 
display it peculiar horror. In 1860 constanc kent cut her littl 
brother' throat, and buri him in the back-yard. mani a night have 
I lain quak in my bed, haunt by vision of sister arm with 
razors, and hurri grave in secret spots. not much more cheer wa 
the nocturn vision of thoma hopley, schoolmaster, of eastbourne, 
convict in 1860 of flog a half-wit pupil to death with a 
skipping-rope, and afterward cover the lacer hand with white 
kid gloves. I confess to a last distast for privat schools, 
found on thi reminiscence. "the floweri land" is a titl so prettili 
fanciful, so suffus with the glamour of the east, that one would 
scarc expect to connect it with piracy, murder, and a five-fold 
execution. yet that is what it meant for youth horror-mong in 
1864. In 1865 the plan which pleas my childish thought wa that 
pursu by dr. pritchard of glasgow, who, while he wa slowli poison 
hi wife and hi mother-in-law, kept a diari of their suffer and 
record their deliver from the burden of the flesh with piou 
unction. two year later a young ruffian, whose crime inspir mr. 
jame rhoad to write a passion poem, cut a child into segments, 
and record in hi journal--"saturday, august 24, 1867: kill a young 
girl; it wa fine and hot." 

one might linger long in these path of dalliance, but space forbids; 
and memori clear nine year at a bound. most vivid, most fascinating, 
most human, if such an epithet be permit in such a context, wa the 
"balham mystery" of 1876. still I can feel the cob bolt with me 
across toot common; still I lave my stiff in a hot bath, and 
tell the butler that it will do for a cold bath to-morrow; still I 
plung my carving-knif into the loin of lamb, and fill up the chink 
with that spinach and those eggs; still I quench my thirst with that 
burgundy, of _which no drop remain in the decanter_; and still I 
wake up in the middl of the night to find myself die in tortur by 
antimoni poisoning. 

but we have sup full on horrors. good night, and pleasant dreams. 




xlii 

social chang 


I have been invit to make some comment on recent chang in society, 
and I obey the call, though not without misgiving. "society" in it 
modern extens is so wide a subject that probabl no one can survey 
more than a limit portion of it area; and, if one gener 
too freeli from one' own experience, one is like to provok the 
contradict of critic who, survey other portions, have been 
impress by different, and perhap contrary, phenomena. all such 
contradict I discount in advance. after all, one can onli describ 
what one ha seen, and my equip for the task entrust to me 
consist of noth more than a habit of observ and a retent 
memory. 

I wa brought up in that "sacr circl of the great-grandmotherhood" 
of which mr. beresford-hop made such excel fun in "strictli tie 
up." As mr. squeer consid himself the "right shop for morals," so 
the whig consid themselv the right shop for manners. what they 
said and did everi one ought to say and do, and from their judgment 
there wa no appeal. A social educ of thi kind leav trace 
which time is powerless to efface--"_vieil école, bonn école, 
begad!_" as major pendenni said. In twenty-f years' contact with a 
more enlarg society, one ha found a perpetu interest in watch 
the departure, gradual but nearli universal, from the social tradit 
of one' youth. the contrast between now and then is constantli 
reassert itself; and, if I note some instanc of it just as they 
occur to my mind, I shall be doing, at ani rate in part, what ha been 
requir of me. 

I will take the most insignific instanc first--inst of 
phrase and diction and pronunciation. I am just old enough to rememb 
a greatgrandmoth who said that she "lay" at a place when she meant 
that she had slept there, and spoke of "use the potticary" when we 
should speak of send for the doctor. some relat of a later 
gener said "ooman" for woman, and, when they were much obliged, 
said they were much "obleeged." "brarcelet" for bracelet and "di'monds" 
for diamond were common pronunciations. tuesday wa "toosday," and 
first wa "fust." chariot wa "charr'ot," and harriet "harr'yet," and 
I have even heard "jeames" for james. "goold" for gold and "yaller" 
for yellow were common enough. stirrup were alway call "sturrups," 
and squirrel "squrrels," and wrap wa pronounc "wropped," and 
tassel "tossels," and gertrud "jertrude." A lilac wa alway call 
a "laylock," and a cucumb a "cowcumber." the stress wa laid on the 
second syllabl of balcony, even as it is written in the "divert 
histori of john gilpin":-- 

"at edmonton hi love wife 
from the balconi spi 
her tender husband, wonder much 
To see how he did ride." 

_n.b._--cowper wa a whig. 

Of course, these archaism were alreadi pass away when I began 
to notic them, but some of them surviv until thi hour, and onli 
last winter, after an even servic in st. paul' cathedral, I wa 
delight to hear a lady, admir the illumin dome, exclaim, "how 
well the doom looks!" 

then, again, as regard the name of places. I cannot profess to 
have heard "lunnon," but I have heard the headquart of my famili 
call "'ooburn," and rome "roome," and sèvre "saver," and falmouth 
"farmouth," and penrith "peerith," and cirencest "ciciter." 

nowaday it is as much as one can do to get a cabman to take one to 
berwick street or berkeley square, unless one call them berwick or 
burkley. gower street and pall mall are pronounc as they are spelt; 
and, if one want a ticket for derby, the booking-clerk obligingli 
correct one' request to "durby." 

and, as with pronunciation, so also with phrase and diction-- 

"chang and decay in all around I see." 

when I wa young the word "lunch," whether substant or verb, wa 
regard with a peculiar horror, and rank with "'bus" in the lowest 
depth of vulgarity. To "take" in the sens of eat or drink wa anoth 
abomin which lay too deep for words. "you take exercis or take 
physic; noth else," said brummel to the ladi who ask him to 
take tea. "I beg your pardon, you also take a liberty," wa the just 
rejoinder. 

I well rememb that, when the journal of an illustri person were 
publish and it appear that a royal parti had "taken luncheon" on a 
hill, it wa stoutli contend in whig circl that the servant had 
taken the luncheon to the hill where their master ate it; and, when 
a close examin of the text prove thi gloss to be impossible, 
it wa decid that the origin must have been written in german, 
and that it had been translat by some one who did not know the 
english idiom. To "ride," mean to travel in a carriage, was, and 
I hope still is, regard as the peculiar properti of my friend 
pennialinus;[12] and I rememb the mild sensat caus in a whig 
hous when a neighbour who had driven over to luncheon declin to wash 
her hand on the ground that she had "ridden in gloves." the vehicl 
which wa invent by a lord chancellor and call after hi name 
wa scrupul pronounc so as to rhyme with groom, and ani one 
indiscreet enough to say that he had ridden in "the row" would probabl 
have been ask if he had gone round by "the zoo." 

[12] A charact invent by mr. william cory. 

"cherri pie and appl pie; all the rest are tarts," wa an axiom 
care instil into the young gastronomer; while "to pass" the 
mustard wa bound in the same bundl of abomin as "i'll troubl 
you," "may I assist you?" "not any, thank you," and "A veri small 
piece." 

then, again, as to what may be call the manner of eating. A man 
who put hi elbow on the tabl would have been consid a yahoo, 
and he who should eat hi asparagu with a knife and fork would have 
been class with the tradit collier who boil hi pineapple. 
fish-kniv (like oxid silver biscuit-boxes) were unknown and 
undreamt-of horrors. To eat one' fish with two fork wa the _cachet_ 
of a certain circle, and the manner of manipul the stone of 
a cherri pie wa the _articulu stanti vel cadentis_. the littl 
daughter of a great whig house, whose eat habit had been contract 
in the nursery, onc ask her mother with wist longing, "mamma, 
when shall I be old enough to eat bread and chees with a knife, and 
put the knife in my mouth?" and she wa promptli inform that not 
if she live to attain the age of methuselah would she be abl to 
acquir that "unchart freedom." On the other hand, old gentlemen 
of the veri highest breed use after dinner to rins their mouth 
in their finger-glasses, and therebi caus unspeak qualm in 
unaccustom guests. In that respect at ani rate, if in no other, the 
most inveter praiser of time past must admit that alter ha 
not been deterioration. 

anoth mark chang in societi is the diminut of stateliness. 
A realli well-turned-out carriage, with a coachman in a wig and two 
powder footmen behind, is as rare an object in the mall as a hansom 
in bermondsey or a tandem in bethnal green. men go to the levé in 
cab or on motor-cars, and send their wive to the palac ball in 
the product of the coupé company. the dowag duchess of cleveland 
(1792-1883) onc told me that lord salisburi had no carriage. On my 
express innoc surprise, she said, "I have been told that lord 
salisburi goe about london in a brougham;" and her tone could not 
have express a more live horror if the vehicl had been a coster' 
barrow. peopl of a less remot date than the duchess' had becom 
inur to barouch for ladi and brougham for men, but a landau 
wa contemn under the derogatori nicknam of a "demi-fortune," and 
the spectacl of a great man scale the dizzi height of the 'bu or 
plung into the depth of the twopenni tube would have given rise to 
live comment. 

A pillar of the tori party, who die not twenti year ago, find hi 
newly-marri wife poke the fire, took the poker from her hand and 
said with majest pain, "mi dear, will you kindli rememb that you 
are now a countess?" A liber statesman, still living, when he went to 
harrow for the first time, sail up the hill in the famili coach, and 
tradit doe not report that hi schoolfellow kick him with ani 
special virulence. 

I have known peopl who in travel would take the whole of a 
first-class carriag sooner than risk the intrus of an unknown 
fellow-passenger: their descend would as like as not reach their 
destin on motor-cars, have pull up at some waysid inn for 
mutton chop and whisky-and-soda. 




xliii 

social grace 


though stateli ha palpabl diminished, the beauti of life ha as 
palpabl increased. In old day peopl loved, or profess to love, 
fine pictures, and those who had them made much of them. but with 
that one except no one made ani attempt to surround himself with 
beauti objects. peopl who happen to have fine furnitur use 
it becaus they had it; unless, indeed, the desir to keep pace with 
the fashion induc them to part with loui seiz or chippendal and 
replac it by the auster product of tottenham court road. the 
idea of buy a chimneypiec or a cabinet or a bureau becaus it wa 
beauti never cross the ordinari mind. the finest old english china 
wa habitu used, and not seldom smashed, in the housekeeper' 
room. It wa the age of horse-hair and mahogany, and crimson flock 
paper and green rep curtains. whatev ornament the hous happen to 
possess were cluster togeth on a round tabl in the middl of the 
drawing-room. the style ha been immort by the hand of a master: 
"there were no skil contrast shade of grey or green, no dado, 
no distemper. the woodwork wa grain and varnish after the manner 
of the philistines, the wall paper in dark crimson, with heavi 
curtain of the same colour, and the sideboard, dinner-waggon, and row 
of stiff chair were all carv in the same massiv and expens style 
of ugliness. the pictur were those familiar present of dirti 
rabbits, fat white horses, bloat goddesses, and misshapen boor by 
masters, who if younger than they assum to be, must have been quit 
old enough to know better." A man who hung a blue-and-whit plate on a 
wall, or put peacocks' feather in a vase, would have been regard as 
insane; and I well rememb the outcri of indign and scorn when 
a well-known collector of bric-a-brac had himself paint with a pet 
teapot in hi hands. 

In thi respect the chang is complete. the owner of fine 
picture-galleri no longer monopol "art in the home." peopl who 
cannot afford old master invok the geniu of mr. mortim menpes. 
If they have not inherit french furnitur they buy it, or at least 
imit of the real, which are quit as beautiful. A sage-green 
wash on the wall, and a white dado to the height of a man' shoulder, 
cover a multitud of paper-hanger' sins. the commonest china is 
pretti in form and colour. A coupl of rug from liberty' replac the 
hideou and costli carpet which last their unfortun possessor 
a lifetime; and, wherea in those distant day one never saw a 
flower on a dinner-table, now "it is roses, rose all the way," or, 
when it cannot be roses, it is daffodil and tulip and poppi and 
chrysanthemums. 

all thi is the work of the despis æsthetes; but thi gener 
will probabl see no mean in the great drama of "patience," and ha 
no concept of the tyrann ugli from which bunthorn and hi 
friend deliv us. their doubl achiev wa to make ugli 
culpable, and to prove that beauti need not be expensive. 

the same chang may be observ in everyth connect with dinner. No 
longer is the mind oppress by those monstrou hecatomb under which, 
as bret hart said, "the tabl groan and even the sideboard sighed." 
frascatelli' monstrou bill of fare, with six "side dishes" and four 
sweets, surviv onli as monument of what our father could do. race 
plate and "epergnes," with silver goddess and sphinx and rams' 
horns, if not discreetli exchang for prettier substitutes, hide their 
diminish head in pantri and safes. instead of these horrors, we 
have bright flower and shade lights; and a veri few, perhap too few, 
dishes, which both look pretti and tast good. here, again, expens 
ugli ha been routed, and inexpens beauti enthron in it place. 

the same law, I believe, hold good about dress. with the mysteri 
of woman' cloth I do not presum to meddle. I do not attempt to 
estim the rel cost of the satin and ermin and scarv which 
lawrenc painted, and the "duck's-egg bolero" and "mauv hopsack" 
which I have late seen advert in the list of a winter sale. but 
about men' dress I feel more confident. the "rich cut genoa velvet 
waistcoat," the solemn frock coat, the satin stock, and the trouser 
strap under the wellingtons, were certainli hideous, and I shrewdli 
suspect that they were vastli more expens than the blue serg suits, 
straw hats, brown boots, and sailor-knot tie in which the men of the 
present day contriv to look smart without be stiff. 

when mr. gladston in old age revisit oxford and lectur on homer 
to a great gather of undergraduates, he wa ask if he saw ani 
differ between hi hearer and the men of hi own time. He 
respond briskly, "yes, in their dress, an enorm difference. I am 
told that I had among my audienc some of the most highly-connect and 
richest men in the university, and there wasn't one whom I couldn't 
have dress from top to toe for £5." 

I have spoken so far of materi beauty, and here the chang in societi 
ha been an inexpress improvement; but, when I turn to beauti of 
anoth kind, I cannot speak with equal certainty. have our manner 
improved? beyond all question they have changed, but have they chang 
for the better? 

It may seem incongru to cite dr. pusey as an author on anyth 
more mundan than a hair-shirt, yet he wa realli a close observ 
of social phenomena, as hi famou sermon on dive and lazarus, 
with it strictur on the modern dives' dinner and mrs. dives' 
ball-gown, suffici testifies. He wa born a bouveri in 1800, 
when the bouveri still were whigs, and he testifi in old age 
to "the beauti of the refin worldli manner of the old school," 
which, as he insisted, were realli christian in their regard for the 
feel of others. "if in ani case they becam soulless as apart from 
christianity, the beauti form wa there into which real life might 
re-enter." 

We do not, I think, see much of the "beauti form" nowadays. men 
when talk to women lounge, and sprawl, and cross their legs, and 
keep one hand in a pocket while they shake hand with the other, and 
shove their partner about in the "washington post," and wallow in the 
kitchen-lancers. all thi is as littl beauti as can be conceived. 
grace and digniti have perish side by side. and yet, oddli enough, 
the peopl who are most thoroughli bereft of manner seem bent on 
display their defici in the most conspicu places. In the 
old day it would have been thought the veri height of vulgar to 
run after royalty. the duke of wellington said to charl greville, 
"when we meet the royal famili in societi they are our superiors, and 
we owe them all respect." that wa just all. If a royal personag knew 
you suffici well to pay you a visit, it wa an honour, and all 
suitabl prepar were made. "mi father walk backward with a 
silver candlestick, and red baiz await the royal feet." If you 
encount a princ or princess in society, you made your bow and 
thought no more about it. An old-fashion father, who had taken a 
schoolboy son to call on a great lady, said, "your bow wa too low. 
that is the sort of bow we keep for the royal family." there wa 
neither drop-down-dead-ativeness, nor pushfulness, nor familiarity. 
well-br peopl knew how to behav themselves, and there wa an end 
of the matter. but to forc one' self on the notic of royalty, to 
intrigu for visit from illustri personages, to go out of one' way 
to meet princ or princesses, to parad befor the gape world the 
amount of intimaci with which one had been honoured, would have been 
regard as the veri mad of vulgarity. 

anoth respect in which modern manner compar unfavour with 
ancient is the grow love of titles. In old day peopl thought a 
great deal, perhap too much, of family. they had a strong sens of 
territori position, and I have heard peopl say of others, "oh, they 
are cousin of ours," as if that fact put them within a sacr and 
inviol enclosure. but titl were contemned. If you were a peer, 
you sate in the hous of lord instead of the hous of commons; and 
that wa all. No one dream of babbl about "peers" as a separ 
order of creation, still less of enumer the peer to whom they 
were related. 

A member of the tori govern wa onc at pain to explain to an 
entir unsympathet audienc that the onli reason whi he and lord 
curzon had not taken as good a degre as mr. asquith wa that, be 
the eldest son of peers, they were more freeli invit into the counti 
societi of oxfordshire. I can safe say that, in the sacr circl of 
the great-grandmotherhood, that theori of academ shortcom would 
not have been advanced. 

the idea of buy a baronetci would have been thought simpli droll, 
and knighthood wa regard as the guerdon of the success grocer. I 
believ that in their inmost heart the whig enjoy the garter which 
were so freeli bestow on them; but they compound for that human 
weak by unmeasur contempt for the bath, and I doubt if they had 
ever heard of the star of india. To state thi case is suffici to 
illustr a conspicu chang in the sentiment of society. 




xliv 

public _v._ retic 


the great peopl of old time follow (quit unconsciously) the 
philosoph who bade man "hide hi life." Of course, the stage of 
polit wa alway a pillory, and he who ventur to stand on it made 
up hi mind to encount a vast varieti of popular missiles. "in my 
situat as chancellor of the univers of oxford," said the duke 
of wellington, "I have been much expos to authors;" and men whom 
choic or circumst forc into polit were expos to wors 
annoy than "authors." but the line wa rigidli drawn between 
public and privat life. what went on in the home wa sacredli secret 
from the public gaze. peopl live among their relat and friend 
and polit associates, and kept the gape world at a distance. now 
we worship public as the chief enjoy of human life. We send 
list of our shooting-parti to "societi journals." We welcom the 
interviewer. We contribut person paragraph to _classi cuttings_. 
We admit the photograph to our bedrooms, and give our portrait to 
illustr papers. We take our exercis when we have the best chanc 
of be seen and noticed, and we never eat our dinner with such keen 
appetit as amid the half-world of a piccadilli restaurant. In brief, 
"expos thi life" is the motto of the new philosophy, and I maintain 
that in thi respect, at ani rate, the old wa better. 

with an increas love of public ha come an increas contempt 
for reticence. In old day there were certain subject which no one 
mentioned; among them were health and money. I presum that peopl had 
pretti much the same complaint as now, but no one talk about them. 
We use to be told of a ladi who die in agoni becaus she insist on 
tell the doctor that the pain wa in her chest wherea it realli wa 
in the unmention organ of digestion. that martyr to proprieti ha 
no imit in the present day. everi one ha a diseas and a doctor; 
and young peopl of both sex are readi on the slightest acquaint 
to describ symptom and compar experiences. "ice!" exclaim a 
pretti girl at dessert, "good gracious, no! so bad for indy"--and her 
companion, who had not travel with the times, learn with amaz 
that "indy" wa the pet name for indigestion. "how bitterli cold!" said 
a plump matron at an open-air luncheon; "just the thing to give one 
appendicitis." "oh!" said her neighbour, survey the company, "we are 
quit safe there. I shouldn't think we had an appendix between us." 

then, again, as to money. In the "sacr circl of the 
great-grandmotherhood" I never heard the slightest refer to income. 
not that the whig despis money. they were at least as fond of it 
as other people, and, even when it took the shape of slum-rents, it 
odour wa not displeasing. but it wa not a subject for conversation. 
peopl did not chatter about their neighbours' incomes; and, if they 
made their own money in trade or professions, they did not regal 
us with statist of profit and loss. to-day everi one seem to be, 
if I may use the favourit colloquialism, "on the make"; and the 
sincer of the devot with which peopl worship money pervad 
their whole convers and colour their whole view of life. "scion 
of aristocracy," to use the good old phrase of pennialinus, will 
produc sampl of tea or floor-cloth from their pockets, and sue quit 
winningli for custom. A specul bottl of extraordinarili cheap 
peach-brandi will arriv with the compliment of lord tom noddy, who 
ha just gone into the wine trade, and lord magnu charter will tell 
you that, if you are go to put in the electr light, hi firm ha 
got some realli good fit which he can let you have on special 
easi terms. 

but, if in old day health and money were subject eschew in polit 
conversation, even more rigid wa the avoid of "risky" topics. 
to-day no scandal is too gross, no gossip too prurient. respect 
mother chatter quit freeli about that "nest of spicery" over 
which sir gorel barn presides, and canvass abomin with a 
self-possess worthi of gibbon or zola. In fact, as regard our 
topic of conversation, we seem to have reach the condit in which 
the pari correspond of the _daili telegraph_ found himself when mr. 
matthew arnold (in "friendship' garland") spoke to him of delicacy. 
"he seem inexplic struck by thi word _delicacy_, which he kept 
repeat to himself. 'delicacy,' said he; 'delicacy, sure I have 
heard that word before! yes, in other days,' he went on dreamily, 'in 
my fresh enthusiast youth, befor I knew sala, befor I wrote for 
that infern paper----.' 'collect yourself, my friend,' said I, lay 
my hand on hi shoulder, 'you are unmanned.'" A similar emot would 
probabl be caus by ani one so old-fashion as to protest that ani 
conceiv topic wa ill-adapt for discuss in gener society. 

An extrem decorum of phrase accompani thi salutari restrict 
of topics. To a boister youth who, just set out for a choral 
festiv in a countri church, said that he alway thought a music 
servic veri jolly, an old whig ladi said in a tone of dignifi 
amendment, "I trust, dear mr. f----, that we shall deriv not onli 
pleasur but profit from the solemn of thi afternoon." 

close relat to the love of public and the decay of retic is 
the chang in the posit of women. thi is realli a revolution, and 
it ha so imparti pervad all depart of life that one may 
plung anywher into the subject and find the same phenomenon. 

fifti year ago the view that "comparison don't becom a young 
woman" still held the field, and, indeed, might have been much more 
wide extended. noth "becam a young woman," which involv clear 
think or plain speak or independ acting. mrs. gener and 
mrs. grundi were still power in the land. "prune and prism" were 
fair burlesqu of actual shibboleths. "fanny," said mrs. general, "at 
present form too mani opinions. perfect breed form none, and is 
never demonstrative." thi wa hardli a parodi of the prevail and 
accept doctrine. to-day it would be difficult to find a subject on 
which contemporari fanni do not form opinions, and express them with 
intens vigour, and translat them into correspond action. 

fifti year ago a hunt woman wa a rarity, even though englishwomen 
had been horsewomen from time immemorial. ladi arabella vane' 
perform were still rememb in the neighbourhood of darlington, 
and ladi william powlett' "scyarlet" habit wa a tradit at 
cottesmore. mrs. jack villier is the onli horsewoman in the famou 
pictur of the quorn, and she suitabl gave her name to the best covert 
in the vale of aylesbury. but now the hunt woman and the hunt 
girl pervad the land, cross their male friend at their fences, and 
ride over them when they lie submerg in ditches, with an airi 
cheer which win all hearts. In brief, it may be said that, in 
respect of outdoor exercises, whatev men and boy do women and girl 
do. they drive four-in-hand and tandem, they manipul motors, they 
skate and cycle, and fenc and swim. A young ladi late show me 
a snapshot of herself learn to take a header. A male instructor, 
classic draped, stood on the bank, and she kindli explain that 
"the head in the water wa the man we were stay with." lawn-tenni 
and croquet are regard as the amus of the mild and the 
middle-aged; the ardour of girlhood requir hockey and golf. I am not 
sure whether girl have taken to rugbi football, but onli last summer I 
saw a girl' cricket eleven dispos most satisfactorili of a boy' team. 

I can well rememb the time when a man, if perchanc he met a ladi 
while he wa smoke in some rather unfrequ street, flung hi 
cigar away and rather tri to look as if he had not been do it. 
yet so far have we travel that not long ago, at a hospit hous 
not a hundr mile from berkeley square, the hostess and her daughter 
were the onli smoker in a larg luncheon-party, and prefac their 
cigarett by the courteou condition, "if you gentlemen don't mind." 

then, again, the polit woman is a product of these latter days. 
In old time a woman serv her husband' polit parti by keep 
a _salon_, give dinner to the bigwigs, and "routs" to the rank 
and file. I do not forget the heroic election of georgiana, 
duchess of devonshire, but her exampl wa not wide followed. On 
great occas ladi sate in seclud galleri at public meetings, 
and encourag the halt rhetor of son or husband by wave 
pocket-handkerchiefs. If a triumphant return wa to be celebrated, the 
ladi of the hero' famili might gaze from abov on the congratulatori 
banquet, like the house-parti at lothair' come of age, to whom the 
"three time three and one cheer more" seem like a "great naval 
battle, or the end of the world, or anyth els of unimagin 
excitement, tumult, and confusion." 

when it wa report that a celebr ladi of the present day 
complain of the stuffi and gloom of the ladies' galleri 
in the hous of commons, mr. gladstone--that stiffest of social 
conservatives--exclaimed, "mrs. w----, forsooth! I have known much 
greater ladi than mrs. w---- quit content to look down through the 
ventilator." 




xlv 

town _v._ countri 


I said at the outset that I am a whig _pur sang_; and the histor 
whig were veri worthi people. A first-rat specimen of the race 
wa that duke of bedford whom juniu lampooned, and whom hi 
great-grandson, lord john russell, champion in an interest 
contrast. "the want of practic religion and moral which lord 
chesterfield held up to imitation, conduct the french nobil to the 
guillotin and emigration: the honesty, the attach to religion, 
the countri habits, the love of home, the activ in rural busi 
and rural sports, in which the duke of bedford and other of hi class 
delighted, preserv the english aristocraci from a flood which swept 
over half of europe, lay prostrat the highest of her palaces, and 
scatter the ash of the most sacr of her monuments." 

thi quotat form a suitabl introduct to the social chang 
which is the subject of the present chapter. In old days, peopl who 
had countri hous live in them. It wa the magnific misfortun 
of the duke in "lothair" to have so mani castl that he had no home. 
In those day the tradit of duti requir peopl who had sever 
countri hous to spend some time in each of them; and those who had 
onli one pass nine month out of twelv under it sacr roof--sacr 
becaus it wa insepar connect with memori of ancestri and 
parentag and earli association, with marriag and children, and pure 
enjoy and activ benevol and neighbourli goodwill. In a word, 
the countri hous wa home. 

peopl who had no countri hous were honestli pitied; perhap they were 
also a littl despised. the most gorgeou mansion in cromwel road or 
tyburnia could never for a moment be quot as suppli the place of 
the hall or the manor. 

for peopl who had a countri hous the interest of life were veri 
much bound up in the park and the covers, the croquet-ground and the 
cricket-ground, the kennel, the stable, and the garden. I remember, 
when I wa an undergraduate, lioniz some yorkshir damsel on their 
first visit to oxford, then in the "high midsumm pomp" of it beauty. 
but all they said was, in the pensiv tone of an unwil exile, "how 
beauti the sun must be shine on the south walk at home!" 

the villag church wa a great centr of domest affection. all the 
famili had been christen in it. the eldest sister had been marri 
in it. gener of ancestri moulder under the chancel floor. 
christma decor were an occas of much innoc merriment, and 
a littl ditti high in favour in tractarian home warn the decor 
to be-- 

"unselfish--look not to see 
proof of their own dexterity; 
but quit content that 'i' should 
forgotten be in brotherhood." 

Of course, whether tractarian or evangelical, religi peopl regard 
church-go as a spiritu privilege; but everi one recogn it 
as a civil duty. "when a gentleman is _sur se terres_," said major 
pendennis, "he must give an exampl to the countri people; and, if I 
could turn a tune, I even think I should sing. the duke of st. david's, 
whom I have the honour of knowing, alway sing in the country, and let 
me tell you it ha a doos fine effect from the famili pew." befor 
the passion for "restoration" had set in, and ere yet sir gilbert scott 
had transmogrifi the parish church of england, the famili pew wa 
inde the ark and sanctuari of the territori system--and a veri 
comfort ark too. It had a privat entrance, a round table, a good 
assort of arm-chairs, a fireplace, and a wood-basket. and I well 
rememb a washleath glove of unusu size which wa kept in the 
wood-basket for the greater conveni of make up the fire dure 
divin service. "you may restor the church as much as you like," 
said an old friend of my youth, who wa lay-rector, to an innov 
incumbent, "but I must insist on my famili pew not be touched. If I 
had to sit in an open seat, I should never get a wink of sleep again." 

A countri home left it mark for all time on those who were brought up 
in it. the son play cricket and went bat-fowl with the villag 
boys, and not seldom join with them in a poach enterpris in 
the patern preserves. howev popular or success or happi a 
public-school boy might be at eton or harrow, he count the day till 
he could return to hi poni and hi gun, hi ferret and rat-trap and 
fishing-rod. amid all the toil and worri of activ life, he look back 
lovingli to the corner of the cover where he shot hi first pheasant, 
or the precis spot in the middl of the vale where he first saw a fox 
killed, and underw the disgust baptism of blood. 

girls, live more continu at home, enter even more intim 
into the daili life of the place. their morn ride led them across 
the villag green; their afternoon drive were often steer by the 
claim of thi or that cottag to a visit. they were taught as soon as 
they could toddl never to enter a door without knocking, never to sit 
down without be asked, and never to call at meal-time. 

they knew everi one in the village--old and young; play with the 
babies, taught the boy in sunday school, carri savouri mess to the 
old and impotent, read by the sick-beds, and brought flower for the 
coffin. mamma knit comfort and dispens warm clothing, organ 
relief in hard winter and time of epidemic, and found place for 
the hobbledehoy of both sexes. the pony-boy and the scullery-maid 
were pretti sure to be product of the village. veri like the 
young-ladies-maid wa a villag girl whom the doctor had pronounc 
too delic for factori or farm. I have seen an excit young groom 
stare hi eye out of hi head at the eton and harrow match, and 
exclaim with raptur at a good catch, "it wa my young governor as 
'scouted' that. 'e' nimble, ain't 'e?" and I well rememb an ancient 
stable-help at a countri hous in buckinghamshir who wa call "old 
bucks," becaus he had never slept out of hi nativ county, and veri 
rare out of hi nativ village, and had spent hi whole life in the 
servic of one family. 

Of course, when so much of the impression part of life wa live 
amid the "sweet, sincer surround of countri life," there grew 
up, between the famili at the hall and the famili in the village, 
a feel which, in spite of our nation unsentimentality, had a 
chivalr and almost feudal tone. the interest of the poor in the 
life and do of "the family" wa keen and genuine. the english 
peasant is too much a gentleman to be a flatterer, and compliment 
were often bestow in veri unexpect forms. "they do tell me as 'i 
understanding' no wors than it alway were," wa a ploughman' way 
of say that the old squir wa in full possess of hi faculties. 
"we call 'im ''i lordship,' becaus 'e' so old and so cunning," wa 
another' descript of a famou pony. "ah, I know you'r but a poor 
creatur at the best!" wa the recogn way of compliment a ladi 
on what she consid her bewitch and romant delicacy. 

but these eccentr were mere verbal, and under them lay a deep 
vein of genuin and last regard. "i'v live under four duke and 
four 'ousekeepers, and i'm not go to be put upon in my old age!" wa 
the exclam of an ancient poultry-woman, whose digniti had been 
offend by some irregular touch her christma dinner. when the 
daughter of the hous marri and went into a far country, she wa sure 
to find some emigr from her old home who welcom her with effusion, 
and wa full of enquiri about hi lordship and her ladyship, and 
miss pinkerton the governess, and whether mr. wheeler wa still 
coachman, and who live now at the entrance-lodge. whether the son got 
commissions, or took ranches, or becom curat in slums, or contest 
remot constituencies, some grin face wa sure to emerg from the 
crowd with, "you know me, sir? bill juffs, as use to go bird's-nest 
with you;" or, "you rememb my old dad, my lord? He use to shoe your 
black pony." 

when the eldest son came of age, hi condescens in take thi step 
wa hail with genuin enthusiasm. when he came into hi kingdom, 
there might be some grumbl if he went in for small economies, or 
alter old practices, or wa a "hard man" on the bench or at the board 
of guardians; but, if he went on in the good-natur old ways, the 
tradit loyalti wa unabated. 

lord shaftesburi wrote thu about the birth of hi eldest son' eldest 
son: "mi littl villag is all agog with the birth of a son and heir 
in the veri midst of them, the first, it is believed, sinc 1600, when 
the first lord shaftesburi wa born. the christen yesterday wa an 
ovation. everi cottag had flag and flowers. We had three triumphal 
arches; and all the peopl were exulting. 'he is one of us.' 'he is a 
fellow-villager.' 'we have now got a lord of our own.' thi is realli 
gratifying. I did not think that there remain so much of the old 
respect and affect between peasant and proprietor, landlord and 
tenant." 

whether the kind of relat thu describ ha utterli perish I do 
not know; but certainli it ha veri greatli diminished, and the caus 
of the diminut is that peopl live less and less in their countri 
houses, and more and more in london. for those who are compel by 
odiou necess to sell or let their hereditari home one ha noth 
but compassion; in itself a sever trial, it is made still sharper to 
well-condit peopl by the sens that the chang is at least as 
pain to the poor as to themselves. but for those who, have both a 
countri and a london house, deliber concentr themselv on the 
town, forsak the country, and abjur the duti which are insepar 
from their birthright, one can onli feel charl lamb' "imperfect 
sympathy." the caus which induc thi derelict and it result on 
societi and on the countri may be discuss in anoth chapter. 




xlvi 

home 


I wa speak just now of the grow tendenc to desert the countri 
in favour of london. I said that it wa difficult to feel sympathi with 
peopl who voluntarili abandon home, and all the duti and pleasur 
which home implies, in favour of lennox garden or portman square; but 
that one felt a live compass for those who make the exchang under 
the pressur of-- 

"bitter constraint and sad occas dear." 

here, again, is anoth social change. In old days, when peopl wish 
to economize, it wa london that they deserted. they sold the "famili 
mansion" in portland place or eaton square; and, if they revisit the 
glimps of the social moon, they took a furnish hous for six week 
in the summer: the rest of the year they spent in the country. thi 
plan wa a manifold saving. there wa no rent to pay, and onli veri 
small rates, for everi one know that countri hous were shame 
under-assessed. carriag did not requir repaint everi season, and 
no new cloth were wanted. "what can it matter what we wear here, 
where everi one know who we are?" the product of the park, the home 
farm, the hothouses, and the kitchen-garden kept the famili suppli 
with food. A brother magnat stay at beaudesert with the famou 
lord anglesey wax enthusiast over the mutton, and said, "excus 
my ask you a plain question, but how much doe thi excel 
mutton cost you?" "cost me?" scream the hero. "good gad, it cost me 
nothing! it' my own," and he wa beyond measur astonish when hi 
statist guest prove that "hi own" cost him about a guinea per 
pound. In anoth great house, conduct on strictli econom lines, 
it wa said that the veri numer famili were rear exclus on 
rabbit and garden-stuff, and that their enfeebl constitut and 
dismal appear in later life were due to thi ascet regimen. 

peopl were alway hospit in the country, but rural entertain 
wa not a veri costli business. the "three squar meal and a snack," 
which repres the minimum requir of the present day, are a 
huge develop of the system which prevail in my youth. breakfast 
had alreadi grown from the tea and coffee, and roll and eggs, which 
macaulay tell us were deem suffici at holland house, to an affair 
of cover dishes. luncheon-parti were sometim given--terr 
ceremoni which last from two to four; but the ordinari luncheon 
of the famili wa realli a snack from the servants' joint or 
the children' rice-pudding; and five o'clock tea wa actual 
not invented. To remember, as I do, the foundress of that divin 
refresh seem like have known stephenson or jenner. 

dinner wa substanti enough in all conscience, and the wine nearli as 
heavi as the food. imagin quench one' thirst with sherri in the 
dog days! yet so we did, till about half-way through dinner, and then, 
on great occasions, a dark-colour rill of champagn began to trickl 
into the saucer-shap glasses. At the epoch of cheese, port made it 
appear in compani with home-brew beer; and, as soon as the ladi 
and the schoolboy departed, the men appli themselves, with much 
serious of purpose, to the consumpt of claret which wa realli 
vinous. 

In thi kind of hospit there wa no great expense. peopl made 
veri littl differ between their way of live when they were alon 
and their way of live when they had company. A visitor who wish to 
make himself agreeabl sometim brought down a basket of fish or a 
barrel of oyster from london; and, if one had no deer of one' own, 
the arriv of a haunch from a neighbour' or kinsman' park wa the 
signal for a gather of local gastronomers. 

and in matter other than meal life went on veri much the same 
whether you had friend stay with you or whether you were alone. 
your guest drove and rode, and walk and shot, accord to their 
tast and the season of the year. they were carri off, more or less 
willingly, to see the sight of the neighbourhood--ruin castles, 
restor cathedrals, famou views. In summer there might be a picnic 
or a croquet-party; in winter a lawn-meet or a ball. but all these 
entertain were of the most home and inexpens character. there 
wa veri littl outlay, no fuss, and no display. people, who were 
compel by stress of financi weather to put into their countri 
hous and remain there till the storm wa over, contriv to econom 
and yet be comfortable. they simpli live their ordinari live until 
thing right themselves, and veri like did not attempt london again 
until they were bring out anoth daughter, or had to make a home 
for a son in the guards. 

but now an entir differ spirit prevails. peopl seem to have 
lost the power of live quietli and happili in their countri homes. 
they all have imbib the urban philosophi of georg warrington, who, 
when pen gush about the countri with it "long calm days, and long 
calm evenings," brutal replied, "devilish long, and a great deal too 
calm. i'v tri 'em." peopl of that type desert the countri simpli 
becaus they are bore by it. they feel with mr. luke in "the new 
republic," who, after talk about "liber air," "sedg brooks," 
and "meadow grass," admit that it would be a horrid bore to have 
no other societi than the clergyman of the parish, and no other topic 
of convers than justif by faith and the measles. they do 
not care for the countri in itself; they have no eye for it beauty, no 
sens of it atmosphere, no memori for it traditions. It is onli made 
endur to them by sport and gambl and boister house-parties; 
and, when from one caus or anoth these resourc fail, they are 
frankli bore and long for london. they are no longer content, as our 
father were, to entertain their friend with hospit simplicity. 
So profoundli ha all societi been vulgar by the worship of the 
golden calf that, unless peopl can vie with alien millionair in the 
sumptuous with which they "do you"--delight phrase,--they prefer 
not to entertain at all. An emul ostent ha kill hospitality. 

So now, when a season of financi pressur set in, peopl shut up 
their countri houses, let their shooting, cut themselv off with a 
sigh of relief from all the unexcit duti and simpl pleasur 
of the home, and take refug from boredom in the delight of london. 
In london life ha no duties. littl is expect of one, and noth 
required. one can live on a larger or a smaller scale accord to 
one' tast or one' purse; cramp oneself in a doll' hous in mayfair, 
or expand one' wing in a kensingtonian mansion; or even contract 
oneself into a flat, or hide one' diminish head in the upper storey 
of a shop. one can entertain or not entertain, spend much or spend 
little, live on one' friend or be live on by them, exactli as one 
find most convenient: and unquestion social freedom is a great 
element in human happiness. 

for mani natur london ha an attract which is all it own, and 
yet to indulg one' tast for it may be a grave derelict of duty. 
the state is built upon the home; and, as a training-plac for social 
virtue, there can sure be no comparison between a home in the countri 
and a home in london. 

"home! sweet home!" yes. (I am quot now from my friend, henri scott 
holland.) that is the song that goe straight to the heart of everi 
english man and woman. for forti year we have never ask madam 
adelina patti to sing anyth else. the unhappy, decadent, latin race 
have not even a word in their languag by which to express it, poor 
things! home is the secret of our honest british protest virtues. 
It is the onli nurseri of our anglo-saxon citizenship. back to it our 
far-flung children turn with all their memori aflame. they may laps 
into rough ways, but they keep someth sound at the core so long as 
they are faith to the old home. there is still a tender in the 
voice, and tear are in their eyes, as they speak togeth of the day 
that can never die out of their lives, when they were at home in the 
old familiar places, with father and mother in the healthi glad of 
their childhood. ah! 

"home! sweet home! 
there' no place like home." 

that is what we all repeat, and all believe, and cheer to the echo. 
and, behind all our british complac about it, nobodi would deni 
the vital truth that there is in thi belief of ours. whatev tend 
to make the home beautiful, attractive, romantic--to associ it 
with the idea of pure pleasur and high duty--to connect it not onli 
with all that wa happiest but also with all that wa best in earli 
years--whatev fulfil these purpos purifi the fountain of 
nation life. A home, to be perfectli a home, should "incorpor 
tradition, and prolong the reign of the dead." It should anim those 
who dwell in it to virtu and benefic by remind them of what 
other did, who went befor them in the same place and live amid the 
same surroundings. 




xlvii 

hospit 


In my last chapter I wa deplor the modern tendenc of societi to 
desert the countri and cultiv london. and the reason whi I deplor 
it is that all the educ influenc of the home are so infinit 
weaker in the town than in the country. In a london home there is 
noth to fascin the eye. the contempl of the mew and the 
chimney-pot through the back window of the nurseri will not elev 
even the most impress child. there is no mystery, no dreamland, no 
enchant palace, no bluebeard' chamber, in a stucco mansion built by 
cubitt or a palac of terracotta on the cadogan estate. there can be 
no tradit of the past, no inspir memori of virtuou ancestry, 
in a hous which your father bought five year ago and of which the 
previou owner are not known to you even by name. "the square" or "the 
gardens" are sorri substitut for the park and the pleasure-grounds, 
the common and the downs. crossing-sweep are a deserv folk, but 
you cannot cultiv those intim relat with them which bind you 
to the lodge-keep at home, or to the old women in the almshouses, 
or the octogenarian waggon who ha driven your father' team ever 
sinc he wa ten year old. st. peter's, eaton square, or all saints, 
margaret street, may be beauti ornate, and the congreg what 
lord beaconsfield call "brisk and modish"; but they can never have 
the romant charm of the countri church where you were confirm side 
by side with the keeper' son, or propos to the vicar' daughter when 
you were wreath holli round the lectern. 

then, again, as regard social relat with friend and neighbours. 
"an emul ostent ha destroy hospitality." thi I believ is 
absolut true, and it is one of the worst chang which I have seen. 
I have alreadi spoken of hospit as practis in the country. now I 
will say a word about hospit in london. 

Of cours rich peopl alway gave banquet from time to time, and these 
were occas when, in lord beaconsfield' drolli vulgar phrase, "the 
dinner wa stately, as befit the high nobility." they were ceremoni 
observances, conduct on the constitut principl of "cutlet 
for cutlet," and must alway have been regard by all concern in 
them, whether as host or guests, in the light of duti rather than of 
pleasure. twenti peopl woke that morn with the impress that 
someth wa to be gone through befor bedtime, which they would be 
glad enough to escape. each of the twenti went to bed that night more 
or less weari and ruffled, but sustain by the sens that a social 
duti had been performed. banquets, however, at the worst were onli 
period events. real hospit wa constant and informal. 

"come and dine to-night. eight o'clock. pot luck. don't dress." 

"mi dear, I am go to bring back two or three men from the house. 
don't put off dinner in case we are kept by a division." 

"I am afraid I must be go back. I am onli pair till eleven. 
good-night, and so mani thanks." 

"good-night; you will alway find some dinner here on govern 
nights. Do look in again!" 

these are the cheer echo of parliamentari home in the older 
and better day of unostentati entertaining, and those "pot luck" 
dinner often play an import part in polit manoeuvre. 
sir georg trevelyan, whose earli manhood wa pass in the thick 
of parliamentari society, tell us, in a footnot to "the ladi in 
parliament," that in the season of 1866 there wa much gossip over the 
fact of lord russel have entertain mr. bright at dinner, and that 
peopl were constantly-- 

"discuss whether bright can scan and understand the line 
about the wooden hors of troy; and when and where he dines. 
though gentlemen should blush to talk as if they care a button 
becaus one night in chesham place he ate hi slice of mutton." 

quit apart from parliamentari strategy, impromptu entertain in 
what wa call "a friendli way" had it special use in the social 
system. there is a delici passag in "lothair" describ that 
hero' initi into an easier and more grace societi than that 
in which he had been reared: "he had been a guest at the occasion 
banquet of hi uncle, but these were festiv of the pict and scots; 
rude plenti and coars splendour, with nois instead of conversation, 
and a tumult of obstruct dependants, who imped by their want of 
skill the veri conveni which they were purpos to facilitate." An 
amaz sentenc indeed, but like all lord beaconsfield' writings, 
picturesqu descriptive, and happili contrast with the succeed 
scene: "A tabl cover with flowers, bright with fanci crystal, 
and porcelain that had belong to sovereign who had given a name to 
it colour or it form. As for those present, all seem grace and 
gentleness, from the radiant daughter of the hous to the noiseless 
attend who anticip all hi wants, and sometim seem to 
suggest hi wishes." 

the mention of "lothair" remind peopl of my date that thirti year 
ago we knew a hous justli fame for the excel marriag which 
the daughter made. there banquet were unknown, and even dinner 
by invit veri rare. the father use to collect young men from 
lord's, or the lobby, or the club, or wherev he had been spend 
the afternoon. servant were soon dismissed--"it is such a bore to have 
them stare at one"--and the daughter of the hous wait on the 
guests. here obvious were matrimoni open not to be despised; 
and, even in famili where there were no ulterior object to be 
served, these free-and-easi entertain went on from februari to 
july. short invitations, pleasant company, and genuin friendli 
were the characterist of these gatherings. veri often the dinner wa 
carv on the table. one could ask for a second slice or anoth wing 
without feel greedy, and the claret and amontillado were within the 
reach of everi guest. this, I consider, wa genuin hospitality, for it 
wa natural, easy, and unostentatious. 

but now, accord to all accounts, the spirit of entertain is 
utterli changed. A dinner is not so much an opportun of pleas 
your friend as of air your own magnificence; and ostentation, 
despic in itself, is doubli odiou becaus it is emulous. If A 
ha a good cook, B must have a better. If C gave you ortolan stuf 
with truffles, D must have truffl stuf with ortolans. If the e' 
tabl is pile with strawberri in april, the f' must retali with 
orchid at a guinea a blossom. G is a littl inclin to swagger about 
hi wife' pearl necklace, and H is bound in honour to decor mrs. H 
with a _rivière_ which belong to the crown jewel of france. 

and, as with the food and the decorations, so also with the company. 
here, again, emul ostent carri all befor it. mr. goldbug is 
a yahoo, but he made hi million in south africa and spend them in 
park lane. lord heath is the most abandon bore in christendom, but 
he is an author at newmarket. ladi bellair ha had a notori 
chequer career, but she play bridg in exalt circles. As lord 
crew sing of a similar enchantress-- 

"from reflect we shrink; 
and of comment are chary; 
but her face is _so_ pink, 
and it don't seem to vary." 

however, she is unquestion smart; and goldbug is a use man to 
know; and we are not go to be outdon by the cashingtons, who got 
heath to dine with them twice last year. So we invit our guests, 
not becaus we like them or admir them, for that in these case is 
impossible; not--heaven knows--becaus they are beauti or famou or 
witty; but becaus they are the right peopl to have in one' house, 
and we will have the right peopl or perish in the attempt. 




xlviii 

ostent 


It is mani a long year sinc I saw the insid of a ballroom, but by 
all account veri much the same chang ha come over the spirit of 
ball-giv as of dinner-giving. here again the "emul ostentation" 
which I have describ is the enemy. when I first grew up, there were 
infinit more ball than now. from easter till august there were 
at least two everi night, and a hostess count herself lucki if 
she had onli one rival to contend with. between 11 p.m. and 2 a.m. 
grosvenor place wa block by the oppos stream of carriag go 
from mayfair to belgravia, and from belgravia to mayfair. there were 
three or four realli great houses--"houses" with a capit h--such as 
grosvenor house, stafford house, dudley house, and montagu house--wher 
a ball could scarc help be an event--or, as pennialinu would 
say, "a function." but, put these on one side, the great mass of 
hostess contriv to give excel balls, where everi one went and 
everi one enjoy themselves, with veri littl fuss and no ostentation. 
the drawing-room of an ordinari hous in belgravia or grosvenor squar 
made a perfectli suffici ballroom. A good floor, a good band, and 
plenti of light, were the onli essenti of success. decor wa 
repres by such quaint devic as pink muslin on the banisters, 
or green festoon depend from the chandelier. A good supper wa 
an addit merit; and, if the host produc hi best champagne, 
he wa held in just esteem by danc men. but yet I well rememb a 
cold supper at a ball which the present king and queen attended, in 
1881, and no one grumbled, though perhap the young blood thought it 
a littl old-fashioned. the essenc of a good ball wa not expens or 
display or overwhelm preparation, but the certainti that you would 
meet your friends. boy and girl danced, and marri women look on, 
or onli stole a waltz when their junior were at supper. In those day 
a ball wa realli a merry-making. 

nowaday I gather from the _morn post_ that ball are compar 
rare events, but what they lack in frequenc they make up in 
ostentation. As to the sum which the heit and the heims, the Le 
beer and the De porters, lavish on one night' entertain I hear 
statist account which not onli outrag economi but stagger 
credibility. here again the rush flood of ill-gotten gold ha 
overflow it banks, and pollut the "crystal river of unreprov 
enjoyment." 

there is yet anoth form of entertain which emul ostent 
ha destroyed. A few year ago there still were women in london who 
could hold a "salon." Of these gather the princip attract 
wa the hostess, and, in a secondari degree, the agreeabl of the 
peopl whom she could gather round her. Of fuss and finery, decor 
and display, there wa absolut nothing. A typic instanc of what 
I mean will perhap recur to the memori of some who read thi chapter. 
pictur to yourself two not veri larg and rather dingi rooms. the 
furnitur is dark and old-fashioned--mahogani and rosewood, with here 
and there a good cabinet or a french armchair. No pretti of lace 
and china; no flowers; and not veri much light. book everywhere, some 
good engravings, a comfort sofa, and a tray of tea and coffee. 
that wa all. It is difficult to conceiv a less ostentati or a 
more econom mode of entertaining; yet the ladi who presid over 
that "salon" had been for fifti year one of the most celebr women 
in europe; had been embrac by napoleon; had flirt with the alli 
sovereigns; had been describ by byron; had discuss scholarship 
with grote, and statecraft with metternich; had sate to lawrence, 
and cabal with antonelli. even in old age and decrepitud she 
open her room to her friend everi even in the year, and never, 
even in the depth of september, found her court deserted. certainli 
it wa a social triumph, and one ha onli to compar it with the 
scene in the stockbroker' saloon--th blaze of electr light, 
the jungl of flowers, the furnitur from sinclair's, the pictur 
from christie's--and to contrast the assembl guests. instead of 
celebrities, notorieties--woman at onc under-dress and over-dressed; 
men with cent. per cent. written deep in everi line of their express 
countenances; and, at the centr of the throng, a hostess in a diamond 
crown, who conduct her correspond by telegraph, becaus her 
spell is a littl shaki and mistak in telegram are charit 
attribut to the clerks. 

one of the worst properti of emul ostent is that it natur 
affect it victim with an insati thirst for money. If mrs. 
tymmyn in onslow garden is to have as good a dinner, and as smart 
a victoria, and as larg a tiara, as her friend mrs. goldbug in park 
lane, it is obviou that mr. tymmyn must find the money somehow. who 
will the end will the means; and, if social exig demand a 
larger outlay, the tymmyns cannot afford to be too scrupul about 
their method of provid for it. I suppos it is thi consider 
which make us just now a nation of gamblers, wherea our more 
respect but less adventur father were well content to be a 
nation of shopkeepers. 

Of course, in all age there ha been a gambl cliqu in society; 
but in old day it kept itself, as the say is, to itself. Of 
necess it alway wa on the look-out for neophyt to initi 
and to pillage, but the non-gambl major of societi regard 
the gambl minor with horror; and a man who palpabl meant to 
make money out of a visit to a countri hous would probabl have been 
request to withdraw. "order a fli for mr. L. at eleven o'clock," 
said old lord crew to the butler when a guest had commit a social 
atroc under hi roof. "thank you, lord crewe," said mr. l., "but not 
for me. I am not go to-day." "oh yes, you are," respond the host, 
and secret himself in hi privat apart till the offend had 
been duli extruded. similar justic would, I think, have been dealt 
out to a gambler who rook the young and the inexperienced. not so 
to-day; the pigeon, howev unfledg and tender, is the appoint 
prey of the rook, and the vener bird who doe the pluck is 
entir undet by ani consider of pity, shame, or fear. "i 
he ani good?" is a question which circul round the board of green 
cloth whenev a new face fresh from oxford or sandhurst is note in 
the social throng. "oh yes, he' all right; I know hi people," may 
be the cheer response; or else, in a veri differ note, "no, he 
hasn't got a feather to fli with." fortun is the youth on whom thi 
disparag verdict is pronounced, for in that case he may escap the 
benevol attent of the 

"many-wint crow 
that lead the gambl rookeri home." 

but even impecunios doe not alway protect the inexperienced. A 
ladi who had live for some year in the countri return to london not 
long ago, and, enumer the social chang which she had observed, 
she said, "peopl seem to marri on £500 a year and yet have diamond 
tiaras." It was, perhaps, a too hasti generalization, but an instanc 
in point immedi recur to my recollection. A young coupl had 
marri with no other mean of subsist than smartness, good looks, 
and pleasant manners. after a prolong tour round the countri hous 
of their innumer friends, they settl down at woolwich. "whi 
woolwich?" wa the natur enquiry; and the reason, when at length 
it came to light, wa highli characterist of the age. It appear 
that these kind young peopl use to give nice littl even parties, 
invit the "gentlemen cadets" from woolwich academy, and make them 
play card for money. the devic of set up housekeep on the 
pocket-money of babe and suckl is thoroughli symptomat of our 
decadence. emul ostent make everi one want more money than he 
has, and at the same time drug all scrupl of conscienc as to the 
method of obtain it. 




xlix 

principl and prejudic 


mr. J. A. froud onc told me that he did not in the least mind the 
accus which wa brought against him (certainli not without reason) 
of be prejudiced. "A good stiff prejudice," he said, "i a veri 
use thing. It is like a rusti weathercock. It will yield to a strong 
and long-continu blast of conviction, but it doe not veer round and 
round in complianc with everi shift current of opinion." 

what mr. froud express other peopl felt, though perhap they would 
not have care to avow it so honestly. 

one of the most notabl chang which I have seen is the decay of 
prejudice. In old day peopl felt strongli and spoke strongly, and 
act as they spoke. In everi controversi they were absolut certain 
that they were right and that the other side wa wrong, and they did 
not minc their word when they express their opinions. 

the first lord leicest of the present creation (1775-1844) told my 
father (1807-1894) that, when he wa a boy, hi grandfath had taken 
him on hi knee and said, "now, my dear tom, whatev els you do 
in life, mind you never trust a tory;" and lord leicest added, "I 
never have, and, by george, I never will." On the other hand, when 
dr. longley, afterward archbishop of canterbury, did homag on hi 
appoint to the see of ripon, king william iv. said, "bishop of 
ripon, I charg you, as you shall answer befor almighti god, that you 
never by word or deed give encourag to those d---- d whigs, who 
would upset the church of england." 

john keble, the gentl saint of the tractarian movement, when he saw 
the whig prepar to attack the properti of the church, proclaim 
that the time had come when "scoundrel should be call scoundrels." 
and the tractarian had no monopoli of vigor invective, for, when 
their famou "tract xc." incur the censur of an evangel dean, 
he urban remark that "he would be sorri to trust the author of 
that tract with hi purse." 

macaulay, on the morn after a vital division, in which the whig had 
save their place by seventy-nin votes, wrote triumphantli to hi 
sister-- 

"so hang the dirti tories, and let them starv and pine, 
and hurrah! for the major of gloriou seventy-nine." 

the same cordial partisan wrote of a polit oppon that he wa "a 
bad, a veri bad, man; a disgrac to polit and to literature;" and, 
of an acquaint who had offend him socially, "hi power gone; 
hi spite immortal--a dead nettle." 

the great and good lord shaftesbury, repudi the theolog of "ecc 
homo," pronounc it "the most pestilenti book ever vomit from 
the jaw of hell;" and, divid hi polit favour with admir 
impartiality, he denounc "the brazen faces, low insults, and accurs 
effrontery" of the radicals; declar that mr. gladstone' "public 
life had long been an effort to retain hi principl and yet not lose 
hi position;" and dismiss lord beaconsfield as "a leper, without 
principle, without feeling, without regard to anything, human or 
divine, beyond hi person ambition." In the same spirit of hearti 
prejudice, bishop wilberforc deplor the polit exig which 
had driven hi friend gladston into "the foul arm of the whigs." 
In the opposit camp wa rang a lady, well rememb in the inner 
circl of whiggery, who never would enter a four-wheel cab until she 
had elicit from the driver that he _wa not_ a puseyit and _was_ a 
whig. 

"mamma," ask a littl girl of whig parentage, who from her cradl had 
heard noth but denunci of her father' polit opponents, 
"are tori born wicked, or do they grow wick afterwards?" and her 
mother judici replied, "mi dear, they are born wick and grow 
worse." 

but alas! they are "gone down to hades, even mani stalwart son of 
heroes,"--with king william at their head, and lord shaftesburi and 
lord leicester, and kebl and macaulay and froud in hi wake--men who 
knew what they believed, and, know it, were not asham to avow it, 
and saw littl to prais or like in the adher of a contrari opinion. 

they are gone, and we are left--an unprejudiced, but an invertebr 
and a flaccid, generation. No one seem to believ anyth veri 
firmly. No one ha the slightest notion of put himself to ani 
inconveni for hi belief. No one dream of dislik or distrust 
a polit or religi opponent, or of treat differ of opinion 
as a line of social cleavage. 

In old days, king leopold of belgium told bishop wilberforc that 
"the onli posit for a church wa to say, 'believ thi or you are 
damned.'" to-day noth in religion is regard as unquestion 
true. when the late archbishop benson first becam acquaint with 
societi in london, he asked, in shock amazement, "what do these 
peopl believe?"--and no veri satisfactori answer wa forthcoming. If 
societi ha ani religi belief (and thi is more than questionable), 
it hold them with the loosest grasp, and is on the easiest term of 
intercours with everi other belief and unbelief. the most fashion 
teacher of religion have one eye nervous fix on the ever-shift 
current of negation, talk plausibl about put the faith in it 
proper relat with modern thought, and toil pant in the wake of 
science; onli to find each fresh theori explod just at the moment 
when they have manag to apprehend it. 

We use to be taught in our nurseri that, when "old daddi longleg 
wouldn't say hi prayers," it wa our duti to "take him by the left 
leg and throw him downstairs;" and the student of folklor will be 
pleas to observ in thi ditti the immemori inclin of mankind 
to punish peopl who will not squar their religion with ours. the 
spirit of religi persecut die hard, but the decay of prejudic 
ha sap it strength. It doe not thrive in the atmospher of modern 
indifferentism, and admir ladi who believ that ritualist ride 
donkey on palm sunday and sacrific lamb on good friday find it 
difficult to reviv the cri of "no popery" with ani practic effect. 

the decay of prejudic in the sphere of polit is even more 
remark than in that of religion. In old days, polit agreement 
wa a strong and a constrain bond. when peopl saw a clear right and 
wrong in politics, they govern their privat as well as their public 
life accordingly. peopl who held the same polit belief live and 
die together. In societi and hospitality, in work and recreation, in 
journal and literature--even in such seemingli indiffer matter 
as art and the drama--they were close and perman associated. 

eton wa suppos to cherish a romant affect for the stuarts, 
and therefor to be a fit train place for suck tories; harrow 
had alway been hanoverian, and therefor attract littl whig to 
it hill. oxford, with it carolin theolog and jacobit tradition, 
wa the tori university; cambridg wa the nursing-moth of whigs, 
until edinburgh, under the influenc of jeffrey and brougham, tore her 
babe from her breast. In societi you must choos between the duchess 
of devonshir and the duchess of gordon, or, in a later generation, 
between ladi holland and ladi jersey. In clubland the width of st. 
james' street mark a divid line of abysm depth; and to thi day 
"grillon's" remain the memori of an attempt, then unique, to bring 
politician of opposit side togeth in social intercourse. On the 
one side stood scott--wher burk had stood befor him--th guardian 
angel of monarchi and aristocracy: on the other were shelley and byron, 
and (till they turn their coats) the emancip singer of freedom 
and humanity. the two polit parti had even their favourit 
actors, and the tori swore by kembl while the whig roar for kean. 

then, as now, the tori were a wealthy, powerful, and highly-organ 
confederacy. the whig were notori a famili party. from john, lord 
gower, who die in 1754, and wa the great-great-great-grandfath of 
the present duke of sutherland, descend all the gowers, levesons, 
howards, cavendishes, grosvenors, harcourts, and russel who walk on 
the face of the earth. It is a goodli company. well might thackeray 
exclaim, "i'm not a whig; but oh, how I should like to be one!" 

lord beaconsfield describ in "coningsby" how the radic 
manufacturer, send hi boy to eton, charg him to form no 
intimaci with hi father' hereditari foes. thi may have been a 
flight of fancy; but certainly, when a lad wa go to oxford or 
cambridge, hi parent and famili friend would warn him against 
enter into friendship with the other side. the univers club 
which he join and the vote which he gave at the union were watch 
with anxiou care. He wa earli initi into the polit societi 
to which hi father belonged. extran intimaci were regard 
with the most suspici anxiety. mother did all they knew to make 
their darl acquaint with daughter of famili whose polit 
faith wa pure, and I have myself learned, by not remot tradition, 
the indign horror which pervad a great whig famili when the 
heir-presumpt to it honour marri the daughter of a tori lord 
chamberlain. "that girl will ruin the polit of the famili and undo 
the work of two hundr years" wa the prophecy; and I have seen it 
fulfilled. 




L 

cultur 


one of the social chang which most impress me is the decay of 
intellectu cultivation. thi may sound paradox in an age which 
habitu talk so much about educ and culture; but I am 
persuad that it is true. dilettant is universal, and a smatter 
of erudition, infinit more offens than honest and manli 
ignorance, ha usurp the place which wa formerli occupi by genuin 
and liber learning. My own view of the subject is probabl ting by 
the fact that I wa born a whig and brought up in a whiggish society; 
for the whig were rather special the alli of learning, and made it 
a point of honour to know, though never to parade, the best that ha 
been thought and written. veri like they had no monopoli of culture, 
and the tori were just as well-informed. but a man "belong to hi 
belongings," and one can onli describ what one ha seen; and here the 
contrast between past and present is palpabl enough. I am not now 
think of profess scholar and students, such as lord stanhop and 
sir charl bunbury, or of profess blue-stockings, such as barbarina 
ladi dacr and georgiana ladi chatterton; but of ordinari men and women 
of good famili and good position, who had receiv the usual educ 
of their class and had profit by it. 

mr. gladston use to say that, in hi schoolday at eton, it wa 
possibl to learn much or to learn nothing, but it wa not possibl to 
learn superficially. and one saw the same in afterlife. what peopl 
profess to know they knew. the affect of cultur wa despised; 
and ignorance, where it existed, wa honestli confessed. for example, 
everi one knew italian, but no one pretend to know german. I rememb 
men who had never been to a univers but had pass straight from 
a public school to a cavalri regiment or the hous of commons, and 
who yet could quot horac as easili as the present gener quot 
kipling. these peopl inherit the tradit of mrs. montagu, 
who "vindic the geniu of shakespear against the calumni of 
voltaire," and they knew the greatest poet of all time with an absolut 
eas and familiarity. they did not troubl themselv about variou 
read and corrupt text and difficult passages. they had noth in 
common with that true father of all shakespearean criticism, mr. curdl 
in "nichola nickleby," who had written a treatis on the question 
whether juliet' nurse' husband wa realli "a merri man" or whether 
it wa mere hi widow' affection partial that induc her so 
to report him. but they knew the whole mass of the play with a wide 
and gener intimacy; their speech wa satur with the immort 
diction, and hamlet' specul were their nearest approach to 
metaphysics. 

broadli speaking, all educ peopl knew the english poet down to 
the end of the eighteenth century. byron and moor were enjoy with 
a sort of furtiv and fear pleasure; and wordsworth wa tolerated. 
everi one knew scott' novel by heart, and had hi or her favourit 
heroin and hero. 

then, again, all educ peopl knew histori in a broad and 
comprehens way. they did not concern themselv about ethnolog 
theories, influenc of race and climat and geography, stream of 
tendency, and the oper of unseen laws; but they knew all about the 
great peopl and the great event of time. they were convers with 
all that wa concret and ascertainable; and they took side as eagerli 
and as definit in the strife of yorkist and lancastrian, protest 
and papist, roundhead and cavalier, as in the controversi over the 
reform bill or the repeal of the corn laws. 

then, again, all educ peopl knew the law of architectur and of 
painting; and, though it must be confess that in these respect their 
view were not veri original, still they were found on first-hand 
knowledg of famou models, and, though conventional, were never 
ignorant. 

but it will be said that all thi repres no veri overwhelm mass 
of culture, and that, if these were all the accomplish which the 
last gener had to boast of, their successor have no reason to 
dread comparison. 

well, I expressli said that I wa not describ learn or even 
except well-read people, but mere the gener level of 
educ society; and that level is, I am persuaded, infinit lower 
than it wa in former generations. Of cours there are instanc to the 
contrari which perplex and disturb the public judgment, and give rise 
to the delus that thi is a learn age. thu we have in societi and 
polit such scholar as lord milner and mr. asquith and mr. herbert 
paul; but then there have alway been some scholar in public life, so 
there is noth remark in the persist of the type; whereas, 
on the other hand, the system of smatter and top-dress which 
pervad univers and public school produc an ever-increas 
crop of gentlemen who, like mr. riley in "the mill on the floss," have 
brought away with them from oxford or cambridg a gener sens of 
know latin, though their comprehens of ani particular latin is 
not ready. 

It is, I believe, gener admit that we speak french less fluentli 
and less idiomat than our fathers. the "barbar neglect" of 
italian, which use to rous mr. gladstone' indignation, is now 
complete; and an even superstiti respect for the german languag is 
accompani by a curiou ignor of german literature. I rememb an 
excel pictur in _punch_ which depict that ideal repres 
of skin-deep culture--th rev. robert elsmere--on hi knee befor 
the sceptic squire, saying, "pray, pray, don't mention the name of 
anoth german writer, or I shall have to resign my living." 

then, again, as regard women; of whom, quit as much as of men, I wa 
think when I describ the cultur of bygon society. here and there 
we see startl instanc of erudit which throw a reflect and 
undeserv glori upon the undistinguish average. thu we have seen a 
ladi senior wrangler and a ladi senior classic, and I myself have the 
honour of know a sweet girl-gradu with golden hair, who got two 
first at oxford. 

the face of the earth is cover with girls' high schools, and women' 
colleg stand where they ought not. I am told, but do not know, 
that girl-undergradu are permit to wit physiolog 
experi in the torture-den of science; and a complet emancip 
in the matter of read ha introduc women to region of thought and 
feel which in old day were the peculiar domain of men. the result 
are not far to seek. 

one ladi boldli take the field with an assault on christianity, and 
her apparatu of belat critic and second-hand learn set all 
societi agape. anoth fill a novel with morbid pathology, slay 
the villain by heart-disease, or make the heroin interest with 
phthisis; and people, forget mr. casaubon and clifford gray, 
exclaim, "how marvellous! thi is, indeed, origin research." A third, 
a fourth, and a fifth devot themselv to the task of readjust 
the relat of the sexes, and fill their passion volum with 
seduct and lubricity. and here, again, just becaus our mother did 
not traffic in these wares, the undiscern public think that it ha 
discov a new vein of real though unsavouri learning, and ladi 
say, "it is not exactli a pleasant book, but one cannot help admir 
the power." 

now I submit that these abnorm are no substitut for decent 
and reason culture. pedantri is not learning; and a vast deal of 
specialism, "mugged-up," as boy say, at the british museum and the 
london library, may co-exist with a profound ignor of all that is 
realli worth knowing. It sound veri intellectu to theoriz about the 
authorship of the fourth gospel, and to scoff at st. john' "senil 
iter and contort metaphysics"; but, when a clergyman read 
st. paul' eulog on chariti instead of the address at the end of a 
wedding, one of hi hearer said, "how veri appropri that was! where 
did you get it from?" 

We can all patter about the trace of bacon' influenc in "the merri 
wive of windsor," and ransack our famili histori for the origin 
of "mr. W. h." but, when "cymbeline" wa put on the stage, societi 
wa startl to find that the title-rôl wa not a woman's. A year or 
two ago some excel scene from jane austen' novel were given 
in a belgravian drawing-room, and a ladi of the highest notoriety, 
enthusiast prais the performance, enquir who wa the author 
of the dialogu between mr. and mrs. john dashwood, and whether he had 
written anyth else. 

I have known in these later year a judg who had never seen the view 
from richmond hill; a publicist who had never heard of lord althorp; 
and an authoress who did not know the name of izaak walton. but 
probabl the most typic illustr of modern cultur wa the repli 
of a ladi who had been enthus over the wagnerian cycle, and, when 
I ask her to tell me quit honestly, as between old friends, if she 
realli enjoy it, replied, "oh yes! I think one like wagner--_doesn't 
one_?" 




LI 

religion 


there onc wa an evangel ladi who had a latitudinarian daughter 
and a ritualist son. On sunday morning, when they were forsak the 
famili pew and set out for their respect place of objection 
worship, these graceless young peopl use to join hand and exclaim, 
"look at us, dear mamma! Do we not exemplifi what you are so fond of 
saying, 'infidel and superstition, those kindr evils, go hand in 
hand'?" 

the combin thu flippantli state is a conspicu sign of the 
present times. the decay of religion and the increas of superstit 
are among the most noteworthi of the social chang which I have seen. 

when I speak of the decay of religion, of cours I must be understood 
to refer onli to extern observances. As to interior convictions, I 
have neither the will nor the power to investig them. I deal onli 
with the habit of religi practice, and in thi respect the contrast 
between then and now is mark indeed. 

In the first place, grace wa then said befor and after dinner. I do 
not know that the ceremoni wa veri edifying, but it wa tradit 
and respectable. bishop wilberforce, in hi diary, tell of a greedi 
clergyman who, when ask to say grace at a dinner-party, use to 
vari the form accord to the charact of the wine-glass which he 
saw befor him on the table. If they were champagne-glasses, he use 
to begin the benedict with "bounti jehovah"; but, if they were 
onli claret-glasses, he said, "we are not worthi of the least of thi 
mercies." 

charl kingsley, who gener drew hi social portrait from actual 
life, describ the impress eloqu of the rev. mr. o'blareaway, 
who inaugur an except good dinner by pray "that the daili 
bread of our less-favour brethren might be merci vouchsaf to 
them." 

there wa a well-rememb squir in hertfordshir whose love of hi 
dinner wa constantli at war with hi pietist traditions. He alway 
had hi glass of sherri pour out befor he sat down to dinner, so 
that he might get it without a moment' delay. one night, in hi 
gener eagerness, he upset the glass just as he drop into hi 
seat at the end of grace, and the formula ran on to an unexpect 
conclusion, thus: "for what we are go to receiv the lord make us 
truli thankful--d---- n!" 

but, if the incongru which attend grace befor dinner were 
disturbing, still more so were the solemn of the close. grace 
after dinner alway happen at the moment of loudest and most gener 
conversation. for an hour and a half peopl had been stuf as if 
their live depend on it--"on feed like forty." after a good deal 
of sherry, the champagn had made it tardi appearance, had perform 
it welcom rounds, and had in turn been succeed by port and 
home-brew beer. out of the abund of the mouth the heart speaketh, 
and everi one wa talk at once, and veri loud. perhap the venu 
wa laid in a fox-hunt country, and then the air wa full of such 
voic as these: "were you out with the squir to-day?" "ani sport?" 
"yes, we'd rather a nice gallop." "plenti of the anim about, I hope?" 
"well, I don't know. I believ that new keeper at boreham wood is a 
vulpicide. I don't half like hi looks." "what an infern villain! A 
man who would shoot a fox would poison hi own grandmother." "sh! sh!" 
"what' the matter?" "_for what we have received_," &c. 

Or perhap we are dine in london in the height of the season. 
fox-hunt is not the theme, but the convers is loud, animated, 
and discursive. A lyric echo from the summer of 1866 is born back 
upon my memory-- 

_agreeabl rattle._ 

thi news from abroad is alarming; 
you'v seen the _pall mall_ of to-day! 
oh! ilma di murska wa charm 
to-night in the _flauto_, they say. 

not a ghost of a chanc for the tories, 
In spite of adullam and lowe; 
By the bye, have you heard the queer stori 
Of overend, gurney and co.? 

_live young lady._ Do you know you'v been talk at the top of your 
voic all the time grace wa go on? 

_agreeabl rattle._ not really? i'm aw sorry. but our host mumbl 
so, I never can make out what he' saying. 

_live young lady._ I can't imagin whi peopl don't have grace after 
dessert. I know i'm much more thank for strawberri ice than for 
saddl of mutton. 

and so on and so forth. On the whole, I am not sure that the abolit 
of grace is a sign of moral degeneracy, but I note it as a social 
chang which I have seen. 

anoth such chang is the disus of famili players. In the day of 
my youth, morn prayer at least form part of the ritual of everi 
well-ord household. the scene recur vividli to the mental eye--th 
dining-room arrang for breakfast, and the master of the hous in 
top-boot and breech with the famili bibl in close proxim to the 
urn on the table. mamma veri often breakfast upstairs; but the son 
and daughter of the house, perhap with their toilett not quit 
complete, came in with a rush just as the proceed began, and a 
long row of maid-servants, head by the housekeep and support by 
the footmen, were rang with militari precis against the opposit 
wall. In famili of a more pronouncedli religi tone, even 
prayer were frequent superadded; and at ten o'clock the assembl 
guest were arous from "squails" or "consequences" by the entranc 
of the butler with "thornton' famili prayers" on a silver salver. In 
one veri evangel hous which I knew in my youth, print prayer 
were supersed by extempor devotions, and, as the experi seem 
successful, the servant were invit to make their contribut in 
their own words. As long as onli the butler and the housekeep voic 
the aspir of their fellows, all wa well; but, in an evil moment, 
a recalcitr kitchenmaid utter an unlooked-for petit for her 
master and mistress--"and we pray for sir thoma and her ladyship. oh! 
may they have now heart given them." and the bare suggest that 
there wa room for such an improv caus a prompt return to the 
live oracl of henri thornton. 

I note the disappear of the domest liturgy; and here again, as in 
the matter of grace, I submit that, unless the rite can be decently, 
reasonably, and rever performed, it is more honour in the breach 
than in the observance. 

much more signific is the secular of sunday. thi is not 
mere a change, but a chang conspicu for the worse. the amount 
of church-go alway differ in differ circles; religi peopl 
went often and careless peopl went seldom, but almost everi one went 
sometimes, if mere from a sens of duti and decorum. mr. gladstone, 
whose tradit were evangelical, thought veri poorli of what he 
call a "once-er," _i.e._ a person who attend divin servic onli 
onc on a sunday. He himself wa alway a "twice-er," and often a 
"thrice-er"; but to-day it would puzzl the social critic to discov a 
"twice-er," and even a "once-er" is suffici rare to be noticeable. 

but far more seriou than the decay of mere attend at church is 
the complet abolit of the day of rest. people, who have noth 
to do but to amus themselves, work at that entranc occup 
with redoubl energi on sundays. If they are in london, they whirl 
off to spend the "week-end" amid the meretrici splendour of the 
stockbroker' suburban paradise; and, if they are entertain friend 
at their countri houses, they play bridg or tenni or croquet; they 
row, ride, cycle, and drive, spend the afternoon in a punt, and wind up 
the even with "the washington post." 

all thi is an enorm chang sinc the day when the onli decor 
amus for sunday wa a visit after church to the stables, or a 
walk in the afternoon to the home farm or the kitchen garden; and, of 
course, it entail a correspond amount of labour for the servants. 
maid and valet spend the "week-end" in a whirl of pack and 
unpacking, and the whole staff of the kitchen is continu employed. 

In old day peopl use to reduc the meal on sunday to the narrowest 
dimensions, in order to give the servant their weekli due of rest and 
recreation, and in a famili with which I am connect the tradit 
bill of fare for sunday' dinner, drawn by a cook who live befor the 
school board, is still affection remembered-- 

soup. 

cold beef. 

salad. 

_cold sweats._ 

In brief, respect peopl use to eat and drink sparingli on sunday, 
caus no unnecessari work, went a good deal to church, and fill up 
their leisur time by visit sick peopl in the cottag or teach 
in the sunday school. No doubt there wa a trace of puritan strict 
about the former practice, and peopl too gener forgot that the 
first day of the week is by christian tradit a feast. societi 
ha rediscov that great truth. It observ the weekli feast by 
over- itself, and honour the day of rest by over-work it 
dependants. 




lii 

superstit 


"superstit and infidel usual go together. profess atheist 
have traffick in augury, and men who do not believ in god 
will believ in ghosts." to-day I take up my parabl concern 
superstition, to which, time out of mind, the human spirit ha betaken 
itself as soon as it part compani with faith. 

I onc ask a ladi who, in her earlier life, had live in the veri 
heart of society, and who return to it after a long absence, what wa 
the chang which struck her most forcibly. she promptli replied, "the 
growth of superstition. I hear peopl serious discuss ghosts. In 
my day peopl who talk in that way would have been put in bedlam; 
their relat would have requir no other proof that they were mad." 

My own experi entir confirm thi testimoni as to the 
develop of superstition, and I have had some peculiarli favour 
opportun of observ it moral effect upon it votaries. the 
onli superstit toler in my youth wa table-turning, and that 
wa alway treat as more than half a joke. To sit in a darken 
room round a tea-table, secretli join hand under the mahogany, and 
"commun a revolv motion" to it (a mr. pickwick to hi fists) 
wa not bad fun when the compani wa mainli young and larky, but 
contain one or two seriou peopl who desir to probe the mysteri to 
it depths. or, perhaps, our psychic forc would caus the respect 
piec of furnitur to rear itself upon one leg, and deal out with a 
ponder foot mysteri raps, which the seriou peopl interpret 
with their own admir solemnity. I well rememb a massiv gentleman 
with an appal stammer who proclaim that some lost document which 
we had ask the tabl to discov would be found in the vatican 
library, "wrap in a rag palimpsest of tertullian;" and the 
quaint of the utter dissolv the tables, or at least the 
table-turners, in laughter. thi particular form of superstit becam 
discredit among respect peopl when sharper got hold of it and 
use it as an engin for rob the weak-minded. It died, poor thing, 
of exposure, and it epitaph wa written by brown in "mr. sludge, 
the medium." 

It wa the same with ghost-stories. peopl told them--partli to fill 
gap when reason convers failed, and partli for the fun of 
make credul hearer stare and gasp. but no one, except ladi as 
weak-mind as byng' half-aunt in "happi thoughts," ever thought of 
take them seriously. bishop wilberforc invent a splendid stori 
about a priest and a slide panel and a conceal confession; and I 
believ that he habitu use it as a foolometer, to test the mental 
capac of new acquaintances. but the bishop belong to that older 
gener which despis superstition, and dure the last few years, 
twaddl of thi kind ha risen to the digniti of a pseudo-science. 

necrom is a favourit substitut for religion. It suppli the 
element of mysteri without which the human spirit cannot long subsist; 
and, as it doe not requir it adher to practis self-denial, 
or get up earli on sunday, or subscrib to charities, or spend their 
leisur in evil-smel slums, it is a cult particularli well adapt 
to a self-indulg age. I vividli rememb a scene which occur 
just befor the coronation. A luxuri luncheon had been prolong by 
the aid of coffee, kümmel, and cigarett till four o'clock; and the 
necromancers--surfeited, flushed, and a littl maudlin--wer loll 
round the drawing-room fire. A whisper colloquy in a corner wa heard 
through the surround chatter, and the hostess saw her opportunity. 
"dear ladi De spook, do let us hear. I know you are such a wonder 
medium." 

_ladi De spook._ really, it wa noth at all out of the common. I had 
come home dead tire from the opera, and just as I wa go to bed I 
heard that rap--you know what I mean? 

_mr. sludge_ (enthusiastically). Oh yes, inde I do! No one who ha 
ever heard it can ever forget it. 

_ladi De spook_ (resuming). well, and do you know it turn out to be 
poor dear lord De spook. It wa wonder how energet he rapped, 
for you know he wa quit paralys year befor he died; and the 
curiou thing wa that I couldn't make out what he said. It seem 
to be, "don't buy. sarah. search." I wa too tire to go on talk 
to him, so I went to bed; but next day, do you know, my maid found 
the coronet which hi first wife, whose name wa sarah, had worn at 
the last coronation. I wa just go to order a new one. wasn't it a 
wonder interposition!--such a saving! 

_chorus_ (sentimentally). ah, wonder indeed! our dear one are never 
realli lost to us. 

close connect with necrom is clairvoyance. A man whom I knew 
well wa taken suddenli and serious ill, and hi relations, who were 
enthusiast spookists, telegraph for the celebr clairvoyant 
mrs. endor. she duli arrived, threw herself into a trance, declar 
that the patient would die, came to, and declar that there wa 
noth much the matter, and that he would be about again in two or 
three days. then, have pocket her cheque, she return to london. 
the patient grew rapidli worse, and died; and hi relations, though I 
am sure they sincer mourn him, were much sustain in the hour 
of bereav by the thought that the opinion which mrs. endor had 
given in her tranc had prove to be the right one, and that spiritu 
scienc wa justifi by the result. 

but, after all, necrom and clairvoy are a littl old-fashioned. 
crystal-gaz is more modish. 'ti as easi as lying. you gather 
open-mouth round a glass ball, and the gift gazer report that 
which he or she can see, but which is invis to grosser eyes. there 
are no bound to the fascin rang of a crystal-gazer' fancy, nor 
to the awestruck credul with which hi revel are received. 

but crystal is not the onli medium through which a purg eye can 
discern the mysteri future. coffee-grounds, though less romantic, 
are veri serviceable. our hostess is an expert in thi form of science, 
and, be a thoroughli amiabl woman, she make the coffe say pretti 
much what we should like to hear. "dear mr. taper, thi is delightful. 
you will be prime minist befor you die. It is true that your parti 
will not be in offic again just yet; but 'hope on, hope ever,' and 
trust your star." 

"oh! mr. garbage, I have such good news for you. your next book will be 
an immens success, and, after that, messrs. skin & flint will be more 
liberal, and, what with the american copyright and the act rights, 
you will make quit a fortune." 

close akin to the scienc of coffee-ground is that of palmistry. 
A wretch gipsi who "tell fortunes" at a race-meet is sent to 
prison; but, when st. berengaria' get up a bazaar for it new vestry, 
a bejewel ladi sit in a secret chamber (for admiss to which an 
extra half-crown is charged), and, after scrutin your line of 
life, tell you that you have had the influenza; and, project her 
soul into futurity, predict that the next time you have it you will 
get pneumonia unless you are veri careful. 

Of course, these minor superstit are mainli ridiculous, and to 
get up moral indign over them would be a wast of force. but 
one cannot speak so lightli of the degrad cult which are group 
togeth under the name of spiritualism. I have known a "spiritu 
wife" who wa highli commend in spookish circl becaus she left her 
husband, family, and home in one contin and cross the world to 
find her "affinity" in another. I have known a most promis boy whose 
health wa destroy and hi career ruin by a hypnot experi 
perform on him without hi parents' knowledge. I have known a 
mesmer clergyman who cozen the women of hi congreg out of 
money, character, and in some case reason. where occult is pursued, 
all verac and self-respect disappear; prurienc find a congeni 
lodgment, and the issu is--well--what we sometim see exhibit in 
all it uncomeli at the central crimin court. 

the wisest lawgiv who ever live said, "thou shalt not suffer a 
witch to live." and a great judg act on the rule. but that wa a 
long time ago. We have improv upon the jurisprud of mose and the 
method of sir matthew hale. stone and hang are a littl out of 
date, but boycot is a remedi still within our reach. whoso is wise 
will ponder these things, and will give occultists, male and female, an 
uncommonli wide berth. 




liii 

the remnant 


some recent observ of mine on the deterior of societi have 
drawn thi interest respons from an emin clergyman in the north 
of london:-- 

"i it possibl that in 'society' itself there is a point of resist 
which may be touch by an effect appeal come from the wholesom 
element in english life? belong as I do to that section of english 
life which is a stranger to societi in the technic sense, I am deepli 
impress with the taint which come to all circl of societi from 
the contamin of the circl at the top. To elicit a strong opinion 
and a resolut determin from what I may call the puritan side of 
english life, may be perhap the first step toward the correct 
of the evil which mr. russel describes. are there not in societi 
itself some men and women who retain the high ideal and the strenuou 
purpos of their ancestry? can they be induc to rais their protest, 
to assert their principles, and open the way to a better--becaus a 
purer--future? I ventur to make thi appeal becaus it is my fix 
convict that even in the worst and most degrad societi there are 
men who sigh for better things, just as in the worst and most degrad 
men there remain a desire, howev overlaid, for regeneration." 

well, frankli I think that an amiabl insan delud my reverend 
friend if he expect a moral reform in the sort of societi which 
I have been describing. It would tax the combin energi of st. john 
the baptist, savonarola, the two wesleys, and georg whitefield, all 
roll into one, to convinc the peopl whom I have in my mind of their 
ethic shortcomings. they have made their own beds, in everi sens of 
that express phrase, and must lie on them till the cataclysm come 
which will bring us all to our senses. 

but I am remind that I promis to write not exclus about 
deterior in society, but about chang of all kinds. that there 
ha been some chang for the better I readili admit, as well as an 
enorm number of chang for the worse. "all thing are double," say 
the son of sirach, "one against the other," and in thi close chapter 
I will tri to balanc our gain and our losses. 

that there ha alway been a mixtur of good and bad in societi is 
onli anoth way of say that societi is part of mankind; but, if I 
am right in my survey, the bad just now is flagrant and ostentati 
to a degre which we have not known in england sinc 1837. there wa 
onc a moralist who spoke of the narrow path which lay between right 
and wrong, and similarli there use to be a debat land which lay 
between the good and evil district of society. It wa inhabit by the 
peopl who, have no ethic convict of their own, go veri much as 
they are led. It wa written of them long ago that-- 

"they eat, they drink, they sleep, they plod, 
they go to church on sunday; 
and mani are afraid of god, 
and more of mrs. grundy." 

As long as mrs. grundi wa a real, though comical, guardian of social 
propriety--a long as the highest influenc in the social system 
tend toward virtu and decorum--th inhabit of the debat 
land were even pain respectable. but now that the "trend" (a 
pennialinu call it) is all the other way, and mrs. grundi ha been 
depos as a bore and an anachronism, they willingli follow the "smart" 
multitud to do evil; and so the area cover by social wicked is 
much larger than in former times. In other words, the evil of societi 
is both wors in qualiti and larger in quantiti than it wa fifty--or 
even twenty--year ago. 

now if thi be true--and I hold it to be unquestionable--what have we 
to set against it? I reply, the greatli increas activ of those 
who are realli good. In old day the good were good in a quiescent 
and letharg way. they were punctual in religi observances, public 
and private; exemplari in the home and the family, and gener to the 
poor. but their religion could scarc be call active, except in 
so far as potter about among the cottages, or teach a class of 
well-wash children in the sunday school, can be reckon as activ 
employments; and even such activ as these were as a rule confin 
to women. 

sir walter scott believ that "there were few young men, and those 
veri sturdi moralists, who would not rather be tax with some moral 
peccadillo than with want of horsemanship." and, in day much more 
recent than the belov sir walter's, men, if they were religious, 
studious kept their light under a bushel, and took the utmost pain 
to avoid be detect in act of chariti or devotion. 

nowaday all thi is changed, and changed, in my opinion, much for the 
better. religi peopl are readi to let the world know what they 
believe, and are activ in the pursuit of the thing which are pure 
and love and of good report. well-dress young men combin danc 
with slumming. untidi and dul are no longer the necessari 
concomit of virtue. offic of the guard sing in the choir and 
serv the altar. men whose name are written in the book of the peerag 
as well as the book of life conduct bible-class and hand round the 
hymn-book at mission-services. the group of young m.p.' who were 
nicknam "hughligans" show the astonish hous of common that 
religion is as practic a thing as politics, and (a one of them 
late said) they cheer encount that hot water which is the 
modern substitut for boil oil. the univers send their best 
athlet and social favourit to curaci in the slum or martyrdom 
in the mission-field. the exampl set by mr. jame adderley, when he 
left christ church and found the oxford hous at bethnal green, ha 
been follow in everi direction. both the universities, and most of 
the colleges, run "settlements," where laymen, in the interv of 
profession work and social enjoyment, spread religion, culture, and 
physic educ amid the "dim, common populations" of camberwel and 
stratford and poplar. 

the public schools, formerli denounc as "the seat and nurseri 
of vice," make their full contribut to activ religion. eton and 
winchest and harrow have their mission in crowd quarter of great 
towns. At one school, the boy have a guild of devotion; at another, a 
voluntari bible-class with which no master inter-meddles. and so the 
young citizen of the privileg order gain their first lesson in 
religi and social service, and carri the idea with them to the armi 
or the bar or the stock exchang or the hous of commons. all thi is, 
in my eyes, a social chang which is also a clear and enorm gain. 

but, if what I say is true of men, it is even more conspicu true 
of women. they are no longer content with the moder church-go 
at comfort hours, and the period visit to particularli clean 
cottages, which at one time were the sum-tot of their activities. 
everi well-organ parish ha it staff of woman-workers, who 
combin method with enthusiasm and pieti with common sense. belgravia 
and mayfair send armi of district-visitor to hoxton and poplar. 
girl from fashion homes, pretti and well dressed, sacrific 
their even to club and social gather for factory-hand and 
maids-of-all-work. beneath the glitter surfac of social life, there 
is a deep current of wise and devot effort for those unhappi be 
who are least abl to help themselves. and all thi philanthrop 
energi is distinct and avowedli christian. It is the work of 
men and women, young and old, wide differenti from one anoth 
in outward circumst of wealth and accomplish and social 
influence, but all agre about "the one thing needful," and all keen 
to confess their faith befor a hostil world. 

what, then, is the conclus of the whole matter? society, dure 
the year in which I have known it, ha chang enormously, alik in 
it exterior characterist and, as far as I can judge, in it inner 
spirit. while some of the chang have been simpli innocuous, and a 
few even beneficial, the great major have been gross and palpabl 
deteriorations. An onlook who knew societi well thu describ it 
present condition: "we are live in an age of decadence, and we 
pretend not to know it. there is not a featur wanting, though we 
cannot mention the worst of them. We are roman of the worst period, 
given up to luxuri and effeminacy, and care for noth but money. We 
care no more for beauti in art, but onli for a brutal realism. sport 
ha lost it manliness, and is a matter of pigeon from a trap, or a 
mountain of crush pheasant to sell to your own tradesmen. religion 
is come down to juggler and table-turn and philand with 
cult brought, like the rite of isis, from the east; and as for 
patriotism, it is turn on like beer at elect times, or work like 
a mechan doll by wire-pullers. We belong to one of the most corrupt 
gener of the human race. To find it equal one must go back to 
the worst time of the roman empire, and look devilish close then. 
but it' uncommonli amus to live in an age of decadence; you see 
the funniest sight and you get everi conceiv luxury, and you die 
befor the irrupt of the barbarians." 

thi is, I believe, a true indict against the age in which our lot 
is cast, although the utter ha just that touch of exagger 
which secur a hear for unpalat truth. but the man who wrote 
it left out of account that redeem element in our nation life 
which I have discuss in thi close chapter. after all, there is a 
world-wid differ between the "majority" and the "remnant,"--and 
the ten righteou men may yet save the guilti city. 




postscript 


_the bulk of thi book appear in the "manchest guardian," and my 
thank are due to mr. C. P. scott for permiss to reproduc it. the 
last twelv chapter were origin publish under the title, "for 
better? for worse?" and they reappear by the kind consent of mr. fisher 
unwin._ 

_g. W. E. r._ 

_twelfth night, 1907._ 


print by ballantyne, hanson & co. edinburgh & london 




transcriber' note: 

--obviou print and punctuat error were corrected. 





end of project gutenberg' see and hearing, by georg W. E. russel 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook see and hear *** 

***** thi file should be name 46821-8.txt or 46821-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/8/2/46821/ 

produc by giovanni fini, chri curnow and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org section 3. inform about the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org/licens 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
