the project gutenberg ebook of the live mummy, by ambros pratt 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org/licens 


title: the live mummi 

author: ambros pratt 

illustrator: loui D. fancher 

releas date: februari 23, 2019 [ebook #58944] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the live mummi *** 




produc by mari glenn krause, martin pettit and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi 
file wa produc from imag gener made avail 
by the internet archive/american libraries.) 






[illustration: 

the live mummi 

I swear by the king of heaven & of earth-- 

_frontispiece_ _page 244_] 




_the_ live mummi 

BY 
ambros pratt 

_with four illustr in color by_ 
loui D. fancher 

[illustration: decoration] 

_second edition_ 

new york 
frederick A. stoke compani 
publish 


copyright, 1910, by frederick A. stoke compani 

_all right reserved_ 

[illustration: logo _february, 1910_] 




the live mummi 




content 

chapter page 
I. concern the son OF hap 1 

ii. A patient OF the desert 13 

iii. two lie 25 

iv. the sarcophagus' perfum 29 

V. the shadow IN the cave 42 

vi. enter doctor bellevil 53 

vii. the one goddess 62 

viii. ottley show hi hand 75 

ix. A cool defianc 90 

X. the captur OF the coffin 96 

xi. good-by TO the nile 104 

xii. the meet 111 

xiii. hubbard IS jealou 124 

xiv. the push man 131 

xv. A quaint love pact 138 

xvi. ladi helen prescrib for her husband 145 

xvii. the séanc 155 

xviii. the unseen 173 

xix. the first victim 184 

xx. ladi helen' medicin oper 193 

xxi. hubbard' philosophi OF life 204 

xxii. the dead hand 211 

xxiii. I set out for the east 220 

xxiv. the gin IS sprung 226 

xxv. the mummi talk 238 

xxvi. A pleasant chat with A murder 246 

xxvii. unbound 262 

xxviii. the struggl IN the chamber 275 

xxix. save BY fire 293 

xxx. the last 305 




the live mummi 




chapter I 

concern the son of hap 

prefac 
I wa hard at work in my tent. I had almost complet translat 
the inscript of a small stele of amen-hotep iii, date B. c., 
1382, which with my own effort I had discovered, and I wa feel 
wonder self-satisfi in consequence, when of a sudden I heard a 
great commot without. almost immedi the tent flap wa lifted, 
and migdal abu' black face appeared. He look vastli excit for an 
arab, and he roll hi eye horribly. "what do you want?" I demand 
irritably. "did I not tell you I wa not to be disturbed?" 

He bent almost double. "excellency--a white sheik ha come ride on an 
ass, and with him a shameless female, also white." 

"the dickens!" I exclaimed, for I had not seen a european for nine 
weeks. 

migdal abu advanc with hand outstretched. "excellency, he would have 
me give you this." 

I took "this," and swore softli underbreath at the humourless 
pompos of my unknown countryman. It wa a pasteboard 
carte-de-visite. and we--in the heart of the libyan desert! 

with a laugh I look at the thing and read hi name--"sir robert 
ottley." 

"what!" I said, then sprang a-foot. ottley the great egyptologist. 
ottley the famou explorer. ottley the emin decipher of cuneiform 
inscriptions. ottley the millionair whose prodig in the caus of 
learn had in ten short year more than doubl the common stock of 
knowledg of the histori of the shepherd king of the nile. I had been 
long sinc a lad to meet him, and now he had come unask to see me 
out on the burn sand of yatibiri. 

trembl with excitement, I caught up a jacket, and hardli wait to 
thrust my arm into the sleeves, rush out of the tent. 

befor me, sit on an ass that wa alreadi sound asleep, despit a 
plagu of fli that play about it eyes, wa a littl bronze-faced, 
grizzl old man attir from head to foot in glisten white duck 
and wear on hi head an enorm pith helmet. My arabs, glad of an 
excus to ceas work, squat round him in a semi-circle. 

"sir robert ottley!" I cried. "A thousand welcomes." 

"you are veri good," he drawled. "I presum you are dr. pinsent." 

"at your service." 

He stoop a littl forward and offer me hi hand. 

"will you not dismount?" I asked. 

"thank you, no. I have come to ask a favour." then he glanc round him 
and began deliber to count my arabs. 

I survey him in blank astonishment. He possess a larg hawk-lik 
nose, a small thin-lip mouth and littl eye twinkl under brow 
that beetled. 

"twelve, and two of them are good for nothing; mere weeds," said sir 
robert. 

then he turn to me with a smile. "you will forgiv me?" he asked, 
ad quickly, "but then arab are cattle. there wa no person 
reflection." 

"A cup of coffee," I suggested. "the sun is dreadful. It would refresh 
you." 

"the sun is nothing," he replied, "and I have work to do. I am camp 
on the southern slope of the hill of rakh. It is twelv miles. I have 
found the tomb for which I have been search seven years. I thought I 
had enough arabs. I wa mistaken." 

"you may have the use of mine and welcome," I observed. 

He gave a queer littl bow. "he give twice who give quickly. the 
sarcophagu is in a rock hole forti feet beneath the level of the 
desert. I simpli must have it up to-night." 

"they shall start at once, and I shall go with them; I am as strong 
as six," I replied. then I shout some order to migdal abu. when I 
turn it wa to gasp. A woman had materialis from the sunbeams. I 
had complet forgotten that sir robert had a femal companion. all 
my eye had been for him. I swung off my hat and stammer some tardi 
word of welcom and invitation. 

sir robert interrupt me. "mi daughter--dr. pinsent," he drawl in 
slow, passionless tones. "mi daughter doe not requir ani refreshment, 
thank you, doctor." 

"I am too excited," said a singularli sweet voice. "father' discoveri 
ha put me into a fever. I realli could not eat, and coffe would choke 
me. but if you could give me a littl water." 

I rush into my tent and return with a brim metal cup. "the 
arab have broken all my glass ware," I said apologetically. 

she lift her veil and our eye met. she wa lovely. she smile and 
show a set of dazzl teeth. the incisor were inlaid with gold. I 
remark the fact in a sort of self-defens panic, for the truth is 
I am a shi idiot with pretti women. thank good she wa thirsti and 
did not notic my confusion. two minut afterward I wa mount on 
my donkey, and we were off on the long tramp to the hill of rakh, the 
arab trail behind us in a thin ill-humour line. We maintain 
the silenc of bad temper and excess heat until the sun sank into 
the sand. then, however, we wipe our foreheads, said a cheer 
good-by to the fli that had been torment us, and woke up. 

"I am immens oblig to you, dr. pinsent," said sir robert. 

"so am i," said miss ottley. 

"the boot is on the other foot," I replied. "it' kind of you to permit 
me to be present at your triumph. Is it a king?" 

"no," said miss ottley, "a priest of amen of the eighteenth dynasty." 

"oh, a priest." 

miss ottley bridl at my tone. "no king wa ever half as interest 
as _our_ priest," she declared. "he wa a wonder man in everi way, a 
prophet, a magician, and enorm powerful. besides, he is believ 
to have commit suicid for the sake of principle, and he predict 
hi own resurrect after a sleep of two thousand years." 

"he ha been dead 3285 years," sigh sir robert. 

"i that hi fault?" cri the girl. 

"it falsifi hi prophecy." 

she shrug her shoulders. 

"ptahm wa hi name," said sir robert, turn to me. "he wa the 
right-hand man of amen-hotep iv; but when that king chang hi 
religion and hi name and becam akhenaten and a devote of the old 
worship of heliopolis, ptahm appar kill himself as a protest 
against the deposit of amen, hi particular divinity." 

"read that," said miss ottley. 

she hand me a page of type-written manuscript. 

It ran as follows: 

"hearken to the order which are put upon you by ptahmes, name 
tahutimes, son of mery, son of hap. 

"all my way were regul even as the pace of an ibis. the 
hawk-head horu wa my protector like amulet upon my body. I train 
the troop of my lord. I made hi pylon 60 cubit long in the nobl 
rock of quartzite, most great in height and firm as heaven. I did 
not imit what had been done before. I wa the royal scribe of the 
recruits. muster wa done under me. I wa appoint judg of the 
palace; overs of all the prophet of the south and of the north. I 
wa appoint high priest of amen in the capital--k of all the gods. 
I wa made the eye and ear of the king: keeper of my lord' heart and 
fan-bear at the king' right hand. great men have come from afar to 
bow themselv befor me, bring present of ivori and gold, copper, 
silver and emery, lazuli, malachite, green felspar and vase of mern 
wood inlaid with white preciou stone sometim bear gold at one 
time 1000 deben (200 pound weight). for my fame wa carri abroad 
even as the fame of the king, 'lord of the sweet wind.' and there 
wa spoken of me by the son of paapi that my wisdom wa of a divin 
nature, becaus of my knowledg of futurities. yet on the sixth day of 
the month of pakhon in the 18th year I desir to rest. My lord, at the 
solicit of the great royal wife and mother nefertiti, ha put off 
the worship of hi predecessors. the name of amen is proscrib from 
the country. Ra is proscrib from the country. horu is proscrib 
from the country. aten is set up in their place and worship in the 
land. My lord ha even chang hi name. apiy is the high priest of the 
new god that is from the mesopotamian wilderness. amen, king of the 
gods, dandl my lord and is forsaken and proscribed. I am an old man 
and would rest: although my lord ha not forsaken me. He ha appoint 
me overs of all hi works. therefore, shall you carri me to the 
templ of kak, and give my bodi to the hand of the priest of amen who 
will wrap me in the linen sheet of horu without remov my heart, my 
entrail or my lungs. then you shall carri me to khizebh and enclos 
me in the place prepar for me; and cover my tomb to a depth of five 
fathom with the sand of the desert at that hour when no man look or 
listens. Do thi even as I command, and as royal scribe I trace the 
order with my pen. but you shall place my papyri and the sign by which 
I shall be known, and the stele of ivori engrav with the direct 
to the priest of amen who are to wake me from my sleep at the distant 
hour, in the tomb that is prepar for my bodi in the templ of 
merenptah and in such manner that I shall there appear to sleep. and 
all these thing you shall do, or my curs shall pursu you and your 
children and their children for the space of four hundr lives. nor 
shall you remov the endow of my gift nor touch them where they 
lie under a penalti of great moment." 

I strain my eye to catch the last words, for the dark wa 
alreadi set down upon the desert; and I wa profoundli interested. 

"wonderful!" I said, as I return her the document. "A papyrus, of 
course?" 

"yes, one of several. father found it seven year ago at dier el 
batiri." 

"I had not heard." 

sir robert coughed. "no," said he, "nor anyon else. I have never 
publish it. It did not come to me in the usual way. I bought it from 
an arab who had rifl the tomb in which it wa discovered." 

"and the other papyri and the ivori stele?" I questioned. 

"they are in my possession, too." 

"they enabl you doubtless to locat the real tomb that hold the 
body?" 

"they helped." 

then silenc supervened. To me it wa fill with wonder. I could not 
help ask myself what circumst could possibl have induc 
ottley to withhold so valuabl an histor treasur for so mani year 
from the world. such a cours of action wa utterli oppos to all 
practice, and the unwritten but immut law of scientif research. 
It seem strang at odds, too, with the man' reput character. It 
would have cover him with glori to have place hi discoveri befor 
the societi to which we both belonged. and a dozen incid relat 
of him far and wide, prove that he wa not indiffer to prais and 
fame. He read my thought probably, for at length he clear hi throat 
and spoke. 

"there were reason whi I should not blazon the find abroad," he said. 

"no doubt," I observed, with unintent dryness. 

"one papyru speak of a golden treasure," he went on quietly. "if 
published, it would have set thousand look for the tomb. In that 
case the chanc are that the bodi of ptahm would have been destroy 
by some vandal intent sole on pillage." 

"you assum a great responsibility," I remarked. I simpli had to say 
it, for I wa angry, and hi explan appear pueril to me. 

"do you disput my right?" he demand coldly. 

I shrug my shoulders. "it is not for me to say, sir robert. 
doubtless when the time come you will be abl to satisfi the societi 
and the world that you have act rightly." 

"I admit no responsibility," he answered; "and permit me to observ 
that you are talk nonsense. I owe no duti to commun the result 
of my purchas or discoveri to ani societi or to the world." 

"true, sir robert. An action for damag could not lie against you." 

"sir!" he cried. 

"father," said miss ottley, "how can dr. pinsent' foolish sarcasm 
affect you? besides, we need hi arabs." 

"quit so," said sir robert. "we need hi arabs. how brightli the star 
shine to-night, dr. pinsent." 

the cool impud of the pair struck me dumb. I shook with passion. 
for a moment I thought of call a halt and return the way we had 
come to my own camp with my arabs. but for my curios to see the 
tomb of ptahm veri probabl I should have done so. In a few seconds, 
however, my rage cooled, and my uppermost feel wa admir mix 
with mirth. I had never been treat with such open and absurd contempt 
before. It wa a refresh experience. I burst of a sudden into a peal 
of laughter. miss ottley join me in the exercise. but sir robert rode 
on like a hook-nos sphinx. 

"I knew I could not be mistaken," said miss ottley. "you should thank 
god for your sens of humour, dr. pinsent." 

"and who is benefit from it at thi moment, I should like to know?" 
I retorted. "the thank are due from you, I fancy." 

"deo gratias!" she flashed. "in sober truth, we need your arab sadly." 

"I repeat, I am glad to be of use." 

"we shall use you, but not necessarili in the caus of your society. 
understand that fully." 

"you mean?" 

"that you must not expect to share our secrets." 

"in plain words, you will not let me help you open the sarcophagus." 

"your penetr is remarkable." 

"and if----" 

"and if," she interrupt quickly, "you requir a reward for the 
courtesi we ask and you accord or have promis to accord, you have 
but to name a sum in cash to have it paid." 

"or----" said I, stung to the quick. 

"or," she flashed, "return! you are at liberti to make your choice. 
your are not the onli arab in egypt. At a pinch we can wait a day or 
two. It is for you to say." 

I tore off my hat. "miss ottley--mi arab are your for as long as you 
requir them!" I furious announced. "good day to you. sir robert, 
good day!" 

then I drag the head of my ass round and set hi face to my 
camp. the beast, however, would hardli budge, and I had to belabour 
him unmerci to induc him to trot. never did man make a more 
undignifi exit from circumst of indignity. and it did not need 
miss ottley' mock laughter to assur me that I look ridiculous. 
I could have strangl her with all the cheer in life; and from 
that moment I have cherish an ineradic hatr of donkeys. sir 
robert did not open hi lips. He did not even return my angri salute. 
almost choke with rage, I final got out of rang of miss ottley' 
laughter. then I dismount and told the desert just what I thought of 
her and her father. It wa almost midnight when I reach my camp, for, 
to crown all, I neglect the star in my passion, and for two hour 
lost my way. 




chapter II 

A patient of the desert 


I spent the next two day in absolut solitude, and got through a 
tremend quantiti of toil. In fact, I ad two whole chapter to my 
treatis on the nile monument and I arrang the detail of a third. 
By the end of that time, however, I wa raven hungry. I had been 
too engross in labour to think of eat anyth but biscuits. and 
appetit at last turn me out of the tent. I look around for my 
arab and saw sand and sky--no live thing--oh, yes, there wa my 
donkey. the littl beast had eaten hi way through a truss of straw, 
and wa asleep. stroll over to the ruin pylon, I glanc down into 
the hole my arab had excavated. It wa empty. "gad!" I exclaimed. 
"they must still be work for ottley." I had to build a fire and turn 
cook, willi nilly. later, fortifi with the pleasant convict of a 
good dinner, I turn my telescop on the hill of rakh. An arab stood 
on the treeless summit lean on a rifl whose barrel glitter in the 
sunlight. I wa puzzled. He wa manifestli post there as sentinel, 
but why? I watch him till dark, but he did not move. that night I 
shot a jackal--omen of disaster. It wa long befor I slept. yet I 
seem onli to have slumber a moment or two when I awoke. A voic 
call my name aloud. "dr. pinsent! dr. pinsent!" I start upright and 
listened, nerv on edge. 

"dr. pinsent!" 

"who calls?" I shouted. 

"i--may ottley." 

"miss ottley!" I hop out of my bag bed like a cricket. "just a 
moment." I struck a light and, grab at my clothes, proceed to 
dress like mad. thu for thirti seconds; then I rememb how I had 
been treated, and went slower. then I thought--"pinsent, you'r a 
cad--she' a woman, and perhap in trouble." So I got up steam again 
and call out, "noth wrong, I hope?" 

"yes," said miss ottley. well, here wa a woman of business, at ani 
rate. she seem to know the use of words, and valu them accordingly. 
wast not, want not. I drew on my jacket and lift the flap. An arab 
rustl past me. 

"hello!" said I. "not so fast, my man." 

but it wa miss ottley. I step back, bewildered. her hair wa tuck 
away in a sort of turban, and she wa wrap from head to heel in 
a burnou that had onc been white--veri long ago. but the costume, 
though dirty, wa becoming. she sank upon a camp stool and ask at 
onc for water. she seem veri tired. My bag wa empty. I hurri 
off without a word to the barrel in the temple. when I return she 
wa asleep where she sat. I touch her shoulder and she start 
up, suppress a scream. "now," said I, as she put down the cup. 
miss ottley stood up. "A bad thing ha happened," she began. "the 
sarcophagu wa fill with treasure, gold and silver in bars, and 
other things. the arab went mad. My father fought like a paladin and 
held them off for a day and a half. but soon after dark thi even a 
caravan arrived. the fight wa renew and my father wa wounded. the 
arab secur the treasur and fled into the desert. the dragoman onli 
kept faith with us. He ha gone by the river to khonsu for troops. I 
hurri here for you. I ran almost all the way. will you come? father 
is veri ill. He ha lost a lot of blood. He wa shot in the shoulder." 

I nodded, caught up my revolv and surgic pack and rush out of the 
tent. In two minut I had saddl the donkey. miss ottley wa stand 
by the door of the tent. I lift her on the beast and we start off 
in silence. An hour later she spoke. 

"there is one thing I like about you," she announced. "you haven't much 
to say for yourself, but you are a worker." 

"tu quoque," I replied. "you must have done that twelv mile in record 
time. It is not yet two o'clock." 

"I made it in two hours, I think." 

"you are an athlete, by jove!" 

"I am no bread-and-butt miss, at ani rate. thi donkey ha a bad 
pace, don't you think?" 

I kick the brute into a trot and ran besid it. the hill of rakh soon 
began to loom larg among the star on the horizon. "I suppos you were 
pretti wild at our cavali treatment of you the other evening," said 
miss ottley. 

"well, yes," I admitted. 

"we were sorri when the fight came." 

"no doubt," said I. 

"it serv us right, eh?" 

"that is my opinion." 

"do you bear malic still?" 

"I am think of your father' wound." 

"that atones?" 

"your twelve-mil run helps." 

"but you are still angri with us?" 

"doe it matter? I am serv you." 

"be generous," said miss ottley. "we have been suffici punished. 
not onli have we lost the treasure, but there wa no mummi in the 
sarcophagus." 

"be a ladi and apologise," I retorted. 

"no," said she, with a most spirit inflection. "it is not a woman' 
place." 

"then be silent or chang the topic," I growled. 

she wa silent. We arriv an hour later at the mountain. I wa bath 
in perspir and as tire as a dog. but miss ottley had no time 
to notic my condition. she slip off the donkey and hurri away 
through the smaller of the three pylon that front a small templ 
hollow out of the rock face of the hill. there wa no sign of tent, 
so I conclud that sir robert had made hi camp within the temple. I 
hitch the ass to a stake and cool off, thank provid for a 
cool breez that swept up from the placid surfac of the nile. day wa 
alreadi show sign of breaking, and a broad flight of long-leg 
flamingo hurri it come with a flash of scarlet just abov the 
eastern horizon. the distant howl of a hyena wa born to me in 
fit snatch on the wind. the earth wa wrap in mysteri and 
melancholy. oh, egypt! egypt, land of sun-lit space and illimit 
shadows; of grandeur and of squalor without peer; of happi dream and 
sad awakenings; of centuri inglori oblivi of glory; of sleep 
and sphinx-browed, age-bound silences; of darkli smile and impot 
despair. what a mistress for a man of curios and of imagination! 
littl wonder that sinc I had been caught in her magic and most 
jealou spell the face of no human be had possess the power to 
threaten her supremaci or cancel my allegi to the mystic desert 
queen. 

"dr. pinsent!" 

I awok from my reveri with a start. "thi way," said miss ottley. I 
bow and follow her into the temple, through a broad but low stone 
doorway, past a row of broken granit columns. A light within show 
us the path. the chamber wa about eighteen feet square; there wa 
anoth of equal size beyond it, in the heart of the hill. An immens 
sarcophagu compos entir of lead almost block the door. the lid, 
carv to repres the figur and face of a tall grave-featur man, 
wa prop up on end against a pillar. the sarcophagu wa empty. 
beyond stood a trestl cot, a tabl and a lamp. sir robert ottley 
lay upon the cot. He wa awake, but evid unconscious, and in a 
high fever. I examin hi wound and prepar for action. there wa 
an oil stove in the room. I light it and set water to boil. miss 
ottley watch me with an express I shall not forget easily. her 
face wa as wan as that of a ghost; and her big red-brown eye glow 
like coals, and were ring with purpl hollows. she wa manifestli 
worn out and on the verg of a breakdown. but although I beg her 
to retire, she curtli refused. judg by her eyes, she wa my enemy, 
and a critic enemi at that. when everyth wa readi I walk over 
to her, pick her up in my arm and carri her struggl like a 
wildcat to the door. then I put her out and block the entranc with 
the lid of the sarcophagus. she panted--"i hate you," from behind it. 
then she began to cry. I said nothing. It seem one of those occas 
wherein silenc wa golden. I tie sir robert to the cot and set to 
work. half an hour later I found the bullet under hi clavicle, and 
then dress the wound and bound him up. He came out of the influenc 
of the anæsthet in hi sober senses; but he wa so eager to tell me 
all hi disappoint that I gave him a hypoderm dose of morphia, 
and he drop asleep in the middl of a rabid diatrib against arab 
in gener and our arab in particular. 

I found miss ottley reclin against a ruin pillar in an angl of 
the pylon. she had cri herself to sleep and wa breath like a 
child. I slip out and found the arab' store-hous and kitchen. 
luckili the gold had exhaust their cupidity. the store were 
untouched. I light a fire and prepar a meal--coffe and curri 
for miss ottley and myself; beef tea and arrowroot for the invalid. 
By that time the sun wa ride high in the heavens, but miss ottley 
still slept. will to assist her rest I secur a cushion from the 
chamber and push it gentli beneath her head. she sigh and turn 
over, allow me to see her face. I examin it and found it good. 
the featur were well-nigh perfect, from the littl grecian nose to 
the round chin. but it wa a face instinct with pride, the pride of a 
femal lucifer. and her form wa in keeping. "god save her husband," 
wa my conclusion. and I ate a hearti breakfast, watch her and 
piti him, whoever he should be. 

sir robert woke about noon, and although a littl feverish, I wa quit 
satisfi with hi progress. after eat a dish of what he feelingli 
describ as "muck" he went to sleep again. I prepar a second meal 
and brought it on a box to where miss ottley still lay sleeping. then 
I sat down and coughed. her eye open at onc and she look at me. 
It is marvel what a woman' glanc can do. I becam instantli 
consciou of a dirti face, unkempt hair, and a nine-weeks' growth of 
beard. In order to conceal my appreci of my ugli I grinned. 

"ugh!" murmur miss ottley, and she got up. 

"sir robert is asleep," I observed. "I found the bullet. He ha had 
lunch and is go on nicely. you had better eat something." 

she gave me a glanc of scorn and glide into the temple. I help her 
to a plate of curry, pour out a cup of coffe and made myself scarce. 
return a quarter of an hour later, I found the plate bare, the cup 
empti and not a crumb left on the box. I took the thing away and 
wash them, and my own face. then I shave with a pocket amput 
knife, use for mirror a pot of soapi water; and I brush my too 
abund lock into someth like order with a bunch of stubbl which 
I convert into a hair brush with a tomahawk and a piec of twine. 
feel prodigi civilis and almost respectable, I stroll back 
to the pylon, sat down on miss ottley' cushion, and light my pipe. 

about two minut later miss ottley appeared. 

"patient awake?" I asked. 

"no," said miss ottley. "what an objection smell of tobacco!" 

war to the knife evidently. I stood up. "when you need me shout," I 
remarked, and stroll off, puf stolidly. but I saw her face as I 
turned, and it wa crimson, perhap with surpris that I could be as 
rude as she, perhap with mortif that I had dared. If ever a 
girl need a dress down it wa she who stood in the pylon stare 
after me. I squat in the shadow of a rock and spent the afternoon 
stupefi over-friendli fli with the fume of prime turkish. she 
shout just befor sundown. her father wa delirious, she said. I 
found him rave and tear at hi bandages. He wa haunt with an 
hallucin of phantom cats. the whole cavern, he declared, wa 
fill with cats; black as erebu with flame yellow eyes. I shoo 
them away and after some troubl calm the poor old man. but it 
wa go to be a bad case, that wa plain. luckili the cave templ 
was, compar speaking, cool. I spent the even disinfect 
everi cranny, and quietli dispers the suspici dust of vanish 
centuries. when I had finish it smelt carbol wholesom and wa 
as clean as a london hospital, even to the ceiling. miss ottley sat 
all the while by her father' cot, and occasion sneez to reliev 
her feelings. I had veri littl sympathi for her distress. I said to 
her, "you will take first watch, i'll sleep in the pylon. call me at 
midnight." then I place my watch on the edg of the sarcophagu and 
went out. she said nothing. I woke at dawn. she wa sit like a 
statu besid her father' bedside. her face wa grey. sir robert wa 
asleep, but breath stertorously. I beckon her out to the pylon. 
"see here, miss ottley," I said, in a cold rage, "i'm not go to beat 
about the bush with you. I told you to call me at midnight. kindli 
explain your disobedience." 

"I am not your servant to obey your orders," she retort icily. 

"no," said I, "you prefer to serv your own prickli pride to behav 
sensibly. but let me tell you this--your father' life depend on 
care nursing. and that is imposs unless we apport the work 
properli between us. you'll be fit for noth today, and my task will 
be doubl in consequence. A littl more of such folli and you'll 
break down altogether. you are strung up to more than concert pitch. 
As for me--i am not a machine, and though I am prepar to do my best 
out of mere humanity, I don't pretend to do the impossible. nor shall 
I answer for your father' life if you forc me to nurs two patient 
single-handed." 

she look me straight in the eye. "veri well, sir, I shall henceforth 
rigidli obey you." 

"you must," I said and strode into the open. when I had prepar 
breakfast, she did not want to eat. but I had onli to frown and she 
succumbed. afterward I made her lie down, and she slept through sir 
robert' groaning. It wa a hideou day. the patient grew steadili 
worse, and so great wa hi strength, despit hi diminut size, that 
our struggl wore me out at last and I wa oblig to strap him down. 
By nightfal he wa a maniac, and hi yell could be heard, I make no 
doubt, a mile around. and the worst of it wa that my stock of bromid 
wa gone. I had to dose him with morphia. but I had not to speak to 
miss ottley again. she woke me out of a delici sleep at a quarter to 
the hour. she wa quit composed, but as pale as a sheet. 

"mi father is go to die, I think," she whispered. 

I went in and look at him. He wa strain like a tiger at hi 
bonds. "not to-night, at ani rate," I observed. "he ha the strength of 
six. you go straight to bed!" 

she went off as meek as ani lamb, and I began to talk to sir robert. 
our convers wa somewhat entertaining. He wa ixion chain to the 
wheel. I wa sisyphu with a day off duty. We commiser one anoth 
on our penalties, and bitterli assail king pluto' unsympathet 
government. final we conspir to dethron him and give the crown of 
hade to proserpine, whose put tender heart might be reckon 
on occasion to mitig the anguish of our punishment. He fell 
into a fit doze at last with hi hand in mine, but he soon awoke, 
and with a yell announc the return of the imaginari plagu of cats. 
On the whole, the night wa wors than the day. and morn wa no 
blessing. sir robert had shed five and forti years. He wa onc again 
at college, and if hi unwil confess are to be reli upon, and 
hi language, he must have been a preciou hand for hi masters. but 
now he steadili lost strength, and the flame of fever ate him up befor 
our eyes. As the shadow lengthen into afternoon I began to look for 
the crisis. 




chapter iii 

two lie 


sleep wa not to be dream of that night for either of us well people. 
I had thought of a plan. leav miss ottley to watch the unconsci 
but ceaselessli babbl patient, I scour out the sarcophagus, and 
then built an enorm fire befor the pylon. over thi I hung the 
arab' cauldron. By nightfal I had the sarcophagu nigh abrim with 
hot water. It form a huge but most admir bath. It wa a heroic 
experi to make; but the dark angel wa in the cavern and I had 
littl chanc left. kill or cure. It seem a toss of the coin either 
way, for sir robert wa die fast. after the bath he slip into a 
state of blank insensibility. miss ottley thought him asleep, and she 
took heart to hope. I did not deceiv her. for four hour I waited, 
my finger continu on hi pulse. It grew continu weaker. I 
administ nitro-glycerin everi half hour, but at length even that 
spur failed. 

"miss ottley," said I, "you must prepar for the worst." 

she show me a face of more than mortal courage. pride is not alway 
amiss in charact like hers. "I have felt it all along," she said 
quietly. "will he regain hi senses?" 

"yes. At least I think he will--befor the end." 

"i there no hope?" 

"none--unless he can be miracul aroused. pardon me--i he veri 
much attach to you?" 

"no--hi heart and soul are wrap up in hi work. He died, to all 
intent and purposes, the hour he wa shot. hi terribl disappoint 
had depriv him of hi best support." 

"the robbery, you mean?" 

"no--th knowledg of hi failure. He made certain of find the bodi 
of ptahmes." 

"ah!" said i--and gave myself to thought. when I look up next miss 
ottley wa gaze at her father with a marbl countenance, but tear 
were stream from her eyes. 

"you love him," I whispered. 

"more than all the world," she answer simply. her voic rang as true 
and unbroken as the chime of a bell. I began in spite of myself to 
admir miss ottley. 

ten minut passed; minut of hideous oppress silence. then, 
without warning, sir robert' eyelid flicker and opened. there wa 
the light of reason in them. I bent over him and hi glanc encount 
mine. I press hi hand and said in brisk, cheer tones, "you must 
hurri up and get well, sir robert, or I shall not be abl to restrain 
my curiosity. thi ptahm of your is the most extraordinari mummi I 
have ever seen; and I am simpli die to take him from hi shroud." 

the dim eye of the die man actual glowed. hi finger clutch at 
my wrist, and with a superhuman effort he gasp forth, "no--no." 

"be easy," I returned, "i'll not touch him till you are well. but you 
must hurry. rememb we are of a trade, you and i." 

He smile and veri slowli hi eye closed. hi breath wa absolut 
imperceptible; but hi pulse, though faint, wa regular. I made sure 
and then put down hi hand. 

"he is dead," said miss ottley, and her voic thrill me to the core. 

"no," said I, "he is sleep like a babe. the crisi is over. He will 
live." 

"oh! my god!" she cried, and fell on her knee besid the bed shaken 
with a storm of sobbing. 

I sneak out of the templ and smoke my first pipe in three days. I 
wa onli half through it when I felt her at my side. 

"no, pleas continu smoking," she said, "I like it, really. I have 
come to tri and thank you." 

"you can't," I replied; "i'm not a man to overestim hi own 
services, but thi is the sort of thing that cannot be repaid by either 
gold or words." 

"oh!" she said. 

"you see," I went on, "I lied. It wa to save hi life--for your sake. 
the sight of your distress touch me. I am glad that he will live, of 
course. glad to have serv you. but the fact remains, I am a liar." 

"dr. pinsent!" she cried. 

"oh, I daresay i'll grow use to it," I interrupt cheerfully. 
"perhap I have onli shed a superstition, after all. I confess to 
an unwont feel of freedom, too. undoubtedli I wa shackled, in 
a sense. yet a convict chain for year feel naked, I am told, 
when he gets, suddenly, hi liberty. I can easili believ it. My own 
experience--but enough; we leav the patient too long alone." 

she flit off like a phantom and as noiselessly. I refil my pipe. 
An hour later I found them both asleep, she seat on the camp-stool 
lean back against the tomb. natur had been too strong for her, 
poor girl. I felt toward her the brotherhood of vice. she, too, had 
lied--in pretend a littl while before--a hatr of tobacco. 

I took her quietli and gentli in my arm and carri her to her own cot 
in the inner cabin. she did not wake. 




chapter IV 

the sarcophagus' perfum 


toward morn my mind grew much easier. sir robert awok and took a 
few mouth of liquid nourishment. but although too weak to speak, 
he wa sensibl and the fever had left him. He fell asleep again 
immediately. soon afterward my eye fell on the sarcophagus. it 
great size affect me with wonder--and it construction. whi should 
imperish treasures, gold, silver, and preciou stone be enclos 
in lead? whi not in stone? and the sarcophagu had been hermet 
seal too, wit the chisel and saw mark on the lid, of ottley' 
making. I examin them attentively, then sat down and stare at the 
sarcophagu again. It wa coffin shaped. why? If it had been intend 
for a mere treasur chest surely--i wa struck suddenli by a fact and 
a remembrance. the sarcophagu manifestli measur four feet high 
at least. and I rememb that in fill it with water for sir 
robert' bath I had onli had to fill eighteen inch in depth. what 
if underneath the treasur it contain anoth chamber overlaid with 
lead? there wa room. I got afoot and measur the depth of water 
on my arm. eighteen, well, certainli not more than nineteen inches. 
I seiz a bucket and began to bail the water out, have need to be 
noiseless for the sleepers' sake. the task occupi the better part 
of half an hour. By then morn had begun to pale the lamplight, 
and I wa weary. but I kept on, and final mop the interior of 
the huge basin dri with a towel. thereupon I examin the bottom 
with the lamp. It did not show a singl crevice. the lead wa in a 
solid and impervi sheet. curious. but the differ between the 
eighteen inch and the four feet remain to be account for. wa the 
interspac fill with lead? If so--whi such uneconom expenditur of 
a valuabl mineral? the mysteri interest me so much that my weari 
wa forgotten. I felt that at ani cost it must be solv forthwith. 
cast about, I found a fine-point and razor-sharp chisel in the 
drawer of sir robert ottley' camp table. with this, I set to work. 
climb into the sarcophagus, I select a spot, and use the weight 
of my bodi in place of a hammer, I forc the chisel into the lead. 
It bit into the metal slowli but surely. one inch. one inch and a 
half. suddenli it slipped. I fell forward and wa brought up by the 
handle. the mysteri wa solved. I recov my posit and wipe my 
forehead. instantli a thin but strang overpow perfum fill my 
nostrils. It resembl camphor, and violets, and lavender, and oil of 
almonds, and a hundr other scents, but wa truli like none of them. 
It creat and compelled, however, a confus train of untranslat 
reflect which might have been memories. but god know what they 
were. I experienc a mysteri sensat of immeasur antiquity. 
and wildli absurd as the idea appear set forth in sober language, 
someth assur me that I wa thousand of year old or had live 
before--so long--so veri long ago. I saw lights--th sound of chant 
voic and of rush water fill my ears. I seem to be assist 
at a solemn ritual. ghostli forc and dim spirit figur fill the 
cave. the air wa thick with incens fumes. My reason rock and swung. 
just in time I realis that I wa becom mysteri anæsthetised. 
I held my breath and with a power effort leap to the floor. then 
I care block up the chisel hole with my kerchief and stagger 
into the open air. veri soon I wa my own man again. return fill 
with apprehens for the patient, I found noth to alarm me. the 
perfum had absolut disappeared. sir robert wa sleep like a 
babe. I took a nip of brandi and sit down, gave myself to dream 
watch the sarcophagus. what wa it secret? and what the secret 
of sir robert ottley' passion interest in the corps of ptahm 
that had been potent enough to call him back to life from the veri 
brink of dissolution? but plainli I must wait to learn. for it would 
not do to trifl with the perfum in the cavern. In that confin 
space it might bring about the destruct of us all. alreadi it 
had affect me. My head ach fearfully, and I knew that my blood 
vessel were distended, and that my heart wa still violent excited. 
My agit wa not all painful. there wa an insidi pleasur 
mingl with it, an intang titil of the nerves; but that 
onli alarm me the more. the poison that are most to be fear are 
those which captiv the senses; they convey no warn to the body, 
and betray the mind, howev watchful, by effect a paralysi of 
will. perhaps--unwittingly--i had been veri near death. the notion 
wa disturbing. I began to regard the sarcophagu much in the light 
of an infern machin possess danger potenti for ill. 
I determin as soon as possible--that is to say, as soon as help 
arrived--to have it remov from the sick room to the pylon. there at 
least it would be less manifestli perilous; have the play of the 
whole wide desert atmospher in which to dissip it noxiou energies. 

A rustl sound dissolv my meditations. I glanc up and saw miss 
ottley bend over her father. I slip out and sought the arab' 
quarters. soon I had a good fire alight and water on to boil. I rather 
spread myself that morning. I cook some tin asparagus, boil a 
tin chicken, and open a jar of prunes. breakfast spread on the lid 
of a brandi box look and smell veri good. I carri it up to the 
pylon and whistl "come into the garden, maude." 

miss ottley appear at once, round eye with surprise. 

"your father ha alreadi eaten," I observed. "in all likelihood he will 
sleep for hour yet. kindli sit down. you'll excus my novel breakfast 
call. It is the onli invit air I am acquaint with." 

she stare at me. 

"may one not be lightheart when all goe well?" I asked. 

"one may," she answered. then her eye fell and she colour painfully. 
"but not two. I slept at my post. oh! how could i?" her voic wa quit 
despair and bitterli contemptuous. 

I bit at the leg of a chicken which I held in my fingers. "after all, 
you are a woman, you know," I commented, with my mouth full. "thi 
chick' prime--don to a turn." 

"how tire you must be!" 

"i'm not complaining. nor do I grudg you the extra rest. you look 
better. hungry?" 

"y-yes," she admitted. 

"then don't be a ninni spend time in vain regrets. fall to and 
repair your wast tissues. In plain english--eat." 

she sat down on a ruin column and I hand her a plate. 

"you look--posit merry!" she said. "you are nurs 
some--pleasant--or profit reflection." she consid the word 
with care. 

"I have discov that I may have--told the truth to your father last 
night after all. By accident." 

"I beg your pardon." 

"I believ I have found your friend ptahmes, miss ottley." 

the plate slid off her lap and broke. chicken and gravi litter the 
pavement. but she had no idea of it. "impossible!" she cried. 

I explain my examin of the sarcophagu and the result in detail. 
she sat gaze at me like a graven image. when she had finish she 
aros and vanished--without a word. I follow and found her stand 
besid the great lead coffin, my kerchief in her hand. she had reopen 
the chisel hole, and the cavern wa alreadi satur with the infern 
gas. I snatch my handkerchief away and onc more block the vent. 
then I exert all my strength and with a prodigi effort place the 
lid on the sarcophagus. with a woman' curios to reckon with, such a 
precaut seem a vital safeguard. I found her stand in the pylon, 
breath like a spent runner. 

"you might have taken my word," I said coldly. "you'd have save 
yourself an ugli headach at the least." 

her face wa crimson; her eye burn like stars. the fume of that 
uncanni perfum had made her drunk. she sway and lean dizzili 
against a pillar. I went up and took her hand. the puls wa beat 
like a miniatur steam hammer. 

"sit down," I said. 

she laugh and sank at my feet in a heap. "oh! oh!" she cri and fell 
to sob half hyster though tearlessly. 

"lord!" I said aloud. "what a bundl of hyster humour it is, and 
how plain to look on when it resolut take a holiday." 

that is the way to treat hysteria. 

miss ottley sat up and wither me with a glance. "i--i 
am. it--it' not hysteria," she stammered, between gasps. 
"besides--you--confessed--it--overcame--you, too." 

then she fainted. I sprang up, but even as I move I heard a loud sigh 
in the cavern. "the sick man first," I muttered, and let the girl lie. 
but at the door of the cavern chamber I stood transfixed. A dark shape 
bent over the patient' cot, hide sir robert ottley' face from view. 
It seem to be a man, but it back wa present to my gaze. "what the 
deuc are you do here, whoever you are?" I cri out, and start 
forward. the shape melt on the instant into thinnest air. "noth 
but a shadow," I said to myself. It wa necessari to say something. 
I wa shock to my soul. I stood for a moment shake and dismayed. 
the shadow had been so thick and bodili and had fled so like a spirit 
that I had work to do to readjust my scatter faculties. Of cours a 
shadow--and my eyes, dazzl by the sunlight without, had momentarili 
fail to pierc it. A reason and quit ampl scientif 
explanation. but what had cast the shadow? pish--what but myself? and 
yet: and yet: I wa shiver like a blancmange. never had my nerv 
use me so ill. perhaps, however, that accurs perfum had affect 
them. ah! there wa a reassur solut of the puzzle. reassur to 
my reason, be it understood, for the fleshi part of me wa taken with 
an agu and refus for mani second to return to it subject to 
my will. sometim now I doubt but that the flesh ha an intellig 
apart from the brain cell and nerv structur that usual control 
it. indeed, I have never met a man of intellect whose memori doe 
not regist experi of some occas in which hi flesh took 
independ fright--lik a startl hare--at some bogi which made hi 
sober reason subsequ smile; nay, contemptu at times. "well, 
well," I said at length and push forward--to receiv anoth shock. 
sir robert ottley wa almost nude. the bed cloth had been push 
down past hi waist. hi finger convuls grip the paillasse. 
hi face wa livid. hi eye were open and upturned. hi whole form 
wa stiff and rigid. A fit? It seem so. hi puls wa still. He 
did not breathe. but a catalept fit then, for at a lanc prick the 
blood flowed. I forc him to hi right side and tri massage. No 
use. strychnin and nitro-glycerin equal refus to act. final I 
satur a cloth with amyl nitrate, place it over hi open mouth and 
tri artifici respiration. A whole hour had pass already, but I 
refus to give in. It wa well. In anoth twenti minut my effort 
were reward with a sigh. I kept on and the man began to breathe. when 
it seem safe to leav off, I dispos him easili and watch events. 
first hi normal colour returned. then hi mouth closed. final hi 
eye revolved. the lid close and open sever times, then rest 
closed. hi puls beat feverishly, but in spite of that he slept. I 
walk to the door. miss ottley--whom I had complet forgotten--stil 
lay insens where she had fallen. I pick her up and brought her 
into the cavern. she awok to conscious in transit. I forc her 
to drink a stiff nobbler of brandy, and veri soon she wa in her old, 
cold, bright, proud, self-reli state--arm cap-a-pi with insol 
and egotism. 

"i your father subject to fits?" I asked. 

"he ha never had, till this, a day' ill in hi life," she 
responded--with a touch of indignation. 

I nodded. "well, hi period of diseas indemn ha passed. while you 
swoon he had a fit. I use the express colloquially. you would 
probabl have so describ hi condit had you seen him. As for me I 
don't know. the symptom were unique. I restor him by treat him 
as a drown man. He wa in a sort of trance. from thi moment he must 
never be left, even for a second." 

"he wa insensible?" 

"he wa inanimate." 

"that perfume!" she cried. 

I shrug my shoulders. "no doubt." 

We glanc at the sarcophagus, then at each other. 

"wa there need?" she asked, colouring. then her eye sparkled. "oh, 
for such strength!" she cried. "it took six arab to lift that coffin 
lid. you must be a samson." 

"fortunately," I observed. 

her brow drew togeth and her lips. "you treat me in a way that I 
resent," she said. "I am as reason a be as yourself." 

I retir to a corner and stretch myself upon the floor without 
replying. 

"when do you wish to be aroused?" she asked. 

"an hour befor sunset. We must eat--that is I. you appear to thrive on 
air." 

she bit her lip and I stare at the ceiling. I wa dog-tired, but 
could not sleep. I count a thousand and then glanc at miss ottley. 
her gaze wa fix on me. 

"you are overtired," she said, and her tone wa pure womanly. 

It irrit and amus me to find she could so unaffectedli assum it. 
I smiled. 

she interpret the smile aloud. "what sound reason have you for 
despis me?" she asked. "you pretend to be a scientist. answer me as 
such, reject bias." 

"I don't," said I. 

"then you dislik me; why?" 

"I don't." 

her lip curled. "oh, indeed." she aros and brought me a cushion. I 
took it and our hand touched. "I must conclude, then, that you like 
me?" she drew her hand swiftli away and return to her seat. 

I smile again. "undoubtedly, miss ottley." 

"thank you." the tone wa instinct with sarcasm. 

"confess that you are crave for a littl human sympathy." 

"i!" she exclaim and start haughtily. 

"be a woman and in a simpli damnabl position." 

"ah!" she cried, "you admit that." 

"mi dear girl, whenev I think of it your pluck amaz me." 

To my astonish her eye close and her bosom heaved. then I 
saw such a struggl as I do not wish ever to wit again. pride 
prevent her from rais her hand to hide her face. and pride put up 
a superhuman fight with human weakness. her featur were distorted. 
one could see that soul and bodi were engag in mortal combat. that 
spectacl wa poignantli fascinating. I thrill to see it and yet 
hate myself for not be abl to look away. why--who knows? but at 
length I could stand it no longer. I got up and shook her gently. she 
stiffen into marble, but did not offer to resist me. 

"peace, peace," I said. "you foolish, foolish child, you are wast 
forc that were given you for quit anoth purpose." 

suddenli her eye open and look straight in mine. "what?" she 
questioned, and two great tear roll down her cheeks. 

"whi do you hate your sex?" I asked. "god know it is more valuabl 
than mine." 

"man," she muttered--and shudder from me--bitterli defiant. 

"woman," I retorted. "and each of us with a fate mission to fulfil, 
not to fight against." 

"your to sting, to hurt, to crush." 

"and your to foster and creat a better, finer-natur breed." 

"generous?" she sneered. "i it possible?" 

"mi dear girl," said I, "I haven't a temper to lose; I am a sober, 
cold-blood man of the world. Of thirty." 

I laugh out heartily, then stopped, rememb the patient. He 
stir and we both hurri to hi side. but he did not wake. 

I look up and offer miss ottley my right hand. 

"we start badly," I whispered, "but still we may be friends." 

her eye darken with anger. she stood like a statu regard me, her 
express sphinx-lik and brooding. "instinct say one thing and pride 
another!" I hazarded. 

she colour to her chin, but her firm glanc did not falter. 

"ah, well," said I, and made off to my stone couch, convinc that a 
man who argu with a woman is a fool. and I wa punish properly. she 
haunt my dreams. 




chapter V 

the shadow in the cave 


We ate heartily, the pair of us, that evening. the effect on me wa 
comfort and humanising. I felt well dispos to my fellow man--and 
woman, and inclin to sanguin expectations. miss ottley, however, 
was, as usual, impenetrable. she belong of right to the age of iron. 
A femal anachronism. To cheer her I suggest a game of chess. she 
consented, and mate me in fourteen moves. We play again, and onc 
more she beat me. My outspoken admir of her skill--i rather fanci 
my own play at chess--left her perfectli imperturbable. In the third 
game she predict my defeat at the eleventh move on make her own 
fourth. I did my best, but her propheci wa fulfilled. "enough!" said 
I, and retir to the door way, I light a cigarette. 

"hassan ali, our dragoman, should be here to-morrow," she present 
remarked, "with troops." 

"they will never catch our rascal arabs," I replied. "with five clear 
days' start those beggar might be anywhere." 

"just so," said she, "but they will be of some use none the less--if 
onli to drag that sarcophagu out of the temple." 

"eh!" I exclaimed--and look at her sharply. "what is the matter with 
the thing--here?" 

she shrug her shoulders, then of a sudden smiled. "do you wish to be 
amused?" 

"of all things." 

"then prepar to laugh at me. while you slept thi afternoon----" she 
paused. 

"yes," I said. 

"mi father awoke." 

"oh!" 

"and conversed." 

"good," I murmured. "he wa sensible." 

"I do not know. He seem so. but he did not speak to me." 

"you said that he conversed." 

"ay--but with a shadow." 

miss ottley compress her lip and look at me defiantly. 

"A shadow," she repeated. "I saw it distinctly. It move across the 
room and stood besid the cot. It wa the shadow of a man. but you are 
not laughing." 

"not yet," said I. "had thi shadow a voice?" 

"no." 

"what did your father say to it?" 

"he implor it to be patient." 

"and the shadow?" 

"vanished." 

"and you?" 

"I told myself I dreamed. I tri not to die of terror, and succeeded." 

"whi did you not wake me?" 

"I wish to, but the shadow intervened." 

"it reappeared?" 

"for a second that reduc me to a state of trembl imbecility." 

"that infern perfum ha simpli shatter your nerves," I comment 
cheerfully. "you'll be better after a good rest. overstrain and anxieti 
of cours are to a degre responsible. indeed, they might be held 
account for the hallucin alone. but I blame the perfum to a 
great extent, becaus it similarli affect me." 

"what!" she cried, "you saw a shadow, too?" 

I laugh softly. "mi own--no other. but it appear shock me 
horribly. In my opinion that coffin perfum work power upon the 
optic nerve. how are you feel now?" 

"a well as ever in my life." 

"no fears?" 

"none. but I admit a distrust of that sarcophagus--or rather of the 
perfum it contains. are you sure that you stop up the chisel hole 
securely?" 

"quite. but pardon me, miss ottley, you are look weary. take my 
advic and retir now." 

"thanks. I shall," she said, and with a cool bow she went into the 
inner chamber. An hour later sir robert awoke. He wa quit sensibl 
and appear much better. I fed him and we exchang a few cheer 
remarks. He declar that he had turn the corner and express a 
strong desir to be up and about hi work again. He also ask after 
hi daughter, and thank me warmli for my services. soon afterward he 
drop off into a tranquil slumber, and I spent the remaind of my 
watch read a _review_. As I wa not veri tire I gave miss ottley 
grace, and it wa a quarter to one when I awaken her. she came out 
look as fresh as a rose, her cheek scarlet from their plung in 
cool water and consequ towelling. she invit me to use her couch, 
but I declined, and sought my accustom corner. I slept like the 
dead--for (I subsequ discovered) just about an hour. but then I 
awok choke and gasp for breath. I had an abomin sensat of 
strong finger clutch about my throat. At first all wa dark befor 
me. but struggl afoot, the shadow reced from my eyes, and I saw 
the lamp--a second afterwards, miss ottley. she stood with her back 
against the further wall of the chamber, her hand outstretch as if 
to repel an impetu opponent; and her face wa cast in an express 
of unutter terror. 

"miss ottley!" I cried. 

she utter a strangl scream, then stagger toward me. "oh! thank 
god--you were too strong--for him," she gasped. "he tri to kill 
you--and I could not move nor cry." 

"who?" I demanded. 

"the--th shadow." she caught my arm and grip them with hyster 
vigour. 

I forc her to sit down and hurri to her father. He wa sleep 
like a babe. I thought of the asphyxi sensat I had experienc 
and step gentli to my sleep corner. kneel down, I struck a 
match. the flame burn steadily. not carbon acid ga then at all 
events; but I tri the whole room to make sure, also the interior of 
the sarcophagus, but without result. So far baffled, I stood up and 
thought. what agenc had been at work to disturb us? I made a tour of 
the wall and examin the stone of their construct one by one. 
It seem just possibl that there might be a secret entranc to the 
chamber; and some robber arab acquaint with it might be employ 
it for evil ends. but I wa forc to abandon that idea like the 
other. and no one had enter through the pylon, for the dust about 
the doorway wa absolut impressionless. what then? I turn to miss 
ottley. she wa watch me with evid pain expectation, her 
hand tightli clasped. 

"what made you think the shadow wish to kill me?" I inquired. 

"I saw it face." 

"oh! it ha a face now, eh?" 

"the face of a devil; and long thin hands. It fasten them about your 
throat." 

"mi dear girl." 

"don't be a fool," she retort stormily; "what arous you? did you 
hear me call?" 

I wa confounded. "veri good," I said, "I admit the hand at least, for 
the nonce, for truli I wa half strangled. but what do you infer?" 

"can human creatur make themselv invis at will?" 

"mi good miss ottley, no. but they can run away." 

"do you want to see the shadow' face?" 

"yes." 

"then look on the lid of the sarcophagu and see it portrait in a 
gentl mood." 

"ptahmes!" I cried. 

"ay, ptahmes," she said slowly. "we are haunt by hi spirit." 

I sat down on the edg of the sarcophagu and lit a cigarette. 

"I am quit at a present loss to explain my throttling," I observed, 
"but that is the onli mystery. I reject your shadow with the contempt 
that it deserves. what you saw wa some wander arab who hop in 
here without troubl to tread through the dust in the doorway and who 
depart in the same fashion. pish! there, too, is the mysteri of my 
throttl solved." 

"perhaps," said she, "inde I hope so." she wa still trembl in 
spasms. 

"are you mind for the experiment?" I asked. 

"what is it?" 

"I wish to drive thi foolish fanci from your mind." I took out my 
revolv and show it to her. "spirit are said to love the dark best. 
let us put out the lamp. it' their element. how, then, can we better 
tempt old ptahm from hi tomb?" I wound up with a laugh. "I can 
promis him a warm reception." 

miss ottley shiver and grew if possibl paler than before. but her 
pride wa equal to the challenge. "veri well," she said. 

I drew up a stool near hers, put out the lamp and sat down. when my 
cigarett had burn out the dark wa blacker than the blackest 
ebony. 

"an idea run in my head that spirit respond most sure to silent 
wooers," I murmured. "but I have no experience. have you?" 

"n-no," said miss ottley. 

the poor girl wa shiver with fear and too proud to admit it. I 
sought about for a pretext to comfort her and found one presently. 

"don't they join hand at a séance?" I inquired. 

"i--i--t-think so," said miss ottley. 

"well, then." 

our hand encountered. her wa piti cold. I enclos it firmli in 
my left and held it on my knee. she sigh but ever so softly, tri 
to prevent my hear it. thereaft we were silent for veri long, 
listen to the sick man' quiet breathing. No other sound wa to be 
heard. but soon miss ottley' hand grew warm, and the finger twine 
around mine. It felt a nice good littl hand. It wa veri small, yet 
firm and silken-smooth, and it possess a strang electr quality. 
It made mine tingle--a distinctli pleasur sensation. I fell into a 
dreami mood and I think I must have indulg in forti winks, when all 
of a sudden miss ottley' hand arous me. her finger were grip 
mine with the forc of a vice. she wa breath hard. 

"what is it?" I whispered. 

"there is some--pres in the room," she gasped. "don't you feel it?" 

[illustration: the live mummi 

three pace off a man' face glower at us 

_face page 48_] 

and as I live, I did. I struck a match and sprang afoot. three 
pace off a man' face glower at us in the fit glimmer of the 
lucifer. it characterist were so unusu that it is not possibl 
ever to forget them. the eye were large, dark and singularli dull. 
they were set at an extraordinari distanc apart in the skull, six 
inches, I should say, at least. but the head, though abnorm broad 
thereabouts, taper to a point in the chin and wa cone-shap abov 
the wide reced temples. the cheek bone were high and prominent. 
they shone in the match light almost white in contrast with the dark 
skin of the more shade portion of the countenance. the nose wa 
long and aquiline, but the nostril were broad and compress at the 
base, point at negroid ancestry. the mouth, wide and thin-lipped, 
wa tightli shut. the chin wa long, sharp and hairless. the ear were 
bat-shaped. 

recov from my first shock of amazement, I address the intrud 
in arabic. 

"what are you do here? what do you want?" I cried. 

He did not answer. enraged, I start forward and hit out from the 
shoulder. strike air. the match went out. I lit another. the man had 
vanished. I relight the lamp and care examin the chamber. but 
our visitor had not left the slightest sign of hi intrusion. 

I shook my head and went over to miss ottley. she wa lean against 
the wall with her eye shut, her bosom heav painfully. 

I touch her and she started--suppress a shriek. her lip were 
trickl blood where she had bitten them. her face wa ghastli and she 
seem about to swoon. 

"pish!" I cried, "there is noth to be frighten of. A rascal 
arab--know some secret way of enter thi cavern, that is all." 

she sway toward me. I caught her as she fell and bore her to a 
stool. but though quit overcom she wa not unconscious. yet her 
fortitud wa broken down at last and she wa helpless. she could not 
even sit up unassisted. place her on the floor a while, I made her 
drink some spirit and then, lift her upon my knee, I rock her in 
my arm like a child and did my best to sooth her fears. heavens, how 
she cried! My handkerchief wa soon as wet as if I had sous it in 
a basin of water, and yet she still cri on. I spoke to her all the 
time. I told her that I would answer for her safeti with my life, and 
all sort of things. and think of her as a poor littl child, I 
call her "dear" continu and "darling"--and I let her weep herself 
into an exhaust sleep upon my breast. and when that happen I did 
not need anyon to tell me that scienc wa no longer the mistress of 
my fate or that I, a compar pauper, had commit the unutter 
folli of fall in love with the daughter of a millionaire--whos 
religion wa pride with a capit P. I held her so till dawn, stare 
dumbl at her face, and thu when her eye open they look straight 
into mine. she did not move, and half-unwillingli my arm tighten 
round her. "the bad dream is over, littl girl," I whispered. "see--th 
golden sunlight." 

"may--may," said sir robert' voice. 

she start up, her face aflame. I follow her to the bedside. the 
patient wa awake, and strong and hungry. also querulous. He complain 
of the pain of the wound and order me to dress it. He had seen 
nothing. but I knew miss ottley would not forgiv me on that account. 
I read it in her eyes. after I had dress the patient' wound and we 
had fed him, she follow me to the door. 

"you had no right to let me sleep--lik that," she said imperiously. 

there wa noth for it but to insult her or to prove myself an 
adventurer. I had no mind for the latter course. "quit right," I 
returned, "when you behav like an idiot I should have treat you 
as such and left you to recov from your own silli terror instead of 
act the soft fool and lose my own rest in serv you. i'll do it, 
too--next time. what will you have for breakfast?" 

she swung on her heel and left me. 




chapter VI 

enter dr. bellevil 


while wait for the kettl to boil I happen to glanc in the 
direct of the nile. A column of move smoke at onc attract my 
attention. A launch, of course, and what more like than that it 
should contain soldiers, arabs, servants, and a surgeon. "I shall 
soon be free to return to my work, it seems!" I said aloud, and it is 
wonder what a lot of dissatisfact the reflect gave me. I came 
within an ace, indeed, of consign the nile monument to literari 
perdition. but onli temporarily. for I felt that I should need as 
engross mental occup soon. work is a fine consoler. the parti 
arriv a few minut befor noon. It consist of sir robert ottley' 
dragoman, half a compani of egyptian camel corp under command of a 
fussi littl english-french lieuten name thoma dubois, some twenti 
swart-fac fellaheen labourers, and two english friend of sir robert 
and hi daughter. the latter were rather singular personages. one wa 
middle-aged, short and thick and "beard like the pard" up to hi veri 
eyes. He rejoic in the name of william bellevil and wa a fellow 
of the royal colleg of surgeons. the other one wa tall and thin and 
marvel good-looking. He call himself captain frankfort weldon, 
and I soon discov wa an honourable. preparatori to discharg 
myself in toto of my responsibilities, I took charg of the entir 
crowd. I have been assur by my best friend that I am a natur 
autocrat. those who are not my friend have sometim describ me 
as an arrog and self-assert egotist. I contend, however, that 
I wa emin well qualifi to judg what wa best to be done, in 
that instance, at all events, and it is not my fault that weldon and 
bellevil chose to consid themselv slight becaus I did not ask 
their advice. within ten minut I had sent the camel soldier pack 
across the desert in the direct taken by the arab robbers. they did 
not want to go in the least, but I put my foot down hard, and they 
went. without lose a moment thereaft I made the fellaheen erect a 
larg doubl tent in a shade cleft in the mountain at some distanc 
from the temple. It did not take them long, for I direct their 
oper personally. I then march them to the temple. miss ottley 
wa talk to the englishmen in the pylon. I bow and pass her, 
follow by the fellaheen. I gave to each man a task, the carriag of 
some piec of furniture. the two strongest I appoint as bearer of 
sir robert ottley' cot. the baronet wa awake. He question me. 

"what are you doing, pinsent?" 

"i'm go to move you to a tent for better air, to hasten your 
recovery," I said. 

He onli sigh and wearili close hi eyes. 

then the process started. when miss ottley saw her father be 
carri out, she wa so surpris that she stood dumb. turn round a 
littl later I saw that she and her friend were convers amiably. 
arriv at the tents, I fix the patient comfortably, then arrang 
the furnitur in both apartments; the outer, of course, wa to be miss 
ottley' room. 

when all wa done, I dismiss the fellaheen to other task and walk 
up to ottley' cot. "sir robert," said I. 

hi eye open and he look at me. 

"you know that your friend, dr. belleville, ha come?" 

"yes--w have had a chat." 

"so. well, I now propos to turn the case over to him. your recoveri 
should be rapid. you are alreadi practic convalescent." 

"you are leav me?" 

"you no longer need my services." 

"how can I ever repay you, pinsent, for your extrem kind to me?" 

"easily; let me be present when you open the coffin of ptahmes." 

"what?" 

"ah!" said I, "I forgot." I then told him of my experi with the 
sarcophagus, and the perfume. He listen with the most passion 
attention. final he said: 

"you are not certain the sarcophagu doe contain the body, though?" 

"not certain, sir robert." 

"yet you told me, if I rememb aright, that, that----" 

"you were dying," I interrupted. "I had to arous you. but, after all, 
I feel sure your desir will be gratified. I have no sort of doubt but 
that a bodi lie in the coffin." 

"nor i," said he. "the papyru speak of an essenti oil the mere 
scent of which arrest decay. ptahm alon knew the secret of it 
preparation. but the sarcophagu must be guarded, pinsent." 

"i'll fix a watch," I said, and held out my hand. "good-bye, sir." 

"you are return to your camp?" 

"yes." 

"then au revoir, pinsent. I shall send for you as soon as I am well 
enough to investig the coffin." 

"thank you." 

but he continu to hold my hand and look me in the eye earnestly. 
"be care of yourself," he murmured. 

"careful," I repeated, puzzled. 

"ay," he murmur still lower, "you have incur the curs 
unwittingly--but still you have incur it." 

"what curse?" 

"the curs which ptahm direct against all desecr of hi tomb." 

I thought he raved, and felt hi pulse. but it wa steadi as a 
rock. "come, come," I said with a smile. "I shall be think you a 
superstiti man, sir robert, presently." 

"do you believ in god?" he asked. 

"yes," I cried, astounded. 

"then are you not superstitious, too? but there, I have warn you. 
i'll say no more. good-bye. kindli send my daughter to me." 

I found miss ottley and the two englishmen at the door of the outer 
tent. "sir robert want you, miss ottley," I observed, and pass on. I 
had hardli gone a dozen yards, however, when I found I had a companion 
on either side of me. 

dr. bellevil immedi open fire. "you have been take time by 
the forelock, dr. pinsent," he said softly. "I should hardli have move 
the patient for a day or two. He is veri weak." 

"mi name is frankfort weldon--captain weldon," said the handsom 
soldier--introduc himself. "I think you have annoy miss ottley, 
dr. pinsent. seem to me you should have consult her befor acting, 
at least." 

I glanc from one to the other and shrug my shoulders. "the 
thing is done," said I. "gentlemen, good-day." My long leg left 
them quickli in the rear. there seem no good reason to wast time 
in explain myself to them. they would soon enough find out the 
reason of my action for themselves, if possess of ordinari 
human curiosity. but a second later I stop and turned. "dr. 
belleville," I shouted, "I shall fix a watch at the temple. ottley 
wish it maintained. miss ottley will tell you why." 

I found the fellaheen collect in a group near the old store house. 
they eye me approach with open sullenness. I chose two among their 
number and direct them to stand guard befor the pylon for four 
hours. the two I had pick move off obedi enough, but they 
were stop almost on instant by their leader, a big ruffian with 
a scarred, black face and wild, fierc scowl eyes. sir robert 
ottley' dragoman hurri to my side. "softly, excellency, or there 
will be trouble," he muttered. "let me speak to them. yazouk is a 
chief--h will not be commanded. hi term of servic doe not start 
till to-morrow. He is angry." 

"silence, you," I respond in the same tone. "there is but one way to 
crush a nigger mutiny." 

I step smilingli forward, look into yazouk' eyes. the black 
giant--h stood six feet four in hi bare feet and wa a splendid 
physic specimen--put hi hand on the knife in hi belt. but befor 
he could guess at my intent he wa sprawl on the sand. He 
utter the yell of an angri wild beast and, spring up, rush at 
me with bare blade. I step asid and kick him in the stomach. He 
collapsed, howl dismally. I march up to the rest, who were all 
handl their knives, and show them my revolver. two minut later 
they were all disarm and I wa a walk arsenal. I turn to the 
dragoman. "I am go away, mehemet--to my own camp. but so that you 
will have no troubl with thi scum, I shall take their chief with me. 
I need a servant." 

mehemet bow to the veri ground. "your excel know best," he 
mutter reverently. 

"yazouk," said I, "yonder is my ass. Go saddl him for me." 

yazouk went. He return with the ass saddl and bridl befor I 
wa half through a cigarette. I mount forthwith and start toward 
my long-desert camp. "come, yazouk!" I call out carelessly, and 
I took good care not to look back. there is no mean surer of make 
an african obey you than to act as if you are certain he ha no 
alternative. perhap yazouk hesit for a moment, torn with fear and 
hate, but he follow me. soon I heard the patter of hi footstep on 
the sand. then I said to myself, "now, if thi man is to remain with 
me and be my servant I must make him fear me as he would the plague. 
but how?" I solv the riddl at the end of five miles. I must show him 
that I despis him utterly. So I stopped. He stopped. twenti pace 
separ us. "yazouk," I said, "come here!" 

He approached, eye me like a wolf. "from thi day for a month, 
yazouk, you shall be my slave," I observ calmly. "if you prove a good 
slave I shall pay you when the term end at the rate of fifti piaster 
a day. If you offend me by so much as wink an eyelash I shall not 
onli pay you nothing, but I shall ask poseidon to transform you into a 
hyena. will you like that?" 

yazouk did not remark on my dread threat, but there wa murder in 
hi eyes. I smile at him, and, alway look him full in the face, I 
took one by one the knive I had taken from hi fellows, from my belt 
and cast them on the sand at hi feet. "it is not fit for a lord to 
carri such trash when he ha a slave," I said. "pick up those knives." 

yazouk obey me. when he stood upright again there wa a great doubt 
in hi eyes. I thought to myself, it would be quit easi for thi 
ruffian to murder me at ani time in my sleep, and alreadi I am a wreck 
for want of sleep. I threw my revolv on the sand. "carri that, 
too!" I command loftily--and spur my ass on. probabl a volum 
might be written on the state of yazouk' mind as he trudg along 
behind me to my camp--a whole compendium of psychology. but I cannot 
write it, becaus I never onc glanc at him, and, therefore, I can 
onli guess at the turmoil of hi thoughts. but the event justifi my 
expectations. I wa so mortal weari when I reach my camp that 
I had no heart left even to discov whether my preciou manuscript 
had been disturb by some chanc wayfar of the wilderness. It 
suffic me that my tent wa stand and that it contain a cot. I 
cast myself down, without even troubl to remov my boots, and I 
slept like the dead for sixteen solid hours. when I awok it wa high 
noon. A steam bowl of coffe stood upon my tabl and a mess of 
bake rice and fish. besid the plate lay my revolver, and everi one 
of the knive I had given yazouk to carry. yazouk himself stood at 
the flap of the tent, a monstrous, stolid sentinel. when I aros he 
bent almost double. I swept the armouri into a drawer and attack my 
breakfast with the relish of a famish man. then I set to work with 
the energi of a giant refreshed; and with short interv for meals, 
sleep and exercise, I toil at my book thereaft till it wa roughli 
finished. So twenti day sped by. throughout yazouk wait upon me 
like the slave of aladdin' lamp. I had not a fault to find with him. 
indeed, he wa a perfect jewel of a servant, and he stood in such 
abject terror of my everi movement, nod or smile or frown, that I could 
have wish to retain hi servic for ever. but that wa not to be. 
On the twenty-first morn he accident drop a cup and broke 
it. I heard the smash and look up. It wa to see yazouk fli like 
a panic-stricken deer into the desert. I shout to recal him, but he 
onli sped the faster. 




chapter vii 

the one goddess 


I spent the rest of the day cover up the stele I had unearth with 
sand. there wa no use think of attempt to transport it to cairo 
under exist circumstances. but I had no mind to be depriv of 
the credit attach to it discovery. So I hid it well. afterward I 
gather up my portabl possessions, includ my tent, and pack them 
in a load for my ass' back readi for the morrow. for I had resolv to 
set out on the morrow for the hill of rakh. surely, I thought, ottley 
will be quit recov by this. I wonder whi he had not sent for 
me before--in accord with hi pledge. had he forgotten it? the 
desert wa except still that evening. there wa a new moon, 
and although it gave but littl light, it seem to have chain the 
denizen of the wilder to cover. I lay upon the sand gaze up at 
the star and listen in vain for sounds, for hours, then, at length, 
I fell into a quiet doze. the howl of a jackal awaken me. It wa 
veri far off, therefor I must have slept lightly. A long sleep, for 
the moon had disappeared. the dark that lay upon the land wa 
like the impenetr gloom of a rayless cave. but the heaven were 
spangl with twinkl eyes, that beam upon me veri friendli wise. 
I had lost all desir to repose, but I had found a crave for a pipe. 
I took out my old briar-wood, therefore, charg it to the brim and 
struck a match. "mi god!" I gasp and scrambl afoot. the tall arab 
who had terrifi miss ottley in the cave templ at rakh stood about 
three pace off intent regard me. I struck a second match befor 
the first had burn out, then felt for my revolver. 

"tell me what it is you want," I cri in arabic, "and quickly, or I 
fire." 

He did not speak, but veri slowli he move toward me. I rais the 
pistol. "stop," I said. He did not stop. "then have it!" I cried, and 
pull the trigger. 

He did not flinch from the blister flash of the discharge. It 
seem to me that it should have sear hi face and that the bullet 
should have split hi skull. I had a momentari glimps of a ghastly, 
brownish-yellow visag and of two dull wide separ eye peer 
into mine. then all wa dark again and I wa struggl as never I had 
struggl in my life before. long, stiff finger clutch my throat. 
A rigid wood-lik form wa press against my own and my nostril 
were fill with a sickli penetr odour which I all too sharpli 
recognised. It wa the perfum that had issu from the sarcophagu of 
ptahm when I drove my chisel through the lead. At first I grasp 
noth but air. but clutch wildli at the thing that grip my 
throat, I caught hand at last compos of bone. there wa no flesh 
on them, or so it seem to me. yet it wa good to grip something. 
It gave me heart. I had a horribl feel for some aw second of 
contend with the supernatural. but those hand were hard and firm. 
they compress my windpipe. back and fro we writhed. I heard noth 
but my own hard breathing. I wa be slowli strangled. It wa veri 
hard to drag those hand apart. but I am strong, stronger than mani men 
who earn their live by exhibit to the vulgar feat of strength. 
impel by fear of death, I exert my reserv of force, and drive 
will and muscl into one suprem unit effort I tore the death grip 
from my neck and flung the arab off. utter a sob howl of relief 
and rage, I follow him and caught him by the middle. then stoop 
low, I heav him high and dash him to the ground. there came a sound 
of snap wood or bones, but neither sigh nor cri of ani sort. "we'll 
see," I growled, and struck a match. the sand befor me wa dinted, 
but deserted. the arab had vanished. My sens rock in horrifi 
astonishment. My flesh crept. A cold chill of vagu unreason terror 
caught me. I listened, all my nerv taut strained, peer wildli 
round into the dark. but the silenc wa unbroken. noth wa to be 
heard, noth wa to be seen. were it not for the dint sand and the 
mark of feet other than my own where we had step and struggled, I 
could have come to the conclus I had dreamed. after a while spent 
in sooth panic fears, I sneak off to my baggag and extract 
from the pile a candl lamp. thi I light and, returning, search 
the sand on hand and knees. the stranger' footprint were longer 
than my own and they were toe-marked. plainly, then, he had stolen on 
me naked-footed. look wide around the dint made by hi fall bodi 
I came present upon some more of them. they were each a yard apart, 
and led toward the hill of rakh. yet onli for a littl while. soon 
they grew fainter and fainter. final they disappeared. tortur by 
the mysteri of it all, I halt where the footprint vanish and, 
put out the lamp, squat on the ground to wait for dawn. It came 
an hour later, but it told me noth fresh. indeed, it onli render 
the riddl more intoler maddening. where had my arab gone? and how 
had he come? for there wa not a singl footprint lead to the camp. 
Of cours he might have thrown a cloak befor him on which to walk; 
and thu he might have progress and left no trace. but wherefor 
such extraordinari caution? and whi should he be so anxiou to conceal 
himself? It wa hard to give up the riddle, but easier to abandon 
than to solv it. call philosophi to my aid and imagination, I 
determin that my arab wa some mad hermit upon whose solitud ottley 
had intrud in the first instance, and I in the second. and that he 
had conceiv a particular animos for some unknown reason against 
my humbl self and wish to kill me. without a doubt, he had some 
secret hiding-plac and fear lest I should seek to discov it. 
perhap he had found some treasur of which he had constitut himself 
the jealou guardian. I felt sure, at ani rate, that he wa mad. hi 
action had alway been so peculiar and hi speechless so baffl 
and astonish and crassli unreasonable. but he or someon had kill 
my donkey. I found the poor beast lie in a hollow, dead as cæsar. A 
knife had been employed, a long, sharp-point knife--perhap a sword. 
It had search out the creature' heart and pierc it. I made a hasti 
autopsi in order to be sure. the circumst wa most exasperating. It 
condemn me to the task of be my own beast of burthen. and the load 
wa not a light one. I made, however, the best of a bad job, and have 
fortifi myself with a good breakfast, I start off laden like a 
pack-hors for the hill of rakh. have cover four miles, I stopped. 
miss ottley and captain frankfort weldon had suddenli come into view. 
they were mounted. I sat down on my baggage, light a cigarett and 
waited. common elementari christian chariti would compel them to offer 
me a lift. It wa a good thought. It is not right that a man should 
work like a beast. and, besides, it wa cheer to see miss ottley 
again. she came up look rather care-worn and a good deal surprised. 
I aros and dof my hat like a courtier. captain weldon touch hi 
helmet with hi whip by way of salute. He might have just step out 
of a bandbox. I felt he did not like me. the girl look at me with 
level brows. 

"sir robert well and strong again?" I asked. 

"quite," said miss ottley. 

"we were on our way to pay you a visit," observ the captain. 

"sir robert want me," I hazarded. 

miss ottley shrug her shoulders. "doe he?" she asked, then ad 
with a ting of irony, "you seem content to be one of those who are 
alway neglect until a need aris for their services. doe it appear 
imposs that we might have contempl a friendli call?" 

"I have no parlour tricks," I explained. 

her lip curled. "you need not tell me. you left without troubl to 
bid me as much as a good-day. how long ago? three weeks. why?" her tone 
wa realli imperious. 

"but I left a benedict on the doorstep," I responded. "you look 
cross and I wa in a hurry." 

her eye blazed; they were beauti to see. "where are you going?" she 
demanded. 

"to call on your father." 

"you have a load," observ the captain. 

"A mere nothing." 

"i not that a tent?" 

"I am shift camp." 

"that nigger chap--yazouk--cam along last evening. but he vanish 
dure the night. We fanci someth might have happened." 

"oh, yazouk. He broke a cup and fear I would turn him into a hyena, 
so he ran away." 

"what!" shout the captain. 

"A superstiti creature," I shrugged. 

the captain shook with laughter. "we wonder how you had tame him," 
he chuckl presently--"aft the bout. 'pon honour, you serv him 
veri prettily. straight from the shoulder and savate, too. the dragoman 
declar you have the evil eye." 

"have you lost your donkey, dr. pinsent?" demand miss ottley. 

"he expir suddenli last evening." 

captain weldon frown and sat up veri straight in hi saddle. 

"eh?" he said and look a question. 

"I had an arab visitor. My visitor or anoth kill my donkey with a 
knife. I should like to have caught him in the act." 

"mi dream," said miss ottley, and caught her breath. 

"bi jove," said the captain, "it is realli wonderful--but wait--you had 
a visitor, doctor?" 

"I believ it." 

"did he offer to attack you?" 

"the spirit of the cavern!" cri the girl. 

"A lunat of an arab," I retorted, "and so littl of a spirit that I 
had hard work to prevent him throttl me." 

"but the face. did you see the face?" 

"our friend of the cavern," I admitted. 

miss ottley glanc at the captain, then back at me. she wa as white 
as a lily. 

"I knew it," she said. "I saw him kill the donkey and steal upon 
you--in a dream. hi hand were bloody--and, look, there is blood still 
on your throat." 

"mi cask wa empty, so perforc I could not wash," I murmured. the 
captain look thunderstruck. "it' the most wonder thing," he kept 
repeating, "the most wonder thing in the world." 

"and I never thought of look in the mirror. It wa pack up," I 
went on. I took out a rather grimi kerchief and began to rub at my neck. 

"ha that wretch arab--worri you at all--sinc I left, miss ottley?" 

"I have seen him twice--and onc more" (she shuddered) "in my dream." 

"and where did you see him out of dreams?" 

"onc in the cavern and onc in my father' tent. each time at night. 
each time he vanish like a shadow." 

"did anyon els see him?" 

"mi father and captain weldon." 

"the most hideou brute I ever saw," comment the captain; "you could 
put a good-siz head between hi eyes. and such eyes. dull as mud, but 
horribl intelligent." 

"well, well," said I. "we'll know more about him some day soon, 
perhaps, that is, if we stay long enough at the hill of rakh. He ha a 
hide thereabouts--without a doubt. your father is pine to open the 
tomb of ptahmes, I suppose, miss ottley?" 

"he ha open it," she answered. 

"oh!" I exclaimed--and stop dead in the act of name sir robert a 
thankless perjurer. 

the girl wa look at me hard. "you are surprised?" 

"curious," I growled. It wa hard to say, for I wa furious. 

"I cannot enlighten your curiosity," she said. 

"no?" 

"he permit no one to be present to assist him. It took place the day 
befor yesterday in the cave temple. and the tomb is now close again." 

"you are then unawar what is discovered?" 

"perfectly." 

"and sir robert?" 

"you will find my father greatli changed, dr. pinsent." 

"indeed." 

"he seem to be quit strong, but he ha age notably, and he will 
hardli condescend to convers with anyone, even me. moreover, the 
subject of ptahm is tabooed. the veri name enrag him. dr. 
bellevil ha forbidden it to be mention in hi hearing." 

"humph!" said I. "if my donkey were aliv I should go to kwansu 
straight. but as it is I shall have to trespass for a stretch on your 
preserv at rakh. I hate it, too, for your father ha broken faith 
with me." 

"ah!" cri the girl. "he promis that you should help him open the 
tomb." 

"exactly." 

"you must not be hard on him. I believ that he is not quit himself." 

"oh! I am accustom to that sort of treatment from the ottleys," I 
replied. 

It wa brutal beyond question, but I wa past reckon on niceti 
with rage. captain weldon turn scarlet and rais hi whip. "dr. 
pinsent," he cried, "you forget yourself. for two pins----" then he 
stopped--hav met my eyes. I laugh in hi face. "whi not?" I 
queri jibingly. "it would be not onli chivalrous--a ladi look 
on--but safe. have you ever seen a st. bernard hurt a spaniel?" 

He went deathli and slash me with hi whip. poor boy. I never blame 
him. i'd have done the same myself. As for me, the blow descend and 
cool my beastli temper, which wa an unmitig blessing. I took 
hi whip away and gave it back to him. then I laugh out, tickl at 
the humour of the situation, though it onli told against myself. "I 
had intend accept your offer of your mule for my belongings," I 
chuckled. "you haven't offer him, but that' a detail. and now I 
can't." I shook with laughter. 

weldon leap on instant to the ground. "do, do!" he almost groaned. 

He wa a gener youngster. "and forgiv me!" he said. "if you can--it 
wa a coward blow." 

"gladli i'll forgiv you," I replied, and we clasp hands. 

"i'll help you load the beast," said he. 

but I put my foot on my baggage. "that mule," I said, "belong to sir 
robert ottley. i'll not risk the break of hi back." 

We look at one anoth and I saw the captain understood me. He turn 
rather sheepishli away, but did not mount immediately. 

miss ottley wa gaze over the desert. "you must know you are behav 
like a child," she cuttingli remarked. 

I shook my head at the captain. "that mean you are keep a ladi 
waiting," I observed. 

He smile wrili in spite of himself. "scottish, are you not?" he asked. 

"from aberdeen." 

He climb on the mule' back. "i'm think dr. pinsent would like to 
be alone," he said. 

miss ottley nod and they rode off together. I pick up my swag and 
trudg after them. It wa dri work. about twenti minut later miss 
ottley rode back alone. she did not beat about the bush at all. 

"I want you to put your thing on my donkey," she said; and slip 
afoot, she stood in my path. 

"not to-day," said I. 

"but i'm in trouble, I need your help," she muttered. 

"with such a cavali as frankfort weldon?" I inquired. 

she coloured. 

"and dr. belleville. old friend both, I am led to fancy." 

she bit her lips. 

"and both of them in love with you," I went on bluntly. 

"dr. pinsent," said miss ottley, "it is my opinion that my father is 
not quit right in hi mind." 

"dr. bellevil is a F. R. C. s.," said I. 

"I am afraid of him--mi own father," she said, in a tragic tone. "I 
have a feel that he hate me, that he want to--to destroy me." 

"captain weldon would lay down hi life for you, I think," said I. 

she put a hand on my breast and look me straight in the eye. "I could 
not tell thi to dr. belleville, nor to the other," she half whispered. 

I thrill all over. "all right," I said, cheerily. "just stand asid 
till I load your littl beastie, will you?" 

her whole face light up. "ah! I knew you would not desert me," she 
said. 

but we did not speak again all the way to the hill of rakh. We were too 
busi thinking; the two of us. when we arriv she flit off, still 
silent. captain weldon came to me. "I want you to share my tent," said 
he. "I have a tub for you in waiting, and some fresh linen laid out, if 
you'll honour me by wear it." 

"you are a brick," I replied, and took hi arm. but at the door of 
the biggest tent in the whole camp to which he brought me I paus in 
wonder. It wa a sort of lady' bower within. the floor wa laid with 
rugs, and the slope canva wall were hung with silken frills; and 
women' photograph litter the fold-up dressing-table. they were all 
of the same face, though, those latter; the face of miss ottley. 

"sybarite!" I cried. 

He winced, then squar hi shoulders. "well--perhap so," he said with 
a smile. 

"but your galleri ha onli one goddess," I commented, point to a 
picture. 

He gave a shame-fac littl laugh. "you see, doctor, I have the 
happi to be engag to marri miss ottley," he explained. then he 
left me to my tub. 




chapter viii 

ottley show hi hand 


the captain' linen he had laid out for my use on hi damask-cov 
cot wa compos of the veri finest silk. even the sock were silk. I 
wa posit asham to draw my stain and work-worn outer garment 
over them; and I thought, with a sigh, of my two decent suit of tweed 
lying, like the dutchman' anchor, far away--in a cairo lodging-house, 
to be precise. I shave with the captain' razor and wonder whi I did 
not in the least mind rest indebt to hi courtesy. the remov of 
my beard laid bare the weal the captain' whip had raised. perhap that 
wa the reason. He came in just as I had finish and he saw the weal 
on instant. "I wish to the lord you'd just blacken one of my eyes," he 
said remorsefully. "the sight of that make me feel an out-and-out cad. 
not ten minut befor it happen miss ottley had been tell me the 
angel of good you had been to her." 

I sat down on the edg of the cot and grinned. "it give me quit a 
distinguish appearance," I replied, "and, say, didn't it give me back 
my temper nicely, too." 

"littl wonder you were wild," said he. "but whi didn't you break me up 
while you were about it? you could have, easili enough. lord! how big 
and strong you are." 

"and ugly," I supplemented. 

He flush all over hi face. "you make me feel a silli girl-man by 
comparison," he cried. "A man ought to be ugli and strong-look like 
you. i'd give half my fortun to possess that jaw." 

"what a boy it is!" I said delightedly, for I wa proud of my jaw, and 
I love flattery. 

"i'm have a cot made now; it will be put over there for you. you'll 
share my diggings, won't you? I want us to be friends," beam the 
captain. 

there wa someth so ingenu and charm in hi frank that I 
assent at once. 

"it' funny," he said afterwards. "but I detest you at first. have 
a cigar. thi box of cabana is for you. they'r prime. i'v more 
in my kit when they are finished. lie down and rest while you smoke 
one, won't you? lunch won't be readi for an hour yet, and you must be 
fagged." 

I wasn't a bit, but I lay back and puf a mouth of delici smoke 
with a long-drawn sigh of luxury. 

"you needn't talk. miss ottley say you don't like talking," said 
the captain. He lit a cigar and sat down on hi kit box. "i'm a real 
gabbler, though," he confessed. "do you mind?" 

"no, fire away, sonny!" 

He fired. It wa all about himself and miss ottley: how they had been 
brought up together, predestin sweethearts: how they had quarrel 
and made up and quarrel again: how realli and truli in their heart 
they ador each other: and how--if it had not been for the girl' 
intens devot for her father, they would have been marri long 
ago. He characteris sir robert as an extrem selfish man, who, 
ever sinc hi wife' death, had use hi daughter as a servant and 
secretari becaus he could get no other to serv him as well and 
intelligently. "but he doesn't realli care for her a straw," conclud 
the captain. "and he would sacrific her without remors to hi beastli 
mummi hobbi for ever if i'd let him. but I won't. i'm go to put my 
foot down presently. i'v wait long enough. He ha done noth but 
drag her all over europ translat papyri for him for the last six 
years. and she ha work for him like a slave. it' high time she had 
a littl peac and happiness." 

"translat papyri," I repeated. "A scholar, then?" 

"between ourselves," repli the captain, "sir robert' fame as 
a scholar and an egyptologist rest entir upon hi daughter' 
labours. without her he would be unknown. she did all the real work. He 
reap the credit. she is three time the scholar he is, and I know a 
frenchman who regard her knowledg of cuneiform as simpli marvellous. 
He is a professor of ancient languages, too, at the sorbonne, so he 
ought to know." 

"queer she never mention a word of it to me," said I. 

"oh!" cri the captain, "she is the modestest, sweetest creatur 
in the universe. I sometim think she is posit asham of her 
extraordinari ability. whenev I speak of it she apologises--and say 
she onli learn the thing she know to be a help to her dear old 
father. dear old father, indeed! the selfish old swine ought to be 
suppressed. He loath me becaus he fear i'll persuad her to leav 
him. If she wasn't so use she could go to the deuc for all he'd 
care. but it' got to end soon or i'll know the reason why. don't you 
think i'm right? we'v been engag now seven years." 

"I consid you a model of patience," I replied. 

"besides," said the captain, start off on a new tack, "the old man 
is posit uncanny. it' my belief he ha an underhand motiv in 
hi love for mummies, especi for hi latest find, thi ptahmes. 
he' a spook-hunter, you know--and he told me one day in an unguard 
moment that he expect to live a thousand years." 

"what' a spook-hunter, captain?" 

"oh! I mean a spiritualist. He ha a medium chap, he keep in london--a 
rascal beggar who bleed thousand a year out of him. they have 
séances. the medium scamp pretend to go into a tranc and tell him 
all sort of rubbish about the nile king and prophet and wizard 
and magician and the elixir of life. It is dash unpleas for me, 
I can tell you. there' alway some wild yarn go round the clubs. 
and as i'm known to be ottley' prospect son-in-law, I have the 
life chaf out of me in consequence. the latest wa that the medium 
chap--oscar neitenstein is hi name--put ottley in the way of find 
an old theban prophet' tomb--thi veri ptahmes, don't you know. and 
though he ha been underground 4000 years, neitenstein ha fool 
ottley into expect to find the prophet still alive. it' too idiot 
to speak serious about, of course; but on my honour the yarn drove me 
out of england. It got into the comic papers. ugh! you know what that 
means. but i'm not sorri in one way. So i'v come here to have it out 
with ottley. and i'm go to--bi gad." 

"you haven't spoken to him yet?" 

"I have, but he treat me like a kid. told me to run away and play and 
allow seriou peopl to work. I storm a bit, but it wa no use. It 
made him so angri that he nearli took a fit--and I had to leave. sinc 
then he ha been shut up with hi infern mummy, in that cave templ 
over there--and he won't even let hi daughter go within yard of the 
door. that' curious, isn't it?" 

"very." 

"and there' that busi about the mysteri arab," went on the 
captain. "the ugli horror that tri to throttl you and ha been 
frighten miss ottley. she think it' a ghost. but I reckon not." 

"ah!" 

"I reckon sir robert know all about that arab, though he pretend he 
doe not know. In my opinion it' anoth of those spook medium of 
his, and he is keep the ugli beast hidden away somewhere. probabl 
the fellow is some aw crimin who ha got to hide. sir robert would 
shelter hill or even that australian wife-murder deem if he said 
he wa a medium." 

"you extend my mental horizon," I remarked. "the arab mysteri is 
clear up." 

the captain simpli beamed. "so glad you catch on," he said. "do you 
know, I am depend heap upon you in thi business." 

"how?" 

the monosyl disconcert the captain. He stutter and haw for 
a while. but, finally, he blurt out, "well, you see, she won't leav 
her father under exist circumst on ani account, that' the 
trouble. but i'm hope if we can convinc the old man he is be 
fool by a pack of scoundrel he will return to hi sober sens and 
live sensibly, and then----" he paused. 

"and then--wed bells," I suggested. 

"exactly," repli the captain. "and see here, I have a plan." 

"ah!" 

"it' to lay for that arab, as a first step--and catch the brute." 

"and what then?" 

the captain look rather foolish. "well," he said, "well--oh!--we'd 
be guid by circumst then, of course. We might induc him to 
confess--don't you think?" 

I could not help laughing. "if you want to know what I think," I said, 
"it is, that you are in the posit of a man who know what he want 
but doe not in the least understand how to get it. still count on my 
help. If we can lay the arab by the heel we shall not harm anyon 
deserv of consideration, and we will put miss ottley' mind at rest, 
at all events; I hate to think that she is worri by the rascal. what 
do you propose?" 

"I thought of hide by the templ to-night. I pass it late last 
evening, and though sir robert wa ostens alone, I could swear I 
heard voices. what do you say?" 

"certainly." 

"shake," said the captain. We shook. "now let' go to lunch," said he. 
We went. 

"that' belleville' shanty," observ the captain, point to a 
neighbour tent. "I don't like the fellow, do you?" 

"I don't know him." 

"he' a spook-hunt like sir robert." 

"ah!" 

"the beggar is in love with miss ottley." 

"oh!" 

"he had the impud to tell her to her face one day that she would 
never marri me. He declar that it wa written--bi spooks, I suppose. 
one of these day i'll have to break hi head for him. but he is not a 
man you can easili quarrel with. you simpli can't insult him. He come 
up smile everi time." 

"an unpleas person." 

"A bounder," said the captain with intens conviction. "lord, how hot 
it is!" 

We enter the eat tent as he spoke. the tabl wa alreadi laid. dr. 
bellevil stood near the head of it talk to miss ottley. A coupl 
of soudanes flit about affect to be busy, but effect veri 
little. At sight of me both shudder back against the canva and stood 
transfixed. one held a spoon, the other a plate. they look extrem 
absurd. I told them in arab that onli the dishonest had occas to 
fear the evil eye, and took a seat. instantli both rush to serv me. 
My companions, not possess the evil eye, were forc to wait. miss 
ottley becam satirical, but I wa hungri and her shaft glanc off 
the armour of my appetite. when I had finish my first help of 
curri she sat down. "there' no use wait for father," she sighed. 
"I shall take hi lunch to him by-and-by." 

dr. bellevil echo the sigh. "mi dear young lady," said he, "permit 
me now," and he vanish a minut later carri a tray. 

"you see," said the captain, sotto voce, to me. 

"more currie," I said, addressing, not the captain, but the tent. 
immedi one of the soudanes slip and sprawl on the floor in 
hi eager to serve. the other leap over hi fellow' prostrat 
bodi and whisk away my plate. He return it load in about five 
seconds. miss ottley broke into a half-hyster laugh. It kept up so 
long that at last I look at her in surprise. she had a knife and fork 
befor her, but noth else; also the captain. "what is the matter?" I 
demanded. 

"look," she gurgled. follow her finger I turn and saw both 
soudanes stand like statu behind me. "wretches," I cried, "have 
you noth els to do?" 

they utter a joint howl of terror and fled from the tent. but the 
joke had staled. I took after them hot foot, caught them and drove them 
back to work, to find that my companion in the meanwhil had help 
themselves. dr. belleville, however, enter a moment later, and at a 
nod from me the trembl soudanes becam hi abject slaves. 

dr. bellevil had someth to say. "the negro are frighten of 
you," he began. 

"they fanci I have the evil eye." 

"humph!" cri the doctor. "talk german--they understand english. it' 
not that." 

"what then?" 

"sir robert ottley sent one of them to you--with a message--last night. 
He return thi morn with three rib broken. He is lie in the 
hospit tent now--in a high fever." 

"A tall, thin man--th eye set far apart in the skull?" I asked. 

dr. bellevil shook hi head. "no. short, thick-set, snub-featured, 
but a giant in strength." 

"how did he explain hi accident?" 

"that unwittingli he anger you." 

"the man is a liar," I declar indignantly. "I had a set-to with 
a skulk rogu last night. that is true enough. but the fellow I 
encount and threw wa taller than myself." 

the doctor shrug hi shoulders. "it wa a dark night, I believe." 
then a minut later--"ottley is much annoyed. thi meeraschi wa an 
excel subject. ottley wa experi with him." 

"how?" 

"hypnotically." 

I glanc at the others, but they were talk apart. 

"ottley sent me a message?" I asked, return to the doctor. 

"yes," repli bellevil between mouthfuls. He wa gulp down hi 
lunch like a wolf in a hurry. "he want you," he went on. 

"needless to say I receiv no message." 

"needless?" repeat belleville. "and you here?" 

the tone wa so insult that I aros and walk quietli out of the 
tent. the sun wa blaze hot. I thought of the cool cave templ and 
wander toward it. whi not see sir robert at once? whi not, indeed. 
two black sentinel guard the middl pylon, skulk in the shadow of 
a column. when I approach they stood bolt upright. they were arm 
with rifles. they bar the way. 

"ottley!" I shouted. "ottley!" and onc again "ottley!" 

At the third the littl baronet' face appear in the stone doorway. 

"oh! pinsent," he said, and stare at me. I read doubt in hi glance, 
some fear and anger and uneasiness. but there wa much els I could not 
read. hi skin wa as yellow as old parchment, and he did not look a 
well man by ani means. 

"it is roasting--here," I observed. 

He swallow audibly, as a woman doe recov from tears. "ah, 
well," he said. "come in--here." 

the black vastli relieved, it appeared, lower their arm and gave me 
passage. sir robert, however, still block the door. I travers the 
pylon and stood befor him. "we can talk here," said he. 

but I had no mind to be treat like that. I look him in the face 
and talk to him like this: "I am not welcome. I can see it. but it 
matter noth to me. I have rights. I gave you back your life. you 
made me a promise. you broke your promise. that reliev me of ani need 
to be conventional. I am curious. I intend to satisfi my curiosity. 
invit me into the cavern and show me what you have there to be seen. 
Or I shall put you asid and help myself. I can do so. your black do 
not frighten me, arm or unarmed. As for you, pouf! now choose!" 

"dr. pinsent," said sir robert. (he wa shake like an aspen.) "in 
about ten minut my dragoman is set out for cairo. If you will 
be good enough to bear him compani he will hand you at the end of the 
journey my chequ for a thousand pounds." 

"I ought to have told you," I murmured, "that it is a point of honour 
with me to keep my word." 

"two thousand," said sir robert. 

"at all costs," said I. 

"five thousand!" he cried. 

"you rich littl cad!" I growled, and look into the muzzl of a 
revolver. 

sir robert' eyes, seen across the sights, glitter like a maniac's. 
"go away!" he whispered. "go--or----" 

I thought of an old, old policeman trick and assum an express of 
sudden horror. "take care," I cried. "look out--h will get you." 

the baronet swung around, gasp and ghastly. In a second I had him by 
the wrist. 

"what wa it?" he almost shrieked. 

"A policeman' trick," I answer coldly, and disarm him. 

"curs you! curs you!" he howled, and doubl hi fists, he rush 
at me, call on hi black the while. the latter gave me momentari 
trouble. but it wa soon over. I prop them up like lay figur 
against the columns, face each other, afterwards, and extract the 
charg from their guns. look over the sand, I saw miss ottley 
and dr. bellevil and the captain walk under umbrella toward 
the tanks. I felt glad not to have disturb them. sir robert had 
disappear within the cavern. I follow him. He had put on a larg 
masqu which entir cover hi face, and he wa fumbl with 
the screw stopper of a huge glass jar at the farthest corner of the 
cavern. the sarcophagu had been overturned. It now rest in the 
centr of the cavern, bottom upwards. and on the flat, leaden surfac 
of the bottom wa stretch out, stiff and stark, the nake bodi of a 
tall, brown-skin man. the bodi glisten as if it had been rub 
with oil. It wa almost fleshless, but sinew and tendon stood out 
everywher like tighten cords. one might almost have taken it for a 
mummy. It had, however, an appear of life--or rather, of suspend 
animation, for it did not move. I wonder and step closer to 
examin it. I look at the face, and recognis the arab who had 
attack me on the previou night, the arab who had frighten miss 
ottley and myself more than once. hi mouth wa tight shut; hi eye 
were, however, open slightly. He did not seem to breathe. I put my 
finger on hi cheek, and pressed. the flesh did not yield. I ran 
my eye down hi frame and utter a cry. three of hi rib were 
broken. then I felt hi pulse; it wa still. the wrist wa as rigid as 
steel--th arm, too--nay, the whole man. "he is dead," I exclaim at 
last, and look at sir robert. the littl baronet wa re-stopp 
the glass jar, but he held a glass in one hand half fill with some 
sort of liquid. present he approach me--but most marvel 
slowly. 

[illustration: the live mummi 

I felt hi puls 

_face page 88_] 

"thi man is dead," I said to him. "he attack me last night. I threw 
him and perhap broke hi ribs. but I did not kill him, for he fled. 
how come it he is dead?" 

sir robert, for answer, threw at my feet the content of the jar. then 
I understood whi he wore the masque. the cavern wa fill with the 
fume of the deadli perfum of the sarcophagu on instant. one sniff 
and my sens were rocking. I held my breath, but in spite of that the 
cavern swung round me with vertigin rapidity. 

It seem best to retire. I did so, but how I hardli know. somehow 
or anoth I reach the pylon, pass the black and step upon 
the sand. about fifti pace off I saw a beauti grove of palm tree 
suddenli spring up out of the desert. such magic wa most astonishing. 
I said to myself, "they cannot be real, of course. I am mere 
imagin them." but their shade wa so delici invit that I 
simpli had to accept it challenge. I enter the grove and sat down 
besid a littl purl stream of crystal water. It wa veri pleasant 
to dip my hand in it. present a love naiad rose up out of the 
pool, seiz my hand and press them to her lips. that wa pleasant, 
too. then she came and sat quit near me on the bank of the rill and 
drew my head upon her lap and stroke cool finger through my hair, 
croon a tender love song all the while. that wa pleasantest of all. 
but her croon made me drowsy. like the lorelei' song, it charm 
away my senses, and I slept. 




chapter IX 

A cool defianc 


Of course, I had swooned, and equally, of course, not on the bank of a 
rivulet and under the cool shade of palm trees, but in the full blaze 
of the mid-day sun and on the smooth, unprotect burn surfac of 
the desert. It wa the accurs sarcophagu perfum that had work the 
mischief. fortun miss ottley saw me fall; otherwis I might have 
had a sunstroke. bellevil and the captain carri me between them to 
the shade of one of the pylons, and bellevil open a vein in my left 
arm--a proceed I am prevent from comment on by consider 
of profession etiquette. happily, I recov conscious in time 
to save a littl of my preciou blood. I told bellevil my opinion of 
him in one comprehens scowl, which he interpret correctly, I am 
glad to say, and then got up. I bandag my arm myself and made off for 
the captain' tent. that gentleman follow me. there arrived, I cast 
myself upon the cot and swore at ease. weldon listen in spellbound 
admiration. He afterward assur me that he had never befor 
encount such profici fluenci in objurg and invective. I 
wa madder than a hatter, and the more becaus I wa as weak as a cat, 
and I want to be strong, with all my soul. yet, five day pass 
befor I felt well enough to be abl to attack the task in front of me. 
meanwhile, I told the captain veri littl and miss ottley nothing. how 
could I let her know I knew her father to be a confound old rascal? 
she wa veri good. she visit me everi day and spent hour read 
aloud by my bedside, while the captain and I watch her face and 
thought much the same thoughts; though I took care, for my own part, 
not to let my featur reflect the fatuou devot of the captain's. 
On the sixth morn I found I could lift that young man shoulder-high 
with one hand without want to sit down and pant afterwards, so I got 
up. It wa just after daylight. the captain want to accompani me, but 
I thought differently. He wa annoyed, but I let him watch me from the 
tent flap. I found sir robert talk to dr. bellevil at the door of 
the cave temple. hi greet wa quit affectionate. "so glad you are 
better again, my dear young friend," he said, and he warmli invit me 
into the chamber. It wa almost empty. the jar of perfum had gone; the 
sarcophagu had disappeared. It contain onli a tabl and a cot. "sit 
down," said sir robert. 

"where is the sarcophagus?" I demanded. 

the old rascal grinned. "I had it quietli transfer last night on a 
truck to a punt," he replied, "while you were enjoy your beauti 
sleep. dr. bellevil and I have not been to bed at all. It is now on 
the road to cairo--and england." 

I sat down on the cot. "and the dead arab?" I questioned. 

dr. bellevil choke back a laugh. sir robert smiled. 

"the dead arab you saw wa the mortal casket of ptahmes," said he. 
"I am not surpris at your mistake. the bodi is in a perfect state 
of preservation. It is not a mummi in ani sens of the expression. I 
regret veri much that your sudden indisposit prevent you from 
examin it close and me from explain the circumst of it 
preserv and discoveri on the spot. however, I can tell you thi 
much now. We found it steep in an essenti oil which an hermet 
process had defend from evaporation. the oil began to evapor 
immedi it wa expos to the air: but I contriv to save a 
certain quantiti with which, later, I purpos to experi in london. 
the egyptian author have been veri good to me. they have given 
me all necessari power to deal with my discoveri as I please. I tell 
you thi lest profession jealousi should lead you to attempt ani 
interfer with my actions." 

"in plain words, sir robert, you wish me to understand that your 
discoveri is for you and not for the world." 

"hardli that, my dear pinsent. mere that I propos to choos my 
own time for take the world into my confidence--and that of dr. 
belleville," he added, bow to hi friend. 

"an unusu cours for a profess scientist to adopt." 

"I have veri littl sympathi with conventionality," coo sir robert. 

"and i," said belleville. 

"the point of view of two burglars," I observed. I scowl at 
belleville. 

"you shall be as rude as you please. you save my life," said sir 
robert. 

dr. bellevil clear hi throat. "ahem--ahem," said he, "the 
discourtesi of the disappoint is--ahem--i a tribut to the merit of 
the more successful." 

In my rage I descend to abuse. "you are a nasti old swindler," I said 
to sir robert, "but your grey hair protect you for the present. but, 
as for you, sir," I turn to belleville, "you black bull-dog--if you 
dare so much as to open your lip to me again, i'll wring your flabbi 
nose off." 

the baronet turn scarlet; the doctor went livid; but neither of them 
said a word. 

I strode to the door intend to quit, but there rage master me 
again. I swung on heel and onc more face them. "one word more," 
I grate out; "you'r not done with me yet, either of you. i'm a 
peac man by nature, but no man tread on my toe with impunity. 
spiritualist or spirit-summon you are, I hear. weldon call you 
spook-hunters--a veri proper term. you'll need all the money you 
possess between you and all the spirits' help you'll buy from your 
rascal spirit-rapp to keep me from your trail. look for the 
elixir of life, i'm told. It will go hard if I don't help you find it. 
the elixir of public ridicule, that i'll turn upon you, will hand your 
name down to posterity. i'll help you to that much immortality, at 
least, and gratis, too. good-day to you!" 

"dr. pinsent!" shout ottley. 

I paus and glanc at him across my shoulder. He gaze at me with 
eye that simpli blazed. 

"be warned," he hissed, "if you valu your life, let me and mine alone. 
i'll send a chequ to your tent to-day; keep it, call quits, and i'm 
done with you. I owe you that consideration, but no more." 

"and suppose, on the other hand----" 

"cross me and you shall see. you sleep sometimes, I suppose. My 
emissari will not alway find you wakeful. He never sleeps." 

"your rascal arab!" I shouted. 

"pah!" he cried. 

"murderer, it wa to you I owe that rough and tumbl a week ago at my 
own camp in the desert." 

"to me," he mumbled. "to me. whom else? My agent are spirit and 
invisible. they do not love you for despis them. they have tortur 
in reserv for you when you are dead and you, too, are a spirit. but I 
would be merciful--i shall send you a cheque. return it at your peril. 
now go, go, go." 

On a sudden I wa cold as ice. the man wa evid insane. He seem 
on the brink of a fit. He wa froth at the mouth. 

"softly, softly, sir robert," I said soothingly. "no need for 
excitement. calm yourself; after all thi is a busi transaction." 

"oh!" he gasped, then broke into a wild laugh. "A mere matter of price. 
I should have known it; a scotchman!" 

"exactly," said I. "and my price is a million. good-morning." 

the whole camp wa astir. the negroes' tent were all down and rolled. 
the mule and ass were be load heavily. evid sir robert 
wa about to flit after the corps of ptahmes. I found miss ottley and 
the captain talk over the appar move. the girl wa agitated. she 
had not been consulted. It wa not a time to minc matters. I told her 
frankli everyth that had pass between her father and myself, and 
hardli had I finished, when she rush off hot foot to visit him. the 
captain went with her. I made a passabl good breakfast. 




chapter X 

the captur of the coffin 


about noon--i saw no one but black in the meanwhile--th captain came 
with a letter. "from sir robert--catch!" said he. I tore it open. A 
singl sheet of note enclos a chequ sign in blank. "dear dr. 
pinsent," ran the letter. "you will find that my signatur will be 
honour for ani sum it may pleas you to put upon my life in your 
esteem. permit me to express a hope that you will not hurt my vaniti in 
your select of numerals. 

"sincer yours, robert ottley." 

I hand the note to weldon. He read it and whistl loud and long. 

"you might beggar him!" he cried. "the man is stark mad." 

"either that or he ha made a truli wonder discovery," I rejoined. 
"and there is bellevil to consider. that man, I fancy, is a 
rascal--but also a sane one." 

"it ha me beat," said the handsom captain. "the whole thing from 
start to finish. ottley is up there now spoon hi daughter like 
a lover. He wa as sweet as pie to me, too. I feel like a strand 
jelly-fish. what will you do?" 

I enclos the chequ in a blank cover, seal it and gave it to the 
captain. 

"will you be my courier?" 

"of course," said he, and swung off. 

He return at the end of my third cigar, with a second letter. It ran, 
"mi dear young friend, your refus ha deepli pain me. the more, 
becaus it depriv me of the pleasur of your compani on the road to 
cairo. I beg you, nevertheless, to choos from my store all that you 
may requir that may serv you dure your continu sojourn at rakh. 
We start at sunset for the nile and north. 

"ever your attachedly, 
"r. ottley." 

when the captain had master thi preciou effusion, he collaps upon 
a stool. "he intend to leav you here alon in the desert. it's--it' 
marooning, noth less!" he gasped. 

I light a fourth cigar and lay back think hard. In ten minut I 
had made up my mind. I sat up. the captain wa anxious watch me. 
"see here, my lad," I said, "in that bundl yonder is the manuscript 
of a book I have been work hard upon for three year and more. It 
is the veri heart of me. take good care of it. one of these days--if I 
live--i'l call for it at your dig in london. I have your address 
in my notebook." 

"oh! oh! oh!" said the captain. "but what' the game?" 

"diamond cut diamond. i'm go a journey. but i'll say no more. mad 
or sane, you are eat ottley' salt, and are beholden to him for hi 
patern of the except gift young woman you propos to marry. 
good-by to you." 

I held out my hand. He sprang up and wrung it hard. "you are sure you 
are do right?" he asked. 

I fill my pocket with hi cigars. "I am sure of nothing," I replied, 
as I did so, "except this--i have been abomin ill-us by a man who 
under heaven owe hi life to me--and this--i resent it." 

I put on my helmet, nod and left the tent. 

the captain cri out, "good luck!" five minut later I turn and 
wave my hand to him. He wa still stand by the tent flap gaze 
after me. I thought to myself, "he is as honest as he is good to look 
upon. He will make may ottley a gallant husband." I am a reason 
bad christian, and quit as selfish as mani worse, but somehow or 
anoth the reflect brought no aftermath of bitterness. the 
handsome, happy-heart boy--h wa littl els for all hi three and 
thirti years--had crept into my heart, and I felt somehow the chamber 
he occupi wa next door to that wherein may ottley' visag wa 
enshrined. but I had work to do; so I turn the key on both. the sun 
wa so hideous hot that I wa forc to hasten slowly. but I reach 
the nile under two hours, and found, as I expected, sir robert ottley' 
steam launch moor to the bank. her smoke funnel had been the 
beacon of my march. she wa in charg of an old french pilot, a turkish 
engineer, and four levantines, piratical-look stokers, mongrel all. 
I stalk aboard with an air of paramount authority. the frenchman came 
forward, bowing. He wore a sort of uniform. "steam up, captain?" I 
asked. 

"sinc morning, monsieur!" he replied. 

"then kindli push off at once. I must overtak the punt that start 
last night without delay." 

hi mouth opened. "but monsieur," he protested, "i----" 

"you wast time," I interrupted. 

He rub hi hand nervous together. "but monsieur is unknown to me. 
I have my written order from sare roberrrrt. doubtless monsieur ha 
authority. but monsieur vill perrceive----" 

"that you are a punctili old fool," I retorted. "here is my 
authority!" what I show him wa a revolver. He jumped, I vow, two 
feet in the air, and hastili retreated. but I follow more quickli 
still, and forc him to the bridge. there he becam veri voluble, 
however; so much so, indeed, that I wa constrain to cock my pistol. 
that settl him. He thunder out hi order and we were soon race 
at ten knot an hour down stream. when round the nearest bend to 
the hill of rakh the temptat wa veri strong in me to sound the 
steamer' whistle. but I am proud to say that I refrained. It would 
have been a little-mind thing to do. about midnight, feel weary, 
I ran the steamer' nose gentli into a mud bank, drove the captain 
down to the deck and lock him with the rest of the crew in the 
engine-house. then I forag round for eatables, made a hearti supper 
and snatch about five hours' sleep. when morn came I awok as 
fresh and strong as a young colt. after bath and breakfast, I releas 
my prisoners, made them eat and then push off the bank. We lost an 
hour at that job, but, at length, it wa accomplished, and our race 
for the punt recommenced. We overhaul it about four o'clock the same 
afternoon. It wa just an ordinari flat-bottom nile abomination, 
tow by a tiny, panting, puffing-billy, with twenti yard of good 
manilla. twelv arab squat round the sarcophagus. seat on the 
sarcophagus, under a doubl awning, wa a burly-look englishman. 
He wa smoke a pipe, and one look at hi face told me exactli whi 
he had been entrust with sir robert ottley' priceless treasure. He 
was, as plain as daylight, a gentleman if one ever lived, a brave man, 
too, shrewd and self-reli and as incorrupt devot to hi duti 
as a bull-dog with a thief' hand between hi jaws. I wonder if I 
would get the better of him. As a first step toward that desideratum, 
I assur the french captain that I entertain too much regard for him 
to put him to a linger death should he disobey me. I had previous 
lock the rest of the crew in the engine-house. then we bore down 
on the punt and I shout for the tug to be stopped. thi wa done. 
As it lost way, we nose up, go easi until we were alongsid the 
punt. then I order half speed astern until we, too, were stationary. 
some power of suction or attract began immedi to draw the two 
craft together. the tug, however, continu to remain, say thirti 
feet off. the englishman order out rope fender and ask me what 
the blaze I wa doing. I answer that I had come after him from sir 
robert ottley--which wa in a sens perfectli true--and that he could 
hardli expect me to shout out urgent privat busi befor listeners, 
which wa also a reason veraci statement of the facts. the 
englishman--i never learn hi name--observed, with some heat, that he 
would not leav hi charg for a second for ani man live except sir 
robert ottley; and that if I had someth to tell him I must go aboard 
the punt. 

I said "veri well," and as the craft touch I help myself to the 
punt with a rope. 

"well, what is it?" he demanded, and he eye me most suspiciously, one 
hand in hi breast. doubtless he had there a revolver. had he been 
warned? and of me? It is a thing I have still my doubt about. but I 
look him frankli in the eye and told him the truth to the veri best 
of my ability. 

"it ha late come to sir robert ottley' knowledge," I began, "that 
one of hi guests--a man name pinsent" (he start at the name) "ha 
conceiv a bold design of reliev you of thi veri charg of yours, 
which you are guard with such praiseworthi solicitude." 

"oh!" said the englishman, "and how would he go about it?" the idea 
appear to tickl him. He laughed. 

"he would follow you and attack you," said I. 

the englishman put hi hand on hi thigh and simpli roared. "he would 
have to swim after me," he chuckled. "there is not anoth launch save 
these two between here and ham!" 

"I am honestli glad to hear it," I replied, and, indeed, I was. 

"it' a mare' nest," declar the englishman. 

"oh!" said I. "thi pinsent is a desper fellow and resourceful. Do 
you know, he actual tri single-hand to seiz that launch." 

"the _swallow_!" cri the englishman. "impossible." 

"on the contrary!" I retorted. "he succeeded. He stand befor you. My 
name is pinsent. permit me!" 

He wa a trifl slow-witted, I fancy. He still look puzzled, when hi 
face emerg abov the nile water, after hi dive. but I would not let 
him return to the punt. immedi I discov that the arab were 
onli arm with knives. I had taken the troubl to throw overboard all 
the firearm that I could find on the _swallow_; so I just drove them 
aboard the launch and order the frenchman to sheer off and return to 
rakh. He wa charm at the permission. 

the englishman fire at me twice from the water, but he had to keep 
himself afloat, so he natur missed. when he wa well-nigh drown 
I haul him up with a boat hook. It wa easi to disarm him in that 
condition. I had intend to put him on the tug, but I wait too long. 
the tug cut the tow rope befor my eye and without so much as by your 
leav puf after the _swallow_. the englishman and I were thu left 
lone on the punt; in middl stream. the current wa fairli strong at 
that point and make toward a long, low-li sweep of reedi flats. 
I had no mind to land there, however, so after tie up the englishman 
neck and crop, I contriv to hoist a sail and steer for the opposit 
bank. 

the englishman and I had noth to say to each other. No doubt he 
recognis the futil of convers in the circumstances; as for 
me, I never felt less inclin to talk. about five o'clock we ground 
under the lee of a pretti littl promontory. It wa popul with 
crocodiles. nice companions--at a distance--crocodiles--musky-smel 
brutes. 




chapter XI 

good-by to the nile 


the englishman wa evid someth of a gourmet. I found foie gras, 
camembert cheese, press sheep' tongu and bottl british ale in 
hi privat locker. but he wa as sullen as a sore-head grizzly. He 
sourli declin to eat even though I offer to free hi hands, and he 
strove to make my dinner unpleas by volunt pungent inform 
on the punish provid by law for the crime of piracy, robberi 
under arms, burglary, assault and battery, and fals imprisonment. 
those, it seems, were the titular head of some of my delinquencies. 
He felt sure that I would get ten years' hard labour, at least. I did 
not argu the point with him. after dinner I examin the sarcophagus. 
the lid wa fasten on with crosswise-run band of hing steel, 
padlock in the centre. but it was, strang to say, wedg at one 
end with iron bolt about an inch ajar, as if on purpos to allow air 
to pass into the coffin. after a littl search I discov a toolbox 
in the shallow hold of the punt; and I attack the band with cold 
chisel and a mallet. ten minutes' work sufficed. I toss the broken 
band asid and lever off the lid. My heart beat like a trip-hamm 
as I look into the coffin. I wa prepar for a surprise. I receiv 
one. My arab gaze up at me. the mysteri arab with the three broken 
ribs, who had frighten miss ottley and tri to throttl me and 
whom I had last seen lying--a corpse--in the cave templ at rakh. Of 
course, sir robert ottley had declar the corps in the templ to 
be ident with that of ptahmes, the four thousand year dead high 
priest of amen-ra. but that wa ridiculous. I had onli had time to make 
a cursori examin of the dead arab in the cave temple, it is true, 
but I am a surgeon, and I had convinc myself that the fellow, so 
far from be a mummy, had not been long dead. I had yet to discov 
an essenti error in my cave templ investigation. My veri first 
impress had been not death, but suspend animation. and I must have 
been right. the later speedi diagnosi had, in sober truth, misl me. 
the man wa not dead. It had been a case of suspend animation. the 
arab lie in the sarcophagu befor me wa alive. hi broken rib 
were neatli set and bandaged. otherwis he wa swath from head to 
foot in oil rags. He wa lie in an easi posit on hi back--upon 
a doubl feather tick. He wa breath softli but unmistakably. and 
he wa awake. hi extraordinari eyes--they were set fulli five inch 
apart in hi abnorm broad skull--wer wide open and stare at me 
in a way to make the flesh creep. they were horribl eyes. the white 
were sepia-coloured, the pupil were yellowish, and the iri of each a 
differ shade of black fleck with scarlet spots. hi cone-shap 
forehead wa moist and glisten with oil or perspiration. hi mouth 
wa held open by two small rubber-tip metal bar join together, 
against which hi teeth--great brown fangs--press with manifest 
spasmod energy. 

now what wa ottley' purpos in take such extraordinari pain to 
transport a live arab in a dead man' coffin from rakh to cairo, and, 
perhaps, london? 

perhap the arab could tell me. burn with curiosity, I stoop down 
and took from hi mouth the mechan contriv which held the 
jaw apart. the arab utter on the instant a deep, raucou sigh. hi 
eyebal roll upward and becam fixed. He appear to have fainted. 
I rush away to procur some water. that water wa in the hold. 
seiz a dipper, I sprang down the steps, hurri to the cask and 
fill it. the whole busi occupi onli a few seconds. I certainli 
could not have been away from the deck half a minute, but when I 
return the sarcophagu wa empty. the arab had disappeared. utterli 
astounded, I gaze about me. had the whole thing been a dream? It 
appear so, but no--i caught sight of a tall, dark figur make off 
hot foot across the promontory. He had leap ashore, a distanc of 
twelv feet or more, and wa run toward the desert. In a second 
I wa after him. I thought of the crocodil while in mid air; but it 
wa too late to turn back at that juncture. My feet land in a patch 
of oozi sand. I scrambl out of it and up the slope among the reeds. 
A loud rustl and a stink of musk warn me of a saurian neighbour. I 
gave a mighti leap and clear the reeds. then I ran as I had never run 
before, for my arab wa in front, and a hungri monster came hard upon 
my heels. A log lay in my path. It wa anoth crocodile. I clear it 
with a bound and gain the desert. I wa hunt for some seconds, I 
believe, but I never look back, so I do not know at what point the 
saurian gave up the chase. the arab wa a marvel. He had a lead of one 
hundr yard and he maintain it. He had three broken rib and I wa 
as sound as a bell. yet, at the end of twenti minut not hi breath 
but mine gave out. I wa forc to paus for a spell. He ran on. hi 
lead doubled. set my teeth, I resum the chase. but I might have 
spare myself the trouble. He gradual grew farther and farther away 
from me. I did my best, but at last I wa compel to admit myself 
beaten. the arab' tall form grew less and less distinguish against 
the stars. final it melt into the mist of the horizon. I wa alon 
on the desert. I sat down to rest and took counsel with myself. I had 
turn pirat and committed, technically, a number of other atroci 
crime for absolut nothing. plainli I could not return to the punt. 

first of all, in order to reach it I should have to face the 
crocodiles. and even should I escap their jaw again, what could I 
do on the river? sooner or later I should be caught. and I had a veri 
strong suspicion that sir robert ottley would not hesitate, onc I wa 
in hi power, to plung me into an egyptian prison. He had evid 
enough to get me a long term of hard labour, and I felt littl doubt 
but that he would go to a lot of troubl for that, and _con amore_ 
after the way that I had serv him. It did not, therefore, take me 
long to resolv to risk the desert rather than rot in an egyptian gaol. 
I had spilt a lot of milk. I wa foodless, waterless, and god know 
where. also, I wa as thirsti as a lime kiln. but no use crying. what 
to do? that wa the question. for a start, I lay down and press my 
cheek against the ground. the horizon thu examin show a faintli 
circl unbroken level line in all direct except the northwest. 
there it wa interrupt for a space by a mound that wa either a 
cloud-bank or a grove of trees. It prove to be the latter. I found 
there water to drink and date to eat. next morn I took my bear 
from the sun, and give the river a wide berth I press on north for 
two day and night on an empti stomach. then I shot an ibi with my 
revolv in a reedi marsh and ate it raw. next day I climb into the 
mountain and look back on assuan and philæ. but it is not my purpos 
to describ my wander minutely. It would take too long. suffic it 
to say that I chang cloth with an arab near redesieh and enter 
eonah dy as a nubian a week later, after cross the river at el-kab 
in a fisherman' canoe. the nile wa still ring with my doings, so 
I judg it best to proceed on foot to luqsor. but there I got a job 
in a dahabeah that wa convey a parti of french savant back from 
elephantin to abydos. I stay with them three weeks, hear much 
talk, meanwhile, of a certain rascal scotch doctor name pinsent. It 
wa suppos he had perish in the desert. one day, however, hear 
that sir robert ottley, who had been lie at thebes, had been seen 
at lykopolis, I desert from my employ, and walk back to farschat. 
there I bought a passag on a store-boat and came by easi stage 
to beni hassan. thenc I tramp to abu girgeh, where I lay for a 
fortnight, ill of a wast fever, in the hous of a man I had formerli 
befriended. A larg reward had been offer for my arrest, but he 
wa an arab of the better sort. So far from betray me to outrag 
justice, he cash my chequ for a respect amount and procur me 
a passag to cairo on a river steamer. I enter the ancient citi of 
memphi one day at dusk, a wreck of my old self and as black as the 
ace of spades. not dare to reclaim my good at my lodging-house, I 
proceed forthwith to alexandria with no wardrob save the cloth 
upon my back, and so anxiou wa I to escap from egypt that I ship 
as stoker on a french steamer bound for marseilles. I could find none 
that would take a negro as passenger. the dye pretti well wore off my 
face and hand dure the voyage, but the circumst onli excit 
remark among the motley scum of the stokehole, and I wa permit 
to land without dispute. heavens! how beauti it wa to dress onc 
more as a european, to eat european food, to sleep on a european bed, 
and not to be afraid to look a european in the face. In europ I did 
not care a pin for sir robert ottley and all that he could do to hurt 
me. In egypt hi money and influenc would have left me helpless to 
resist him; but I felt myself someth more than hi match in the 
centr of modern civilisation. He had the law of me, of course, but I 
had a weapon to bring him to book. I could hold him up to public scorn 
and ridicule. were he to prosecut me I could put him in the pillori 
as a wretch ungrat for hi life save by my care and skill, a 
promise-break and someth of a lunatic. On the whole, I decid he 
would not ventur to put me in the dock. and so sure did I feel on that 
head that I proceed to london as fast as steam could carri me. 




chapter xii 

the meet 


whenev in london my practic for year had been to put up at 
my friend dixon hubbard' room in bruton street. We had been 
schoolfellows. He wa one of the most fortun and unfortun 
creatur in the world. born with a silver spoon in hi mouth, he 
had inherit from some cross-grain ancestor a bite tongu and 
a gloomi disposition. He wa an incur misanthrop and unpopular 
beyond words. At colleg he had been detested. be a sickli lad, 
hi tongu had earn him mani a thrash which he had had to endur 
without other repris than sarcasm. yet he had never spare that. hi 
spirit wa unconquerable. I believ that he would have taunt hi 
execution while they burn him at the stake. I use to hate him 
myself once. but one day after give him a fairli good hammer I 
fell so in love with the manli way in which he immedi thereaft 
gave me a sound excus for wring hi neck that I beg hi pardon 
for be a hulk bulli in have lift hand against a weaker 
bodi but a keener brain and more untam spirit than my own. that 
conquer him. from that moment we were insepar chums, and on an 
averag the privileg cost me at least two hard fight a week, for my 
code was--hit my chum and you hit me. hi gratitud lay in jibe at 
me if I lost the fight, and if I won inform me that I wa a fool 
for my pains. but we understood each other, and our friendship brave 
withstood the test of time and circumstance. I found him nurs an 
attack of splenit rheumat befor a fire in hi study, and we were 
still onli in the middl of july. hi man, miller, had just broken 
a sévre vase, and hubbard wa tell miller in a gentle, measur 
way hi view of clumsi in serving-men. miller--a meek, dog-lik 
creatur usually--stood befor hi master glow but inarticul 
with rage. hi fist were clench and hi lip were drawn back from 
hi teeth. hubbard wa evid enjoy himself. He watch the 
effect of hi placid exhort with a sweet smile--and he appli 
hi mordant softli utter gibe with the pride of a sculptor at work 
upon an image. each one produc some trifl but signific chang 
in miller' expression. probabl hubbard wa experimenting--seek 
to discov either how far he could go with safeti or exactli what it 
would be necessari to say in order to make miller spring at hi throat. 
they were both so engross that I enter without disturb them. I 
listen for a moment and then creat a diversion. miller' tension 
wa posit dangerous. I walk over, took him by the collar and 
propel him from the room. "you'll find my bag downstairs," I said. 
"i'v come to stay." 

miller gave me the look of a dog that want but doe not dare to lick 
your hand. hi gratitud wa pathetic. I shut the door in hi face. 

hubbard did not rise. He did not even offer to shake hands. He half 
close hi eye and murmur in a tire voice: "the bad penni is back 
again, and uglier than ever." 

I cross the room and threw open a window. then I march into hi 
bedroom, seiz a water jug, return and put out the fire. 

"you'v been coddl yourself too long," I remarked. "get up and 
put on your hat. it' almost one. you are go to lunch with me at 
verrey's." 

"I have a stiff leg," he remonstrated. 

"fancy! mere fancy," I returned. 

the room wa full of steam and smoke. hubbard said a wick thing and 
got afoot, coughing. I found hi hat, cram it on hi skull and 
crook my arm in his. He declin to budg and wag a blister 
tongue, but I laugh and, pick him up, I carri him bodili 
downstair to a cab. He call me forti sort of cowardli bulli in hi 
gentl sweetli courteou tones, but befor two block were pass hi 
ill-humour had evaporated. He rememb he had news to give me. We 
had not met for eighteen months. Of a sudden he stop beshrew me 
and lean back in the cushions. I knew hi way and talk about the 
weather. He endur it until we were seat within the grill-room. then 
he beg me veri civilli to let god manag hi own affairs. 

"I am veri willing," I said. 

He impal an oyster on a fork and snif at it with brutal 
indiffer to the waiter' feelings. satisfi it wa a good oyster, 
he swallow it. 

"I am no longer a bachelor," said he. "I have taken unto myself a wife." 

"the deuce!" I cried. 

"exactly," he said. "but the prettiest imp imaginable." 

"mi dear hubbard, I assur you----" 

"mi dear pinsent, you have blunder on the truth." 

"but----" 

He held up a warn finger. "it occur a year ago. We live togeth 
for six weeks. then we compromised. I gave her my hous in park lane 
and return myself to bruton street. pish! man, don't look so shocked. 
helen and I are friends--i see her onc a week now at least, sometim 
more often. I assur you I enjoy her conversation. she ha a natur 
geniu for gossip and use all her opportunities. she ha alreadi 
becom a fix star in the firmament of society' smartest set and 
aspir to found a new solar system. I allow her fifteen thousand 
pound a year. she spend twenty. My compens is that I am never 
at a loss for a subject of reflection. We shall call on her thi 
afternoon. A devil, but diverting. you will be amused." 

"do I know her, hubbard?" 

"no; you are mere acquainted. her maiden name wa arbuthnot." 

"ladi helen arbuthnot!" I cried. 

He smile and shrug hi shoulders. "you will find her changed. 
marriag ha develop her. I rememb befor you went away--wa it to 
egypt?--sh tri her blandish on you. but then she wa a mere 
apprentice. heaven help you now--if she mark you for her victim." 

"poor wretch!" I commented. "I suppos you can't help it. but you ought 
to make an effort, hubbard, really." 

"an effort. what for?" 

"to conceal how crude in love with your wife you are." 

He bit hi lip and frowned. "children and fool speak the truth," 
he murmured. then he set to work on the champagn and drank much 
more than wa good for him. the wine, however, onli affect hi 
appearance. It brought a flush to hi pallid cheek and made hi dull 
eye sparkle. He delug me with polit till three o'clock. then we 
drove to park lane. ladi helen kept us wait for twenti minutes. 
In the meantime, two other caller join us. men. In order to show 
himself at home hubbard smoke a cigarette. the men look pensiv 
appalled. they were poets. they wore long hair and exot garden in 
their buttonholes. and they roll their eyes. they must have been 
poets. also they carri bouquets. certainli they were poets. when ladi 
helen enter they surg up to her, utter littl artist foreign 
cries. and they kiss her hand. she gave their bouquet to the footman 
with an air of fascin disdain. their deject wa delightful. 
but she consol them with a smile and advanc to us. certainli she 
had changed. I had known her as a somewhat unconvent and piquant 
débutante. she wa now a brilliant siren, an accomplish coquett and 
a woman of the world. her tini statur made her attractive, for she 
wa perfectli proport and her costum ravishingli emphasis the 
petit and dainti grace of her figure. her face wa reminisc of one 
of those wild flower of torrid region which resembl noth grown in 
an english garden, but which, nevertheless, arrest attent and charm 
by their bizarrerie. It wa full of eeri wisdom, subtl wil 
and quaint, half-humor diablerie. In one word, she wa a sprite. 
she greet her husband with an unctuou affect of interest which 
would have made me, in hi place, wish to box her ears. hubbard, 
however, wa as good an actor as herself. He protest he wa grate 
for the audienc and claim credit for introduc me. ladi helen 
look me up and down and rememb that I had owe her a letter for 
nearli thirty-seven months. she gave me the tip of her finger and 
then rush away to kiss on both cheek a ladi who had just entered. 
"oh, you darling!" she twittered. "thi is just too love of you. I 
have long for you to come." 

It wa may ottley. she did not see me at once. ladi helen utterli 
engross her. I had, therefore, time to recov from the unexpect 
shock of her appearance. I wa ridicul agitated. I slip into an 
alcov and pick up a book of plates. At first my hand shook so that 
I could hardli turn the pages. hubbard glide to my side. I felt hi 
smile without see it. "I smell a brother idiot," he whispered. 

I met hi eye and nodded. 

"in egypt, of course?" 

"yes." 

"she marri a guardsman next month, I hear." 

"indeed." 

"the poor man," murmur hubbard. "come out and let us drink hi 
health." 

"no, thank you." 

"you'd rather stay and sing your wings, poor moth." 

"and you?" 

"mine," said he, "were amput in st. jame church. she is a love 
creature, pinsent." 

"which?" 

He chuckl without replying. A footman pompous announced: "mrs. 
carr--lord edward dutton." 

"bring the tea, please," said ladi helen' voice. 

"she is stare thi way at you," murmur hubbard. "she recognis 
your back. no, not quite, she is puzzled." 

"she ha never seen me in civilis apparel," I explained. 

"are you afraid of her, my boy?" 

"yes." 

"well, you are honest." 

I began to listen for her voice. the air wa fill with scrap of 
conversation. 

"three thousand, I tell you. He cannot go on like that. shouldn't 
wonder if he went abroad. like father, like son. old ranger had the 
same passion for bridge." 

"you can say what you like, name tell one nothing. In my opinion the 
man is a jew. what if he doe call himself fortescue? consid hi 
nose. I am tire of these rich colonials. I have no time for them. 
heaven know what they are after." 

"she will spoil her lower regist complet if she keep on. her 
voic is a mezzo and noth else. you should have seen the way old 
delman sneer when he listen to her last night." 

"mi test of a realli fine soprano is the creepi feel the high C 
give one in the small of the back. delicious. she never thrill me at 
all." 

"oh! lord edward, how malicious. what ha the poor man done to you?" 

"he play billiard too well to have been anyth but a marker in hi 
youth. I believ he kept a saloon somewher in the states." 

"they say it will end in the divorc court. that is what come of 
marri a milkmaid. and, after all, she did not present him with a 
son. ah, well, it' an ill wind that blow nobodi ani good. young 
carnarvon is hi heir still, and hi chanc of succeed grow rosier 
everi day." 

"mi dear mrs. belvigne, if it wa not for her red hair, she would be as 
commonplac as--a my dear friend mrs. sorenson. what you men see in 
red hair----" 

"conscience, ladi helen, is a composit of indulgences. It is a 
marriag de conven between the convent instinct and the 
appetite." 

"dr. pinsent," said miss ottley, "i it realli you?" 

I turn and look into her eyes. they were all aglow and her cheek 
were suffus with colour. she gave me both her hands. the room 
wa alreadi crowded. peopl enter everi minute. hubbard point 
significantli at the tea-cups. miss ottley and I drift to the divan. 
We watch the crowd through the part curtains, sip our tea. We 
might as well have been in a box at the theatr watch the play. 

"I knew you would escape," she murmured, presently. "the other 
believ you to have perish in the desert." 

"they consol themselves, no doubt?" 

"mi father especially." 

"did he recov hi arab?" 

"what arab?" 

"the creatur he had imprison in the sarcophagus." 

"the mummy, you mean. the bodi of pthames? oh, yes, that wa safe 
enough, but he wa in a fear state until we found the punt. He 
fear that you would either steal or destroy the mummy, I believe." 

"miss ottley!" I cried. 

"you must not blame him too much," she murmured; "you know how he had 
set heart----" 

"look here!" I interrupted. "do you mean to tell me that you found the 
mummi in the sarcophagus?" 

"certainly. why?" 

"did you see it?" 

"yes." 

"the mummy?" 

"why, of course." 

"A dead body, a mummy?" 

"dr. pinsent, how strang you insist." 

"i'll tell you the reason. when I open the sarcophagus----" 

"yes." 

"it contain not a mummy, but a live man." 

"impossible." 

"you think so? the arab wa the veri man who frighten you so often in 
the templ at the hill of rakh." 

"dr. pinsent!" 

"when I remov the lid he leap out of the sarcophagus, sprang ashor 
and fled to the desert. I follow him for sever miles. but I could 
not catch him. I wa compel to give up the chase. and now you tell 
me that you afterward found a mummi in the coffin which I had left 
empty." 

"one of us is dreaming," said the girl. 

"what wa thi mummi like?" 

"A tall man--with a curiou conical-shap head--and eye set hideous 
far apart in it skull--but you have seen the arab who frighten 
me--and inde he attack you at your camp. hi mummifi counterpart." 

"and some of hi rib were broken?" 

"I do not know." 

"but hi bodi wa bandaged. otherwis he wa almost nude." 

"good heavens!" she exclaimed. she put down her cup. "you make me veri 
unhappy. you forc me to recal my horror--in the cave temple. the 
wretch uncanni sens of the supernatur that oppress me there. you 
make me rememb that I wa tortur into a fanci that the mummi wa a 
ghost--that we were haunted--that--oh! oh! and father ha been so kind 
to me lately, kinder than ever before." 

"he is in london?" 

"yes." 

"and the mummy?" 

"yes." 

"and dr. belleville?" 

"he is stay with us." 

"captain weldon?" 

she turn asid her head. "he is in london, too." 

"you are shortli to be married, I am informed." 

she stood up. "I must realli be going," she observ constrainedly; 
then she held out her hand. I watch her pick her way through the 
crowd to our hostess. It wa a well-br crowd, but it stare at her. 
she wa worth look at. she walk just as a woman should and she 
bore herself with the proper touch of pride that is at the same time a 
person protect and a provoc of curiosity. some peopl call 
it dignity. hubbard materialis from the shadow of a neighbour 
curtain. "mi wife ha invit me to dinner," he announced. "you, too. 
I have made her your excus becaus I have a money matter to discuss 
that should not be postponed." 

"you have my deepest sympathy," I answered, and left him as puzzl to 
know what I meant as I was. someth wa whisper over and over 
in my ear--"work! work! work!" and whisper in the imper mood. 
I determin to call upon captain weldon and procur from him my 
manuscript, at once. I rememb he live in jermyn street. I walk 
thither as fast as I wa able. 




chapter xiii 

hubbard Is jealou 


I encount the captain on hi doorstep. He wa just go out, 
hat and gloved, but on see me he abandon hi intention. 
hi delight wa that of a child, and so manifestli genuine, so 
transpar sincere, that it warm my heart. He drag me into 
hi sitting-room and wrung my hand again and again, express hi 
pleasur in tone that made the window rattle. one cannot help 
like a man so simpl and at the same time so kind. there are too 
mani complex peopl in the world. He had griev for my suppos loss 
more than at hi own brother' death, he said, and I believ him. 
veri few men care much for their brothers. then he told me all about 
hi approach marriage. It wa to take place in five week and he 
wa dread the ordeal already. He had just finish furnish hi 
wexford countri hous from top to bottom. they were to settl there 
after a honeymoon in itali and adopt the life and manner of countri 
magnates, onli come to town for the season. It wa miss ottley' 
desire; she did not care for london smart society, it seemed, and 
although he did, he wa quit will to give it up or anyth 
els inde to pleas her. It wa pleasant to hear him rhapsodis 
concern her and to watch hi happi face. it spirit made him ten 
time handsomer, and although hi speech wa boyish it did not detract 
him from hi exuber virility. He wa a man from the crown of hi 
head to the sole of hi feet,--a splendid animal, with just enough 
brain to be a forc to command respect, and a heart big enough to 
fill the whole world with hi affection. there wa not a singl bitter 
drop in the cup of hi happiness. He wa about to marri the woman he 
adored. He wa enorm wealthy, and hi wife-to-b wa the onli 
daughter of a millionaire. hi plan for the futur were utopian. He 
dream of enlarg hi estat and provid for at least the welfar 
of a hundr families. wealth wa given one in trust for others, he 
declared, and he wa resolv to make everi one around him happi and 
contented. As a wed present to hi tenant he had alreadi order 
the rebuild of their home and cottag on a scale of almost lavish 
grandeur. each farmhous would be a model of luxury; each labourer' 
cottag would be a miniatur castl with tile walls, and hot and 
cold water attachments. other landlord were annoy with him and had 
not hesit to express their resentment. He wa spoil hi own 
tenant and make them dissatisfied, they said. but the captain ask 
me with eye aglow how could one want to keep all the good thing of 
life to benefit a singl class? It wa monstrous, impossible, absurd. 
He onli wish he could at one stroke make all the poor in the world 
comfortable. "you ought to hear may on the subject," he cri out in a 
burst of confidence. "you'd think she wa a socialist. but she is onli 
an angel." thenc he wander to her father. sir robert had given up 
all hi old stupid ways. He had reform and wa as sane as ani man 
in england. He had repudi hi ancient attach to "spooks" and 
spirit-rapping, and mahatmas, and had sent hi famou medium, navarro, 
to the right about, much to that gentleman' disgust and indignation. 
sir robert wa now engag with dr. bellevil in compil a histori 
of the dynasti from papyri they had found in the tomb of ptahmes. the 
captain still thought that ottley had treat me veri badly, but he 
beg me to forgiv the old man as he had evid not been quit 
in hi mind at the time. "you excit hi profession jealousy, 
don't you know, old chap," said weldon. "sir robert ha one fault--h 
is dread vain and he want to get all the credit out of hi 
discovery. He told me so himself. He quit open up to me on the 
voyag home." 

A vision of sir robert ottley "open up" to the captain occur to 
me. the little, old, inscrutable, shut-in face of the baronet peer 
slyli into the frank and unsuspici counten of the handsome, 
simple-mind guardsman and make a confess of hi fault the 
while! for why? I could not guess, but I had a feel that it wa 
for no straightforward purpose. We dine together, and while we ate I 
question him about dr. belleville. for the first time I saw a shade 
on hi face. He did not like the doctor. I pursu the investigation. 
for a while he fenc with my question but final it all came out. 
"I have an idea," said he, "that bellevil annoy may. He is in love 
with her. Of cours one can't blame him for that, but as a guest in her 
father' hous and her father' closest friend, he ha opportun to 
forc hi attentions, and I believ the brute abus them. she doe not 
complain and will tell me nothing--but all the same I have my opinion. 
you see, she worship her father so much that she will run no risk of 
hurt hi feelings. she would put up with almost anyth rather 
than distress him, and bellevil know it. He ha sir robert under 
hi thumb far more than I like. I hate to think I may be wrong the 
fellow--but upon my soul I cannot help distrust him." 

"but you have noth definit to go upon?" 

"nothing--except this: one day about two week ago I went in 
unannounc and found her--in tears. I had pass bellevil in the 
hall a second earlier. He look as black as night. and she--well, she 
told me, weeping, that she would marri me when I pleased. Up till then 
she had alway put off name the day. what would you make of it, 
pinsent?" 

"what did you?" 

"I conclud that he had been persecut her and that--well, that she 
felt safer with me than with her father. don't rag me for be vain, 
old chap. If you'd seen her cry. she is not that sort of a girl either. 
It wa the first time I ever knew her to break down, and i'v known her 
all my life." 

"did you speak to bellevil about it?" 

"she forbad me to--but all the same I did. I behav like an idiot, of 
course. lost my temper and all that sort of thing. He wa as cool as a 
cucumber. He deni noth and admit nothing. He pretend to think 
I had been drinking, and that enrag me the more. I wa fool enough 
to strike him. He got all the best of it. He pick himself up smile 
sweetli and said that noth could induc him to resent anyth 
address by a person in whom miss ottley wa interested. the infer 
wa that he love her in an infinit superior way to me. I felt like 
choke him for a bit. and would you believ it--h actual offer to 
shake hands." 

"A danger man, my lad. bewar of him." 

"he give me the creeps," said the captain. "but let' talk of 
someth els pleasanter." 

We talk of miss ottley, or rather he did, while I listened, till 
midnight. then he stroll with me to bruton street and we part at 
dixon hubbard' doorstep as the clock were strike one. 

I found hubbard seat befor the fire, smoking, and stare dreamili 
up at a portrait of hi wife that rest on the mantel. 

"i'v found out whi I marri her, pinsent," he said slowly. "it wa 
to benefit a jew name mauric levi--th most aw bounder in london. 
she had been borrow from him at twenty-f per cent. to pay some of 
her brother' gambl debts. levi want to marri her, and would have, 
too, if I had not step in to save him. she is the dearest littl 
woman in the world. she shed some tears. they cost me about a thousand 
pound apiece." 

"good-night, dixon," I said gently. 

"tears, idl tears," he murmured. "the poet, mark you, did not speak of 
woman' tears." then he close hi eye and heav a deep sigh. "you 
find me changed, pinsent?" 

"A little." 

"for better or worse? Be frank with me." 

"for the better. thi afternoon for the first time in our acquaint 
I beheld you in a lady' drawing-room. you are grow toler of your 
kind." 

"I am no longer a misanthrope, but I am rapidli becom a misogynist. 
yes, I am altered, old friend, greatli altered. At the bottom of my 
former misanthropi wa a diseas convict born of vaniti that I wa 
the onli person in the world realli worth think badli about. but 
marriag ha compel me to think more badli still of somebodi else. 
the less selfish outlook thu induc ha broaden my mind. I begin to 
look forward to a time when my pervers will be complet and I shall 
be abl without blush to look ani woman in the face and acknowledg 
her superior in innat viciousness." 

"I begin to piti your wife, dixon." 

"A wast of sentiment. she ha marri five and twenti thousand pound 
per annum, and she would be the last to tell you that the institut 
is a failure. few women contriv to dispos as advantag of the 
sort of good they have to sell. ladi helen would have made a fortun 
as a bagman. but there, I do not want to prejudic you against her. she 
like you, I believe. perhaps--who knows--but there--good-night." 

I wa glad to get away. 




chapter xiv 

the push man 


A day or two afterwards, while spend an hour in the room of the 
egyptolog societi I wa introduc to a new fellow, who had been 
appoint dure my absenc from england. hi name wa loui coen. He 
wa in privat life a broker, but hi heart and soul were wrap in 
the cause. He evid spelt it with a capital, in sympathy, perhaps, 
with the vast sum in cash he had alreadi put at the dispos of the 
societi for explor work. He wa intens entertaining. He took me 
asid and confid that it wa hi ambit to transform the societi 
into a sort of club. We need a liquor licens and more commodi 
premises, it seemed. then we would _boom_. He offer to provid all 
the money requisit and he beg me to use my influenc with other 
member to get hi view adopted. He wa one of those men whose 
mission in life is to "run" everi concern into which they can manag 
to insinu themselves. I wa afraid I disappoint him, although I 
did my best to be polite. but he wa noth daunted. He declar he 
would galvanis the "old fogies" into fresh activ and make us see 
thing from hi point of view or die in the attempt. We might be as 
seriou as we pleased, but he would forc us to be sociable. He had a 
nose like a parrot, and wa alreadi on the committe of management. He 
even propos to chang our name. the royal egyptian club seem to 
him a "real smart monniker." He save me from an impend mental and 
physic collaps by mention the name of sir robert ottley. ottley, 
it appeared, wa hi latest convert. ottley agre with him that we 
want new blood, that our method were too conservative. ottley 
thought it wa ridicul that everyth a member did or discov 
should have to be report to, and judg about, by a lot of old 
fossils. what right had those old "stick-at-homes" to appropri the 
credit of the exert of the energetic? "would you believ it," cri 
mr. coen, "they have had the impud to demand from him an account 
of hi recent find--th tomb of an old johnni name ptahmes--which he 
unearth at hi own expens entirely! they have had the 'hide' to 
insist that he shall immedi hand over the mummi to the british 
museum and place the papyri befor them--them--them--for the purpos of 
translation, et-cetera! I never heard a more cheeki proposit in my 
life. My friend ottley would act rightli if he told them to go to the 
deuce!" 

"what ha he told them?" I inquired. 

"oh, he is temporising. He ha written to say that he will place hi 
discoveri at their dispos when he ha satisfi himself of their 
authenticity, et-cetera. Of cours that' all '_gyver_.' the mummi is 
genuin enough, so are the papyri. but he natur want to have first 
'go' at them, and he is fight for time. meanwhile, I am organis 
the progressives. We can never hope to get thi show properli on the 
move till we shake thing up and reform on sound commerci lines. I 
tell you, sir, befor i'v done with it, i'll make thi societi a power 
in the land. i'm go to take it up in both hand and chuck it right 
in the eye of the B. p., that mean the british public. and you take 
it from me, it' go to stay there. good-day to you. i'm glad to have 
met you. you are a bit antiqu in your notions; but you'r a young 
man yet, and you'll find you'll have to join my crowd. s'long!" 

He shook my hand veri energet and bustl off. I sank into a 
chair and began to fan myself. A moment later the president, lord 
ballantine, enter the room. the poor old gentleman wa purpl in the 
face, spluttering: "has-has-ha that man coen been can-can-canvass 
you?" he thundered. 

I nodded. 

"i-i-i'l resign--bi god!" cri lord ballantine. "it-it-it' too much. 
i-i-i," he stopped----gasp for a word, the pictur of impot rage 
and misery. 

but I felt no sympathi for him. "whi did you let him in?" I asked. 

"we-we-w were short of funds." 

"and now?" 

"he' bought us, or think he has, bodi and soul." 

"who nomin him?" 

"ottley." 

I wa not surpris to hear it. "he--he' ottley' broker. ottley 
and he are run the market-change--together. have you heard. they 
have corner south africans. they made half a million between them 
yesterday. all london is talk about it. and they want to turn us 
into a beer garden." 

"you'll have to turn them out." 

"how can we? We owe them, lord know how much." 

"then if you cannot," I said calmly, rise as I spoke, "you'll have to 
grin and bear the inflict you have brought upon yourselves. after 
all, it' a question of voting." 

"you'll stand by us, pinsent?" he implored. 

"mi resign is at ani time at your disposal, ballantine. all the 
same, I don't piti you a scrap. you are get littl more than you 
deserve. I have been work for three year for the societi without 
remuneration, and I am a poor man. mani of your older member are as 
rich as croesus, and yet you must need import a vulgar semit broker 
to help you out of a hole. good-afternoon." 

I left the poor old fellow helpless and speechless, stare after me 
with anguish eye and mouth agape. that even I receiv a letter 
from loui coen offer to financ my book on the nile monuments. He 
said he felt sure it would prove a work of rare educ value, 
and on that account he wa will to furnish everi librari in the 
english-speak world with a free copy. aware, however, that I wa 
not a busi man, he would conduct all the busi arrang 
himself. On receipt of the manuscript, therefore, he would forward 
me a chequ for £1000 as an instal in advanc of my share of the 
profits--fifteen per cent. he propos to allow me--and he wound up as 
follows: "your accept of my offer will commit you to noth as 
regard our chat of thi morning. My good friend, sir robert ottley, 
put me up to thi venture. He ha the brightest opinion of your abil 
and he is sure your book will prove a success. I am go blind on hi 
say so. let me have an answer right away." 

I thought a good deal over thi preciou epistle, but in the end I 
did not see whi I should not make a littl money. I knew veri well 
that under ordinari circumst it would be imposs for me to 
make £100, let alon a thousand, out of the nile monuments. but I felt 
littl doubt that mr. coen had a plan to make even more--somehow or 
other. but I had done the man injustice--it wa not money he wa after. 
read the _times_ two morn later I came upon the follow 
announcement: 


"A patron OF learning" 

"we are inform that mr. loui coen, F. R. E. s., ha induc 
the well-known egyptologist, dr. hugh pinsent, to commit the 
result of hi recent archæolog research on the nile to the 
endur care of the printer' ink. mr. coen ha purchas the 
right in advanc for a larg sum of the project volume, which 
it is said will take the form of an exhaust treatis on the 
nile monuments. It is not, however, mr. coen' object to direct 
hi enterpris to hi own financi benefit. It is hi intent 
to produc a splendidli illustr edit of the book for 
present to educ establish all over the unit 
kingdom in the hope of thu fix public attent upon the 
enorm histor import of the work now be carri on 
by the royal egyptologist society, of which societi mr. coen is a 
member, and a gener supporter. mr. coen is to be congratul 
upon hi latest effort in the interest of popular education. 
It will be rememb that last year he endow a chair in the 
univers of newcom for studi of the ancient egyptian tongue; 
but it may be confid expect that hi exploit of dr. 
pinsent' histori will go much further in popularis a subject 
which is now practic confin to the rank of leisur 
scholars." 


It wa not pleasant to think that I had been idiot enough to allow mr. 
coen to use me as a stepping-ston to notoriety. but it wa too late 
to object. the thing wa done. My consol wa a bigger bank 
account than I had had for years. not even the fact that dure the day 
I receiv a score of sarcast congratulatori telegram from member 
of the society, could rob me of that satisfaction. but I sent in my 
resign all the same. I felt that I had no right to belong to ani 
institut run by mr. coen. I might meet him there--and if I did, a 
polic court case of assault and batteri would infal result. 




chapter XV 

A quaint love pact 


one even after a hard morning' work on my book, and a particularli 
fatigu afternoon spent in vainli tri to lift hubbard out of 
a funer mood, I thought I should make myself a present of a few 
minutes' convers with miss ottley. I argu that she would be sure 
to spend the even out somewhere, so I knock at her father' door a 
few minut befor eight o'clock. A gloomy-look footman open the 
door. yes, miss ottley wa at home. He would give her my card. would I 
wait? I would, though I wondered. I heard dr. belleville' voice. It 
issu from a room that open on the hall. He wa talk shrilli as 
though he were angered, and in french, perhap to spare the feel 
of the servants. He kept repeat that he had made up hi mind and 
that he would not wait anoth day for god almighty. all of a sudden 
the door open and he stalk out look like the baffl villain in 
a melodrama. We came face to face. He stop dead and glare at me. 
"you!" he gasped. "what are you do here; what do you want?" 

I glanc beyond him and saw miss ottley. He had been speak to her, 
then, and like that. My blood began to boil. I advanc upon him tri 
to smile. I had seen miss ottley' face. "I want you to go right back 
into that room and pretend you are a gentleman," I said. the girl had 
put a kerchief to her eyes. "quickly!" I added. 

dr. bellevil return into the room. I follow and close the door. 

"dr. pinsent----" he began as I turned. but I cut him short. 

"on your knees," I commanded. He went livid. "dr. pinsent," said miss 
ottley, "I beg you not to interfere. you will onli make it the harder 
for me." 

she might as well have spoken to a fence. I never took my eye from 
belleville. "you know what you ought to do," I murmured. "if you compel 
me to teach you, you'll repent the object lesson in a hospital." 

He fell on hi knee befor the girl. "I apologise," he groan out in 
a choke voice. 

I bow him out of the room as deferenti as if he were a woman. He 
vanish silently. miss ottley wa dress for the opera. 

"you are go out?" I asked. 

"y-yes," she said. she wa powder her face befor a mirror. 

"to the opera?" 

"yes. To meet there mrs. austin." 

"dare you walk there--with me for a companion?" 

"oh, yes," she said. 

A moment later we found ourselv in curzon street. she took my arm. 
We walk for two block in absolut silence, save that everi now and 
then she choke back a sob. she wa her own mistress again at length, 
however. "whi did you come--of all time to-night?" she asked. 

"I do not know." 

"did you wish to see my father?" 

"no. you." 

"why?" 

"I had a subconsci convict that you might be need me." 

"truly?" she cried--and press my arm. 

"that or someth else. At ani rate, I felt oblig to call. It may 
have been from a desir to reassur myself about the colour of your 
eyes." 

"ah! I suppos you are wondering--because--dr. 
belleville--because--i----," she paused. 

"I am human," I observed. 

"I want you to forget it. will you, dr. pinsent?" 

"on the spot." 

"that is good of you." her tone wa crisp with disappointment. "you are 
inde a friend." 

"but not in need a friend, eh? come, come, miss ottley, you are in 
trouble. I am strong and trustworthi and capable. there are time when 
a man may tell the truth about himself, and this, I think, is one of 
them. can I help you?" 

"no one can help me," she said sadly, "you least of all." 

"and whi least of all?" 

"becaus you hate my father." 

"i he in trouble, too?" 

"he is the will but unwit victim of a wicked, wick man--but, 
oh, what am I saying? dr. pinsent, please, pleas let us talk of 
someth else." 

"you are trembling--may." 

"oh!" she said--and look at me. 

"it slip out--unconsciously," I stammered. "I did not mean to 
be impertinent. I think of you--bi that name. Is it impertin to 
think----" 

"no, no." 

"then you'll forgiv me?" 

"what is there to forgive?" 

"all that the circumst implies. come, after all, I am not sorri for 
the slip. whi should I twist it mean either, like a coward. It is 
onli the weak who need the shelter of hypocrisy. look straight befor 
you--may--and do not turn your eyes. may again, you see." 

"you have someth to tell me," she said gravely. 

"the old, old story, may," I answer with a short but reckless laugh. 

"should you--dr. pinsent--do you think?" 

"yes, becaus the husband you have chosen is a gallant fellow and my 
friend. I am too fond of him to wish to do him an ill turn, even in 
my own adventure. why, look you, may, were you to turn to me and say, 
'I love you, hugo pinsent,' I would answer, 'yes--and we both love 
frankfort weldon.'" 

"yes," said miss ottley. she stop and we look deep into each 
other' eyes. 

"yes," she said again. "and we both love frankfort weldon." 

"god help us," I exclaimed. 

"it is a good prayer. god will hear it," she said softly. 

"what made you?" I ask a littl later; we were walk on again--but 
now apart. 

"you," she said. 

"it is veri wonderful." 

"and sad," said she. 

"but grand and beautiful." 

"I shall not go to the opera to-night," she said. "will you put me in a 
cab?" 

"you will go home?" 

"yes." 

"and belleville?" 

"he will be at work. I shall not see him." 

"he threaten you?" 

"not me, but captain weldon. He demand that I shall marri him. My 
father also wish it. you see I tell you everything--now. you will 
help me, will you not?" 

"of course. but you must teach me how. In what fashion doe bellevil 
threaten weldon?" 

"he vows--that unless I do as he demand within thi week--captain 
weldon will be found dead in hi bed." 

"murder!" I cried. 

"he doe not scrupl to conceal the fact. He declar he ha noth 
to fear. He pretend to possess a secret which give him as great a 
power over life and death as providence. An esoter power, of course. 
It is connect with the discoveri of ptahmes. He claim to have 
alreadi test it. My father ha use it in other ways. He ha been 
experi on the stock exchange. In ten day he ha alreadi doubl 
hi fortune. sure of that you must have heard." 

"I have heard that he ha been specul with extravag success. 
but that hi luck wa due to supernatur agenc I declin to believe. 
In my opinion bellevil is simpli put up a scoundrelli game of 
bluff." 

"I wish I could think so, too. but I cannot." 

"but, my dear girl, consid the probabilities. belleville' stori 
belong to the middl ages." 

"yes--but he believ it. I am as sure of that as that I live." 

"and is that a reason whi you should believ it, too? the man is 
perhap a lunatic." 

"ah!" she said. "I knew that you would take thi view. that wa partli 
whi I felt you could not help me." 

but her distress cut me to the quick. "it doe not matter what view I 
take," I mutter hastily. "i'll do anyth you wish." 

"anything?" 

"did you doubt it?" 

"no." 

"then----" 

"then go and stay with captain weldon. He will welcom you, for he 
like you out of mention. spend the week with him. Do not let him from 
your sight at night. especi guard him while he sleeps. Is it too 
much to ask?" 

"no." 

"there is a cab--stop it, please! thanks. now say good-by to me." 

"good-bye--may." I help her into the vehicle. "would it be 
permiss to kiss your hand?" 

"no!" she said, "but give me yours." 

I felt her lip upon my fingers, and with a sort of groan I snatch 
them away from her grasp. that wa our good-bye. 




chapter xvi 

ladi helen prescrib for her husband 


next morn earli I pick a quarrel with hubbard, and left him bite 
hi finger nails. I went straight to jermyn street with my valise. 
weldon wa in bed. I told him I had had a fight with hubbard and ask 
to be put up for a few days. He agre with acclamation, though I am 
sure he wa perfectli astound at my strang request. I proceed 
to astound him further. I mendaci inform him that my nerv 
were in rag and that I wa obsess with a horribl hallucin of 
a mysteri threaten life at night. would, then, he give me a 
shakedown in hi own bedroom, just for a week? It is wonder how easi 
lie come to one after the first plunge. I did the thing thoroughly. 
mind you, I felt all along the utmost scorn for dr. belleville' 
threat against young weldon' life. but miss ottley had ask me to 
look after him, and I wa determin to fulfil the trust to the veri 
foot of the letter. He wa a splendid fellow to live with. It give 
me a heartach to rememb the anxieti to make me comfortable, the 
almost absurd cordial of hi welcome, the unselfish sincer of 
hi desir to please. one would have thought me a superior creation, 
a sort of divin in disguise, the way he treat me. I had never 
awaken such affect in ani live thing before, except in a mongrel 
retriev which onc upon a time follow me home and which I had to 
turn away after it had lick my hand. and the amaz thing was, I 
had done noth in the world to deserv it. I had never put myself 
out of my way in the smallest particular to serv the captain. when we 
first met I had treat him with the scantest courtesi and afterward 
with a sort of good-natur contempt. even now I cannot understand it 
properly. It may have arisen from a secret disposit to hero-worship. 
some men are like that. they are fond of invest a sentient 
figure-head with exagger attribut of majesti and bow down 
befor it. It is the surviv of an aborigin instinct to glorifi the 
insubordinate. weldon admir two thing abov all others: strength of 
bodi and strength of mind. In both these gift he felt himself inferior 
to me, therefor he must need put me on a pedestal. hi gratitud 
in find me will to stoop to ask a favour of him wa unbounded. 
It resembl that of an eton fag to a monitor kind enough to take an 
interest in hi doings. I have said befor that he wa essenti a 
boy at heart. but what an honest, clean-minded, fresh, wholeheart 
boy! I found myself like and admir him more and more each day. He 
taught me one of the greatest truth a man may learn. It is this--ther 
is a more admir thing in the world than intellect. weldon' 
intellect wa not of the first order. that is whi I began by veri 
nearli despis him. but he wa the straightest, truest, manliest and 
simplest-mind man I have ever met. and I end by half-humor but 
none the less sincerely, reverenc him. If it were onli for hi sake 
I shall while I live regard the highest type of brain as incomplet 
without a paramount ideal of morality. and the best thing about weldon 
wa that he wa utterli unconsci of hi goodness. He wa perfectli 
incap of posing, but he had a fine, robust vaniti of sorts, and he 
like to regard himself as a bit of a "sad dog!" romanc wa at the 
bottom of this. He envi the more than question experi of some 
of hi acquaintances. It wa becaus of the glamour of their perfum 
wickedness. but their callou self-extr from entangl after 
grow weari of their chain made him long to wring their necks. for 
hi own part, a certain shop girl had onc fallen in love with him. He 
twirl hi moustach and cast furtiv glanc at the mirror near him. 
It appear he had dalli with the temptat for a while--th "sad 
dog"--but miss ottley' portrait had save him. He had kiss the shop 
girl once--horror of horrors!--in the park after dark. He apologis 
to her father with a thousand pound and fled to south america. when 
he came back she wa married. He had confess the whole of hi truli 
dread crimin to miss ottley in a letter--and she had kept him 
wait three miser day for a reply. He believ he would have 
gone to the dog headlong if she had refus to pardon him. but she 
did not. vaniti told him the reason. but it wa beauti to see the 
colour flush hi cheek and hi eye sparkl as he protest that he 
couldn't understand whi she ever brought herself to speak to him again. 
I believ that wa as far as weldon ever got to tell a downright 
falsehood; the dear, great gander. 

On the third afternoon of my stay at jermyn street I wa busili at work 
writing, when a knock sounded. weldon wa out; he had gone to take 
miss ottley for a drive in hi newest dogcart. hi man, too, had a day 
off, so I wa quit alone. I said "come in," and there enter ladi 
helen--hubbard' wife. she wa a vision of lace fripperi and arch, 
minc daintiness. 

"so! run to earth!" she cried. 

I sprang up and offer her a chair. 

she settl into it with a swish and a sigh. "been search for you 
everywhere! I had thought of appli to the police." 

I suppos I look astonished, for she laughed. 

I stammered, "whi have you been search for me?" 

she gave me a glanc of scorn. "should a duti wife regard with 
indiffer the sudden desert of her husband by the onli friend he 
possesses? just tell me that." 

"you take my breath away." 

"no," she flashed, "the 'duti wife' did that. confess!" 

"well, sinc you insist--i admit that helen becom you better than 
joan," I said audaciously. 

her eye glittered. "may be, my fine gentleman--but would you say 
'dixon' wa synonym with 'darby'?" 

"not quite. still, they both commenc with a 'd.' that is something, 
eh?" 

"so doe anoth word which rhyme with lamb," she retort cuttingly. 
"oh! I might have known that you would take hi part. you men alway 
stick together." 

"I beg your pardon, ladi helen. I consid that you deserv well of 
your country. you have improv hubbard past belief. He is worth 
improving." 

she smiled. "I have humanis him, just a little, don't you think?" 

I nodded. 

she lean forward suddenli and look me in the eye. "it' onli the 
commencement, the thin edg of the wedge." 

"oh!" 

she began speak through her teeth. "i'll make a man of him yet if I 
have to beggar him in the process." 

"I beg you to excus me." 

she fell back and began to laugh. "oh, how solemn you are. you 
disapprov of me. ha! ha! ha! you don't even begin to hide it." 

"you see I do not understand you." 

"yet you disapprove?" 

"no. I wonder." 

"you are a man, doctor, that one can't help trusting!" she stood up 
and began to move about the room. "I am go to confid in you," she 
announced, stop suddenly. 

"A danger experiment," I observed. 

"one risk death everi time one cross a car-crowd thoroughfare. 
i'll take the risk." 

I shrug my shoulders. 

she frowned. "you use to like me once. what stop you?" 

"I haven't stopped." 

she smile bewitchingli and, glide forward, place her hand upon 
my arm. "he want to take me away to south america--h own a ranch 
there--and to buri us two for ever from the world. that wa hi idea of 
marriage. It all came of a root disbelief in hi own abil to keep 
me interest in himself while I possess an opportun to contrast 
him with hi social equals. He saw a rival in everi man I look at or 
who look at me. He should have been born a turk. I should then have 
been the queen of hi zenana. but no, I must do him justice--h is not 
polygam inclined. still, he would have shut me up." 

"the poor devil," I muttered. "it is hi disposition. He cannot help 
himself." 

"but he may be cure of it," said ladi helen. "he think everi woman 
is a rake at heart. but he is mad. I for one am not. mind you, I love 
society. I like men. I live for admiration. but as to--pshaw!"--sh 
spread out her hands. 

"you quarrelled?" I inquired. 

"no, we argu the matter out and came to an arrangement. We are good 
friends. but he doe not conceal hi opinion that some day or anoth I 
will go to the devil. He think it inevitable. pride, however, forbid 
him from look on except at a distance. that is whi he separ from 
me. He imagin that no woman can keep true to one man unless she is 
immured. the fool, the utter fool! As if wall and lock and key were 
ever an encumbrance. love is the onli solid guarante of a woman' 
faith." 

"but my dear ladi helen, your husband ha not the faintest idea that 
you love him!" 

she drew back gasping. "you--you--you!" she cried. she wa scarlet. 
then she said, "how dare you!" she look so love that I no longer 
wonder at hubbard' infatuation. 

"you should not have kept it from him," I said severely. "but there, 
it' wonderful. how did you ever manag it? He is not an attract 
man. and you--a butterfly. It is a miracle. there must be depth in 
you. are marriag made in heaven? I thought--h thinks--you marri 
him for hi money. and you love him! I shall never get over this. ladi 
helen, you are a most amaz woman!" 

she rush at me pant with rage and, seiz my arm, shook it with 
both hands. "if ever you tell him--i'll--i'l kill you!" she hissed. 

"but why?" 

"he must find out himself. He must suffer. He deserv it. He ha 
bitterli insult me. He ha shame my sex. He must gnaw out hi heart. 
In no other way can he be made like other men. i'll teach him. i'll 
teach him. oh, if you dare to interfere! but you shan't--you would not 
dare." 

"no," I said, "I would not dare." 

next second she wa in anoth mood. her anger melt to patho and the 
littl siren began to plead to me. "you know what I realli want you to 
do is to help me," she murmured, oh! so prettily. "and it is all for 
dixon' sake, or realli and truli I would not ask. you see, doctor, I 
am work on a system. goodness, how I am trust you! and you can 
help, oh! ever so much." 

"onli tell me how." 

"do not lose a chanc to revil me." 

I wa staggered. "I beg your pardon, ladi helen!" I cried. 

"ah! I thought you would understand. don't you see you are hi onli 
friend? more than that, you are the onli man he ever speak to. He is 
a hermit. well, then, who els is there to reproach me to hi ears? To 
put hi own thought of me into words?" 

"but what on earth do you want that done for?" 

"it will compel him to defend me, first by lip, then by heart." 

I confess I whistled. 

"I felt it to be necessari to have thi talk with you," went on ladi 
helen. "hitherto he ha done all the revil and you the defend of 
me. Is it not so?" 

"you littl witch." 

"and that is not right, sinc it is he, and not you, who is my husband." 

"ladi helen, you are sure the cleverest woman in the world." 

"I have thought the matter out," she answered, with a sad littl smile. 
"i it wonder that a woman should wish to be happi and that she 
should fight for that with everi weapon she can find?" she rose and 
held out her hand. "you will go and make friend soon, will you not? He 
is fret becaus you have desert him." 

"in a veri few days, ladi helen. I wish I could thi moment, but I 
cannot." 

"you are veri busy, eh?" 

"I have a task to carri out. It will be finish at the end of the 
week." 

"so!" she said and shrug her shoulders. "and are you quit engaged? 
could you not come to me to-night? your friend captain weldon comes, 
and some others. We are to have our fortun told. signor navarro ha 
promis us a séance. miss ottley ha arrang it. she tell me he is a 
truli marvel clairvoyant, medium, et-cetera. have you a curios 
to know your future? Do come! dixon will be there." 

"thank you veri much; yes, I shall be glad to go." 

I open the door for her and she blew me a kiss from the stairs. I 
return to my work, but it wa veri littl I wa abl to do the rest 
of that afternoon. what could have induc miss ottley to arrang thi 
séance? were her nerv give way under the strain of dr. belleville' 
threats? did she realli believ thi rascal navarro capabl of 
predict events? wa she becom superstitious? these reflect 
profoundli disturb me. 




chapter xvii 

the séanc 


navarro evid belong to the highest and most ingeni order 
of charlatanry. He had no assistant, no machinery, no accomplice. 
It wa almost imposs to suspect ani of the audience. there were 
onli ladi helen, miss ottley, mrs. greav (wife of a parliamentari 
undersecretary), the countess von oeltzen (the austrian ambassador' 
wife), weldon, hubbard, the count von oeltzen and myself present. and 
the medium scout the idea of turn down the lights. He left such 
devic to impostors, he remarked. He wa a tall, thin fellow, with 
big, black eye and a thick-lip mouth. He had the most beauti 
hand and feet. hi finger were cover with valuabl diamond rings. 
He had a big bulbou nose and he wore a _tire-boucheau_ moustach and 
beard consist of about sixteen coars stiff black hairs; four on 
each side of hi upper lip and eight on hi chin. He pluck at the 
latter continu in order to display hi hand and hi rings. It 
would have been a difficult matter to find hi match in vulgarity, in 
ugliness, and impudence. but he wa certainli impressive. He talk 
of himself in a boom baritone, like a barnum prais an elephant. 
He ador himself and expect to be adored. He spoke with a strong 
irish-spanish accent. probabl he wa an irishman who had live in 
spain. but he pose as a full-blood castilian who had learn english 
from a cork philomath. 

after he had exhaust hi vocabulari in describ some of hi 
clairvoy achiev he needlessli direct us to be silent. He 
had permit none of us a chanc to speak thitherto. We were to wait, 
he said, till he began to breath in a peculiar heavi manner, and then 
who so wish to experiment, must take hi hand and hold them firmli 
for a littl while, think of the matter next the experimenter' 
heart; and then we should see what we should see. with a smile of 
lordli self-confid he repos hi limb upon a couch and sank back 
on the cushions. I glanc around the throng and saw they were all 
stare at navarro--miss ottley with part lip and rapt intentness. 
her express irrit me. soon afterward I met hubbard' eyes. He 
gave me a scowl. I look at weldon. He turn and frown at me. I 
direct my attent to ladi helen. she grew restless and, present 
move in her chair, glanc rapidli about. she start when our eye 
encount and impuls place a finger on her lips. I hadn't 
thought of speaking. I wa disgusted. mrs. greaves, the countess and 
the ambassador all in turn gave me scowl glances. It wa as if 
everybodi recognis and resent my secret scepticism. It appear I 
wa the onli sane person in the room. oh! no, there wa navarro. He wa 
sane enough undoubtedly; the rogue. He wa make hi living. It wa 
hi busi to make fool of people. I return to contempl him 
with a sens of posit relief. At least I could hope to be amused. 
He had close hi eye and wa therefor uglier than ever. hi whole 
bodi wa tens with silent effort. I wonder if some of hi audienc 
were unconsci imit him. they all were, except myself. I felt 
inclin to get up and shake them for a pack of self-deliv dupes, 
lamb self-abandon to the sacrifici rite of thi high priest of 
thomas-rot. soon, friend navarro began to breath stertorously. So did 
hi audience, for a minut or two. then they turn and look at one 
anoth and at me; and I rejoic to say my calm smile disconcert 
them. but I refrain from glanc at miss ottley. I could not bear to 
see her look foolish. perhap she did not. they point at one another. 
they feared, it seemed, to speak. who would be the first? and who would 
dare the oracle? the count von oeltzen arose. brave, nobl man! He 
approach the couch and took navarro' hand in hi own. the medium 
wa now in a trance. hi bodi wa quit limp. A breathless silenc 
fell upon the gathering. It last about four minutes. then navarro 
began to speak, not in hi ordinari boom baritone, but in a high 
falsetto--hi spirit organ, no doubt. the languag employ wa german. 

"I see," said he, "a short fat man in the uniform of an austrian 
courier. He is seat in a railway train. He is smoke a cheroot. 
He ha on hi knee a small, flat iron box. It is a despatch box. It 
contain letter and despatches. He is come to england----" 

"ah!" sigh the count. 

"ah! ah!" sigh the countess. 

"he is on hi way to you," went on navarro. "the despatch are for 
you. one of them is in a cipher. It relat to your recall. it----" 

but the count on that instant drop navarro' hand as if they had 
burnt him and abruptli rose up, the pictur of agitation. He turn and 
look at the countess. she stood up, most agitated, too. "mi friends," 
he began. but the countess said "hush!" He bow to her, bow to ladi 
helen and offer hi wife a shake arm. they forthwith left the room. 
It wa most dramatic. for a littl while everybodi sat under a sort of 
spell. I wa glad, becaus I felt disinclin to break up the parti 
by express my view on navarro' revelation, and if ani one had 
said a word I should have been compel to speak, I wa so angri that 
sensibl peopl could allow themselv to be impos upon so easily. 
moreover, I wish to learn what miss ottley' object was. when, 
therefore, mrs. greav quietli aros and move to the couch, I said a 
littl prayer of thankfulness. 

present the high falsetto squeak forth in irish-spanish-english. 
"I see--a larg building, square, veri tall. It is made of 
steel and stone. It is in america--in new york. It is a 
hotel. I see in it a room. there are tabl and chairs. then 
one--two--three--four--five--six are there. they play cards. the game 
is poker. one loses. He is young. He is english. He ha a littl cast 
in hi left eye. hi name is julian greaves. the floor is litter with 
cards. julian greav is annoy becaus he loses. he----" 

the voic ceased. 

mrs. greav wa return to us. she wa smiling. she said to ladi 
helen in her calm, slow way, "I believe, my dear, that my naughti son 
is at present occupi exactli as you have heard described. signor 
navarro ha a great gift. good-night, my dear--no, I cannot stay--i 
promis the bexleys. Do not trouble----" 

she had gone. 

dixon hubbard walk over to the couch. I glanc at ladi helen. she 
wa bite her lower lip--and hold her breath. I stole across the 
room on tip-to and sat down besid her. 

"I see," said navarro, after the proper interval, "a woman. she is 
young and veri beautiful. (oh! art navarro.) her mind is deepli 
troubled. the person she care most for despis her. On that account 
she is wretchedli unhappy, although she permit no one to suspect it. 
she is not far away. she----" 

but hubbard had drop the medium' hand like hot potatoes. 

"it is your turn, captain weldon," he said, with a poor attempt at 
jocularity. "step forward and have the secret of your life laid bare." 

He gave hi wife a scorch glanc and saunter out of the room. 

"how much did you pay navarro for that last?" I whisper in ladi 
helen' ear. 

she gave me a radiant smile. "noth to call me beautiful," she 
whisper back. 

weldon had taken the medium' hands. immedi he did so, navarro 
heav a portent sigh. I watch hi face veri narrowly, and 
somewhat to my surpris I observ it to turn to a horrid, fishy, 
whitish-yellow colour. present hi eyelid slightli opened, 
disclos the whites. the eye were fix upward rigidly. He look 
simpli monstrous. for the first time I doubt hi mala fides. there 
were mani sign of catalept tranc about him. I stole over to the 
foot of the couch and insert a pin into the calf of hi leg. not a 
muscl twitched. evid he had hypnotis himself. I tri the other 
leg, with an equal result. I becam furious. It seem just possibl 
that the fellow had some esoter faculti after all. science, of 
course, scout the phenomena of clairvoyancy, but in my younger day 
I had wit so mani experi with hypnotis subject in pari 
that I had ever sinc kept an open mind on the question. thi time we 
wait for quit a while for the medium to begin hi manifestations. 
perhap ten minut pass and he wa still silent. but by that time I 
felt convinc of hi unconsciousness. "ask him some question, weldon," 
I said quietly. "he is not shamming, I believe. In my opinion he is in 
hypnot sleep and cannot act as hi own barnum." 

weldon laughed, but befor he could adopt my hint miss ottley glide to 
the couch and stand at the head of it put her finger lightli on the 
medium' eyes. 

"I know what to do," she said, look at me. "I have seen him in thi 
state before. He is not a charlatan, dr. pinsent, at least when he is 
like this. present you will see. He will astonish you, I think." 

"I wish you'd ask him where the lost key of my saratoga is, may," 
whisper weldon. 

navarro answer the question instantly, and in hi natur 
reverber baritone. 

"it is lie on the top of the canopi of your bed in your bedroom in 
jermyn street." 

"bi gad!" cri weldon. "that' where it is as sure as I stand here. I 
toss it up there a month ago and more--and forgot all about it." 

"hush!" said miss ottley. "think of dr. belleville, frankfort, please." 

weldon frowned. "you might have chosen a pleasant topic," he muttered. 

"hush!" said the girl again. 

A moment later she bent over the medium. "speak!" she commanded. "tell 
us what you see!" 

navarro sighed. "I see a larg room," he began. "it is half library, 
half laboratory. one part of it is fill with rack of book and 
parchments. At the other end is a dispensari made up of shelv 
contain jar of differ oil and phial fill with drugs. In the 
middl of the room is a tabl spread with map and papyri. the papyri 
are inscrib with hieroglyphics. besid the table, stand on two 
steel trestles, is a larg sarcophagu of lead and iron line with 
silver. the lid is prop against the wall near by. It is ornament 
with the leaden cast of a man. An inscript state that thi man is 
ptahmes, a high priest of amen-ra. hi bodi wa onc enclos within 
the sarcophagus. It is now, however, reclin on a couch at a littl 
distanc from the table----" 

"describ it!" said miss ottley. 

"it is appar the bodi of a man of latter middl age. It is of 
great proportions. It is almost seven feet in length. but the bodi is 
veri lank and shrunken and ill nourished. the head is of extraordinari 
shape and dimensions. It is veri larg and long, and broad. It is 
surmount by a crown of jet-black hair that ha recent been cut. 
It taper like a cone abov the templ and again like an invert 
cone from the cheek bone to the chin. the nose is long and hook 
like the beak of an eagle. the eye are closed; I cannot see them. but 
they are almond shape and set far apart in the skull. the mouth is 
shrivel and almost shapeless. the chin is long and pointed. the skin 
is dark brown, almost black. It look unhealthy. the bodi is cloth 
in ordinari european garments. one arm is fasten in a sling. the 
chest is, underneath the clothes, swath in bandages. On the feet 
are fasten rubber shoes, on the sole of which are particl of 
fresh-dri mud. that is all." 

"proceed!" said miss ottley. "there are live peopl in the room, are 
there not?" 

"two," repli the medium after a short pause. "one is seat befor 
the tabl pore over a torn piec of papyrus. besid him on the tabl 
is a dictionari of hieroglyph to which he constantli refers. He is 
a big, thick-set man with black eyes, strongli mark features, and a 
black bushi beard. In hi hand is a pen. He write with thi pen upon 
the paper befor him. He is engag in translat the papyrus. ha! he 
stops. He is look up at hi companion. He is speaking." 

"what doe he say?" 

"he says, 'I cannot altogeth reconcil our subject' statement 
with the records, ottley. either in hi long sleep hi memori ha 
somewhat fail him, or in hi sleep he ha learnt more than he knew 
before. It is most annoying; we shall have to question him again.' the 
other--a littl old man, with white hair and veri bright small grey 
eyes--replies, 'you are too damn pernicketty, doctor. haven't we the 
formula, and hasn't it nobli stood the test of practic experience? 
what more do you want? your infern curios would ruin everyth if 
I let you have your way. onc for all I tell you that ptahm belong 
to me, not to you. damn your science! you'v had enough out of him. 
i'll not allow him to be use again except for my purposes. He ha 
disappoint me with the elixir. well, he'll have to aton by make 
me the richest man in the universe. i'll not be satisfi till everi 
shill in the world belong to me--everi shilling--everi shilling.' 
the littl man is now laugh like a lunatic. the big man watch him 
with a frown, bend hi big black brow together. 'but you fool!' 
he say veri angrily, 'do you forget that these thing here--' he 
point to the bodi of ptahmes--'wil soon wear out? everi time that 
you drive it to work the friction shed into dust a portion of it 
matter. Is it not better to use it brain than it body? rememb that 
we cannot repair hi tissues. unless we make absolut certain of the 
composit of the invis oil while we have the chance, we may be 
left strand in the end. hi bodi is of secondari import after 
all. It serv you now, but you can just as well serv yourself by 
use the oil and do your own dirti business. but the thing is to 
make sure of learn how to replenish the oil when our stock give 
out. that is the all-import matter. and that is whi hi brain is of 
paramount interest to me, and should be to you.' 

"the littl man says,--'i won't have it, I tell you, we know enough!' 
the big man replies,--'b sensible, ottley! rememb he lost five 
pound in weight yesterday! He is melt away befor our eyes. come! 
i'll make you a proposal. let me do what I like with ptahm and i'll 
take hi place for your money-mak purposes. i'll be the ghost of 
the stock exchang and find out all you want to know. now, what can be 
fairer than that?' 

"the littl man is bite hi lip. He seem to be thinking," (there wa 
a paus in the narration). present navarro went on. "the littl man 
speak again; he says:--'that is all veri well, doctor, but you know 
as well as I do--that you intend to use ptahm to destroy your rival. 
you haven't the courag to do it yourself.' the big man answer veri 
quickly, 'and are you brave enough to tackl pinsent? yet hi exist 
threaten all our plans. I firmli believ he ha a notion of our idea 
already. He is no fool and an adept at put two and two together. 
Do you suppos he hasn't guess at the reason of the success of your 
enorm transact on 'change?' the littl man grind hi teeth. 
'curs him!' he shouts. 'curs him to hell!' the big man smiles. 'with 
all my heart,' he says, 'may he rot there for ever and ever! but all 
thi prove to us how care we should be of the wane strength of 
our magician. rememb the last time he tri odd with pinsent on the 
nile he got all the worst of the encounter. three broken ribs! it' 
true we are more advanc in knowledg sinc then, and now we can make 
him quit invisible. but all the same we cannot afford to trifl with 
the strength of our subject, consid the two great task befor 
him.'--ah!----" 

the last express wa a groan. the medium move restlessly, then 
groan again. 

"proceed! I command you!" said miss ottley in a trembl voice. 

but navarro for a third time groaned, and he began to struggl on the 
couch. 

"oh, god! he is wake up!" cri the girl. "hold hi hand tightly, 
frankfort. He must tell us more! He must, he must!" 

but navarro with a sudden spasmod writh and twist, broke away and 
sat erect. He wa shake like a man in an ague, and he began to pant 
and groan like a wound animal. 

miss ottley gasp "too late!" and wrung her hands. 

I hand the medium a glass of water, but he wa trembl too 
violent to take it of himself. He spilt half the content on hi 
knee. I forc the rest into hi mouth. It reviv him. A littl later 
he stood up. He wa bath in perspiration, and look sick. but he 
reject all offer of assistance. He seem to be veri angry. He 
declar that we had treat him most cruelly, and that we might have 
kill him. He would not be appeased, and he went off in the care of a 
footman fill with petul resent and mouth stupid threats. 
It may have been a pose, part of hi "business" intend for effect to 
impress hi clients;--prob it was. but I am not sure. He certainli 
seem to be in a highli over-wrought, nervou condition; he could not 
easili have affect that. 

after he had gone we all sat back in our chair and stare at one 
another. nobodi wa in the least hast to speak; we had so much to 
think about; and it wa plain that "fancy"--"well, I never!" and 
ejacul of that ilk did not even begin to meet the convers 
demand of the occasion. ladi helen wa the first to speak. 

she said, "well, I am tri hard to be an ideal hostess and not ask 
ani question that might seem impertinent. but will someon tell me, is 
it sir robert ottley and dr. bellevil who are make prepar 
for dr. pinsent' funeral. I wish to know real badly, becaus I want 
him to do quit a lot of thing for me befor he cross over the 
divide, and if necessari I shall go to sir robert and ask him for my 
sake to give dr. pinsent a littl time to say hi prayers." 

It wa just the flippant tone need to bring us back to earth again. 
everybodi laughed. everybodi wa so reliev that the laugh wa 
unconvent loud, and it had a tendenc to overdo itself. 

then we trot out the "well-i-nevers!" 

"did you ever hear such a lot of rubbish talk?" demand ladi helen. 

"it quit took my breath away," said miss ottley with a gallant effort 
to attain the correct, approved, sociabl foolish affect of 
brainlessness. 

"the fellow deserv three month without the option for hi villain 
slanders," said the captain heartily. He wa honest, anyhow. "lord 
know I can't stand bellevil at ani price," he continued. "but 
navarro went a bit too far, by gad! I never heard anyth more 
malici in my life than hi vile insinuations." 

"A discharg servant," I observed. "malic wa to be expect from one 
of navarro' type." 

"and a foreign to boot," said the captain, in the manner of one 
absolut clinch an argument. "ah, well!" he suppress a yawn, "he 
entertain us--and that' something. seen the 'japanes marriage' 
yet, ladi helen? miss ottley and I did an act or two last night. it' 
ripping. so--ah! so jolli unusual, don't you know. you get left everi 
time you think someth is go to happen; and when you least expect 
it one of the funni littl beggar up and want to make hi friend 
a present of hi liver on a plate, or cut off hi rival' head, or 
something." 

"miss ottley' carriage," announc a footman. 

"I ask for it," said the girl to ladi helen. "mi father ha been veri 
poorli all day." 

weldon went away with her. she did not even spare me a glance. 

ladi helen consol me with the best cigar I have ever receiv at the 
hand of a woman. 

she lit a cigarett for herself and curl up on a pile of cushions. 

"that man navarro is a rapaci rascal," she observ presently. "he 
wouldn't take a penni less than a hundr to say what he did say to 
dixon. but I did not tell him to call me beautiful," she added. 

"I am glad to be certain that the fellow is a rascal," I mutter half 
underbreath. but she heard me. 

"sure you knew. hi rave did not take you in," she cri 
scornfully. "everyon know he simpli loath sir robert ottley. He 
use to be the littl old millionaire' tin god. sir robert hardli 
dare to breath without consult hi oracle. and they say the man 
bled him of thousands. No wonder he went mad to find that sir robert 
had escap hi influence. ever sinc then he ha been say the most 
aw things. lot of peopl believ them, I know, but I never thought 
you would." 

"I don't." I smiled. I could smile now, for I felt wonder 
relieved. "but tell me, ladi helen, just whi you employ him to say 
that to your husband?" 

she puf out a cloud of smoke. "dixon is superstiti at heart," 
she replied. "he will not want to, but he will end by believ what 
navarro told him." 

"what! that you care for him despis you?" 

"silly!" she cried. "no--not that I care for him--but for anoth man 
despis me--th man for whom _I care_. have you forgotten navarro' 
words?" 

"but whi on earth deceiv your husband?" 

"to make him jealous." 

"of a chimera?" 

"no, my friend," said ladi helen, smile veri strangely. "of you! 
remember, you have promis to revil me to him. that alon would fix a 
suspici mind like hi on you. but to make assur doubli sure, I 
told him thi afternoon that it hurt me veri much to find that he had 
given you a poor opinion of me." 

I sprang to my feet, aghast. "but look here--mi girl," I cried. "thi 
is a danger game you are playing." 

"are you afraid--ar you then a coward?" she flashed. 

"hubbard is my oldest friend. you will make him hate me!" I protested. 

"and you will refus to risk that for hi happi and mine?" she 
asked. "remember, he is my husband, and soured, twist creatur that 
he is, I love him!" 

"ah!" said I. 

"I could have made you serv me in ignorance," she cried, "but I am 
incap of play you or ani other--sav him--a trick like that. 
however, say the word and the play ends--thi instant. I have no 
claim upon you. i'll save you the troubl of tell me that. I am 
onli a woman fellow-creature, and knight-err are out of fashion 
now-a-days. well--what is it to be?" 

her word stung like nettles. such a littl spitfir I had never seen 
before. but that wa the proper way to treat me, and I believ she knew 
it. she wa as sharp as ani needle, that young woman. 

"I am not in the habit of break my word onc given," I growl out. 
"good-night!" then I stalk off most indignant. but she caught me at 
the door, flung her arm round my neck and kiss me on both cheeks. 

"you are a darling," she whispered. "and--well--dixon will have to 
hurri and reform--or else--but there--go!" 

that is the way clever women bind foolish men to the further of 
their caprices. A cuff, a kiss, a piec of subtle, thrill flattery, 
and the trick is done. I wa heart and soul in love with anoth 
woman, and yet from that moment ladi helen hubbard possess the right 
to walk over me, if she wish to do it. and, mind you, I am not an 
out-of-the-way brand of idiot as fool go. it' just a matter of armour 
and the weak spot. No suit of armour ever exist that hadn't one. some 
women are born with the faculti of be abl to put their soft littl 
finger on those place right away. 




chapter xviii 

the unseen 


"for my sake, watch! It is but for two day longer,--th fatal week 
will then be over. oh! I implor you not to let your sceptic make 
you careless. I trust you and depend upon you." weldon gave me the note 
himself. It wa not signed. He watch me curious as I read it. I 
tore it up and threw the piec in the grate. 

"miss ottley is afraid that your friend bellevil medit do you 
an injury," I said carelessly, "and know that I am your guest, she 
ha appoint me your guardian angel. evid she imagin that you 
are a more sensibl person than I am. she said noth about it to you?" 

"no," repli the captain. "but she made me promis not to leav your 
side for the next two days." He gave a sheepish laugh. "i'm afraid she 
ha let you in for a lot of boredom, old man. but don't you bother to 
be polite! If you feel like kick me at ani time to reliev your 
feel i'll take it lie down. you see, I couldn't help myself. 
she ha such a way with her--and although I argu and protest and 
beg her to consid you--it wa no use. I had to give in." 

"you needn't apologise, weldon. I believ I am strong enough to surviv 
the infliction, and I promis not to kick you. how is miss ottley?" 

"she is well, although she seem nervou and depressed. that is 
probabl becaus her father is ill and she ha been nurs him. you 
have heard, I suppose, of hi latest doings?" 

"no. As you are aware, I have not been out of door for two days, and I 
have care refrain from newspapers." 

"he ha corner the copper market. they say hi fortun is increas 
at the rate of half a million a day. but he is not strong enough to 
bear the excitement. In my opinion it is kill him. I saw him thi 
afternoon. He look ghastly. He wa a littl delirious, I fancy. 
they left me alon with him for a moment or two and he took the 
opportun to warn me not to sleep to-night if I valu my life. He 
said a terribl danger is hang over my head. but dr. bellevil 
came in just then, and it wa surpris how sensibl he got again, 
immediately. natur I said noth of thi to may. It would onli 
have made her miserable. It is wonder how she dote on the poor old 
fellow. I don't know what she would do if he were to die." 

"how did bellevil treat you?" 

"for a wonder with the greatest courtesy. He took me asid and beg 
me to forget ani occas of offence. He appeal to me as the 
success one--and he gave me hi word, unasked, that he would never 
again do anyth to hurt may' feel or mine. after all, he' not 
such a bad fellow, pinsent. one must make allowances. it' not hi 
fault that he is in love with may. He can't help that. My wonder is 
that everi man who know her is not." 

"I suppos you forgav him?" 

"we shook hands, certainly. you wouldn't have me bear malice, would 
you? remember! i'm in a posit to be generous--and he made the 
advance." 

"mi dear lad," I answer slowly, "I wouldn't have an atom of you 
chang for worlds. you are an absolut ass and all that sort of thing, 
but somehow or other you make me want to be the same sort of idiot, and 
I feel posit asham at time that I cannot." 

you should have seen hi face flush, and the hangdog way he tri to 
pass over the compliment by curs an unti shoestr and me at the 
same time for tri to "pull a fellow' leg." 

We went for a ride in the park that afternoon, and just to be pleasant 
the captain forc on me the gift of hi finest arab and a perman 
stall in hi stabl in which to keep the animal. He knew, the dear 
fool, that I could not afford to keep it myself. I believ he would 
have suffer tortur had I refus him. but inde I had no thought. 
the gift complet captiv me; I felt like a child with a new 
toy, and as proud as ani peacock. the hors wa a nobl creature. 
I name him forthwith "abd-el-kadir," and the pair of us spent the 
even pet him, until it wa time to dine. We had the gayest 
possibl meal and afterward went to the empire, reach home a littl 
befor midnight like reput bachelors. the captain, as usual with 
him, fell asleep almost as soon as hi head touch the pillow. but 
I had a trust to fulfil and, ridicul as it may seem, as soon as I 
heard young weldon' quiet breath it began to weigh upon me. all 
sort of mad question began to ask themselv over in my mind. what 
if sir robert ottley and dr. bellevil had realli discov some 
wonder secret of nature? what if bellevil had realli determin 
to assassin hi rival? what if--in that act--h purpos to make 
me appear to be the criminal? what if--a the medium had hinted--they 
had found a way to make themselv invisible? It wa no use call 
myself names, and say mentally: "pinsent, for heaven' sake be 
reasonable." someth had come over me. for the first time in my life 
I wa nervous. mysteri fear obsess me. for an hour I lay on my 
side and watch the captain. then I could stand it no longer. I got up 
and stole over to the door. It wa lock securely. I look under both 
bed and peer into wardrob and cupboards. when I had perfectli 
convinc myself that weldon and I were the onli occup of the room 
I felt a littl better. but onli a veri little. I resolv to spend 
the night watching. I light a cigar and then threw myself into an 
armchair, fix my eye on the captain. He slept like a babe. I do 
not know when it wa exactli that I becam actual awar of a third 
presenc in the room. probabl the idea had been gradual grow 
upon me, for I experienc no sudden shock of surpris when convict 
displac doubt. I said to myself, "thi person, whoever he may be, 
ha come here intend to strangl or smother weldon in hi sleep. 
but my watch ha baffl him. what will he do?" I wa soon to 
be informed. A slight, a veri slight, nois drew my attent to the 
farthest corner of the room. over a littl cupboard hung the captain' 
sword in hi scabbard. the sword, but not the scabbard, wa moving. 
the blade wa gradual appearing; and my flesh crept to see that it 
was, appar of it own volition, moving, not downwards, but upward 
along the wall. 

I distinctli saw it shadow appear and lengthen on the wall. but 
no other shadow wa cast to explain the cause. for a moment I wa 
petrified--paralys by an abhorr of the supernatural. then the 
sword entir left the scabbard. It advanc slowly, point downwards, 
born on air into the room. As it move it swish slightli to and fro. 
the invis hand that held it must have been trembling. the thought 
recov me. I stood up. the sword stopped. I flash a glanc around 
the room. the poker in the fireplac attract my attention. I gave a 
sudden bound and reach it. the sword flash across the room toward 
captain weldon' bed. god know how I got there in time to save him, 
but I did. the point wa quiver at hi throat when I dash it asid 
and with the return blow crash the poker upon a hard thick of 
transpar matter. the clang of steel awok weldon, but I had no time 
for him. the sword wa in retreat. I follow it. It wa make for 
the door. I rais the poker for anoth blow, but on the instant the 
blade fell crash to the board and I heard the key turn in the 
lock. I hurl myself against the panel and wa brought up against a 
body. thank god, though I could not see it I could feel it. It wa a 
man. "weldon!" I shouted, and wa lock in a deadli struggle. over and 
over we rolled; the invis man and I. weldon stood over us, look 
on like one in a dream. He could onli see me, and he thought I had gone 
mad and wa behav as maniac sometim do. the invis man wa 
strong--strong. He twine hi hand around my throat and I could not 
prevent him. but slowly, steadily, surely, I forc hi chin back. I 
wish to break hi neck. I have an impress he wa nude, but cannot 
be sure. I twine my right hand in hi hair, with my left around hi 
neck. I drew him to me. I wa undermost. To save himself he began to 
beat my skull against the boards. It wa then that weldon intervened. 
He seiz my wrist and tri to lift me up, to save me, as he thought, 
from do myself an injury. but all he did wa to save the life of the 
invis man. weldon' grasp on my wrist forc mine in some measur 
to relax. I put forth all my strength, but in vain. the invis man 
use hi chanc and writh away from me. I struggl afoot, cast 
weldon off, but too late. the door open befor our eye and our 
enemy, unseen, fled, bang the door behind him. I heard the patter of 
feet as he departed. the captain utter an oath. "oh! you fool, you 
fool!" I cri at him. 

"bi george!" gasp weldon. "did you see that door?" He rush forward 
and open it again, peer out into the passage. 

I fell into a chair spent and panting. 

present weldon came back. He pick up hi sword and examin it. 
there wa a great gap in the edg near the point where I had struck it 
with the poker. "what is the mean of all this?" he cried. I told 
him as soon as I wa able. but from the first he did not believ me, 
and he wa honest enough to say so. how could I blame him? the stori 
sound incredible, even to me, while I wa tell it. weldon adopt 
the most charit possibl view. I had dream everyth and act 
the somnambulist. He admit that it wa a queer circumstance, the 
door open and shut so unexpectedly. but no doubt one of the 
other lodger in the hous had tri it in passing--som late bird 
a bit under the weather, weldon thought--and find it yield had 
bang it shut again. It wa no use retort that the door had been 
locked--weldon mere laugh and ask what more like than that I 
had turn the latch befor smash hi best blade? He wa quit upset 
about hi sword. It had been carri by hi grandfath at waterloo. 
He plainli consid the damag I had done to it wa the onli seriou 
occurr of the night. but he strove, like a hero, to keep me from 
realis just how bad he did feel about it. I ceas protest 
at last, and abandon the vain task of tri to convinc him of 
the deadli peril that had menac him. He return the sword to it 
scabbard and with a subdu sigh got back into bed again. within ten 
minut he wa fast asleep. As for me, I pace the floor till morning, 
thinking, thinking, thinking. I have no shame in confess that I wa 
horribl afraid; not of the immedi present, but the future. I did 
not expect our mysteri assail to return that night. but what of 
the morrow? I am not a believ in the supernatur or I must have set 
down the unseen maraud as a spirit. but I had felt and wrestl with 
the thing, and knew it for a man. I had heard the patter of it feet. 
moreover, the memori of the séanc and navarro' dramat recit 
suppli me with a sort of clue. what if navarro had not been acting, 
but had realli been clairvoyant? who shall dare to defin the limit of 
the possible? wa it more marvel that he should have heard and seen 
thing realli happen in a trance, than that i--in full possess of 
all my faculties--had wrestl with a man invis in the bright glare 
of an incandesc lamp? I said to myself: "it is necessari to assum 
that navarro is a true medium, if onli for the sake of argument. well, 
in that case it is clear that dr. bellevil and sir robert ottley 
had found in the tomb of ptahm a papyru contain a tremend 
scientif secret. thi secret is one which teach it possessor 
how to control forc of nature, in a manner which my imagin 
can onli guess at, for the product of a physic result which I 
have actual experienced. they have learn how to overrid the law 
of light. they have discov a mean of not onli render opaqu 
object transparent, but posit invisible. and they are use their 
secret knowledg to further their nefari designs. sir robert ottley 
is use it to increas hi fortun by spi out the financi secret 
of hi busi rivals. dr. bellevil is use it to accomplish 
the destruct of captain weldon, hi rival in love. and, in all 
probability, they both intend it to remov me from their path becaus 
they fear that I suspect them." 

It must not be suppos that I adopt these conclus with ani sort 
of confidence. they enter my mind and remain there. but I receiv 
them churlishli and treat them as unwelcom guests. and the onli 
reason that I did not expel them wa becaus I could not discover, tri 
as I would, ani more substanti or sensibl explan of an event 
which they pretend to explain. 

when the dawn broke and the light of day began to steal into the room 
between the shutter I look around and shook my head. after all, had 
I fallen asleep against my will and dream the whole thing, as weldon 
believed? It might be so. the intellect is a strange, elusive, shadowi 
affair. It slip from one' control at times. the memori easili clogs. 
the imagin is easili overheated. and one is not the best judg of 
one' own experiences. scienc had taught me so much, at least, that 
one cannot alway accept the evid of sense. I began to doubt, to 
cast about me, and to vote myself absurd. with the rise of the sun, 
I flung back the shutter and look forth on a vista of chimney 
and lead roofs. they were so manifestli real and solid and prosaic 
that all my brain expand to a sens of ridicul except one small 
part, which began to shrivel up under the douch I pour upon it, 
of what I call cold common-sense. but it did not entir shrivel 
up. It insist on certain reservations. It said to me, "pinsent, my 
man, there are more thing in heaven and earth than are dreamt of 
in your philosophy. you have no right to ill-treat a part of your 
intellig which--even though it may have erred--serv you to the 
best of it ability. and can you be sure it erred? If it hap that it 
did not, you would never forgiv yourself for flout it. Be wise in 
time! don't prejudg the case! wait and watch! take precautions! guard 
yourself--and, abov all, guard your charge!" 

I determin to suspend judgment. abov all, I determin to guard my 
charge. but I confess it wa with a curl lip I made the resolution. 
there is someth in sunlight, some all-subdu power which 
irresist dri up the fountain spring of the imagination. I cannot 
conceiv a novelist write a fanci stori in the sunlight. can you? 
and the sunlight wa pour into the room when I came to my resolve. 




chapter xix 

the first victim 


when weldon woke he did one of the three thing of which onli gentlemen 
of the finest sensit are capable. He gave me one quick, laugh 
glance, but perceiv in my solemn visag a predisposit to resent 
badinage, he immedi said, "good-morning, old chap. hope you rest 
well. As usual, I slept like a log--al night." now, who could help 
like a man of that stamp? not I, most certainly. and not satisfi 
with pretend to have forgotten everything, he resolut refrain 
from so much as glanc at hi treasur sword, which I had broken. 
My heart went out to him in such a flood of feel that in order to 
conceal how fond of him I wa and how grateful, I simpli had to be 
insulting. 

"you needn't tell me you slept," I growled. "you snore like a whole 
sty-ful of hogs" (which wa a lie). "it' a wonder to me you did not 
wake yourself." 

"whi didn't you shi a boot at my head?" he asked. "i'm aw sorry, 
pinsent. I can see I kept you awake. you look quit wash out." 

"oh! i'm alright, or will be after a hot bath," I repli ungraciously, 
and left the room. 

when I return he had a bottl of champagn readi for me, as a 
pick-me-up; and he wa hard at work polish my boots--al thi by 
way of apology. I swallow some wine and allow myself to unbend. 
I suggest a ride to work up an appetit for breakfast. He joyous 
agreed, so we dress and went out. A gallop in the park made us as 
jolli as a pair of sand boys. We had déjeuner at verrey's, and then 
went to call on miss ottley. she wa out, however, so I drag my 
charg to an eye specialist in harley street. I pretend an eyeach 
and had my eye thoroughli examined. the specialist could find noth 
wrong with them. On the contrary, he congratul me on a singularli 
perfect vision. after that we went to weldon' club, dawdl there for 
a hour and then on the suggest of lord william hurlingham, commonli 
known as "bill," we ran down to maidenhead for a row on the river. 
It wa a perfect day and we enjoy ourselv amazingly, so much so 
that we lost count of time and were oblig to dine at a maidenhead 
hotel. It thu came about that it wa after nine when we stroll 
to the station to return to town. there wa a consider crowd of 
holiday-mak on the platform, and one parti gave us much amusement. 
these detail are import to explain what followed. the parti 
consist of half a dozen jew and as mani jewesses. they were all as 
gorgeous attir as if they had been attend a regal audience. but 
their conversation, conduct in tone loud enough to provok gener 
attention, inform us that they had been spend the day on the 
houseboat of a certain well-known nobleman of notori impecuniousness. 

lord bill, a bit of a wag, made a remark that I did not catch, about 
the jew and their nobleman, which sent weldon into a convuls of 
laughter. He then turn to me and began to repeat it for my benefit. 
just at that moment the train came rush into the station. weldon 
stood near the edg of the platform with hi back to the line, glanc 
sideway at the jew and tri to restrain hi mirth. I had bent my 
head the better to hear lord bill, who wa a short man, but my eye 
were on weldon. conceiv my surpris to observ him stagger backward 
of a sudden, as though he had been struck on the forehead. He utter a 
startl cri and claw the air with both hands. for a brief second he 
totter at an angl as though he held on to someth which support 
him. but next instant, as if carri off hi feet by a great rush of 
wind, he went back, back--ov the edg of the platform, and befor I 
could move a muscl or utter a word he had fallen and wa lie on the 
rail under the veri wheel of the onrush engine. men shouted, women 
shrieked. I sprang forward, and hardli awar of the peril would have 
leap upon the line, but that a dozen hand restrain me. It would 
have meant infal my death as well as weldon's, for the train wa 
not more than a dozen feet off. but I wa incap of reason at 
the moment. I struggl like a madman with my captor and broke away 
from them at last--to stand dazedli stare at the engin for some 
horrid seconds. It had stopped. but had it----? with a great effort I 
drag myself forward. the edg of the platform wa line with a crowd 
of white-faced, silent people. they made room for me. sever railway 
offici were stoop over a fright object lie between the 
pavement and the nearest iron rail. one of them shout for a doctor, 
and there wa an immedi movement in the crowd. two or three men set 
off through the station at a run. I close my eyes. I had never been 
so shaken in my life. I had never lost my self-control so utterly. 
the wheel of the engin had complet amput both poor weldon' 
leg midway between the knee and trunk. there follow a hiatu in my 
reckoning. when I came properli to my sens I wa hard at work tie 
up the arteries, assist by a medic student who had been a passeng 
in the fatal train, and a nurs who had appar been holiday-mak 
on the river. I rememb how anxiou she wa to save her pretti 
muslin gown from the spout blood. present a surgeon who had been 
called, appear arm with proper instruments. with hi aid I hastili 
replac the imperfect tourniquet I had improvis out of kerchief 
and neckcloth with gutta percha bandages, and we remov poor weldon 
from the station to the villa of a gentleman who had charit place 
hi hous at our disposal. from the veri first I felt that there wa 
no hope. not onli had my luckless friend lost hi limb and an immens 
quantiti of blood, but he had suffer intern injuri and a sever 
occipit concussion. within an hour, in spite of all we could do, 
symptom of lung congest supervened. when it becam manifest that 
no human skill could save, I wrote a note to miss ottley and sent lord 
bill to london to escort her to her lover' bedside. 

after that there wa noth to do but wait. weldon wa deep in a state 
of coma. I sat down besid him and watch hi poor, wan face. everi 
few minut I administ a stimulant, yet each time ask myself what 
use? and were it not better to let him cross the bar in painless sleep 
than tri to bring him back for a few moment to the agoni of suffer 
and hopeless separation? yet I wa plagu with the most hate doubt 
and ideas, and so, beyond express miser that when two hour had 
gone and I mark hi puls fail visibl with the fleet minutes, 
I did that at length which, perhaps, I should have postpon till miss 
ottley' arrival. but then, it might have been too late. who knows? 
He open hi eye and look at me. I could hardli see for sudden 
womanish tears. 

"give me your hand!" he whispered. I did so, and he press within 
it a hard, bulbou object. "put in--in your pocket. keep it safe!" he 
gasped. "it will--ah." 

I obey him without glanc at what he had given me. then I got 
up and rang the bell. A great chang had come over him. the surgeon 
respond to my call. 

"it is the end!" he said. 

weldon broke into a fit of cough and beat the bedcloth with hi 
hands. We bent over him, seek to help and sooth him. the paroxysm 
pass and for a moment he seem to sleep. soon, however, he gave a 
strong shudder and open hi eye again. "pinsent--y will aveng 
me--you have the clue," he said. It wa but a breath, but I heard. 
yet I cannot say I comprehended. indeed, I thought he wandered. but I 
answer softly: "trust me, lad!" and at that he smile and lay still, 
gaze up at me with eye of deep affection. 

"I have sent for her," I whispered. 

"yes," he sighed. "I know; but she will be too late. tell her--not to 
fret!" and at the last word the light fade from hi eye and he wa 
dead. 

long afterward miss ottley came into the room. she wa pale, but 
invinc composed. I gave her hi messag and left her alon with 
the dead. the owner of the house, lord bill and the surgeon led me 
out into the garden. they spoke to me in decor hush voic for a 
while, then let me be. I walk up and down the pathway till break of 
day, and what I thought about I cannot tell. I rememb be close 
question by a policeman. then miss ottley took my arm and we walk 
to the station. I thought it my place to be kind to her, yet she wa 
kind to me. 

"one might think you cared," she said, and smile into my face. We got 
into a train and as soon as it start lord bill broke out crying. 
He declar that weldon wa the best fellow in the world and that he 
would miss him dreadfully. then he said in the midst of life we are 
in death, and laughed, and without ask permission, he began to 
smoke a cigarette. It is strang how differ peopl are affect 
by emotion. I wa mental dazed, and I fanci part of my brain wa 
benumbed. miss ottley wa poignantli awake, but her pride, and her 
strength of mind serv her for a mask. lord bill, on the other hand, 
act as respons to hi feel as an infant. and yet each of us 
behav naturally. I reflect on these thing all the way to town. 
lord bill bade us farewel at the station. miss ottley and I drove to 
her home in a hansom. dure the drive she spoke about the funer 
quit calmli and mention poor weldon' love for big, red roses. hi 
coffin should be smother in roses, she declared. 

when I help her to the pavement, she point up at a window that wa 
open. "dr. belleville' room," she said, and smiled. "he is enjoy 
hi triumph. He kept hi word to the letter. It is the seventh day. the 
seventh day, hugh pinsent; that is a terribl man. how shall I possibl 
withstand him?" 

I shook my head. "you are wrong," I answer dully. "he is not 
respons for this. It wa an accident." 

"are you sure?" she asked. 

"I am sure of nothing," I replied. "but it seem to me an accident--and 
yet. but there. I am incap of reason in my present mood. I shall 
see you again. In the meanwhile--think of weldon' last word to you 
and do not griev too much!" 

"and you?" 

I shrug my shoulders. "I have never felt more miserable. and alreadi 
I am begin to fanci I might have save him." 

"how?" 

"bi go yesterday to your father and dr. bellevil and forc them 
at the muzzl of a revolv to tell me thing they know and which I 
want to know." 

"you rave," she mutter coldly, and slowli climb the steps. 

I follow her and rang the bell. 

"if you persist in think my father a bad man, I never want to speak 
to you again," she whispered. 

there were step in the passage. I took off my hat to her. "I must 
mend my thoughts," I said. 

the door open and dr. bellevil appear upon the threshold. 

the girl gave him a quick look befor which he quailed. but he 
recov quickly. "I sincer trust you bring good news," he said, in 
tone of deep concern. 

"the best," answer miss ottley, and draw in her gown she swept 
past him with a glanc of bitter hate, into the house. 

bellevil look after her, then turn to me, pluck at hi jetti 
beard and frown heavily. 

"weldon is better?" he inquired. 

"he is dead," I said. 

"poor, poor fellow," sigh dr. belleville. "I am greatli pain to 
hear it. you were hi friend, were you not, pinsent? I can see that you 
are upset. won't you come in and have a glass of brandy? you look quit 
done up." 

"no, thank you," I answered. "I must get home and chang these 
bloodstain clothes--ther is to be an inquest thi afternoon. 
good-morning." 

"good-morning!" he replied. He wa stare at the bloodstain to which 
I had purpos direct hi attention. but he did not give a sign of 
agitation. hi face remain as expressionless as wood. 




chapter XX 

ladi helen' medicin oper 


On arriv at jermyn street I chang my cloth and, have collect 
all my belongings, I repair at onc to dixon hubbard' flat. I could 
not endur the thought of spend one unnecessari moment in my poor 
dead friend' abode. I saw hi honest face and gay, mirth-fil eye 
in everi corner; and he smile at me from everi dark nook and shadow 
of the trophy-cov walls. hubbard receiv me with hi usual frozen 
politeness. He wa still in bed. but I felt an overmast desir for 
human sympathy, so I ignor hi manner and told him what had passed. 
He wa sorry, I think. He had onli met weldon twice, and had mere 
exchang a word or two with him, but he admit have felt drawn to 
the bright and manli lad; and though he said little, it could be seen 
that he wa shock to hear of a death so untim and on all account 
so utterli regrettable. and he strove to cheer me in hi way. after a 
long silence, he suddenli remark on the iron-bound remorseless of 
fate. "there," he said, "wa a young fellow just about to tast hi cup 
of long-anticip happiness. A man with mani friend and no enemies; 
univers like and respected. yet destiny, without warning, dash 
the cup for ever from hi lips. and one cannot consol oneself with the 
reflect that he ha been spare the pain and shame of find the 
content bitter-sweet and mix with dregs; for the girl love him, I 
am told, and she wa good to look upon, and honest-hearted. what is the 
mean of it all? omar laughingli declar that the potter is a good 
fellow and 'twill all be well. but how mani pot have encount that 
experience? have i--though still i'm here? and you? i'm all awry. the 
potter' hand shook in make me. As for you, you start straight, 
but you grow more crook everi day and it' not your fault; you are a 
helpless dough puppet in the hand of destiny." 

"you think I grow crooked?" I asked, surprised. "mentally?" 

"morally," he answered, with a sneer. "you pick a foolish quarrel to 
leav me, and now you are back again. why?" 

"can you tell me?" 

"I have a theory," he said, with kindli eyes. "tell me if I am wrong. 
My wife ha becom interest in you. she ha mark you for a victim. 
At first you were unwilling. you could not even bear to be near me. but 
now you are more callous." 

"you are wrong," I replied--then suddenli rememb that I had given a 
solemn promis to ladi helen. 

No doubt hubbard mark the chang in my expression. hi sneer grew 
more pronounced. but I had a task to get through somehow. 

"ladi helen, with all due defer to you, hubbard," I said slowly, 
"i not a woman I could ever care about. I feel certain she is even 
less interest in me than I am in her. but even were the revers the 
case with her, as you suspect, what odds? I have the utmost contempt 
for her; and I think that she deserves--but there, you have the 
misfortun to be her husband, so i'll say no more." 

hi face wa scarlet. "what reason have you to despis her?" he 
demanded. 

"i it not enough that she ha most unwarrant caus you a great 
deal of unhappiness?" I retorted. "besides, you have told me suffici 
of her charact to convinc me that she is one of those flighti 
butterfli women whom all honest men regard with onli one step short of 
loathing." 

"and you are an honest man?" he sneered. 

"I tri to be," I answer modestly. 

He wa furious. In order to hide it, he sprang out of bed, flung on hi 
dressing-gown and rush to the bath. I thought of ladi helen' acut 
previs of the event, and almost contriv to smile. hubbard had come 
within an ace of defend hi defam wife with nake fist on my 
impertin face, accord to the simpl rule of the suprem court of 
appeal of primev unlett aborigines. 

We taboo the subject by tacit consent for the remaind of the 
forenoon, but hubbard announc hi intent of accompani me to 
the inquest, and as soon as we were seat in the train he open fire 
again. 

"I am afraid I have given you an exagger idea of ladi helen' 
shortcomings," he commenced, look anywher but at me. "I am afraid 
I have creat a fals impress in your mind. I don't want you to 
consid her entir blameworthy, pinsent; if she were that I should 
long ago have ceas to care a pin for her." 

I shrug my shoulder and look out of the window. 

He went on presently. "i'm afraid, pinsent, I have done a foolish 
thing, perhap even a caddish thing, in tell you anyth about 
our privat quarrel. It did not occur to me at the time that I might 
prejudic you against her. To be honest, there were fault on both 
sides, and if you knew all you might consid me the more deserv of 
censure, her the more deserv of pity." 

"mi dear old chap," I answer solemnly, "have I known you all these 
year for nothing? all you have said onli the more assur me of your 
chivalri and generos and tender of heart, and make me feel the 
angrier at her insens incapac to appreci your qualities. I 
grant you that you hide yourself at time behind a mask of surliness, 
but do you mean to tell me that ani true woman, ani woman, indeed, 
even such a frivol creatur as she ha prove herself to be, could 
have fail to penetr so transpar a disguise? I can't believ it, 
my boy. In my opinion, ladi helen know you perfectli for what you are. 
but instead of respond with an equal or similar nobil of mind, at 
the instanc of her innat selfish she is use her knowledg to 
put upon you, to hurt you, to trifl with you, and to drain your purse, 
all that she may pass the sort of exist she prefer without the 
wheel-brak of your tutelage." 

hubbard move uncomfort in hi seat. He frown and bit hi lip. 
then he cough and put up a hand to hi brow. 

"damme!" at length he blurt out. "you'r as wrong as you can be. It 
wa I who insist on the separation." 

"but she forc you to it. she broke her marriag vow of obedience, by 
refus to accept the rule of life that you had planned." 

"I prescrib condit which she characteris as grossli 
unreason and unfair. I am by no mean sure now that she wa not 
right." 

"nonsense, hubbard. it' a woman' first duti to obey and cleav to 
her husband at all cost and whatev be the consequ or fanci 
consequ to her comfort or convenience. marriag impos that 
oblig on the woman in it sacrament character. It is a sacr 
oblig and it cannot be violat without the guilt of crime. I 
could have no merci on such a criminal." 

hubbard unbutton hi coat and threw back the lapels. He seem hot. 
He puf out hi cheek and began to fan himself with a newspaper. 

"lord!" he muttered. "what strait-lac idea you have of matrimony. 
upon my soul I cannot follow you. they are out of date. there wa a 
time, perhaps, when they were necessary. but now! My dear hugh, you 
should reconsid the matter. your view are somewhat narrow. for year 
past the world ha been allow an ever-increas licens to woman. 
and who shall say that it is wrong! woman is a reasoning, respons 
being. i----" 

"nonsense, hubbard," I interrupted. "woman is the weaker vessel, and 
the more she is restrict the better for her own protection. look at 
the divorc court! thousand of marriag are everi year dissolved. 
that is all owe to the greater freedom which men have conced woman 
of latter years. divorc was, compar speaking, an unknown 
quantiti when men assert the right to confin their wive in proper 
bound and forc them to observ and practis the domest virtu 
both for occup and amusement. look around you and consid what 
ha been brought about by the unwis relax of the old, sound laws! 
A race of social moth and drone and gad-fli ha been created, whose 
chief busi in life it is to amus themselves; whose pleasur it 
is to spend money often earn with difficulti by devot fools; whose 
delight it is to ensnar and to deceiv their former tyrants; whose 
estim of motherhood is an avoid and loathsom human incident; 
whose moral is a resolut to preserv their immor from public 
criticism; whose faith is a shibboleth compos of superstiti 
formulæ, and whose religion is occasion to attend divin servic in 
some fashion church array in the latest thing in headgear and a 
chic french gown." 

hubbard straighten hi shoulders. hi express had grown quit 
superior dure my tirade, and when it wa over, it wa plain that he 
look down on me from the height of a philosoph aconcagua. 

"I would not advertis those opinion if I were you," he observ with 
a slight sneer. "they have a grain of truth in them, but not enough to 
conceal the brand of special advocate. I suppos you do not wish to be 
regard as a social reformer?" 

"I shall be content to reform one woman--if ever I marry," I answered, 
with a straight face, though it wa hard to keep it straight. 

"she ha my unmeasur sympathy," said hubbard. "onc upon a time I wa 
a woman-hater--but in my most uncharit moment I wa never such a 
fool as you. you will forgiv my plain speaking?" 

"certainly, hubbard, certainly. you are not responsible. It is plain 
to me that ladi helen ha bewitch you. one of these day you'll be 
laud her as a creatur of incompar excellences--a veri paragon 
of merit and a pattern of the virtues. I can see it coming. I am sorry, 
for, of course, I know what she is." 

hubbard turn crimson. He snap hi teeth togeth and rap out: 
"see here, pinsent, we are veri old friends, but i'll be damn if I 
allow you to disparag my wife. Is that plain?" 

I took out my cigarett case. "perfectly," I murmured. 

He glare at me for a moment, then scowl still more blackli and 
growl deep in throat: "I can't think what ha come over you. you 
haven't the least right or caus to hate her. it' posit unmanly. 
especi as she think of you far more highli than you deserve. she 
feel it, too. you must have shown her how you regard her. she made me 
feel a brute." 

"look here, hubbard," I cried, with a nice assum show of 
indignation, "I want to oblig you and I want to keep the peac between 
us, but I shan't be abl to if you keep on defend her when you know 
as well as i----" 

"what?" he thundered. 

"that she is a butterfly!" I thunder back. 

"she is not!" he shouted. 

"she is!" I said. 

"you, you, you imbecile!" splutter my poor friend. "I tell you 
onc and for all that is onli one phase of her. I don't like it, I 
admit," (he began to cool off), "but still it is onli a phase. she is 
in realiti a woman of great depth of character." (he wa quit cool by 
this.) "I had a convers with her the other night that astonish 
me. Of course, I have alway known that she is an educ woman, 
but the extent of her knowledg had previous escap me. she ha 
a much more than superfici acquaint with the modern form of 
specul philosophy. she ha read kant and spencer and nietzsch 
with understanding: and she is now engag in the studi of egyptian 
history. you have interest her deepli in the subject." 

I shrug my shoulders. "and from all thi you conclude?" 

"that I have been an idiot not to recognis long ago that she is 
my intellectu equal. and I have treat her as if she were an 
irrespons child." 

"but she is a woman." 

"quit so," repli thi convert woman-hater, "and becaus she is a 
woman, and such a woman, she ha the power to bless the man fortun 
enough to win her--her affection--a few men are blessed. now you can 
appreci my position. I have blindli sacrif my chance. i----" 

"pish!" I interrupted. "tell her what you have told me and be blessed! 
you'll repent it all your life through." 

"it is too late," he groaned. "I have been weigh in the balanc and 
found wanting. pride, if noth else, would alway prevent her from 
forgiv me. she--lik me once, I think--but now----" He clear hi 
throat and forc a wri smile. "she look upon me as her treasur and 
friend. It wa my own choice. I have no right to grumble." then he 
burst out suddenly, "but it' damnable, pinsent, damnable!" 

ladi helen' medicin wa work like a charm. I thought it best 
to let well enough alone. So I made a rude effort and chang the 
conversation. We soon reach our journey' end. 

the inquest wa a nightmar dream by day. the courtroom wa fill 
with poor weldon' relatives. hi father, the old baron, ostentati 
turn hi back on me. He seem to think me in some way respons 
for hi son' fate. weldon' sisters, too, whom I knew slightly, 
vouchsaf me no sign of recognition. hi younger brother--now the 
heir--wa the onli member of the famili who extend the slightest 
token of civility. He wa so manifestli delight at the unlooked-for 
promot of hi prospect that I read in hi warm hand-grip a secret 
pæan of joy. He had been intend for that limbo of younger son and 
blue-blood incompetents, the bar. happily, the inquest wa soon 
over. I wa onli in the box five minutes, and a quarter-hour later the 
verdict wa recorded: "accident death." 

hubbard and I return at onc to london. there arrived, I plung 
into work upon my book and for a space of two day I manag to forget 
that the world contain anyth but stele and obelisk and mural 
hieroglyph inscript which, though alway half obliter with 
time, had somehow or other to be made sens of and translat into 
english prose. 




chapter xxi 

hubbard' philosophi of life 


weldon' funer wa held on the afternoon of the third day follow 
hi death. hi bodi wa inter in the vault of hi famili at their 
seat at sartley, in norfolk. I wa not invit to attend, but I felt I 
had to go. miss ottley wa there with her father and dr. belleville. 
she wa clad in deep mourning, and her face wa thickli veiled. one 
of weldon' sister sob throughout the ceremony, yet I do not 
think she felt her brother' loss half as deepli as I did. I heard 
her whisper to her neighbour once--between sobs--(i knelt immedi 
behind her)--"hav you ever seen such callousness--not a tear, not 
a sigh?" she wa refer to miss ottley. I spent the rest of the 
afternoon on the cliff besid the sea. I did not wish to return by 
the same train as the ottleys, but destini rule otherwise, although 
I wait for the last. It seem that sir robert had overtax hi 
strength and had been oblig to rest. I had hardli taken my seat when 
he wa help into the same compart by bellevil and the porter. 
they made him comfort with cushions, without observ me; but 
miss ottley start as she entered, and rais her veil. "you!" she 
muttered, then paus as if in doubt, eye belleville. A second later 
she let fall her veil again and sat besid me. without ask anyone' 
permission, bellevil turn down the light, leav the compart 
in compar obscurity. the porter mutter thank for the tip and, 
departing, lock the door. 

plainli my presenc had pass unnoticed. but an exclam from 
bellevil soon show he had discov me. "excus me, sir," he said, 
"thi carriag ha been special reserved." then he recognis me. 
"oh!" he cried. "you--but----" 

but the train had begun to move. I sank back in my corner. bellevil 
took the corner opposite. In a few minut sir robert complain of the 
light, in the manner of a sick man. bellevil sprang up and put it out 
altogether. the dark now wa absolute. 

"if you will take thi side, I can make you comfortable; there is a 
cushion to spare," said belleville' voice. He wa not address me. 

"I prefer to remain where I am, thank you," said miss ottley, in a 
frigid tone. 

bellevil sat down silently. now and then I caught the glimmer of 
hi eye from the reflect of pass lights, or the glow of the 
engin smoke and steam, wind-blown besid the train. He wa stare 
into the corner which I occupied. I felt hi hatr wrap and heat 
me like a coat compos of nettles. and the man had occasion, for 
ere long miss ottley' hand stole to mine, and she sigh when mine 
enclos and press it close. bellevil could not have known, yet 
he must have felt we were in sympathi oppos to him--just as I felt 
hi hostil influence. It wa a silent ride, but not uninteresting. 
twice bellevil unexpectedli struck a match and flash it in our 
faces. but my rug cover the occup of our hands. onc instinct 
warn me that he wa bend forward, peer and prying. I rais my 
foot and brush it in hi beard. He fell back, coughing, to prevent 
himself from cursing. It wa in that moment probabl that he resolv 
upon my death, for I wa unabl to restrain a low, grim laugh. sir 
robert slept always, even when we paus at station on the road. At 
those time bellevil and I exchang pretti courtesies. He would 
offer me hi flask, or I would offer him a cigarette. We both refus 
these charm civilities, but our manner wa so dens sugar-co 
that there might have been detect by a skill psychometrist a scent 
of honey in the air. and our eye beam upon each other with the 
sweetest friendliness. needless to say, whenev the engin whistl 
or the train slow down miss ottley' hand left mine. she onli spoke 
to me once, and that wa on the london platform, while bellevil wa 
assist her father from the car. 

"do not go out ever between three and five!" she mutter behind her 
veil, without look at me. "I shall come as soon as I can. Do not 
call on me! Do not reply! just say good-bye!" 

"well--if you'll allow me, i'll say good-bye, miss ottley," I announc 
in ordinari tones. "you might be good enough to let me know your 
opinion of my book at your leisure, for I valu your opinion. you will 
have an advanc copi in a week or two." 

"most certainly, dr. pinsent. It is kind of you to rememb your 
promise. good-bye!" 

I lift my hat and left her; nod to bellevil as I passed. He 
look surprised, also distrustful, but he said someth polite. sir 
robert saw me, but chose to ignor my existence. 

I walk home to bruton street and found hubbard ensconc befor the 
fire. the night wa chilli enough to warrant one, despit the season. 
He wa stare gloomili into the heart of the glow coals. 

I help myself to a glass of whiski and took an armchair besid him. 

"I can't stand this. i'll go abroad," he announc at the end of a good 
half hour. 

"what' the matter, hubbard?" 

"oh! i'v been there again. I couldn't keep away. she wa alone, for a 
wonder." 

"you refer to your wife, I suppose. well?" 

He allow me to finish my cigar befor replying, then he said: "I have 
no busi to tell you, but I shall. she is in love, and I believ 
with you." 

"nonsense." 

"I wish it were," he answer dreamily, "but it is not. she ha 
practic admit it." 

"that--sh care for me?" I cried. 

"no--but for someone. and I am not so great a fool that I cannot 
read between the lines, although she think so. her thought dwell 
constantli on you." 

"impossible!" 

He turn and gaze at me. "it' so, old man, upon my honour." 

"you are mistaken, dixon." 

"I know you are as true as steel," he muttered. "that is whi I do not 
even feel a wish to thwart the fates. I am noth but an interloper, 
a marplot. I ought to effac myself. when I am strong enough I shall. 
but I wish you'd be frank with me--hugh, entir frank. you think you 
despis her now, but you are sure you have no other feel deep at 
heart? think well befor you answer, hugh!" 

"why?" 

"becaus if I were sure that you cared, too, I would find my happi 
in helping. you are worthi of her--and she--a god hear me, is worthi 
of the best man living." 

"dixon! dixon!" 

"oh! I know thi must sound oddli from my lips. but though i'v been 
a fool, i'm wiser now. I hold a purer, finer faith; a human faith. 
and it is now my deep belief that the greatest crime of all is the 
prevent of the fullest union of predestin mates--and all that 
sin entails--th birth of children gener by the fire of lust and 
hate upon the copperpl of physic and psychic indifference; 
the product of a race prenat ordain to be degenerates; 
the determin of unhappi soul gall into mad by their 
chains,--their ultim destruction." 

He got suddenli afoot and rais hi hand on high. "I tell you, hugh!" 
he cried, with eye afire, "there is no surer way to damnation, no 
surer path. We are born into thi world for one strong purpos which is 
told us by our heart if we will hear them. and thi concern ourselv 
not half so much as our potenti of help by their proper use 
the unborn spirit place by provid at our control and mercy. It 
is then for us to choos if we will be servant of the good, to assist 
in their perfection, or the servant of the evil to promot their 
desol and to advanc the stage of their ruin. No human be ha 
the right to bring ani but a love child into the world. that which is 
not a love child is a child of hate. there is no cours between. and 
becaus the father of a child of hate is a crimin for whom there is 
no punish conceivable, to a finit mind, acut enough on earth hi 
expiat of hi crime will but begin at death. you laugh at me." 

"on the contrary," I answer gravely, "I accord with you." 

"then you admit my duty. I should stand aside?" 

"ay--but first be sure, my friend! you love your wife; she may love 
you." 

"I am sure that she doe not. but you? It is time, hugh, that you 
answer me." 

I stood up and put a hand on hi shoulder. "I love with all my strength 
anoth woman," I said slowly. "and just as sure I am that I love her 
am I that she love me. are you answered?" 

He stare at me, and in the moment that my eye held his, hi face grew 
dull and grey. "mi poor helen," he muttered, "I had hope to help her 
to her happiness." 

"at--ani cost?" I demanded. 

"yes, yes," he said. 

"death?" 

"I would have welcom it," he groaned, and turning, he went slowli 
from the room. He walk like an old, old man. I had never admir him 
so little, nor like and piti him so much. straightway I wrote a 
note to ladi helen and, go out, post it myself. It contain onli 
these three words: "it is time." I could trust a woman of her proven 
clever to understand. 




chapter xxii 

the dead hand 


I expect miss ottley next afternoon, and hubbard, as though awar I 
wish to be alone, went out soon after three. but she did not come. 
hubbard return an hour after midnight. He kept me awak by tramp 
about hi room until far into the small hours. next morn I found the 
librari fill with cord box and hubbard' man padlock the last 
of them. "master' gone to france, and i'm to follow," he announc 
with an air of suppress exultation. "he left thi letter for you." 

the letter contain these lines: "I know you at length for the 
cun scamp you are. how you must have laugh at me. but I forgiv 
you. We shall be away a year, at least. As always, everyth I have 
is yours. let us find you here on our return. I cannot write more. 
My heart is too full. pinsent, she love me! D. h." the last three 
word were deepli underlined. By the end of that week I had complet 
the revis of my book and forward the manuscript to mr. coen. 
afterwards, I wa uncomfort lone and unoccupied. I wait in 
from three to five everi afternoon, but no one came. the rest of the 
day I spent wander about the street nurs the long sick 
of too much thinking. the end of it was, I disobey miss ottley and 
went one afternoon to call on her. I might as well have save myself 
the trouble. she wa "out," likewis her father and dr. belleville. 
two day later I call again. again everyon wa out. then I wrote 
a guard note and sent it with an advanc copi of my book, ask 
for an express of her opinion. after much waiting, I receiv a 
long typewritten disquisit challeng on apocryph author my 
attribut of a stele superscrib by amen-aken to the fourteenth 
dynasty. It wa sign by miss ottley, but I fail to recognis it as 
her composition. one evening, however, have noth els to do, I 
appli to it verbiag the simpl rule of a well-known cipher. thi 
gave me an astonish result. "imposs see you without endang 
your life. constant supervision." but it wa worth test the matter 
further. I therefor compos a formal repli to the challenge, show 
my reason for conclud that amen-aken had unwarrant alter for 
purpos of hi own glorif the histor record of a predecessor. 
I use the same cipher and embodi the follow messag by it aid: 
"shall pass the hous befor midnight friday. throw letter from window 
explain all! I live to serv you." thi document I forward to miss 
ottley enclos in a letter in which I took pain to show that I had 
been disappoint by her criticism, and that I wa not anxiou for the 
correspond to be continued. then I wait as patient as possibl 
for friday to come round. the hour pass with leaden feet, but they 
passed--and midnight found me in the lane walk slowli by the house. 
It wa wrap in gloom from roof to basement, but her window wa open. 
As the clock began to chime, a white thing flash out and flutter 
to my feet. It wa a kerchief weight with a golden bracelet. I felt 
a paper crinkl in it folds. hastili conceal it within my coat, I 
press on and return by a circuit rout to bruton street. soon 
I wa pore over my treasure. It wa typewritten like the challenge. 
It read: "I have been oblig to typewrit this, becaus I am a close 
prison and am forbidden the use of pen or pencil. but they make 
me work as their stenograph some hour each day--and I wa forc 
to seiz the opportun so presented. thank god you understood the 
cipher. If you love me give out that you proceed immedi to egypt. 
then go to pari and return to london under anoth name and well 
disguised. take lodg east; and wait until you see in person 
column of _daili wire_ direct address to 'd. menchikoff!' follow 
them implicitly! Am in power of fiends. open opposit perilous. must 
allay suspicion. otherwis forc immedi marriag b." here the 
missiv ended. 

I sat down befor the fire and thought hard for some minutes. the paper 
wa crunch up in my hand. suddenli the door opened. I turn my head 
at the sound of the creak, but could see no one. what could have open 
the door? I heard the sound of caught breath, a foot on the door and a 
sigh. In a flash I understood. I had been seen by my enemi pick up 
the letter in the street, and they had sent their invis messeng 
to win it from me. quick as thought I thrust the paper in the flame 
and sprang afoot. there follow a deep-voic oath and a rush of air 
fan my face. I struck out with all my strength right and left, half 
besid myself with rage and fear. but my blow encount noth 
tangible, and a second later the door bang shut. I wa so unnerv 
that I simpli walk over and lock it. how can a man fight with an 
enemi he cannot see? or even follow him? when my hand stop shake 
I began to pack up my trunks. I resolv to follow miss ottley' 
bid to the letter. to-morrow I would announc my departur for 
egypt and cross the channel in order to put bellevil off the track. 
meanwhil I ransack my wardrobe. present I receiv a shock. from 
an unrememb corner in a chest I brought out the cloth I had 
worn on the day of poor weldon' death. they were cover with dy 
bloodstains, the blood of my dead friend. I place them on the tabl 
and eye them, shuddering. My mind, as if spell-compelled, review 
all the detail of weldon' death. I saw him stagger back, back, and 
fall beneath the wheel of the onrush locomotive. I heard hi die 
shriek. onc more I struggl desperately, but alas! how vainli with 
the dark angel, for hi life. onc more, as the end approached, I saw 
hi glaze eye open and look into mine. onc more I heard hi die 
words--"giv me your hand!" 

and but--god in heaven! how could I ever have forgotten it! had he not 
given me something--someth I had put in my pocket half unconsci 
without look to see what it was--someth he had implor me to 
"keep safe." 

I felt my sens rock at the recollection; and then I went hot all 
over with shame, to think of my neglect, my inattention. until that 
moment--despit hi die direction, I had utterli forgotten hi sad 
trust. and the thing he had given me to keep--wher wa it now? where, 
indeed, but in the pocket of that coat where I had place it. oh! It 
wa safe enough, no doubt--but that did not absolv me. for week I had 
been a recreant trustee. I had, I saw it now, I had been a coward. I 
felt hi death so much that I had resolut put all thought of him 
aside, smother them with work, fear the miseri which they must 
bring. and I had been hi friend! 

I took up the coat and felt in the pocket. yes, it wa there. what 
wa it? I drew it out befor the light and saw nothing! yet I held 
someth heavi and hard. wa I go mad? wa my sight diseas or 
what? I rub my eye and look again. nothing! I strode over to the 
ga jet and held the thing between my visual organ and the flame. ah! 
someth now! but how describ it? I saw a small light blur; a sort of 
shapeless haze off which the rays, the jet of light diffused, recoil 
obliquely. It wa not transparent, but neither wa it in the true sens 
visible. It seem to defi the light rays, to repuls them rather than 
absorb them. when held directli befor the flame I could not see the 
ga jet through it, and yet itself I could not truli see. It confus 
and disarrang my vision as a wateri mote doe float on the surfac 
of an eyeball. slowli and sure experi with the thing, I found 
that the farther I withdrew it from the lamp the less sensibl my sens 
becam awar of it existence. but when I place it directli against 
the lamp the flame becam mysteri obscured. I say mysteriously, 
becaus the thing cast no discover shadow, and although solid to 
the sens of touch, it wa not otherwis appar opaque. the flame 
still burn behind it, and I still saw the flame, yet not through, 
but over and around an intermedi blur. In that connect the thing 
did not resembl glass. had the revers been the case I should have 
seen the flame through it directly. As it was, as far as I can make 
out, the impress of the flame wa convey to my retina by ray of 
light that did not travel in a straight path. they climb over and 
surround the interpos object first, and thu gave me a slightli 
distort imag of the flame; and instead of reveal the obstacl 
which they had to overcom in transit, all they did wa to indic 
vagu it situation. thus, abov and below the indiscern point 
where their straight and proper cours wa interf with I perceiv 
a misty, indefin haze. and at the point where the ray seem to 
reassembl and readjust themselv to the resumpt of their ordinari 
busi there wa a blur. perhap the best way to depict the effect 
wa to present the hypothesi of a weak flame held up befor a stronger 
one. thi doe not exactli describ the phenomenon I wit and 
investigated, but it approxim as close as I can manage. the chief 
point of differ are, that everi flame cast a shadow, and thi 
thing did not, unless a blur of light be a shadow; and furthermore, a 
flame may be seen even confront with a stronger flame, and thi thing 
I held wa destitut of a percept outline. the piti wa that I wa 
then work without a singl clue to ani comprehens of the thing; 
and the greater piti is that though my knowledg becam fuller, I am 
still ignor of the action of the properti which made the thing 
visual impalpable. I can onli guess at them. but I think I guess 
correctli when I conjectur assert that it wa surfac coat with 
some essenc which had the power to compel the great major of the 
light ray to travel along it side and surfac and to resum their 
origin direct afterwards. I do not pretend to understand how thi 
essenc could so interfer with and control the law of light. but 
grant that it could, the explan is a natur one. and though 
scientist may frown at me for advanc a theori which I am unabl 
to substantiate, I prefer to incur their scorn rather than adopt the 
alternative--supernatur agency. I simpli declin to believ in the 
supernatural. It is my profound convict that noth ha ever 
happen on thi planet, howev mysteri and inexplicable, which 
ha not been produc by a pure and perfectli natur cause. and the 
longer I live the more certain do I becom that, deep and wonder as 
our scientif acquaint with natur undoubtedli is, we have not yet 
even thoroughli explor the porch of her palac of secrets, her vast 
treasure-hous of wonders. 

but I stray from my subject. It is my present busi to relat 
events, not to discuss their basic principles. 

To resum then, after a great while spent in experi with the 
thing which poor weldon had given me, befor the light, I wa oblig 
to confess myself baffled. I then fell back upon my other four senses. 
I got out a pair of scale and weigh the thing. It weigh exactli 
seven ounces. then I smelt it. the thing wa odourless. I bit it, but 
it wa tasteless. yet it yield to my teeth like stiff rubber or 
leather. next I place it on a sheet of paper and trace it outlin 
with a pencil. that wa the first realli definit result I got. the 
trace show a bulbou object four inch wide by five long. It wa 
shape someth like a pear. it base contain four indent with 
correspond round protuber like knuckles. the apex wa ragged. 
next I took a knife and with the blade scratch it surface. A moment 
later a long streak of dark, dri tissu wa revealed. I could see it 
plainly. I shook all over with excitement. the mysteri seem to be 
clear up. but even as I took up the knife again I paused, convuls 
with a wild, improb idea. what if?--but there. I held my breath and 
took the thing befor the fire to think it problem out. I sat down. 
My nerv were all jangled. the fire need replenishing. It wa low 
and I wa cold. I stoop down and heap on some coal. then came a 
thought. I put the thing on a shovel and held it over the grate. heat! 
yes, heat! the greatest of great resolvents. fool not to have thought 
of it before. fool, indeed! one minute--two--three. there wa a shadow 
on the shovel. I bent forward. instantli my nostril were assail 
with the unforgett perfum of the tomb of ptahmes! ah! the flood 
of recollect that came surg at it bid to my brain! but I 
fought them back. I bent right over the fire--and I made out presently, 
lie on the shovel, the dim form of a tight-clench human hand. 




chapter xxiii 

I set out for the east 


It wa the hand of a mummy. It had been half snapped, half torn from 
the forearm, just abov the wrist. thu the edg of the stock were 
rag and the tendon were drawn out and torn; the bone, however, had 
fractur clearly, just as glass breaks, leav a hard, smooth edge. 
but the hand wa not an ordinari mummy' hand. the bone were cover 
with mummifi flesh truly, but, although dry, it wa neither stiff 
nor brittle. On the contrary, it possess the tough consist of 
leather and wa resili and kneadabl like rubber. the phalanges, 
when pull straight, return to their ordinari and origin position, 
like springs, immedi the pressur wa removed. the colour of the 
skin wa a veri dark chocolate. It wa marvel preserved. the veri 
pore were still discernible, and the vein and arteri beneath the 
epidermis, which had been convert by age into fine black cords, could 
be trace with ease. now, whose hand wa it? from what mummi torn? and 
how had weldon becom possess of it? I gave up the attempt to solv 
the first two problem as soon as I had mental propound them. the 
third, however, answer itself. I knew weldon too thoroughli to admit 
a doubt that he would ever have carri about with him such a ghastli 
trophy. like most healthi young englishmen, he had a horror of such 
things. well, then he must have snatch the hand, then invisible, 
from the grasp of someone--in the veri moment in which he had been 
fall to hi death. but no one had been near him. that is, no one 
visibl to us or him. but sinc the hand had been practic invis 
until I had subject it to the influenc of heat, wa it not just 
as like that it might have been--nay, must have been--carri by 
an invis person? but that invis person must have been veri 
near weldon. He must have been close enough to have save weldon had 
he chosen. whi had he not chosen? why, indeed, unless he had wish 
weldon to die? and if he had wish weldon to die, would it not have 
been easi for him--becaus invisible--to help weldon to die? easy! 
good heavens, how easy! how appallingli easy! and then I rememb 
how astonish I had been to see weldon stagger back, step after step, 
to the platform' edge--thre step at least. I understood it now--and 
hi startl outcry. He had been assail by an invis adversary. 
He had been forc back. He had been hurl over the platform--and as 
he fell he had clutch out wildli and seiz the mummy' hand. He had 
been foulli murdered; and we had watch hi murder, comprehend 
nothing. My flesh began to creep as the light of understand broke 
in upon my brain. for I realis in the same instant that weldon' 
murder was, in all probability, the man who had had most occas 
to desir hi death--belleville--mi enemi and the enemy, although 
the lover, of the woman I loved; the wretch in whose power she wa 
at that moment. He had warn miss ottley that unless she broke off 
her engag with weldon her fiancé would die within the week. He 
had died--murd in cold blood--on the even of the seventh day. 
bellevil had been most terribl faith to hi aw promise. To 
the veri letter he had kept hi dread vow. and now--miss ottley 
wa hi prison in her own father' house; and, no doubt, sir robert 
ottley, sick, enfeebl in bodi and intellect, wa belleville' puppet 
instrument to the further of hi atroci purposes. what chanc 
had i--fight a man so utterli unscrupulous, so strong-wil and 
remorseless, and endow with a power so tremend and far-reach 
as the possess of a chemic agent capabl of render himself 
impercept to mortal sight whenev it should pleas him to make 
use of it? how could I or anybodi bring such a man to justice? why, 
even if I should foil hi scheme for my undoing, and were it possible, 
as well, to get the better of him to the extent of satisfi myself 
beyond doubt as to hi guilt, what court on earth would believ the 
evid I could bring forward? A tissu of absurdities; a network 
of hypothes and chimeras! I should be laugh at as a madman, a 
foolish visionary; and he would go scot free with undamag reputation, 
free to work hi evil will upon an unconsci and defenceless world. 
belleville' advantag over me wa so manifestli overwhelm that I 
confess the prospect of enter into a trial of strength and cun 
with him daunt me. and yet, if I did not, weldon' death would sure 
go unavenged, and miss ottley' fate would be sealed. she would be 
forc into a marriage--somehow or other--with a man she loathed--th 
murder of her dead lover. I felt so sure of thi that toward morn 
I resum my packing. I did not go to bed at all. after breakfast I 
went out and call at half a dozen newspap offices. I saw as mani 
journalists, who all promis to paragraph my departur for the east. 
I then wrote a letter to the societi stating, guardedly, my intent 
of again visit the nile; and I caught the afternoon train to dover. 
that night I slept at calais. On the follow day I went to pari and 
put myself in the hand of a hairdress and costumier, who carri on 
a peculiar busi at montmartr under the secret surveil and 
govern of the police. for a respect consider he effect a 
complet metamorphosi in my appearance. He speckl my black eyebrow 
with silver. He shave off my moustach and beard and dy my skin a 
jejeun saffron, my hair a biliou iron-brown. He forbad me to wear 
a starch collar. He taught me how to walk like an elderli man; and, 
finally, he provid me with a suit of cloth that fit fairli 
well, but which could not be said to possess ani other virtue. but 
the fellow wa well worthi of hi hire. when he had finish with me 
I could not recognis myself. the mirror show me a gaunt piec of 
human wreckage. I wa to the life a decay gentleman; an unobtrus 
rakish, elderli degenerate. I wa remark in noth except height, 
and even that singular depart as I learn to stoop. In such guis 
I return to london by way of boulogn and folkestone, and I took 
up resid immedi in a tenement-hous in soho, to which I had 
been recommend by my friend, the costumier. It wa a curiou place. 
It wa popul by frenchmen, italians, and a sprinkl of swiss, 
and a number of russian polit refugees. I found them a decent lot 
of law-abid miserables. the major were derelict of fortune, 
who live like parasit on the toil of some few hardworking, foolish 
artisan among them. and yet, despit their deplor estate, they 
alway had a cheer word and a smile to spare for a stranger. they 
were a picturesque, interest people, and I should have like to 
studi them under other circumstances. but place as I was, I conceiv 
it best to keep my room as much as possible, and I onli went abroad to 
buy a paper and to eat and drink. On the fourth morn the expect 
summon came to hand. It wa the first advertis in the column. 
"d. menchikoff. fearless. doorfront. twelve. unfailing. noiseless. 
open. mizpah." and thi I interpret to mean, "fearlessli approach 
the front door at midnight thi evening! you will find it open. enter 
without noise! god be with you till we meet!" 




chapter xxiv 

the gin Is sprung 


I set out wear rubber shoe and arm with a load revolver. thi I 
conceal in my breast pocket. I time myself so nice that I arriv 
at sir robert ottley' mansion on the fifth stroke of twelve. forthwith 
I mount the step and softli tri the door. It wa ajar. I push 
it back and entered, close it noiselessli behind me. I lock it, 
too. the hall wa unlight and black as erebus. I stood for a moment 
or two listen breathlessly. then I thought I heard a sigh. "may!" I 
whispered. 

I wa answer by a sibil soft "s-sh!" then a hand wa laid upon 
my sleev and I felt myself drawn forward. I gave myself up to be 
guid the more willingli that I hardli knew the place. We came to 
a staircase. My guid breath "s-sh" again, and mutter "stairs." 
We climb them step by step. heavens, how dark it was! afterward I 
wa drawn like a shadow through a maze of thickli carpet corridors. 
finally, we stopped. the hand left my arm and I heard a door creak 
open. "come!" whisper my guide. I step toward a dim, dim glow, 
and as I cross the threshold, the door, shut on my entrance, 
graze my arm. 

"at last!" the voic whispered. 

It wa a signal. hardli wa it utter than a blaze of white light 
stab the darkness. I found myself in an immens apartment, blink 
foolishli into the muzzl of a revolv present at my forehead by dr. 
belleville. our eye met present across the sights. hi were smile 
coldly. 

"an excel disguise, dr. pinsent; my sincer congratulations," he 
observed. "it is evid you have obey my instruct to the letter." 

"your instructions," I said. 

"ay. mine." 

"then you----" 

"the cipher wa my idea entirely. ah! but you must not blame miss 
ottley. she sign the first letter without understanding. later, 
however, she would not write. she knew. I wa oblig to use the 
typewriter, and in order to convinc you of the authent of the 
letter I threw at your feet last thursday night--mi emissari follow 
you home and pretend to wish to wrest it from you. you fell into the 
snare. and now you are here, and no one knows, eh? No one knows?" 

"you think so?" I asked. I wa begin to get back my wits. 

but he onli laughed. "it doe not matter. the great thing is, you are 
here and in my power. that wa all I wanted. now, ottley! now!" 

It wa anoth signal. someth hard and heavi crash against my 
skull. for a second I fought for breath against a horribl feel of 
sick and impotence, then came blank night and nothingness. I had 
been sandbagged. 

I recov to find that my captor had strap me hand and foot in 
a huge iron chair. I could not move an inch in ani one direction, but 
otherwis my situat wa toler comfortable. bellevil sat face 
me some feet away. He wa pluck thought at hi big, black 
beard. there wa no one els in the room. perceiv I wa awake, he 
aros and took from a tabl near him a glass of water, which he brought 
to me. 

"it is not poisoned," he remarked. "I have consider need of you for 
some time yet." He place the glass to my lip then, and I drank with 
confidence. I felt better afterwards, but my head ach brave still. 

bellevil resum hi chair and again began to pluck at hi beard. "no 
doubt your head aches," he observed. "I regret have been oblig to 
use you so discourteously, but we have had so much experi of your 
muscular vigour that to have risk a physic encount would have 
been absurd. We might have been forc to kill you, and that would not 
have suit my plans." 

"indeed," said I. It cost me a pain effort to speak at all. 

"I desir to be perfectli candid with you," said belleville. "but 
befor we get down to busi it were as well to prove to you how 
complet at my merci you are." He took, as he spoke, a revolv from 
hi pocket and aim carelessli at the opposit wall. "thi apart 
use to be a shoot gallery," he observed. "all the wall are 
padded." He then discharg the weapon six time in rapid succession. 
the bullet spatter on a plate of steel. the sound of the report 
wa simpli deafening. A full minut pass befor the echo and 
reverber ceased. all the while bellevil smile at me. "no one 
heard but you and i," he said. "the futility, therefore, of wast 
your breath in shout for help will appeal to you." 

I glanc about and found that all the wall I could see were 
windowless. the room wa light by electricity. the door wa thickli 
coat with pad cushion leather. the floor wa carpet with one 
vast sheet of rubber. the place wa fit up as a chemic laboratory. 
I count half a dozen glass tabl litter with retort and dynamos, 
test tube and other instruments. there were big glass case fill 
with porcelain box and phial of drug and larg jar contain 
acids. and final there wa one object my eye rest on with a littl 
shock of recognition. thi wa the sarcophagu of ptahmes. It wa 
rais about three feet from the ground upon two steel trestles. the 
great sculptur lid wa prop on end against a neighbour wall. 
but although the coffin wa open I could not see within it becaus the 
edg wa almost on a level with my eyes. 

"are you satisfied?" ask bellevil presently. He had follow the 
direct of my glanc with a sort of half-contemptuous, half-amus 
curiosity, reload hi revolv the while. the man evid 
cherish an immens opinion of himself--but he wa as cautiou as a 
sage: wit the reload of hi weapon--despit the fact that I wa 
as helpless as a truss fowl. 

"yes. I am satisfied," I answered. 

"and cool? what I mean is are you perfectli collected? Do you feel abl 
to engag in conversation? Or are you too dazed--or perhap too angry?" 

"I can promis at least to listen and tri to understand you." 

He gave me a sardon smile. "the under dog is a fool to be sarcastic," 
he said drily. "however, pleas yourself. listen then! you are no doubt 
awar that it is one of my ambit to marri miss ottley?" 

"yes." 

"captain weldon stood some time sinc in my road." 

"yes." 

"peac to hi ashes," smile the doctor. then he frowned. "but to my 
astonish I now find that the ladi did not care for the gallant 
captain." 

"indeed." 

"inde and indeed." bellevil bit hi lip. "but for you," he snarled. 

I wa silent. 

"it is almost incredible, but it is true." 

"she ha confid in you?" I asked. 

"a a preliminari step to defi me," repli belleville. "it wa 
rather silli of her, but perhap she could not help herself. women, 
even the wisest, are slave to their emot of the moment. I wa 
will to make all sort of concessions, too. I even offer her your 
life." 

"mi life." 

"I offer to permit you to live if she would marri me." 

"and she?" 

bellevil bare hi teeth just as I have seen a jackal grin. "you 
know how women love to glorifi the object of their admiration," he 
said slowly. "in their opinion the men they--they love--ar alway 
the wisest, the strongest, the most astut and the best. I am free to 
admit, my dear pinsent, that you are by no mean a fool. you have no 
doubt a fairli keen intelligence--but miss ottley ha place you on an 
alabast pedestal--pedest do I say? A pinnacle! she ha actual 
ventur to contrast your abil with mine to my disparagement. she 
reject my offer with disdain and challeng me to measur wit with 
you. and when I accept the challeng she calmli predict that you 
would defeat and destroy me. It thu becam my duti to show her how 
mistaken and fallibl in truth is her estim of me. weldon' death 
taught her nothing, absolut nothing. she protest that if I wa 
realli the _deu ex machina_ it onli prove me to be an ordinari sort 
of heartless murderer. weldon' particular order of intellect never 
impress her, it appears. but yours, in her eyes, is littl short of 
divine. there wa no help then but to dispos of you in such a way as 
to open her eyes. It is no boast to say that I could have kill you 
at ani time of the day or night I pleas for week past. had I done 
so, however, I should have been constrain so to arrang matters--a 
in weldon' case--a to make your end appear natural; and i'm afraid 
miss ottley would on that account have been inclin to consider, for 
a second time, me a lucki prophet and you the second victim of an 
inscrut providence. that is her present attitud toward weldon' 
final exit from the stage of life. I wa oblig then so to arrang 
matter as to get you into my power, but, _bien entendu_, without the 
fanfar of trumpets. I flatter myself that I have manag veri well. 
you may pretend the contrari if you choose, but you'll not convinc 
me. I have had your everi movement care followed, and I believ 
that outsid of thi hous there is not a soul in england of your 
acquaint who ha a doubt but that you are on your way to egypt. 
and I have neglect no precaut that could ever give rise to such 
a doubt. immedi you quit your lodg in soho thi evening, 
my emissari enter your room by mean of a master key and brought away 
your trunks. No one saw him, for he wa invisible; and no one saw your 
trunk depart, for he made them invisible, too. they are at thi moment 
in thi house. you doubt me?" 

"yes," I cried. "I doubt you; produc them!" 

"I am too comfort to move," smile belleville. "but here is 
someth I found at the bottom of one of them." 

As he spoke he took from hi breast pocket the mummi hand poor weldon 
had given me. I could not suppress an exclamation. He had spoken truli 
then. bellevil toss the hand upon a table. "I wa rather glad to 
get it back," he said. "not that it realli mattered; but I wonder who 
had found it. did weldon still cling to it after he wa dead?" 

"you scoundrel!" I cried. "it wa you--real then? you push him over 
the platform?" 

He laughed. "in person, no, but by direction, yes." then he 
becam serious. "but let us avoid personalities, if you please. 
We each possess an ugli temper, I believe; and mine is sometim 
uncontrollable. Do you agree?" 

"proceed!" said I. 

He bow ironically. "there is but littl more to tell you now. you 
know almost all you need to know, and enough, I feel sure, to enabl 
you to anticip your fate." 

"you intend to murder me, I suppose?" 

"exactly. but it depend on yourself whether you shall have a painless 
death or no. If you will do what I requir you shall have the choic 
between aconit and morphia. If you refuse, well,"--h purs up hi 
lips--"you'l live longer, pinsent; yes, you'll live longer--but 
frankly, old chap, you won't like it. I hate you, you know, and I am 
a surgeon, and you are there and I am here; I repeat, I hate you. and 
I am not onli a surgeon, I am a skil surgeon. I am, besides, a 
vivisectionist. that is one of my hobbies. and i'll keep you aliv as 
long as possible. for let me yet again assur you I _hate--you--h 
you, hate you_!" 

there wa no doubt of it. He hate me. the emot wa infectious. I 
hate him. I had before; but I now realis how much. after one long 
glanc into hi gloat eye I lower mine and ask in a voic I 
strove to render civil: "what is it you want me to do for you?" 

"I want you to play the part of a friendli disembodi ghostli 
match-maker." 

"I fail to understand you." 

"naturally. but listen. I intend to render you invisible. when that is 
done I shall bring miss ottley here. she know your voice. you will 
speak to her. Do you see daylight now?" 

"I begin." 

"that is well. you will inform the ladi that you are dead, but that 
your spirit is held in duranc vile at my command. like all other 
women, she is at heart deepli superstitious. she will believ what 
you say and she will conceiv a prodigi respect for my power and 
ability. you will assur her that I control your fate and that you can 
onli obtain deliver from unimagin aw tortur at the price 
of her consent to becom immedi my wife. well?" 

"A pretti plot," said I. 

"I felt certain it would earn your admiration," he returned. 

"I marvel at your candour!" 

"mi dear pinsent," he said, smiling, "complet candour is the privileg 
of the all-powerful, and that am i--at least in your regard. I can 
perfectli afford to be perfectli frank with you, becaus I can compel 
you to serv me even should you decid to disobey me." 

"indeed, and how?" 

"the thing is as simpl as A, B, C. If you are so foolish as to 
refus to play the part I have assigned, I shall render you three 
parts--instead of entir invisible. I shall make your bonds, however, 
entir invisible. you will then be put to certain electr tortur 
of my invention, and I shall invit miss ottley to observ the 
spectacl of a soul in pain. I confess I should prefer you to behav 
like a sensibl ghost and talk to her in the manner I have indicated; 
but you must admit that in the altern she will, nevertheless, be 
forc to a conclus flatter alik to my ambit and my pride." 

"i it possibl that you are all the heartless scoundrel you pretend? 
can you realli find pleasur in the notion of win the woman you are 
presum to love--bi a trick so infam and despicable?" 

"yes, pinsent, yes." 

"you must be anim by a devil." 

"on the contrary, my dear enemy, I am just an ordinari human be who 
ha been seduc by the most extraordinari temptat that ha ever 
been offer to a live being. A power ha been place at my dispos 
which put me on a level with the immort god of ancient greece. In 
decid to make use of it, I have adopt their idea of morality, 
almost, as it were, perforce. I now make a cult of my convenience, 
and a religion of the indulg of my instincts. I intend henceforth 
to kill alway what I hate, to possess what I love, to seiz what I 
covet, and to enjoy what I desire. miss ottley dislik and despis 
me. that ha irrit my vaniti to such an extent that it is necessari 
to my happi that I should convert her dislik into subjection, her 
contempt into the unbound rever of fear. when she becom my wife 
I shall be the master of her millions--h father is on the point of 
dissolution--and I shall be the tyrant of her person. I shall rule her 
with a rod of iron terror. that domin will give me a far greater 
joy than the vulgar pleasur of reciproc passion. and not the least 
part of it will dwell in the reflect that you, my dear enemy, will 
have so larg and so unwillingli contribut to the gratif of 
my sweet will. now you have all the fact befor you. My card are all 
exposed. It is for you to make up your mind what you will do. don't 
decid immediately! there is no hurry. think the matter over. As I am 
rather weary" (he yawn in my face), "I shall now leav you to your 
medit till the morning. good-night." 

He rose, bow to me with mock polit and move over to the door. A 
moment later he had gone, and with him the light vanished. I wa left 
in the profoundest darkness, and my thought were nearli as colourless 
and sombr as the gloom in which I sat. 




chapter xxv 

the mummi talk 


the sensat of awaken inform me of the surpris fact that I 
had fallen asleep. I wa rather proud under the circumst that I 
had been abl to do so. probabl I had slept for a long while, too, 
for the laboratori wa light up, and it wa evid that it had been 
care dust in the interval. there wa a sound of sweep behind 
my chair, but strain as I would I could not turn my head to see who wa 
my companion. "I say," I call out. "I am thirsty. fetch me a glass of 
water, will you?" 

the sweep stopped. present step approach my chair. they pass 
it, and next second I saw the giant arab of the cave templ at rakh, 
the wretch who had attempt to strangl me at my camp, and whom I had 
releas from the sarcophagu of ptahm on the nile. He stood befor 
me, hi extraordinari blood-colour eye stare at me with the glaze 
expressionless regard of an automaton. He wa clad in a long, yellow 
shapeless garment like a smock, and hi feet were shod in leather 
sandals. In one hand he held a broom. veri slowli he extend hi other 
arm befor my face, and I saw with a shock of avers that the hand 
had gone. It had been sever from the wrist and noth but a stump 
remained. involuntarili I thought of the mummi hand which poor weldon 
had given me. It still lay upon the tabl where dr. bellevil had 
toss it, full in my view. It wa a left hand. the arab' left hand 
had been lost. the connect wa obvious. but--but--of cours a mummi 
hand thousand of year old perhaps, could not have grown upon a still 
living, breath man. living! breathing! the word repeat themselv 
as I gaze at the arab. how like a mummi he appeared! hi skin wa of 
exactli the same colour as the mummi hand. It had the same shrivel 
appearance, the same leather-lik texture. and, good heavens! unless I 
dream he did not breathe! not a movement of hi bodi disclos the 
smallest sign of respiration. I stare at him, appalled. hi featur 
were fix and set rigidly. hi mouth wa closed. hi nostril were 
fallen in and glu together. how then could he breathe? and yet there 
wa life in hi gaunt frame; some anim spirit that control 
it mechanism, for slowli hi handless arm fell back to hi side, 
and he continu to regard me with a steadfast, unwink stare. I 
examin hi eye and found that they were lidless. the lid had 
shrunken back and disappeared. A closer inspect show that the 
eye themselv owe all their lustr to reflect light. the cornea 
wa in each orb noth but a thin gelatinous-lik film fill with 
tini littl crinkl that caught up and refract pass ray from 
all directions. the white were opaqu black teguments, dri and dead. 
behind the lens wa no sign of ani pupil. there wa noth but an 
iri which seem to be compos of dull red dust. 

living! breathing! the arab wa a mummy! an anim corpse. oh! Of 
cours I dreamed. I must have dreamed. I have told myself that so mani 
thousand time that it is a marvel the constant reiter ha not 
forc me to believ it. but I do not. nor do I know what to believe. I 
am in as great a maze to understand now as I wa then. 

At first I conceiv an almost intoler horror of the thing befor 
me. but find that the arab did not menac me, I gradual becam 
accustom to it most unpleas and almost ghastli proximity. and 
after a time I felt so strong a fever of thirst that I forc myself to 
speak to it again. 

I ask it for water. It did not move. I becam convinc it heard 
but did not comprehend the languag I employed. I spoke to it in 
french and german and in arabic, but still it did not move. final 
I said to myself, "if it is a mummy, it will be an egyptian and will 
understand the tongu of ancient egypt." then I gasp out such a term 
as I believ might have been use by a thirsti theban ask for 
allevi of hi famine. the thing instantli move off behind me. 
present I heard the sound of fall water, and a moment later a 
glass wa press to my parch lips. I drain it thankfully, eye 
the while, with a feel of deep, unconquer repulsion, the sinewi 
black mummi hand that serv me. I then thank the arab in the same 
tongu which had persuad him to be my minister. He gaze at me a 
while and then move to the tabl and look at it. He appear to be 
writing, but I could not be sure. I heard a curious, raucou scratch 
sound. thu ten minut sped by. meanwhile, I shut my eye and tri 
hard to persuad myself that I dreamed. then a sound disturb me. I 
open my eye with a start and saw that the arab had return to my 
side. He held a slate befor me cover with hieroglyphics. never had I 
greater occas to bless my knowledg of that ancient languag and to 
grate regard the patient year of labour I had spent acquir it. 
but likewis never had I greater occas to lament the imperfect 
of my knowledg and defect in my memory. I could understand a portion 
of the message--th greater part indeed--but still a part escap me. 

briefli translated, the part I comprehend ran: 

"it is not meet that ptahmes--nam tahutimes--son of mery, son of 
hap, high priest of amen-ra and the hawk-head horus, should be a 
wick unbeliever' slave.... death explains.... the spirit of a good 
man hurri henc accus me unansw at the ... throne.... for time 
unending.... fanet.... king of all the gods.... thu onli shall you 
escap the death that threatens. you shall swear to break my stele of 
ivory, to commit my papyri to the flame unread, to burn my bodi and 
scatter my ash to the wind of heaven. you shall swear by amen-ra, 
king of earth and heaven, to destroy ... the oppressor and your enemy. 
He ha deciph the inscriptions. He ha master their meaning. He 
knows. He cannot be permit to live lest I ... and he the enemi exalt 
himself and triumph over you and me.... swear then, and aid shall be 
accord in your hour of need." 

I gather from thi messag that the ghost of ptahm inhabit 
the mummi befor me; that bellevil had possess himself of some 
stupend wizard power which enabl him to compel the soul and dust 
of ptahm to obey hi infam behests, but that ptahm wa hi most 
unwil slave. I also gather that ptahm promis me help if I 
would take an oath to kill belleville, to destroy certain papyri and 
an ivori stele in belleville' possess which I must promis not to 
attempt to read, and also to burn the mummifi remain of ptahmes, 
and so, I suppose, secur the rest of hi troubl spirit. I did not 
paus to reflect on the wild unreal of the happen my sens 
registered. they did not appear inde unreal to me at all--then. 
On the contrary, I felt that I wa confront with a veri grave and 
seriou proposal, which if I decid to accept would be carri out to 
the letter as regard the assist promis me, a circumst that 
would oblig me as an honest man to keep my part of the contract. the 
question remained: would I be justifi in solemnli swear to compass 
belleville' death? whi not? sure he deserv capit punish if 
ever a man did. By hi own confess he had either murder frankfort 
weldon or procur hi murder; and he had cold-bloodedli assur me 
that he wa relentlessli resolv to murder me. and there were other 
thing to think of. He had given me posit proof of the possess 
of some unknown power over the law of natur which had enabl him 
alreadi to commit crime without incur a shadow of legal suspicion. 
were I then to effect my escap from him, it would be my duti as a 
citizen of the state to do all in my power to prevent him work 
further ill in the community. yet I could not bring him to justice. I 
had no evid to produc against him which the court would not scorn 
and ridicule. the attempt to convict him of the murder he had confess 
to me, would onli result in brand me in all men' eye as a lunatic. 
He would meanwhil be at liberti to go abroad to work hi evil will 
upon the world. He would veri soon reveng himself upon me, and destroy 
me in the same diabol ingeni fashion, perhaps, in which he had 
kill poor weldon. and miss ottley would then be at hi mercy, with 
no man live to defend her. she might continu to resist him for a 
time, but in the end a man so unscrupul and implac determin 
would be sure to have hi way. abl to make himself invisible--a I 
believ he could--h might as a last resort rob her of her honour and 
so bend her proud spirit to hi wish. It wa thi thought that final 
determin me. I look up and said quietli to the patient, wait 
arab: "ptahmes, son of mery, son of hap, onc high priest of amen-ra, 
but now I know not what--i swear by the king of earth and heaven to 
destroy the stele and papyri unread if I shall find them, to burn your 
bodi and scatter the ashes, and to kill your enemi and mine." 

the dark, fixed, corpse-lik face of the arab turn forthwith from 
me. He press the slate to hi bosom with the stump of hi left 
wrist and with the right hand rub out the hieroglyph writing. He 
then glide over to the tabl and replac the slate. I follow hi 
movement with the most passion attention, expect him to return 
and immedi releas me from my bonds. but he did no such thing. In 
the contrary, he move slowli forward to the great sarcophagu and to 
my great astonish I saw him climb over the edg and repos himself 
within the tomb. present he had entir vanish from my sight. I 
could hardli credit my eyes. what wa the mean of hi strang act? 
I wait for a few minutes, but he did not reappear. then I call out 
hi name aloud: "ptahmes! ptahmes!" 

noth answer me. 

I rack my brain to string togeth an implor sentenc in the 
ancient tongu of egypt, and have fashion one, I cri it forth 
in tone of passion entreaty, by turn command and beseech 
him to keep hi pledge. and not onc or twice, but a hundr times, 
did I address him in these ways. but I might as well have cri out 
to the stars. My effort were all unavailing, and at length, weari 
out with them, I desist and abandon my remain energi to the 
bitter task of reactionari self-reviling. I caustic inform myself 
that my brain had gone wandering. thu until I wa hot all over with 
shame. then in a more kindli spirit I cast about for excus to salv 
my intellectu vanity. I ascrib the whole wild dream that I had 
dream to the blow my poor head had receiv last night. but all the 
while, deep at heart, I did not believ I had dreamed. I pretend to, 
in order to make sure that I still possess a critical, scientif 
faculty. but I did not believ it really. I could not. and thi fact 
is one more proof to me that faith in all it form depend more upon 
feel than intellectu conviction. 




chapter xxvi 

A pleasant chat with a murder 


I awok so much refresh and free from pain that I must have slept for 
mani hours. bellevil wa pinch my shoulder. hi black-visag face 
wa curious bilious-looking, and puffi purpl hollow underhung hi 
eyes. 

"you didn't sleep thu on the bank of the nile," he muttered, with a 
sick man' frown. "you were wake enough then. one would think you 
had been drugged." 

"indeed," said I. "but I had need to be wake then." 

"who set on the light," he demanded. "I swear I left you in dark. who 
ha been here?" 

"your arab," I replied. "he swept out the room and gave me a drink. 
then he climb into the sarcophagu yonder, and unless he went away 
while I slept, there you'll find him." 

the rascal look perfectli astounded. "mi arab!" he repeated, stare 
sharpli into my eyes. then of a sudden he turn and simpli rush over 
to the big lead coffin. stoop over the edge, he peep into the 
interior and seem to be shift someth with hi hands. hi back 
wa all I saw, but it move to and fro, and he strain on tiptoe. when 
he stood up hi face wa scarlet and hi eye were troubled. "swept the 
room, you said, and gave you a drink?" he mutter half to himself. 
with that he took to examin the floor, crawl on hand and knees. 
hi peregrin took him behind me, and what he did there or found 
there I do not know; but he rap out an oath and I heard him pace 
up and down, swear in an angri undertone. So five minut passed, 
then he stalk into my view and show me a veri troubl and a veri 
angri countenance. 

"you ask my arab for a drink?" he cried. 

"I did," said I. 

"in english?" 

"what else?" 

"did he answer you?" 

"in the kindliest fashion possible. He assuag my thirst." 

"blast him!" cri belleville, all of a trembl with rage. "the villain 
ha been trick me. like enough i'v loos a forc i'll yet have to 
reckon with." 

"I don't comprehend," said I. 

"nor need you," he rap back. "shut your mouth till I address you or 
i'll cut your pri tongu out." the rascal wa besid himself, that 
wa evident. and sinc I wa quit at hi merci I thought it best to 
do hi bidding. He clap a hand to hi head and rush onc more to 
the sarcophagus. He glare over the edg for a minute, then turn and 
flung out hi arms. "for two pin i'd do it now," he gasped. "cut him 
to piec and burn the parts. it' doubt if i'll ever get more good 
out of him. but if I do that i'll kill the chance. and yet he' play 
me fals already. been laugh in hi sleev at me! but no--h can't 
have meant hurt or he'd have freed the prisoner. As easi that as fetch 
him a drink. No doubt he wa asked. yet he' not to be trust now, 
that is evident. i'll have to gaol him, too. let' see!" 

He cross the room and caught hold of the lid of the sarcophagus; but 
do what he could he wa unabl to shift it. I regard hi effort 
with a deal of secret amusement. He emerg from the struggl pant 
and with disord dress, and hi temper in a molten glow. but he wa 
not beaten. leav the lid alone, he wheel a big loung over to the 
sarcophagu and, tip it on edge, heav it up athwart the mouth. 
then he pile everyth of weight he could find atop of the loung and 
soon he had built up a pyramid which would have taken a hercul to 
shift, if shut up in the sarcophagu beneath. It wa then that I began 
to feel I had been a notabl fool in tell bellevil anyth about 
the "arab." but it wa littl use cri over spilt milk. 

hi labour over, the rascal sank into a chair befor me, and began 
fan hi hot face with a piec of cardboard. 

"now for our business," he present observed. "you'v probabl come to 
some decision, pinsent. I wait to hear it." 

"well," I said, "the thing is in a nutshell. you'v promis me noth 
but a choic of deaths. I may be a fool, but I like life so well that I 
prefer a linger sort to ani other, howev painless." 

"you'r a fool," he answer shortly, and pout out hi loos thick 
lip beyond hi beard, so that he seem to have the snout of a hairi 
pig. "you don't know what a pleasur it will be to me to tortur you," 
he continued. "i'll make you suffer like the damn befor you die." 

"I don't doubt your will; it' your abil which is in question," I 
said, as coolli as I wa able. "you may think you have me laid here 
veri nice by the heels, dr. belleville, and so you have in seeming. 
but you'r not the onli man who ha a knowledg of the old magic art 
of ancient egypt. I tell you to your face that I possess a charm no 
whit less potent than the one you found the secret of in yonder tomb. 
and if you forc me to use it, why, I shall use it. now put that in 
your pipe and smoke it." 

He stood up at once, greatli surprised, much incredulous, but also a 
littl troubl and dubious, as I could see. 

"you think you can bluff me?" he snarled. but I _had_ bluf him. I 
could read it in hi eyes. 

I answer him with noth but a smile. 

He assum a sneer. hi eye glinted. He put hi hand in hi pocket and 
produc a revolver. He cock the weapon and put it to my temple. 

"well, you'v challeng me," he jeered. "in just one minut i'll blow 
your brain out. your charm is now in question!" 

for a few second a dark haze of blind terror shut off my power of 
vision. I felt the villain meant to do what he had threatened. hi 
nerv had been shaken by what I had said to him about the arab--though 
why, I could not fathom--and my challenge, although the merest bluff, 
had complet their disorder. He wa in a spell of panic and it had 
swept hi reason and hi resolut to the winds. He intend to kill 
me in order to restor hi own sens of security, and at once. and I 
wa impot to prevent him. He wa count aloud, "one, two, three, 
four." He had got up to fifteen befor I even partial awok out of my 
tranc of craven fear. but in the next five second I had live a whole 
seri of lifetim and I had receiv an inspir born of wrath and 
hate and desper necessity. 

"look in my eyes," I shriek at him. "and listen if you want to live." 

He look at me. I put the strength of my exist into my gaze, and 
I felt a strange, wild thrill of exult as I saw hi eye dilat 
encount the glanc I threw at him. 

"mi death mean yours," I hissed. "mi monitor stand over you. you'll 
be shrivel as by lightning. we'll go togeth to the throne of 
god! now shoot if you will and damn your soul for all eternity! 
shoot--shoot!" 

but dr. bellevil did not shoot. hi hand fell to hi side. He 
stagger back, stare at me open-mouth until the chair arrest 
him. I saw my advantag and press it home. 

"stop!" I shouted. "a you valu your dirti life. stop! stand still and 
do not turn your head. one movement and we both die. I don't want to 
die for a dog like you." 

He stood like a frozen image. hold hi glanc with mine, I began to 
mutter in a sing-song way a string of meaningless egyptian phrases. 
then the more power to impress the superstiti fool-scoundrel, 
all of a sudden I utter a loud heart-rend groan and allow my 
head to fall over on the strap that encircl and sustain my neck. 
but though I onli affect to swoon, the fright amount of will 
forc and nervou energi I had expend in the crisi had induc 
a consequenti lassitud so enthral that I came veri near to 
faint in reality. and, indeed, it is quit like that I lost my 
sens for a time. soon, however, I felt water sprinkl on my face and 
slowli I rais my head. "A drink!" I gasped. 

A glass wa press to my lips. I drank thirstili and open my eyes. 
belleville, white-fac but compos now and gloomili frowning, wa my 
minister. 

"I make you my compliments," he said in cold, slow, even tones. "you 
have a quick wit and a nerv of iron. I am glad, becaus they save 
me from a folly. you would ceas to be of use to me dead, curs you, 
though I wish you carrion, and will make you worm food befor I am much 
older." 

"you'll not live to repent it," I replied. "i'v bound your fate with 
mine by tie no mortal can unsolve." 

"enough of that rubbish," he retort harshly. "you cannot haze me 
twice. you could not have at all if I had stop to think or been 
quit well. but i'm liverish and out of sort to-day--th result of 
stay up all night nurs ottley." 

"you'll see when the time comes--if you have the courage," I respond 
in an acrid tone. "you cannot scare me, belleville, becaus you cannot 
harm me without hurt yourself--and in your deep of heart, you 
rogue, you know it." 

He burst out laughing, but there wa a note of nervous in hi 
mock mirth that pleas me pass well. 

"pah!" he said at last. "would you sit there truss up like a chooki 
skewer for the tabl if you had the power you pretend?" 

"idiot!" I snapped. "can electr unbuckl strap without machinery? 
yet it can splinter rock without an effort and without assistance." 

"ah!" said he, "ah! So you pretend----" 

"tri me!" I interrupted. 

"not i," cri he. "i'v encount so mani wonder late that i'm 
now begin to regard what I of old consid the imposs as the 
most like thing of all to happen. I don't believ you, pinsent, but 
neither do I disbeliev you. therefore, act on the kindli hint you 
dropped, i'll take all sane precautions. Au revoir." 

He march to the door, pass out and disappeared. I chew the bitter 
cud of thought for some hours. meanwhil I grew desper hungry, ay, 
and thirsty, too. there came a time when I would have given the last of 
my possess for a beef-steak and a jug of water. and, oh! how tire 
I wa of my position. the blood gradual ceas to circul properli 
through all my parts. My hand becam purple. My leg went to sleep. My 
limb were on a rack of pin and needl and even breath hurt me. 
I did my best by strain at the bond at interv to promot the 
arteri flow and stop the agoni of muscular irritation. but it wa a 
poor best, and I sank welcom at length into a benumb letharg 
state near akin to stupor, from which I knew I could wake to anguish by 
the merest movement. 

As near as I can guess twelv hour had uncoil their lethal fold 
befor my infern captor return to the laboratory. one instant I 
wa sharpli sensibl and suffer most damnably. the rogu look 
posit sick and he smelt like a gin palace. He had evid drunk 
a deal of spirit, but he wa not the least intoxicated. "it is over!" 
he cri and threw himself into a chair. 

"what?" I questioned. 

"ottley is dead," said he, "and I am glad of it, all said and done, 
though I work like a galley slave to keep him by me. He wa a fine 
cloak for my doings, but he grew wearisome--th fractiou old fool--at 
times. and i'm not sure i'd bring him back now--wer I able." 

"and miss ottley?" 

"A pretti scene!" He shrug hi shoulders, then grimac and 
whistled. "i'm her father' murderer, it seems!" He stretch out 
hi arm and yawned. "but she' not responsible, poor thing--grief 
demented. the two consult physician heartili sympathis with 
me. they knew how I had worked, you see, and sir philip lang himself 
suggest morphia. they'v sign a paper give me control of 
her--und their direct i'm truste of the estat under the will 
besides. lang think she may recover--ultimately, but it is evid 
that she must be confined. she rave of mummies, and spirits, and dead 
men come to life from the sleep of ages, and so forth. It impress 
lang, vastly. He tap hi sage old head and mutter 'too much 
learning.' He ha a fad that woman' brain are nurtur best on pap, 
and I had the tact to humour him. oh! i'm a devilish clever fellow, 
pinsent. what do you think?" 

"there is littl doubt of it," I said politely, veri politely, indeed, 
for I wish to get as much inform from him as I could and also 
someth to eat and drink. "with your brain you might do anything. 
I suspect I have hitherto misjudg you. still, I wonder that you are 
not an archbishop. It seem to me the church would give you the proper 
cloak you need to exercis your talent in." 

"gad!" he cried. "there' point in that remark. but between ourselves, 
pinsent, I aim at higher game than spiritu power." 

"temporal," I suggested. 

"the highest," he answered, sit up. "and what' to prevent me?" he 
ask defiantly. "no man' life is safe from me." 

I wa puzzled. "you'd not make yourself elig for kingship by 
kill kings," I said. 

"kingship be damned," he sneered. "mi father wa an earl' bastard, but 
as for me, i'm a pure democrat. no, no, i'm go to abolish royalty. 
It ha serv it turn." 

"but where do you come in?" 

"the pleasur of the game is mine, the knowledg and the ecstasi of 
power unlimit to make and break." 

"oh! oh! my tiger, have tast blood already, onc at least, the 
thirst grow on you." 

"onc at least--bah!" he jeered, grin like a fiend. 

"pardon my ignorance," I entreated. "who wa your latest victim." 

"navarro," he answered, grin still. "the scamp is a true 
clairvoy and had to be shut up. He leap from london bridg the 
night you came here and step like a poor rabbit into the trap I laid 
for you." 

"well," said I, in tone huski with throat dryness and appar 
admiration, "that make two--weldon and navarro?" 

"there is a third still," he answered, fairli snap at the bait. "mi 
old grandfather, the earl of havelock." 

"and whi did you murder him?" 

"for hi snobbish refus to receiv me as hi kin ten year ago." 

"might one ask how?" 

"it' a stori to entertain," he answered, lick hi lips. "he wa 
over eighty, but he'd kept all hi faculties, els ther'd been no joy 
in kill him. A week since, I went to him invisible, enter the 
hous with my blood cousin, now the earl, soon after midnight return 
from a carousal. He did not see me, of course, and I took care not to 
let him hear. but littl care wa needed, the degener wa filthi 
drunk. It wa easi to find the old earl' room, the young man got 
so sober pass it. the door wa unlocked, too, so I had no troubl 
first and last. I went over to the old chap' bed and look at him 
and laugh to see. He slept with hi mouth wide and hi toothless 
gum were hideous funny. hi teeth were in a glass of h2o besid the 
bed. I pull hi nose to waken him, have first turn on the light 
full. then I play the ghost of my dead father. 'your hour is come,' 
say I. 'i'm the spirit of your bastard son come to warn you.' He shook 
all over, palsi with fear. 'no--no--no,' he gasped, 'i'm not fit to 
die.' 'you'r not fit to live,' I whispered, stern as fate. 'how have 
you treat the son of your bastard son? have you been kind to him and 
help him in the world.' 'mercy, mercy!' he whined. 'I know I have 
been remiss, but give one more chance--anoth year--a week--a day--and 
i'll do my duty. i'll bar the entail, i'll give him all.' 

"'wretch!' I hissed--and sat me on hi chest. It wa heaven sweet to 
hear hi stifl moans. He did not struggl at all. and my onli regret 
wa it wa so soon over. He broke a vessel and smother in hi own 
blood. the paper announc next day that he had die of the syncop of 
senil peac while sleeping. ha, ha, ha!" 

I echo the heartless villain' laugh, croak out guffaws. the sound 
irrit him. "stop that raucou row!" he ordered. 

"then stop tell me funni stories, or els give me someth to 
drink!" I snapped. 

He sprang afoot at once. "lord!" he cried, "i'm not propos to starv 
you to death. whi the deuc did you not remind me? you'v been--let' 
see--sixti hour without food." 

"sixty!" I gasped. "impossible." 

"it' a fact," he said, and stalk out of the room. but he return 
within a few minut carri a tray set with cold meat and wine 
which he set on a littl tabl and wheel befor me. then he freed my 
right hand and stood over me with a revolv while I ate. but I could 
not eat at once, for the good reason that my arm wa paralyzed, and 
minut pass befor I could make use of it. even then it pain like 
a raw scald. but I suppress a refer to it condit and at the 
earliest instant clear the board in the fashion of a famish wolf. 
afterward he bound me up again, stand behind me to do it, out 
of respect for my strength, no doubt. then he put up hi pistol and 
resum hi chair. 

"upon my soul, I enjoy a chat with you," he assur me. "you see, 
I have no one els to confid in"--her he grinned--"and there' a 
peculiar pleasur in unbosom to a helpless enemy." 

"the pleasur is mutual," I protest courteously. "no other man ha 
given me such mental pabulum." 

He close one eye in a veri vulgar manner, "confess you expir with 
curios to hear more of my beauti fiancée--th woman you love!" 

"the more readily," I responded, "becaus I know you'll be delight to 
taunt me with the satisfact of that same curiosity." 

"ah!" said he. "you are a foeman worthi of my steel. My heart warm 
with hate for you; respect hate." He took out a silver pocket flask 
of spirit and fill the cup. 

At thi he began to sip, eye me the while with secret delight at my 
care repress impatience. but he wa too anxiou to tortur me 
directli to keep me wait long. 

"she' in a drug sleep thi moment," he announced. "i'll keep her 
like that till after the funeral." 

"that' unlik you," I remarked. "it' almost kind." 

"pish!" said he, "I can't afford to let her out of my control even for 
a moment." 

"so?" 

"so." 

"but you will have to let her see her relatives, eh?" 

"fortun she hasn't one blood relat in england. her mother wa 
an australian, a victorian farmer' daughter, and ottley took good care 
not to marri the family. she ha never even seen one of her mother' 
people." 

"but her father's?" 

"she is just as fortun placed, from my point of view, in thi 
regard. ottley wa the onli son. and although I believ there is an old 
maiden aunt twice remov knock round somewher in wales, i'm not 
afraid of her. she' bed-ridden and a pensioner. As i'm truste of the 
estat she'll do what I tell her and stay where she is or i'll know the 
reason why." 

"i'm sure you will," I agre with piou fervour. 

"the fate seem to have deliber conspir to assist me in everi 
possibl way," continu belleville. "the onli real woman friend miss 
ottley had, ladi helen hubbard, ha gone to south america with her 
husband, and the onli man friend who might have help her sit in that 
chair. there is not anoth soul in england who ha either the shadow 
of a right or interest to question my treatment. i'm her sole truste 
and as well as that her legal guardian, for although she is over age 
she doe not come into control of her fortun until she is twenty-seven 
unless she marri in the meanwhile." 

"you propose, of course, that she shall marri you. when?" 

"oh, in a few days' time. It will natur be a secret marriag 
in order to save scandal. but i'm determin it shall take place 
immediately." 

"and afterwards--how will you treat her?" I had hard work to grind thi 
question out. 

bellevil gave a nasti laugh. "that depend on herself," he answered. 
"if she is a dutiful, docil wife she will have littl caus to 
grumble." 

"and--if not?" 

"you know me and ask that?" he cried. then he laugh again, stood up 
and shook himself. "i'm go to indulg in a nice comfort sleep," 
he said. "you may not know it, pinsent, but it' almost midnight. take 
my advic and go to by-by, too! pleasant dream to you and au revoir." 
He went out gape with yawns, but he turn out the light as he went, 
and onc more dark enfold me. 




chapter xxvii 

unbound 


It is not worth while describ the next few days. they were quit or 
almost colourless. onc each four and twenti hours, belleville, take 
sound precautions, releas me for a short while from my prison chair 
to let me stretch my limb and in the interest of keep me aliv for 
hi own purposes. We had veri littl conversation, for he had fallen 
into a moros and gloomi mood, the result of an attack of insomnia. In 
answer to direct question I learn that sir robert ottley' funer 
had pass without incident, but that miss ottley' violent grief had 
been succeed by a long stupor. she wa be nurs by a creatur 
of belleville's, an old frenchwoman name elis lorrain in whom he 
evid repos a deal of confidence. bellevil spent most of hi 
time at work in the laboratory, but what he did I could not see, for he 
conduct hi labour behind my chair. On one occas he gave way to 
a savag fit of passion, and without ani caus whatev that I could 
perceive, he broke a number of glass implement upon the floor. anoth 
time, have cut hi hand in some experiment, he reveng himself by 
flog me with a piec of whalebon until my flesh wherev he could 
reach it wa cover with weal and blisters. He wa not a nice man to 
live with and my hatr of him grew daili more intense. but perforc 
I wa civil to him. On the eighth day he enter the room with a 
chalk-whit face. I knew at onc that someth had happened; but I wa 
not to learn what it wa immediately. He disappear forthwith behind 
my chair and for ten minut stamp about swear like a pagan. 
then the light went out of a sudden and he depart in the dark. He 
return about four hour later, but I did not see him enter, although 
he put on the light immediately. I heard him pass my chair; that 
wa all. but a few second later a sharp and most acridli irrit 
odour fill the room, and soon afterward he came forward and sank 
into hi accustom chair, opposit to mine. He look posit 
ghastly. "to-morrow morn england will mourn the loss of her greatest 
physician," he announc in quiver tones. "sir philip lang ha just 
commit suicide." 

"what!" I cri in deep astonishment. "sir philip lang!" 

He bare hi teeth. "the world will think so," he snarled. "but in 
reality--but there, you shall judge. thi afternoon without give me 
notic the fool came to thi house, forc hi way into the sick room 
and had a long privat convers with may ottley. I do not know 
to what conclus he came, but she must have persuad him of her 
sanity, for he order elis to take her out for a walk; and if it had 
not been that elis refus to obey him pend my arriv there would 
have been a pretti kettl of fish for me to fry. however, he won't 
troubl me again." 

"you murder him!" I gasped. 

"like an artist," said belleville. "I stole upon him while he sat 
in hi privat sitting-room at supper and, stand opposit to him 
unseen, I reach out and pour some aconit into hi wine. He wa 
dead insid a quarter hour, and I took care that he made no outcry. the 
verdict should be suicide, I think. don't you?" 

with that he got up and left me. 

that night while I slept he dose me with chloroform, and while I wa 
senseless he drew over my cloth a suit of rubber overalls. He also 
did whatev wa necessari to render me invisible, and he gag me 
with a piec of steel thrust under my tongu and secur around my 
throat and neck with fine wire that bit deep in the flesh. I awok 
groan with agoni to find that I wa stretch out on the nake 
framework of an iron bed. 

bellevil stood over me grasp miss ottley by the hand. when I saw 
her I stop groan as if by instinct. I knew at onc that she 
did not see anyth except the bed. she look well, but tragic 
sorrow and wild. she wa stare as it were through me. 

"you see nothing," said belleville' hollow voice, "but hi spirit lie 
there for all that. It is in my power and cannot escap without I set 
it free. you know my price. It is for you to rule hi fate, through me 
if so you wish. 

"what!" he continued, "do you not believe--well, then, look now!" 

Of a sudden he flash a blue light lanthorn into my face and he did 
someth els which sent a thousand sting current of electr 
anguish quiver along my nerves. I utter a shriek, but the gag 
stifl it to a hiss wail, and then I fell to breath groans. 
hell can have no wors torment than that villain had devis for my 
undoing. had my mouth been unfett I should have besought the woman 
I ador for death at ani price for rest of pain. As it wa I pray 
her with my eyes--and she saw and took a message. 

"let him go!" she sobbed, "and I will marri you. oh, thi is horrible!" 

On instant the blue light fade out and a bless heaven of diminish 
tortur gave me peace. 

bellevil took from hi breast a nake dagger which he put into the 
girl' hand. "strike, then!" he said, "strike here," and he put hi 
finger on my breast. 

the devil propos to make hi innoc victim a murderess. I saw hi 
purpose, and with everi atom of my strength I groaned. It wa the onli 
warn I could send. 

but I had play right into belleville' hands. 

"hear him implor you!" cri belleville. 

"oh! I can't, I can't," she wailed. 

"'ti onli a spirit--and it' the onli way," he protest warmly. 

miss ottley swung around suddenli and drove the dagger at hi heart, 
but he had been expect it. He caught her wrist and laughed. then all 
my anguish recommenced. In the midst of it, made desperate, the girl 
lean right across the bed and struck. the blade glanc down upon a 
rib and deepli pierc my side. providence, surely, had direct the 
blow. she withdrew the dagger, then scream aloud to see it drip 
with blood. bellevil caught her in hi arm and bore her roughli 
back. He bent her bodi on a tabl until she wa as helpless as a dove, 
then took the blade and drew the horrid thing across her lips; so they 
were carmin with my blood. 

"bi thi and thi you'll rememb you are mine," he said, and kiss 
her lip till hi were bloody, too. then the two stare deep into each 
other' eyes. 

"i'v kill hi body; you, hi soul," said belleville. "we'r well 
mated, you and I. there--i'v no longer ani fear you'll hurt yourself. 
you'll be henceforth too much afraid of him to die." 

He let her go, and stood away from her. she sway erect, then came 
forward till she stood besid me. I held my veri breath for fear that 
she would hear. I don't know why. 

"it is all a trick--a cruel, devilish trick. there' noth there!" 
said the girl, her bosom heav as she spoke. 

bellevil laugh like a hyena. "feel--if you dare!" he cried. 

but she took him at hi word. her hand went out and, guid by a dark 
blotch which, as afterward I learn she saw, she put them on my wound 
and drew them swiftli back ensanguined. then horror settl on her like 
a black cloud on a mountain top. she turn about with one loud gasp 
sigh and sank down in a lifeless heap at belleville' feet. 

soon afterward I swooned, too, from pain and loss of blood. when I 
awok my wound wa neatli bandaged, and I wa onc more seat in my 
chair. 

bellevil sat opposit smoke a cigar. He wa dress veri smartli 
in a frock suit and a tall hat wa set jauntili on hi brow. He wore a 
geranium in hi buttonhole. hi face wa wreath in smiles. A bottl 
of champagn wa set befor him on a tabl and he sip at a glass 
with an air of triumphant good-humour. 

I found that I could speak; my gag had been removed. 

"water!" I implor him. 

He started, then press forward with hi glass. "where the devil is 
your mouth?" he said. 

He could not see me, that wa plain. 

"here!" said I. "water." 

"it is my wed morn--and you shall toast me in wine or go 
thirsting," he rap out. 

then he found my lip and I drank life into my veins. I have never 
tast draught one-half so glorious. 

"I wa marri less than an hour ago," he said, "at a registrar' 
office. she' no longer miss ottley, pinsent." 

I wa silent. 

"do you hear me, man?" he demanded. 

"I hear," I answered. 

He nod hi head and smiled. "I suppos you are wonder whi you'r 
still alive, eh?" 

"you'll die when I die," I mutter wearily. "you are afraid to kill 
me, that is why." 

"bosh!" he flash back. "I have a better reason far. to-morrow she 
will be my wife indeed--a maid no longer--pinsent. It wa worth keep 
you aliv to gloat on that." 

"oh! I see." 

"but you don't see everything, pinsent. she insist upon see your 
bodi to-day in order to be sure that you are dead." 

"ah!" 

"she still ha a linger doubt that I have trick her, and she ha 
sworn on the cross that unless I produc your corps for her inspect 
she will take her own life rather than--you can guess what, pinsent." 

"yes--i can guess." 

"so you see the time draw nigh for you to die." 

"god onli knows." 

the villain frowned. "but befor you go you must do someth for me." 

"and that?" 

"you must write her a letter tell her that your onli hope of soul 
resurrect and salvat lie in her obey me. she now consid me 
a danger magician, but I want her to regard me as a sort of deity." 

"I will not do it, belleville. you ought to know me better by this." 

"I think you will," said he. "that is if you realli care for her. you 
see it will save her a lot of--let' call it inconvenience. with such a 
weapon as your messag I can rule her kindly. but rule her in ani case 
I shall. If you deni me i'll gag you thi moment so you can't make a 
sound, then i'll bring her here and beat her as I would a dog. how will 
you like that?" 

"i'll write the letter," I said huskily. 

A few minut later the thing wa done, and I had sign my name to 
the atroci express of hi demand. To transcrib them I am too 
ashamed. 

"what now?" I asked. 

"the last scene in the last act," said he, as he put the letter in 
hi pocket. "I may tell you that I intend alway to keep your bodi by 
me--for her to look at--if she ever show a mind to mutiny." 

"in spirits?" I questioned. 

"the embalm oil of the princ of old egypt. I found the receipt in 
ptahmes' tomb," he answered. "I propos to convert you into a mummy." 

with that he took off hi hat and coat, roll up hi sleev and put 
on a huge oil-skin apron. "i'll not kill you till the last moment 
necessary," he observed. "in fact, you'll be half-mummi befor you 
die; I have a curios to discov if the process of substitut is 
painful. I rather think it must be." 

He move over as he spoke to the sarcophagu and began to shift the 
object that seal up the mouth. It took him some minut to do so, 
and as he put down the couch, last of all, one of the castor crash 
upon hi toe. He curs the misfortun like a madman and danc 
about the floor on one foot like a dervish, wind up by strike 
me brutal with close fist on the lips. that gave him back hi 
self-control. 

"i'll teach you to laugh at me," he growled. then he return to hi 
work and stoop over the great coffin he haul out the lifeless 
mummi that had rest there so long. for an instant I glimps the 
strang dead featur of the dust of ptahm which so strikingli 
resembl the effigi carven on the lid of the sarcophagu and also the 
arab who had twice in egypt attempt to destroy me. then bellevil 
carelessli threw the thing upon the couch; and travers the room to 
where stood three glass jar fill with a dark viscou fluid. one by 
one he roll these on end across the floor till all three stood besid 
the coffin. afterward he disappear behind my chair, return soon, 
hi head cover with a long breath mask. I watch him--on may 
guess with what passion attention. He unscrew the stopper of the 
nearest jar, seiz the thing bodili in hi arm and pour out the 
content into the sarcophagus. A curiou cloud-lik steam aros that 
haze the prospect, but soon it dissipated. the air wa fill with the 
perfum I had first smelt in the cave templ of the hill of rakh. but 
it wa not altogeth overpowering. It made my puls throb and brought 
a great rush of blood to my head and hand and feet much as would the 
scent of amyl nitrate. but it did not take away my senses. belleville, 
protect by hi mask, wa in no way affected. He quickli unstopp 
the second jar, and ad it content to the first. then he turn and 
approach me, take off hi helmet as he came. the action appris 
me that the wonder perfum had almost die away. there wa now a 
healthi and stimul odour in the room that resembl boil tar. 
evid the two jar had contain differ chemicals. A loud, 
seething, bubbl sound wa plainli to be heard; it came from the 
sarcophagus. 

bellevil sat down and wipe hi forehead with a handkerchief. "we 
must give the stuff ten minut to mix," he said and, take out hi 
watch, he glanc at the time. "it' twenti past eleven," he remarked. 
"you'll begin to mummifi at the half hour precisely, pinsent, so if you 
are a religi man you'd best compos your soul in prayer." 

I am not asham to say that I follow hi advice. I close my eye 
and ask the omnipot for remiss of my sins. and sinc it seem 
to me that my hour had come, I resolut put asid my detest 
of the monster who design to murder me, and I even ask for hi 
forgiveness, too. then a great, deep, splendid peac mantl over me, 
and for the first time in my life I truli realis the littl of 
man' exist and the majesti of resignation. It wa almost worth 
while to go through all I had been compel to endur to experi 
at the end that mood of grand, calm dignity. I felt almost sublim 
detach from my surroundings. I open my eye at last and said with 
perfect calm: 

"I am ready, belleville." 

He stood up and stretch out hi arms, yawn widely. then of a 
sudden everyth wa dark. 

"what in hell----?" shout belleville. I heard him rush forward 
curs angrily, then he stumbl and fell headlong to the floor amidst 
a crash of glass. In the same instant unseen hand fumbl over me. My 
bond suddenli relax and I wa free. I stood up, stiff but quiver 
in everi nerve. there follow a rasp sound, a match flicker into 
light, and I saw bellevil rise from the ruin of a broken jar. He 
held the lucif abov hi head, and it show stand at an angl 
between us the tall frame of the arab of the cave templ at rakh. 

bellevil rip out an oath. there came a blind flash of light and 
the deafen report of a revolver. I stagger from the chair to the 
wall and lean against it, helpless as a babe. the echo were still 
thunder in roll wave of brain-daz sound from wall to wall 
when the pitch black of the room wa again reliev by the glare 
of electricity. bellevil had succeed in turn on the lights. He 
stood by the door peer all about him. for a moment I thought all wa 
up. I wa free, certainly, but my muscl were so cramp and tauten 
that I could hardli move a finger. I wa not fit to contend against 
a breath of wind, let alon a burli ruffian like the doctor. but the 
next instant I rememb I wa still invisible. I could not see my own 
hand held befor me, and I had immedi proof that he wa unabl to 
perceiv me. 

"where are you, pinsent? are you hurt?" he cried. 

I did not answer, but, follow hi glance, I look at the couch and 
there I saw what utterli astound me. the mummi of ptahm lay upon 
the couch in exactli the same attitud as when bellevil had flung 
it there asid from the sarcophagus. who, then, or what, had set me 
free? I examin the apart eagerly, but saw noth live save 
belleville, who with cock revolv thrust out befor him now step 
forward cautious into the room, wave hi arm about him as he 
walked, and muttering, as he walked, through clench teeth a string of 
angri blasphemies. 




chapter xxviii 

the struggl in the chamber 


the advantag I possess wa danger minimis by my physic 
incapacity, but I hoped, given time, to get back some measur of 
strength. the great thing wa to preserv my liberti until I had 
acquir forc enough to use it. I speedili realis that I could not 
remain where I was, for bellevil wa make toward me and reflect 
would soon teach him that weak would compel me to seek a prop 
for my support. but I fear to move lest the sound should betray my 
whereabouts. for the same reason I almost fear to breathe. I thought 
to myself, "oh, that he would fire again so that I could move elsewher 
under cover of the noise." 

onc or twice he seem to look me in the eye. He made a zigzag to my 
chair. there he paus and listened. I ceas to breathe. onli six feet 
separ us. but impati consum him. "tell me where you are!" 
he growled, "or by the lord when I catch you i'll tear you limb from 
limb." I breath while he spoke and ceas when he stopped. 

"you can't escap me!" he snarled. "i'v onli to light my blue lamp 
and i'll find you in a minute. but if you put me to that troubl and 
make me wast my preciou oil besides, well, look out, that' all!" 

I clench and unclench my hands; the use of them wa come back to 
me. 

"veri well," said belleville. He pass my chair and stalk to the 
other end of the room, where he open a cabinet. I move slowli 
and pain to the veri centr of the room. then I stood stock 
still. belleville, returning, paus within a foot of me. He carri 
a bull's-ey lanthorn. thi he put upon the table, and present he 
struck a match. A moment later a round shaft of intens blue radianc 
shot across the room and mark a moon-shap sphere on the wall. It 
began to flit along the wall, up and down from the veri floor to the 
height of a man' chest, until it touch the corner. then it flash 
back twice over the same path, and afterward attack the next wall. 
sooner or later it would be bound to encount and, perhaps, discov 
me. but bellevil wa onli a few feet off. perhap if I sank down 
the shaft would pass over me without touching. At least I could try. 
suppress a shriek of agony, I crouch upon my hand and knees. then 
came anoth thought. slowli and labori I began to crawl nearer 
and nearer to my enemy. the blue shaft wa now shoot right over my 
head. I crept behind him and, breath noiselessly, stood up. If 
I had possess a tith of my strength I might have reach out and 
caught hi neck and strangl him with ease. but I dare not risk it. 
all on a sudden he utter an oath. the lamp had gone out. "damn the 
thing!" he growled. put down hi revolv on the table, he open 
the lamp and peer in at the smoke wick. We were now face to face 
and hi cock weapon lay within eighteen inch of my hand. I tri 
my finger and found that they were reason supple. the blood wa 
stream through the puffi vein and vesicles. the oper hurt 
horribly; in fact, I wa one mass of crude, raw, pain man flesh. but 
now I wa full of hope and despit the muscular torment of return 
anim I felt that my vigour wa returning. bellevil snuf the 
wick and struck a match along the table. the head came off. He took 
anoth and rub it on the sole of hi shoe, stoop slightli to do 
so. As he move I reach out and twine my finger round the hilt of 
hi revolver. but I had not the strength to lift it up. I cannot paint 
the agoni of that experience. I exert everi atom of my will, but my 
hand wa like a putti puppet. tantalu never suffer tortur half as 
keen. withdraw my hand, I put the finger in my mouth and suck 
the still half-lifeless digits. meanwhile, the lamp flicker alight; 
bellevil took up hi revolv and resum hi task. I watch him 
hungrily. the blue shaft onc more began to play and stab the walls. 
It dart hither and thither, like an incandesc elf, danc up 
and down and round and round, and into everi hole and cranni of the 
room. but it did not find me out, becaus move round and round the 
tabl as bellevil move I alway kept behind him. but thi could not 
last for ever, and, indeed, the end came too soon. bellevil utter 
suddenli a savag curs and swung round full upon me. perhap I had 
made some sound that had betray me to hi nerve-strain senses. I do 
not know. He cried, "ha! at last," and fire point blank. the bullet 
whistl past my temple. the smoke of the discharg flame blue in the 
ray of the lanthorn. I fell upon the tabl and thrust it like a ram 
with all my forc against my adversary. He fire again and onc more 
missed, but ere he could repeat hi tactic the tabl struck him and 
the lanthorn fell. He stagger back and the lanthorn roll underneath 
the table. I push the tabl forward and kick the lanthorn with my 
foot. It went out. belleville, recov hi equilibrium, stood like 
an imag peer straight at me and listening. yet he did not see me: 
and for the moment I wa safe, for the tabl wa between us. but the 
man had brains. judg swiftli where I wa most like to be, he gave 
an unexpect spring and vault clear across the obstacle. I had just 
time to step back ere he landed. He swung hi arm about like flails, 
but fail immedi to find me, hi ugli temper must need flare 
up in curses. It wa just what I need to cover the sound of my 
movements. I evad him and return to the table, and then he knew 
not where I was. In a few moment he realis hi folli and, onc more 
relaps into silence, he took up hi lamp. but the oil had either 
been wast or wa exhausted. the wick refus to catch. He groan 
out a blasphem oath on thi discovery, and rush down to the 
cabinet, from which first he had procur the lanthorn. I follow him 
as swiftli as I could, have care to make no sound, and while he wa 
fill the lamp with oil from a beauti carven vase of solid gold 
egyptian ware of the fifteenth dynasty, I onc more put my hand upon 
the hilt of hi revolver, which he had momentarili laid upon the edg 
of the cabinet. but thi time I found I could hold and use it, too. 
shadow-like, I caught it up and put my finger on the trigger. then I 
back away a yard or two and lean upon a case of glass and steel. 

"belleville!" said I. 

He start as though an adder had stung him, then see hi pistol 
gone, he let both vase and lanthorn fall in hi dismay and swung on 
heel to face my voice. 

"it' my turn now," I muttered. "hand abov your head--up, man, 
up--higher--higher!" He saw the muzzl point at hi breast and 
sullenli obeyed. I made him walk backward to the chair that formerli 
had prison me and sit in it. and then, the steel press to hi ear 
to keep him still, I managed, with one hand, to pass a strap around 
hi throat and buckl it. afterward I similarli bound hi wrist 
and ankles. when all wa done I wa so sore spent, so hideous full 
of weari pain, that I lay upon the floor and sank immedi into a 
troubl sleep. bellevil woke me with hi struggl to get free. 
somehow or other he had pri himself on tipto backward, and the heavi 
chair, overbalancing, had drag him over in it fall. that I had 
not heard, but the weight of iron and hi own bodi wa all curious 
press upon one forearm, and the pain of it set him groan like a 
wound bull. the strangest thing of all wa that thi arm wa free. 
somehow or other he had writh it loose. after I had tie it up again 
I sat down to think what I should do. I wa not, however, in the mood 
to sit in judgment on him then, for although much stronger from my 
sleep, the exert hurt, and everi pang I suffer wa too power 
an advoc of vengeanc to let me tri the rascal soberly. I need 
food and drink. not find ani in the room, I tri the door and 
after some short search, made out it fastening--a simpl but clever 
slip of prodigi strength. I found the key to it in belleville' 
pocket. He wa madli anxiou to be made acquaint with hi fate, but I 
turn a deaf ear to all hi questions, and slip out of the room, 
I slam the door on hi solicitations. I found myself in a long, 
blind passage, light with a singl jet, with anoth pad door 
set in it farthest end. thi open to the same key as the first. It 
gave me egress on a second passage, which led by three right angl 
to a big velvet-drap arch and a bifurc maze of broad-balconi 
corridors. here I saw the natur light of day for the first time in 
more than a week. ah! how I revel in it. I stop befor an open 
window and peer forth on a wall courtyard and the blank, tall wall 
of a neighbour mansion beyond. street sound percol to my ears. 
It wa like come back to life from the grave. draw back from the 
window, after some deep, delici moments, I look to find my bodi 
and my hand and feet. but I could not see aught but vague, delus 
shadows, though the sunbeam glisten on me. the phenomenon fill 
me with a new sens of marvel and uncertainty. I had to pinch myself 
to make sure I wa not a disembodi phantom--such stuff as dream 
are made of. yet I wa real enough to touch, thank heaven. reassured, 
I made for the nearest door and softli tri it. within wa a man' 
bedroom--belleville's, perhaps. It wa untenanted. the next apart 
wa a sitting-room. It wa also untenanted, but it contain a table, 
cover-spread for two. with a sigh of joy, I enter and hurri to the 
table. under the first cover wa a cold partridg pie. I did not touch 
the others, but, lord, how I enjoy that pie! I might have been a 
wolf--and then champagne! later, seduc by an open cigar-box on the 
mantel, I threw myself upon a loung and lit a weed. In ten minut I 
wa my own man again, and almost comfortable, for the torment that had 
rack my wretch muscl on reawaken from their tether lethargy, 
were disappear fast. but I wa not permit longer rest. warn by 
a tap on the door, I had bare time to toss my cigar into the grate, 
when the door open and a short, squat negro step into the room. 
He carri a salver of sweetmeat to the table; he stop short and 
utter a guttur exclam of surprise. next instant he wa join 
by a companion, but no negro, an arab, a tall, thin arab, who wa the 
live counterpart of the mummifi corps of ptahm I had left in the 
laboratory, and of the mysteri scoundrel who had attempt my life 
in the cave templ at rakh, and at my camp on the bank of the nile. I 
wa so utterli astound that I wonder I did not shout out my amazement. 

the negro spoke in arabic. "bi allah, he ha eaten and alone," he 
cried. "now tell me, ptahmes, how a man shall serv a master with so 
littl feel for hi servants." 

the arab stalk solemnli over to the tabl and eye the ruin pie. 

"he hungered. He ate. may hi shadow increase," he drawled. 

"for my part," retort the nubian, with an ill-natur scowl, "hi 
shadow may wither and I shall not grieve. It is imposs to pleas 
him." 

"hi gold is good and hard and yellow and much," said the arab, in a 
sort of sing-song. 

"add to that ill-got," repli the negro, "and I shall be an echo to 
your speech. natamkin tell me that the ladi weep still, though no 
more a prisoner, and he took her forth into hi whirl babel town 
thi morning. He ha put a spell on her to depriv her of her gold." 

"what matter if he share it with hi slaves?" demand the arab. 

"I fear him," said the nubian. 

"I also," drawl the arab. "but guard your idl tongu uromi! He may 
be listen to us now." 

the negro shudder and made as if to hastili depart. but the arab 
laughed, and he stop look both angri and ashamed. 

"allah!" he exclaimed, "you laugh, but you may have spoken true." 

"ugh!" said the arab, "he ha bigger fish to fry--th white man you 
entic into the room of wonder die to-day." 

"you--know that, ptahmes!" 

"ay--i am to help him to embalm the body. now I think of it, I wonder 
he ha eaten. I wa to stir the pot while he made merri with the ladi 
over wine--th unbeliev dog. At one of the clock he order me to go 
to him. 'ti almost time." 

"will you not fear to stay alon in that great room of magic, ptahmes?" 

"like enough, uromi, but I shall think me of the pay and work with 
tight-shut eye till he returns." 

"what ha he promis you?" 

"five piec of gold, uromi. Do you covet them?" 

"I would not cross the threshold of that room for ten time five." 

"you have a chicken' heart, uromi." 

"and you a miser' gizzard." 

the arab utter a sardon laugh. "get to your woman' work!" he 
sneered. "and clear those thing away! you had better tell natamkin to 
serv the ladi in her room!" 

"and you--oh, great lord!" growl the nubian, with elephantin sarcasm. 

the arab, however, did not troubl himself to answer. with a mien of 
princ digniti he stalk in silenc to the door and vanished. 

I said to myself, "there, without doubt, goe the man who, in the nick 
of time, releas me from my bonds. He is my friend." the reflect 
gave me substanti satisfaction, for much against my will I had 
hitherto been compel to ascrib my salvat to a supernatur 
agency. but now all wa changed. without doubt the arab had been 
secretli watch over me, and when the time came he turn out 
the lights, rush into the laboratori and unfasten my straps. 
afterwards, he had adroitli manag to escap befor bellevil could 
turn on the light again. No doubt, too, thi arab wa the man of 
my dream, who had bargain with me to kill bellevil when I got 
free, to destroy the mummi of ptahmes, the priest of amen-ra--and hi 
papyri and steles. whi he should have driven such a bargain I could 
not fathom. and why, moreover, he should have taken the troubl to 
imperson the mummi and pretend he could not speak, I wa also at a 
loss to understand. suddenli I rememb that the anim mummi of my 
dream had convers with me in the tongu of ancient egypt per medium 
of a slate and had seem not to understand modern arabic. also, hi 
left hand had been removed--and thi arab enjoy the undiminish 
use of his. My head whirl at the contempl of these essenti 
contradictions. were they one and the same man or not? wa it possibl 
that belleville' arab servant could be a professor of the languag 
of sesostris? and I recollected, too, how close I had scrutinis 
the ghostli mummy' face and realis it utter deadness. the mystery, 
after all, wa not to be as easili solv as my first warm flush of 
fanci had conceived. realis this, I put it out of mind and aros to 
address myself to the practic affair that lay befor me. the nubian 
wa in the act of quit the room, laden with a heavi tray of dishes. 
I follow him out into the corridor and leisur made back to the 
laboratory. I met nobodi en route, but onc insid the blind passage, 
which open on my old prison chamber, I becam awar that someth 
had gone wrong. the air wa heavi with the mysteri scent of the 
sarcophagus. moreover, the door of the laboratori which I had been 
care to shut close wa now ajar. instinctively, I slip the key I 
had just use on the outer door, into my mouth and hurri softli up 
the passage. there a bewild surpris await me. the laboratori 
wa appar unten by live beings. the mummi of ptahm still 
lay upon the couch. the strap which had fasten bellevil to the 
chair were all unfasten and bellevil himself had disappeared. yet 
there were nois in the room, nois of footfal and the tinkl 
of glass. present I saw a larg glass phial move quietli from a 
marbl slab and stand pois in air. A second later the stopper, 
which had been laid besid it, sprang up, too, and settl neatli in 
the phial' mouth. then the bottl leap up high into the air and 
settled, with mysteri precision, on a shelf. I stare at these 
wonder half-understanding, half-dazed. but soon I comprehend all. 
belleville' voic speak in arab came to me through the hush. 

"that will do, I think. there onli remain for us to steal upon him now 
and take him by surprise. serv me well in this, ptahmes, and I shall 
trebl your reward." 

"the man is of iron strength, master," answer the arab' voice. "it 
is true that we are two to one and he is unsuspicious, but I should 
like well to have a knife." 

"nonsense," retort belleville. "I cannot make steel invisible. We 
must need trust to the sandbags. now lead on to the lady' room and 
take care from thi moment that you make no sound." 

On thi I left the doorway and, slip into the opposit corner, 
press flat against the wall. present the door creak open and I 
heard the nois of breathing. I follow it as gentli as a shadow, 
halt sharpli when I could not hear it or it grew too near. I wa 
weaponless--for I had left belleville' revolv in the laboratori 
ere for the first time leav it. but still, I dare not arm myself, 
for to have done so would have given my adversaries, sooner or later, 
a certain clue to my position; and my onli hope of worst them now 
consist in preserv my absolut invis and at the same 
time know where, in the gener sense, they were. My first great 
difficulti aros in the passag of the outer door. I dare not slip 
out with them, and sinc they lock it after them, I wa forc to 
wait some time befor I deem it safe to open it again. thus, when I 
reach the outer passag there wa absolut noth left to guid 
my steps. however, I hurri to the arch and thenc look forth along 
the bifurc corridor. see and hear nothing, I sank to the 
floor, and like an indian press my ear against the boards. one 
far-off panel a littl later creak distinctly. wood, though carpeted, 
is a fine sound conductor. thi gave me the direction. hot foot I 
follow it. but soon I came to a corner and beyond a short, wide 
cul-de-sac, with three close doors. here I stop with strain ear 
and listen with a beat heart and bate breath. the conspir 
were there, beyond the scope of doubt; and present I knew the door 
they wish to pass. I saw the handl turn and heard a sigh. "locked," 
murmur a voic in english--then in arab it breathed. "keep close 
by me, ptahmes, hold my coat!" three sharp rap follow on the panels. 
A voic that thrill me, ask within the room, "who is there?" 

A voice, the cleverli twist voic of belleville, answer in a sharp 
falsetto from without, "it is I, my dear young lady, sir philip lang." 

the door wa immedi open and I saw the sad face of my sweetheart. 

"sir philip!" she cried--then, see no one, she stopped, dismayed. Of 
a sudden she utter a shriek and fell back into the room, back, back, 
clasp her hand to her neck and struggl to cri out. I guess the 
reason instantly--bellevil had seiz her by the throat. I sprang 
to her assistance, but paus again--bi a miracle, in time--just 
across the threshold. miss ottley--i shall not, cannot call her mrs. 
belleville, though, indeed, she was--went spin across the room, 
free, I saw. I slip along the wall besid the lintel and waited, 
hold breath. what next? the door slam and the bolt shot in answer 
to my question. then came a long silence. miss ottley stood besid the 
farthest wall, support herself on the back of a saddle-bag chair, 
a pictur of horror and fear personified. I would have given all the 
world for liberti to sooth her fears, to take her in my arm and 
comfort her. but it wa not to be. everyth depend on my cun 
and my silence. tear my glanc from her ashen face, I look around 
the room. It wa her bedroom. the bed occupi one corner. besid the 
canopi wa an open window through which the light stream in, strike 
full upon the door. against anoth wall stood a duchess toilet tabl 
and a huge bemirror cloth chest of carven ivori and ebony. the 
floor wa cover with a thick pile carpet of dark crimson hue. the 
window curtain were of purpl velvet. the bed' canopi of crimson 
silk. the wall were paint black and gold. It was, indeed, a mourn 
chamber. 

"who is it--who is it?" gasp the white-faced, black-rob mourner. I 
glanc at her again and saw that one hand wa press tightli to her 
side. 

No answer coming, she repeat her demand with more composure. then a 
curiou thing happened. A board creaked, and look swiftli at the 
floor, I saw the imprint of a foot mark in the pile. It vanish 
and the pile sprang up again resiliently, but, twenti inch farther 
onward toward the girl, a second sole-shap hollow form itself 
and there remained. An instant' flash search disclos three 
others. I now knew for certain the posit of my enemies, and with a 
wild heart-throb of joy I nerv myself for action. the shape of the 
footmark show me that both men face the girl, and that they were 
stand about a yard apart. with two noiseless strides, I step 
behind the rearmost. then I stoop and seiz a pair of hard, lean 
thigh and heav a bodi up and sent it hurl through the air abov 
the second set of footprints. "i'v got you again, you dog!" I cried; 
then step back swift and noiseless to my former place. the trick 
wa perfectli successful. silent, save for their heavi breath and 
the trembl of their feet, the rascal writh and stamp about the 
room, locked, doubtless, in a close embrace, although I could not see 
them. As for me, I slip present to a chair, caught it up, and 
guid by a sound, I brought it crash down upon the head of one of 
them. there follow a heavi groan, then a dagger blade flash out of 
nothing and once, twice, thrice, it rose and fell. murder wa be 
done befor my eyes, but I had onli half a mind to stay it, and indeed, 
befor I could the knife had vanish into mist again, and all to be 
seen wa a dark flow of scarlet fluid that well in air and sank upon 
the carpet. I wait spellbound. which wa alive--which wa dead? 

belleville' voic put the question at rest suddenly. "well done, 
ptahmes," he gasp in arabic. "he had me throttl when you struck. 
you shall have fifti pound for thi day' work." 

"thanks, good master." I return and edg toward hi voice. but at 
that moment miss ottley fell in a swoon, and death could hardli have 
avail to keep me from her side. with a bound I wa across the room, 
and in anoth second she wa in my arms. 

bellevil must have seen, but think me the arab, instead of 
chiding, he commend me. "carri her to the laboratory," he commanded. 
"i'll follow with thi carrion. We must dispos of it. nay, wait. i'll 
go first. damn him, how he bleeds!" he ad in english. then a littl 
later, "he is wonder light for so tall and strong a man." 

By then he must have had the arab' bodi in hi arms. I heard heavi 
footfal stamp to the door. carri my burden, I follow them. 
the door open and we both pass out. I hate the thought of take 
my sweetheart to that room of horror, but I could not bear to leav 
her where she had been so terrified, to recov by herself. and in the 
next place I did not dare to let bellevil even for a moment out of 
my reach. He would soon be bound to discov hi mistak and then the 
fight would be renew with the advantag all on hi side, sinc he 
wa arm with a weapon, which, it wa evident, he could conceal till 
the time came for use it. prudenc demand that I should seiz and 
disarm bellevil befor hi suspicion becam excited. prudenc also 
demand that I should leav my sweetheart somewher on the journey. 
but I could not bring myself to do the latter, her face so near to 
mine, her breath upon my lips. that is whi I went to the laboratory, 
and whi I took her with me. 




chapter xxix 

save by fire 


belleville' first act, after toss the arab' corps upon the floor 
and bolt the laboratori door, wa to rush over to the couch and 
remov therefrom the mummi of ptahmes. thi he place with care 
hast upon a marbl slab, and he command me, in arabic, meanwhile, to 
carri the ladi to the couch. I obey him in silence. He then order 
me to take up the bodi of the englishman, pinsent, and bring it to the 
sarcophagus. thi gave me an opportun to examin the arab. I did 
so, and found him quit dead. belleville' dagger had twice pierc 
hi heart. I then rais the corps and carri it to the great lead 
coffin. "what next, master?" I ask in guttur arabic. 

belleville' voic answer from behind me. "lift the carrion up! that 
is well. now let it slip into the bath! gently, ptahmes, gently--or the 
stuff will splash. here--i will help you." 

"where?" I demanded. I wa tri to locat him. 

"wait," he replied--then "here!" hi voic sound from across the 
sarcophagus. 

A second later hi hand brush one of mine and passed. "i'll take 
the shoulders," he said. "you take the feet! Be careful, man--gently, 
gently!" 

It wa madden to be so near and yet so far. but there wa noth 
for it except to follow hi directions. I, therefore, grasp the 
corps firmli by the ankles, when the greater weight of it had 
been transferred, and then I watch the great blood clot upon it 
chest--th onli visibl sign of it existence--sink down, down to the 
liquid content of the coffin. soon it rest there like a crimson 
lili on the surfac of a pond. I let my finger loos their hold and 
the unseen limb of the corps subsid on the liquid with an oili 
swish. the whole corps seem to be floating. bellevil realis 
thi as soon as I. "wait here!" he said to me--then ad in english, 
speak to himself, "where the deuc did I put that glass rod? ah! I 
remember." then I heard the thud of hi retreat steps, and a littl 
later I saw waveringli approach me from across the room, appar 
of it own volition, a long, glass, solid bar, about four feet long and 
an inch thick. I wa overjoy at the sight, for my hand were free, 
bellevil could not see me, and the glass rod inform me exactli of 
hi whereabouts. quick as thought, I slip around the sarcophagu and 
make a littl detour, got behind the murderer. He went straight to 
the coffin and plung the rod within it. doubtless he wa use it to 
submerg the corpse. I heard a hissing, bubbl sound, and bellevil 
saying, "watch me closely, ptahmes--for thi is what you must do." 

I crept upon him until I could hear hi breath quit distinctly, 
although he wa not greatli exert himself. then came the time to 
act. "mi god!" he suddenli exclaimed--"not pinsent--ptahmes--what' 
this?" 

the glass rod wa still. It stood bolt upright in the sarcophagus, and 
so rigidli motionless that I guess belleville' weight wa lean 
on it. I gave a swift glanc into the coffin and almost shriek with 
surprise. the liquid had made the dead arab visibl again, and hi 
death-mask grin up at us with a fix and blood-curdl stare. On 
instant I open my arm wide and threw them round my unseen enemy. 
He utter a howl of rage and terror and turn within my grasp to 
fight me, bite and claw like a savag beast. but veri soon I 
master him. disregard hi animal-lik efforts, I seiz him by 
the throat and beat hi skull upon the edg of the sarcophagu until 
he had quit ceas to struggle. then, anxious, of all things, to make 
sure of him by see him, I heav him up and allow him to slide 
headforemost down into the bath besid the arab he had murder in 
mistak for me. I reason that sinc the liquid there had made the 
arab visible, it should produc a like effect on belleville. but I 
wa utterli unprepar for the result. the stuff must have been an 
acid of tremend power. It awaken the senseless wretch to almost 
instant tortur consciousness. A seri of dread shriek fill 
the room with strang deton echoes. bellevil wa no sooner in 
the coffin than out of it and visibl in part. hi face and hand were 
plainli to be seen. they came out white and drip wet, but a few 
seconds' contact with the air turn them red as blood. I seiz the 
glass rod to defend myself, expect an attack. but there wa no need 
to use it. the shriek wretch stagger down the room to the first 
dispens cabinet. He tore the door open and clutch at a big phial, 
the content of which he pour upon hi hand and splash upon hi 
face, wail all the while like a lost soul in the depth of hell. 
happili he did not keep thi up for long. the drug that he appli to 
hi hurts, whatev it was, must have salv them, for in a moment or 
two hi heart-rend outcri subsid to a deep, low sobbing. even 
that, however, wa more than I could stand. I want bellevil dead, 
but I could not endur the sight and sound of hi agony--agoni that I, 
unwittingly, had caused. 

"belleville," I call out, "can I help you?" 

He gasp and caught hi breath, turn hi face toward me. To my 
surpris it wa no longer scarlet. It had caught the hue of leather, 
and the eye were mantl purpl at the whites. 

"I did not know the stuff wa acid," I continued. "if there is 
anyth I can do to sooth your suffering, I shall and gladly." 

"you dog!" said he. "you'v ruin me and now you are gloat over 
your handiwork." 

with that, he put hi hand in hi bosom and began to steal in my 
direction. I rememb hi conceal dagger and call out, "be 
warned, belleville--i can see you. your dagger will not help you." 

"oh! oh! oh!" he groaned, and stop short. 

"hugh pinsent' voice--oh, heaven!" cri miss ottley--behind me. she 
had awaken from her swoon. 

I swung on heel and watch her rise. "hugh!" she sighed. "hugh--wher 
are you, dear?" then she saw belleville, and the hideou apparit 
he presented, a black pain-tortur face hover in mid-air, with 
two dark, ghostli hand outstretch befor it, froze her blood. 
mercifully, she swoon again and fell back senseless on the lounge. 
bellevil recommenc hi moaning, and began walk up and down 
wring hi hands. I stood silent, lost in thought and wonder what 
I ought to do. bellevil told me. He stop on a sudden and call my 
name twice, "pinsent, pinsent." 

[illustration: _the_ live mummi 

A black pain-tortur face hover in mid-air 

_face page 296_] 

"here!" said I. 

"I am at your merci now," he muttered, in a broken voice. "i'm blind." 

"what!" I cried. 

"ay," said he, "and my facial extrem are die fast--pah! my nose 
is alreadi dead; look." He put up one hand to hi face and befor my 
eye broke off hi nose and toss it on the floor. It snap like a 
piec of tinder, leav a black, ugli stump. 

next he pluck the dagger from hi breast--or rather, from where hi 
bosom seem to be--and cast it on the floor. I wa speechless with 
horror and surprise. 

"now that you have naught to fear from me," he groaned, "if you have a 
heart in your breast you will help to end my pain." 

"anything, anything--onli tell me how!" I cried, advanc toward him 
as I spoke. but hear me approaching, he shout out for me to stop. 
"don't come near me!" he wailed. "don't touch me--or I shall tri to 
murder you--i'l not be abl to prevent myself--and I want to undo some 
of the ill i'v done befor I die." 

I halted. "but what then shall I do?" I asked. 

"light the asbesto fire. you'll find match in the tabl drawer. I am 
perish of cold, that is the onli thing that will sooth the anguish 
I am go through. oh! be quick, be quick!" 

I flew to obey him, and in a moment I had set the stove ablaze. 
bellevil found hi way to it as if by instinct, and stoop down, 
he press hi awful-look face against the bars, groan in a 
way that made my veri flesh creep. "yes--yes, i'm blind," he kept 
muttering, between hi moans. "and veri soon I shall be dead. I must 
atone. I must atone." 

"belleville," I said at last--i forc myself to say it, for hi face 
had grown ink-black, "are you not wast preciou time? Is there not 
someth I can get to counteract the acid? It appear to----" 

"hush!" he interrupted. "there is nothing. It is eat into my brain. 
besides, I am blind and do not wish to live. but let me think. thi 
pain--i cannot use my wits--it daze me! ah! now! I must. I must. how 
can I die with all--pinsent! pinsent!" 

hi voic wa a pierc scream. 

"yes--yes," I answered. I wa shake like a reed. 

"i there not a big jar of yellow spirit near the coffin somewhere?" 

"yes." 

"then, for god' sake, lead me to it." 

I caught him by the hand and guid him forthwith to the jar. 

"take out the stopper," he entreated. I did so and thereupon he plung 
hi hand into the vessel and began to lave hi neck and face, sob 
raucous the while. the odour of the stuff, however, wa so nauseou 
to me that I step back in order to escap it. 

bellevil seem to know at once. "pinsent!" he cried, "where are you?" 

"here," said I. 

"go and wake her, my wife!" he mutter suddenly. "I have someth to 
tell you both befor I go. I am die fast." 

I hasten to do hi bidding, but befor I reach miss ottley' side 
I wa arrest by a loud thud crash. turn swiftly, I saw that 
bellevil had overturn the jar. it content had alreadi flood the 
floor. He hover over with a light vesta in one of hi black hands. 

"what are you doing?" I demanded. 

He stoop floorward with the match and instantli a mighti flame shot 
up that lick the veri roof. "revenge!" he shrieked. "revenge! i'v 
fool you, pinsent, fool you. now we all shall die together. look!" 
with that, he steep both hand in the burn fluid and, flit 
like a salamand through the flames, he made for the sarcophagus. 
I could not have stay him had I wished, for there wa a sea of 
fire between us. but in good truth I wa too daze for the while, at 
least, to move a muscle. reach the great lead tomb, the dread 
flame object that had onc been bellevil thrust hi lambent hand 
into the coffin. there follow an explos of appal fury. A 
mass of brilliant, white, combust shot up with a mighti roar from 
the sarcophagu to the ceiling. It pierc the pad line like a 
thunderbolt and flash into the room above. but on it impact with 
the ceil it also splash a rain of fire about the great laboratory. 
In two second the whole place ran with flames. By a miracl I wa not 
touched. but it wa not so with miss ottley. her skirt wa ablaze. 
I rush forward and tore the thing off in strip befor it burnt 
her--then seiz her in my arms, I made like a madman to the door. A 
hideou burn object lay befor it shriek sulphur curses. It 
wa belleville. but he had come to the end of hi strength and he could 
not stay me. the catch yield to my hand and I dash into the passag 
half blind with fire and smoke, but safe. I did not rest until I 
had reach the staircase. miss ottley wa then awake. she struggl 
in my arms, so I set her down and face her. but she did not see me. 
her dress wa smoulder in places. she seem utterli bewildered. 
A woman ran up to her and began to put out the burn patch with 
her hands. the hous wa in an uproar. servants--they were all either 
arab or nubians--ran hither and thither shout and scream in a 
panic. the woman, evid a nurse, who attend to miss ottley, wa 
the onli white person to be seen. she wa evid terrified, but 
she did not lose her head. she kept ask miss ottley in french to 
explain what had happened. nobodi seem awar that the hous wa on 
fire. they had all been mere alarm by the nois they had heard. 
miss ottley in the middl of it all began to weep. she wa thoroughli 
upset and ill, and I perceiv at onc that she wa on the verg of a 
mental and physic collapse. In the circumstances, I judg it best to 
remain a silent onlook of event and not to take ani action unless 
there aros a real necessity. It wa plain that I wa still invisible. 
and as for the hous be on fire, I deem it utterli desir that 
it should burn down to the last shave and thu fittingli entomb 
in it destruct the ghastli tragedi of the laboratory. the issu 
talli larg with my wishes. the fire wa seen first from the 
street. there follow a verit pandemonium. the colour servant 
fled like coward for their lives, and in an incred short space 
of time the hous wa in the hand of firemen and police. miss ottley 
wa taken by the nurs out into the street and there question by a 
sergeant. but she wa quit unabl to answer hi insist queri 
satisfactorily. all she could say wa that she had been a long time 
ill. she had faint in her room that afternoon, and dr. bellevil 
or someon had carri her to the laboratory. when she woke up she 
had heard a fright noise. she suppos it wa one of the doctor' 
experiments. she thought she had faint again, but she rememb 
noth more until she found herself with her dress on fire at the foot 
of the staircase. she could not explain how she got there. the sergeant 
wa civil enough to her, but the fool, in hi fussi officiousness, 
overlook her weak condition, and the girl broke down and utterli 
collaps befor he realis hi quit unnecessari cruelty. the worst 
of it wa that the french nurs had disappear dure the colloquy. 
there was, therefore, no woman at hand to attend to my poor sweetheart. 
fortunately, however, a physician appear opportun on the scene, 
and at hi direct she wa immedi convey to a hospital. after 
she had gone, I did not tarri veri long. choos a place where the 
cordon crowd wa thinnest, I slip back through the park railings, 
over which I climb and drop into the park, feel the weight 
of my invis acutely. from thi vantag point I watch the 
conflagr for a while. the hous wa manifestli doomed. indeed, 
the effort of the firemen were entir direct to save adjoin 
buildings. A hundr jet of water play upon the wall of these in 
thin continu streams. men about me were talk the matter over as 
if it person appeal to them. they mostli view it with a sort of 
half-secret satisfaction. the misfortun of millionair do not excit 
much sympathi in the heart of the mob. 

one man glibli quoted, "lay not up unto yourselv treasur in thi 
world!" on the occas of a grimi fireman bring out a magnific 
but half-destroy silver-fram canva of velasquez. but the crowd 
cheer the fireman for hi pluck all the same. At length I realis 
that I wa veri tired, and hungry, too, so I slunk off and made my way 
to dixon hubbard' rooms. they were locked, of course, and I had not 
the key. I had left it with the porter of the building. but I could not 
go to him and ask him to give it up to an appar fleshless voice. 
wonder what to do, I crept into the passage, sat down in a corner 
underneath the stair and wait for an inspiration. wait there, I 
fell asleep. 




chapter xxx 

the last 


I awok in the grey light of dawn, stiff with cold and ach in everi 
limb. arising, I left my hiding-plac and went into the vestibule. the 
night porter sat on a stool in hi littl offic toast hi toe 
befor the stove and read one of the morn papers. I step 
up to the door at once. hear my footsteps, he look around. 
"good-morning, michael," I said, as well as my chatter teeth would 
let me. "do you want all that fire?" I had forgotten that I wa 
complet invisible. the fellow sprang to hi feet with a start and 
stare at me aghast. "what' the matter with you?" I demanded, testily. 

"'ere--y keep off. i'v done noth to 'arm you!" he whined, and 
he back befor my advanc against the wall of the office, the veri 
pictur of abject terror. hi appear recal me to my senses. but 
it wa too late to cri over spilt milk. I thought it better to make a 
confid of the man if he would let me. 

"don't be frightened, michael; there is no need. i'm not a ghost, feel 
my hands!" I said. 

but panic seiz the fellow. He utter a wild shriek and fled for 
hi life into the passage. I could hardli help laughing, but I saw a 
chanc in the contretemp to end my immedi difficulty--so I went 
straight to the desk, and fortun found it open. In hubbard' 
pigeon-hol wa the key I wanted. I took it out, caught up a _times_ 
and hurri up the stairs. In anoth moment I wa safe in hubbard' 
room with the door lock against intrusion. My first care wa to set 
the asbesto ablaz and warm myself. then I open the paper and found 
at onc the news I sought under great cross headlin in the main 
sheet. miss ottley' hous had been complet gut by fire. some of 
the wall still stood, but with the except of a few pictures, the 
whole of the valuabl art furnitur and the late sir robert ottley' 
splendid collect of egyptian coins, manuscript and curio had 
been destroyed. It wa suppos that dr. bellevil had perish in 
the flames, but no sign of hi remain had been discovered. the fire, 
as far as it wa possibl to ascertain, had arisen from an accid 
due to the unsuccess conduct of a chemic experiment. It wa well 
known in scientif circles, said the journal, that the doctor had been 
engag in a seri of experiments, the object of which had been kept 
a close secret, but a citi firm of manufactur chemist had recent 
suppli him with larg quantiti of a certain highli inflamm 
liquid compound possess radio activ which had been prepar at 
enorm cost, under hi directions. the manag of the firm, on be 
interviewed, state that in hi opinion, thi compound wa princip 
respons for the tragic disaster. there wa alway a danger in 
handl it of spontan combustion, it appeared, and if it onc took 
fire, by no mean could it be extinguish except by the shut off 
of all suppli of oxygen. fail this, it would burn to the last with 
the most explos energy. accord to miss ottley' statement, when 
first interrog by an offic from scotland yard, she had been in 
the laboratori with dr. bellevil at the time of the catastrophe. she 
had late been veri ill and it seem she had fainted. It wa extrem 
probabl that the doctor, in hi anxieti to reviv her, had neglect 
hi usual caution and had done some careless thing which had led to 
hi destruction. probabl he had been kill outright by the first 
explosion. It was, however, a matter of gener relief that miss ottley 
had manag to escape, and that there had been no further sacrific of 
life. everyon would sympathis with the unfortun young ladi in her 
sad position. onli a few week ago the gallant young offic to whom 
she had been engag to be married, had come to an untim end in a 
railway accid on the veri eve of hi wed day. then, a littl 
later, the dark angel had depriv her of a love and belov father, 
the great millionair archæologist, whose recent oper on 'chang 
had startl the world, and made of him the richest man in the unit 
kingdom. and now, she had lost by death the kind and learn guardian 
to whom her late father had entrust her futur and the manag 
of her enorm fortune. nobodi would be surpris to learn that 
thi great accumul of calam had reduc the fate-stricken 
young ladi to a state of utter physic prostration. she had been 
taken yesterday evening, after her rescu from the burn mansion, 
to the albert hospital, but she had subsequ been remov to the 
walsingham hotel, where the manag had place a suit of room 
at her disposal. she wa there be treat under the care of drs. 
fiaschi and mason, the well-known heart and nerv specialists. these 
gentlemen express themselv hope of her ultim recovery, but they 
do not conceal the fact that she is at present in a veri low condition, 
and it is signific that the road in front of the hotel was, in the 
small hour of the morning, thickli overspread with tan. 

thi last paragraph, as may easili be conceived, fill me with 
anxiety. I resolv to go at onc to the walsingham hotel and find out 
exactli how she wa for myself. but, fortunately, in move toward the 
door to put my purpos into execution, I had to pass the mirror-back 
door of a cloth press. I did not pass it then. I stopped, spellbound. 
I wa no longer invisible. that is to say, my face and hand were 
not--although my bodi was. the mirror show me a head float 
appar in mid-air and a pair of hand hang mysteri from 
nothing. My eye were curious goggl with a thin, gelatinous-lik 
film, with a glassi surfac that wa bound about my head. thi I 
tore off forthwith and curious examined. It wa actual compos 
of gelatine. toss it aside, I ran my finger over my cloth and 
discovered, from the sens of touch, that I wa clad to the neck in one 
unbroken combin suit of rubber overalls, which includ footgear. 
I soon made out the secret of it fastening, and tear it open, I 
step forth into the light of day and perfect visibility, to find 
that I still had on all the cloth I had worn when dr. bellevil 
trap me, except my boots. the overalls, however, remain visible, 
or rather partial so, for their inner surfac view from the open 
wa discernible. I put them care asid for futur investig 
and proceed to make a toilet. My first care wa a hot bath. the hall 
porter, whom I had frighten so desper a littl while before, 
answer my ring. He wa astound to see me, but I did not choos to 
make him ani explanations, and he wa too overcom to ask me for any. 
A littl later I wa luxuri in a steam bath, which remov the 
last vestig of my parisian disguise. most of the paint, however, had 
worn off before, so it wa the easier to becom myself again. but not 
quit my old, familiar self. My experi had perman age me. 
there were line upon my face that I wa stranger to, and with which I 
made reluct acquaintance. and my hair wa liber streak with 
grey. I had put on ten years, at least. I felt old, too, that wa the 
worst of it--old, ill and thick-blood and infinit world-weary. 
I felt a hunger for the desert and big open spaces; a need to hasten 
from the grinding, selfish life of cities, with their secret crime 
and gild vice and dull-herd grope after sordid happiness. but 
I did not wish to go alone. At a littl after eight o'clock I enter 
the walsingham and demand to see miss ottley' head nurse. she wa 
at breakfast, but the waiter told me that miss ottley had spent a good 
night and wa still asleep, so I wa content to wait. afterwards, I had 
to lie to the nurs in order to be permit to see the invalid. I told 
her that I wa miss ottley' nearest live relative, and I suppress 
the fact of my medic qualifications. the woman, otherwise, would 
have refer me to the physicians, who had employ her, and I should 
have been put off for hours. As it was, it requir all my power of 
persuas to induc her to admit me to the sick room. but I prevail 
on her at last, with a show of stern authority, and a curt intim 
that her posit depend on my complaisance. the falsehood is not 
one that I feel ani shame at, for I knew what an effect my appear 
would make in the patient, and I wa determined, at all costs, to be 
with her at the moment of her waking. I shall pass over the preliminari 
period that I spent besid her bed. It is too full of sorrow to recal 
with anyth but misery. the poor girl wa as frail and wan as ani 
spirit. they had cut off all her gloriou hair, and the hand I kissed, 
which lay so weakli on the coverlid, wa whiter than a snowflake, and 
almost as destitut of vigour. she slept as gentli as a weari babe, and 
it wa hard at first to believ thoroughli she lived. but at length she 
sigh and her great eye slowli open and look up questioningli 
into mine. she thought that she wa dead and that my ghost had sought 
her out. "hugh!" she whispered, and a soft smile light her face and 
made it infinit lovely, though so wan. "I knew that I should find 
you, dear," she sighed. "and so I could not help but pray to die. will 
god punish us for that?" 

but I kiss her on the lips--th first long kiss of love that I had 
known--or she--and she came back warm with quicken hope and will to 
live within my arms. and all wa well with us. 

there is littl more to tell. As soon as she wa strong again we 
marri quietly, and now we live in a place where crowd citi are 
unknown--far from old england' shores. I never again saw belleville' 
arab servant, who so marvel resembl the old high priest of 
amen-ra; nor hi companion, the nubian, uromi. they disappear 
after the fire, and not all the effort of the polic could trace 
their hiding-place. the invis suit of overal is still in my 
possession--but it had lost it old mysteri properties, and although 
I expend month of patient labour to explor it secret, it wa all 
in vain. To thi day I cannot tell who releas me from the chair in 
which bellevil had bound me in the murderer' laboratory. and I 
am still unabl to explain the mani other littl mysteri that so 
involv us in the period of our content with the wretch, the fatal 
termin of whose wick scheme I have set forth in these pages. 
the greater part of sir robert ottley' fortun ha been given to the 
poor. the rest we settl on my wife' sole live blood relation, 
the old bed-ridden aunt, whom she ha never seen. We both felt that 
we should be do well to dispos of rich that--to an extent, at 
least--must have been acquir by art of sinist significance. still, 
we have never wanted, and we are not like to. My profess yield 
us a comfort live in these grand but spars settl wilds. 
and, although we sometim think regret upon the delight we onc 
experienc in search out the letter past of long-dead centuries, 
we have other interest now to fill our live and banish vain regrets. 
We have our grow children to attend to and provid for. We are 
of real servic to the peopl who surround us, for my wife is the 
schoolmistress of the district, and I am the onli surgeon in a radiu 
of one hundr miles. then, we have our book and our long even 
togeth in the splendid twilight of the endless plains. We have given 
up the past for the future. and we are happi in our labour and our love. 


the end 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the live mummy, by ambros pratt 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the live mummi *** 

***** thi file should be name 58944-8.txt or 58944-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/9/4/58944/ 

produc by mari glenn krause, martin pettit and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi 
file wa produc from imag gener made avail 
by the internet archive/american libraries.) 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org/licens 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
