the project gutenberg ebook of the monster, by S. M. tenneshaw 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the monster 

author: S. M. tenneshaw 

releas date: march 25, 2008 [ebook #24913] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the monster *** 




produc by greg weeks, stephen blundel and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









the monster 

By S. M. tenneshaw 


what will cosmic ray do to a live organism? 
will they destroy life, or produc immortality? 
the emin dr. blair gaddon thought he knew ... 

prefac 
fred trent pull hi coup into the curb and lean hi head out the 
open window besid him. 

"hi, joan, need ani help?" 

He call to a trim-look girl in a nurse' uniform. joan drake wa 
hold on to a leash with both hands, and her slender bodi wa tug 
against the leash as she strain against the pull of a great dane on 
the other end. 

she look over her shoulder as trent call out, her blond hair 
glint in the warm afternoon sunlight. blue eye smile an impish 
greet at him. 

"hello, fred. No thanks. brutu and I get along famously." 

trent open the car door and got out. He walk up the sidewalk and 
stood besid the girl. 

[illustration: they watch as white-hot flame shot from the base of 
the cradl rocket. there wa a tremend roaring, and then the rocket 
slowli lift upward.] 

"busi must be mighti slack for the great gland specialist, stanley 
fenwick. Is thi all he can find for hi pretti nurs to do?" 

the girl sniffed. "walk brutu around ha it compensations. At least 
he doesn't get fresh--lik some peopl I know." 

fred grin as he saw the huge dog suddenli turn on it leash and rais 
itself off the ground to stick out a long rapier-lik tongu and lick 
the girl' cheek befor she could move her head away. 

"down, brutus! down!" she call out, half-laughing. 

trent step in and pull the big anim away from the girl, pat 
the dog' head as he did so. 

"what wa that you said about get fresh?" trent ask her. "look to 
me like the dog' life is the best around the fenwick offices." 

"just don't get ani ideas!" joan drake shot back. 

"i'v alreadi got them," he replied. "which remind me, am I see you 
tonight?" 

the girl held a tight grip on the leash and look at him coyly. 

"let' see. we'll take in a movie, stop for a bite to eat at joe' 
hamburg palace, and then drive out to north butte. you'll park the car 
and then you'll ask me when i'm go to quit my job and settl down 
rais a famili for you, and i'll say--" 

"you'll say not until I get the biggest scoop in arizona, a big raise, 
and a bonu as a down payment on a house," he complet her sentence. 

"there! you see? We might just as well not have our date. In effect, 
we'v had it already." 

He look at her for a long moment, and when he spoke again hi voic 
had lost it humor note. 

"you forgot one veri import item. when I ask you that usual question, 
and after you give your usual answer, i'll take you in my arm and tell 
you how much you mean to me, and--" 

"you win," she interrupt him. "I had forgotten about that." 

* * * * * 

the dog start to pull against the leash again and fred reach out to 
help her hold the big anim in check. then she look at him again. 

"what bring you to the outskirt of tucson? don't tell me there' a big 
stori break on the edg of town." 

He shook hi head. "not exactly. i'm on my way to the rocket research 
prove grounds. just a routin stori on the experi they'r go to 
pull off thi evening. i'v got to interview mathieson, gaddon, and a 
few other scientist on the project." 

the girl laughed. "that' someth of a coincidence. dr. blair gaddon 
is in dr. fenwick' offic right now." 

fred trent' eyebrow rais in surprise. 

"that so? someth wrong with him?" 

"no. he' just have a physic checkup. seem to be worri about hi 
heart. dr. fenwick didn't need me sinc it' a routin job, so I took 
brutu for a walk." 

trent nodded. "that' a bit of luck. I think i'll stick around and give 
gaddon a lift out to the prove grounds. I want to talk to him 
anyway." 

"in that case," the girl replied, "you can give me a hand put brutu 
back in hi kennel. onc he get out he' someth of a problem." 

fred nodded, take the leash from her hand and feel the big dog tug 
against him. 

"never could figur out whi fenwick want a big hound like this. seem 
to me a terrier would be more practical." 

"that' a matter of taste," joan answered. "dr. fenwick is veri fond of 
brutus--and so am I for that matter. but tell me someth about thi 
experi you'r covering." 

they had turn in at a larg spanish type hous that trent knew serv 
as a combin live quarter and offic for the famou gland 
specialist. He shrugged. 

"don't know much about it myself. they'r shoot off thi new type 
rocket, a realli big affair, load with all sort of instruments. some 
sort of experi with cosmic rays. the rocket will go up to the outer 
layer of the earth' atmosphere, where a clock mechan will releas 
a parachute-attach section contain the instruments. thi will float 
back to the surfac of the earth. 

"there is one interest thing about it though. they'r also includ 
a live anim with the instruments. A cat I believe. they want to see 
what effect the cosmic ray will have on a live creature." 

the girl turn a shock face toward him as they walk up the step to 
the front door of the house. trent could see a panel in the center of 
the door that open from the inside, and over it, the sign, _doctor is 
in, pleas ring_. 

"but I think that' posit cruel!" joan drake said earnestly. 
"subject an innoc anim to what may be certain death!" 

fred laugh at her concern. "hold on, now. you should be the last one 
to take such an attitude. doesn't medic scienc experi on anim 
to find out about human ailments?" 

"that' different," the girl insisted, open the door and lead the 
way into a long hall. "doctor know what they are doing--but thi is a 
sheer wast of life ..." 

* * * * * 

trent let the dog pull him down the hall toward a door at the end which 
he knew open on the backyard where the great dane wa kept. 

"seem to me it' much the same thing," he answer her. "scientist 
want to explor the mysteri of space, and the onli way to do it is 
with an animal. Or would you like to make the trip--mayb I can arrang 
it? would make a big story, just the one i'v been wait for." 

"I believ you would at that!" she mocked, open the rear door. 
"here, give me the leash." 

trent hand over the leash to her and watch as she releas the huge 
dog. brutu flick out a long tongu onc again and caught the girl' 
cheek in a wet caress befor she straightened. 

"brutus! now get along with you!" 

the dog took a leisur bound through the door and into the backyard. 
trent glanc through the door at the tall fenced-in yard with the larg 
kennel that might well have serv as a small garage. He stood besid 
the girl watch the big anim romp for a few moments, then she shut 
the door and they turn back down the hall. 

"i'll have to go insid now, fred," she said. "if you want to wait for 
gaddon, have a seat. It shouldn't be long." 

she start to turn in at a door mark private, when fred pull her 
gentli around and befor she could stop him, had kiss her. 

"I wa get mighti jealou of brutus. now I feel better." 

"I don't know which of you I prefer," she shot back, then smile and 
pull away from him. 

He watch her open the offic door and close it after her. 

* * * * * 

He had lit hi second cigarett and gotten halfway through hi third 
magazin on the rack besid the chair when the offic door open again. 
He heard the pleasant voic of dr. stanley fenwick. 

"if everi man had a heart as strong as yours, blair, we wouldn't need 
half the doctor we have." 

then he heard the deep, gruff voic of dr. blair gaddon half laugh. 

"thank a lot, fenwick. you'v taken a load off my mind. goodbye, miss 
drake." 

He heard joan repli and then saw dr. fenwick usher the physicist out 
into the hall. 

trent rose as the two men approached. 

"why, hello, trent," dr. fenwick said. 

trent nod at the tall, white-co figur of the famou gland 
specialist. 

"afternoon, doctor." 

fenwick smile at him. "don't tell me you'r wait to see me?" 

fred shook hi head. "not exactly. I wa wait to see dr. gaddon 
though. I wa on my way out to the prove ground and I happen to 
stop by and talk to miss drake." He turn to the physicist, a bulki man 
with firm, hard features, who move hi larg bodi with an almost 
cat-lik grace. 

"I hope you don't mind, dr. gaddon. possibl I can give you a lift back 
out to the base. i'm cover the launch for my paper." 

gaddon smile at him. "but of cours I don't mind. and i'll take you up 
on that offer. it'll save me a trip back to town to take one of the 
staff cars." 

* * * * * 

the word had a friendli note to them, as did the smile on gaddon' 
face. and yet, somehow, fred trent found that he did not like thi man. 
It wa noth he could put hi finger on, noth he could rationalize, 
unless it wa the coldli calcul look in the scientist' eyes. 

"that' fine, doctor," trent replied. "shall we go?" 

He turn and said good-by to fenwick and pass a smile glanc at 
the girl. He could see her blush slightli as fenwick caught the glanc 
and laughed. then they were out of the hous and trent led the way to 
hi car. 

inside, he start the motor and drove away. besid him, gaddon lit a 
cigar and blew a long plume of smoke through the open window. 

"you said you want to talk to me, trent?" 

fred nodded. "that' right, doctor. i'm write up the rocket experi 
for my paper, and I thought mayb you could give me a few detail of 
interest." He paus for a moment, then asked: "would it be too person 
to ask if your visit to dr. fenwick had anyth to do with the come 
experiment?" 

gaddon shot a quick glanc at him. 

"whi do you ask that?" 

fred trent shrugged. "it wa just a thought. I heard dr. fenwick talk 
about your heart, but you look pretti healthi to me, so I thought mayb 
it wa becaus fenwick is a gland specialist and you might be talk to 
him about examin the cat after the rocket return ..." 

gaddon laugh roughly. "A mighti clever reasoning, trent, but not quit 
correct. the fact is, I wa see the doctor for person reasons. just 
a physic checkup. It had noth to do with the rocket experi or 
the effect of the cosmic ray on the anim we'r includ in the 
experiment." 

"it wa just a thought, doctor," trent replied, as he move the coup 
out on the open highway away from tucson and toward the rocket prove 
ground on the desert flat in the distance. 

"so now that we'v dispos of that, what els would you like to know?" 
gaddon ask him, a peculiar edg to hi voic that trent did not miss. 

"well, I would like to get a first hand bit of inform on just 
exactli what you plan to prove with thi experiment. If i'm correct, dr. 
mathieson, the head of the project, contend that cosmic ray may be 
lethal, and thi experi is to prove hi point." 

the physicist snorted. "it is no secret that mathieson and myself 
disagre violent on that subject." 

trent' eyebrow raised. "i that so? I wasn't awar of it?" 

gaddon paused, see that hi word had slip out too freely. final 
he said, "what I meant to say, trent, is that up until now it ha not 
been a public issu of disagreement. and I would prefer to have it 
remain a privat matter until after the experiment." 

"I see," trent mused. "you have my word that I won't print anyth you 
say without your permission. but just what is the differ of opinion 
between you and mathieson?" 

gaddon took a long pull at hi cigar and wait a few moment befor 
replying. It wa appar to trent that he wa debat continu the 
subject with a newspaperman. but trent had gaug the man correctly. 
there wa a flair of vaniti in gaddon that date back to hi english 
ancestry. trent rememb that gaddon, quit a figur in english 
scientif circles, had creat a stir when he had come over to the 
unit state to assist in rocket research at the arizona prove 
grounds. It seem that gaddon had not want to take a back seat to the 
fame american scientist, mathieson. It had made a few gossip column in 
the newspap befor washington put an offici clamp on the matter. 

* * * * * 

now, as trent wait for the englishman to reply, he could almost sens 
the thought that were go through gaddon' mind. the englishman wa 
debat whether to take an open stand against the viewpoint of hi 
american colleague. but trent felt that the british stubborn in the 
man would make him reveal hi own theories. especi sinc trent had 
alreadi promis not to print anyth without gaddon' permission. that 
would give him an opportun to gloat safely, should hi own idea be 
proven correct. 

"veri well, trent, i'll take you at your profession word to keep thi 
matter confidential. but if what I contend is correct, you'll have a big 
stori to tell." 

trent wait expectantly, not want to break the englishman' train of 
thought. 

"the fact is, trent, that mathieson is all wrong. To go even further, 
most of your american scientist don't have the haziest idea of exactli 
what the cosmic ray are. We in britain have made quit exhaust 
studi of the phenomena." 

trent didn't bother to argu with him. He onli nod hi head. It would 
have been silly, he knew, to contradict gaddon, to tell him that the 
english didn't know a thing more about the cosmic ray than the american 
scientists, that american scienc had made, and wa continu making, 
exhaust research into that scientif field of studi on as great if 
not more so a scale than britain could possibl achieve. It wa onli 
gaddon' vaniti talking, trent knew, so he let him put in the barb of 
ridicule, waiting. 

"I wa sent over here, as you may know, to aid in the current 
experiment. To formul it as a matter of fact. thi test is be 
conduct to determin just what effect cosmic ray will have on a 
live organism. As I said, mathieson, and your other scientist are of 
the opinion that the ray are lethal. that they will destroy life. In 
effect, that they are death rays. 

"but I contend that they are wrong. what would you say if I told you 
that cosmic ray are the veri sourc of life and energi in the 
universe?" 

trent whistl judiciously, and note that gaddon' face smile at the 
appar surpris trent evinced. 

"you find that a startl statement?" 

trent nodded. "i'd say that it sound like the begin of a veri 
interest theory." 

"and you would be right," gaddon replied, warm to hi subject. "it is 
my content that the cosmic ray will prove to be the fountain of 
youth that men have sought through the ages. that they will react on the 
gland of a live creatur and produc immortality. 

"now take your choice. whose theori would you rather believe? 
mathieson' idiot claim of a death ray, or mine as a sourc of the 
utmost benefit to science?" 

trent took a moment befor replying. when he did so, he spoke with tact, 
and also with the feel that hi trip to fenwick' offic had proven 
veri valuable. for there wa a stori here. A big story. 

"i'd say, doctor, that i'd like to believ your theori wa correct. but 
isn't it a littl prematur to be so definit about it?" 

gaddon snorted. "no more prematur than mathieson's. and i'll tell you 
someth else, trent. you may not realiz it, but you'r about to take 
part in what may be the biggest stori of the century. and when it 
breaks, you'll rememb our convers here. I intend to prove that 
your american scientist are wrong." 

trent notic the person emphasi that gaddon put in hi last 
statement, but he wa drawn away from the convers as he turn the 
coup into the guard entranc to the prove grounds. 

there wa a moment of credenti flash to the guards, and a 
respect salut to the scientist in the car besid trent. then trent 
move hi coup through the entranc and up the cement roadway to the 
administr building. 

As gaddon got out of the car he turn to trent. 

"i'll leav you here. the member of the press will be conduct to the 
launch site at dusk. i'll see you then. In the meantime, don't forget 
that you'v given your word not to releas ani of the inform i'v 
given you." 

trent nod and watch him walk away. He follow the englishman with 
hi eyes, a frown cross hi face. there wa someth too cocksur 
about the man. hi ridicul of american scientist could be ignored, but 
the way he spoke about hi theory, as if it had alreadi been a proven 
fact against the idea of mathieson.... 

A faint chill ran up fred trent' back. He couldn't explain it. but it 
wa there. An omin note of foreboding. 

He shrug it off and left hi car to walk toward the administr 
building. 

* * * * * 

the remain hour of the afternoon drag by in a monotoni of idl 
speculation. trent listen to the gather newspapermen discuss the 
come experi at dusk, accompani them as dr. mathieson, the head 
of the project, conduct them on a tour of the project, to the 
launch site, and then back to the central building. 

the launch site itself had been an impress sight. the huge 
rockets, much in appear like the fame V2 of world war ii, but on a 
much larger scale, were cradl in their launch platform like some 
huge monster about to be unleash into the unsuspect heavens. 

they had listen as mathieson explain the variou number of 
instrument that were be includ in the first rocket, to record it 
hurtl trip through the atmospher to the outermost layer of the 
earth' surface. 

and they had been told of the other, and to the gather newspapermen, 
the most interest part, the inclus of a cat in the rocket, in a 
larg oxygen-f chamber, to studi the effect of the cosmic ray on a 
live creature. 

then back to the central building. back to wait. and the tension began 
to mount. for the shadow were lengthening, the sun sink behind the 
horizon to the west. the moment wa now close at hand. 

* * * * * 

A stocki figur detach itself from the shadow besid the huge bulk of 
the laboratori build and slowli edg out into the dusk. 

It paus momentarily, to survey the scene. sharp eye scan the 
loom rocket and their launch platforms, watchful, alert. they 
final settl upon the arm guard who walk a measur distanc back 
and forth in front of the rockets. then the figur move forward again, 
cautiously, purposefully. 

the distanc from the giant rocket shorten gradually, and then the 
guard, turn to retrac hi steps, saw the approach figure. 

there wa a snap sound as a rifl wa brought into position, and a 
rap command bark out. 

"halt! who goe there?" 

the shadowi figur halt abruptli a short distanc away from the guard. 
and a voic answered. 

"dr. blair gaddon." 

the guard' rifl snap into present arm and then back to the 
soldier' right shoulder. 

"oh, it' you, sir. Is there anyth wrong? the launch is set for 
fifteen minut from now, isn't it?" 

gaddon walk slowli up to the soldier and the guard could then see hi 
face in the thicken shadows. 

"that' right," gaddon replied. "i'm make a last minut inspection." 

the guard nodded. "dr. mathieson and the newspapermen will be along ani 
minute, sir?" 

gaddon move closer to the soldier, and then suddenli hi hand came out 
of hi coat pocket and there wa a gun in it. 

"drop your rifle, soldier. quick!" 

the guard stare at the scientist in shock astonishment. 

"what is this, sir? A gag?" 

gaddon motion with hi gun. 

"it is no gag! Do as I say--or must I shoot?" 

* * * * * 

there wa an omin note in gaddon' voice. and a strain qualiti to 
it that told the guard the man meant what he said. veri slowli the 
soldier remov the rifl from hi shoulder and drop it to the 
ground. 

gaddon motion with hi gun. 

"now step back! move!" 

the guard move slowli back a pace, and then the englishman step 
forward and kick the rifl away from the man. then he motion around 
the rocket. 

"now move over around the side of the number one rocket to the far side 
of number two." 

He watch as the guard turn and began to walk slowli around the huge 
base of the wait rocket. He follow the soldier. 

"I don't know what thi is all about, dr. gaddon," the guard protested. 
"but I can tell you one thing, you'r play with the unit state 
govern right now. when dr. mathieson hear about this--" 

"when dr. mathieson hear about this, soldier, i'll be a long way from 
here--out at the edg of space itself!" 

gaddon could hear the guard draw in hi breath sharply, but the man kept 
walk around to the far side of the second rocket cradle. 

"you can't mean that you'r go to go up--" 

the soldier' voic broke off uncertainli and gaddon laugh shortly. 

"you are a discern man, soldier. that is exactli what I intend to do. 
and I warn you, don't make a fals move or i'll shoot. My plan are made 
and I intend to carri them out!" 

they had reach the far side of the second rocket now, away from view 
of the rest of the buildings, out of sight. away in the distanc the 
faint outlin of the great wire fenc circl the test ground 
could be seen, and beyond that, the twinkl light of tucson, alreadi 
visibl in the dusk. 

"thi is far enough," gaddon said suddenly. 

He watch as the soldier halted. then gaddon move up quickli behind 
the man. befor the soldier sens what wa about to occur, gaddon' 
hand rais over hi head and the butt of the weapon in hi hand crash 
against the back of the man' head. 

there wa a soft groan in the shadow as the soldier crumpl limpli to 
the ground. In the silenc that followed, gaddon' tens breath wa 
the onli sound. He look down at the still bodi of the unconsci man, 
then he quickli turn and retrac hi footstep back the way he had 
come. 

when he had reach the far side of the first rocket, he stop befor 
the metal step of the cradl lead up to the close door of the 
rocket. He look quickli about him, make sure that nobodi wa in 
close proximity, then he threw hi gun under the rocket besid the rifl 
of the soldier, and ran up the steps. 

A cool breez sprang up in the western night and whisper softli around 
gaddon as he fumbl for a moment with a switch set in the smooth side 
of the rocket besid the seal door. 

there wa a click, finally, and the door slid open. 

gaddon took a last look about him and then quietli slip through the 
opening. A moment later there wa the sound of the door slide shut. 

insid the rocket, gaddon lit a small pocket flash and look around 
him. A soft sound struck hi ears. the mew sound of a cat. He turn 
the flash on the startl anim and a low laughter crept from hi 
throat. 

He move through the larg instrument chamber then and sat on the floor 
besid the cat. 

then the flash went out and hi laughter came again ... 

* * * * * 

"all right, gentlemen, the time ha come. In a few minut an automat 
control, synchron with control in the rocket will be set off in the 
main laboratori building. If we want to watch the launch we'll have 
to hurry." 

fred trent listen to the voic of mathieson, and saw the fame 
american scientist start out of the central lobbi toward the launch 
site. the gather newspapermen followed, their voic fill with 
excit now that the moment had come. 

trent follow along with them, but felt a peculiar tens within 
him. He had been watch for gaddon to make hi appearance. but as yet 
the englishman had not show up. wa it possibl that he wasn't go 
to watch the rocket launching? As trent follow the other out into the 
gather night, he frown to himself. It wa certainli strange. and 
entir unlik the bluster manner gaddon had display on the drive 
back from tucson. Or had the man suddenli realiz that he had made a 
fool of himself and wa take thi easi way out? 

but that too didn't seem natural. and trent found himself edg 
forward through the rank of the newsmen, until he had reach the side 
of mathieson. 

the scientist wa talk to one of the journalist as they round the 
corner of the administr building. now the rocket were in sight, 
stand tall and immens in the shadows. 

mathieson held hi hand up in a gestur of halt, and the men behind him 
drew into a compact circle. 

fred turn to mathieson. 

"dr. mathieson, isn't dr. gaddon go to be here for the launching?" 

the head of the rocket project turn to trent. fred could see a 
suddenli puzzl look in hi eyes. 

"yes, that is strang ..." then he laughed. "I suppos gaddon is in the 
laboratori supervis the fire controls. well, if he want to miss 
the show, that' hi fault. He know the schedule." 

trent accept the scientist' word without replying. but he still 
wasn't satisfied. what wa it that gaddon had said in the car about the 
biggest stori of the year? what had the man meant? question after 
question aros in trent' mind as he stood there, and alway the queer 
feel insid him grew in intensity. He could not place hi finger on 
it, but somehow, he knew that someth wa wrong. 

but then hi suspicion were put asid for the moment as he heard 
mathieson say: 

"all right, gentlemen, the time is nearli here. In precis one minut 
the rocket will be fired." 

the statement wa made with a quiet eagerness, and then suddenli the 
gather wit grew silent. 

trent' eyes, along with the others, fasten on the loom bulk of the 
wait rocket. 

and the second tick off in fred' mind. 

As he count them, he thought that it seem imposs that within a 
veri few moment that gigant hulk of smooth, taper metal would 
dislodg itself from the cradl it rest in with a burst of roar 
flame. that in anoth few second it would shoot into the blacken 
sky, and in a few short minut would reach unbeliev height in the 
heavens, to the edg of space itself befor the automat control 
releas the instrument section to be return safe to earth. 

and the second passed. 

"time!" 

trent heard the voic of mathieson rap the word out sharply. 

and then there wa a roar of sound from the cradl rocket. 

A spear of flame shot from it base, explod the night into a 
brilliant display of pyrotechnics. 

* * * * * 

the roar grew louder as the tremend power of the now unleash 
rocket took hold of the night air. fred watch as the flame grew 
white-hot bright, and then he saw the gigant rocket shudder in it 
cradle. 

the shudder grew into a spasm of movement, and then slowly, but steadili 
grow faster, the rocket lift from it cradle. 

fred' eye were fasten on the rocket now, a feel of awe sweep 
through him. He suddenli realiz how puni man wa against the forc 
man could unleash. forc that here were be util to scientif 
ends, but forc that upon a moment' notice, could in turn be unleash 
upon the rest of human in a burning, devast terror of death. 

and as the thought flit across hi mind, he saw the rocket gather 
speed as it left it cradle. It wa now rise in a swift, sure arc, 
lash into the dark sky like a fury. 

and then the terribl speed of the rocket took hold against the forc 
of graviti and it shot into the heavens, it roar becom a fade 
hiss of sound, the brilliant flash of flame from it explod tubes, a 
reced beacon of light that gradual fade to a pinpoint far over 
their heads. 

after the terrif thunder of sound that had accompani the launch 
of the rocket, the sudden silenc now wa almost palpable. the gather 
wit stood mutely, awe still in their eyes, their ear still 
ring with the sound of the takeoff. 

final the voic of mathieson broke the quiet night air. 

"well, gentlemen, that' it. tomorrow morn we'll scout the return 
section. It should land somewher in the open countri to the south. 
we'v comput that pretti carefully. I guess that' about all for--" 

hi voic broke off suddenli and fred trent heard what must have 
distract the scientist. 

A man wa shout from the vicin of the second rocket, and as they 
looked, a dim figur could be seen stagger away from the side of the 
other rocket, come slowli toward them. 

"good lord!" mathieson breathed. "what' that man do out there? He 
could have been killed!" 

then suddenli they saw the stagger figur stumbl on the ground. 

and then trent and the other were race across the ground to the side 
of the fallen man. 

when they reach him, mathieson came forward and knelt besid the 
figure. 

"why, it' one of the guards!" he said in shock surprise. 

and it wa then that the strang feel of forebod hit fred again. 
As he knelt besid the groan guard, it swept over him in a chill 
wave. He lift the man' head from the ground and the guard open hi 
eyes. He recogn the face of mathieson as the scientist look 
anxious in hi direction. 

"good heavens, man, what happened? you were order to leav five 
minut befor launch time!" 

the guard' mouth open as he struggl to a sit position. the 
man' hand reach up and touch the back of hi head painfully. 

"sir--gaddon--dr. gaddon attack me ..." 

there wa a momentari stun silenc as the soldier' word sunk in on 
the gather men. 

"_what?_" mathieson' voic wa incredulous. 

and as trent watch the soldier nod hi head, the suspicion he had felt 
suddenli overwhelm him in a grim realization. even as the soldier 
blurt out pain-fil words, trent knew somehow what he wa go to 
say. 

"gaddon--h pull a gun on me ... He forc me to the far side of 
number two--h said he wa go up in the rocket--h said he had 
plans--then he hit me with the gun ... I came to when the rocket went 
off--i wa away from the blasts, luckili ..." 

then the soldier wa stand on hi feet again, sway as he fought to 
clear hi fog senses. 

but trent wa no longer awar of the soldier. and he saw that mathieson 
wa no longer look at the guard. for a brief instant their eye met, 
and trent saw a stun look in the scientist's, then fred' gaze swept 
up into the night. Up into the darken sky where, mile abov them, the 
hurtl rocket wa even now reach the apex of it flight. 

Up where a man rode on a peril trip into the unknown. 

* * * * * 

gaddon hunch in the dark of the rocket, waiting. He had count 
the remain minut off, one by one. and he knew that final the 
moment wa at hand. 

It would be too late now to stop him. they had not notic hi absence, 
and if they had, they would not delay the launch for him. He had 
taken that fact into consideration. 

and now that the moment wa close to completion, he felt a glow sens 
of triumph within him. He would now show those fools, and especi 
mathieson. He would prove conclus that cosmic ray were what he had 
said they were--a sourc of the energi of life, a fountain from which 
youth and vital would pour, make hi bodi immortal. He would go 
down in histori as one of the great of science. A man who had risk 
hi life to prove hi theory. A man who would be the first to achiev 
the goal of the ages, the dream of the philosophers, etern life. 

the triumph would be his. _all_ his! 

and the rocket tube explod into sound. 

gaddon tens in the darkness, grip the safeti strap he had 
attach to himself. besid him he felt the cat let out a frighten 
mew sound as the roar of the explod rocket power grew. He felt the 
furri bodi rub against hi side, seek sanctuari against thi 
dread sound. 

and then the rocket trembl with sudden movement. 

It wa slow at first, but then it grew faster, and gaddon felt a faint 
intens of fear in hi templ at the shudder power of that 
movement. 

and then he felt the blood drain from hi head, make him faint with 
dizzi as the rocket acceler suddenli into a terribl burst of 
speed. 

He could feel it move swiftli through the atmospher now, feel the 
tortur rush of air that whip against the side of the projectil in 
a moan dirg that mingl with the roar of the explod rocket fuel. 

and as the second passed, he becam accustom somewhat to the 
increas veloc of the projectile, and the dizzi pass from hi 
head. then he becam awar of the trembl bodi of the cat besid him 
and a soft laughter rose in hi throat. 

but it die stillborn as the roar of the rocket grew to a thunder 
hiss now in hi ears. 

and he felt the cool sweet of the automat releas oxygen fill 
the chamber about him and he drank it into hi lung hungrily. 

with each second now, he knew the projectil wa race higher into the 
rarefi atmosphere, head steadili out to where the air of earth 
would be almost non-existent. 

and a grim smile cross hi face in the darkness, for he knew that 
shortli the rocket would enter the outermost layer and the cosmic ray 
would play with all their energi upon the projectile. 

and he tens suddenly. 

there wa a glow that sprang into be in the chamber about him. 

It wa dim at first. but it grew steadili in intens around him, 
reveal the interior of the chamber in it weird light. 

An exult swept through him then. He knew they had enter the field 
of the cosmic rays, and that the manifest of light he saw wa a 
result of those forc of nature. 

besid him the cat mew plaintiv in fear and huddl closer against 
gaddon' body. hi eye watch the tini creatur for a moment and then 
swept around the larg chamber at the mass instrument panel that were 
record everi minut fraction of a second of the flight. 

and the glow grew. 

and suddenli the hiss of the explod rocket fuel began to diminish 
in volume. the apex of the flight wa nearli at hand then. 

and the glow around gaddon began to color. from a weird phosphoresc 
white it chang to a dull but intens yellow. and with the change, 
a strang feel crept through hi body. 

* * * * * 

It tug at him with invis hands. It play upon hi everi nerve, 
hi everi fiber, the innermost feel of hi sensibility. It grew 
stronger, thi alien probe within him, grew as the glow puls in the 
chamber around him. 

and suddenly, instead of a fierc feel of triumph, a sens of dread 
swept through him. He fought at the grip sensat within him, 
tri to dispel them, to no avail. they grew stronger, like invis 
hand that were chang the veri essenc of life insid him. 

and as the thought pass through hi suddenli tortur mind, he 
realiz that wa exactli what wa take place. A change. A chang 
beyond hi comprehension, beyond the understand of ani man. beyond-- 

and the whine fear mew of the cat besid him changed. It tens 
against hi body, and the whine in it anim throat becam an irat 
hiss. He look down and saw the hackl rise on the back of the cat, 
saw the creatur look up at him now, not with wide frighten eye of 
appeal, but with a feroc of wild that brought a chill to hi 
inner being. 

and the glow grew around him, brilliant yellow in textur now. and with 
the increas brillianc of the light, the feel of chang grew 
within him. 

It wa stronger than he now. It held hi everi heartbeat in it puls 
grip. It throb in hi temples, ach to the end of hi toes, set 
hi bodi aflam with it. 

and the cat suddenli lung against him, it sharpen claw bite 
through hi garment and into hi flesh. 

hi hand reach down in a quick movement and grip the bodi of the 
cat. He tore the rake claw away from hi bodi and held the cat in the 
air besid him. 

the creatur writh in hi grasp, fight madli to escape. and as hi 
grip tighten on the animal, the eye of the cat suddenli lock with 
his. 

He felt the forc within him reach a crescendo at that moment. and hi 
bodi wa frozen immobile, hi eye lock on the cat' eyes, burn 
into the animal, the anim burn into him. burn and burn ... 

It could onli have been a matter of seconds, he knew. but they were 
second that stretch into the farthermost reach of eternity. second 
that live a million year and pass in anoth fleet instant. 

and then he could move again. 

and he felt strang as he moved. It wa as if he wa anoth person, as 
if the bodi he move wa alien to him, as if it had never belong to 
him, to ani man, to ani thing. 

and hi eye tore away from the now dull express in the cat' eyes. 
He did not find it strang that thi wa so. He knew in some inner sens 
that the mighti life forc in him had quell the cat. had still the 
fight in it felin eyes. 

and he saw hi hand clutch the bodi of the cat. 

He stare at them for a long disbeliev moment. for they were not the 
hand he had known. they were not the hand of blair gaddon. they were 
not the hand of ani man. they were long and taper and claw-like. 
there wa dark fuzzi fur around them, fur that wa cat-like. 

deep within him a fear struggl upward through hi mind. A cold dread 
that forc hi lip to move, to utter a gasp of the terror he felt. 

and the sound left hi lips. 

It left hi lip and echo terribl in hi ears. A harsh sound. A 
mew sound. _A cat sound ..._ 

the creatur in hi grasp struggl feebli then. It wa a small 
movement, a movement without vitality, almost without life. and as the 
creatur moved, a sens of rage well up insid him. A rage that he 
could not control, an anger that he want to unleash to it fullest. 
and as it took possess of him, the human part of hi mind shriek 
and forc word from hi lips. 

"_you fiend! you fiend of hell!_" 

and hi finger crept up to the neck of the cat and close in a mighti 
grip. He felt the anim give a singl desper effort in hi grasp, 
but hi grip tighten and he saw the mouth of the creatur open wide 
and heard a faint hiss gasp as it tongu stuck far out and it eye 
bulg in a last moment of life. 

then the anim lay limp in hi claw-lik hand and he drop it to the 
floor of the rocket chamber, a growl of frustrat leav hi lips. 

He stare at the cat' bodi for a moment, then hi finger stole up and 
touch hi face. He felt the hairi coars of it, the furri tingl 
of hi onc smooth skin. and he scream into the now fade glow that 
he knew wa the energi of the cosmic rays. 

"no! no! It can't be true! I haven't _changed_ like this! 
i--i--_meowrr_ ..." 

around him the thunder of the rocket fuel suddenli vanish into 
silence, and then the rocket gave a lurch. 

deep within hi mind he knew that the instrument section had been 
releas from the main bodi of the projectile, and even now he knew the 
seal chamber wa fall back toward the earth, back toward the 
atmospher where the parachut would take hold and drift the chamber 
safe down to the arizona soil. 

and a dread close over him in that moment. back to the men. back to the 
thing of men. back he must go, a mew thing that wa not a man. A 
thing that he felt wa take hold of him, drive the last vestig of 
human instinct from him. 

He fought it. He fought it mew on the floor of the rocket chamber. 

* * * * * 

"he must have gone mad!" 

fred trent pull hi gaze from the sky and look with stun eye at 
the figur of dr. mathieson stand besid him. the scientist wa 
trembl with an inner feeling, and hi head wa shake in disbelief. 

"gaddon! the man is go to hi death! it' insane!" 

again mathieson' voic broke the silenc in the huddl group of men. 
then the newspapermen came to life and excit talk becam a jabber of 
word around them. trent took the arm of mathieson and turn him. He 
tri to lead the scientist away from the newspapermen but one of them 
step forward and grab hi arm. 

"but whi did he do it, doctor? the man must have had a reason!" 

mathieson shook hi head numbly. 

"i--i don't know, unless ..." hi voic trail off for a moment and 
then he spoke again. "unless he realli believ what he said ..." 

"what did he say, doctor?" the newsman asked. 

there wa a puzzl note to mathieson' voic as he answered. 

"he disagre with me on the suppos effect of the cosmic rays. It ha 
been my content that they are of lethal effect, and gaddon 
maintain that I wa wrong. He kept insist that they were a sourc 
of life energy. that wa whi we decid to experi with an animal--to 
see what effect the ray would have on a live creatur ... 

"but this! I never dream of such a possibility--to prove hi point he 
sign hi own death warrant!" 

"that' a story, doctor, a real story!" 

trent heard the newsman exclaim excitedly. and then it came to him that 
the real stori wa as yet untold. the real stori that had been unfold 
in hi car earlier that day. 

fred move suddenli away from the clamor of the newsmen around the 
scientist. He knew what he had to do. 

He hurri across the ground to hi wait coup outsid the 
administr building. then he got behind the wheel and start the 
motor. 

He drove to the gate and wait until the guard pass him through, then 
he turn up the road toward tucson. 

As he drove he felt an odd tens sweep through him. for he wa 
think of what gaddon had said on the drive up to the prove grounds. 
He wa rememb the man' word on the cosmic ray and the secret of 
etern life they held. and fred trent knew that thi wa the biggest 
story. the stori that he alon held. It wa the big break that he had 
been wait for. It would be hi exclusive. the inside, person stori 
of a man who had die to prove hi theory. told as gaddon himself had 
relat it. with all the vaniti of the man, all the pompou assur he 
had shown. It would make the headlin and featur section all over the 
country. the stori of a man who had flown to hi death in quest of 
immortality. 

and then trent' thought grew sober suddenly. but wa he go to hi 
death? could he be sure that mathieson wa right? that gaddon wa 
suffer from some streak of insan that had manifest itself in 
thi final ventur of madness? Or could it be that gaddon might be 
right, that ... 

trent set hi lip and sighed. no, that couldn't be true. It wa beyond 
the comprehens of man. 

what matter now wa the story. the stori that would put hi name in a 
thousand paper all over the country. and he thought in that moment of 
joan drake. A warm smile pull at hi lip as he thought of her. thi 
would forc her to quit her job now and marri him. the one condit she 
had made--h had final overcome. 

He thought of the date he wa suppos to have with her that evening. 
It would have to be postpon until later. the stori came first. and 
then ... 

He drove hi car swiftli through the outskirt of the citi and into the 
main part of town. then he pull up befor the offic of the _tucson 
star_ and left hi car at the curb. 

* * * * * 

He enter the building, took the elev to hi floor and walk into 
the citi room. the clatter of typewrit met hi ear and the sound wa 
sweet to him in that moment. 

He cross swiftli to hi desk and sat dawn. then he motion to a copi 
boy. the boy came up to hi desk. 

"jerry, tell the chief to hold up the form on page one. i'v got a 
special--an accid out at the prove grounds. headlin copy." 

the youth hurri away toward the offic of the citi editor, and fred 
pick up hi phone and dial a number. He wait a moment and then the 
voic of joan drake came across the wire. 

"dr. fenwick' office." 

"joan, thi is fred." 

the girl' voic laugh across the wire. "don't tell me you'r plan 
to break our date? just when I get all dress up." 

A smile cross trent' lips. "you'r almost psychic, honey. fact is, I 
wa call to tell you i'll be a littl late." 

there wa a paus and when the girl spoke again there wa an injur 
note in her voice. 

"well, that' a fine thing. I wait here deliber after hour for you 
to pick me up and now you tell me you'll be late! just what' so more 
import than me right now?" 

"I haven't got time to tell you now, joan, but believ me, i'v got the 
break of the year. A stori that will rock the front page across the 
country. i'll tell you all about it later. you can wait at fenwick' 
place. He won't mind, will he?" 

He could hear the girl sniff on the other end of the wire. 

"I don't suppos he will, but I don't think I can say the same for 
myself." 

"that' a good girl," trent laughed. "just wait for me. It may be an 
hour or so--" 

"an _hour_ or so! what are you writing, the great american novel?" 

He look up and saw the frown face of the citi editor approach 
hi desk. He spoke hurriedly. 

"i'v got to sign off now. the boss is come up. i'll see you later. 
give my regard to brutus." 

He replac the phone as the editor reach hi desk. 

"what' all thi about a remak on the front page, trent?" 

fred nodded. "that' right, chief. the biggest stori sinc the atom 
bomb. listen!" 

He gave a short account of what had happened, and then ad the 
person detail of hi talk with gaddon. He saw the eye of the editor 
widen as he went on, and by the time he had finished, there wa a look 
of excit on the editor' face. 

"get to that story, trent. write it hot, and write it fast. i'll hold 
the first form and tear down the front page. stress the human interest 
angle. play it up big. we'll hit the news wire with it after we go to 
press." 

then a smile cross the editor' face. "and you'll get a by-lin on 
this, trent, that ought to put you in for some big money. nice work." 

then he turn on hi heel and wa hurri across the citi room toward 
hi glassed-in office, holler for a copi boy as he went. 

trent turn back to hi desk and slip a sheet of paper into hi 
typewriter. there wa a tens around hi eye as he brought hi 
finger down on the keys. for a moment the old question rose again in 
hi mind. _wa gaddon right? could it be possibl that ..._ 

then he forgot everyth but the story. and hi finger click against 
the keys, put it down on paper. 

* * * * * 

the rocket chamber sway gentli through the night air, whistl it 
way slowli downward, move more slowli as the great parachut abov it 
caught in the rapidli thicken densiti of the cabin' atmosphere. 

insid it, the thing that had been gaddon, the thing that wa no longer 
a man, sat on the floor of the chamber, idli toy with the dead bodi 
of the cat. 

strang thought cours through the mind insid it head. half of the 
mind that belong to gaddon, and half of the mind that wa an alien 
thing, a creatur unnamed. 

there wa a thought of kill and the thought wa good. the claw-lik 
hand play with the cat' dead body, fondl it idly, wish it 
were still aliv so that it might die again. 

and the other part of it mind, the part that still knew it wa gaddon, 
rebel against the thought. tri to drive it away. tri to move that 
alien intellig into the rear of hi consciousness. 

A growl left hi lip as he struggl with it. and then a whimper 
sound. 

for now the alien thought of kill and the joy it had experienc as 
the cat die scant moment before, wa replac by anoth thought. A 
thought of loneliness. 

It wa a weird feeling, an utter loneli that came from the great 
void beyond man' planet. It cri out in silent protest for it knew it 
wa alon in thi world of men. 

and it knew it would remain alone, friendless. for what manner of men 
such as the other part of it mind show would react in a friendli 
fashion? where would be their common meet ground? there could onli be 
one, it knew. and that one wa fear. fear and the hate that went with 
it. 

A growl left it lip again, and gaddon' thought tri to forc their 
way through. tri and fail again. 

but wa it necessari to want companionship? It thought about that for a 
moment. and then the alien beast thought grew sharper, clearer. It knew 
suddenli that it did not want man' compassion. It knew that there wa 
onli one drive thought in it. hate. hate that would inspir fear. fear 
that would freez it victim into terror. and terror that would be 
replac by death. and then it would be happi again. happi to sit and 
fondl the thing that had been alive. and it knew someth else. It 
knew that a hunger would have to be satisfied. A hunger that call for 
flesh. 

deep, primev thought race through it then. thought that were 
spawn in the ancient jungl of a new and steam world. A world 
where great cat roamed, where scream of cat-rag split the air as 
tawni bodi arc in lightn leap to land on the trembl bodi of 
their victims. It wa a satisfi thought. A thought that span the 
age of earth, a sens that wa inher in all cat mind through the 
ages. 

and as the thought race through that portion of it mind, the part that 
wa gaddon struggl to fight it back. for it realiz with a sick 
that spread horror through it that the thought wa part of the anim 
exist that had been creat in him. part of the monster that lay by 
instinct in all felin creatures. and gaddon knew that the dead creatur 
at hi feet, the limp and twist bodi of the cat, had die long befor 
hi hand had crush it in their mighti grip. for the essenc of that 
life, that anim existence, had been merg with him, fuse by a mighti 
sourc from outer space. 

* * * * * 

and as he struggl with the thought, fought to regain the balanc of 
control of the strang bodi that wa now his, the rocket chamber sway 
in a gust of wind from without. and as he clutch the side of the 
chamber with hi strong claw-lik hands, the chamber gave a bound 
lurch as it struck the ground a glanc blow. 

there wa a grate sound as the metal chamber goug into the earth, 
sank it weight upon the arizona soil. and the thing wa thrown 
violent against the side of the chamber. 

then there wa quiet again. 

gaddon' mind fought to the fore, took control of that felin man-shap 
that wa his, struggl to it feet and move in a lith bound to the 
opposit side of the chamber. A claw hand reach up where gaddon 
knew the releas mechan of the door lay, and press it. 

the door slid back with a slide sound and the cool night air rush in 
upon it. 

gaddon move hi cat-bodi through the open and bound to the ground 
in a lithe, power movement. He felt new muscl react as he land on 
the ground, and knew that there wa a great strength in them. strength 
that wa wait to be used. 

and he felt the other thought start to move forward in hi mind 
again and he forc them back. He knew he must keep control of that 
mind. for there wa someth that he must do. 

He thought desper about it. and the pattern becam clearer in hi 
mind. 

the cosmic rays. the reaction in hi body. He had sought immort in 
the door to outer space and had found a monster wait for him. A forc 
that had chang hi glands, grown the shaggi fur on hi body. gland 
that had warp hi mind. open an age-old cun of felin thought. 

_glands._ 

gaddon' thought whip the word. held it. knew it must be the answer. 
and then it found a prayer of hope. and a name that went with that 
thought. 

"fenwick! i'v got to reach fenwick befor it' too late. _befor it' 
too late!_" 

hi voic came hoarsely, strang formed. and he look wildli about 
him. He saw, off in the distance, a glow of light in the night. and 
he knew somehow that it wa the citi of tucson. 

and in that city, at it veri edge, wa a hous he must reach. 

He stumbl away into the darkness, feel hi limb move rapidli 
then, smoothly, cover the ground in great leap strides. 

and though gaddon' thought kept the balanc of control, deep insid 
hi mind, the monster growl with a cun laughter ... 

* * * * * 

fred trent pull the last sheet of paper from hi typewrit and lean 
back in hi chair exhausted. that wa it, the end of the story. He wave 
hi hand at a copi boy and the boy ran up to take the final page. each 
sheet had been taken like that, to be immedi set in the compos 
room. now it wa finished, the stori of the year. 

and as trent slowli lit a cigarett and inhal deeply, he knew that he 
had done a good job on the story. and a smile cross hi face as he 
thought of it. hi futur wa assur now. there could be no more 
stopgaps, no more delay in hi plan to marri joan and settl down. and 
the girl would have to agree. for the first time in mani months, fred 
felt that hi troubl were over with. and the feel wa nice. It 
spread through him and he wa content. 

He glanc at hi wrist watch and frowned. the stori had taken longer 
than he had anticipated. It wa nearli eleven. some of the enthusiasm 
ran out of him as he thought of joan wait for him at fenwick's. He 
could imagin how angri she must be by now. 

He got up quickli from hi desk and reach for hi hat. As he start 
to walk away, the phone on hi desk rang. 

He step back and pick up the receiver. 

"trent speaking." 

"_fred!_" 

trent heard hi name utter in terror across the wire and he felt a 
chill run through him as he recogn the voice. It wa joan drake. 

"joan, what' wrong?" he ask anxiously. 

"fred! come quickly! bring help befor it' too late--he'l kill us!" 

"joan! for god' sake, calm down! now what' the matter?" hi voic held 
a tens in it as he spoke. 

"it' gaddon, fred! onli it isn't gaddon--it' a monster! he'll kill 
us!" 

"_gaddon?_" trent' voic spoke incredulously. "but that' imposs--" 

"oh, fred, hurry-- i--oh--no--no! keep away--" 

He heard the girl scream over the phone then. and he heard someth 
else. A growl sound. A sound of anim nois unlik ani other sound 
he had ever heard. and then as he shout into the phone: "joan! joan!" 
the line went dead. 

He stood for a moment, stare stupidli at the receiv in hi hand. 
then he slam it back on it cradl and turned. He nearli knock over 
the copi boy who holler at him. 

"hey, trent, the boss want you in hi office!" 

but he swept by the boy unheeding. He didn't wait for the elevator. He 
took the stair in leap bounds, and then he wa on the main floor of 
the build and out on the street. 

He slam the door of hi car shut and start the motor. hi hand 
trembl as he mesh the gear and shot the coup away from the curb. 
then he wa move swiftli through the traffic. 

As he turn down the street where fenwick' offic was, fred trent' 
mind wa a whirl of confus thought. 

there wa fear there. fear and dread. and there wa puzzlement too. A 
puzzlement that made hi brain spin. joan had spoken with terror in her 
voice. terror that had said somebodi wa go to kill. and joan wa 
not a girl to be easili frightened. and she had mention gaddon' 
name. gaddon, the man who had shot into the heaven in an experiment 
rocket. gaddon, who wa suppos to be dead. 

* * * * * 

He felt now that same feel that had crept through him after the 
launching. the feel that had whisper in hi mind that mayb gaddon 
had been right after all. that mayb he wouldn't die. that mayb ... and 
now the dread swept him. for he thought of the sound he had heard over 
the phone. the last sound befor the line went dead. the sound of an 
anim growl in wrath. and he rememb the girl' scream about a 
monster. 

A cold sweat wa on hi forehead as he pull the coup into the curb in 
front of the fenwick house. He switch off the motor and close the car 
door after him. 

then he wa hurri up the walk to the front door, hi eye take in 
the hous in a swift glance, note that the light were lit in the 
consult room. light that sliver out from the close venetian 
blinds. 

He stood then on the front porch, hi hand close over the knob of the 
door. 

It wa locked. 

He press the bell then and heard it clarion sound insid the house. 
but other than that there wa noth to be heard. A deep, omin 
silenc that somehow brought a feel of panic to him. wa he too late? 

and then suddenli the panel in the front of the door open and a face 
peer out at him. 

fred trent felt the blood drain from hi lips. A paralysi seem to 
grip hi bodi at what he saw frame in the opening. 

for it wa not the face of a human being. and yet, it wa not the face 
of an animal. It wa a horrible, twisted, cat-lik visag that peer 
out at him, fur and ugly, with bare teeth and glowing, felin eyes. 

and as he looked, a sound came from the twist lips. It wa the same 
sound he had heard over the telephone. the sound of a growl rage. 

and as the sound hit hi ears, a terribl realiz swept over him. 
for hi eyes, rivet on that monstrou countenance, had regist an 
imposs fact upon hi mind. 

_a twist as it was, as horribl chang into an anim grimace, it 
wa the face of someon he knew--th english scientist, blair gaddon!_ 

and then suddenli the face vanish from the opening. and fred trent 
felt hi paralysi leav him. He knew now that he should never have come 
alone. that he should have call the polic first. that he-- 

the door swung open then and trent found himself face the thing that 
had been gaddon. 

He took a backward step and start to turn and run for hi car and 
help, but he wa too slow. 

An arm shot out and a claw-lik hand suddenli grip hi shoulder in a 
swift, steel-lik movement. He felt himself be pull forward and 
into the house, as anoth growl snarl from the lip of the creature. 

trent tri to break the grip of that vise-lik hand. He tri to smash 
hi fist into the ugli visag of a face that confront him. but he wa 
like a child in that grip. and like a child, he wa hurl across the 
hall, and he heard the door slam shut behind him. 

As he got slowli to hi feet and turn to face the creature, he heard a 
sob sound from the open door of the consult room. It wa the 
voic of joan drake. 

and then the monster had reach him and the claw hand reach out 
and spun him through the doorway, into the consult room. and he 
heard a growl voic utter harshly: "you will regret thi 
interference, trent!" 

and he knew that it wa the voic of blair gaddon. and yet he also knew 
that it wa not the same voice. It wa changed. It had a bestial qualiti 
to it. 

then trent look around him. He saw joan drake, huddl in a corner of 
the room, besid dr. stanley fenwick. the specialist wa sit in a 
chair, hold hi right hand to hi mouth. fred could see blood ooz 
from a gash in the surgeon' lips. 

* * * * * 

and then he heard anoth sound. A sound from without the house, come 
from the rear. It wa the bay of brutus. the big dog must have sens 
the presenc of the monster. and it wa protest in it anim voice, 
a mourn dirge. 

then hi attent wa drawn onc again to the anim bodi of blair 
gaddon. and now that the first shock had left him, trent stare at the 
man. He heard the girl sob. 

"fred! I told you to bring help--" 

"be quiet!" the voic of gaddon issu from the twist lips. and the 
girl' sob stifl itself in a look of dread. 

then the face that had been gaddon turn to trent. there wa a twist 
leer to it, and fred sens that there wa a struggl go on in that 
warp mind. 

"you are gaddon? the blair gaddon who went up with the experiment 
rocket?" trent' voic came incredulously. 

the face of the creatur twist in a grimac of acknowledgment. 

"yes, trent. I am blair gaddon. I am not a pretti sight to look at, am 
i?" word left the twist lips, and there wa a bestial pain in them. 

"but--you'r suppos to be dead! mathieson--" 

A strang sound of ironi came from gaddon. 

"mathieson wa right about the cosmic rays--i know that now. look at me! 
you see what ha happen to me? I sought immort through the life 
energi of space--and look at me!" 

horror reflect in fred' eye in that moment. for he felt the pain 
terror in the voic of the anim shape befor him. and he saw the 
claw-lik hand clench spasmodically. 

"mi glands!" the voic screamed. "the cosmic ray react on them--f 
the essenc of the cat into them--chang me into thi monstrou being!" 

trent stare at the rage-fil face. felt the emot that wa sweep 
through the creature. felt a sudden compass that wa eras by the 
bestial look that came into the monster' eyes. 

and then it turn toward the chair where fenwick sat. the doctor wa 
look at the creature, hi eye wide and terrified. 

"but what do you expect me to do for you, gaddon? whi do you stand here 
threatening--" fenwick' voic came hoarsely. 

"why? you fool! becaus there is so littl time! I am changing! even now 
my human instinct are nearli gone!... you'r a gland specialist! there 
is someth you can do--stop thi change--stop it!" 

fenwick shook hi head slowly. "you'r rave like a madman, gaddon. i'm 
not a god--do you think I can chang someth that is beyond human 
understanding? If you'll onli let me call in the author ..." 

A growl of rage left gaddon' anim lips. "authorities! So you can have 
me put in cage like a wild beast? So you and your medic expert can 
stand and watch me as you would a freak? you'r a fool! you'll help me 
now! you'll do something--befor it' too late! Do you hear me?" 

the creatur advanc slowli upon the doctor, and the girl back away 
to the far wall, fear mirror in her eyes. 

then fred trent step forward, hi voic tense. 

"hold on, gaddon--of cours the doctor will help you--_won't_ you, 
fenwick?" 

there wa an urgent emphasi in trent' last words, and hi eye caught 
those of the surgeon's, and held them in a meaning look. He couldn't 
say what he want to, but the messag in hi eye wa impart to 
fenwick, and the doctor suddenli nodded. 

"yes--yes, of cours ... but you'll have to remain quiet, gaddon, and be 
patient a moment...." 

the creatur stop it advanc upon fenwick then. and a growl rumbl 
in gaddon' anim throat. 

then fred watch as the doctor step swiftli to a tabl with 
instrument and hurriedli began to prepar a hypodermic. 

"i'll give you a special extract inject to start...." fenwick 
explain as he worked. 

and trent knew that the doctor wa prepar an inject that would 
subdu the monster. that would enabl them to call the police.... 

and the eye of gaddon watch the finger of the surgeon prepar the 
hypodermic. and for a singl moment the human part of gaddon' monster 
mind relax it tenaci hold. 

* * * * * 

there wa a rumbl of rage thought deep within hi twist brain. It 
swept up, grip the human element, and envelop it. A hoars mew 
sound left the twist lip as the mind becam a single, bestial thing. 

and now it thought with a viciousness. It knew now that it wa final 
in control. that the full chang had been completed. and it knew 
suddenli what it wanted. 

it anim eye stare at the three humans. and it felt a hatr for the 
men who did not understand it. and it felt a desir for the woman who 
fear it. A desir that crept out of the primev jungles. that swept 
through it to find one of it kind. and there wa the vagu instinct 
that wa gaddon, who told it how to fulfil that desire. gaddon, who 
knew where the secret lay. 

and then there wa the drive urg that swept up from the anim ages. 
the urg to kill, to destroy what wa hated. and the eye of the monster 
fasten on the figur of fenwick as the doctor turn from the table, 
the hypoderm in hi hand. 

"all right, gaddon ..." 

the voic of fenwick trail off. and fred trent stare at the face of 
the monster. what he saw there brought a chill to hi being. and he 
heard the girl gasp from the far corner of the room, as her eye too saw 
the chang that had spread over the face of the creature. 

for there wa no longer ani vestig of human recognit in that face. 
there wa no longer ani trace of the man who had been gaddon. there wa 
onli the monster now. the twisted, leer lip of an anim mind. 

A harsh growl left those lip then and the creatur move forward toward 
the surgeon. 

trent knew what wa happening, and he knew what he must do. there wa 
death on that bestial face. death that wa reach out ... 

He heard the dim bay of the great dane from the rear of the hous as 
he leap forward. 

then hi fist lash out and caught the anim face in a lash blow. 
hi knuckl felt numb as he screamed: 

"the hypodermic--doctor--quick!" 

then the creatur turn on him and a long arm shot out. trent felt a 
claw rake across hi face and felt the burn bite of that claw sink 
into hi flesh. then, as he tri to dodg away from the beast and bring 
hi fist up again, the monster leap at him and trent felt a power 
blow crash against hi chin. 

He spun back, fall to the floor, hi head hit the edg of an 
examin table. hi sens reel and he felt the blood run down 
hi cheek, a warm, sticki stream that drip to the floor. 

He fought to keep hi conscious as he saw the beast turn away from 
him, satisfi that he wa out of the way. then he saw it leap at the 
stun figur of fenwick. 

He heard the girl scream in terror and he saw fenwick' arm come up with 
the hypodermic. He saw the doctor tri to bring the needl down in a jab, 
but the monster' arm swept the needl asid and then a claw-lik hand 
grip fenwick' throat. 

there wa a gasp of terror from fenwick' lip as those finger close 
around hi neck. then the hypoderm fell from hi nerveless hand and he 
fought to break away. 

A deep rumbl growl spat from the lip of the monster as it close 
with the struggl figur of fenwick. then the claw that were it 
hand rake the surgeon' throat in a felin rage. 

trent watch with numb eyes, fight back the wave of black that 
threaten to overcom him, and he saw the figur of fenwick suddenli go 
limp in the grip of the monster. 

He saw a spurt of blood burst from the man' torn throat, and then the 
creatur drop the limp body. 

It fell to the floor, and a wave of red wash across the floor from the 
mangl throat. the monster stood over the lifeless body, a triumphant 
sound issu from it twist lips. 

then it turn toward the girl. 

trent tri to move. He tri to push back the weak that numb hi 
body. but he couldn't. hi head swam with the pain of the blow he had 
received, and he could onli watch through half-clos eye as the 
monster reach out for the girl. 

joan drake scream onc as the long arm reach out for her. then her 
voic end abruptli as she fell to the floor in a faint. 

the monster stood over her for a moment, then it reach down and pick 
up her bodi in it blood splattered-arms. 

It turn for a moment, hold the girl, and shot a hate-fil glanc 
at trent' limp figure. 

then it move swiftli across the room and out into the hall. 

and the bay of the great dane sound angrili in fred trent' ear ... 

* * * * * 

with a superhuman effort fred trent forc the numb from hi bodi 
and move slowli to hi feet. A horror grip him that brought a new 
strength to hi body, flood it. 

He step over the bodi of fenwick, forc hi eye away from the 
grisli sight of it as he dash to the hallway. 

"joan--_joan_!" 

the girl' name came hoars from hi lip as he ran into the hall and 
stare at the open door of the house. He ran to the door and out into 
the night. 

hi eye stare wildli into the darkness, search the street. but he 
saw noth but hi park car at the curb. the monster had vanished. 
and with him, the unconsci girl. 

A hopeless despair well up insid trent at that moment. for he knew he 
could never hope to find the creatur now. and by the time help came it 
would be too late. they would find joan' mangl bodi ... 

the bay of the great dane rang in hi ear then. the huge dog' howl 
of rage thunder in hi ear and he heard the hound crash it great 
bodi against the close door at the end of the hall, strive to get 
through. 

and then a cri of hope left trent' lips. He turn and ran back into 
the house. He grab the long leash from it wall hook besid the rear 
door and then he swung the door partway open. 

"brutus! quiet, brutus!" 

the head of the great dane struggl through the partli open door, a 
snarl of rage well from the huge dog' mouth as trent shout at it. 

then he slip the leash into it metal ring around the neck of the dog 
and pull the door open. 

the anim rush into the hall, nearli tear the leash from fred 
trent' hand as it lung forward. 

the dog paus besid the open door of the consult room where the 
bodi of fenwick lay dead and still on the floor. the anim lift it 
muzzl and snif the air. A howl of anguish rage left it then and 
trent knew that the dog sens it master had been murdered. and then it 
caught the scent of the monster, the thing that had caus it wild rage 
to be unleashed, and it leap forward, down the hall and out the front 
door into the night. 

trent held the leash tightli in hi hands, run behind the strain 
dog, jump over a low hedg after the anim as it head down the 
shadow street to the edg of the city. 

and then the last hous wa behind them and trent wa race behind the 
dog out into the desert land beyond. 

* * * * * 

hi breath wa an ach fire in hi throat. hi leg were numb beyond 
feeling. they were part of hi bodi that simpli refus to stop moving, 
though everi nerv and muscl in them scream in protest. 

It seem like he had been run for hours, half tripping, stumbl 
across the darken ground behind the seemingli tireless bodi of the 
great dane. 

they ran in near silenc now. onli the sound of their labor breath 
mingl with the night wind. the howl of rage no longer issu from the 
throat of the huge dog. there wa onli it pant breath, and the 
strain of it mighti bodi as it sought to tear loos from the man 
hold it. 

but trent held grimli to the leash, run as fast as hi numb bodi 
would go. 

and he knew he could not go much further. that soon he would drop to the 
ground in exhaustion. that hi last reserv of energi wa nearli spent. 

and then hi eye peer through the dark ahead and he saw a glow of 
light in the distance. and suddenli he knew those lights. and he becam 
awar of where they were race toward. 

It wa the rocket prove grounds! 

and the fenc of the govern project loom close ahead. 

and as they near the fence, trent' eye pierc the dark and he 
saw a jag tear in the metal mesh of the fence. A tear that stood as 
high as a man, a hole through which a man could have entered. 

the great dane bound toward that hole and trent follow the dog 
through it. He felt the anim paus momentarili and he nearli stumbl 
over a bodi lie on the ground at hi feet just insid the fence. 

hi heart stood still for a moment and the girl' name sped to hi lips. 
but he never utter the word. for he suddenli saw that it wa the bodi 
of a guard. A bodi whose torn throat lay red and gori in death. 

and then the great dane let a howl of anger out on the night wind, and 
the beast leap forward again, trent run behind it. 

and ahead of them, trent saw a great loom shape in the darkness, and 
as hi eye fell upon it, a despair terror grip him. 

It wa the second rocket! stand in it cradle, silent in the night, a 
shaft of metal that look skyward. 

and a realiz of what the monster had in mind struck him. He knew 
now where they were headed. He knew whi the monster had torn the fence, 
whi a guard had been kill where he stood. 

and as if the thought had been a prelude, he saw the rocket loom befor 
them as the great dane bound around it base. 

and he saw the metal stairway lead up to the middl of the giant 
projectile. 

and at the top of those stairs, go into the now open rocket chamber, 
wa the monster, hold the unconsci girl in it arms. 

the great dane saw the creatur in the same instant. and a terribl howl 
of rage well from it throat. It gave a lung forward then that broke 
trent' grip from the leash he held. and the dog wa free. 

* * * * * 

the monster turn in the same moment and saw them. A roar of felin 
anger left it throat as the huge dog leap up the step toward the 
platform above. 

the monster drop the girl' bodi on the narrow platform and back 
toward the open of the rocket chamber. 

then the great dane reach the platform and pois itself for a leap. 

trent wa dash forward toward the stair as the dog' bodi flew 
through the air. He saw the flash jaw of the anim snap at the 
throat of the monster, as it heavi bodi smash against it. 

then the arm of the creatur were tear at the dog as it wa forc 
back into the rocket chamber. 

trent' feet flew up the stairs, hi breath a tortur gasp in hi 
throat. He saw the girl stir on the platform, as conscious return 
to her. 

"joan!" 

her name sped from hi lip as he reach the top step. then hi hand 
close around the girl' shoulders, lift her to her feet. 

the snarl of the great dane reach hi ear from the rocket chamber, 
and the answer roar of rage from the monster as they fought. hi eye 
saw the vague, terribl shadow of them, heard the snap jaw of the 
dog, and the rake claws. 

and then he wa drag the girl down the steps. 

they reach the ground and trent pull her away from the rocket, felt 
her come to life in hi arms, heard the sob on her lips. 

but hi head turn away from her and he stare anxious up at the open 
rocket chamber. 

He heard the bodi of the monster and the dog slam against the inner 
side of the chamber, and then he saw the door of the rocket close. He 
knew that the automat mechan must have been touch in the battle. 

and even as the thought ran through hi mind he heard a sudden roar of 
flame sound. the night lit up in a sheet of brilliant light and a wave 
of flame spread out from the base of the rocket. 

trent pull the girl away from that blind sheet of explod energy, 
and hi eye stare in grim fascin as they ran. 

He saw the rocket shudder in it cradl and then lift slowly. It wa as 
if time had turn back and he were watch an ident scene that had 
happen earlier that day. 

onli it wasn't the same scene. It wa now a scene of horror. for he knew 
that the monster and the dog were in that rocket. the rocket that would 
shoot skyward in moments, even as it companion had done. would reach 
into the outer fring of the earth' atmospher where the cosmic ray 
would envelop it, would react upon the anim insid it. 

and a terribl dread spread through trent at the thought. for if the 
first chang had been terribl enough, what would happen now? 

and as he thought, he saw the rocket lift slowli from it cradl and 
gather speed as it shot upward into the night. 

* * * * * 

the blind light of the explod rocket fuel lit the prove ground 
like a huge beacon of incandescence, and trent wa awar of shout ahead 
of him, and run feet. 

then he wa surround by men from the project, and he caught the glint 
of alert weapon and uniforms. 

He felt arm grab him and the girl and heard question pound at him. 

but then he saw a face he knew. and he tore away from the arm of the 
guard and shouted. 

"dr. mathieson! listen to me!" 

the scientist step up to him and trent grip hi arm in the fade 
light of the vanish rocket. 

"what' happen here?" the scientist demanded. "aren't you one of the 
newsmen--" 

trent interrupt him. He pour out a string of words. word that told 
what had happened. and as he talk he saw the eye of the scientist 
widen in disbelief. and he heard the guard grow silent around him. felt 
everi ear listen with awe to hi words. 

and when he had finish there wa a long moment of silence. and then 
joan drake move tremblingli up besid trent and she spoke: 

"it' true, doctor! everi word fred said is true!" 

and one of the guard broke in: 

"the word just came in from post four. the fenc wa torn to pieces--and 
gid ha been murdered--just as they said!" 

then the silenc again. and the face of mathieson wa grim as trent 
broke through the quiet: 

"--doctor--that monster who wa gaddon--he' up there now! when the 
cosmic ray chang him and the dog and the chamber is releas ..." 

the scientist shook hi head slowly, a look of awe in hi eyes. 

"it won't release, trent," he said. 

fred trent look at him questioningly. 

"gaddon must have forgotten one thing," the scientist continued. "that 
rocket wa also an experiment project. but not for the same purpose. 
It wa to test a new type of explos ..." 

mathieson' voic trail off and silenc close over the small group 
then. 

there wa no need to say anyth further. there wa onli the tension of 
waiting, the tension that show in everi eye. 

and the girl move closer to trent, her bodi trembl against his. 

they waited. the second pass like moment in eternity. slowli they 
march by, one by one. and then a minute. and the tension grew. 

they heard it then. off in the distance. out in the wast of the open 
desert land. A thunder sound. An explos that roll in a wave of 
sound. 

and with it a flash of brilliant light. light that sear through the 
night in a terribl wave. and with it the thunder of the explos 
warhead. 

and then silence. 

after a long moment the voic of mathieson came through the quiet night 
wind. 

"... it' over. gaddon is--dead. poor fool, he fumbl with the tool of 
creation, tool that man is not readi to wield ..." 

and trent heard one of the soldier gasp, "what a story! _what_ a 
story!" 

but he knew, as he held the girl against him, felt her bodi relax besid 
his, that it wa a stori he didn't want to write. 

He want onli to forget ... 




transcriber' note: 

thi etext wa produc from _amaz stories_ april 1949. extens 
research did not uncov ani evid that the u.s. copyright on 
thi public wa renewed. minor spell and typograph 
error have been correct without note. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the monster, by S. M. tenneshaw 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the monster *** 

***** thi file should be name 24913.txt or 24913.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/9/1/24913/ 

produc by greg weeks, stephen blundel and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
