the project gutenberg ebook of the return Of the soul, by robert S. hichen 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the return Of the soul 
1896 

author: robert S. hichen 

releas date: novemb 8, 2007 [ebook #23419] 
last updated: decemb 17, 2016 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the return OF the soul *** 




produc by david widger 






the return OF the soul 

By robert S. hichen 

1896 

“I have been here before, but when, or how, I cannot tell!” 

rossetti. 




I. 

_tuesday night, novemb 3rd_. 
prefac 
theories! what is the good of theories? they are the scourg that lash 
our mind in modern days, lash them into confusion, perplexity, despair. 
I have never been troubl by them before. whi should I be troubl by 
them now? and the absurd of professor black’ is sure obvious. A 
child would laugh at it. yes, a child! I have never been a diari writer. 
I have never been abl to understand the amus of sit down 
late at night and scrawl minut in some hidden book everi paltri 
incid of one’ paltri days. peopl say it is so interest to read 
the entri year afterwards. To read, as a man, the _menu_ that I ate 
through as a boy, the love-stori that I wa actor in, the tragedi that I 
brought about, the debt that I have never paid--how could it profit me? 
To keep a diari ha alway seem to me mere an addit to the ill 
of life. yet now I have a hidden book, like the rest of the world, and I 
am scrawl in it to-day. yes, but for a reason. 

I want to make thing clear to myself, and I find, as others, that 
my mind work more easili with the assist of the pen. the actual 
trace of word on paper dispel the cloud that cluster round my 
thoughts. I shall recal event to set my mind at ease, to prove to 
myself how absurd a man who could believ in professor black would 
be. “littl dry-as-dust” I use to call him ‘dry’? He is full of wild 
romance, rubbish that a school-girl would be asham to believ in. yet 
he is abnorm clever; hi record prove that. still, clever men are 
the first to be led astray, they say. It is the searcher who follow the 
wander light. what he say can’t be true. when I have fill these 
pages, and read what I have written dispassionately, as one of the 
outsid public might read, I shall have done, onc for all, with the 
ridicul fanci that are begin to make my life a burden. To put 
my thought in order will make a music. the evil spirit within me will 
sleep, will die. I shall be cured. It must be so--it shall be so. 

To go back to the beginning. ah! what a long time ago that seems! As a 
child I wa cruel. most boy are cruel, I think. My school companion 
were a merciless set--merciless to one another, to their master when 
they had a chance, to animals, to birds. the desir to tortur wa 
in nearli all of them. they love to bully, and if they bulli onli 
mildly, it wa from fear, not from love. they did not wish their 
boomerang to return and slay them. If a boy were deformed, they twit 
him. If a master were kind, or gentle, or shy, they made hi life as 
intoler as they could. If an anim or a bird came into their power, 
they had no pity. I wa like the rest; indeed, I think that I wa worse. 
cruelti is horrible. I have enough imagin to do more than know 
that--to feel it. 

some say that it is lack of imagin which make men and women 
brutes. may it not be power of imagination? the interest of tortur is 
lessened, is almost lost, if we can not be the tortur as well as the 
torturer. 

As a child I wa cruel by nature, by instinct. I wa a handsome, 
well-bred, gentlemanlike, gentle-look littl brute. My parent ador 
me, and I wa good to them. they were so kind to me that I wa almost 
fond of them. whi not? It seem to me as polit to be fond of them as 
of anyon else. I did what I pleased, but I did not alway let them 
know it; so I pleas them. the wise child will take care to foster 
the ignor of it parents. My peopl were pretti well off, and I wa 
their onli child; but my chief chanc of futur pleasur in life were 
centr in my grandmother, my mother’ mother. she wa immens 
rich, and she live here. thi room in which I am write now wa her 
favourit sitting-room. On that hearth, befor a log fire, such as is 
burn at thi moment, use to sit that wonder cat of hers--that 
horribl cat! whi did I ever play my childish card to win thi house, 
thi place? sometimes, lately--veri late only--i have wondered, like a 
fool perhaps. yet would professor black say so? I remember, as a boy of 
sixteen, pay my last visit here to my grandmother. It bore me veri 
much to come. but she wa said to be near death, and death leav great 
hous vacant for other to fill. So when my mother said that I had 
better come, and my father ad that he thought my grandmoth wa 
fonder of me than of my other relations, I gave up all my boyish plan 
for the holiday with appar willingness. though almost a child, I wa 
not short-sighted. I knew everi boy had a futur as well as a present. I 
gave up my plans, and came here with a smile; but in my heart I hate my 
grandmoth for have power, and so bend me to relinquish pleasur 
for boredom. I hate her, and I came to her and kiss her, and saw her 
beauti white persian cat sit befor the fire in thi room, and 
thought of the fellow who wa my bosom friend, and with whom I long 
to be, shooting, or fishing, or riding. and I look at the cat again. 
I rememb it began to purr when I went near to it. It sat quit still, 
with it blue eye fix upon the fire, but when I approach it I 
heard it purr complacently. I long to kick it. the limit of it 
ridicul life satisfi it completely. It seem to reproduc in an 
absurd, diminish way my grandmoth in her white lace cap, with her 
white face and hands. she sat in her chair all day and look at the 
fire. the cat sat on the hearthrug and did the same. the cat seem to 
me the anim personif of the human be who kept me chain 
from all the sport and pleasur I had promis myself for the 
holidays. when I went near to the cat, and heard it calmli pur at 
me, I long to do it an injury. It seem to me as if it understood 
what my grandmoth did not, and wa complac triumph at my 
voluntari imprison with age, and laugh to itself at the pain 
men--and boys--wil undergo for the sake of money. brute! I did not love 
my grandmother, and she had money. I hate the cat utterly. It hadn’t a 
_sou!_ 

thi beauti hous is not old. My grandfath built it himself. He had 
no love for the life of towns, I believe, but wa passion in touch 
with nature, and, when a young man, he set out on a strang tour through 
england. hi object wa to find a perfect view, and in front of that 
view he intend to build himself a habitation. for nearli a year, so I 
have been told, he wander through scotland and england, and at last 
he came to thi place in cumberland, to thi village, to thi veri spot. 
here hi wander ceased. stand on the terrace--then uncultiv 
forest--that run in front of these windows, he found at last what he 
desired. He bought the forest. He bought the wind of the river, 
the field upon it banks, and on the extrem edg of the steep gorg 
through which it run he built the love dwell that to-day is mine. 

thi place is no ordinari place. It is characterist in the highest 
degree. the hous is wonder situated, with the ground fall 
abruptli in front of it, the river form almost a horsesho round it. 
the wood are lovely. the garden, curiously, almost wildly, laid out, is 
like no other garden I ever saw. and the house, though not old, is full 
of littl surprises, curious shape rooms, remark staircases, 
quaint recesses. the place is a place to remember. the hous is a hous 
to fix itself in the memory. noth that had onc live here could ever 
come back and forget that it had been here. not even an animal--not even 
an animal. 

I wish I had never gone to that dinnerparti and met the professor. there 
wa a horror come upon me then. He ha hasten it steps. He ha put 
my fear into shape, my vagu wonder into words. whi cannot men leav 
life alone? whi will they catch it by the throat and wring it secret 
from it? To respect reserv is one of the first instinct of the 
gentleman; and life is full of reserve. 

It is get veri late. I thought I heard a step in the hous just 
now. I wonder--i wonder if _she_ is asleep. I wish I knew. day after 
day pass by. My grandmoth seem to be failing, but almost 
imperceptibly. she evid love to have me near to her. like most old 
die people, in her mind she frantic clutch at life, that could 
give to her noth more; and I believ she grew to regard me as the 
personif of all that wa leav her. My vital warm her. she 
extend her hand to my flame hearthfire. she seem tri to live 
in my life, and at length becam afraid to let me out of her sight. 
one day she said to me, in her quavering, ugli voice--old voic are so 
ugly, like hideou echoes: 

“ronald, I could never die while you were in the room. So long as you 
are with me, where I can touch you, I shall live.” 

and she put out her white, corrug hand, and fondl my warm boy’ 
hand. 

how I long to push her hand away, and get out into the sunlight and 
the air, and hear young voices, the voic of the morning, not of the 
twilight, and be away from wrinkl death, that seem sit on the 
doorstep of that hous huddl up like a beggar, wait for the door to 
be opened! 

I wa bore till I grew malignant. I confess it. and, feel malignant, 
I began to long more and more passion to vent myself on someon or 
something. I look at the cat, which, as usual, wa sit befor the 
fire. 

anim have intuit as keen as those of a woman, keener than those 
of a man. they inherit an instinct of fear of those who hate them from a 
long line of ancestor who have suffer at the hand of cruel men. 
they can tell by a look, by a motion, by the tone of a voice, whether 
to expect from anyon kind or malignity. the cat had pur 
complac on the first day of my arrival, and had hunch up her 
white, furri back toward my hand, and had smile with her calm, 
light-blu eyes. now, when I approach her, she seem to gather 
herself togeth and to make herself small. she shrank from me. there 
was--a I fancied--a dawn comprehension, a dawn terror in her blue 
eyes. she alway sat veri close to my grandmoth now, as if she sought 
protection, and she watch me as if she were watch for an intent 
which she apprehend to grow in my mind. 

and the intent came. 

for, as the day went on, and my grandmoth still lived, I began to 
grow desperate. My holiday time wa over now, but my parent wrote 
tell me to stay where I was, and not to think of return to school. 
My grandmoth had caus a letter to be sent to them in which she said 
that she could not part from me, and ad that my parent would never 
have caus to regret interrupt my educ for a time. “he will be 
paid in full for everi moment he loses,” she wrote, refer to me. 

It seem a strang tast in her to care so much for a boy, but she had 
never love women, and I wa handsome, and she like handsom faces. the 
brutal in my natur wa not written upon my features. I had smiling, 
frank brown eyes, a lith young figure, a gay boy’ voice. My movement 
were quick, and I have alway been told that my gestur were never 
awkward, my demeanour wa never unfinished, as is the case so often with 
lad at school. outwardli I wa attractive; and the old woman, who had 
marri two husband mere for their looks, delight in feel that 
she had the power to retain me by her side at an age when most boy 
avoid old peopl as if they were the pestilence. 

and then I pretend to love her, and obey all her insuffer 
tiresom behests. but I long to wreak vengeanc upon her all the same. 
My dearest friend, the fellow with whom I wa to have spent my holidays, 
wa leav at the end of thi term which I wa missing. He wrote to 
me furiou letters, urg me to come back, and reproach me for my 
selfish and lack of affection. 

each time I receiv one I look at the cat, and the cat shrank nearer 
to my grandmother’ chair. 

It never pur now, and noth would induc it to leav the room where 
she sat. one day the servant said to me: 

“I believ the poor dumb thing know my mistress can’t last veri much 
longer, sir. the way that cat look up at her goe to my heart. ah! them 
beast understand thing as well as we do, I believe.” 

I think the cat understood quit well. It did watch my grandmoth in 
a veri strang way, gaze up into her face, as if to mark the chang 
contours, the increas lines, the down-droop of the features, that 
bespok the gradual soft approach of death. It listen to the sound of 
her voice; and as, each day, the voic grew more vague, more weak and 
toneless, an anxieti that made me exult dawn and deepen in it blue 
eyes. Or so I thought. 

I had a great deal of morbid imagin at that age, and love to weav 
a web of fancies, mostli horrible, around almost everyth that enter 
into my life. It pleas me to believ that the cat understood each new 
intent that came into my mind, read me silent from it place 
near the fire, track my thoughts, and wa terror-stricken as they 
concentr themselv round a definit resolve, which harden and 
toughen day by day. 

It pleas me to believe, do I say? I did realli believe, and do believ 
now, that the cat understood all, and grew haggard with fear as my 
grandmoth fail visibly. for it knew what the end would mean for it. 

that first day of my arrival, when I saw my grandmoth in her white 
cap, with her white face and hands, and the big white cat sit 
near to her, I had thought there wa a similar between them. that 
similar struck me more forcibly, grew upon me, as my time in the 
hous grew longer, until the latter seem almost a reproduct of 
the former, and after each letter from my friend my hate for the two 
increased. but my hate for my grandmoth wa impotent, and would alway 
be so. I could never repay her for the _ennui_, the furious, forc 
inact which made my life a burden, and spur my bad passion 
while they lull me in a terrible, enforc repose. I could repay her 
favourite, the thing she had alway cherished, her felin confidant, 
who live in safeti under the shadow of her protection. I could wreak my 
furi on that when the protect wa withdrawn, as it must be at last. 
It seem to my brutal, imaginative, unfinish boy’ mind that the 
murder of her pet must hurt and wound my grandmoth even after she wa 
dead. I would make her suffer then, when she wa impot to wreak a 
vengeanc upon me. I would kill the cat. 

the creatur knew my resolv the day I made it, and had even, I should 
say, anticip it. 

As I sat day after day besid my grandmother’ armchair in the dim room, 
with the blind drawn to shut out the summer sunlight, and talk to her 
in a subdu and rever voice, agre with all the old banal 
she uttered, all the preposter opinion she propounded, all the 
command she laid upon me, I gaze beyond her at the cat, and the 
creatur wa haggard with apprehension. 

It knew, as I knew, that it day wa coming. sometim I bent down and 
took it up on my lap to pleas my grandmother, and prais it beauti 
and it gentl to her and all the time I felt it warm, furri bodi 
trembl with horror between my hands. thi pleas me, and I pretend 
that I wa never happi unless it wa on my knees. I kept it there for 
hours, stroke it so tenderly, smooth it thick white coat, which 
wa alway in the most perfect order, talk to it, caress it. 

and sometim I took it head between my two hands, turn it face to 
mine, and stare into it larg blue eyes. then I could read all it 
agony, all it tortur of apprehension: and in spite of my friend’ 
letters, and the dul of my days, I wa almost happy. 

the summer wa deepening, the glow of the rose flush the garden ways, 
the sky were clear abov scawfell, when the end at last drew near. 
My grandmother’ face wa now scarc recognizable. the eye were sunk 
deep in her head. all express seem to fade gradual away. her 
cheek were no longer fine ivori white; a dull, sickening, yellow pallor 
overspread them. she seldom look at me now, but rest entomb in her 
great armchair, her shrunken limb seem to tend downwards, as if she 
were inclin to slide to the floor and die there. her lip were thin 
and dry, and move perpetu in a silent chattering, as if her mind 
were talk and her voic were alreadi dead. the tide of life wa 
retreat from her body. I could almost see it visibl ebb away. the 
fail wave made no sound upon the shore. death is uncanny, like all 
silent things. 

her maid wish her to stay entir in bed, but she would get up, 
mutter that she wa well; and the doctor said it wa useless to 
hinder her. she had no specif disease. onli the year were take 
their last toll of her. So she wa place in her chair each day by the 
fire, and sat there till evening, mutter with those dri lips. the 
stiff fold of her silken skirt form an angle, and there the cat 
crouch hour after hour, a silent, white, wait thing. 

and the wave eb and eb away, and I wait too. 

one afternoon, as I sat by my grandmother, the servant enter with 
a letter for me just arriv by the post. I took it up. It wa from 
willoughby, my school-friend. He said the term wa over, that he had 
left school, and hi father had decid to send him out to america to 
start in busi in new york, instead of enter him at oxford as he 
had hoped. He bade me good-bye, and said he suppos we should not meet 
again for years; “but,” he added, “no doubt you won’t care a straw, so 
long as you get the confound money you’r after. you’v taught me one 
of the lesson of life, young ronald--nev to believ in friendship.” 

As I read the letter I set my teeth. all that wa good in my natur 
centr round willoughby. He wa a realli fine fellow. I honestli and 
truli love him. hi news gave me a bitter shock, and turn my heart to 
iron and to fire. perhap I should never see him again; even if I did, 
time would have chang him, sear him--mi friend, in hi wonder 
youth, with the morn in hi eyes, would be no more. I hate myself in 
that moment for have stayed; I hate still more her who had kept me. 
for the moment I wa carri out of myself. I crush the letter up in 
my burn hand. I turn fierc round upon that yellow, enigmatic, 
die figur in the great chair. all the fury, lock within my heart 
for so long, rose to the surface, and drove self-interest away. I turn 
upon my grandmoth with blaze eye and trembl limbs. I open my 
mouth to utter a torrent of reproach words, when--what wa it?--what 
slight chang had stolen into the wrinkled, yellow face? I bent over 
her. the eye gaze at me, but so horribly! she sat so low in her chair; 
she look so fearful, so veri strange. I put my finger on her eyelids; 
I drew them down over the eyeballs: they did not open again. I felt her 
wither hands: they were ice. then I knew, and I felt myself smiling. I 
lean over the dead woman. there, on the far side of her, crouch the 
cat. it white fur wa all bristling; it blue eye were dilated; on it 
jaw there were fleck of foam. 

I lean over the dead woman and took it in my arms. 

***** 

that wa nearli twenti year ago, and yet to-night the memori of that 
moment, and what follow it, bring a fear to my heart which I must 
combat. I have read of men who live for long space of time haunt 
by demon creat by their imagination, and I have laugh at them and 
piti them. sure I am not go to join in their folly, in their 
madness, led to the gate of terror by my own fancies, half-confirmed, 
apparently, by the chanc utter of a conceit professor--a man of 
fads, although a man of science. 

that wa twenti year ago. after to-night let me forget it. after 
to-night, do I say? hark! the bird are twitter in the dew outside. 
the pale, earli sun-shaft strike over the moors. and I am tired. 
to-morrow night I will finish thi wrestl with my own folly; I will 
give the _coup de grâce_ to my imagination.. but no more now. My brain 
is not calm, and I will not write in excitement. 




ii. 

_wednesday night, novemb 4th_. 

margot ha gone to bed at last, and I am alone. thi ha been a horribl 
day--horrible; but I will not dwell upon it. 

after the death of my grandmother, I went back to school again. but 
willoughbi wa gone, and he could not forgiv me. He wrote to me onc or 
twice from new york, and then I ceas to hear from him. He die out of 
my life. hi affect for me had evid declin from the day when 
he took it into hi head that I wa onli a money-grubber, like the 
rest of the world, and that the jew instinct had develop in me at an 
abnorm earli age. I let him go. what did it matter? but I wa alway 
glad that I had been cruel on the day my grandmoth died. I never 
repent of what I did--never. If I had, I might be happier now. 

I went back to school. I studied, played, got into mischief and out of 
it again, like other boys; but in my life there seem to be an etern 
coldness, that I alone, perhaps, wa consciou of. My deed of cruelty, 
of brutal reveng on the thing that had never done me injury, had 
sear my soul. I wa not sorry, but t could not forget; and sometim 
I thought--how ridicul it look written down!--that there wa a power 
hidden somewher which could not forget either, and that a penalti might 
have to be paid. becaus a creatur is dumb, must it soul die when it 
dies? Is not the soul, perhaps--a _he_ said--a wander through mani 
bodies? 

but if I did not kill a soul, as I kill a body, the day my grandmoth 
died, where is that soul now? that is what I want to arriv at, that is 
what I must arriv at, if I am to be happy. 

I went back to school, and I pass to oxford. I tast the strange, 
uniqu life of a university, narrow, yet pulsating, where the youth, 
that is so green and springing, tri to arm itself for the battl with 
the weapon forg by the dead and sharpen by the more elderli among 
the living. I did well there, and I pass on into the world. and then 
at last I began to understand the valu of my inheritance; for all that 
had been my grandmother’ wa now mine. My peopl wish me to marry, 
but I had no desir to fetter myself. So I took the spong in my strong, 
young hands, and tri to squeez it dry. and I did not know that I wa 
sad--i did not know it until, at the age of thirty-three, just seventeen 
year after my grandmoth died, I understood the sort of thing 
happi is. Of course, it wa love that brought to me understanding. 
I need not explain that. I had often play on love; now love began to 
play on me. I trembl at the harmoni hi hand evoked. 

I met a young girl, veri young, just on the verg of life and of 
womanhood. she wa seventeen when I first saw her, and she wa vals 
at a big ball in london--h first ball. she pass me in the crowd 
of dancers, and I notic her. As she wa a _debutante_ her dress wa 
natur snow-white. there wa no touch of colour about it--not a 
flower, not a jewel. her hair wa the palest yellow I had almost ever 
seen--th colour of an earli primrose. natur fluffy, it nearli 
conceal the white riband that ran through it, and cluster in 
tendril and tini natur curl upon her neck. her skin wa whiter than 
ivory--a clear, lumin white. her eye were veri larg and china-blu 
in colour. 

thi young girl danc pass and repass me, and my glanc rest 
on her idly, even cynically. for she seem so happy, and at that time 
happi won my languid wonder, if ingenu exhibited. To be happi 
seem almost to be mindless. but by degre I found myself watch 
thi girl, and more closely. anoth danc began. she join it with 
anoth partner. but she seem just as pleas with him as with her 
former one. she would not let him paus to rest; she kept him danc 
all the time, her youth and fresh spoken in that gentl compelling. 
I grew interest in her, even acut so. she seem to me like the 
spirit of youth danc over the bodi of time. I resolv to know her. I 
felt weary; I thought she might reviv me. the danc drew to an end, 
and I approach my hostess, point the girl out, and ask for an 
introduction. her name wa margot magendie, I found, and she wa an 
heiress as well as a beauty. 

I did not care. It wa her human that drew me, noth else. 

but; strang to say, when the moment for the introduct arrived, and I 
stood face to face with miss magendie, I felt an extraordinari shrink 
from her. I have never been abl to understand it, but my blood ran 
cold, and my puls almost ceas to beat. I would have avoid her; an 
instinct within me seem suddenli to cri out against her. but it wa 
too late: the introduct wa effected; her hand rest on my arm. 

I wa actual trembling. she did not appear to notic it. the band 
play a valse, and the inexplic horror that had seiz me lost 
itself in the gay music. It never return until lately. 

I seldom enjoy a vals more. our step suit so perfectly, and her 
obviou childish pleasur commun itself to me. the spirit of youth 
in her knock on my rather jade heart, and I open to it. that wa 
beauti and strange. I talk with her, and I felt myself younger, 
ingenu rather than cynical, inclin even to a radiant, though 
foolish, optimism. she wa veri natural, veri imperfect in worldli 
education, full of fragmentari but decis view on life, quit 
unabash in give them forth, quit inconsider in summon my 
adher to them. 

and then, presently, as we sat in a dim corridor under a rosi hang 
lamp, in say someth she looked, with her great blue eyes, right 
into my face. some veri faint recollect awok and stir in my mind. 

“surely,” I said hesitatingly--“sur I have seen you before? It seem 
to me that I rememb your eyes.” 

As I spoke I wa think hard, chase the vagrant recollect that 
elud me. 

she smiled. 

“you don’t rememb my face?” 

“no, not at all.” 

“nor I yours. If we had seen each other, sure we should recollect it.” 

then she blushed, suddenli realiz that her word implied, perhaps, 
more than she had meant. I did not pay the obviou compliment. those 
blue eye and someth in their express move me strangely; but I 
could not tell why. when I said good-by to her that night, I ask to 
be allow to call. 

she assented. 

that wa the begin of a veri beauti courtship, which gave a 
colour to life, a music to existence, a mean to everi slightest 
sensation. 

and wa it love that laid to sleep recollection, that sang a lullabi to 
awaken horror, and strew poppi over it till it sigh itself into 
slumber? wa it love that drown my mind in deep and charm waters, 
bind the strang power that everi mind possess in floweri garland 
stronger than ani fetter of iron? wa it love that, call up dreams, 
alien my thought from their search after reality? 

I hardli know. I onli know that I grew to love margot, and onli look 
for love in her blue eyes, not for ani deed of the past that might be 
mirror there. 

and I made her love me. 

she gave her child’ heart to my keep with a perfect confid 
that onli a perfect affect could engender. she did love me then. No 
circumst of to-day can break that fact under their hammers. she 
did love me, and it is the knowledg that she did which give so much of 
fear to me now. 

for great chang in the human mind are terrible. As we realiz them we 
realiz the limitless possibl of sinist deed that lie hidden in 
everi human being. A littl child that love a doll can becom an old, 
crafty, secret murderer. how horrible! 

and perhap it is still more horribl to think that, while the human 
envelop remain total unchanged, everi word of the letter within may 
becom altered, and a messag of peac fade into a sentenc of death. 

margot’ face is the same face now as it wa when I marri 
her--scarc older, certainli not less beautiful. onli the express 
of the eye ha changed. 

for we were married. after a year of love-making, which never tire 
either of us, we elect to bind ourselves, to fuse the two into one. 

We went abroad for the honeymoon, and, instead of shorten it to the 
fashion fortnight, we travel for nearli six months, and were 
happi all the time. 

boredom never set in. margot had a beauti mind as well as a beauti 
face. she soften me through my affection. the current of my life began 
to set in a differ direction. I turn the page of a book of piti 
and of death more beauti than that of pierr loti. I could hear at 
last the great cri for sympathy, which is the music of thi strang 
suffer world, and, listen to it, in my heart there rang an echo. 
the cruelti in my natur seem to shrivel up. I wa more gentl than I 
had been, more gentl than I had thought I could ever be. 

At last, in the late spring, we start for home. We stay for a week 
in london, and then we travel north. margot had never seen her 
futur home, had never even been in cumberland before. she wa full 
of excit and happiness, a verit child in the readi and ardent 
express of her feelings. the station is sever mile from the house, 
and is on the edg of the sea. when the train pull up at the waysid 
platform the day drew toward sunset, and the flat level of the beach 
shone with a rich, liquid, amber light. In the distanc the sea wa 
toss and tumbling, whip into foam by a fresh wind. the isl of man 
lay far away, dark, mysterious, under a stack of belli white clouds, 
just begin to be ting with the faintest rose. 

margot found the scene beautiful, the wind life-giving, the flat 
sand-banks, the shine levels, even the dry, spiki grass that flutter 
in the breeze, fascin and refreshing. 

“I feel near the heart of natur in a place like this,” she said, 
look up at a seagul that hover over the littl platform, cri to 
the wind on which it hung. 

the train stole off along the edg of the sands, till we could see onli 
the white streamer of it smoke trail toward the sun. We turn away 
from the sea, got into the carriag that wa wait for us, and set 
our face inland. the ocean wa blot out by the low grass and 
heather-cov bank that divid the fields. present we plung into 
woods. the road descend sharply. A village, an abruptli wind river 
sprang into sight. 

We were on my land. We pass the inn, the rainwood arms, name after 
my grandfather’ family. the peopl whom we met stare curious and 
salut in rustic fashion. 

margot wa full of excit and pleasure, and talk incessantly, 
hold my hand tightli in her and ask a thousand questions. pass 
through the village, we mount a hill toward a thick grove of trees. 

“the hous stand among them,” I said, pointing. 

she sprang up eagerli in the carriag to find it, but it wa hidden. 

We dash through the gate into the momentari dark of the drive, 
emerg between great green lawns, and drew up befor the big doorway of 
the hall. I look into her eyes, and said “welcome!” 

she onli smile in answer. 

I would not let her enter the hous immediately, but made her come with 
me to the terrac abov the river, to see the view over the cumbrian 
mountain and the moor of eskdale. 

the sky wa veri clear and pale, but over styhead the cloud were 
boil up. the scree that guard ebon wastwat look grim and sad. 

margot stood besid me on the terrace, but her chatter had been 
succeed by silence. and I, too, wa silent for the moment, absorb in 
contemplation. but present I turn to her, wish to see how she wa 
impress by her new domain. 

she wa not look toward the river and the hills, but at the terrac 
walk itself, the band of emerald turf that border it, the stone pot 
full of flowers, the wind way that led into the shrubbery. 

she wa look at these intently, and with a strang puzzled, almost 
startl expression. 

“hush! don’t speak to me for a moment,” she said, as I open my lips. 
“don’t; I want to---- how odd thi is!” 

and she gaze up at the window of the house, at the creeper that 
climb it walls, at the slope roof and the irregular chimney-stacks. 

her lip were slightli parted, and her eye were full of an inward 
express that told me she wa struggl with forget and 
desir recollection. 

I wa silent, wondering. 

At last she said: “ronald, I have never been in the north of england 
before, never set foot in cumberland; yet I seem to know thi terrac 
walk, those veri flower-pots, the garden, the look of that roof, those 
chimneys, even the slant way in which that great creeper climbs. Is 
it not--i it not veri strange?” 

she gaze up at me, and in her blue eye there wa an express almost 
of fear. 

I smile down on her. “it must be your fancy,” I said. 

“it doe not seem so,” she replied. “I feel as if I had been here 
before, and often, or for a long time.” she paused; then she said: “do 
let me go into the house. there ought to be a room there--a room--i seem 
almost to see it. come! let us go in.” 

she took my hand and drew me toward the hall door. the servant were 
carri in the luggage, and there wa a certain amount of confus and 
noise, but she did not seem to notic it. she wa intent on something; I 
could not tell what. 

“do show me the house, ronald--th drawing-room, and--and--ther is 
anoth room I wish to see.” 

“you shall see them all, dear,” I said. “you are excited. It is natur 
enough. thi is the drawing-room.” 

she glanc round it hastily. 

“and now the others!” she exclaimed. 

I took her to the dining-room, the library, and the variou apart 
on the ground-floor. 

she scarc look at them. when we had finish exploring, “are these 
all?” she asked, with a waver accent of disappointment. 

“all,” I answered. 

“then--show me the room upstairs.” 

We ascend the shallow oak steps, and pass first into the apart 
in which my grandmoth had died. 

It had been done up sinc then, refurnished, and almost complet 
altered. onli the wide fireplace, with it brass dog and it heavi 
oaken mantelpiece, had been left untouched. 

margot glanc hastili round. then she walk up to the fireplace, and 
drew a long breath. 

“there ought to be a fire here,” she said. 

“but it is summer,” I answered, wondering. 

“and a chair there,” she went on, in a curiou low voice, indicating--i 
think now, or is it my imagination?--th veri spot where my grandmoth 
wa wont to sit. “yes--i seem to remember, and yet not to remember.” 

she look at me, and her white brow were knit. 

suddenli she said: “ronald, I don’t think I like thi room. there is 
something--i don’t know--i don’t think I could sit here; and I seem to 
remember--someth about it, as I did about the terrace. what can it 
mean?” 

“it mean that you are tire and overexcited, darling. your nerv are 
too highli strung, and nerv play us strang tricks. come to your own 
room and take off your things, and when you have had some tea, you will 
be all right again.” 

yes, I wa fool enough to believ that tea wa the panacea for an 
undreamed-of, a then unimaginable, evil. 

I thought margot wa simpli an overtir and imagin child that 
evening. If I could believ so now! 

We went up into her boudoir and had tea, and she grew more like 
herself; but sever time that night I observ her look puzzl and 
thoughtful, and a certain express of anxieti shone in her blue eye 
that wa new to them then. 

but I thought noth of it, and I was-happy. two or three day 
passed, and mar-got did not again refer to her curiou sensat of 
pre-knowledg of the hous and garden. I fanci there wa a slight 
alter in her manner; that wa all. she seem a littl restless. 
her vivac flag now and then. she wa more will to be alon than 
she had been. but we were old marri folk now, and could not be alway 
in each other’ sight. I had a great mani peopl connect with the 
estat to see, and had to gather up the tangl thread of mani affairs. 

the honeymoon wa over. Of cours we could not alway be together. 

still, I should have wish margot to desir it, and I could not hide 
from myself that now and then she scarc conceal a slight impati 
to be left in solitude. thi troubl me, but onli a little, for she wa 
gener as fond as ever. that evening, however, an incid occur 
which render me decidedli uneasy, and made me wonder if my wife were 
not inclin to that curs of highly-strung women--hysteria! 

I had been ride over the moor to visit a tenant-farm who live at 
some distance, and did not return until twilight. dismounting, I let 
myself into the house, travers the hall, and ascend the stairs. As I 
wore spurs, and the step were of polish oak and uncarpeted, I walk 
noisili enough to warn anyon of my approach. I wa pass the door 
of the room that had been my grandmother’ sitting-room, when I notic 
that it stood open. the hous wa rather dark, and the interior wa dim 
enough, but I could see a figur in a white dress move about inside. 
I recognis margot, and wonder what she wa doing, but her movement 
were so singular that, instead of speak to her, I stood in the 
doorway and watch her. 

she wa walking, with a veri peculiar, stealthi step, around the room, 
not as if she were look for anything, but mere as if she were 
restless or ill at ease. but what struck me forcibl wa this, that 
there wa someth curious anim in her movements, seen thu in a 
dim half-light that onli partial reveal her to me. I had never 
seen a woman walk in that strang wild yet soft way before. there wa 
someth uncanni about it, that render me extrem discomforted; yet 
I wa quit fascinated, and root to the ground. 

I cannot tell how long I stood there. I wa so complet absorb in 
the passion of the gazer that the passag of time did not concern me 
in the least. I wa as one assist at a strang spectacle. thi white 
thing move in the dark did not suggest my wife to me, although it 
wa she. I might have been watch an animal, vague, yet purpos of 
mind, trace out some hidden thing, follow out some instinct quit 
foreign to humanity. I rememb that present I involuntarili clasp 
my hand together, and felt that they were veri cold. perspir broke 
out on my face. I wa painfully, unnatur moved, and a violent desir 
to be away from thi white move thing came over me. walk as softli 
as I could, I went to my dressing-room, shut the door, and sat down on a 
chair. I never rememb to have felt thoroughli unnerv before, but now 
I found myself actual shaken, palsied. I could understand how deadli 
a thing fear is. I lit a candl hastily, and as I did so a knock came to 
the door. 

margot’ voic said, “may I come in?” I felt unabl to reply, so I got 
up and admit her. 

she enter smiling, and look such a child, so innocent, so tender, 
that I almost laugh aloud. that I, a man, should have been frighten 
by a child in a white dress, just becaus the twilight cast a phantom 
atmospher around her! I held her in my arms, and I gaze into her blue 
eyes. 

she look down, but still smiled. 

“where have you been, and what have you been doing?” I ask gaily. 

she answer that she had been in the drawing-room sinc tea-time. 

“you came here straight from the drawing-room?” I said. 

she replied, “yes.” 

then, with an indiffer air which hid real anxiety, I said: 

“bi the way, margot, have you been into that room again--th room you 
fanci you recollected?” 

“no, never,” she answered, withdraw herself from my arms. “I 
don’t wish to go there. make haste, ronald, and dress. It is nearli 
dinner-time, and I am ready.” and she turn and left me. 

she had told me a lie. all my feel of uneasi and discomfort 
return tenfold. 

that even wa the most wretch one, the onli wretch one, I had 
ever spent with her. 

***** 

I am tire of writing. I will continu my task to-morrow. It take me 
longer than I anticipated. yet even to tell everyth to myself bring 
me some comfort. man must express himself; and despair must find a 
voice. 




iii. 

_thursday night, decemb 5th_. 

that lie awok in me suspicion of the child I had married. I began to 
doubt her, yet never ceas to love her. she had all my heart, and must 
have it till the end. but the calm of love wa to be succeed by love’ 
tumult and agony. A strang wa creep over margot. It wa as if 
she took a thin veil in her hands, and drew it over and all around her, 
till the outlin I had known were slightli blurred. her disposition, 
which had been so clear cut, so sharply, beauti defined, stand 
out in it innoc glori for all men to see, seem to withdraw itself, 
as if a dawn necess for secreci had arisen. A thin crust of 
reserv began to subtli overspread her everi act and expression. she 
thought now befor she spoke; she thought befor she looked. It seem 
to me that she wa becom a slightli differ person. 

the chang I mean to impli is veri difficult to describe. It wa not 
abrupt enough to startle, but I could feel it, slight though it was. 
have you seen the first flat film of waveless water, sent by the 
incom tide of the sea, crawl silent up over the wrinkl brown 
sand, and fill the tini ruts, till diminut hill and valley are 
all one smooth surface? So it wa with margot. A tide flow over her 
character, a waveless tide of reserve. the hill and valley which I 
love disappear from my ken. behind the old sweet smile, the old frank 
expression, my wife wa shrink down to hide herself, as one escap 
from pursuit hide behind a barrier. when one human be know anoth 
veri intimately, and all the barricad that divid soul from soul have 
been broken down, it is difficult to set them up again without nois and 
dust, and the sound of thrust-in bolts, and the tap of the hammer that 
drive in the nails. It is difficult, but not impossible. barricad 
can be rais noiselessly, soundless bolts--that keep out the soul--b 
push home. the black gauz veil that blot out the scene drops, and 
when it is raised--if ever--th scene is changed. 

the real margot wa reced from me. I felt it with an impot of 
despair that wa benumbing. yet I could not speak of it, for at first I 
could hardli tell if she knew of what wa take place. indeed, at thi 
moment, in think it over, I do not believ that for some time she had 
ani definit cognis of the fact that she wa grow to love me 
less passion than of old. In act she wa not changed. that wa the 
strang part of the matter. her kiss were warm, but I believ them 
premeditated. she clasp my hand in hers, but now there wa more 
mechan than magic in that act of tenderness. impuls fail within 
her; and she had been all impulse? did she know it? At that time I 
wondered. believ that she did not know she wa changing, I wa at the 
greatest pain to guard my conduct, lest I should implant the suspicion 
that might hasten what I feared. I remained, desperately, the same as 
ever, and so, of course, wa not the same, for a deed done defiantli 
bear littl resembl to a deed done naturally. I wa alway 
consid what I should say, how I should act, even how I should 
look. To live now wa sedul instead of easy. effort took the place 
of simplicity. My wife and I were gaze furtiv at each other through 
the eye-hol of masks. I knew it. did she? 

At that time I never ceas to wonder. Of one thing I wa certain, 
however--that margot began to devis excus for be left alone. when 
we first came home she could hardli endur me out of her sight. now she 
grew to appreci solitude. thi wa a terribl danger signal, and I 
could not fail to so regard it. 

yet someth within me held me back from speak out. I made no 
comment on the chang that deepen day by day, but I watch my wife 
furtively, with a concentr of attent that sometim left me 
physic exhausted. I felt, too, at length, that I wa grow morbid, 
that suspicion colour my mind and caus me, perhaps, to put a wrong 
interpret on mani of her actions, to exagger and misconstru 
the most simpl thing she did. I began to believ her everi look 
premeditated. even if she kiss me, I thought she did it with a 
purpose; if she smile up at me as of old, I fanci the smile to be 
onli a conceal of it opposite. By degre we becam shi of each 
other. We were like uncongeni intimates, forc to occupi the same 
house, forc into a fear knowledg of each other’ person habits, 
while we knew noth of the thought that make up the true live of 
individuals. 

and then anoth incid occurred, a pendant to the incid of 
margot’ strang deni visit to the room she affect to fear. It wa 
one night, one deep dark night of the autumn--a season to affect even a 
cheer mind and inclin it toward melancholy. margot and I were now 
often silent when we were together. that evening, toward nine, a dull 
steadi rain set in. I rememb I heard it on the window-pan as we sat 
in the drawing-room after dinner, and remark on it, say to her that 
if it continu for two or three day she might chanc to see the flood 
out, and that fishermen would descend upon us by the score. 

I did not obtain much respons from her. the dreari of the weather 
seem to affect her spirits. she took up a book presently, and appear 
to read; but, onc in glanc up suddenli from my newspaper, I thought 
I caught her gaze fix fear upon me. It seem to me that she wa 
look furtiv at me with an absolut terror. I wa so much affect 
that I made some excus for leav the room, went down to my den, lit 
a cigar, and walk uneasili up and down, listen to the rain on the 
window. At ten margot came in to tell me she wa go to bed. I wish 
her good-night tenderly, but as I held her slim bodi a moment in my arm 
I felt that she began to tremble. I let her go, and she slip from 
the room with the soft, cushion step that wa habitu with her. and, 
strang enough, my thought recur to the day, long ago, when I 
first held the great white cat on my knees, and felt it bodi shrink 
from my touch with a nameless horror. the uneasi movement of the woman 
recal to me so strongli and so strang the uneasi movement of the 
animal. 

I lit a second cigar. It wa near midnight when it wa smoke out, and I 
turn down the lamp and went softli up to bed. I undress in the room 
adjoin my wife’s, and then stole into hers. she wa sleep in the 
wide white bed rather uneasily, and as I lean over her, shade the 
candl flame with my outspread hand, she mutter some broken word that 
I could not catch. I had never heard her talk in her dream before. I 
lay down gentli at her side and extinguish the candle. 

but sleep did not come to me. the dull, dead silenc weigh upon 
instead of sooth me. My mind wa terribl alive, in a ferment; 
and the contrast between my own excit and the hush peac of my 
environ wa painful, wa almost unbearable. I wish that a wind 
from the mountain were beat against the window-panes, and the 
rain lash the hous in fury. the black calm around wa horrible, 
unnatural. the drizzl rain wa now so small that I could not even 
hear it patter when I strain my ears. margot had ceas to mutter, 
and lay perfectli still. how I long to be abl to read the soul hidden 
in her sleep body, to unravel the mysteri of the mind which I had 
onc understood so perfectly! It is so horribl that we can never open 
the human envelope, take out the letter, and seiz with our eye upon 
it everi word. margot slept with all her secret safeguarded, although 
she wa unconscious, no longer watchful, on the alert. she wa so 
silent, even her quiet breath not reach my ear, that I felt 
impel to stretch out my hand beneath the coverlet and touch her ever 
so softly. I did so. 

her hand wa instantli and silent withdrawn. she wa awake, then. 

“margot,” I said, “did I disturb you?” 

there wa no answer. 

the movement, follow by the silence, affect me veri disagreeably. 

I lit the candl and look at her. she wa lie on the extrem edg 
of the bed, with her blue eye closed. her lip were slightli parted. I 
could hear her steadi breathing. yet wa she realli sleeping? 

I bent lower over her, and as I did so a slight, involuntari movement, 
akin to what we call a shudder, ran through her body. I recoil from 
the bed. An impot anger seiz me. could it be that my presenc wa 
becom so hate to my wife that even in sleep her bodi trembl when 
I drew near it? Or wa thi slumber feigned? I could not tell, but I 
felt it imposs at that moment to remain in the room. I return to 
my own, dressed, and descend the stair to the door open on to the 
terrace. I felt a long to be out in the air. the atmospher of the 
hous wa stifling. 

wa it come to this, then? did I, a man, shrink with a fantast 
cowardic from a woman I loved? the latent cruelti began to stir within 
me, the tyrant spirit which a strong love sometim evokes. I had been 
margot’ slave almost. My affect had brought me to her feet, had 
kept me there. So long as she love me I wa content to be her captive, 
know she wa mine. but a chang in her attitud toward me might rous 
the master. In my natur there wa a certain brutality, a savagery, 
which I had never wholli slain, although margot had soften me 
wonder by her softness, had brought me to gentl by her 
tenderness. the boy of year ago had develop toward better things, but 
he wa not dead in me. I felt that as I walk up and down the terrac 
through the night in a wild meditation. If my love could not hold 
margot, my strength should. 

I drew in a long breath of the wet night air, and I open my shoulder 
as if shake off an oppression. My passion for margot had not yet drawn 
me down to weakness; it had rais me up to strength. the faint fear 
of her, which I had felt almost without know it more than once, die 
within me. the desir of the conqueror elev me. there wa someth 
for me to win. My paralysi pass away, and I turn toward the house. 

and now a strang thing happened. I walk into the dark hall, close 
the outer door, shut out the dull murmur of the night, and felt in 
my pocket for my matchbox. It wa not there. I must inadvert have 
laid it down in my dressing-room and left it. I search about in the 
dark on the hall table, but could find no light. there wa noth 
for it, then, but to feel my way upstair as best I could. 

I started, keep my hand against the wall to guid me. I gain the 
top of the stairs, and began to travers the landing, still with my hand 
upon the wall. To reach my dressing-room I had to pass the apart 
which had been my grandmother’ sitting-room. 

when I reach it, instead of slide along a close door, as I had 
anticipated, my hand drop into vacancy. 

the door wa wide open. It had been shut, like all the other door 
in the house, when I had descend the stairs--shut and locked, as it 
alway wa at night-time. whi wa it open now? 

I paus in the darkness. and then an impuls seiz me to walk forward 
into the room. I advanc a step; but, as I did so, a horribl low cri 
broke upon my ear out of the darkness. It came from immedi in 
front of me, and sound like an express of the most abject fear. 

My feet root themselv to the ground. 

“who’ there?” I asked. 

there came no answer. 

I listen for a moment, but did not hear the minutest sound. the desir 
for light wa overpowering. I gener did my write in thi room, 
and knew the exact whereabout of everyth in it. I knew that on the 
writing-t there wa a silver box contain wax matches. It lay on 
the left of my desk. I move anoth step forward. 

there wa the sound of a slight rustle, as if someon shrank back as I 
advanced. 

I laid my hand quickli on the box, open it, and struck a light. the 
room wa vagu illuminated. I saw someth white at the far end, 
against the wall. I put the match to a candle. 

the white thing wa margot. she wa in her dressing-gown, and wa 
crouch up in an angl of the wall as far away from where I stood 
as possible. her blue eye were wide open, and fix upon me with an 
express of such intens and hideou fear in them that I almost cri 
out. 

“margot, what is the matter?” I said. “are you ill?” 

she made no reply. her face terrifi me. 

“what is it, margot?” I cri in a loud, almost harsh voice, determin 
to rous her from thi horrible, unnatur silence. “what are you do 
here?” 

I move toward her. I stretch out my hand and seiz her. As I did 
so, a sort of sob burst from her. her hand were cold and trembling. 

“what is it? what ha frighten you?” I reiterated. 

At last she spoke in a low voice. 

“you--you look so strange, so--so cruel as you came in,” she said. 

“strange! cruel! but you could not see me. It wa dark,” I answered. 

“dark!” she said. 

“yes, until I lit the candle. and you cri out when I wa onli in the 
doorway. you could not see me there.” 

“whi not? what ha that got to do with it?” she murmured, still 
trembl violently. 

“you can see me in the dark?” 

“of course,” she said. “I don’t understand what you mean. Of cours I 
can see you when you are there befor my eyes.” 

“but----” I began; and then her obviou and complet surpris at my 
question stop them. I still held her hand in mine, and their 
extrem cold rous me to the remembr that she wa unclothed. 

“you will be ill if you stay here,” I said. “come back to your room.” 

she said nothing, and I led her back, wait while she got into bed, and 
then, place the candl on the dressing-table, sat down in a chair by 
her side. 

the strong determin to take prompt action, to come to an 
explanation, to end these dreari mysteri of mind and conduct, wa 
still upon me. 

I did not think of the strang hour; I did not care that the night wa 
glide on toward dawn. I wa self-absorbed. I wa beyond ordinari 
considerations. 

yet I did not speak immediately. I wa tri to be quit calm, tri 
to think of the best line for me to take. So much might depend upon our 
mere word now. At length I said, lay my hand upon hers, which wa 
outsid the coverlet: 

“margot, what were you do in that room at such a strang hour? whi 
were you there?” 

she hesit obviously. then she answered, not look at me: 

“I miss you. I thought you might be there--writing.” 

“but you were in the dark.” 

“I thought you would have a light.” 

I knew by her manner that she wa not tell me the truth, but I went 
on quietly: 

“if you expect me, whi did you cri out when I came to the door?” 

she tri to draw her hand away, but I held it fast, closing, my finger 
upon it with even brutal strength. 

“whi did you cri out?” 

“you--you look so strange, so cruel.” 

“so cruel!” 

“yes. you frighten me--you frighten me horribly.” 

she began suddenli to sob, like one complet overstrained. I lift 
her up in the bed, put my arm round her, and made her lean against me. 
I wa strang moved. 

“I frighten you! how can that be?” I said, tri to control a passion 
of mingl love and anger that fill my breast. “you know that I love 
you. you must know that. In all our short marri life have I ever been 
even momentarili unkind to you? let us be frank with one another. our 
live have chang lately. one of us ha altered. you cannot say that it 
is i.” 

she onli continu to sob bitterli in my arms. I held her closer. 

“let us be frank with one another,” I went on. “for god’ sake let us 
have no barrier between us. margot, look into my eye and tell me--ar 
you grow tire of me?” 

she turn her head away, but I spoke more sternly: 

“you shall be truthful. I will have no more subterfuge. look me in the 
face. you did love me once?” 

“yes, yes,” she whisper in a choke voice. 

“what have I done, then, to alien you? have I ever hurt you, ever 
shown a lack of sympathy, ever neglect you?” 

“never--never.” 

“yet you have chang to me since--since----” I paus a moment, tri 
to recal when I had first notic her alter demeanour. 

she interrupt me. 

“it ha all come upon me in thi house,” she sobbed. “oh! what is it? 
what doe it all mean? If I could understand a little--onli a little--it 
would not be so bad. but thi nightmare, thi thing that seem such a 
mad of the intellect----” 

her voic broke and ceased. her tear burst forth afresh. such mingl 
fear, passion, and a sort of strang latent irritation, I had never seen 
before. 

“it is a mad indeed,” I said, and a sens almost of outrag made my 
voic hard and cold. “I have not deserv such treatment at your hands.” 

“I will not yield to it,” she said, with a sort of desperation, suddenli 
throw her arm around me. “I will not--i will not!” 

I wa strang puzzled. I wa torn with conflict feelings. love and 
anger grappl at my heart. but I onli held her, and did not speak until 
she grew obvious calmer. the paroxysm seem pass away. then I 
said: 

“I cannot understand.” 

“nor i,” she answered, with a direct that had been foreign to her 
of late, but that wa part and parcel of her real, beauti nature. “I 
cannot understand. I onli know there is a chang in me, or in you to 
me, and that I cannot help it, or that I have not been abl to help it. 
sometim I feel--do not be angry, I will tri to tell you--a physic 
fear of you, of your touch, of your clasp, a fear such as an anim 
might feel toward the master who had beaten it. I trembl then at 
your approach. when you are near me I feel cold, oh! so cold and--and 
anxious; perhap I ought to say apprehensive. oh, I am hurt you!” 

I suppos I must have winc at her words, and she is quick to observe. 

“go on,” I said; “do not spare me. tell me everything. It is mad 
indeed; but we may kill it, when we both know it.” 

“oh, if we could!” she cried, with a poignanc which wa heart-break 
to hear. “if we could!” 

“do you doubt our ability?” I said, tri to be patient and calm. “you 
are unreasoning, like all women. Be sensibl for a moment. you do me a 
wrong in cherish these feelings. I have the capac for cruelti in 
me. I may have been--i have been--cruel in the past, but never to you. 
you have no right to treat me as you have done lately. If you examin 
your feelings, and compar them with facts, you will see their 
absurdity.” 

“but,” she interposed, with a woman’ fatal quickness, “that will not do 
away with their reality.” 

“it must. look into their face until they fade like ghosts, seen onli 
between light and darkness. they are found upon nothing; they are bred 
without father or mother; they are hysterical; they are wicked. think a 
littl of me. you are not go to be conquer by a chimera, to allow a 
phantom creat by your imagin to ruin the happi that ha been 
so beautiful. you will not do that! you dare not!” 

she onli answered: 

“if I can help it.” 

A passion anger seiz me, a furi at my impot against thi child. 
I push her almost roughli from my arms. 

“and I have marri thi woman!” I cri bitterly. I got up. 

margot had ceas cri now, and her face wa veri white and calm; it 
look rigid in the faint candle-light that shone across the bed. 

“do not be angry,” she said. “we are control by someth insid of 
us; there are power in us that we cannot fight against.” 

“there is noth we cannot fight against,” I said passionately. “the 
doctrin of predestin is the devil’ own doctrine. It is the 
doctrin set up by the sinner to excus hi sin; it is the coward’ 
doctrine. understand me, margot, I love you, but I am not a weak fool. 
there must be an end of thi folly. perhap you are play with me, 
act like a girl, test me. let us have no more of it.” 

she said: 

“I onli do what I must.” 

her tone turn me cold. her set face frighten me, and anger me, for 
there wa a curiou obstinaci in it. I left the room abruptly, and did 
not return. that night I had no sleep. 

I am not a coward, but I find that I am inclin to fear that which 
fear me. I dread an anim that alway avoid me silent more than an 
anim that actual attack me. the thing that run from me make me 
shiver, the thing that creep away when I come near wake my uneasiness. 
At thi time there rose up in me a strang feel toward margot. 
the white, fair child I had marri wa at moments--onli at 
moments--horr to me. I felt dispos to shun her. someth within 
cri out against her. long ago, at the instant of our introduction, an 
unreason sensat that could onli be call dread had laid hold 
upon me. that dread return from the night of our explanation, return 
deepen and ad to. It prompt me to a suggest which I had no 
sooner made than I regret it. On the morn follow I told 
margot that in futur we had better occupi separ rooms. she assent 
quietly, but I thought a furtiv express of relief stole for a moment 
into her face. 

I wa deepli anger with her and with myself; yet, now that I knew 
beyond question my wife’ physic terror of me, I was-half afraid of 
her. I felt as if I could not bring myself to lie long hour by her side 
in the darkness, by the side of a woman who wa shrink from me, who 
wa watch me when I could not see her. the idea made my veri flesh 
creep. 

yet I hate myself for thi shrink of the body, and sometim 
hate her for rous it. A hideou struggl wa go on within me--a 
struggl between love and impot anger and despair, between the lover 
and the master. for I am one of the old-fashion men who think that a 
husband ought to be master of hi wife as well as of hi house. 

how could I be master of a woman I secretli feared? My knowledg of 
myself spur me through acut irrit almost to the verg of 
madness. 

all calm wa gone. I wa altern gentl to my wife and almost 
feroci toward her, readi to fall at her feet and worship her or to 
seiz her and treat her with physic violence. I onli restrain myself 
by an effort. 

My variat of manner did not seem to affect her. indeed, it sometim 
struck me that she fear me more when I wa kind to her than when I wa 
harsh. 

and I knew, by a thousand furtiv indications, that her horror of me wa 
deepen day by day. I believ she could hardli bring herself to be in 
a room alon with me, especi after nightfall. 

one evening, when we were dining, the butler, after place dessert upon 
the table, move to leav us. she turn white, and, as he reach the 
door, half rose, and call him back in a sharp voice. 

“symonds!” she said. 

“yes, ma’am?” 

“you are going?” 

the fellow look surprised. 

“can I get you anything, ma’am?” 

she glanc at me with an indescrib uneasiness. then she lean back 
in her chair with an effort, and press her lip together. 

“no,” she said. 

As the man went out and shut the door, she look at me again from 
under her eyelids; and final her eye travel from me to a small, 
thin-blad knife, use for cut oranges, that lay near her plate, 
and fix themselv on it. she put out her hand stealthily, drew it 
toward her, and kept her hand over it on the table. I took an orang 
from a dish in front of me. 

“margot,” I said, “will you pass me that fruit-knife?” 

she obvious hesitated. 

“give me that knife,” I repeat roughly, stretch out my hand. 

she lift her hand, left the knife upon the table, and at the same 
time, spring up, glide softli out of the room and close the door 
behind her. 

that even I spent alon in the smoking-room, and, for the first time, 
she did not come to bid me good-night. 

I sat smoke my cigar in a tumult of furiou despair and love. the 
situat wa becom intolerable. It could not be en-dured. I long 
for a crisis, even for a violent one. I could have cri aloud that 
night for a verit tragedy. there were moment when I would almost 
have kill the child who mysteri elud and defi me. I could 
have wreak a cruel vengeanc upon the bodi for the sin of the mind. I 
wa terribly, mortal distressed. 

after a long and pain self-communion, I resolv to make anoth wild 
effort to set thing right befor it wa too late; and when the clock 
chime the half-hour after ten I went upstair softli to her bedroom and 
turn the handl of the door, mean to enter, to catch margot in my 
arms, tell her how deep my love for her was, how she injur me by her 
base fears, and how she wa drive me back from the gentl she had 
given me to the cruelty, to the brutality, of my first nature. 

the door resist me: it wa locked. I paus a moment, and then tap 
gently. I heard a sudden rustl within, as if someon hurri across the 
floor away from the door, and then margot’ voic cri sharply: 

“who’ that? who is there?” “margot, it is I. I wish to speak to you--to 
say good-night.” 

“good-night,” she said. “but let me in for a moment.” there wa a 
silence--it seem to me a long one; then she answered: 

“not now, dear; i--i am so tired.” “open the door for a moment.” “I 
am veri tired. good-night.” the cold, level tone of her voice--for the 
anxieti had left it after that first sudden cry--rous me to a sudden 
furi of action. I seiz the handl of the door and press with all my 
strength. physic I am a veri power man--mi anger and despair 
gave me a giant’ might. I burst the lock, and sprang into the room. My 
impuls wa to seiz margot in my arm and crush her to death, it might 
be, in an embrac she could not struggl against. the blood cours like 
molten fire through my veins. the lust of love, the lust of murder even, 
perhaps, wa upon me. I sprang impetu into the room. 

No candl were alight in it. the blind were up, and the chill 
moonbeam filter through the small lattic panes. By the farthest 
window, in the yellowish radiance, wa huddl a white thing. 

A sudden cold took hold upon me. all the warmth in me froze up. 

I stop where I wa and held my breath. 

that white thing, seen thu uncertainly, had no semblanc to humanity. 
It wa anim wholly. I could have believ for the moment that a white 
cat crouch from me there by the curtain, wait to spring. 

what a strang illus that was! I tri to laugh at it afterwards, but 
at the moment horror stole through me--horror, and almost awe. 

all desir of violenc left me. heat wa dead; I felt cold as stone. I 
could not even speak a word. 

suddenli the white thing moved. the curtain wa drawn sharply; the 
moonlight wa blot out; the room wa plung in darkness--a dark 
in which that thing could see! 

I turn and stole out of the room. I could have fled, driven by the 
nameless fear that wa upon me. 

onli when the morn dawn did the man in me awake, and I curs 
myself for my cowardice. 

***** 

the follow even we were ask to dine out with some neighbours, 
who live a few mile off in a wonder old norman castl near the 
sea. dure the day neither of us had made the slightest allus to 
the incid of the previou night. We both felt it a relief to go 
into society, I think. the friend to whom we went--lord and ladi 
melchester--had a larg parti stay with them, and we were, I believe, 
the onli outsid who live in the neighbourhood. one of their guest 
wa professor black, whose name I have alreadi mentioned--a little, 
dry, thin, acrid man, with thick black hair, innoc of the comb, and 
pursed, straight lips. I had met him two or three time in london, 
and as he had onli just arriv at the castle, and scarc knew hi 
fellow-visitor there, he brought hi wine over to me when the ladi 
left the dining-room, and enter into conversation. At the moment I 
wa glad, but befor we follow the women I would have given a year--i 
might say years--of my life not to have spoken to him, not to have heard 
him speak that night. 

how did we drift into that fatal conversation? I hardli remember. We 
talk first of the neighbourhood, then sway away to books, then to 
people. yes, that wa how it came about. the professor wa speak of 
a man whom we both knew in town, a curious effemin man, whose everi 
thought and feel seem that of a woman. I said I dislik him, 
and condemn him for hi woman’ demeanour, hi woman’ mind; but the 
professor thereupon join issu with me. 

“piti the fellow, if you like,” he uttered, in hi rather strident 
voice; “but as to condemn him, I would as soon condemn a tadpol for 
not be a full-grown frog. hi soul is beyond hi power to manage, or 
even to coerce, you may depend upon it.” 

have sip hi port, he drew a littl nearer to me, and slightli 
drop hi voice. 

“there would be less censur of individu in thi world,” he said, 
“if peopl were onli a littl more thoughtful. these soul are like 
letters, and sometim they are seal up in the wrong envelope. for 
instance, a man’ soul may be put into a woman’ body, or _vice versâ_. 
It ha been so in d------‘ case. A mistak ha been made.” 

“bi providence?” I interrupted, with, perhaps, just a _soupçon_ of 
sarcasm in my voice. 

the professor smiled. 

“suppos we imit thoma hardy, and say by the presid of the 
immortals, who make sport with more human than tess,” he answered. 
“mistak may be deliberate, just as their revers may be accidental. 
even a mighti power may condescend sometim to a veri practic joke. 
To a thinker the world is full of apple-pi beds, and cold wet 
spong fall on us from at least half the door we push open. the 
soul-juggleri of the before-ment presid are veri curious, but 
peopl will not realiz that soul transfer from bodi to bodi is 
as much a plain fact as the daili rise of the sun on one half of the 
world and it nightli set on the other.” 

“do you mean that soul pass on into the world again on the death of 
the particular bodi in which they have been for the moment confined?” I 
asked. 

“precisely: I have no doubt of it. sometim a woman’ soul goe into 
a man’ body; then the man act woman, and peopl cri against him for 
effeminacy. the soul colour the bodi with actions, the bodi doe not 
colour the soul, or not in the same degree.” 

“but we are not irresponsible. We can command ourselves.” 

the professor smile dryly. 

“you think so?” he said. “I sometim doubt it.” 

“and I doubt your theori of soul transference.” 

“that show me--pardon the appar impertinence--that you have never 
realli examin the soul question with ani close attention. Do you 
suppos that d------ realli like be so notic differ from 
other men? depend upon it,’ he ha notic in himself what we have 
notic in him. depend upon it, he ha tri to be ordinary, and found 
it impossible. hi soul manag him as a strong natur manag a 
weak one, and hi soul is a female, not a male. for soul have sexes, 
otherwis what would be the sens of talk about wed souls? I have 
no doubt whatev of the truth of reincarn on earth. soul go on 
and on follow out their object of development.” 

“you believ that everi soul is reincarnated?” 

“A certain number of times.” 

“that even in the anim world the soul of one anim pass into the 
bodi of another?” 

“wait a minute. now we are come to someth that tend to prove 
my theori true. anim have souls, as you imply. who can know them 
intim and doubt it for an instant? soul as immortal--or as 
mortal--a ours. and their souls, too, pass on.” 

“into other animals?” 

“possibly. and eventually, in the process of development, into human 
beings.” 

I laughed, perhap a littl rudely. “mi dear professor, I thought that 
old notion wa quit explod in these modern scientif days.” 

“I found my belief upon my own minut observations,” he said rather 
frigidly. “I notic certain anim masquerading--to some extent--a 
human beings, and I draw my own conclusions. If they happen to fit in 
at all with the conclus of pythagoras--or anyon else, for that 
matter--wel and good. If not, I am not much concerned. sure 
you notic the animal--and not mere the animal, but definit 
animals--reproduc in man. there are men whose whole demeanour suggest 
the monkey. I have met women who in manner, appearance, and even 
character, were intens like cats.” 

I utter a slight exclamation, which did not interrupt him. 

“now, I have made a minut studi of cats. Of all anim they interest 
me the most. they have less appar intensity, less utter passion, 
than dogs, but in my opinion more character. their subtleti is 
extraordinary, their sensit wonderful. will you understand me 
when I say that all dog are men, all cat women? that remark express 
the differ between them.” 

He paus a moment. 

“go on--go on,” I said, lean forward, with my eye fix upon hi 
keen, pucker face. 

He seem pleas with my suddenly-ar interest.. 

“cat are as subtl and as difficult to understand as the most complex 
woman, and almost as full of intuitions. If they have been well treated, 
there is often a certain gracious, condescend suaviti in their 
demeanour at first, even toward a total stranger; but if that stranger 
is ill dispos toward them, they seem instinct to read hi soul, 
and they are in arm directly. yet they dissembl their fear in a cold 
indiffer and reserve. they do not take action: they mere abstain 
from action. they withdraw the soul that ha peep out, as they can 
withdraw their claw into the pad upon their feet. they do not show 
fight as a dog might, they do not becom aggressive, nor do they whine 
and put their tail between their legs. they are simpli on guard, 
watchful, mistrustful. Is not all thi woman?” 

“possibly,” I answered, with a pain effort to assum indifference. 

“A woman intuit know who is her friend and who is her enemy--so 
long, at least, as her heart is not engaged; then she run wild, I 
allow. A woman---- but I need not pursu the parallel. besides, perhap 
it is scarc to the point, for my object is not to bolster up an 
absurd content that all women have the soul of cats. no; but I have 
met women so strang like cat that their soul have, as I said befor 
soul do, colour their bodi in actions. they have had the veri look 
of cat in their faces. they have move like them. their demeanour ha 
been patent and strongli feline. now, I see noth ridicul in the 
assumpt that such women’ bodi may contain souls--in process of 
development, of course--that formerli were mere cat souls, but that 
are now gain human gradually, are work their way upward in 
the scale. after all, we are not so much abov the animals, and in our 
laps we often becom mere animals. the soul retrograd for the 
moment.” 

He paus again and look at me. I wa bite my lips, and my glass of 
wine wa untouched. He took my agit as a compliment, I suppose, for 
he smile and said: 

“are you in process of conversion?” 

I half shook my head. then I said, with an effort: “it is a curiou and 
interest idea, of course. but there is much to explain. now, I should 
like to ask you this: Do you--do you believ that a soul, if it pass 
on as you think, carri it memori with it, it memori of former love 
and--and hates? say that a cat’ soul goe to a woman’ body, and 
that the cat ha been--ha been--well, tortured--poss killed, by 
someone--say some man, long ago, would the woman, meet that man, 
rememb and shrink from him?” 

“that is a veri interest and curiou problem, and one which I do not 
pretend to have solved. I can, therefore, onli suggest what might be, 
what seem to me reasonable. 

“I do not believ that the woman would rememb positively, but I think 
she might have an intuit about the man. our intuit are, perhaps, 
sometim onli the fragmentari recollect of our souls, of what 
formerli happen to them when in other bodies. why, otherwise, should 
we sometim conceiv an ardent dislik of some stranger--charm to 
all appearance--of whom we know no evil, whom we have never heard of nor 
met before? intuitions, so called, are often onli tatter memories. 
and these intuit might, I should fancy, be strengthened, given 
body, robustness, by associations--of place, for example. cat becom 
intens attach to localities, to certain spots, a particular hous 
or garden, a particular fireside, apart from the peopl who may be 
there. possibly, if the man and the woman of whom you speak could 
be brought togeth in the veri place where the tortur arid death 
occurred, the dislik of the woman might deepen into posit hatred. 
It would, however, be alway unreason hatred, I think, and even quit 
unaccount to herself. still----” 

but here lord melchest rose from the table. the convers broke 
into fragments. I felt that I wa pale to the lips. 

We pass into the drawing-room. the ladi were group togeth at one 
end, near the piano. margot wa among them. she was, as usual, dress 
in white, and round the bottom of her gown there wa an edg of 
snow-whit fur. As we came in, she move away from the piano to a 
sofa at some distance, and sank down upon it. professor black, who had 
enter the room at my side, seiz my arm gently. 

“now, that lady,” he whisper in my ear--“i don’t know who she may 
be, but she is intens cat-like. I observ it befor dinner. did you 
notic the way she move just then--th soft, yielding, easi manner in 
which she sat down, fall at once, quit naturally, into a charm 
pose? and her china-blu eye are----” 

“she is my wife, professor,” I interrupt harshly. 

He look decidedli taken aback. 

“I beg your pardon; I had no idea. I did not enter the drawing-room 
to-night till after you arrived. I believ that ladi wa one of 
my fellow-guest in the house. let me congratul you. she is veri 
beautiful.” 

and then he mingl rather hastili in the group near the piano. 

the man is mad, I know--mad as a hatter on one point, like so mani 
clever men. He see the anim in everi person he meet just becaus hi 
preposter theori inclin him to do so. have given in hi adher 
to it, he see fact not as they are, but as he wish them to be; but 
he shall not carri me with him. the theori is his, not mine. It doe not 
hold water for a moment. I can laugh at it now, but that night I confess 
it did seiz me for the time being. I could scarc talk; I found 
myself watch margot with a terribl intentness, and I found myself 
agre with the professor to an extent that made me marvel at my own 
previou blindness. 

there wa someth strang felin about the girl I had married--th 
soft, white girl who wa becom terribl to me, dear though she still 
wa and must alway be. her movement had the subtle, instinct and 
certain grace of a cat’s. her cushion step, which had often struck me 
before, wa like the step of a cat. and those china-blu eyes! A sudden 
cold seem to pass over me as I understood whi I had recognis 
them when I first met margot. they were the eye of the anim I 
had tortured, the anim I had killed. yes, but that prove nothing, 
absolut nothing. mani peopl had the eye of animals--th soft eye 
of dogs, the furtive, cruel eye of tigers. I had known such people. I 
had even onc had an affair with a girl who wa alway call the shot 
partridge, becaus her eye were suppos to be like those of a die 
bird. I tri to laugh to myself as I rememb this. but I felt cold, 
and my sens seem benumb as by a great horror. I sat like a stone, 
with my eye fix upon margot, tri pain to read into her all 
that the word of professor black had suggest to me--trying, but 
with the wish not to succeed. I wa rous by ladi melchester, who came 
toward me ask me to do something, I forget now what. I forc myself 
to be cheerful, to join in the conversation, to seem at my ease; but I 
felt like one oppress with nightmare, and I could scarc withdraw 
my eye from the sofa where my wife wa sitting. she wa talk now 
to professor black, who had just been introduc to her; and I felt a 
sudden furi in my heart as I thought that he wa perhap dryly, coldly, 
studi her, littl know what issues--far-reaching, it might be, 
in their consequences--hung upon the truth or falsehood of hi strang 
theory. they were talk earnestly, and present it occur to me 
that he might be imbu margot with hi pernici doctrines, that he 
might be give her a knowledg of her own soul which now she lacked. 
the idea wa insupportable. I broke off abruptli the convers in 
which I wa take part, and hurri over to them with an impuls which 
must have astonish anyon who took note of me. I sat down on a chair, 
drew it forward almost violently, and thrust myself in between them. 

“what are you two talk about?” I said, roughly, with a suspici 
glanc at margot. 

the professor look at me in surprise. 

“I wa instruct your wife in some of the mysteri of 
salmon-fishing,” he said. “she tell me you have a salmon-riv run 
through your grounds.” 

I laugh uneasily. 

“so you are a fisherman as well as a romant theorist!” I said, rather 
rudely. “how I wish I were as versatile! come, margot, we must be go 
now. the carriag ought to be here.” 

she rose quietli and bade the professor good-night; but as she glanc 
up at me, in rising, I fanci I caught a new express in her eyes. 
A ray of determination, of set purpose, mingl with the gloomi fire of 
their despair. 

As soon as we were in the carriag I spoke, with a strain effort at 
eas and the haphazard tone which should mask furtiv cross-examination. 

“professor black is an interest man,” I said. 

“do you think so?” she answer from her dark corner. 

“surely. hi intellect is realli alive. yet, with all hi scientif 
knowledg and hi power of elicit fact and elucid them, he is 
but a feather head man.” I paused, but she made no answer. “do you not 
think so?” 

“how can I tell?” she replied. “we onli talk about fishing. He manag 
to make that topic a pleasant one.” 

her tone wa frank. I felt relieved. 

“he is exceedingli clever,” I said, heartily, and we relaps into 
silence. 

when we reach home, and margot had remov her cloak, she came up to 
me and laid her hand on my arm. 

So unaccustom wa her touch now that I wa startled. she wa look 
at me with a curious, steadi smile--an unwav smile that chill 
instead of warm me. 

“ronald,” she said, “there ha been a breach between us. I have been the 
caus of it. I should like to--to heal it. Do you still love me as you 
did?” 

I did not answer immediately; I could not. her voice, school as it 
was, seem somehow at issu with the word she uttered. there wa a 
desperate, hard note in it that accord with that enigmat smile of 
the mouth. 

It rous a cold suspicion within me that I wa close to a mask 
battery. I shrank physic from the touch of her hand. 

she wait with her eye upon me. our face were lit tremblingli by the 
flame of the two candl we held. 

At last I found a voice. 

“can you doubt it?” I asked. 

she drew a step nearer. 

“then let us resum our old relations,” she said. 

“our old relations?” 

“yes.” 

I shudder as if a phantom stole by me. I wa seiz with horror. 

“to-night? It is not possible!” 

“why?” she said, still with that steadi smile of the mouth. 

“because--becaus I don’t know--i---- to-morrow it shall be as of old, 
margot--to-morrow. I promis you.” 

“veri well. kiss me, dear.” 

I forc myself to touch her lip with mine. 

which mouth wa the colder? 

then, with that soft, stealthi step of hers, she vanish toward her 
room. I heard the door close gently. 

I listened. the key wa not turn in the lock. 

thi sudden abandon by margot of the fantast precaut I had 
almost becom accustom to fill me with a nameless dread. 

that night I fasten my door for the first time. 




iv. 

_friday night, novemb 6th_. 

I fasten my door, and when I went to bed lay awak for hour 
listening. A horror wa upon me then which ha not left me sinc for a 
moment, which may never leav me. I shiver with cold that night, the 
cold born of sheer physic terror. I knew that I wa shut up in the 
hous with a soul bent on unreason vengeance, the soul of the anim 
which I had kill prison in the bodi of the woman I had married. I 
wa sick with fear then. I am sick with fear now. 

to-night I am so tired. My eye are heavi and my head aches. No wonder. 
I have not slept for three nights. I have not dare to sleep. 

thi strang revolut in my wife’ conduct, thi passionless 
change--for I felt instinct that warm human had noth to do 
with the transformation--took place three night ago. these three last 
day mar-got ha been play a part. with what object? 

when I sat down to thi gray record of two souls--at onc dreari and 
fantast as it would seem, perhaps, to many--i desir to reassur 
myself, to write myself into sweet reason, into peace. 

I have tri to accomplish the impossible. I feel that the wildest 
theori may be the truest, after all--that on the borderland of what 
seem madness, actual paces. 

everi remembr of my mind confirm the truth first suggest to me by 
professor black. 

I know margot’ object now. 

the soul of the creatur that I tortured, that I killed, ha pass into 
the bodi of the woman whom I love; and that soul, which onc slept in 
it new cage, is awak now, watching, plot perhaps. unconsci to 
itself, it recognis me. It stare out upon me with eye in which 
the dull terror deepen to hate; but it doe not understand whi it 
fears--why, in it fear, it hates. intuit ha taken the place of 
memory. the chang of environ ha kill recollection, and ha left 
instinct in it place. 

whi did I ever sit down to write? the recal of fact ha set the 
seal upon my despair. 

instinct onli woke in margot when I brought her to the place the soul 
had known in the year when it look out upon the world from the bodi 
of an animal. 

that first day on the terrac instinct stir in it sleep, open it 
eyes, gaze forth upon me wonderingly, inquiringly. 

margot’ faint remembr of the terrac walk, of the flower-pots, of 
the grass border where the cat had often stretch itself in the sun, 
her eager to see the chamber of death, her stealthi visit to that 
chamber, her grow uneasiness, deepen to acut apprehension, 
and final to a deadli malignity--al lead me irresist to one 
conclusion. 

the animal’ soul within her no longer mere shrink away in fear of 
me. It ha grown sinister. It lie in ambush, full of a cold, a stealthi 
intention. 

that curious, abrupt chang in margot’ demeanour from avoid to 
invit mark the subtle, inward develop of feeling, the silent 
passag from sensat onli toward action. 

formerli she fear me. now I must fear her. 

the soul, crouch in it cage, show it teeth. It is compass my 
destruction. 

the woman’ bodi twitch with desir to aveng the death of the 
animal’s. 

I feel that it is onli wait the moment to spring; and the inher 
love of life breed in me a physic fear of it as of a subtl enemy. 
for even if the soul is brave, the bodi dread to die, and seem at 
moment to possess a second soul, pure physical, that cri out 
childishli against pain, against death. 

then, too, there is a cowardic of the imagin that can shake the 
strongest heart, and thi resurrect from the dead, from the murdered, 
appal my imagination. that what I thought I had long sinc slain should 
have companion me so close when I knew it not! 

I am sick with fear, physic and mental. 

two day ago, when I unlock my bedroom door in the morning, and saw 
the autumn sunlight stream in through the lead pane of the hall 
windows, and heard the river danc merrili down the gulli among the 
tree that will soon be quit bare and naked, I said to myself: “you 
have been mad. your mind ha been fill with horribl dreams, that have 
transform you into a coward and your wife into a demon. put them away 
from you.” 

I look across the gully. A clear, cold,-thin light shone upon the 
distant mountains. the cloud stack lay pile abov the scawfel 
range. the sky wa a sheet of fade turquoise. I open the window for 
a moment. the air wa dri and keen. how sweet it wa to feel it on my 
face! 

I went down to the breakfast-room. mar-got wa move about it softly, 
await me. In her white hand were letters. they drop upon the 
tabl as she stole up to greet me. her lip were set tightli together, 
but she lift them to kiss me. 

how close I came to my enemi as our mouth touched! her lip were colder 
than the wind. 

now that I wa with her, my momentari sensat of acut relief desert 
me. the horror that oppress me returned. 

I could not eat--i could onli make a pretenc of do so; and my hand 
trembl so excess that I could scarc rais my cup from the 
table. 

she notic this, and gentli ask me if I wa ill. 

I shook my head. 

when breakfast wa over, she said in a low, level voice: 

“ronald, have you thought over what I said last night?” 

“last night?” I answered, with an effort. 

“yes, about the cold between us. I think I have been unwell, 
unhappy, out of sorts. you know that--that women are more subject to 
mood than men, mood they cannot alway account for even to themselves. 
I have hurt you lately, I know. I am sorry. I want you to forgiv 
me, to--to”--sh paus a moment, and I heard her draw in her breath 
sharply--“to take me back into your heart again.” 

everi word, as she said it, sound to me like a sinist threat, and 
the last sentenc made my blood liter go cold in my veins. 

I met her eyes. she did not withdraw hers; they look into mine. they 
were the blue eye of the cat which I had held upon my knee year ago. 
I had gaze into them as a boy, and watch the horror and the fear dawn 
in them with a malign triumph. 

“I have noth to forgive,” I said in a broken, huski voice. 

“you have much,” she answer firmly. “but do not--pray do not bear 
malice.” 

“there is no malic in my heart--now,” I said; and the word seem like 
a cowardli plea for merci to the victim of the past. 

she lift one of her soft white hand to my breast. 

“then it shall all be as it wa before? and to-night you will come back 
to me?” 

I hesitated, look down. but how could I refuse? what excus could I 
make for deni the request? then I repeat mechanically: 

“to-night I will come back to you.” 

A terrible, slight smile travel over her face. she turn and left 
me. 

I sat down immediately. I felt too unnerv to remain standing. I wa 
give way utterli to an imagin horror that seem to threaten my 
reason. In vain I tri to pull myself together. My bodi wa in a cold 
sweat. all masteri of my nerv seem gone. 

I do not know how long I remain there, but I wa arous by the 
entranc of the butler. He glanc toward me in some obviou surprise, 
and thi astonish of a servant act upon me almost like a scourge. 
I sprang up hastily. 

“tell the groom to saddl the mare,” I said. “I am go for a ride 
immediately.” 

air, action, were what I need to drive thi stupor away. I must get 
away from thi hous of tears. I must be alone. I must wrestl with 
myself, regain my courage, kill the coward in me. 

I threw myself upon the mare, and rode out at a gallop toward the moor 
of eskdal along the lone countri roads. 

all day I rode, and all day I thought of that dark house, of that 
white creatur await my return, peer from the windows, perhaps, 
listen for my horse’ hoof on the gravel, keep still the long 
vigil of vengeance. 

My imagin sickened, fainted, as my weari hors stumbl along 
the shadowi roads. My terror wa too great now to be physical. It wa a 
terror pure of the spirit, and indescribable. 

To sleep with that white thing that wait me! To lie in the dark by it! 
To know that it wa there, close to me! 

If it kill me, what matter? It wa to live and to be near it, with it, 
that appal me. 

the light of the hous gleam out through the trees. I heard the sound 
of the river. 

I got off my hors and walk furtiv into the hall, look round me. 

margot glide up to me immediately, and took my whip and hat from me 
with her soft, velveti white hands. I shiver at her touch. 

At dinner her blue eye watch me. 

I could not eat, but I drank more wine than usual. 

when I turn to go down to the smoking-room, she said: “don’t be veri 
long, ronald.” 

I mutter I scarc know what word in reply. It wa close on midnight 
befor I went to bed. when I enter her room, shield the light of 
the candl with my hand, she wa still awake. 

nestl against the pillows, she stretch herself curious and smile 
up at me. 

“I thought you were never coming, dear,” she said. 

I knew that I wa veri pale, but she did not remark it. I got into bed, 
but left the candl still burning. 

present she said: 

“whi don’t you put the candl out?” 

I look at her furtively. her face seem to me carv in stone, it wa 
so rigid, so expressionless. she lay away from me at the extrem edg of 
the bed, sideways, with her hand toward me. 

“whi don’t you?” she repeated, with her blue eye on me. 

“I don’t feel sleepy,” I answer slowly. 

“you never will while there is a light in the room,” she said. 

“you wish me to put it out?” 

“yes. how odd you are to-night, ronald! Is anyth the matter?” 

“no,” I answered; and I blew the light out. 

how ghastli the dark was! 

I believ she meant to smother me in my sleep. I knew it. I determin 
to keep awake. 

It wa horribl to think that, as we lay there, she could see me all the 
time as if it were daylight. 

the night wore on. she wa quit silent and motionless. I lay listening. 

It must have been toward morn when I close my eyes, not becaus I 
wa sleepy, but becaus I wa so tire of gaze at blackness. 

soon after I had done thi there wa a stealthi movement in the bed. 

“margot, are you awake?” I instantli cri out sharply. 

the movement immedi ceased. there wa no reply. 

when the light of dawn stole in at the window she seem to be sleeping. 

***** 

last night I did not close my eye once. she did not move. 

she mean to tire me out, and she ha the strength to do it. to-night I 
feel so intens heavy. soon I must sleep, and then---- 

shall I seek ani longer to defend myself? everyth seem so 
inevitable, so beyond my power, like the work of an inexor 
justic bent on visit the sin of the father upon the child. for wa 
not the cruel boy the father of the man? 

and yet, is thi tragedi inevitable? It cannot be. I will be a man. I 
will rise up and combat it. I will take margot away from thi hous 
that her soul remembers, in which it bodi so long ago wa tortur and 
slain, and she will--sh must forget. 

instinct will sleep onc more. It shall be so. I will have it so. I will 
strew poppi over her soul. I will take her far away from here, far 
away, to place where she will be onc more as she ha been. 

to-morrow we will go. to-morrow---- 

***** 

ah, that cry! wa it my own? I am suffocating! what wa that? the horror 
of it! the pen ha fallen from my hand. I must have slept; and I have 
dreamed. In my dream she stole upon me, that white thing! her velveti 
hand were on my throat. the soul stare out from her eyes, the soul of 
the cat! even her body, her woman’ body, seem to chang at the moment 
of vengeance. she slowli strangl me, and as the breath die from me, 
and my fail eye gaze at her, she wa no longer woman at all, but 
someth lith and white and soft. fur envelop my throat. those hand 
were claws. that breath on my face wa the breath of an animal. the bodi 
had come back to companion the soul in it vengeance, the bodi of---- 

ah, it wa too horrible! 

can vengeanc for the dead bring with it resurrect of the dead? 

hark! there is a voic call to me from upstairs. 

“ronald, are you never coming? I am tire of wait for you. ronald!” 

“yes.” 

“come to me!” 

“and I must go.” 

***** 

just at the glimmer of dawn the first pale shaft of the sun struck 
across a bed upon which lay the huddl and distort corps of a man. 
hi head wa sunk down in the pillows. hi eyes, that could not see, 
stare toward the rise light. and from the open window of the chamber 
of death a woman in a white wrapper lean out, watch eagerli with 
wide blue eye the bird as they dart to and fro, rest on the 
climb creepers, or circl abov the gorg through which the river 
ran. her set lip smiled. she look like one calm, easy, and at peace. 
present an unwari sparrow perch on the trelli beneath the window 
just within her reach. her white hand dart down softly, close on the 
bird. she vanish from the window. 

can the dead hear? did he catch the sound of her faint, continu 
pur as she crouch with her prey upon the floor? 






end of project gutenberg’ the return Of the soul, by robert S. hichen 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the return OF the soul *** 

***** thi file should be name 23419-0.txt or 23419-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/1/23419/ 

produc by david widger 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase “project 
gutenberg”), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat (“the foundation” 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project 
gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase “project gutenberg” associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
“plain vanilla ascii” or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin “plain vanilla ascii” or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, “inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation.” 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
“defects,” such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the “right 
of replac or refund” describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you ‘as-is’ with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm’ 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation’ ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state’ laws. 

the foundation’ princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation’ web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
