the project gutenberg ebook of twenty-f ghost stories, by W. bob holland 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org/licens 


title: twenty-f ghost stori 

author: W. bob holland 

releas date: octob 31, 2016 [ebook #53419] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook twenty-f ghost stori *** 




produc by david edwards, chuck greif and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi 
book wa produc from scan imag of public domain 
materi from the googl book project.) 










twenty-f ghost stories. 

compil and edit 

BY 

W. bob holland. 

“there are more thing in heaven and earth, horatio, 
than are dreamt of in your philosophy.” 
--_hamlet._ 

copyright, 1904, BY 
J. S. ogilvi publish company. 

new york: 

J. S. ogilvi publish company, 
57 rose street. 




contents. 


page 

prefac 5 

the black cat 7 

the flay hand 28 

the vengeanc of a tree 37 

the parlor-car ghost 44 

ghost of buckstown inn 51 

the burglar’ ghost 59 

A phantom toe 76 

mrs. davenport’ ghost 81 

the phantom woman 90 

the phantom hag 100 

from the tomb 105 

sandy’ ghost 114 

the ghost of red creek 123 

the spectr bride 128 

how He caught the ghost 134 

grand-dame’ ghost stori 144 

A fight with a ghost 153 

colonel halifax’ ghost stori 168 

the ghost of the count 190 

the old mansion 202 

A misfit ghost 210 

An unbidden guest 215 

the dead woman’ photograph 220 

the ghost of a live man 228 

the ghost of washington 236 




prefac 


thi collect of ghost stori owe it public to an interest 
that I have long felt in the supernatur and in work of the 
imagination. As a child I wa deepli concern in tale of spooks, 
haunt houses, wraith and specter and stori of weird experiences, 
clank chains, ghostli sight and gruesom sound alway held me 
spellbound and breathless. 

experi in editori offic taught me that I wa not alon in 
like stori of mystery. the desir to know someth of that 
exist that is veil by death is equal potent in old age and in 
youth, and men, women and children like to be thrill and to have a 
“creepy” feel along the spinal column as the result of read of a 
visitor from beyond the grave. 

thi volum contain the most famou of the weird stori of edgar allan 
poe, that master of thi form of literature. “the black cat” contain 
all the need element of mysteri and supernatural, and yet the felin 
act in a natur manner all of the time, and the stori is quit 
possibl true. It is onli in the manner of it tell that the tale 
becom one that fittingli find it place in thi collection. 

guy de maupassant, the clever frenchman, is also repres by two 
effect bit of work, and other less wide known writer have also 
contribut stori that are worth reading, and when onc read will be 
remembered. there is not a stori among the twenty-f that is not 
worthi of close reading. 

there ha recent been a reviv in interest in ghost stories. mani of 
the high-class magazin have within a few month print stori with 
supernatur incidents, and writer whose name are known to all who 
read have turn their attent to thi form of literature. 

whether or not the reader believ in ghosts, he cannot fail to be 
interest in thi littl book. without ventur to express a posit 
opinion either way, I will onli say with hamlet: “there are more thing 
in heaven and earth, horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy.” 

W. bob holland. 




twenty-f ghost stori 




the black cat. 

BY edgar allan poe. 


for the most wild, yet most home narr which I am about to pen, I 
neither expect nor solicit belief. mad inde would I be to expect it, 
in a case where my veri sens reject their own evidence. yet, mad am I 
not--and veri sure do I not dream. but to-morrow I die, and to-day I 
would unburden my soul. My immedi purpos is to place befor the 
world, plainly, succinctli and without comment a seri of mere 
household events. In their consequences, these event have 
terrified--hav tortured--hav destroy me. yet I will not attempt to 
expound them. To me they have present littl but horror, to mani they 
will seem less terribl than baroques. hereafter, perhaps, some 
intellect may be found which will reduc my phantasm to the 
commonplace--som intellect more calm, more logical, and far less 
excit than my own, which will perceiv in the circumst I detail 
with awe noth more than an ordinari success of veri natur caus 
and effects. 

from my infanc I wa note for the docil and human of my 
disposition. My tender of heart wa even so conspicu as to make 
me the jest of my companions. I wa especi fond of animals, and wa 
indulg by my parent with a great varieti of pets. with these I spent 
most of my time, and never wa so happi as when feed and caress 
them. thi peculiar of charact grew with my growth, and in my 
manhood I deriv from it one of my princip sourc of pleasure. To 
those who have cherish an affect for a faith and sagaci dog, 
I need hardli be at the troubl of explain the natur or the 
intens of the gratif thu derivable. there is someth in the 
unselfish and self-sacrif love of a brute, which goe directli to 
the heart of him who ha had frequent occas to test the paltri 
friendship and gossam fidel of mere man. 

I marri early, and wa happi to find in my wife a disposit not 
uncongeni with my own. observ my partial for domest pet she 
lost no opportun of procur those of the most agreeabl kind. We 
had birds, goldfish, a fine dog, rabbits, a small monkey and a cat. 

thi latter wa a remark larg and beauti animal, entir black, 
and sagaci to an astonish degree. In speak of hi intelligence, 
my wife, who at heart wa not a littl tinctur with superstition, made 
frequent allus to the ancient popular notion, which regard all 
black cat as witch in disguise. not that she wa ever seriou upon 
thi point--and I mention the matter at all for no better reason than 
that it happens, just now, to be remembered. 

pluto--thi wa the cat’ name--wa my favorit pet and playmate. I 
alon fed him, and he attend me wherev I went about the house. It 
wa even with difficulti that I could prevent him from follow me 
through the streets. 

our friendship lasted, in thi manner, for sever years, dure which 
my gener tempera and character--through the instrument of the 
fiend intemperance--had (I blush to confess it) experienc a radic 
alter for the worse. I grew, day by day, more moody, more 
irritable, more regardless of the feel of others. I suffer myself 
to use intemper languag to my wife. At length I even offer her 
person violence. My pets, of course, were made to feel the chang in 
my disposition. I not onli neglect them, but ill-us them. for pluto, 
however, I still retain suffici regard to restrain me from 
maltreat him, as I made no scrupl of maltreat the rabbits, the 
monkey or even the dog, when by accid or through affect they came 
in my way. but my diseas grew upon me--for what diseas is like 
alcohol! and at length even pluto, who wa now becom old, and 
consequ somewhat peevish--even pluto began to experi the 
effect of my ill-temper. 

one night, return home much intox from one of my haunt about 
town, I fanci that the cat avoid my presence. I seiz him, when, in 
hi fright at my violence, he inflict a slight wound upon my hand with 
hi teeth. the furi of a demon instantli possess me. I knew myself no 
longer. My origin soul seemed, at once, to take it flight from my 
body; and a more than fiendish malevolence, gin-nurtured, thrill everi 
fiber of my frame. I took from my waistcoat pocket a penknife, open 
it, grasp the poor beast by the throat, and deliber cut one of 
it eye from the socket! I blush, I burn, I shudder while I pen the 
damnabl atrocity. 

when reason return with the morning--when I had slept off the fume of 
the night’ debauch--i experienc a sentiment half of horror, half of 
remorse, for the crime of which I had been guilty; but it was, at best, 
a feebl and equivoc feeling, and the soul remain untouched. I again 
plung into excess, and soon drown in wine all memori of the deed. 

In the meantim the cat slowli recovered. 

[illustration: “_one night, return home much intoxicated._”] 

the socket of the lost eye presented, it is true, a fright 
appearance, but he no longer appear to suffer ani pain. He went about 
the hous as usual, but, as might be expected, fled in extrem terror at 
my approach. I had so much of my old heart left as to be at first 
griev by thi evid dislik on the part of a creatur which had onc 
so love me. but thi feel soon gave place to irritation. and then 
came, as if to my final and irrevoc overthrow, the spirit of 
perverseness. Of thi spirit philosophi take no account. yet I am not 
more sure that my soul live than I am that pervers is one of the 
primit impuls of the human heart--on of the indivis primari 
faculti or sentiment which give direct to the charact of man. 
who ha not, hundr of times, found himself commit a vile or silli 
action, for no other reason than becaus he know he should not? have we 
not a perpetu inclination, in the teeth of our best judgment, to 
violat that which is law, mere becaus we understand it to be such? 
thi spirit of perverseness, I say, came to my final overthrow. It wa 
thi unfathom long of the soul to vex itself--to offer violenc 
to it own nature--to do wrong for the wrong’ sake only--that urg me 
to continu and final to consumm the injuri I had inflict upon 
the unoffend brute. one morning, in cold blood, I slip a noos 
about it neck, and hung it to the limb of a tree; hung it with the 
tear stream from my eye and the bitterest remors at my heart; hung 
it becaus I knew that it had love me, and becaus I felt it had given 
me no offense; hung it becaus I knew that in so do I wa commit 
a sin--a deadli sin that would so jeopard my immort soul as to 
place it, if such a thing were possible--even beyond the reach of the 
infinit merci of the most merci and most terribl god. 

On the night of the day on which thi cruel deed wa done, I wa arous 
from sleep by the cri of “fire!” the curtain of my bed were in flames. 
the whole hous wa blazing. It wa with great difficulti that my wife, 
a servant and myself made our escap from the conflagration. the 
destruct wa complete. My entir worldli wealth wa swallow up, and 
I resign myself thenceforward to despair. 

I am abov the weak of seek to establish a sequenc of caus and 
effect between the disast and the atrocity. but I am detail a chain 
of facts, and wish not to leav even a possibl link imperfect. On the 
day succeed the fire I visit the ruins. the walls, with one 
exception, had fallen in. thi except wa found in a compart 
wall, not veri thick, which stood about the middl of the house, and 
against which had rest the head of my bed. the plaster had here, in 
great measure, resist the action of the fire--a fact which I 
attribut to it have been recent spread. about thi wall a dens 
crowd were collected, and mani person seem to be examin a 
particular portion of it with veri minut and eager attention. the word 
“strange!” “singular!” and other similar express excit my 
curiosity. I approach and saw, as if graven in bas-relief upon the 
white surface, the figur of a gigant cat. the impress wa given 
with an accuraci truli marvelous. there wa a rope about the animal’ 
neck. 

when I first beheld thi apparition--for I could scarc regard it as 
less--mi wonder and my terror were extreme. but at length reflect 
came to my aid. the cat, I remembered, had been hung in a garden 
adjac to the house. upon the alarm of fire thi garden had been 
immedi fill by the crowd--bi some one of whom the anim must 
have been cut from the tree and thrown through an open window into my 
chamber. thi had probabl been done with the view of arous me from 
sleep. the fall of other wall had compress the victim of my 
cruelti into the substanc of the freshli spread plaster, the lime of 
which with the flames, and the ammonia from the carcass, had then 
accomplish the portraitur as I saw it. 

although I thu readili account to my reason, if not altogeth to my 
conscience, for the 

[illustration: “_becaus I knew that it had love me._”] 

startl fact just detailed, it did not the less fail to make a deep 
impress upon my fancy. for month I could not rid myself of the 
phantasm of the cat; and, dure thi period, there came back into my 
spirit a half sentiment that seemed, but wa not, remorse. I went so far 
as to regret the loss of the animal, and to look about me, among the 
vile haunt which I now habitu frequented, for anoth pet of the 
same speci and of somewhat similar appearance, with which to suppli 
it place. 

one night as I sat, half stupefied, in a den of more than infamy, my 
attent wa suddenli drawn to some black object, repos upon the 
head of one of the immens hogshead of gin, or of rum, which 
constitut the chief furnitur of the apartment. I had been look 
steadili at the top of thi hogshead for some minutes, and what now 
caus me surpris wa the fact that I had not sooner perceiv the 
object thereupon. I approach it and touch it with my hand. It wa a 
black cat--a veri larg one-- as larg as pluto, and close 
resembl him in everi respect, but onli pluto had not a white hair 
upon ani portion of hi body; but thi cat had a large, although 
indefinite, splotch of white, cover nearli the whole region of the 
breast. 

upon my touch him he immedi arose, pur loudly, rub against 
my hand, and appear delight with my notice. this, then, wa the 
veri creatur of which I wa in search. I at onc offer to purchas it 
of the landlord; but thi person made no claim to it--knew noth of 
it--had never seen it before. 

I continu my caresses, and when I prepar to go home the anim 
evinc a disposit to accompani me. I permit it to do so, 
occasion stoop and pat it as I proceeded. when it reach the 
hous it domest itself at once, and becam immedi a great 
favorit with my wife. 

for my own part, I soon found a dislik to it aris within me. thi 
wa just the revers of what I had anticipated; but--i know not how or 
whi it was--it evid fond for myself rather disgust and annoy 
me. By slow degre these feel of disgust and annoy rose into 
the bitter of hatred. I avoid the creature; a certain sens of 
shame, and the remembr of my former deed of cruelty, prevent me 
from physic abus it. I did not, for some weeks, strike, or 
otherwis violent ill use it; but gradually--veri gradually--i came to 
look upon it with unutter loathing, and to flee silent from it 
odiou presence, as from the breath of a pestilence. 

what added, no doubt, to my hatr of the beast, wa the discovery, on 
the morn after I brought it home, that, like pluto, it also had been 
depriv of one of it eyes. thi circumstance, however, onli endear 
it to my wife, who, as I have alreadi said, possessed, in a high degree, 
that human of feel which had onc been my distinguish trait, 
and the sourc of mani of my simplest and purest pleasures. 

with my avers to thi cat, however, it partial for myself seem 
to increase. It follow my footstep with a pertinac which it would 
be difficult to make the reader comprehend. whenev I sat it would 
crouch beneath my chair or spring upon my knees, cover me with it 
loathsom caresses. If I aros to walk it would get between my feet, and 
thu nearli throw me down, or, fasten it long and sharp claw in my 
dress, clamber, in thi manner, to my breast. At such times, although I 
long to destroy it with a blow, I wa yet withheld from so doing, 
partli by a memori of my former crime, but chiefly--let me confess it at 
once--bi absolut dread of the beast. 

thi dread wa not exactli a dread of physic evil--and yet I should be 
at a loss how otherwis to defin it. I am almost asham to own--yes, 
even in thi felon’ cell, I am almost asham to own--that the terror 
and horror with which the anim inspir me had been heighten by one 
of the merest chimera it would be possibl to conceive. My wife had 
call my attent more than once, to the charact of the mark of 
white hair, of which I have spoken, and which 

[illustration: “_the figur of a gigant cat._”] 

constitut the sole visibl differ between the strang beast and 
the one I had destroyed. the reader will rememb that thi mark, 
although large, had been origin veri indefinite; but, by slow 
degrees--degre nearli imperceptible, and which for a long time my 
reason struggl to reject as fanciful--it had, at length, assum a 
rigor distinct of outline. It wa now the represent of an 
object that I shudder to name--and for this, abov all, I loath and 
dreaded, and would have rid myself of the monster had I dared--it wa 
now I say the imag of a hideous, of a ghastli thing--of the gallows! 
oh, mourn and terribl engin of horror and of crime--of agoni and of 
death! 

and now wa I inde wretch beyond the wretched of mere humanity. 
and a brute beast, whose fellow I had contemptu destroyed--a brute 
beast to work out for me--for me, a man, fashion in the imag of the 
high god--so much of insuffer woe. alas! neither by day nor night 
knew I the bless of rest ani more. dure the former the creatur 
left me no moment alone, and in the latter I start hourli from dream 
of unutter fear, to find the hot breath of the thing upon my face, 
and it vast weight--an incarn nightmar that I had no power to shake 
off--incumb etern upon my heart. 

beneath the pressur of torment such as these the feebl remnant of 
the good within me succumbed. evil thought becam my sole 
intimates--th darkest and most evil of thoughts. the moodi of my 
usual temper increas to hatr of all thing and of all mankind; 
while, from the sudden, frequent and ungovern outburst of a furi to 
which I now blindli abandon myself, my uncomplain wife, alas! wa 
the most usual and the most patient of sufferers. 

one day she accompani me upon some household errand into the cellar of 
the old building, which our poverti compel us to inhabit. the cat 
follow me down the steep stairs, and, nearli throw me headlong, 
exasper me to madness. uplift an axe, and forgetting, in my 
wrath, the childish dread which had hitherto stay my hand, I aim a 
blow at the anim which, of course, would have prove instantli fatal 
had it descend as I wished. but thi blow wa arrest by the hand of 
my wife. goaded, by the interference, into a rage more than demoniacal, 
I withdrew my arm from her grasp, and buri the ax in her brain. she 
fell dead upon the spot, without a groan. 

thi hideou murder accomplished, I set myself forthwith, and with 
entir deliberation, to the task of conceal the body. I knew that I 
could not remov it from the house, either by day or by night, without 
the risk of be observ by the neighbors. mani project enter my 
mind. At one period I thought of cut the corps into minut 
fragment and destroy them by fire. At anoth I resolv to dig a 
grave for it in the floor of the cellar. again, I deliber about 
cast it into the well in the yard--about pack it in a box, as if 
merchandise, with the usual arrangements, and so get a porter to 
take it from the house. final I hit upon what I consid a far 
better expedi than either of these. I determin to wall it up in the 
cellar--a the monk of the middl age are record to have wall up 
their victims. 

for a purpos such as thi the cellar wa well adapted. it wall were 
loos constructed, and had late been plaster throughout with a 
rough plaster, which the damp of the atmospher had prevent from 
hardening. moreover, in one of the wall wa a projection, caus by a 
fals chimney, or fireplace, that had been fill up, and made to 
resembl the rest of the cellar. I made no doubt that I could readili 
displac the brick at thi point, insert the corpse, and wall the whole 
up as before, so that no eye could detect anyth suspicious. 

and in thi calcul I wa not deceived. By mean of a crowbar I 
easili dislodg the bricks, and, have care deposit the bodi 
against the inner wall, I prop it in that position, while, with 
littl trouble, I relaid the whole structur as it origin stood. 
have 

[illustration: “_an extraordinari cat._”] 

procur mortar, sand and hair with everi possibl precaution, I 
prepar a plaster which could not be distinguish from the old, and 
with thi I veri care went over the new brickwork. when I had 
finish I felt satisfi that all wa right. the wall did not present 
the slightest appear of have been disturbed. the rubbish on the 
floor wa pick up with the minutest care. I look around triumphantli 
and said to myself, “here, at least, then, my labor ha not been in 
vain.” 

My next step wa to look for the beast which had been the caus of so 
much wretchedness, for I had at length firmli resolv to put it to 
death. had I been abl to meet with it at the moment there could have 
been no doubt of it fate; but it appear that the crafti anim had 
been alarm at the violenc of my previou anger and forebor to 
present itself in my present mood. It is imposs to describ or to 
imagin the deep, the bliss sens of relief which the absenc of the 
detest creatur occas in my bosom. It did not make it appear 
dure the night--and thus, for one night at least sinc it 
introduct into the house, I soundli and tranquilli slept--aye, slept, 
even with the burden of murder upon my soul! 

the second and the third day passed, and still my tormentor came not. 
onc again I breath as a free man. the monster, in terror, had fled 
the premis forever! I should behold it no more! My happi wa 
supreme! the guilt of my dark deed disturb me but little. some few 
inquiri had been made, but these had been readili answered. even a 
search had been instituted--but, of course, noth wa to be 
discovered. I look upon my futur felic as secured. 

upon the fourth day of the assassin a parti of the polic came veri 
unexpectedli into the hous and proceed again to make a rigor 
investig of the premises. secure, however, in the inscrut of 
my place of concealment, I felt no embarrass whatever. the offic 
bade me accompani them in their search. they left no nook or corner 
unexplored. At length, for the third or fourth time, they descend into 
the cellar. I quiver not in a muscle. My heart beat as calmli as that 
of one who slumber in innocence. I walk the cellar from end to end. I 
fold my arm upon my bosom and roam easili to and fro. the polic 
were thoroughli satisfi and prepar to depart. the glee at my heart 
wa too strong to be restrained. I burn to say but one word, by way of 
triumph, and to render doubli sure their assur of my guiltlessness. 

“gentlemen,” I said at last, as the parti ascend the steps, “I delight 
to have allay your suspicions. I wish you all health and a littl 
more courtesy. By the by, gentlemen, this--thi is a veri well 
construct house.” (in the rabid desir to say someth easili I 
scarc knew what I utter at all.) “I may say an excel well 
construct house. these walls--ar you going, gentlemen?--thes wall 
are solidli put together;” and here, through the mere frenzi of bravado, 
I rap heavily, with a cane which I held in my hand, upon that veri 
portion of the brickwork behind which stood the corps of the wife of my 
bosom. 

but may god shield and deliv me from the fang of the arch fiend! No 
sooner had the reverber of my blow sunk into silenc than I wa 
answer by a voic from within the tomb!--bi a cry, at first muffl 
and broken, like the sob of a child, and then quickli swell into 
one long, loud and continu scream, utterli anomal and inhuman--a 
howl!--a wail shriek, half of horror and half of triumph, such as 
might have arisen onli out of hell, conjointli from the throat of the 
damn in their agoni and of the demon that exult in the damnation. 

Of my own thought it is folli to speak. swooning, I stagger to the 
opposit wall. for an instant the parti upon the stair remain 
motionless, through extrem of terror and of awe. In the next a dozen 
stout arm were toil at the wall. It fell bodily. the corpse, alreadi 
get decay and clot with gore, stood erect befor the eye of 
the spectators. upon it head, with red, extend mouth and solitari eye 
of fire, sat the hideou beast whose craft had seduc me into murder, 
and whose inform voic had consign me to the hangman. I had wall 
the monster up within the tomb! 




the flay hand. 

BY guy DE maupassant. 


one even about eight month ago I met with some colleg comrad at 
the lodg of our friend loui R. We drank punch and smoked, talk of 
literatur and art, and made joke like ani other compani of young men. 
suddenli the door flew open, and one who had been my friend sinc 
boyhood burst in like a hurricane. 

“guess where I come from?” he cried. 

“I bet on the mabille,” respond one. “no,” said another, “you are too 
gay; you come from borrow money, from buri a rich uncle, or from 
pawn your watch.” “you are get sober,” cri a third, “and, as 
you scent the punch in louis’ room, you came up here to get drunk 
again.” 

“you are all wrong,” he replied. “I come from p., in normandy, where I 
have spent eight days, and whenc I have brought one of my friends, a 
great criminal, whom I ask permiss to present to you.” 

with these word he drew from hi pocket a long, black hand, from which 
the skin had been stripped. It had been sever at the wrist. it dri 
and shrivel shape, and the narrow, yellow nail still cling to 
the fingers, made it fright to look upon. the muscles, which show 
that it first owner had been possess of great strength, were bound in 
place by a strip of parchment-lik skin. 

“just fancy,” said my friend, “the other day they sold the effect of an 
old sorcerer, recent deceased, well known in all the country. everi 
saturday night he use to go to witch gather on a broomstick; he 
practis the white magic and the black, gave blue milk to the cows, and 
made them wear tail like that of the companion of saint anthony. the 
old scoundrel alway had a deep affect for thi hand, which, he said, 
wa that of a celebr criminal, execut in 1736 for have thrown 
hi law wife head first into a well--for which I do not blame 
him--and then hang in the belfri the priest who had marri him. 
after thi doubl exploit he went away, and, dure hi subsequ 
career, which wa brief but exciting, he rob twelv travelers, smoke 
a score of monk in their monastery, and made a seraglio of a convent.” 

“but what are you go to do with thi horror?” we cried. 

“eh! parbleu! I will make it the handl to my door-bel and frighten my 
creditors.” 

“mi friend,” said henri smith, a big, phlegmat englishman, “I believ 
that thi hand is onli a kind of indian meat, preserv by a new 
process; I advis you to make bouillon of it.” 

“rail not, messieurs,” said, with the utmost sang froid, a medic 
student who wa three-quart drunk, “but if you follow my advice, 
pierre, you will give thi piec of human debri christian burial, for 
fear lest it owner should come to demand it. then, too, thi hand ha 
acquir some bad habits, for you know the proverb, ‘who ha kill will 
kill.’” 

“and who ha drank will drink,” repli the host as he pour out a big 
glass of punch for the student, who empti it at a draught and slid 
dead drunk under the table. hi sudden drop out of the compani wa 
greet with a burst of laughter, and pierre, rais hi glass and 
salut the hand, cried: 

“I drink to the next visit of thi master.” 

then the convers turn upon other subjects, and shortli afterward 
each return to hi lodgings. 

* * * * * 

about two o’clock the next day, as I wa pass pierre’ door, I 
enter and found him read and smoking. 

“well, how goe it?” said I. “veri well,” he responded. “and your hand?” 
“mi hand? did you not see it on the bell-pull? I put it there when I 
return home last night. but, apropo of this, what do you think? some 
idiot, doubtless to play a stupid joke on me, came ring at my door 
toward midnight. I demand who wa there, but as no one replied, I 
went back to bed again, and to sleep.” 

At thi moment the door open and the landlord, a fat and extrem 
impertin person, enter without salut us. 

“sir,” said he, “I pray you to take away immedi that carrion which 
you have hung to your bell-pull. unless you do thi I shall be compel 
to ask you to leave.” 

“sir,” respond pierre, with much gravity, “you insult a hand which 
doe not merit it. know you that it belong to a man of high breeding?” 

the landlord turn on hi heel and made hi exit, without speaking. 
pierr follow him, detach the hand and affix it to the bell-cord 
hang in hi alcove. 

“that is better,” he said. “thi hand, like the ‘brother, all must die,’ 
of the trappists, will give my thought a seriou turn everi night 
befor I sleep.” 

At the end of an hour I left him and return to my own apartment. 

I slept badli the follow night, wa nervou and agitated, and sever 
time awok with a start. onc I imagined, even, that a man had broken 
into my room, and I sprang up and search the closet and under the 
bed. toward six o’clock in the morn I wa commenc to doze at 
last, when a loud knock at my door made me jump from my couch. It wa 
my friend pierre’ servant, half dressed, pale and trembling. 

“ah, sir!” cri he, sobbing, “mi poor master. someon ha murder 
him.” 

I dress myself hastili and ran to pierre’ lodgings. the hous wa 
full of peopl disput together, and everyth wa in a commotion. 
everyon wa talk at the same time, recount and comment on the 
occurr in all sort of ways. with great difficulti I reach the 
bedroom, made myself known to those guard the door and wa permit 
to enter. four agent of polic were stand in the middl of the 
apartment, pencil in hand, examin everi detail, confer in low 
voic and write from time to time in their note-books. two doctor 
were in consult by the bed on which lay the unconsci form of 
pierre. He wa not dead, but hi face wa fix in an express of the 
most aw terror. hi eye were open their widest, and the dilat 
pupil seem to regard fixedly, with unspeak horror, someth 
unknown and frightful. hi hand were clinched. I rais the quilt, 
which cover hi bodi from the chin downward, and saw on hi neck, 
deepli sunk in the flesh, the mark of fingers. some drop of blood 
spot hi shirt. At that moment one thing struck me. I chanc to 
notic that the shrivel hand wa no longer attach to the bell-cord. 
the doctor had doubtless remov it to avoid the comment of those 
enter the chamber where the wound man lay, becaus the appear 
of thi hand wa inde frightful. I did not inquir what had becom of 
it. 

I now clip from a newspap of the next day the stori of the crime with 
all the detail that the polic were abl to procure: 

“A fright attempt wa made yesterday on the life of young M. pierr 
b., student, who belong to one of the best famili in normandy. He 
return home about ten o’clock in the evening, and excus hi valet, 
bouvin, from further attend upon him, say that he felt fatigu 
and wa go to bed. toward midnight bouvin wa suddenli awaken by 
the furiou ring of hi master’ bell. He wa afraid, and light a 
lamp and waited. the bell wa silent about a minute, then rang again 
with such vehem that the domestic, mad with fright, flew from hi 
room to awaken the concierge, who ran to summon the police, and, at the 
end of about fifteen minutes, two policemen forc open the door. A 
horribl sight met their eyes. the furnitur wa overturned, give 
evid of a fear struggl between the victim and hi assailant. In 
the middl of the room, upon hi back, hi bodi rigid, with livid face 
and fright dilat eyes, lay, motionless, young pierr b., bear 
upon hi neck the deep imprint of five fingers. dr. bourdean wa call 
immediately, and hi report say that the aggressor must have been 
possess of prodigi strength and have had an extraordinarili thin 
and sinewi hand, becaus the finger left in the flesh of the victim 
five hole like those from a pistol ball, and had penetr until they 
almost met. there is no clue to the motiv of the crime or to it 
perpetrator. the polic are make a thorough investigation.” 

the follow appear in the same newspap next day: 

“m. pierr b., the victim of the fright assault of which we publish 
an account yesterday, ha regain conscious after two hour of the 
most assidu care by dr. bourdean. hi life is not in danger, but it 
is strongli fear that he ha lost hi reason. No trace ha been found 
of hi assailant.” 

My poor friend wa inde insane. for seven month I visit him daili 
at the hospit where we had place him, but he did not recov the 
light of reason. In hi delirium strang word escap him, and, like 
all madmen, he had one fix idea: he believ himself continu 
pursu by a specter. one day they came for me in haste, say he wa 
worse, and when I arriv I found him dying. for two hour he remain 
veri calm, then, suddenly, rise from hi bed in spite of our efforts, 
he cried, wave hi arm as if a prey to the most aw terror: “take 
it away! take it away! It strangl me! help! help!” twice he made the 
circuit of the room, utter horribl screams, then fell face downward, 
dead. 

* * * * * 

As he wa an orphan I wa charg to take hi bodi to the littl villag 
of p., in normandy, where hi parent were buried. It wa the place from 
which he had arriv the even he found us drink punch in loui 
r.’ room, when he had present to us the flay hand. hi bodi wa 
inclos in a leaden coffin, and four day afterward I walk sadli 
besid the old cure, who had given him hi first lessons, to the littl 
cemeteri where they dug hi grave. It wa a beauti day, and sunshin 
from a cloudless sky flood the earth. bird sang from the blackberri 
bush where mani a time when we were children we had stolen to eat the 
fruit. again I saw pierr and myself creep along behind the hedg and 
slip through the gap that we knew so well, down at the end of the 
littl plot where they buri the poor. again we would return to the hous 
with cheek and lip black with the juic of the berri we had eaten. I 
look at the bushes; they were cover with fruit; mechan I 
pick some and bore it to my mouth. the cure had open hi breviary, 
and wa mutter hi prayer in a low voice. I heard at the end of the 
walk the spade of the grave-digg who were open the tomb. suddenli 
they call out, the cure close hi book, and we went to see what they 
wish of us. they had found a coffin; in dig a stroke of the 
pickax had start the cover, and we perceiv within a skeleton of 
unusu stature, lie on it back, it hollow eye seem yet to 
menac and defi us. I wa troubled, I know not why, and almost afraid. 

“hold!” cri one of the men, “look there! one of the rascal’ hand ha 
been sever at the wrist. ah, here it is!” and he pick up from besid 
the bodi a huge wither hand, and held it out to us. 

“see,” cri the other, laughing, “see how he glare at you, as if he 
would spring at your throat to make you give him back hi hand.” 

“go,” said the cure, “leav the dead in peace, and close the coffin. We 
will make poor pierre’ grave elsewhere.” 

the next day all wa finished, and I return to paris, after have 
left fifti franc with the old cure for mass to be said for the repos 
of the soul of him whose sepulchr we had troubled. 




the vengeanc OF A tree. 

BY eleanor F. lewis. 


through the window of jim daly’ saloon, in the littl town of c----, 
the set sun stream in yellow patches, light up the glass 
scatter on the tabl and the face of sever men who were gather 
near the bar. farmer mostli they were, with a sprinkl of 
shopkeepers, while promin among them wa the villag editor, and all 
were discuss a startl piec of news that had spread through the 
town and it surroundings. the tide that walter stedman, a labor on 
albert kelsey’ ranch, had assault and murder hi employer’ 
daughter, had reach them, and had spread univers horror among the 
people. 

A farmer declar that he had seen the deed commit as he walk 
through a neighbor lane, and, have alway been note for hi 
cowardice, instead of run to the girl’ aid, had hail a parti of 
miner who were return from their mid-day meal through a field near 
by. when they reach the spot, however, where stedman (a they 
supposed) had done hi black deed, onli the girl lay there, in the 
still of death. her murder had taken the opportun to fly. the 
parti had search the wood of the kelsey estate, and just as they were 
near the hous itself the appear of walter stedman, walk in a 
strang unsteadi manner toward it, made them quicken their pace. 

He wa soon in custody, although he had protest hi innoc of the 
crime. He said that he had just seen the bodi himself on hi way to the 
station, and that when they had found him he wa go to the hous for 
help. but they had laugh at hi stori and had flung him into the tiny, 
stifl calaboos of the town. 

what were their proofs? walter stedman, a young fellow of about 
twenty-six, had come from the citi to their quiet town, just when time 
were at their hardest, in search of work. the most of the men live in 
the town were honest fellows, do their work faithfully, when they 
could get it, and when they had social ask stedman to have a drink 
with them, he had refus in rather a scorn manner. “that infern 
citi chap,” he wa called, and their hate and envi increas in strength 
when albert kelsey had employ him in prefer to ani of themselves. 
As time went on, the stori of stedman’ admir for margaret kelsey 
had gone afloat, with the ad inform that hi employer’ 
daughter had repuls him, say that she would not marri a common 
laborer. So stedman, when thi news reach hi employer’ ears, wa 
discharged, and this, then, wa hi revenge! for them, these proof were 
suffici to pronounc him guilty. 

yet that afternoon, as stedman, crouch on the floor of the calaboose, 
grew hopeless in the knowledg that no one would believ hi story, and 
that hi undeserv punish would be swift and sure, a tramp, 
board a freight car sever mile from the town, sped away from the 
spot where hi crime had been committed, and knew that forev it 
shadow would follow him. 

from the tini window of hi prison walter stedman could see the red glow 
of the heaven that betoken the set of the sun. So the red sun of 
hi life wa soon to set, a life that had been innoc of all crime, 
and that now wa to be end for a deed that he had never committed. 
most promin of all the vision that swept through hi mind wa that 
of margaret kelsey, lie as he had first found her, fresh from the 
hand of her murderer. but there wa anoth of a more tender nature. 
how long he and margaret had tri to keep their secret, until walter 
could be promot to a higher position, so that he could ask for her 
hand with no fear of the father’ antagonism! then came the remembr 
of an afternoon meet between the two in the wood of the kelsey 
estate--how, just as they were parting, walter had heard footstep near 
them, and, glanc sharpli around, saw an evil, scowling, murder 
face peer through the brush. He had start toward it, but the owner 
of the counten had taken himself hurriedli off. 

the gossip townspeopl had misconstru thi romance, and when albert 
kelsey had heard of thi clandestin meet from the man who wa later 
on to appear as a leader of the mob, and that he had discharg stedman, 
they had believ that the young man had formal propos and had been 
rejected. but justic had gone wrong, as it had done innumer time 
before, and will again. An innoc man wa to be hanged, even without 
the comfort of a trial, while the man who wa guilti wa free to wander 
where he would. 

that autumn night the dark came quickly, and onli the star did 
their best to light the scene. A bodi of men, all masked, and have as 
a leader one who had ever sinc stedman’ arriv in town, cherish a 
secret hatr of the young man, drag stedman from the calaboos and 
tramp through the town, defi all, defi even god himself. along 
the highway, and into farmer brown’ “cross cut,” they went, vigilantli 
guard their prisoner, who, with the lantern light up hi haggard 
face, walk among them with the lag step of utter hopelessness. 

“that’ a good tree,” their leader said, presently, stop and 
point out a spread oak; when the slipknot wa adjust and stedman 
had step on the box, he added: “if you’v got anyth to say, you’d 
better say it now.” 

“I am innocent, I swear befor god,” the doom man answered; “I never 
took the life of margaret kelsey.” 

“give us your proof,” jeer the leader, and when stedman kept a 
despair silence, he laugh shortly. 

“ready, men!” he gave the order. the box wa kick aside, and 
then--onli a writh bodi swung to and fro in the gloom. 

In front of the men stood their leader, watch the contort of the 
bodi with silent glee. “i’ll tell you a secret, boys,” he said suddenly. 
“I wa after that poor murder girl myself. A d---- littl chanc I 
had; but, by ----, he had just as little!” 

A pause--then: “he’ shunt thi earth. cut him down, you fellows!” 

* * * * * 

“it’ no use, son. i’ll give up the blast thing as a bad job. there’ 
someth queer about that there tree. Do you see how it branch 
balanc it? We have cut the trunk nearli in two, but it won’t come down. 
there’ plenti of other around; we’ll take one of them. If i’d a long 
rope with me i’d get that tree down, and yet the way the thing stand it 
would be risk a fellow’ life to climb it. it’ got the devil in it, 
sure.” 

So old farmer brown shoulder hi axe and made for anoth tree, hi 
son following. they had saw and chop and chop and sawed, and yet 
the tall white oak, with it branch jut out almost as regularli as 
if done by the work of a machine, stood straight and firm. 

farmer brown, well known for hi weak, cowardli spirit, who in behold 
the murder of albert kelsey’ daughter, had in hi fright mistaken the 
criminal, now in hi superstit let the oak stand, becaus it 
well-balanc posit save it from falling, when other tree would 
have been down. and so thi tree, the same one to which an innoc man 
had been hanged, wa left--for other work. 

It wa a bleak, raini night--such a night as can be found onli in 
central california. the wind howl like a thousand demons, and lash 
the tree togeth in wild embraces. now and then the weird “hoot, 
hoot!” of an owl came softli from the distanc in the lull of the 
storm, while the bark of coyot woke the echo of the hill into 
sound like fiendish laughter. 

In the wind and rain a man fought hi path through the bush and into 
farmer brown’ “cross cut,” as the shortest way home. suddenli he 
stopped, trembling, as if held by some unseen impulse. befor him rose 
the white oak, waver and sway in the storm. 

“good god! it’ the tree I swung stedman from!” he cried, and a strang 
fear thrill him. 

hi eye were fix on it, held by some undefin fascination. yes, 
there on one of the longest branch a small piec of rope still 
dangled. and then, to the murderer’ excit vision, thi rope seem to 
lengthen, to form at the end into a slipknot, a knot that encircl a 
purpl neck, while below it writh and sway the bodi of a man! 

“damn him!” he muttered, start toward the hang form, as if about 
to help the rope in it work of strangulation; “will he forev follow 
me? and yet he deserv it, the black-heart villain! He took her 
life----” 

He never finish the sentence. the white oak, tower abov him in it 
strength, seem to grow like a frenzied, live creature. there wa a 
sudden split sound, then came a crash, and under the fallen tree lay 
stedman’ murderer, crush and mangled. 

from between the broken trunk and the stump that wa left, a gray, dim 
shape sprang out, and sped past the man’ still form, away into the wild 
black of the night. 




the parlor-car ghost. 


all drape with blue denim--th seasid cottag of my friend, sara pyne. 
she ask me to go there with her when she open it to have it set in 
order for the summer. she confess that she felt a trifl nervou at 
the idea of enter it alone. and I am alway readi for an excursion. 
So much blue denim rather surpris me, becaus blue is not 
complimentari to sara’ complexion--sh alway wear some shade of red, 
by preference. she perceiv my wonder; she is veri near-sighted, and 
therefor see everyth by some sort of sixth sense. 

“you do not like my portier and curtain and table-covers,” said she. 
“neither do I. but I did it to accommodate. and now he rest well in hi 
grave, I hope.” 

“whose grave, for pity’ sake?” 

“mr. J. billington price’s.” 

“and who is he? He doesn’t sound interesting.” 

“then I will tell you about him,” said sara, take a seat directli in 
front of one of those curtains. “last autumn I wa leav thi place 
for new york, travel on the fast express train known as the fli 
yankee. Of course, I thought of the fli dutchman and wagner’ music 
set of the uncanni legend, and how differ thing are in these 
day of steam, etc. then I look out of the window at the landscape, 
the horizon that seem to wheel in a great curv as the train sped on. 
everi now and then I had an impress at the ‘tail of the eye’ that a 
man wa sit in a chair three or four number in front of me on the 
opposit side of the car. each time that I saw thi shape I look at 
the chair and ascertain that it wa unoccupied. but it wa an odd 
trick of vision. I rais my lorgnette, and the chair show emptier 
than before. there wa nobodi in it, certainly. but the more I knew that 
it wa vacant the more plainli I saw the man. alway with the corner of 
my eye. It made me nervous. when passeng enter the car I dread 
lest they might take that seat. what would happen if they should? A bag 
wa put in the chair--that made me uncomfortable. the bag wa remov at 
the next station. then a babi wa place in the seat. It began to laugh 
as though someon had gentli tickl it. there wa someth odd about 
that chair--thirteen wa it number. when I look away from it the 
impress wa strong upon me that some person sit there wa 
watch me. 

“really, it would not do to humor such fancies. So I touch the 
electr button, ask the porter to bring me a table, and take from 
my bag a pack of cards, proceed to divert myself with a game of 
patience. I wa puzzl where to put a seven of spades. ‘where can it 
go?’ I murmur to myself. A voic behind me prompted: ‘play the four of 
diamond on the five, and you can do it.’ I started. the onli occup 
of the car, besid me, were a bridal couple, a mother with three littl 
children, and a typic preacher of one of the straitest sects. who had 
spoken? ‘play up the four, madam,’ repeat thi voice. 

“I look fear over my shoulder. At first I saw a bluish cloud, 
like cigar smoke, but inodorous. then the vision cleared, and I saw a 
young man whom I knew by a subtl intuit to be the occupant, seen and 
not seen, of chair number thirteen. evid he wa a travel 
salesman--and a ghost. Of course, a drummer’ ghost sound 
ridiculous--they’r so extrem alive! Or els you would expect a dead 
drummer to be particularli dead and not ‘walk.’ thi wa a most 
commonplace-look ghost, cordial, pushing, businesslike. At the same 
time, hi face had an express of utter despair and horror which made 
him still more preposterous. Of cours it is not nice to let a stranger 
speak to one, even on so imperson a topic as a four of diamonds. but a 
ghost--ther can’t be ani rule of etiquett about talk with a ghost! 
My dear, it wa dreadful! that forward creatur show me how to play 
all the cards, and then beg me to lay them out again, in order that 
he might give me some clever points. I wa too much amaz and disturb 
to speak. I could onli place the card at hi suggestion. thi I did so 
as not to appear to be listen to the empti air, and be suppos to be 
a crazi woman. present the ghost spoke again, and told me hi story. 

“‘madam,’ he said, ‘I have been ride back and forth on thi car ever 
sinc februari 22, 189--. seven month and eleven days. all thi time I 
have not exchang a word with anyone. for a drummer, that is pretti 
hard, you may believe! you know the stori of the fli dutchman? well, 
that is veri nearli my case. A curs is upon me and will not be remov 
until some kind soul----. but i’m get ahead of my text. that day 
there were four of us, travel for differ houses. one of the boy 
wa in wool, one in bake powder, one in boot and shoes, and myself in 
cotton goods. We met on the road, took seat togeth and fell into 
talk shop. 

“‘those fellow told big lie about their sales, washington’ birthday 
though it was. the bake powder man rais the amount of the bill of 
good which he had sold better than a whole can of hi stuff could have 
done. I admit the straight truth, that I had not yet been abl to 
make a sale. and then I swore--not in a light-minded, chipper style of 
verbal trimmings, but a great, round, heaven-defi oath--that I would 
sell a case of blue denim on that trip if it took me forever. We becam 
dri with talk, and when the train stop at rivermouth, we went out to 
have some beer. It is good there, you know--pardon me, I forgot that I 
wa speak to a lady. well, we had to run to get aboard. I miss my 
footing, fell under the wheels, and the next thing that I knew they were 
hold an inquest over my remains; while I, disemboweled, wa sit 
on a corner of the undertaker’ table, wonder which of the coroner’ 
juri wa like to want a case of blue denims. 

“‘then I rememb my wick oath, and understood that I wa a soul 
doom to wander until I could succeed in sell that bill of goods. I 
spoke onc or twice, offer the denim under value, but nobodi notic 
me. verdict: accident death; neglig of deceased; railroad 
corpor not to blame; deceas got out for beer at hi own risk. the 
other drummer took charg of the remains, and wrote a beauti letter 
to my rel about my social qualiti and my impress 
conversation. I wish it had been less impress that time! I might have 
lie about my sales, or I might have said that I hope for better luck. 
but after that oath there wa noth for it. back and forth, back and 
forth, on thi road, in chair number thirteen, to all eternity. nobodi 
suspect my presence. they sit on my knees--i’m play in luck when it 
is a nice babi as it wa thi afternoon! they pile wraps, bags, even 
railway literatur on me. they play card under my nose--and what 
duffer some of them are! you, madam, are the first person who ha 
perceiv me; and therefor I ventur to speak to you, mean no 
offense. I can see that you are sorri for me. now, if you recal the 
stori of the fli dutchman, he wa save by the chariti of a good 
woman. In fact, senta marri him. now i’m not ask anyth of that 
size. I see that you wear a wed ring, and no doubt you make some 
man’ happiness. I wasn’t a marri man myself, and, naturally, am not 
a marri ghost. and that ha noth to do with the matter anyway. but 
if you could--i don’t suppos you would have ani use for them--but if 
you were dispos to do a turn of good, solid, christian charity--i 
should be everlastingli grateful, and you may have that case of denim 
at $72.50. and that qualiti is quot to-day at $80. doe it go, madam?’ 

“the speech of the poor ghost wa not veri eloquent, but hi eye had an 
intense, eager glare, which wa terrible. something--pity, fear, I do 
not know what--compel me. I decid to do without that white and gold 
even cloak. instead, I gave $72.50 to the ghost and took from him a 
receipt for the sum, sign J. billington price. then he smile 
contentedly, thank me with emotion, and return to chair number 
thirteen. sever time on the journey, although I did not perceiv him 
again, I felt dazed. when the train arriv at new york, and I, with the 
other passengers, dismounted, it seem to me that a strong hand pass 
under my elbow, steadi me down the steps. As I walk the length of 
the station my bag--not heavi at ani time--appear to becom 
weightless. I believ that the parlor-car ghost walk besid me, 
carri the bag, whose handl still remain in my other hand. indeed, 
onc or twice I thought I felt the touch of cold finger against mine. 
sinc then I have no reason to suppos that the poor ghost is not at 
rest. I hope he is. 

“but I never expect nor wish for the blue denims. the next day, 
however, a dray belong to a great wholesal hous back up to our 
door and deliv a case of denims, with a receipt bill for the same. 
what wa I to do? I could not go about sell blue denims; I could not 
give them away without excit comment. So I furnish the cottag with 
them--and you know the effect on my complexion. piti me, dear! and 
credit me, frivol woman as I am, with have save a soul at the 
expens of my own vanity. My stori is told. what do you think about 
it?” 




ghost OF buckstown inn. 

BY arnold M. anderson. 


sever travel-worn drummer sat in the lobbi exchang yarns. It wa 
rodney green’ turn, and he look wise and began hi tale. 

“I don’t claim, by ani means, that the belief in ghost is a gener 
thing in arkansas, but I do say that I had an experi out there a few 
year ago. 

“it wa late in the fall, and I happen to be in the villag of 
buckstown, which desecr a veri limit portion of the state. the 
town is about as small and dirti a place as ever I saw, and the 
buckstown inn is not much abov the gener charact of the place. the 
region is inhabit by nativ who still cling to all sort of foolish 
superstitions. the inn, in the ante-bellum days, wa kept by one who wa 
said to be the meanest and most crab of mortals. the old demon wa as 
miserli as he wa mean, and all hi narrow life he hoard hi filthi 
lucr with fiendish greed. report had it also that he had even murder 
hi patron in their bed for their money. what the fact actual were 
I don’t know, but even to thi day the old inn is held in suspicion. A 
linger effect of former horror still cloud it memory. 

“the present proprietor, bunk watson--hi real name is bunker, I 
believe--i an altogeth differ sort of chap--a southern type, in 
fact--on of those shiftless, heedless, happy-go-lucki mortal who love 
strong whiskey and who chew an enorm quid of black tobacco and 
smoke a corncob pipe at the same time. 

“when the former keeper ‘shuffl off,’ hi properti fell to a distant 
relative, the present keeper, who, with hi family, immedi move in 
from a neighbor hamlet and took possession. It wa well known that 
the old proprietor had accumul consider wealth dure hi 
sojourn among the living, but all effort to discov ani treasur upon 
the premis had failed, and now the idea of ever find it wa 
practic given up. As far as bunk wa concerned, the matter troubl 
him little. He had a hard-work wife who ran thing the best she could 
under the circumstances, and saw that hi meal were forthcom at 
their respect intervals. what more could he wish? whi should he care 
if there wa a treasur buri upon hi place? indeed, it would have 
been a sore puzzl for him to know what to do with a fortun unless 
perhap hi wife came to hi aid. 

“among the stori that hover in the histori of the buckstown inn wa 
one which involv a ghost. In the room where the former keeper had die 
peculiar nois were heard at unearthli hours: sighing, moaning, and, in 
fact, all the other indic which point to the exist of ghosts, 
were said to be present. On account of thi the chamber had long sinc 
been abandoned. 

“I listen with keen interest to the wonder tale about the haunt 
room, and then suddenli resolv to investigate--to sleep in that 
chamber that veri night and see for myself all that wa to be seen. I 
told buck of my purpose. He shook hi head, shrug hi shoulders, but 
instead of warn me and offer a flood of protests, as I expected, 
he mere took hi pipe from hi mouth, let fli a quart or so of 
yellowish juic from between a pair of brown-stain lips, and, open 
one corner of hi wide mouth, lazili call out: ‘jane.’ hi wife 
appeared, and he intim that I should settl the matter with the ‘old 
woman.’ the prospect of a fee persuad the wife, and off she went to 
arrang for my bed in that ill-fat room. 

“at nine o’clock that even I bid the famili good-night, took my 
candle, ascend the ricketi stair and enter the chamber of horrors. 
the atmospher wa heavi and had a peculiar odor that wa not at all 
pleasing. however, I latch the door and wa soon in bed. have 
prop myself up with pillows, I wa prepar to await the come of 
the ghost. 

“overhead the dusti rafters, which onc had experienc the sensat of 
be whitewashed, but which were now a dirty, yellowish color, were 
hung with a fantast array of cobwebs. the flicker light of the 
candl reflect upon the wall and against the ceil a pyramid of 
grotesqu shapes, and with thi effect be continu disturb by 
the sway cobwebs, the whole caus the room to appear rather ghostli 
after all, and especi so to an imagin mind. 

“I wait and wait for hours, it seemed, but still no ghost. perhap 
it wa afraid of my candl light, so I blew it out. No sooner had I done 
thi and settl back in bed again than a white hand appear through 
the door, then a whole figure--at last the ghost had come, a white and 
sheet ghost! 

“it had come right through the door, although it wa locked, and now it 
advanc toward the bed. rais it long, white arm, it point a boni 
finger at me, and then commanded: ‘come with me!’ thereupon it turn to 
the door, while instantli I jump out of bed to follow. some unseen 
power compel me to obey. the door flew open and the ghost led me down 
the stairs, through long hall into the cellar, through mysteri 
underground corridors, upstair again, in and out room which I never 
dream were to be found in that old rambl inn. finally, through a 
small door in the rear, we left the house. I wa in my sleep 
garments, but no matter, I had to follow. 

“the white form, with a slow and measur tread and as silent as death, 
led the way into the orchard. there, under a tree at the farther end, it 
point to the ground, and in the same ghostli tone befor used, said: 

“‘here you will find a great treasur buried.’ 

“the ghost then disappeared, and I saw it no more. I stood daze and 
trembling. upon recov my wit I start to dig, but the chill of 
the night air and the scanti of my night robe made such labor 
impracticable. So I decid to leav some mark to identifi the place and 
come around again at daybreak. I reach up and broke off a limb. 
overcom with my night’ exert I slept the next morn until a loud 
rap on my door and a croak voic warn me that it wa noon. 

“I had intend to leav buckstown inn that day, but, prompt by 
curios and anxiou to investigate, I unpack my gripsack for a 
comfort stay. 

“you must understand that thi wa my first experi with a ghost, and 
I fear I might never see another. 

“at breakfast my landladi wait on me in silence, though onc I 
detect her eye follow me with a peculiar expression. she want to 
ask me how I enjoy the night, but I would not gratifi her by 
volunt a word. 

“mi host wa more outspoken. 

“‘reckon ye didn’t get much sleep,’ said he, with a queer smile. 

“‘did you hear anything?’ I asked. 

“‘well, I did--ye-es,’ he said, with a drawl. ‘but ye didn’t disturb me 
any. I knew ye’d hev troubl when ye went in thet room ter sleep.’ 

“that afternoon I slip out to the tree. but to my amaz I found 
that the twig I had broken from the branch wa gone. final I found 
under the lower trunk of an appl tree an open place from which a small 
branch had evid been wrested. but on look further, I discov 
that everi appl tree in the orchard had been similarli disfigured. 

“‘more mysteri than ever,’ I said; ‘but to-night shall decide.’ 

“that night I plead weariness, which no one seem inclin to 
question, and sought my couch earlier. 

“‘goin’ ter tri it again?’ ask my host. 

“‘yes; and i’ll stay all winter but what i’ll get even with that ghost,’ 
I said. 

“that night I kept the candl burn until midnight, when I blew it 
out. 

“instantli the room wa flood with a soft light, and at the foot of 
the bed stood my ghost, the ident ghost of last night. 

“again the boni finger beckon and a sepulchr voic whispered, 
‘follow me!’ I sprang from the bed, but the figur dart ahead of me. 
It flew through the doorway and down the stairs, and I after it. At the 
foot of the staircas an unseen hand reach forward and caught my foot 
and I fell sprawl headlong. 

“but in a second I wa on my feet and pursu the ghost. It had gain 
on me a few yards, but I wa quicker, and just as we reach the outsid 
door I nearli touch it robes. they sent a chill through my frame, and 
I nearli gave up the pursuit. 

“a it pass through the doorway it turn and gave me one look, and I 
caught the same malign light in it eye that I rememb from the 
night before. 

“in the open orchard I felt sure I could catch it. 

“but my ghost had no intent of allow me ani such opportunity. To 
my disgust, it dart backward and into the house, slam the door in 
my face. 

“in my frenzi of fear and chagrin I threw myself against the oaken door 
with such forc that it rusti old hing yield and I land in the 
big front room of the inn just in time to see the white skirt of the 
ghost flit up the stairs. 

“upstair I flew after it, and into an old chamber. there, huddl in a 
corner, I saw it. In the minute’ delay it had secur a light candl 
and, as I entered, it advanc to daunt me with boni arm uprais to a 
great height. 

“‘caught!’ I cried, throw my arm around the figure. and I had made 
the acquaint of a real live ghost. 

“the white robe fell, and I saw reveal my hostess of buckstown inn. 

“next morning, when I threaten to call the police, she confess to me 
that she masquerad as a ghost to draw visitor to the out-of-the-way 
old place, and that she found it tale of be haunt highli 
profit to her.” 




the burglar’ ghost. 


I am not an imagin man, and no one who know me can say that I have 
ever indulg in sentiment idea upon ani subject. I am rather 
predisposed, in fact, to look at everyth from a pure practic 
standpoint, and thi qualiti ha been further develop in me by the 
fact that for twenti year I have been an activ member of the detect 
polic forc at westford, a larg town in one of our most import 
manufactur districts. A policeman, as most peopl will readili 
believe, ha to deal with so much practic life that he ha small 
opportun for develop other than practic qualities, and he is 
more apt to believ in tangibl thing than in idea of a somewhat 
superstiti nature. however, I wa onc under the firm convict that 
I had been larg help up the ladder of life by the ghost of a onc 
well-known burglar. I have told the stori to many, and have heard it 
comment upon in variou fashions. whether the comment were satir 
or practical, it made no differ to me; I had a firm faith at that 
time in the truth of my tale. 

eighteen year ago I wa a plain cloth offic at westford. I wa then 
twenty-thre year of age, and veri anxiou about two matters. first and 
foremost I desir promotion; second, I wish to be married. Of cours 
I wa more eager about the second than the first, becaus my sweetheart, 
alic moore, wa one of the prettiest and cleverest girl in the town; 
but I put promot first for the simpl reason that with me promot 
must come befor marriage. know this, I wa alway on the lookout for 
a chanc of distinguish myself, and I paid such attent to my 
duti that my superior began to notic me, and foretold a success 
career for me in the future. 

one even in the last week of september, 1873, I wa sit in my 
lodg wonder what I could do to earn the promot which I so 
earnestli wish for. thing were quiet just then in westford, and I am 
afraid I half wish that someth dread might occur if I onli could 
have a share in it. I wa pursu thi train of thought when I suddenli 
heard a voic say, “good evening, officer.” 

I turn sharpli around. It wa almost dusk and my lamp wa not lighted. 
for all that, I could see clearli enough a man who wa sit by a 
chest of drawer that stood between the door and the window. hi chair 
stood between the drawer and the door, and I conclud that he had 
quietli enter my room and seat himself befor address me. 

“good evening!” I replied. “I didn’t hear you come in.” 

He laugh when I said that--a low, chuckling, rather sli laugh. “no,” 
he said, “I dessay not, officer. i’m a veri quiet sort of person. you 
might say, in fact, noiseless. just so.” 

I look at him narrowly, feel consider surpris and astonish 
at hi presence. He wa a thickli built man, with a squar face and 
heavi chin. hi nose wa small, but aggressive; hi eye were littl and 
overshadow by heavi eyebrows; I could see them twinkl when he spoke. 
As for hi dress, it wa in keep with hi face. 

He wore a rough suit of woolen or frieze; a thick, gayli color belcher 
neckerchief encircl hi bull-lik throat, and in hi big hand he 
continu twirl and twist a fur cap, made appar out of the 
skin of some favorit dog. As he sat there smile at me and say 
nothing, it made me feel uncomfortable. 

“what do you want with me?” I asked. 

“just a littl matter o’ business,” he answered. 

“you should have gone to the office,” I said. “we’r not suppos to do 
busi at home.” 

“right you are, guv’nor,” he replied; “but I want to see you. it’ you 
that’ got to do my job. If i’d ha’ seen the superintend he might 
ha’ put somebodi els on to it. that wouldn’t ha’ suit me. you see, 
officer, you’r young, and nat’ral eager-lik for promotion. eh?” 

“what is it you want?” I inquir again. 

“ain’t you eager to be promoted?” he reiterated. “ain’t you now, 
officer?” 

I saw no reason whi I should conceal the fact, even from thi strang 
visitor. I admit that I wa eager for promotion. 

“ah!” he said, with a satisfi smile; “i’m glad o’ that. it’ll make you 
all the keener. now, officer, you listen to me. i’m a-goin’ to put you 
on to a nice littl job. ah! I dessay you’ll be a sergeant befor long, 
you will. you’ll be compliment and prais for your clever conduck in 
thi ’ere affair. mark my word if you ain’t.” 

“out with it,” I said, fanci I saw through the man’ meaning. “you’r 
go to split on some of your pals, I suppose, and you’ll want a 
reward.” 

He shook hi head. “A reward,” he said, “wouldn’t be no use to me at 
all--no, not if it wa a thousand pounds. no, it ain’t noth to do 
with reward. but now, officer, did you ever hear of light to jim?” 

light to jim! I should have been a poor detect if I had not. why, 
the man known under that sobriquet wa one of the cleverest burglar and 
thiev in england, and had enjoy such a famou career that hi name 
wa a household word. At that moment there wa an addit interest 
attach to him. He had been convict of burglari at the northminst 
assiz in 1871, and sentenc to ten years’ penal servitude. after 
serv nearli two year of hi time he had escap from portland, 
get away in such clever fashion that he had never been heard of 
since. where he wa no one could say; but late there had been a strong 
suspicion among the polic that light to jim wa at hi old trick 
again. 

“light to jim!” I repeated. “I should think so. why, what do you know 
about him?” 

He smile and nod hi head. “light to jim,” said he, “i in 
westford at thi ’ere hident moment. listen to me, officer. light 
to jim is a-goin’ to crack a crib to-night. said crib is the mansion 
of miss singleton, that ’ere rich old ladi as live out on the mapleton 
road. you know her--aw rich, with naught but women servant and 
anim about the place. there’ some veri valyabl plate there. that’ 
what light to jim’ after. he’ll get in through the sculleri window 
about 1 a. m., then he’ll pass through the back and front kitchen and 
into the butler’ pantry--onli it’ a butleress, ’co there ain’t no men 
at all--and there he’ll set to work on the safe. some of hi late pal 
in portland give him the tip about thi ’ere job.” 

“how did you come to hear of it?” I asked. 

“never mind, guv’nor. you wouldn’t understand. now, I want you to be up 
there to-night and to nab light to jim red-handed, so to speak. it’ll 
mean promot for you, and it’ll suit me down to the ground. you want 
to be about and to watch him enter. then follow him and dog him. and be 
armed, officer, for jim’ll fight like a tiger if you don’t draw hi 
teeth first.” 

“now, look here, my man,” said I, “thi is all veri well, but it’ all 
irregular. you must just tell me who you are and how you come to be in 
light to jim’ secrets, and i’ll put it down in black and white.” 

I turn away from him to get my write materials. I wa not half a 
minut with my back to him, but when I turn round he wa gone. the 
door wa shut, but I had heard no sound from it either open or 
shutting. quick as thought I dart to it, tore it wide open, and look 
down the narrow staircase. there wa no one there. I ran hastili 
downstair into the passage, and found my landlady, mrs. marriner, 
stand at the open door with a femal friend. “mrs. marriner,” I said, 
break in upon their conversation, “which way did that man go who came 
downstair just now?” 

mrs. marrin look at me strangely. “there ain’t been no man come 
downstairs, mr. parker,” said she; “leastways, not thi good 
three-quart of an hour, which me and missi higgin ’ere, as ’ave 
come out to take an airing, her have been ironin’ all thi bless 
day, ha been standin’ ’ere all the time and ain’t never seen a soul.” 

“nonsense,” I said. “A man came down from my room just now--th man you 
sent up twenti minut since.” 

mrs. marrin look at me with an express betoken the most 
profound astonishment. mrs. higgin sigh deeply. 

“mr. parker,” said mrs. marriner, “sorri am I to say it, sir, but you’r 
either intox or els you’r a-sicken for brain fever, sir. 
there ain’t no person enter thi door, in or out, for nigh onto an 
hour, as me and missi higgin ’ere will take our bibl oath on.” 

I went upstair and look in the room on either side of mine. the man 
wa not there. I look under my bed, and of cours he wa not there. He 
must have gone downstairs. but then the women must have seen him. there 
wa onli one door to the house. I gave it up in despair and began to 
smoke my pipe. By the time I had drawn the last whiff I decid that if 
anyon wa “intoxicated,” it wa probabl mrs. marrin and mrs. 
higgins, and that my strang visitor had depart by the door. I wa not 
go to believ that he had anyth supernatur about him. 

I had no duti that night, and as the hour wore on I found myself stern 
in my resolv to go up to miss singleton’ hous and see what I could 
make out of my informant’ story. It wa my opinion that my late visitor 
wa a whilom “pal” of light to jim, and that have becom awar of 
the latter’ plot, he had, for some reason of hi own, decid to split 
on hi old chum. thieves’ disagr is an honest man’ opportunity, 
and I determin to solv the truth of the stori told me. lest it should 
come to nothing, I decid not to report the matter to my chief. If I 
could realli captur light to jim, my success would be all the more 
brilliant by be suddenli sprung upon the authorities. 

I made my plan of action rapidly. I took a revolv with me and went up 
to miss singleton’ house. fortunately, I knew the housekeep there--a 
middle-aged, strong-mind woman, not easili frightened, which wa a 
good thing. To her I commun such inform as I consid 
necessary. she consent to conceal me in the room where the safe stood. 
there wa a cupboard close by the safe from which I could command a full 
view of the burglar’ oper and pounc upon him at the right 
moment. If onli my inform wa to be reli upon, there wa everi 
chanc of my captur the famou burglar. 

soon after midnight, when the hous wa all quiet, I went to the pantri 
and got into the cupboard, lock myself in. there were two open 
in the panel, through either of which I wa abl to command a full view 
of the room. My posit wa somewhat cramped, but the time soon pass 
away. My mind wa princip occupi in wonder if I wa realli 
about to have a chanc of distinguish myself. somehow, there wa an 
air of unreal about the event of the even which puzzl me. 

suddenli I heard a sound which put me on the alert at once. It wa 
noth more than the creak of a board or open of a door would 
make in a quiet house; but it sound intensifi to my expect ears. 
I drew myself up against the door of the cupboard and place my eye to 
the open in the panel. I had oil the key of the door, and kept my 
finger upon it in readi to spring upon the burglar at the proper 
moment. after what seem some time I saw the gleam of light through the 
keyhol of the door open into the pantry. then it opened, and a man 
carri a small lantern came gentli into the room. At first I could see 
noth of hi face; but when my eye grew accustom to the hazi light 
I saw that I had been rightli informed, and that the burglar wa inde 
no other than the famou light to jim. 

As I stood there watch him I could not help admir the cool fashion 
in which he went to work. He went over to the window and examin it. He 
tri the door of the cupboard in which I stood concealed. then he 
lock the door of the pantri and turn hi attent to the safe. He 
set hi lamp on a chair befor the lock and took from hi pocket as neat 
and pretti a collect of tool as ever I saw. with these he went 
quietli and swiftli to work. 

light to jim wa a somewhat slimli built fellow, with littl muscular 
develop about him, while I am a big man with plenti of bone and 
sinew. If matter had come to a fight between us I could have done what 
I pleas with him; but I knew that jim would not chanc a fight. 
somewher about him I felt sure there wa a revolver, which he would use 
on the least provocation. My plan, therefore, wa to wait until hi back 
wa bent over the lock of the safe, then to open the cupboard door 
noiselessli and fall bodili upon him, pin him to the ground beneath 
me. 

befor long the moment came. He wa work steadili away at the lock, 
hi whole attent concentr on the job. the slight nois of hi 
drill wa suffici to drown the faint click of the key in the cupboard 
door. I turn it quickli and tumbl right upon him, drive the tool 
out of hi hand and tumbl him into a heap at the foot of the safe. 
He utter an exclam of rage and astonish as he went down, and 
immedi began to wriggl under me like an eel. As I kept him down 
with one hand I tri to pull out the handcuff with the other. thi 
somewhat embarrass me, and the burglar profit by it to pull out a 
sharp knife. He had work himself round on hi back, and befor I 
realiz what he wa after he wa hack furious at me with hi keen, 
dagger-lik blade. then I realiz that we were go to have a fight 
for it, and prepar myself. He tri to run the knife into my side. I 
ward it off, but the blade caught the fleshi part of my left arm and I 
felt a warm stream of blood spurt out. 

that madden me, and I seiz one of the steel drill lie near at 
hand, and hit my man such a blow over the templ that he collaps at 
once, and lay as if dead. I put the handcuff on him instantly, and, to 
make matter still more certain, I secur hi ankles. then I rose and 
look at my arm. the knife had made a nasti gash, and the blood wa 
flow freely, but it wa not serious; and when the housekeeper, who 
had just then appear on the scene, had bandag it, I went out and 
secur the help of the first policeman I met in convey light to 
jim to the office. 

I felt a proud man when I made my report to the inspector. 

“light to jim?” said he. “what, jame bland? nonsense, parker.” but I 
took him to the cell where jim wa be attend to by the doctor. 

“you’r right, parker,” he said. “that’ the man. well, thi will be a 
fine thing for you.” 

after a time, feel a littl exhausted, I went home to tri and get 
some sleep. the surgeon had attend to my arm, and told me it wa but a 
superfici wound. It felt sore enough in spite of that. 

I had no sooner reach my lodg than I saw sit in my easy-chair 
the strang man who had call upon me earlier in the evening. He rose 
to hi feet when I entered. I stare at him in utter astonishment. 

“well, guv’nor,” said he, “I see you’v done it. you’v got him squar 
and fair, I reckon?” 

“yes,” I said. 

“ah!” he said, with a sigh of complet satisfaction. “then i’m 
satisfied. yes, I don’t know as how there’ aught more I could say. I 
reckon as how light to jim an’ me is quits.” 

I wa determin to find out who thi man wa thi time. “sit down,” I 
said. “there’ a question or two I must ask you. just let me get my coat 
off and i’ll talk to you.” I took my coat off and went over to the bed 
to lay it down. “now then,” I began, and look around at him. I said no 
more, be liter struck dumb. the man wa gone! 

I began to feel uncomfortable. I ran hastili downstairs, onli to find 
the outer door lock and bolted, as I had left it a few minut 
before. I went back, utterli nonplussed. for an hour I ponder the 
matter over, but could neither make head nor tail of it. 

when I went down to the offic next morn I wa inform that the 
burglar want to see me. I went to hi cell, where he wa lie in bed 
with hi head bandaged. I had hit him pretti hard, as it turn out, and 
it wa probabl he would have to lie on the sick list for some days. 
“well, guv’nor,” said he, “you’d the best of me last night. you hit me 
rather hard that time.” 

“I wa sorri to have to do it, my man,” I answered. “you would have 
stab me if you could.” 

“yes,” he said, “I should. but I say, guv’nor, come a bit closer; I want 
to ask you a question. how did you know I wa on that littl job last 
night? for, s’elp me, there wasn’t a soul knew a breath about it but 
myself. I hadn’t no pals, never talk to anybodi about it, never 
thought aloud about it, as I know on. how came you to spot it, 
guv’nor?” 

there wa no one els in the cell with us, and I thought I might find 
out someth about my mysteri visitor of the night before. “it wa a 
pal of your who gave me the information,” I said. 

“can’t be, guv’nor. No use tell me that. I ain’t got no 
pals--leastway not in thi job.” 

“did you ever know a man like this?” I describ my visitor. As I 
proceeded, light to jim’ face assum an express of real terror. 
whatev color there wa in it fade away. I never saw a man look more 
thoroughli frightened. “yes, yes,” he said, eagerly. “in cours I know 
who it is. why, it’ barksea bill, as I pal’d with at one time--and what 
did he say, guv’nor--that he owe me a grudge? that we wa quit at 
last? right you are, ’co he did owe me a grudge. I treat bill veri 
shabby--veri shabby, indeed, and he swore solemn he’d have hi revenge. 
on’y, guv’nor, what you see wasn’t barksea bill at all, but hi ghost, 
’co barksea bill’ been dead and buri thi three year.” 

I wa natur veri much exercis in my mind over thi weird 
develop of the affair, and I use to think about it long after light 
to jim had onc more retir to the seclus of portland. while he 
wa in charg at westford I tri more than onc to worm some more 
inform out of him about the defunct barksea bill, but with no 
success. He would say no more than that “bill wa dead and buri thi 
three year;” and with that I had to be content. gradual I came to have 
a firm belief that I had inde been visit by barksea bill’ ghost, 
and I often told the stori to brother officers, and sometim got well 
laugh at. that, however, matter littl to me; I felt sure that ani 
man who had gone through the same experi would have had the same 
beliefs. 

Of cours I got my promot and wa soon afterward married. thing went 
well with me, and I wa lift from one step to another. In my secret 
mind I wa alway sure I owe my first rise to the burglar’ ghost, and 
I should have continu to think so but for an incid which occur 
just five year after my captur of light to jim. 

I had occas to travel to sheffield from westford, and had to chang 
train at leeds. the carriag I step into wa occupi by a solitari 
individual, who turn hi face to me as I sat down. though dress in 
more respect fashion, I immedi recogn the man who had 
visit me so mysteri at my lodgings. My first feel wa one of 
fear, and I daresay my face show it, for the man laughed. 

“hallo, guv’nor,” said he; “I see you knew me as soon as you come in. 
you owe a deal to me, guv’nor; now, don’t you, eh?” 

“look here, my man,” I said, “i’v been take you for a ghost these 
five year past. now just tell me how you got in and out of my room that 
night, will you?” 

He laugh long and loud at that. “A ghost?” said he. “well, if that 
ain’t a good un! why, easi enough, guv’nor. I wa a-lodg for a day or 
two in the same house. it’ easi enough, when you know how, to open a 
door veri quiet and to slip out, too.” 

“but I follow you sharp, and look for you.” 

“ay, guv’nor; but you look down, and I had gone up! you should ha’ 
come up to the attics, and there you’d ha’ found me. So you took me for 
a ghost? well, i’m blowed.” 

I told him what light to jim had said in the cell. 

“ay,” said he, “I dessay, guv’nor. you see, ’twa thi way--it weren’t 
jim’ fault as I wasn’t dead. He tri to murder me, guv’nor, he did, 
and left me a-li for dead. So I se to myself when I come round that 
i’d pay him out sooner or later. but after that I quit the profession, 
jim’ nasti conduck havin’ made me sick of it. So I went in for honest 
work at my old trade, which wa drain and pipe repairing. I wa on a 
job o’ that sort in westford, near miss singleton’ house, when I see 
light to jim. I had a hidea what he wa up to, havin’ heard o’ the 
plate, and I watch him one or two nights, and get a notion ’ow he wa 
go to work the job. then, o’ course, you be a offic and close at 
hand I split on him--and that’ all.” 

“but you had got the time and detail correct?” 

“why, o’ course, guv’nor. I wa an old hand--serv mani year at 
portland, I have, and I knew just how jim would work it, after see 
hi perlim’nari observations. but a ghost! ha, ha, ha! why, guv’nor, you 
must ha’ been a veri green young offic in them days!” 

perhap I was. At ani rate I learn a lesson from the ci-dev barksea 
bill--namely, that in search a hous it is alway advis to look 
up as well as down. 




A phantom toe. 


I am not a superstiti man, far from it, but despit all my effort to 
the contrari I could not help thinking, directli I had taken a survey of 
my chamber, that I should never quit it without go through a strang 
adventure. there wa someth in it immens size, heavi and gloom 
that seem to annihil at one blow all my resolut skeptic as 
regard supernatur visitations. It appear to me total imposs 
to go into that room and disbeliev in ghosts. 

the fact is, I had incauti partaken at supper of that favorit 
dutch dish, sauerkraut, and I suppos it had disagre with me and put 
strang fanci into my head. Be thi as it may I onli know that after 
part with my friend for the night I gradual work myself up into 
such a state of fidgeti that at last I wasn’t sure whether I hadn’t 
becom a ghost myself. 

“supposing,” rumin I, “suppos the landlord himself should be a 
practic robber and should have taken the lock and bolt from off thi 
door for the purpos of enter here in the dead of the night, 
abstract all my property, and perhap murder me! I thought the dog 
had a veri cutthroat air about him.” now, I had never had ani such idea 
until that moment, for my host wa a fat (all dutchmen are fat), 
stupid-look fellow, who I don’t believ had sens enough to 
understand what a robberi or murder meant, but somehow or other, 
whenev we have anyth realli to annoy us (and it certainli wa not 
pleasant to go to bed in a strang place without be abl to fasten 
one’ door), we are sure to aggrav it by myriad of chimera of our 
own brain. 

so, on the present occasion, in the midst of a thousand disagre 
reveries, some of the most wild absurdity, I jump veri gloomili into 
bed, have first put out my candl (for total dark wa far 
prefer to it flickering, ghostli light, which transform rather 
than reveal objects), and soon fell asleep, perfectli tire out with 
my day’ riding. 

how long I lay asleep I don’t know, but I suddenli awok from a 
disagre dream of cutthroats, ghost and long, wind passag in a 
haunt inn. An indescrib feeling, such as I never befor 
experienced, hung upon me. It seem as if everi nerv in my bodi had a 
hundr spirit tickl it, and thi wa accompani by so great a heat 
that, inwardli curs mine host’ sauerkraut and wonder how the 
dutchmen could endur such poison, I wa forc to sit up in bed to 
cool myself. the whole of the room wa profoundli dark, except at one 
place, where the moonlight, fall through a crevic in the shutters, 
threw a straight line of about an inch or so thick upon the 
floor--clear, sharp and intens brilliant against the darkness. I 
leav you to conceiv my horror when, upon look at thi said line of 
light, I saw there a nake human toe--noth more. 

for the first instant I thought the vision must be some effect of 
moonlight, then that I wa onli half awak and could not see distinctly. 
So I rub my eye two or three time and look again. still there wa 
the accurs thing--plain, distinct, immovable--marblelik in it 
fixed and rigidity, but in everyth els horribl human. 

I am not an easili frighten man. No one who ha travel so much and 
seen so much and been expos to so mani danger as I, can be, but there 
wa someth so mysteri and unusu in the appear of thi singl 
toe that for a short time I could not think what to be at, so I did 
noth but stare at it in a state of utter bewilderment. 

At length, however, as the toe did not vanish under my steadi gaze, I 
thought I might as well chang my tactics, and rememb that all 
midnight invaders, be they thieves, ghost or devils, dislik noth 
so much as a good nois I shout out in a loud voice: 

“who’ there?” 

the toe immedi disappear in the darkness. 

almost simultan with my word I leap out of bed and rush 
toward the place where I had beheld the strang appearance. the next 
instant I ran against someth and felt an iron grip round my body. 
after thi I have no distinct recollect of what occurred, except 
that a fear struggl ensu between me and my unseen opponent; that 
everi now and then we were violent hurl to the floor, from which we 
alway rose again in an instant, lock in a deadli embrace; that we 
tug and strain and pull and pushed, I in the convuls and 
frantic energi of a fight for life, he (for by thi time I had 
discov that the intrud wa a human being) actuat by some passion 
of which I wa ignorant; that we whirl round and round, cheek to cheek 
and arm to arm, in fierc contest, until the room appear to whiz round 
with us, and that at least a dozen peopl (mi fellow travel among 
them), roused, I suppose, by our repeat falls, came pour into the 
room with light and show me struggl with a man have noth on 
but a shirt, whose long, tangl hair and wild, unsettl eye told me 
he wa insane. and then, for the first time, I becam awar that I had 
receiv in the conflict sever gash from a knife, which my oppon 
still held in hi hand. 

To conclud my stori in a few word (for I daresay all of you by thi 
time are get veri tired), it turn out that my midnight visitor wa 
a madman who wa be convey to a lunat asylum at the hague, and 
that he and hi keeper had been oblig to stop at delft on their way. 
the poor fellow had contriv dure the night to escap from hi 
keeper, who had carelessli forgotten to lock the door of hi chamber, 
and with that irresist desir to shed blood peculiar to mani insan 
peopl had possess himself of a pocketknif belong to the man who 
had charg of him, enter my room, which wa most like the onli one 
in the hous unfastened, and wa probabl medit the fatal stroke 
when I saw hi toe in the moonlight, the rest of hi bodi be hidden 
in the shade. 

after thi terribl freak of hi he wa watch with much greater 
strictness, but I ought to observe, as some excus for the keeper’ 
negligence, that thi wa the first act of violenc he had ever 
attempted. 




mrs. davenport’ ghost. 

BY frederick F. schrader. 


dear readers, do you agre with hamlet? Do you believ that there is 
more between heaven and earth than we dream of in our philosophy? doe 
it seem possibl to you that elipha levi conjur up the shade of 
apolloniu of tyana, the prophet of the magii, in a london hotel, and 
that the great sage, william crookes, drank hi tea at breakfast sever 
day a week, for month in succession, in the societi of the 
materi spirit of a young lady, attir in white linen, with a 
feather turban on her head? 

Do not laugh! panic would seiz you in the presenc even of a turban 
spirit, and the grotesqu spectacl would but intensifi your terror. As 
for me, I did not laugh last night on read an account in a new york 
newspap of a crimin trial that will probabl termin in the death 
penalti of the accused. 

It is a sad case. I shudder as I transcrib the record of the trial 
from the testimoni of the hotel waiter, who heard the convers of 
the two confeder through a keyhole, and of forti thoroughli 
credibl witnesses, who testifi to the same facts. what would be my 
feel if I had seen the beauti victim with the gape wound in her 
breast, into which she dip her finger to mark the brow of her 
murderer? 


I. 

about three o’clock on the afternoon of februari 3, professor davenport 
and miss ida soutchotte, a veri pale and delic young girl, who had 
submit to the test of professor davenport for a number of years, 
were finish their dinner in their room in the second stori of a new 
york hotel. professor benjamin davenport wa a celebrity, but it wa 
said that he owe hi fame to somewhat question means. the lead 
spiritualist did not repos the confid in him that manifestli 
mark their regard for william crook or daniel dougla home. 

“greedi and unscrupul mediums,” the author of spiritu in america 
thinks, “are to blame for the most bitter attack to which our caus ha 
been exposed. when the materi do not take place as quickli as 
circumst require, they resort to trickeri and fraud to extric 
themselv from a dilemma.” 

professor benjamin davenport belong to these “versatile” mediums. 
asid from this, queer stori were afloat about him. He wa secretli 
accus of highway robberi in south america, cheat at card in the 
gambl hous of san francisco, and the overhasti use of firearm 
toward person who had never offend him. It wa said almost openly, 
that the professor’ wife had die from abus and grief at hi 
infidelity. but in spite of these annoy rumors, mr. davenport, by 
virtu of hi skill as a fraud and fakir, continu to exercis a great 
deal of influenc upon certain plain and simple-mind folks, whom it 
wa imposs to convinc that they had not touch the materi 
spirit of their brothers, mothers, or sister through the agenc of hi 
wonder power. hi profession success receiv materi access 
from hi swarthy, mephisto-lik countenance, hi deep, fieri eyes, hi 
larg curv nose, the cynic express of hi mouth, and the lofty, 
almost prophet tone of hi words. 

when the waiter had made hi last visit--h did not go far--th 
follow convers took place in the room: 

“there is to be a seanc thi even at the resid of mrs. harding,” 
began the medium. “quit a number of influenti peopl will be there, 
and two or three millionaires. conceal under your skirt the blond 
woman’ wig and the white materi in which the spirit usual make 
their appearance.” 

“veri well,” repli ida soutchotte, in a resign tone. 

the waiter heard her pace the room. after a pause, she asked: 

“whose spirit are you go to control thi evening, benjamin?” 

the waiter heard a loud, brutal laugh and the chair groan beneath the 
weight of the demonstr professor. 

“guess.” 

“how should I know?” she asked. 

“I am go to conjur up the spirit of my dead wife.” 

and anoth burst of laughter issu from the room, full of sinist 
levity. A cri of terror burst from ida’ lips. A muffl sound indic 
to the eavesdropp at the door that she wa drag herself to the 
feet of the professor. 

“benjamin, benjamin! don’t do it,” she sobbed. 

“whi not? they say I broke mrs. davenport’ heart. the stori is damag 
my reputation, but it will be forgotten if her spirit should address me 
in term of endear from the other shore in the presenc of numer 
witnesses. for you will speak to me tenderly, will you not, ida?” 

“no, no. you shall not do it; you shall not think of it. listen to me, 
for god’ sake. dure the four year that I have been with you I have 
obey you faith and suffer patiently. I have lie and deceived, 
like you; I learn to imit the sleep and symptom of clairvoyants. 
tell me, did I ever refus to serv you, or utter a word of complaint, 
even when my shoulder bent with the weight of my burden, when you 
pierc the flesh of my arm with knit needles? wors than all this, 
I imit distant voic behind curtains, and made mother and wive 
believ that their son and husband had come from a better world to 
commun with them. how often have I perform the most danger 
feat in parlor with the lamp turn low? cloth in a shroud or white 
muslin I essay to repres supernatur forms, whom tear-dim eye 
recogn as those of depart dear ones. you do not know what I 
suffer at thi unhallow work. you scoff at the mysteri of 
eternity. I suffer the torment of an impend retribution. My god! if 
some time the dead whom I counterfeit should rise up befor me with 
uplift arm and dread imprecations! thi constant terror ha 
injur my heart--it will kill me. I am consum by fever. look how 
emaciated, how worn-out and downcast I am. but I am under your control. 
Do as you like with me; I am in your power, and I want it to be so. have 
I ever complained? but do not forc me to do thi thing, benjamin. have 
piti on me for what I have done for you in the past, for what I am 
suffering. Do not attempt thi mummery; do not compel me to play the 
role of your dead wife, who wa so tender and beautiful. oh, what put 
that thought into your mind? spare me, benjamin, I implor you!” 

the professor did not laugh again. amid the confus of upturn 
articl of furnitur the eavesdropp distinguish the sound of a 
skull strike the floor. He conclud that professor davenport had 
knock miss ida down with a blow of hi fist, or had kick her as she 
approach him. but the waiter did not enter the room, as no one rang 
for him. 


ii. 

that even forti person were assembl in mrs. joann harding’ 
parlor, stare at the curtain where a spirit form wa in process of 
materializing. one dark lantern in a corner of the room contribut the 
light that emphas the dark rather than reliev it. the room wa 
pervad by profound silence, save the quickened, suppress breath 
of the spectators. the fire in the grate cast mysteri ray of light, 
resembl fugit spirits, upon the object around, almost 
indistinguish in the semi-gloom. 

professor davenport wa at hi best thi evening. the spirit world 
obey him without hesitation, like their law master. He wa the 
mighti princ of souls. hand that had no arm were seen pick flower 
from the vases; the touch of an invis spirit conjur sweet 
melodi from the key of the piano; the furnitur respond by 
intellig rap to the most unanticip questions. the professor 
himself elev hi form in symbol distort from the floor to an 
altitud of three feet, indic by mrs. harding, and remain 
suspend in the air for a quarter of an hour, hold live coal in hi 
hands. 


iii. 

but the most interesting, as well as the most conclusive, test wa to be 
the materi of the spirit of mrs. arabella davenport, which the 
professor had promis at the begin of the seance. 

“the hour ha come,” exclaim the medium. 

and while the heart of all throb with anxiou suspense, and their 
eye distend with pain expect of the promis materialization, 
benjamin davenport stood befor the curtain. In the twilight the tall 
man with the dishevel hair and demon look, wa realli terribl and 
handsome. 

“appear, arabella!” he exclaimed, in a command voice, with gestur 
of the nazaren at the sepulch of lazarus. 

all are waiting---- 

suddenli a cri burst from behind the curtain--a piercing, shuddering, 
horribl shriek, the shriek of an expir soul. 

the spectat trembled. mrs. hard almost fainted. the medium 
himself appear surprised. 

but benjamin recov hi composur on see the curtain move and 
admit the spirit. 

the apparit wa that of a young woman with long blond tresses; she 
wa beauti and pale, clad in some light, whitish material. her breast 
wa bare, and on the left side appear a bleed wound, in which 
trembl a knife. 

the spectat aros and retreated, push their chair to the wall. 
those who chanc to look at the medium notic that a deathli pallor 
had overspread hi face, and that he wa cower and trembling. 

but the young woman, mrs. arabella, the real one, whom he so well 
remembered, she had come in respons to hi summons, and advanc in a 
direct line toward benjamin, who in terror cover hi eye to shut out 
the ghastli sight, and with a cri fled behind the furniture. but she 
dip the finger of her thin hand into the blood from her wound and 
trace it across the brow of the unconsci medium, the while 
repeating, in a slow, monoton tone that sound like the echo of a 
wail, again and again: 

“you are my murderer! you are my murderer!” 

and while he wa roll and toss in deadli terror on the floor they 
turn up the lights. 

the spirit had vanished. but in the commun room, behind the 
curtain, they found the bodi of poor miss ida soutchott with horribl 
distort features. A physician who wa present pronounc it heart 
stroke. 

and that is the reason that prof. benjamin davenport appear alon in a 
new york courtroom to answer to the charg of have murder hi wife 
four year ago in san francisco. 




the phantom woman. 


He took an all-possessing, burn fanci to her from the first. she wa 
neither young nor pretty, so far as he could see--but she wa wrap 
round with mystery. that wa the key of it all; she wa notic in 
spite of herself. her face at the window, sunset after sunset; her eyes, 
gaze out mourn through the dusti panes, hypnot the lawyer. He 
saw her through the twilight night after night, and he grew at length to 
wait through the day in a feverish wait for dusk, and that one look 
at an unknown woman. 

she wa alway at the same window on the ground floor, sit do 
nothing. she look beyond, so the infatu solicitor fancied, at him. 
onc he even thought that he detect the ghost of a friendli smile on 
her lips. their eye alway met with a mute desir to make acquaintance. 
thi romanc went on for a coupl of months. 

gilbert dent assur himself that noth in thi life can possibl 
remain stationary, and he cudgel hi brain for a respect manner of 
introduc himself to hi idol. 

He had hardli arriv at thi point when he receiv a shock. there came 
an even when she wa not at the window. 

next morn he walk down wood lane on hi way to the office. He 
alway went by train, but he felt a strong disinclin to go through 
anoth day without a sight of her. hi heart began to beat like a 
schoolgirl’ as he drew near the house. If she should be at the window. 
He wa almost dispos to take hi courag in hi hand and call on her, 
and--yes, even--tel her in a quick burst that she had mysteri 
becom all the world to him. He could see noth ridicul in thi 
course; the possibl of her be married, or have famili tie of 
ani sort, had simpli never occur to him. 

however, she wa not at the window; what wa more, there wa a sinist 
silence, a sort of breathless about the whole place. 

It wa a veri hot morn in late august. He look a long time, but no 
face came, and no movement stir the house. 

He went hi way, walk like a man who ha been heavili knock on the 
brow and see star still. that afternoon he left the offic early, and 
in less than an hour stood at the gate again. the window wa blank. He 
push the gate back--it hung on one hinge--and walk up the drive to 
the door. there were five steps--fiv step lead up to it. At the 
foot he wheel asid sharpli to the window; he had a sick dread of 
look through the small panes--whi he could not have told. 

when at last he found courag to look he saw that there wa a small 
round tabl set just under the window--a work-tabl to all appearance; 
one of those thing with lot of littl compart all round and a lid 
in the middl which shut over a well-lik caviti for hold piec of 
needlework. He rememb that hi mother had one--thirti year before. 

round the edg of the tabl wa grip a small, delic hand. gilbert 
dent’ eye ran from thi bloodless hand and slim wrist to a shoulder 
under a coars stuff bodice--to a rather wast throat, which wa bare 
and flung back. 

So thi wa the end--befor the beginning. He saw her. she wa dead; 
twist on the floor with a ghastli face turn up toward the ceiling, 
and stiff finger caught in desper round the work table. 

He stumbl away along the path and into the lane. 

for a long time he could not realiz the horror of thi thing. the 
influenc of the decay hous hung over him--noth seem real. It 
wa quit dark when he move away from the gate, and went in the 
direct of the nearest polic station. that she wa dead--thi woman 
whose veri name he did not know although she influenc him so 
powerfully--h wa certain; one look at the face would have told anyon 
that. that she wa murder he more than suspected. He had seen no blood 
about; there had been no mark on the long, bare throat, and yet the word 
rush in hi ears, “murder.” 

later on he went back with a polic officer. 

they broke into the hous and enter the room. It wa in utter 
darkness, of course, by now. dent, hi finger trembling, struck a 
match. It flare round the wall and light them for a moment befor he 
let it fall on the dusti floor. 

the policeman began to light hi lantern and turn it stolidli on the 
window. He had no reason for delay; he wa eager to get to the bottom of 
the business. hi profession zeal wa whetted; thi promis to be a 
mysteri with a spice in it. 

He turn the light full on the window; he gave a strange, choke cry, 
half of rage, half of apprehension. then he went up to gilbert dent, who 
stood in the middl of the room with hi hand befor hi eyes, and took 
hi shoulder and shook it none too gently. 

“there ain’t nobody,” he said. 

dent look wildli at the window--th recess wa empti except for the 
work-table. the woman wa gone. 

they search the house; they minut inspect the garden. everyth 
wa normal; everyth told the same mourn tale--of desertion, of 
death, of long empti years. but they found no woman, nor trace of one. 

“thi house,” said the policeman, look suspici into the lawyer’ 
face, “ha been empti for longer than I can remember. nobody’l live in 
it. they do say someth about foul play a good mani year ago. I don’t 
know about that. all I do know is that the landlord can’t get it off hi 
hands.” 

It wa doubt if gilbert dent heard one word of what the man wa 
saying. He wa too stun to do anyth but creep home--when he wa 
allow to go--and let himself stealthili into hi own hous with a 
latch key; he wa afraid even of himself. He did not go to bed that 
night. 

As for the mysteri of the woman, the matter wa allow to drop; it 
ended--officially. there wa a shrug and a grin at the polic station. 
the impress there wa that the lawyer had been drinking--that the 
dead woman in the empti room wa a gruesom freak of hi tipsi brain. 

* * * * * 

A week or so later dent call on hi brother ned--th one near relat 
he had. ned wa a doctor; perhap he wa a shade more matter-of-fact 
than gilbert; at all events, when the latter told hi stori of the hous 
and the woman, he attribut the affair sole to liver. 

“you are overworked”--th elder brother look at the younger’ yellow 
face. “an experi of thi natur is by no mean uncommon. haven’t you 
heard of peopl have their pet ‘spooks’?” 

“but thi wa a real woman,” he declared. “i--i, well, I wa in love 
with her. I had made up my mind to marri her--if I could.” 

ned gave him a keen, swift glance. 

“we’ll go to brighton to-morrow,” he said, with quiet decision. “a for 
your work, everyth must be put aside. you’v run complet down. you 
ought to have been taken in hand before.” 

they went to brighton, and it realli seem as if ned wa right, and 
that the woman at the window had been mere a nervou creation. It 
seem so, that is, for nearli three weeks, and then the climax came. 

It wa in the twilight--sh had alway been part of it--that gilbert 
dent saw her again; the woman that he had found lie dead. 

they were walking, the two brothers, along the cliffs. 

the wind wa blow in their faces, the sea wa boom beneath the 
cliff. ned had just said it wa about time they turn back to the hotel 
and had some dinner, when gilbert with a cri leapt forward to the veri 
edg of the flat grass path on which they were strolling. the movement 
wa so sudden that hi brother bare caught him in time. they 
struggl and sway on the veri edg of the cliff for a second; 
gilbert, possess by some sudden frenzy, seem resolv to go over, 
but the other at last drag him backward, and they roll togeth on 
the close, thick turf. 

At thi point gilbert open hi eye and tri to get on hi feet. 

“better?” ask hi brother, cheerfully, hold out a help hand. 
“strange! the sea ha that effect on some people. didn’t think that you 
were one of them.” 

“what effect?” 

“vertigo, my dear fellow.” 

“ned,” said the other solemnly, “I saw her. It is not worth your while 
to tri to account for anything. I have been inclin to think that you 
were right--that she, the woman at the window, wa a fancy, that I had 
fallen in love with a creation of my own brain; but I saw her again 
to-night. you must have seen her yourself--sh wa within a coupl of 
feet of you. whi did you not tri and save her? It wa noth short of 
murder to let her go over like that. I did my best.” 

“you certainli did--to kill us both,” said ned, grimly. 

gilbert gave him a wild look. 

after luncheon ned persuad him to rest--watch him fall asleep, and 
then went out. 

In the porch of the hotel he wa met by a waiter on hi return who told 
him that gilbert had left about a quarter of an hour after he had 
himself gone out. 

directli he heard thi he fear the worst; having, as is usual in such 
cases, a veri hazi idea of what the worst might be. Of cours he must 
follow without a moment’ delay; but a refer to the time-t told 
him that there wa not anoth train for an hour, and that wa slow. 

It wa alreadi get dusk when he arriv there. He felt certain that 
gilbert would go there. He got to the end of the lane and walk up it 
slowly, examin everi house. there would be no difficulti in 
recogn the one he wanted; gilbert had describ it in detail more 
than once. 

He stood outsid the loos hang gate at last, and stare through 
the dark at the shabbi stucco front and rank garden. 

He went down a flight of step to the back door, and find it 
unfastened, step into a stone passage. It wa one of the problem of 
the place that he should have avoid the main entranc door with a 
half-admit dread, and that, onli half admit still, he wa afraid 
to mount the long flight of stone stair lead from the servants’ 
quarters. however, he pull himself togeth and went up to the room. 

It wa quit dark inside. He heard someth scuttl across the floor; 
he felt the grit and dust of year under hi feet. He struck a 
match--just as gilbert had done--and look first at the recess in which 
the window wa built. the match flare round the room for a moment and 
gave him a flash pictur of hi surroundings. He saw the stripe of 
gaudi paper move almost imperceptibly, like tentacl of some sea 
monster, from the wall; he saw a creature--it look like a rat--scurri 
across the floor from the window to the great mantelpiec of hard white 
marble. 

If he had seen noth more than this. 

He saw in detail all that the first match had flash at him. He saw hi 
brother lie on the floor; a ghastli coincidence, hi hand wa caught 
round the edg of the work-tabl as her had been. the other hand wa 
clench across hi breast; there wa a look of great agoni on hi face. 

A dead face, of course. thi wa the end of the affair. He wa lie 
dead by the window where the woman had sat everi night at dusk and 
smile at him. 

the second match went out; the brother of the dead man struck a third. 
He look again and closely. then he stagger to hi feet and gave a 
cry. It rang through the empti room and echo without weari down 
the long, stone passag in the basement. 

gilbert’ head wa thrown back; hi chin peak to the ceiling. On hi 
throat were livid marks. the doctor saw them distinctly; he saw the grip 
of small fingers; the distinct impress of a woman’ littl hand. 

* * * * * 

the curiou thing about the whole story--th most curiou thing, 
perhaps--i that no other eye ever saw those murder marks. So there 
wa no scandal, no chase after the murderer, no undiscov crime. they 
faded; when the doctor saw hi brother again in the full light and in 
the presenc of other hi throat wa clear. and the post mortem prove 
that death wa due to natur causes. 

So the matter stands, and will. 

but where the hous and it overgrown garden stood run a new road with 
neat red and white villas. 

whatev secret it knew--if any--it kept discreetly. 

ned dent is morbid enough to go down the smart new road in the twilight 
sometim and wonder. 




the phantom hag. 


the other even in an old castl the convers turn upon 
apparitions, each one of the parti tell a story. As the account grew 
more horribl the young ladi drew closer together. 

“have you ever had an adventur with a ghost?” said they to me. “do you 
not know a stori to make us shiver? come, tell us something.” 

“I am quit will to do so,” I replied. “I will tell you of an 
incid that happen to myself.” 

toward the close of the autumn of 1858 I visit one of my friends, 
sub-prefect of a littl citi in the center of france. albert wa an old 
companion of my youth, and I had been present at hi wedding. hi 
charm wife wa full of good and grace. My friend wish to show 
me hi happi home, and to introduc me to hi two pretti littl 
daughters. I wa fete and taken great care of. three day after my 
arriv I knew the entir city, curiosities, old castles, ruins, etc. 
everi day about four o’clock albert would order the phaeton, and we 
would take a long ride, return home in the evening. one even my 
friend said to me: 

“to-morrow we will go further than usual. I want to take you to the 
black rocks. they are curiou old druidic stones, on a wild and 
desol plain. they will interest you. My wife ha not seen them yet, 
so we will take her.” 

the follow day we drove out at the usual hour. albert’ wife sat by 
hi side. I occupi the back seat alone. the weather wa gray and 
somber that afternoon, and the journey wa not veri pleasant. when we 
arriv at the black rock the sun wa setting. We got out of the 
phaeton, and albert took care of the horses. 

We walk some littl distanc through the field befor reach the 
giant remain of the old druid religion. albert’ wife wish to climb 
to the summit of the altar, and I assist her. I can still see her 
grace figur as she stood drape in a red shawl, her veil float 
around her. 

“how beauti it is! but doe it not make you feel a littl 
melancholy?” said she, extend her hand toward the dark horizon, which 
wa light a littl by the last ray of the sun. 

the afternoon wind blew violently, and sigh through the stunt tree 
that grew around the stone cromlechs; not a dwell nor a human be 
wa in sight. We hasten to get down, and silent retrac our step 
to the carriage. 

“we must hurry,” said albert; “the sky is threatening, and we shall have 
scarc time to reach home befor night.” 

We care wrap the robe around hi wife. she tie the veil around 
her face, and the hors start into a rapid trot. It wa grow dark; 
the sceneri around us wa bare and desolate; clump of fir tree here 
and there and furz bush form the onli vegetation. We began to feel 
the cold, for the wind blew with fury; the onli sound we heard wa the 
steadi trot of the hors and the sharp clear tinkl of their bells. 

suddenli I felt the heavi grasp of a hand upon my shoulder. I turn my 
head quickly. A horribl apparit present itself befor my eyes. In 
the empti place at my side sat a hideou woman. I tri to cri out; the 
phantom place her finger upon her lip to impos silenc upon me. I 
could not utter a sound. the woman wa cloth in white linen; her head 
wa cowled; her face wa overspread with a corpse-lik pallor, and in 
place of eye were ghastli black cavities. 

I sat motionless, overcom by terror. 

the ghost suddenli stood up and lean over the young wife. she 
encircl her with her arms, and lower her hideou head as if to kiss 
her forehead. 

“what a wind!” cri madam albert, turn precipit toward me. “mi 
veil is torn.” 

As she turn I felt the same infern pressur on my shoulder, and the 
place occupi by the phantom wa empty. I look out to the right and 
left--th road wa deserted, not an object in sight. 

“what a dread gale!” said madam albert. “did you feel it? I cannot 
explain the terror that seiz me; my veil wa torn by the wind as if by 
an invis hand; I am trembl still.” 

“never mind,” said albert, smiling; “wrap yourself up, my dear; we will 
soon be warm ourselv by a good fire at home. I am starving.” 

A cold perspir cover my forehead; a shiver ran through me; my 
tongu clove to the roof of my mouth, and I could not articul a 
sound; a sharp pain in my shoulder wa the onli sensibl evid that I 
wa not the victim of an hallucination. put my hand upon my ach 
shoulder, I felt a rent in the cloak that wa wrap around me. I 
look at it; five perfectli distinct holes--vis trace of the grip 
of the horribl phantom. I thought for a moment that I should die or 
that my reason should leav me; it was, I think, the most dread 
moment of my life. 

final I becam more calm; thi nameless agoni had last for some 
minutes; I do not think it is possibl for a human be to suffer more 
than I did dure that time. As soon as I had recov my senses, I 
thought at first I would tell my friend all that had passed, but 
hesitated, and final did not, fear that my stori would frighten 
madam albert, and feel sure my friend would not believ me. the 
light of the littl citi reviv me, and gradual the oppress of 
terror that overwhelm me becam lighter. 

So soon as we reach home, madam albert unti her veil; it wa 
liter in shreds. I hope to find my cloth whole and prove to 
myself that it wa all imagination. but no, the cloth wa torn in five 
places, just where the finger had seiz my shoulder. there wa no 
mark, however, upon my flesh, onli a dull pain. 

I return to pari the next day, where I endeavor to forget the 
strang adventure; or at least when I thought of it, I would forc 
myself to think it an hallucination. 

the day after my return I receiv a letter from my friend albert. It 
wa edg with black. I open it with a vagu fear. 

hi wife had die the day of my return. 




from the tomb. 

translat from the french OF DE maupass BY E. C. waggener. 


the guest file slowli into the hotel’ great dining-hal and took 
their places, the waiter began to serv them leisurely, to give the 
tardi one time to arriv and to save themselv the bother of bring 
back the courses; and the old bathers, the yearli habitues, with whom 
the season wa far advanced, kept a close watch on the door each time it 
opened, hope for the come of new faces. 

new faces! the singl distract of all pleasur resorts. We go to 
dinner chiefli to canvass the daili arrivals, to wonder who they are, 
what they do and what they think. A restless desir seem to have taken 
possess of us, a long for pleasant adventures, for friendli 
acquaintances, perhaps, for possibl lovers. In thi elbow-to-elbow life 
our unknown neighbor becom of paramount importance. curios is 
piqued, sympathi on the alert and the social instinct doubli active. 

We have hatr for a week, friendship for a month, and view all men 
with the special eye of watering-plac intimacy. sometim dure an 
hour’ chat after dinner, under the tree of the park, where rippl a 
heal spring, we discov men of superior intellect and surpris 
merit, and a month later have wholli forgotten these new friends, so 
charm at first sight. 

there, too, more special than elsewhere, seriou and last tie are 
formed. We see each other everi day, we learn to know each other veri 
soon, and in the affect that spring up so rapidli between us there 
is mingl much of the sweet abandon of old and tri intimates. and 
later on, how tender are the memori cherish of the first hour of 
thi friendship, of the first communion in which the soul came to light, 
of the first glanc that question and respond to the secret 
thought and interrogatori the lip have not dare yet to utter, of 
the first cordial confid and delici sensat of open one’ 
heart to someon who ha seem to lay bare to you hi own! the veri 
dull of the hours, as it were, the monotoni of day all alike, but 
render more complet the rapid bud and bloom of friendship’ 
flower. 

that evening, then, as on everi evening, we await the appear of 
unfamiliar faces. 

there came onli two, but veri peculiar ones, those of a man and a 
woman--fath and daughter. they seem to have step from the page 
of some weird legend; and yet there wa an attract about them, albeit 
an unpleas one, that made me set them down at onc as the victim of 
some fatality. 

the father wa tall, spare, a littl bent, with hair blanch white; too 
white for hi still young countenance, and in hi manner and about hi 
person the sedat auster of carriag that bespeak the puritan. the 
daughter was, possibly, some twenty-four or twenty-f year of age. 
she wa veri slight, emaciated, her exceedingli pale counten bear 
a languid, spiritless expression; one of those peopl whom we sometim 
encounter, appar too weak for the care and task of life, too 
feebl to move or do the thing that we must do everi day. nevertheless 
the girl wa pretty, with the ether beauti of an apparition. It wa 
she, undoubtedly, who came for the benefit of the waters. 

they chanc to be place at tabl immedi opposit to me; and I wa 
not long in notic that the father, too, had a strang affection, 
someth wrong about the nerv it seemed. whenev he wa go to 
reach for anything, hi hand, with a jerki twitch, describ a sort of 
flutter zig-zag, befor he wa abl to grasp what he wa after. soon, 
the motion disturb me so much, I kept my head turn in order not to 
see it. but not befor I had also observ that the young girl kept her 
glove on her left hand while she ate. 

dinner ended, I went out as usual for a turn in the ground belong to 
the establishment. A sort of park, I might say, stretch clear to the 
littl station of auvergne, chatel-guyon, nestl in a gorg at the 
foot of the high mountain, from which flow the sparkling, bubbl 
springs, hot from the furnac of an ancient volcano. beyond us there, 
the domes, small extinct craters--of which chatel-guyon is the start 
point--rais their serrat head abov the long chain; while beyond 
the dome came two distinct regions, one of them, needle-lik peaks, the 
other of bold, precipit mountains. 

It wa veri warm that evening, and I content myself with pace to and 
fro under the rustl trees, gaze at the mountain and listen to 
the strain of the band, pour from the casino, situat on a knoll 
that overlook the grounds. 

presently, I perceiv the father and daughter come toward me with 
slow steps. I bow to them in that pleasant continent fashion with 
which one alway salut hi hotel companions. the gentleman halt at 
once. 

“pardon me, sir,” said he, “but may I ask if you can direct us to a 
short walk, easi and pretty, if possible?” 

“certainly,” I answered, and offer to lead them myself to the valley 
through which the swift river flows--a deep, narrow cleft between two 
great declivities, rocki and wooded. 

they accepted, and as we walked, we natur discuss the virtu of 
the miner waters. they had, as I had surmised, come there on hi 
daughter’ account. 

“she ha a strang malady,” said he, “the seat of which her physician 
cannot determine. she suffer from the most inexplic nervou 
symptoms. sometim they declar her ill of a heart disease; sometim 
of a liver complaint; again of a spinal trouble. At present they 
attribut it to the stomach--that great motor and regul of the 
body--thi protean diseas of a thousand forms, a thousand mode of 
attack. It is whi we are here. I, myself, think it is her nerves. In ani 
case it is sad.” 

thi remind me of hi own jerk hand. 

“it may be hereditary,” said I, “your own nerv are a littl disturbed, 
are they not?” 

“mine?” he answered, tranquilly. “not at all, I have alway possess 
the calmest nerves.” then, suddenly, as if bethink himself: 

“for this,” touch hi hand, “i not nerves, but the result of a 
shock, a terribl shock that I suffer once. fanci it, sir, thi child 
of mine ha been buri alive!” 

I could find noth to say, I wa dumb with surprise. 

“yes,” he continued, “buri alive; but hear the story, it is not long. 
for some time past juliett had seem affect with a disord action 
of the heart. We were final certain that the troubl wa organ and 
fear the worst. one day it came, she wa brought in lifeless--dead. 
she had fallen dead while walk in the garden. physician came in 
haste, but noth could be done. she wa gone. for two day and night 
I watch besid her myself, and with my own hand place her in her 
coffin, which I follow to the cemeteri and saw place in the famili 
vault. thi wa in the country, in the provinc of lorraine. 

“it had been my wish, too, that she should be buri in her jewels, 
bracelets, necklac and rings, all present that I had given her, and in 
her first ball dress. you can imagine, sir, the state of my heart in 
return home. she wa all that I had left, my wife had been dead for 
mani years. I returned, in truth, half mad, shut myself alon in my room 
and fell into my chair dazed, unabl to move, mere a miserable, 
breath wreck. 

“soon my old valet, prosper, who had help me place juliett in her 
coffin and lay her away for her last sleep, came in noiselessli to see 
if he could not induc me to eat. I shook my head, answer nothing. He 
persisted: 

“‘monsieur is wrong; thi will make him ill. will monsieur allow me, 
then, to put him to bed?’ 

“‘no, no,’ I answered. ‘let me alone.’ 

“he yield and withdrew. 

“how mani hour pass I do not know. what a night! what a night! It wa 
veri cold; my fire of log had long sinc burn out in the great 
fireplace; and the wind, a wintri blast, charg with an ici frost, 
howl and scream about the hous and strain at my window with a 
curious sinist sound. 

“long hours, I say, roll by. I sat still where I had fallen, 
prostrated, overwhelmed; my eye wide open, but my bodi strengthless, 
dead; my soul drown in despair. suddenli the great bell gave a loud 
peal. 

“I gave such a leap that my chair crack under me. the slow, solemn 
sound rang through the empti house. I look at the clock. 

“it wa two in the morning. who could be come at such an hour? 

“twice again the bell pull sharply. the servant would never answer, 
perhap never hear it. I took up a candl and made my way to the door. I 
wa about to demand: 

“‘who is there?’ but, asham of the weakness, nerv myself and drew 
back the bolts. My heart throbbed, my puls beat, I threw back the panel 
brusqu and there, in the darkness, saw a shape like a phantom, 
dress in white. 

“I recoiled, speechless with anguish, stammering: 

“‘who--who are you?’ 

“A voic answered: 

“‘it is I, father.’ 

“it wa my child, juliette. 

“truly, I thought myself mad. I shuddered, shrink backward befor the 
specter as it advanced, gesticul with my hand to ward off the 
apparition. It is that gestur which ha never left me. 

“again the phantom spoke: 

“‘father, father! see, I am not dead. someon came to rob me of my 
jewels--they cut off my finger--the--th flow blood reviv me.’ 

“and I saw then that she wa cover with blood. I fell to my knee 
panting, sobbing, laughing, all in one. As soon as I regain my senses, 
but still so bewild I scarc comprehend the happi that had 
come to me, I took her in my arms, carri her to her room, and rang 
frantic for prosper to rekindl the fire, bring a warm drink for 
her, and go for the doctor. 

“he came running, entered, gaze a moment at my daughter in the 
chair--gav a gasp of fright and horror and fell back--dead. 

“it wa he who had open the vault, who had wound and rob my 
child, and then abandon her; for he could not effac all trace of hi 
deed; and he had not even taken the troubl to return the coffin to it 
niche; sure, besides, of not be suspect by me, who trust him so 
fully. We are truli veri unfortun people, monsieur.” 

He wa silent. 

meanwhil the night had come on, envelop in the gloom the still and 
solitari littl valley; a sort of mysteri dread seem to fall upon 
me in presenc of these strang beings--thi corps come to life, and 
thi father with hi pain gestures. 

“let us return,” said I, “the night ha grown chill.” 

and still in silence, we retrac our step back to the hotel, and I 
shortli afterward return to the city. I lost all further knowledg of 
the two peculiar visitor to my favorit summer resort. 




sandy’ ghost. 


“‘commerd fer the night, stranger? waal, yes; I reckon we can fix 
a place fer you. hev a cheer an’ set you down.” 

“thank you. don’t you find thi rather a lone place--no neighbors, no 
nothing, that I can see? how came you to settl here, so far remov 
from other habitations?” 

“waal, perhap it’ best not ter ask too mani question ter once.” 

“beg your pardon. No offens wa intended, I assur you. simpli idl 
curiosity.” 

“don’t say ’nuther word, stranger, but come in an’ we’ll hev a snack fer 
supper. polly, bring on the victu’ls. yer jes’ in time.” 

polli at onc obeyed. she wa a typic western girl--tall, lithe, 
grace and limpid-eyed. she wa clear-skin and high-spirited, too, 
and in thi case ignor through no fault of her own. john barr’ eye 
scan her intently, and a flush came to her cheeks. for the first time 
in her life she wa unpleasantli consciou of her bare feet. It may have 
been thi that made her stumbl and spill some of the content of an 
earthen bowl over the guest’ knee as she place it on the table. 

her eye flash and a tear of anger twinkl on the lashes. she 
stopped, half mean to apologize, but an oath from her father caus 
her to set the bowl down heavili and to hurri from the cabin. A moment 
later barr saw a flutter of pink calico from behind a pile of rocks. old 
kit robinson saw it, too. 

“don’t wonder at yer sayin’ ’tain’t right. she’ a sma’t gal, and a good 
looker, too, as should hev been sent away frum here ter school ter be 
eddicated. but she won’t leav her no ’count dad. I orter be shot fer 
cussin’ her. but I ain’t what I use ter be. settin’ here an’ keepin’ 
guard make me narvous.” 

barr’ eye ask the question hi lip refus to speak. supper eaten, 
the men went outsid and sat with their chair tilt back against the 
cabin. someth in the younger man’ frank face had soften old kit 
into a reminisc mood and made him strang inclin to gratifi an 
idl curiosity. 

the soft even wind sigh through the branch of the tall spruce 
pines, and the declin ray of the set sun caus the shadow of 
the rude home to stretch out longer across the greensward. from it 
shelter where he sat john barr look out on the grand rang of the 
rocki and wonder where in their vast he would find the man he 
sought--th find of whom had brought him out into thi wild and 
almost forsaken mine camp. 

“stranger, i’v took a likin’ ter you. ye’v a sumthin’ about you thet 
remind me of sum one I know, an’ you look like an honest chap. say, do 
you b’liev in ghosts?” 

He put the question veri suddenly, and a look of disappoint cross 
hi face when barr told him that he did not believ in spooks. 

“waal, i’v seen ’em!” 

A thought connect the pink calico with someth in the past came to 
barr’ mind. 

“can’t you tell me about it?” he asked. 

“i’d like ter if you’ll sw’ar, on yer derringer, never ter blab. will 
you sw’ar?” 

the solitari guest start to smile, but the smile fade at the thought 
of unsh tear in polly’ eyes. It might make it easier for her if he 
humor the old man. 

“i’ll swear,” he said. and he did. 

“do you see yan old spruce at the turn of the trail an’ the cliff jes’ 
above? waal, thet’ the spot i’m watchin’ an’ guardin’ till the owner 
cum ter claim it. i’m quick ter burn powder an’ a pretti sure shot. I 
know a man when I see him, an’ I ain’t easi fooled. waal, ter begin 
with, I had a pardner once, an’ he wuz a man, sure ’nough. He wuz frum 
the state of new york. I never axe him as ter how so fine a gent cum 
ter be diggin’ an’ shov’lin’ in the rockies, though ter myself I said 
thar wuz sum good reason. He had light hair, an’ we call him sandy, 
fer short, an’ he wuz jes’ erbout as gritti as sand. We wuz as unlik as 
ani two feller you ever saw. He wuz quietlik an’ steady, an’ I wuz 
sorter wild an’ reckless an’ like mount dew mos’ too well. waal, 
when we had a littl dust scrape together, we would divvy, an’ I tuk my 
share way down ter the station on the other side of the cliff an’ sent 
it off ter the bank in helena. but I aller left sum hid whar the gal 
would find it. old sandi hed a bank of hi own thet no one knew erbout, 
’cept hisself, an’ ev’ri time we divid he’d carri part of it ter 
hi hidin’ place, an’ then give the rest ter me ter send ter hi boy, 
thet he said wuz bein’ eddic in sum colleg way up in boston. He 
seem ter think a heap of thet boy. arter awhil my old woman give out, 
an’ soon we laid her away on the hillside. It wuz hard, stranger.” 

old kit’ voic fail him for a moment, but he quickli regain hi 
composur and continued: 

“but when old sandy, my good old pard, give up I didn’t keer fer 
nothin’. We buri him in style. all the boy frum round the diggin’ 
wuz thar, an’ mani an eye wuz wet. We didn’t hev nari a preacher, but 
the gal she pray at the grave. fer the life of me I don’t know where 
she larnt it. reckon the old woman must hev told her. next mornin’ the 
gal show me a letter thet sandi give her jes’ afor he died. It wuz 
ter hi boy, an’ she wuz ter give it ter him if he ever cum out thi 
way, an’ she’ got it yet. 

“thet same evenin’ after supper, feelin’ kinder glumish an’ like thar 
wuz sumthin’ in my throat I couldn’t swaller, I tuk a stroll up the 
gulch. I went on out ter the top of the edg of the big rock an’ got ter 
studyin’ whar i’d find anoth pard like sandy. all ter onc I felt a 
hand touch my shoulder kinder light onc or twice. I jump up, half 
expectin’ it wuz sandy, but it wuz onli the gal. waal, I wuz all tuk 
back at fust, an’ then I got mad. 

“‘what air you doin’ up here?’ I axed, kinder rough. she hed tear in 
her eye as she look at me, an’ said: 

“‘pap, don’t git mad. I wuz lonesum. I seed you cumin’ up thi way, an’ 
I foller you, ’caus I want ter tell you thet sandi said ter give 
hi boy hi pile when he cums.’ 

“‘waal,’ say I, ‘you might hev wait till I cum back ter the house.’ 
an’ then I sent her back. 

“arter she wuz gone I sot ter studyin’ whar in the world sandy’ pile 
wuz. I tri ter think whar could he hev hid it. but it warn’t no use. 
all ter onc I notic it wuz plum dark, an’ as these mount ain’t a 
he’lthi place fer a man ter roam in arter nightfall, especi if he 
ain’t got hi shootin’ iron on, I cut a pretti swift gait fer the 
shack. 

“jes’ as I cum round the bend thar at the pine I happen ter look up 
terward the clift, an’ thar sot sandy. yes, sir. It wuz him sure as yer 
born. My feet felt heavi as lead, an’ I couldn’t move frum the spot. I 
tri ter holler, but it warn’t no go. final I gave a sudden jerk an’ 
made a step terward him, an’ as I did so he disappeared. then I made 
track fer home. but I kept mum, ’caus I know the boy would say thet 
mount dew wuz lickin’ up my brains, an’ I would be seein’ snake an’ 
sich thing afor long. 

“the next night sumhow er ’nuther I thought ter go an’ see if he wuz 
thar ag’in, an’ sure ’nough, thar he sot, lookin’ kinder sad an’ make 
mark on the rock with hi fingers. I hed my hand on my gun thi time, 
so I got a littl closter than afore. but, by hookey, he got away from 
me ag’in, nor did he cum back. 

“I could hardli wait fer the next night ter cum round. At the same time 
I wuz on hand good an’ early, jes’ as it begun ter git dark, an’ the 
tree look like long spook a-stretchin’ out their arms. I look 
terward the clift, an’ thar he sot a-markin’ an’ a-scratchin’ on the 
rock with hi finger an’ still look sad. now, thi bein’ the third 
time, I kinder got bold, an’ I went a littl closter, an’ says: 

“‘sandy, wha-what’ the ma-mat-matt with you? didn’t the boy do the 
plantin’ right fer you?’ 

“then as luck would hev it I thought of sumthin’ els right quick, an’ I 
said: 

“‘or is it the dust you hev hid whar yer sittin’?’ 

“waal, he look up then, an’ the happiest smile cum ter hi face, an’ 
all ter onc he disappear ag’in. an’ sinc then I hev sot here an’ 
guard the place till the right one cum along ter claim it. 

“let’ see. what did you say yer name wuz?” 

“pardon me. I thought I had told you. My name is john willett barr.” 

“polly, oh, polly! cum hyar, gal. what wuz sandy’ full name? I plum 
fergot.” 

“what you want ter know fer?” she asked. “I ain’t a-goin’ ter tell you 
now. thet’ my own secret.” 

“cum, cum, gal. tell me ter once, or it won’t be he’lthi fer you.” 

“waal, then,” she answer stubbornly, “it’ john willett barr.” 

At her repli the younger man’ face grew deathli pale, and he start up 
from hi chair, but kit thrust him back into hi seat, saying: 

“bring me the letter, polly.” 

“what are you goin’ ter do with it, pa?” she inquired, cautiously. 

“I promis old sandi on my oath ter keep it till the right one cum 
erlong ter claim it, an’ I mean ter keep my word. the right one is here, 
gal. thar he sits. So trot thet letter out, an’ don’t parley long with 
me if you know when yer well off.” 

polli stare at the younger man in utter bewilder for a moment. 
then, turn slowly, she step quietli into the cabin after the 
preciou document; an unusu gleam of joy light up her face and a 
suppress excit shone in her eyes. under her breath she said: 
“sumhow er ruther I felt he wuz the right one.” 

too truly, john barr realiz in that pain moment that he whom he 
sought wa now dead to him; that the father from whom he had been part 
so mani year wa sleep that long, dreamless sleep in the clay mound 
on the hillside, which mark hi last rest place. As he turn to 
look at the face of old, honest kit, who had been hi father’ friend 
dure those long year of forc exile, a happi smile lit up the old 
miner’ rug featur as he point with hi finger to the rock cliff 
near the old spruce vine, and said, in an exultant, trembl voice: 

“thar he be, stranger--jes’ as I hev seen him mani a night--yer dad--mi 
pard--por old sandy!” 

with an eager voic john barr sprang forward, and the mountain echo 
and re-echo the plaintiv cri of “father! father!” but hi 
outstretch arm clasp onli empti and the darken shadow of 
the rapidli approach night. 




the ghost OF red creek. 

BY S. T. 


To the northward of mississippi citi and it neighbor, handsboro, there 
extend a tract of pine forest for mile with but few habit 
scatter through it. black and red creeks, with their numer 
branches, drain thi region into the pascagoula river to the eastward. 
with the swamp of pascagoula as a refuge, and the luxuri and 
unfrequ bottom of red and black creek to brows upon, there are 
few choicer spot for deer. know thi fact, a small parti of 
gentlemen on the day befor a crisp, cold christmas, start from 
handsboro in a larg four-wheel wagon for a thirty-mil drive into 
thi wilder of pine and a week’ sport after the deer. the guid wa 
jim caruthers, a true woodsman, and the driver and gener factotum, a 
jolli negro name jack lyons, than whom no one could make a better 
hoe-cak and cook a venison steak. hi laugh could be heard a quarter of 
a mile, and hi good natur wa as expans as the rang of the 
laughter. 

the usual experi of a hunt camp were heartili enjoy dure 
the first day of thi life out of doors; but it cream did not rise 
until about the fifth night, when, from familiar intercourse, jack lyon 
becam loquacious, and after the day’ twenti or twenty-five-mil walk, 
would spin yarn in front of the camp fire, which brought forget 
of fatigue. 

the night befor new year’ wa intens cold. the cold north wind of 
the afternoon had subsid at sunset, and onli a gust now and again 
touch the music leav of the pines, make them vibrant with that 
mourn score of nature’ opera which even maestro have fail to 
catch. 

In front of two new and white tent two sportsmen reclin at length 
within reach of the warmth of the fire, while opposit them rest at 
eas the guid and the worthi jack lyons. 

weari with the day’ chase four stanch hounds--ringwood, rose, jet and 
boxer--wer dream of futur quarry. 

the firelight brought out in bright relief the trunk of the tall pine 
like cathedr columns, and sparkl through the leafi dome overhead 
the scintil star glisten with a diamond brightness. A silenc 
which ad it influenc to the scene rest about the border of the 
creek below, and gave more effect to the stori of the veteran teamster 
than perhap it otherwis would have had. 

“if de deer run down de creek,” said old jack, smack hi lip over a 
care prepar brew of the real campbellton punch, “wese boun’ to 
see fun to-morrer, for dey’ll take us down thar by de old gibbet’ 
place. In daylight dere’ no place like it, but after nightfall, you bet 
you wouldn’t catch di nigger thar.” 

old jack wa natur ask whi he didn’t care about visit the 
gibbet’ place at night. ask to be excus until he fill hi pipe, 
the silenc wa unbroken until hi return. He pile on more pine knot 
and commenced: 

“you kno’, gemmen, dat when de gunboat wa in de sound we folk had to 
travel way back hyar on dese road outun de rang of deir big guns. I 
wa ’gage by mr. harrison in haul salt from de factori at 
mississippi city, on de beach ober to mobile, an’ I had been make a 
trip eberi week or so. di back countri road wa neber thought ob by de 
federals, an’ we had good time long de way, no shell and no shootin’. 

“de nite, gemmen, i’s speakin’ of wa a friday, dat you all know is 
unlucky. well, you see, I hitch up betsi an’ rose in de lead, an’ ole 
fox an’ blossom at de pole, an’ take in de biggest load of salt dat 
team eber carried. I start out an’ cross de biloxi riber at han’sboro 
jes’ as de moon wa goin’ down. yes, boss, dese road weren’t no better 
den now, an’ de rain had made ’em mighti rough when yer come to de 
holes. 

“I sat in de seat whistlin’ ‘de cow is in de pea patch,’ and a-thinkin’ 
of sarah jamison, what wa afterward my wife, when I felt de off fore 
wheel go ‘kersush’ in a hole up to de hub. i’d made seventeen mile out 
ob han’sboro. I did some cussin’, an’ den went to de fence, about twenti 
yard off, an’ took out a rail to prize up de wheel. den I saw I wa at 
mister gibbet’ place. I sez to myself, i’ll go up to de hous an’ get 
old mr. gibbet to give me a turn. I had done gone by dar two week afor 
an’ seed de old man. 

“now, gemmen, yer listen to me, for what i’s tellin’ yer is as sure as 
jinny’l blow de horn on de las’ day. I walk up to de hous an’ dar I 
saw a bright light inside. It show out froo de windows, an’ I saw 
shadder of miss gibbet and mrs. gibbet on de window curtain--shore, 
honeys, shore. De front do’ wa shet, an’ I step up on ter de galleri 
an’ knock wid de butt end of my whip. I didn’t knock loud, needer. god 
bless us all, gemmen, de light went out like dat, an’ I hear set up a 
laugh, ha-ha-ha-ha. how dat set my knee a-shakin’. I open de do’, an’ 
dere wa no sign of anybody. I struck a match an’ all de furnitur wa 
move out, an’ de old red curtain dat I fought I seed wa in rags. De 
whole famili wa gone, for shore. I didn’t kno’ ’zactli what to think 
’bout dem strang voices, but I start back to de wagon, when it 
lightened, an’ bress god, dar in de front yard wa six grave jes’ made. 
somefin’ wrong here, sed I; an’ I build a fire by de wagon an’ dig de 
wheel out. jes’ den old squir pastur kem along de road from mobile, 
an’ he tell me de news. ole man gibbet cut de froat of hi wife and 
fore chillern an’ shoot hisself in de head outun jealousi of hi wife. 
dey wa all buri in de front yard, an’ de hous wa desert ten day 
befo’. 

“gemmen, when I hear dat, dem mule make de quickest time to mobil eber 
seed; an’ yous can tell me dar’ no ghosts, but yo’ don’ catch me roun’ 
dat log hous of gibbet’ ’ceptin’ sun’ an hour high.” 

jack look suspici over hi shoulder into the dark and crawl 
into hi blanket, muttering: 

“it scare di nigger eben now to tell ’bout dat night.” 

sleep soon fell upon the camp, but the impress of old jack’ stori 
surviv the night, and the next day he still assert it truth. 




the spectr bride. 


the winter night up at sault ste. mari are as white and lumin as 
the milki way. the silenc that rest upon the solitud appear to be 
white also. natur ha includ sound in her arrestment. save the still 
white frost, all thing are obliterated. the star are there, but they 
seem to belong to heaven and not to earth. they are at an immeasur 
height, and so black is the night that the opaqu ether roll between 
them and the observ in great liquid billows. 

In such a place it is difficult to believ that the world is peopl to 
ani great extent. one fanci that cain ha just kill abel, and that 
there is need for the greatest economi in the matter of human life. 

the night ralph hagadorn start out for echo bay he felt as if he were 
the onli man in the world, so complet wa the solitud through which he 
wa passing. He wa go over to attend the wed of hi best friend, 
and was, in fact, to act as the groomsman. busi had delay him, and 
he wa compel to make hi journey at night. but he hadn’t gone far 
befor he began to feel the exhilar of the skater. hi skate were 
keen, hi leg fit for a longer journey than the one he had undertaken, 
and the tang of the frost wa to him what a spur is to a spirit horse. 

He cut through the air as a sharp stone cleav the water. He could feel 
the tumult of the air as he cleft it. As he went on he began to have 
fancies. It seem to him that he wa enorm tall--a great vike of 
the northland, hasten over ici fiord to hi love. that remind him 
that he had a love--though, indeed, that thought wa alway present with 
him as a background for other thoughts. To be sure, he had not told her 
she wa hi love, becaus he had onli seen her a few time and the 
opportun had not present itself. she live at echo bay, too, and 
wa to be the maid of honor to hi friend’ bride--which wa anoth 
reason whi he skate on almost as swiftli as the wind, and why, now and 
then, he let out a shout of exhilaration. 

the one drawback in the matter wa that mari beaujeu’ father had 
money, and that mari live in a fine hous and wore otter skin about 
her throat and littl satin-lin mink boot on her feet when she went 
sledding, and that the jacket in which she kept a bit of her dead 
mother’ hair had a black pearl in it as big as a pea. these thing 
made it difficult--nay, impossible--for ralph hagadorn to say anyth 
more than “I love you.” but that much he meant to have the satisfact 
of saying, no matter what came of it. 

with thi determin grow upon him he swept along the ice which 
gleam under the starlight. indeed, venu made a glow path toward 
the west and seem to reassur him. He wa sorri he could not skim down 
that avenu of light from the love star, but he wa forc to turn hi 
back upon it and face toward the northeast. 

It came to him with a shock that he wa not alone. hi eyelash were a 
good deal frost and hi eyebal blur with the cold, and at first 
he thought it an illusion. but he rub hi eye hard and at length 
made sure that not veri far in front of him wa a long white skater in 
flutter garment who sped over the snow fast as ever werewolf went. 
He call aloud, but there wa no answer, and then he gave chase, 
set hi teeth hard and put a tension on hi firm young muscles. 
but howev fast he might go the white skater went faster. after a time 
he becam convinced, as he chanc to glanc for a second at the north 
star, that the white skater wa lead him out of hi direct path. for 
a moment he hesitated, wonder if he should not keep to hi road, but 
the strang companion seem to draw him on irresistibly, and so he 
followed. 

Of cours it came to him more than onc that thi might be no earthli 
guide. Up in those latitud men see strang thing when the hoar frost 
is on the earth. hagadorn’ father, who live up there with the lake 
superior indian and work in the copper mines, had onc welcom a 
woman at hi hut on a bitter night who wa gone by morning, and who left 
wolf track in the snow--yes, it wa so, and john fontanelle, the 
half-breed, could tell you about it ani day--if he were alive. (alack, 
the snow where the wolf track were is melt now!) 

well, hagadorn follow the white skater all the night, and when the ice 
flush red at dawn and arrow of love light shot up into the cold 
heavens, she wa gone, and hagadorn wa at hi destination. then, as he 
took off hi skate while the sun climb arrogantli up to hi place 
abov all other things, hagadorn chanc to glanc lakeward, and he saw 
there wa a great wind-rift in the ice and that the wave show blue as 
sapphir besid the gleam ice. had he swept along hi intend path, 
watch the star to guid him, hi glanc turn upward, all hi bodi 
at magnific momentum, he must certainli have gone into that cold 
grave. the white skater had been hi guardian angel! 

much impressed, he went up to hi friend’ house, expect to find 
there the pleasant wed furore. but someon met him quietli at the 
door, and hi friend came downstair to greet him with a solemn 
demeanor. 

“i thi your wed face?” cri hagadorn. “why, really, if thi is 
the way you are affected, the sooner I take warn the better.” 

“there’ no wed to-day,” said hi friend. 

“no wedding? why, you’r not----” 

“mari beaujeu die last night----” 

“marie----” 

“di last night. she had been skate in the afternoon, and she came 
home chill and wander in her mind, as if the frost had got in it 
somehow. she got wors and wors and talk all the time of you.” 

“of me?” 

“we wonder what it all meant. We didn’t know you were lovers.” 

“I didn’t know it myself; more’ the pity.” 

“she said you were on the ice. she said you didn’t know about the big 
break up, and she cri to us that the wind wa off shore. then she 
cri that you could come in by the old french creek if you onli 
knew----?” 

“I came in that way,” interrupt hagadorn. 

“how did you come to do that? it’ out of your way.” 

So hagadorn told him how it came to pass. 

and that day they watch besid the maiden, who had taper at her head 
and feet, and over in the littl church the bride who might have been at 
her wed said prayer for her friend. then they buri her in her 
bridesmaid’ white, and hagadorn wa there befor the altar with her, as 
he intend from the first. At midnight the day of the burial her 
friend were marri in the gloom of the cold church, and they walk 
togeth through the snow to lay their bridal wreath on her grave. 

three night later hagadorn start back again to hi home. they want 
him to go by sunlight, but he had hi way and went when venu made her 
bright path on the ice. He hope for the companionship of the white 
skater. but he did not have it. hi onli companion wa the wind. the 
onli voic he heard wa the bay of a wolf on the north shore. the 
world wa as white as if it had just been creat and the sun had not 
yet color nor man defil it. 




how HE caught the ghost. 


“yes, the hous is a good one,” said the agent; “it’ in a good 
neighborhood, and you’r get it at almost nothing; but I think it 
right to tell you all about it. you are orphans, you say, and with a 
mother depend on you? that make it all the more necessari that you 
should know. the fact is, the hous is said to be haunted----” 

the agent could not help smile as he said it, and he wa reliev to 
see an answer smile on the two face befor him. 

“ah, you don’t believ in ghosts,” he went on; “nor do I, for that 
matter; but, somehow, the reput of the hous keep me from have a 
tenant long at a time. the place ought to rent for twice as much as it 
does.” 

“if we succeed in drive out the ghost, you will not rais the rent?” 
ask the boy, with a merri twinkl in hi eyes. 

“well, no--not thi year, at ani rate,” laugh the agent. and so the 
hous wa rented; and the slip of a girl and the tall lad, her brother, 
went their way. 

within a week the famili had move into the house, and were delight 
with it. It wa larg and cool, with wide hall and fine stairways, and 
with more room than they needed. but that did not matter in the least, 
for they had alway been cramp in small houses, suffer mani 
discomforts; and they never could have afford such a place as thi if 
it had not been “haunted.” 

“bless on the ghost!” cri margaret, gaily, as she ran about as 
merri as a child. “who would be without a ghost in the house, when it 
bring one like this?” 

“and it is so near your school,” said the mother; “and I use to worri 
so over the long walk; and david can come home to lunch now, and you 
don’t know what a pleasur that will be.” 

“it seem to me,” david grave explained, “that if I should meet the 
ghost I would treat him with the greatest polit and encourag him 
to stay. We shall not miss the room he takes, shall we? I think it would 
be well to set asid that room over yours, maggie, for hi ghostship’ 
own, for we shall not need that, you know. besides, the door doesn’t 
shut, and he can go in and out without break the lock.” 

and then they all laugh and had a great deal of fun over the ghost, 
which wa a great joke to them. 

they were veri tire that night and slept soundli all night long. when 
they met the next morn there wa more laughter about the ghost which 
wa shi about meet strangers, probably, and had made no effort to 
introduc himself. for the next three day they were all hard at work, 
tri to bring chao into someth like order; and then it wa time 
for the school to open, and margaret wa to begin teaching, and david 
insert an advertis in the citi paper for a maid-of-all-work, who 
might help their mother in their absence. 

for one whole day prospect color servant present themselv and 
announced: 

“i di de hous whar dey want a worklady? no, ma’am, I ain’ gwine to 
work in di house. ketch me workin’ in no ha’nt house.” 

after which they each and all departed, and other came in their stead. 
one wa secur after a while, but no sooner had she talk across the 
fenc with a neighbor’ servant than she, too, departed. 

“never mind, children,” said mrs. craig, wearily, “I would much rather 
do the work than be troubl in thi way.” 

So the maid-of-all-work wa dismiss and the craig famili lock the 
door and went to their rooms, worn out with the day’ anxieties. 

they had been in the hous four days, and there had been neither sight 
nor sound of the ghost. the veri mention of it wa enough to start them 
all to laughing, for they were thoroughli practic people, with a 
fond for inquir into anyth that seem mysteri to them and 
for understand it thoroughli befor they let it go. 

david wa soon sleep the sound sleep of healthi boyhood, and all wa 
silent in the house, when margaret stole softli into hi room and laid 
her hand on hi arm. He wa not easi to waken, and sever minut had 
pass befor he sat up in bed with an articul murmur of surprise. 

“hush!” said margaret, in a whisper, with her hand on hi lips. “I want 
you to come into my room and listen to a sound that I have been hear 
for some time.” 

“door creaking,” suggest david, as he began to dress. 

“noth of the kind,” wa all she said. 

they walk up the stairway, and along the upper hall to the door of the 
unus room. someth wa wrong with the lock and the door would not 
stay fastened, as I have said. 

someth that wa not fear thrill their heart as they push the 
door further ajar, and stood where they could see everi foot of the 
vacant floor. one of their own box stood in the middl of the room, 
but asid from that, noth wa to be seen, and they look at one 
anoth in silence. 

“hold the lamp a minute, maggie,” david said, at last, and then he went 
all over the room, and look more particularli at it emptiness, and 
even felt the walls. 

“secret panels, you know,” he said, with a smile, but it wa a veri 
puzzl smile indeed. 

“I can’t see what it could have been,” margaret said, as they went down 
the stairs. 

“no, I can’t see, either, but i’m go to see,” said david. “that wa a 
chain, and chain don’t drag around by themselves, you know. A ghost 
could not drag a chain, if he were to try.” 

“the convent ghost veri often drag chains,” said margaret, as she 
close the door of her room. 

and then she lay awak all night and listen for the convent ghost 
that drag a chain, but it seem that the weight of the chain must 
have weari him, for he wa not heard again. 

the mother had slept through it all, and next morn they gave her a 
vivid account of the night’ adventure. 

“perhap it wa someon in the house,” she said, in alarm. there were no 
ghost within the bound of possibility, so far as she wa concerned, 
but burglar were veri possible, indeed. 

then margaret and david both laugh more than ever. 

“what fun it would be,” said david, “for a burglar to get into thi 
hous and tri to find someth worth carri away!” 

So they went on to the next night, all three fulli determin to spend 
the night in listen for the ghost, and run him to earth if 
possible. 

but it wa margaret that heard the ghost, after all. she had been 
sleep and wa suddenli startl wide awake, and there, overhead, wa 
the sound of the chain dragging; and just as she wa on the point of 
spring out of bed to call her brother, the chain seem to go out of 
the upper room. she lay still and listened, and in a moment she heard it 
again. 

It wa come down the stairs. 

there wa no carpet on the stairs, and she could hear the chain drop 
from step to step, until it had come the whole way down. there it was, 
almost at the door of her room, and someth that wa strang like 
fear kept her lie still, listen in horrifi silence. 

then it went along the hall, drag close to the door; and then 
further away; and back and forth for awhile; and then it began drag 
back up the stair again. step by step she could hear it drawn over the 
edg of everi step--and by the time it had reach the top she 
rememb herself and call david. 

again did the brother and sister make a tour of the upper room, with the 
lamp. not onli that, but they look into everi nook and corner of the 
upper part of the house, and at last came back, baffled. they had seen 
noth extraordinary, and they had not heard a sound. 

“i’m go to see that ghost to-night,” david said to hi sister the 
next evening. 

“how?” 

“i’m go to sit up all night at the head of the stairs. don’t say 
anyth about it to mother; it might make her uneasy.” 

so, after the household were all quiet, david slip into hi place at 
the head of the stairs, and sat down to hi vigil. He had place a 
screen at the head of the stairway so that it hid him from view--a if a 
ghost care for a screen--and he establish himself behind it, and 
prepar to be as patient as he could. 

It seem to him that hour so long had never been devis as those the 
town clock toll off that night. He bore it until midnight moder 
well, because, he argu with himself, if there were ani ghost about 
they would sure walk then; but they were not in a humor for walking; 
and still the hour roll on without ani developments. He took the 
fidgets, and had nervou twitch all over him, and at last he could 
endur it no longer, and had lean hi head back against the wall and 
wa go bliss to sleep when---- 

He heard a chain drag just beyond the open door of that unus room. 

In spite of himself a shiver ran down hi back. there wa no mistak 
it; it wa a real chain, if he had ever heard one. more than that, it 
had left the room, and wa come straight toward the stairs. the hall 
wa dark, and it wa imposs for him to see anything, although he 
strain hi eye in the direct of the sound. and even while he 
look it had pass behind the screen, and wa go down the stairs, 
drop from step to step with a clank. 

half way down a narrow strip of moonlight from a stair-window lay 
directli across the steps. whatev the thing was, it must pass through 
that patch of light, and david lean forward and watched. 

down it went from step to step, and present it had slip through the 
light, and wa down; and a littl later it came back again, through the 
light, and up the stairs, and back into that unus room. 

and then david slap hi knee jubilantly, and ran down to hi room, 
and slept all the rest of the night. 

next morn he wa veri mysteri about hi discoveri of the night 
before. 

“oh, yes, I saw the ghost,” he said to maggie. “there; don’t ask so mani 
questions; i’ll tell you more about it to-morrow, maybe.” 

and that wa all the inform she could get from him. It wa veri 
provoking. 

that day david made a purchas down town and brought home a bulki 
bundle, which he hid in hi own room and would not let hi sister even 
peep at. 

“i’m go to tri to catch a ghost to-night,” he said, “and you know how 
it is; if I brag too much beforehand, I shall be sure to fail.” 

He wa work with someth in the hall after the other had retired; 
but he did not sit up thi time. He went to bed, and margaret listen 
at hi door and found that he wa soon asleep. 

but away in the night they were all awaken by a squeal that brought 
them all into the hall in a great hurry; and there, at the head of the 
stairs, they found the huge rat-trap that david had set a few hour 
before, and in the midst of the toil wa a rat. 

“why, david,” exclaim the mother, “I didn’t know that there wa a rat 
in the house.” 

and then, all at once, she saw that there wa a long chain hang from 
a littl iron collar around the creature’ neck, and she and margaret 
cri together. 

“and thi wa the ghost!” 

such a funni ghost when they came to think of it--thi poor rat, with a 
nest in some hole of the broken chimney. He had been someone’ pet, 
once, perhaps; and now, the household he had broken up, the night he 
had disturbed, the wild sensat he had created--it made hi captor 
laugh to think that thi innoc creatur had been the caus of the 
whole trouble. 

“i’ll get a cage for him, and take care of him for the rest of hi 
life,” said david. “we owe him so much that we can’t afford to be 
ungrateful.” 

the next morn he took the ghost-in-a-cag and show it to the agent, 
and gave him a vivid account of the capture. 

“so, you have a good hous for about half price, all on account of that 
rat,” exclaim the agent, grimly. “young man--but never mind, you 
deserv it. what are you work for now? six dollar a week? If you 
ever want to chang your place--suppos you come around here. I think 
you need a busi that will give you a chanc to grow.” 

and the agent and david shook hand warmli over the cage of the 
“ghost.” 




grand-dame’ ghost story. 

BY C. D. 


I don’t know whether you ever tell your children ghost stori or not; 
some mother don’t, but our mother, though of german descent, wa 
strong-mind on the ghost subject, and earli taught all of her children 
to be fearless mental as well as physically, and, though dearli fond 
of hear ghost stories, especi if they were real true ghosts, we 
were sadli skeptic as to their be anyth of the kind that could 
harm. We were quit learn in ghostli lore, knew all about 
“doppeigangers,” “will o’ the wisp,” “blue lights,” etc., and we could 
not have a greater treat for good behavior than for our mother to draw 
on her store of supernatur tale for our entertainment. the stori I am 
about to relat she told us one stormi night, when, gather round her 
chair in her own cozi sanctum, befor a cheer fire, we ate nut and 
apples, and listen while she recit “an o’er true tale,” told her by 
her grandmother, who herself wit the vision: 

It wa a fear night, the wind sob and wail round the hous like 
lost spirit mourn their doom; the rain beat upon the casements, and 
the trees, writh in the tortur of the fierc blast, groan and 
sway until their top almost swept the earth; bright flash of 
lightn pierc even through the close shutter and heavi curtains, 
and the thunder had a sullen, threaten roar that made your blood 
creep. It wa a night to make one seek to shut out all sound, draw the 
curtain close, stir the fire and nestl deep in the arm-chair befor 
it, with feet upon the fender, and have someth cheer to think or 
talk about. but I wa all alone; none in the hous with me but the 
servants, and the servants’ wing wa detach from the main part of the 
building, for I do not care to have menial near me, and I had no love 
one near. 

It wa just such a night that nanci black died. “what a fear night 
for the soul to leav it earthli home and go out into the vast, unknown 
future!” I spoke aloud, as, rous from a train of thought, I drew my 
heavi mantl closer round me, wheel my arm-chair nearer the fire, and 
cuddl down in it, buri my feet in the foot-cushion to warm them, 
for I felt strang cold. I wa in the library; it wa my usual 
sitting-room, for I seldom use the parlors. what wa the use? My book 
were my friends, and I love best to be with them. My children dead, or 
marri and away, the cold, grand parlor alway seem gloomi and sad; 
the ghost of depart pleasur haunt them, and I care not to enter 
them. 

It wa a long, wide room across the hall from the parlors, run the 
whole length of the house, and wa line with shelv from floor to 
ceiling. My husband’ father had been a bibliomaniac, and my husband had 
had a lean that way also, and the shelv held mani an old rare work 
that wa worth it weight in gold. the fire, though burn brightly, 
did not illum one-half the room of which, sit in the chimney 
corner, I command a full view, and had been look at the shadow 
play on the furnitur and shelves, as the flame shot up, and after 
flicker a moment, would die out, leav a gloom which would break 
away into fantast shadow as the firelight would again shoot up. 

while watch the gleam of light and darkl shades, unconsci 
the wail of the storm outsid attract my attention, there seem to 
be odd nois of tap on the windows, and sob and sighs, as though 
someon wa entreat entranc from the fierc tumult; and as I sat 
there, again I thought of nanci black, the old schoolgirl friend who had 
love me so dearly, and the night when she went forth to meet the doom 
appoint her; rest my head upon my hand, I sat gaze in the fire, 
think over her strang life, and still stranger death, and wonder 
what could have becom of the money and jewel that I knew she had onc 
possessed. 

while sit thus, a queer sensat crept over me; it wa not fear, 
but a feel as though if i’d look up i’d see someth frightful; a 
shiver, not like that of cold, ran from my head to my feet, and a 
sensat as though someon wa breath ici cold breath upon my 
forehead, the same feel you would caus by hold a piec of ice to 
your cheek; it flutter over my face and final settl round my lips, 
as though the unseen one wa caress me, thrill me with horror. but 
I am not fearful, nervou nor imaginative, and resolut throw off 
the dread that fell upon me, I turn round and look up, and there, so 
close by my side that my hand, involuntarili thrown out, pass through 
her seem form, stood nanci black. It wa nanci black, and yet not 
nanci black; her whole bodi had a semi-transpar appearance, just as 
your hand look when you hold it between yourself and a strong light; 
her clothing, appar the same as worn in life, had a wavy, seething, 
flicker look, like flame have, and yet did not seem to burn. 

“in the name of god, nanci black, what brought you here, and whenc came 
you?” I exclaimed. 

A hollow whisper followed: 

“thank you, my old friend, for speak to me, and, oh, how deepli I 
thank you for think of me to-night--i shall have rest.” 

rest! I heard echoed, and a jeer laugh rang through the room that 
made her quiver at it sound. 

“I have been near you often; but alway fail to find you in a 
condit when you would be en rapport befor to-night. what I came for 
I will tell you; whenc I come, you need not know; suffic it to say, 
that were I happi I would not be here on such an errand, nor on such a 
night--it is onli when the element are in a tumult, and the wind wail 
and moan, that we come forth. when you hear these sound it is soul of 
the lost you hear mourn their doom--’ti then they wander up and 
down, to and fro, their onli releas from their fear home of tortur 
and undi pain. 

“I have come to tell you that you must go over to the old house, and in 
the back room I alway kept locked, have the carpet taken up from toward 
the fireplace. you will see a plank with a knot-hol in it. remov that, 
and you will find what caus me to lose my soul--hav prayer said for 
me, for ’ti well to pray for the dead. the money and jewel give in 
charity; buri in holi ground the other you find, and pray for them and 
me. ah! jeannette, you thought your old friend, though strang and odd, 
pure and innocent. It is a bitter part of my punish that I must 
chang your thought of me. farewell! Do not fail me, and I shall troubl 
you no more. but whenev you hear that wind howl and sweep round the 
hous as it doe to-night, know that the lost are near. It is their 
swift flight through space--fle befor the scourg of memori and 
conscience--that caus that sound. 

“that to-morrow you may not think you are dreaming, here is a token,” 
and she touch the palm of my hand with her finger-tips, and as you 
see, my child, to thi day, there are three crimson spot in the palm of 
my hand that noth will eradicate. 

“do not fail me, and pray for us, jeannette, pray,” and with a longing, 
wist gaze, and a deep, sob sigh, nanci black fade from my sight. 

“am I dreaming?” I exclaimed, as I rose from my chair and rang the bell. 
when the servant entered, I bade him attend to the fire and light the 
lamps, and I went through the room to see if ani unusu arrang of 
the furnitur could have caus the appearance, but noth wa 
apparent, and I bade him send my maid to attend me in my chamber, for I 
could not help feel unwil to remain in the librari ani longer 
that evening. 

while make my toilet for the night my maid said: 

“have you burn your hand, madam?” 

glanc hastili down, I saw three dark crimson spot upon the palm of 
my left hand. they had an odd look, sear as though touch by a 
red-hot iron, yet the flesh wa soft, not burn and not painful. make 
some excus for it, I did not allud to it again, and dismiss her 
speedily, that I might reflect undisturb over the singular occurrence. 
there were the mark upon my hand; I could not remov them, and they did 
not fade. In fact, their deep red made the rest of the palm lose it 
pinkish hue and look pale from the strong contrast. could I have been 
asleep and dream it all, and by ani mean have done thi to myself? I 
thought, but final conclud that on the morrow i’d go over to nanci 
black’ old resid and settl the question; and with that conclus 
had to content myself until the morrow came. 

nanci black wa an old friend from my girlhood, who had own larg 
properti in the town, and live all alon in a spaciou stone hous 
directli opposit my home, and who, when dying, had left me the sole 
legate of her property. 

when morn came I took the keys, and, with my maid, went over to 
nancy’ house. It had never been disturb sinc her death, which wa 
sudden and somewhat singular, and the furnitur remain just as she 
left it when taken to her last rest place. We went to the room nanci 
had directed. I bade sarah take up the carpet, and, sure enough, there 
wa a plank with a knot-hol in it; so I sent her from the room, and 
lift the plank myself, and there, between the two joints, rest a 
long box, the lid not fastened. open it, I wa horrifi to see two 
skeletons--thos of an infant and of a woman, small in statur and 
delic frame. In a moment it flash befor me that I saw all that 
remain of nanci black’ young sister, a girl of seventeen, who had 
left home somewhat mysteri year ago, and had die while absent--at 
least, that wa the version nanci had given of her absence, and no one 
had dream of doubt it, her tale wa so natur told. 

left orphan when luci wa onli two year and nanci eighteen, she had 
devot her life to the care of thi young girl, and when she found her 
sister had fallen, she, in her pride of name and position, had destroy 
mother and child, that her shame might not be known, and had live all 
those dreari year in that hous with her fear secret. 

round the box, heap up on everi side, were money and jewels, and a 
parchment scroll among them had written on it: “lucy’ share of our 
father’ estate.” I carri out nancy’ wish to the letter, for I now 
firmli believ that she had come to me herself that night. To avoid 
scandal rest on the dead, I took our clergyman into my confidence, 
and with hi assist had the remain buri quietli in consecr 
ground. the money and jewel were given to the poor, and the old 
build I turn into a home for destitut females; and morn and 
night, as I kneel in prayer, I pray forgiv to rest upon nanci black 
and peac to her troubl soul. 




A fight with A ghost. 

BY Q. E. D. 


“no, I never believ much in ghosts,” said the doctor. “but I wa 
alway rather afraid of them.” 

“have you ever seen one?” ask one of the other men. 

the doctor took hi cigar out of hi mouth and contempl the ash for 
a moment or two befor replying. “I have had some rather startl 
experiences,” he said, after a pause, dure which the rest of us 
exchang glances, for the doctor ha seen mani thing and is not avers 
to talk about them in congeni company. “would you care about 
hear one of them? It give me the cold shiver now to speak of it.” 
We nodded, and the doctor, take a sip as an antidot to the shivers, 
began: 

“you rememb georg carson, who play for the ‘varsiti some year ago; 
big chap, with a light mustache? well, I saw a good deal of him befor 
he married, while he wa read for the bar in town. It wa just after 
he becam engag to miss stonor, who is now mrs. carson, that he ask 
me to go down to a place which hi peopl had taken in the country. miss 
stonor wa to be there and he want me to meet her. I could not go down 
for christma day, as I had promis to be with my people. but as I had 
been work a bit too hard, and want a few days’ rest, I decid to 
run down for a few day about the new year. 

“woodcot wa a pleasant enough place to look at. there were two pack 
of hound within easi distance, and it wa not far enough from a station 
to cut you off complet from the morn papers. the carson had been 
lucky, I thought, in come across such a good hous at such a moder 
figure. for, as georg told me, the owner had been oblig to go abroad 
for hi health, and wa anxiou not to leav the place empti all the 
winter. It wa an old house, with big gabl and preposter corner 
all over the place, and you couldn’t walk ten pace along ani of the 
passag without tumbl up or down stairs. but it had been patch 
from time to time and, among other improvements, a big billiard-room had 
been built out at the back. A countri hous in the winter without a 
billiard-room, when the frost stop hunting, is just--well, not even a 
gild prison. the parti wa a small one; besid georg and hi father 
and mother, there were onli a coupl of miss carson, who, be 
somewher in the earli teens, didn’t count, and miss stonor, who, of 
course, count a good deal, and, lastly, myself. 

“miss stonor ought to have been happy, for georg carson, besid be 
an excel fellow all around, wa by no mean a bad match, be an 
onli son with consider expectations. but, somehow or other, she did 
not strike me as look either veri well or veri happy. she gave me the 
impress of have someth on her mind, which made her altern 
nervou and listless. george, I fancied, notic it, and wa puzzl by 
it, for I caught him sever time watch her with an anxiou and 
inquir look, but, as I wa not there as a doctor, of cours it wa no 
busi of mine, though I discov the reason befor I left woodcote. 

“the second night after my arrival--w had been playing, I remember, a 
famili pool; the rest had gone upstair to bed--georg and I adjourn 
to a sort of study, which he had arrang upstairs, for a final smoke 
and a chat befor turn in. the studi wa next to hi bedroom, and 
part off from it by curtains. As we were settl down I miss my 
pipe, and rememb that I had laid it down in the billiard-room. On 
principl I never smoke anoth man’ pipe, so I lit a candle, the hous 
be in darkness, and start away in search of my own. the hous 
look aw weird by the flicker light of a solitari candle, and 
the stair creak in a particularli gruesom way behind me, just for 
all the world as though someon were follow at my heels. I found my 
pipe where I had expect in the billiard-room, and came back in perhap 
a littl more hurri than wa absolut necessary. which, perhaps, 
explain whi I stumbl in the uncertain light over a coupl of 
unforeseen stairs, and drop my candle. Of cours it went out, but 
after a littl grope I found it. have no match with me I wa 
oblig to feel my way along the banisters, for it wa so dark that I 
could not see my hand in front of me. and as I slowli advanced, slide 
my hand along the broad balustrad at my side, it suddenli slid over 
someth cold and clammy, which wa not balustrad at all; for, 
stop dead, and close my finger round it for an instant, I felt 
that I wa hold anoth hand, a skinny, boni hand, which writh 
itself slowli from my grasp. and though I could hear noth and see 
nothing, I wa yet consciou that someth wa brush past me and 
go up the stairs. 

“‘hi--what’ that? who are you?’ I called. 

“there wa no answer. 

“I admit that I wa in a regular funk. I must have shown it in my face. 

“‘what’ the matter?’ ask george, as I blunder into hi study. 

“‘oh, nothing,’ I answered; ‘drop my candl and lost the way.’ 

“‘but who were you talk to?’ 

“‘i wa onli swear at the candle,’ I replied. 

“‘oh! I thought perhap you had seen--somebody,’ repli george. 

“somehow I did not like to tell him the truth, for fear he would laugh 
at my nervousness. but I determin to keep an eye on my liver, and take 
a coupl of weeks’ complet rest. that night I woke up sever time 
with the feel of that confound hand under my own--a clammi hand 
which writh as my finger close upon it. 

“the next morn after breakfast I wa in the billiard-room practic 
stroke while carson wa over at the stables. present the door opened, 
and miss stonor look in. 

“‘come in,’ I said; ‘georg will be back from the stabl in a few 
minutes. meanwhil we can have fifti up.’ 

“‘i want to speak to you,’ she said. 

“she wa look veri tire and ill, and I began to think I should not 
have an uninterrupt holiday after all. 

“‘do you believ in ghosts?’ she asked, have close the door and come 
up to the table, where she stood lean with both her hand upon it. 

“‘no,’ I replied, miss an easi carrom as I rememb my experi 
of last night, ‘but I believ in fancy.’ 

“‘and, suppos then that a person fanci he saw things, is there ani 
remedy?’ 

“‘what do you mean, miss stonor?’ I replied, look at her in some 
surprise. ‘do you mean that you fancy----’ 

“I stopped, for miss stonor turn away, sat down on one of the 
easy-chair by the wall, and burst into tears. 

“‘oh! pleas help me’ she sobbed; ‘I believ I am go mad.’ 

“I laid down my cue and went over to her. 

“‘look here, miss stonor,’ I said, take her hand, which wa hot and 
feverish, ‘I am a doctor, and a friend of george. now tell me all about 
it, and i’ll do my best to set it right.’ 

“she wa in a more or less hyster condition, and her word were 
freeli punctuat by sobs. but gradual I manag to elicit from her 
that nearli everi night sinc she came to woodcot she had been awaken 
in some mysteri way, and had seen a horribl face look at her from 
over the top of a screen which stood by the door of her bedroom. As soon 
as she move the face disappeared, which convinc her that the 
apparit exist onli in her imagination. that seem to distress her 
even more than if she had believ it to be a genuin ghost, for she 
thought her brain wa give way. 

“I told her that she wa onli suffer from a veri common symptom of 
nervou disorder, as inde it was, and promis to send a groom into 
the villag to get a prescript made up for her. and, have made me 
promis to breath no word to anyon on the subject, more especi to 
george, she went away relieved. nevertheless, I wa not quit certain 
that I had made a correct diagnosi of the case. you see I had been 
rather upset myself not mani hour before. georg wa longer than I 
expect at the stable, and I wa just go to find him when at the 
door I met mrs. carson. 

“‘can you spare me one moment?’ she said, as I held open the door for 
her. ‘I want to find you alone.’ 

“‘certainly, mrs. carson, with pleasure; an hour, if you wish,’ I 
replied. 

“‘it is so convenient, you know, to have a doctor in the house,’ she 
said, with a nervou laugh. ‘now I want you to prescrib me a sleep 
draught. My nerv are rather out of order, and--i don’t sleep as I 
should.’ 

“‘ah,’ I said, ‘do you see faces--and such like thing when you wake?’ 

“‘how do you know?’ she ask quickly. 

“‘oh, I infer from the other symptoms. We doctor have to observ all 
kind of littl things.’ 

“‘well, of course, I know it is onli fancy; but it is just as bad as if 
it were real. I assur you it is make me quit ill; and I didn’t like 
to mention it to mr. carson or to george. they would think I wa lose 
my head.’ 

“I gave mrs. carson the same prescript as I had written for miss 
stonor, though by that time the convict had grown upon me that there 
wa someth wrong which could not be cure by medicine. however, I 
decid to say noth to georg about the matter at present. for I 
could hardli util the confid which had been place in me by miss 
stonor and mrs. carson. and my own experi of the night befor would 
scarc have appear convinc to him. but I determin that on the 
next day--which wa sunday--i would invent an excus for stay at home 
from church and make some explor in the house. there wa obvious 
some mysteri at work which want clear up. 

“we all sat up rather late that night. there seem to be a gener 
disinclin to go to bed. We stay all togeth in the billiard-room 
until nearli midnight, and then loiter about in the hall, talk in 
an aimless sort of fashion. but at last mrs. carson said good-night, 
with a confidenti nod to me, and miss stonor murmured, ‘so mani 
thanks; i’v got it,’ and they both went upstairs. georg and I part 
in the corridor above. our room were opposit each other. 

“I did not begin undress at once, but sat down and tri to piec 
togeth some theori to account for the uncanni of things. but the 
more I thought, the more perplex it became. there wa no doubt 
whatev that I had put my hand on someth extrem aliv and 
extrem unpleas the night before. the bare recollect of it made 
me shudder. what live thing could possibl be creep about the hous 
in the dark? It wa a man’ hand. Of that I wa certain from the size of 
it. georg carson wa out of the question, for he wa in hi room all 
the time. nor wa it like that mr. carson, senior, would steal about 
hi own hous in hi sock and refus to answer when spoken to. the onli 
other man in the hous wa an emin respectable-look butler; and 
hi hand, as I had note particularli when he pour out my wine at 
dinner, wa plump and soft, wherea the mysteri hand on the 
balustrad wa thin and bony. and then, what wa the real explan of 
the face which had appear to the two ladies? indigest might have 
explain either singly. extraordinari coincid do sometim occur, 
but it seem too extraordinari that a coupl of ladies--on old and one 
young--should suffer from the same indigest in the same house, at the 
same time, and with the same symptoms. On the whole, I did not feel at 
all comfortable, and look care in all the cupboard and recesses, 
as well as under the bed, befor start to undress. then I went to the 
door, intend to lock it. just as my hand wa upon the key, I heard a 
soft step in the corridor outside, accompani by a sound which wa 
someth between a sigh and a groan. veri faint, but quit 
unmistakable, and, under the circumstances, discomposing. It might, of 
course, be george. anyhow, I decid to look and see. I turn the 
handl gentli and open the door. there wa noth to be seen in the 
corridor. but on the opposit side I could see a door open, and george’ 
head peep round the corner. 

“‘hullo!’ he said. 

“‘hullo!’ I replied. 

“‘wa that you walk up the passage?’ he asked. 

“‘no,’ I answered, ‘I thought it might be you.’ 

“‘then who the devil wa it?’ he said. ‘i’ll swear I heard someone.’ 

“there wa silenc for a few moments. I wa wonder whether I had 
better tell him of the fright I had alreadi had, when he spoke again: 

“‘i say, just come here for a bit, old fellow; I want to speak to you.’ 

“I step across the passage, and we went togeth into the littl 
studi which adjoin hi bedroom. 

“‘look here,’ he said, poke up the fire, which wa burn low, 
‘doesn’t it strike you that there is someth veri odd about thi 
house?’ 

“‘you mean----’ 

“‘well, I wouldn’t say anyth about it to the master or miss stonor 
for fear of frighten them. all the same, scarc a night pass but 
I hear curiou footstep on the stairs. you’v heard them yourself, 
haven’t you?’ 

“‘now you mention it,’ I said, ‘I confess I have.’ 

“‘and, what is more,’ he continued, ‘I wa sit here two night ago 
half asleep, and--it seem ridiculous, I know, but it’ a fact--i 
suddenli saw a horribl face glare at me from between those curtain 
behind you. It wa gone in a moment, but I saw it as plainli as I see 
you.’ 

“I move my seat uneasily. 

“‘did you look in your bedroom or in the passage?’ I asked. 

“‘yes--at once,’ he replied. ‘there wa noth to be seen; but twice 
again that night I heard footstep passing--good god!’ 

“he start up in hi chair, stare straight over my shoulder. I turn 
quickli and saw the curtain which part off the bedroom swing 
together. 

“‘what is it?’ I asked, breathlessly. 

“‘i saw it again--th same face--between the curtains.’ 

“I tore the hang aside, and rush into the next room. It wa empty. 
the lamp wa burn upon a side table, and the door wa open, just as 
georg had left it. In the passag outsid all wa quiet. I came back 
into the studi and found georg run hi finger through hi hair in 
perplexity. 

“‘there is clearli one person too mani in the house,’ I said. ‘I think 
we ought to draw the place and find out who it is.’ 

“‘all right,’ said he, pick up the poker from the fireplace; ‘if it’ 
anyth made of flesh and blood thi will be useful, and if not----’ 

“he stop short, for at that instant the most aw shriek of horror 
rang through the house--a shriek of wild, uncontrol terror, such as 
I had never heard befor and I never hope to hear again. one moment we 
stood stare at each other, dumbfounded. the next georg carson had 
dash out of the room and down the corridor to the stairs. I follow 
close behind him. for we both knew that none but a woman in mortal fear 
would shriek like that, and that that woman wa miss stonor. 

“down the stair we tumbl pell-mel in the darkness. but befor I 
reach the land below, where miss stonor’ room was, I felt, as I 
had felt the even before, someth brush swiftli past me. As I ran I 
turn and caught at it in the dark. but my hand grip onli empti air. 
I wa just about to turn back and follow it, when a cri from georg 
arrest me, and, look down, I saw him stand over the prostrat 
form of miss stonor. the door of her room wa open, and by the moonlight 
which stream into the room I could see her lie in her white 
nightdress across the threshold. what follow in the next few minut 
I can scarc recal with accuracy. the whole hous wa arous by the 
poor girl’ aw shriek. she wa quit unconsci when we came upon 
her, but she reviv more or less as soon as mrs. carson and one of the 
terrifi servant had lift her into bed again. noth intellig 
could be gather from her, however, as to the caus of her fright; she 
onli repeated, hysterically, again and again: 

“‘oh, the face; the face!’ 

“when I saw I could do her no further good for the present, I took 
georg by the arm and led him out of the room. 

“‘look here, george,’ I said, ‘we must find out the reason of thi at 
once. I am certain I felt someth go by me as I came downstairs. now 
doe that staircas lead anywher but to our rooms?’ 

“georg consid for a moment. 

“‘yes,’ he replied; ‘there is a door at the end of the passag which 
lead up into a sort of lumber room.’ 

“‘then we’ll explor it,’ I said. ‘for my part I can’t go to sleep until 
i’v got to the bottom of this. get the man to bring a lantern along.’ 

“the butler look as though he didn’t half like the enterprise, and, to 
tell the truth, no more did I. It wa the uncanniest job I ever 
undertook. however, we started, the three of us. first of all we 
search the room on the floor above, where georg and I slept. 
everyth wa just as we had left it. then I push open the door at 
the end of the corridor. A crazy-look staircas led up into darkness. 
We went cautious up, I first with a candle, then george, and last of 
all the butler with a lantern. At the top we step into a big, rather 
low room, with beam across the ceiling, and a rough, uneven floor. our 
light threw strang shadow into the corners, and more than onc I 
start at what look like a crouch human figure. We search everi 
corner. there wa noth to be seen but a few old boxes, a roll or two 
of matting, and some broken chairs. but in the far corner georg point 
out to me a ricketi ladder which end at a close trap-door. just then 
I distinctli heard the curious, half groaning, half sigh sound which 
had alreadi puzzl me in the corridor below. We stood still and look 
at one another. We all heard the sound. 

“‘whatev it is, it’ up there,’ I said. ‘the question is, who is go 
up?’ 

“georg put hi candl down upon the floor and step upon the ladder. 
It crack beneath hi weight. He stopped. 

“‘come down; it won’t bear you,’ I said. ‘I shall have to go.’ 

“I don’t know that I wa ever in such a queer funk as I wa while I 
slowli mount that ladder, and push open the trap-door. I had form 
no clear idea of what I expect to find there. certainli I wa not 
prepar for what happened. for no sooner wa the trap-door fulli open 
than there fell--liter fell--upon me from the dark abov a thing 
in human shape, which kick and spat and tore at me as I stood cling 
to the ladder. It last but a moment or so, but in that moment I live 
a lifetim of terror. the ladder sway and crack beneath me, and I 
fell to the floor with the thing grip my throat like a vise. the 
next instant georg had stun it with a blow from the poker and 
drag it off me. It lay upon it back on the floor--a ragged, hideous, 
loathsom shape. and the mysteri wa solved.” 

“but you haven’t told us what it realli was,” said one of the listeners. 

the doctor smiled. 

“it wa the owner of the house,” he replied. “he had not gone abroad. He 
had gone to a privat lunat asylum with homicid mania upon him. 
about a fortnight befor thi he had manag to escape; and, have made 
hi way to hi former home, had conceal himself, with a cun often 
shown by lunatics, in the loft. I suppos he had found enough to eat in 
hi nightli rambl about the house. the onli wonder is that he didn’t 
kill someon befor he wa caught.” 




colonel halifax’ ghost story. 


I had just come back to england, after have been some year in india, 
and wa look forward to meet my friends, among whom there wa none I 
wa more anxiou to see than sir franci lynton. We had been to eton 
together, and for the short time I had been at oxford, befor enter 
the army, we had been at the same college. then we had parted. He came 
into the titl and estat of the famili in yorkshir on the death of 
hi grandfather--hi father had predeceased--and I had been over a good 
part of the world. one visit, indeed, I had made him in hi yorkshir 
home, befor leav for india, of but a few days. 

It will be easili imagin how pleasant it was, two or three day after 
my arriv in london, to receiv a letter from lynton, say that he 
had just seen in the paper that I had arrived, and, beg me to come 
down at onc to byfield, hi place in yorkshire. 

“you are not to tell me,” he said, “that you cannot come. In fact, you 
are to come on monday. I have a coupl of hors which will just suit 
you; the carriag shall meet you at packham, and all you have got to do 
is to put yourself in the train which leav king cross at twelv 
o’clock.” 

accordingly, on the day appointed, I started, in due time reach 
packham, lose much time on a detest branch line, and there found 
the dog-cart of sir franci await me. I drove at onc to byfield. 

the hous I remembered. It wa a low gabl structur of no great size, 
with old-fashion lattic windows, separ from the park, where were 
deer, by a charm terrac garden. 

No sooner did the wheel crunch the gravel by the princip entrance, 
than, almost befor the bell wa rung, the porch-door opened, and there 
stood lynton himself, whom I had not seen for so mani years, hardli 
altered, and with all the joy of welcom beam in hi face. take me 
by both hands, he drew me into the house, got rid of my hat and wraps, 
look me all over, and then, in a breath, began to say how glad he wa 
to see me, what a real delight it wa to have got me at last under hi 
roof, and what a good time we would have together, like the old day 
over again. 

He had sent my luggag up to my room, which wa readi for me, and he 
bade me make hast and dress for dinner. 

So say he took me through a panel hall, up an old oak staircase, 
and show me my room, which, hurri as I was, I observ wa hung 
with tapestry, and had a larg four-post bed, with velvet curtains, 
opposit the window. 

they had gone in to dinner when I came down, despit all the hast I 
made in dressing; but a place had been kept for me next ladi lynton. 

besid my hosts, there were their two daughters, colonel lynton, a 
brother of sir francis, the chaplain, and some others, whom I do not 
rememb distinctly. 

after dinner there wa some music in the hall, and a game of whist in 
the drawing-room, and after the ladi had gone upstairs, lynton and I 
retir to the smoking-room, where we sat up talk the better part of 
the night. I think it must have been near three when I retired. onc in 
bed I slept so soundli that my servant’ entranc the next morn 
fail to arous me, and it wa past nine when I awoke. 

after breakfast and the dispos of the newspapers, lynton retir to 
hi letters, and I ask ladi lynton if one of her daughter might show 
me the house. elizabeth, the eldest, wa summoned, and seem in no way 
to dislik the task. 

the hous was, as alreadi intimated, by no mean large; it occupi 
three side of a square, the entranc and one end of the stabl make 
the fourth side. the interior wa full of interest--passages, rooms, 
galleries, as well as hall, were panel in dark wood and hung with 
pictures. I wa shown everyth on the ground 

[illustration: “_lose much time on a detest branch line._”] 

floor, and then on the first floor. then my guid propos that we 
should ascend a narrow, twist staircas that led to a gallery. We did 
as proposed, and enter a handsom long room or passag lead to a 
small chamber at one end, in which my guid told me her father kept 
book and papers. 

I ask if anyon slept in thi gallery, as I notic a bed and 
fireplace, and rod by mean of which curtain might be drawn, enclos 
one portion where were bed and fireplace, so as to convert it into a 
veri cosi chamber. 

she answer “no;” the place wa not realli used, except as a playroom; 
though, sometimes, if the hous happen to be veri full--in her 
great-grandfather’ time--sh had heard that it had been occupied. 

By the time we had been over the house, and I had also been shown the 
garden and the stables, and introduc to the dogs, it wa nearli one 
o’clock. We were to have an earli luncheon, and to drive afterward to 
see the ruin of one of the grand old yorkshir abbeys. 

thi wa a pleasant expedition, and we got back just in time for tea, 
after which there wa some read aloud. the even pass much in the 
same way as the preced one, except that lynton, who had some 
business, did not go down into the smoking-room, and I took the 
opportun of retir earli in order to write a letter for the indian 
mail, someth have been said as to the prospect of hunt the next 
day. 

I had finish my letter, which wa a long one, togeth with two or 
three others, and had just got into bed, when I heard a step overhead, 
as of someon walk along the gallery, which I now knew ran 
immedi abov my room. It wa a slow, heavy, measur tread which I 
could hear get gradual louder and nearer, and then as gradual 
fade away, as it retreat into the distance. 

I wa startl for a moment, have been told that the galleri wa 
unused; but the next instant it occur to me that I had been told it 
commun with a chamber where sir franci kept book and papers. I 
knew he had some write to do, and I thought no more on the matter. 

I wa down the next morn at breakfast in good time. “how late you 
were last night,” I said to lynton, in the middl of breakfast. “I heard 
you overhead after one o’clock.” 

lynton repli rather shortly: “inde you did not, for I wa in bed 
last night befor twelve.” 

“there wa someon certainli move overhead last night,” I answered, 
“for I heard hi step as distinctli as I ever heard anyth in my life 
go down the gallery.” 

upon which colonel lynton remark that he had often fanci he had 
heard step on the staircase, when he knew that no one wa about. He wa 
appar dispos to say more, when hi brother interrupt him 
somewhat curtly, as I fancied, and ask me if I should feel inclin 
after breakfast to have a hors and go out and look for the hounds. they 
met a consider way off, but if they did not find in the covert they 
would first draw, a thing not improbable, they would come our way, and 
we might fall in with them about one o’clock and have a run. I said 
there wa noth I should like better. lynton mount me on a veri nice 
chestnut, and the rest of the parti have gone out shooting, and the 
young ladi be otherwis engaged, he and I start about eleven 
o’clock for our ride. 

It wa a beauti day, soft, with a bright sun, one of those beauti 
day which so frequent occur in the earli part of november. 

On reach the hilltop where lynton had expect to meet the hounds, no 
trace of them wa to be discovered. they must have found at once, and 
run in a differ direction. At three o’clock, after we had eaten our 
sandwiches, lynton reluctantli abandon all hope of fall in with 
the hounds, and said we would return home by a slightli differ route. 

We had not descend the hill befor we came on an old chalk quarri and 
the remain of a disus kiln. 

I recollect the spot at once. I had been here with sir franci on my 
former visit, mani year ago. “why, bless me!” said I; “do you remember, 
lynton, what happen here when I wa with you before? there had been 
men engag remov chalk, and they came on a skeleton under some depth 
of rubble. We went togeth to see it removed, and you said you would 
have it preserv till it could be examin by some ethnologist or 
anthropologist, ani one of those dry-as-dusts, to decid whether the 
remain were dolichocephal or brachycephalous--wheth british, 
danish, or--modern. what wa the result?” 

sir franci hesit a moment, and then answered, “it is true, I had 
the remain removed.” 

“wa there an inquest?” 

“no. I had been open some of the tumuli on the wolds. I had sent a 
crouch skeleton and some skull to the scarsborough museum. this, I 
wa doubt about--wheth it wa a prehistor interment--in fact, to 
what date it belonged. No one thought of an inquest.” 

On reach the house, one of the groom who took the horses, in answer 
to a question from lynton, said that colonel and mrs. hampshir had 
arriv about an hour ago, and that, one of the hors be lame, the 
carriag in which they had driven over from castl frampton wa to put 
up for the night. In the drawing-room we found ladi lynton pour out 
tea for her husband’ sister and her husband, who, as we came in, 
exclaimed: “we have come to beg a night’ lodging.” 

It appear that they had been on a visit in the neighborhood, and had 
been oblig to leav at a moment’ notic in consequ of a sudden 
death in the hous where they were staying, and that, in the 
imposs of get a fly, their host had sent them over to 
byfield. 

“we thought,” mrs. hampshir went on to say, “that as we were come 
here the end of next week, you would not mind have us a littl sooner; 
or that, if the hous were quit full, you would be will to put us up 
anywher till monday, and let us come back later.” 

ladi lynton interpos with the remark that it wa all settled; and 
then, turn to her husband, added: “but I want to speak to you for a 
moment.” 

they both left the room together. 

lynton came back almost immediately, and, make an excus to show me, 
on a map in the hall, the point to which we had ridden, said, as soon as 
we were alone, with a look of consider annoyance: “I am afraid we 
must ask you to chang your room. shall you mind veri much? I think we 
can make you quit comfort upstair in the gallery, which is the 
onli room available. ladi lynton ha had a good fire lit; the place is 
realli not cold, and it will be onli for a night or two. your servant 
ha been told to put your thing together, but ladi lynton did not like 
to give order to have them actual move befor my speak to you.” 

I assur him that I did not mind in the veri least; that I should be 
quit as comfort upstairs; but that I did mind veri much their 
make such a fuss about a matter of that sort with an old friend like 
myself. 

certainli noth could look more comfort than my new lodg when I 
went upstair to dress. there wa a bright fire in the larg grate, an 
arm-chair had been drawn up besid it, and all my book and write 
thing had been put in, with a reading-lamp in the central position, and 
the heavi tapestri curtain were drawn, convert thi part of the 
galleri into a room to itself. indeed, I felt somewhat inclin to 
congratul myself on the change. the spiral staircas had been one 
reason against thi place have been given to the hampshires. No lady’ 
long dress trunk could have mount it. 

sir franci wa necessarili a good deal occupi in the even with hi 
sister and her husband, whom he had not seen for some time. colonel 
hampshir had also just heard that he wa like to be order to egypt, 
and when lynton and he retir to the smoking-room, instead of go 
there I went upstair to my own room to finish a book in which I wa 
interested. I did not, however, sit up long, and veri soon went to bed. 

befor do so, I drew back the curtain on the rods, partli becaus I 
like plenti of air where I sleep, and partli also becaus I thought I 
might like to see the play of the moonlight on the floor in the portion 
of the galleri beyond where I lay, and where the blind had not been 
drawn. 

I must have been asleep for some time, for the fire, which I had left in 
full blaze, wa gone to a few spark wander among the ashes, when I 
suddenli awok with the impress of have heard a latch click at the 
further extrem of the gallery, where wa the chamber contain book 
and papers. 

I had alway been a light sleeper, but on the present occas I woke at 
onc to complet and acut consciousness, and with a sens of stretch 
attent which seem to intensifi all my faculties. the wind had 
risen, and wa blow in fit gust round the house. 

A minut or two passed, and I began almost to fanci I must have been 
mistaken, when I distinctli heard the creak of the door, and then the 
click of the latch fall back into place. then I heard a sound on the 
board as of one move in the gallery. I sat up to listen, and as I did 
so I distinctli heard step come down the gallery. 

[illustration: “_who are you?_”] 

I heard them approach and pass my bed; I could see nothing, all wa 
dark; but I heard the tread proceed toward where were the uncurtain 
and unshutt windows, two in number; but the moon shone through onli 
one of these, the nearest--th other wa dark, shadow by the chapel or 
some other build at right angles. the tread seem to me to paus now 
and again, and then continu as before. 

I now fix my eye intent on the one illumin window, and it 
appear to me as if some dark bodi pass across it; but what? I 
listen intently, and heard the step proceed to the end of the gallery, 
and then return. 

I again watch the light window, and immedi that the sound 
reach that portion of the long passag it ceas momentarily, and I 
saw, as distinctli as I ever saw anyth in my life, by moonlight, a 
figur of a man with mark features, in what appear to be a fur cap 
drawn over the brows. 

It stood in the embrasur of the window, and the outlin of the face wa 
in silhouette; then it move on, and as it move I again heard the 
tread. 

I wa as certain as I could be that the thing, whatev it was, or the 
person, whoever he was, wa approach my bed. 

I threw myself back in the bed, and as I did see a mass of char wood 
on the hearth fell down and sent up a flash of--i fanci sparks, that 
gave out a glare into the darkness, and by that--r as blood--i saw a 
face near me. 

with a cry, over which I had as littl control as the scream utter by 
a sleeper in the agoni of a nightmare, I called, “who are you?” 

there wa an instant dure which my hair bristl on my head, as in the 
horror of the dark I prepar to grappl with the be at my side; 
when a board creak as if someon had moved, and I heard the footstep 
retreat, and again the click of the latch. 

the next instant there wa a rush on the stair and lynton burst into 
the room, just as he had sprung out of bed, crying: “for god’ sake, 
what is the matter? are you ill?” 

I could not answer. lynton struck a light and lean over the bed. then 
I seiz him by the arm, and said, without moving: “there ha been 
someth in thi room--gon in thither.” 

the word were hardli out of my mouth when lynton, follow the 
direct of my eyes, had sprung to the end of the corridor and thrown 
open the door there. 

He went into the room beyond, look round it, returned, and said: “you 
must have been dreaming.” 

By thi time I wa out of bed. 

“look for yourself,” said he, and he led me into the littl room. It wa 
bare, with cupboard and boxes, a sort of lumber place. “there is 
noth beyond this,” said he, “no door, no staircase. It is a blind 
way.” then he added: “now pull on your dressing-gown and come downstair 
to my sanctum.” 

I follow him, and after he had spoken to ladi lynton, who wa stand 
with the door of her room ajar in a state of great agitation, he turn 
to me, and said: “no one can have been in your room. you see, my and my 
wife’ apart are close below, and no one could come up the spiral 
staircas without pass my door. you must have had a nightmare. 
directli you scream I rush up the steps, and met no one descending; 
and there is no place of conceal in the lumber-room at the end of 
the gallery.” 

then he took me into hi privat snuggery, blew up the fire, light a 
lamp, and said: “I shall be realli grate if you will say noth 
about this. there are some in the hous and neighborhood who are silli 
enough as it is. you stay here, and if you do not feel inclin to go to 
bed, read--her are books. I must go to ladi lynton, who is a good deal 
frightened, and doe not like to be left alone.” 

He then went to hi bedroom. 

sleep, as far as I wa concerned, wa out of the question, nor do I 
think sir franci and hi wife slept much, either. 

I made up the fire, and after a time took up a book, and tri to read, 
but it wa useless. 

I sat absorb in thought and question till I heard the servant 
stir in the morning. I went to my own room, left the candl burning, 
and got into bed. I had just fallen asleep when my servant brought me a 
cup of tea at eight o’clock. 

At breakfast colonel hampshir and hi wife ask if anyth had 
happen in the night, as they had been much disturb by nois 
overhead, to which lynton repli that I had not been veri well, and had 
an attack of cramp, and that he had been upstair to look after me. from 
hi manner I could see that he wish me to be silent, and I said 
noth accordingly. 

In the afternoon, when everyon had gone out, sir franci took me into 
hi snuggery, and said: “halifax, I am veri sorri about that matter last 
night. It is quit true, what my brother said, that step have been 
heard about thi house, but I never gave heed to such things, put 
all nois down to rats. but after your experi I feel that it is 
due to you to tell you something, and also to make to you an 
explanation. there is--ther was--no one in the room at the end of the 
corridor, except the skeleton that wa discov in the chalk-pit when 
you were here mani year ago. I confess I had not paid much heed to it. 
My archæolog fanci passed; I had no visit from anthropologists; 
the bone and skull were never shown to experts, but remain pack in a 
chest in that lumber-room. I confess I ought to have buri them, have 
no more scientif use for them, but I did not--on my word, I forgot all 
about them, or, at least, gave no heed to them. however, what you have 
gone through, and have describ to me, ha made me uneasy, and ha also 
given me a suspicion that I can account for that bodi in a manner that 
had never occur to me before.” 

after a pause, he added: “what I am go to tell you is known to no one 
else, and must not be mention by you--anyhow, in my lifetime. you know 
now that, owe to the death of my father when quit young, I and my 
brother and sister were brought up here with our grandfather, sir 
richard. He wa an old, imperious, hot-temp man. I will tell you 
what I have made out of a matter that wa a mysteri for long, and I will 
tell you afterward how I came to unravel it. My grandfath wa in the 
habit of go out at night with a young under-keeper, of whom he wa 
veri fond, to look after the game and see if ani poachers, whom he 
regard as hi natur enemies, were about. 

“one night, as I suppose, my grandfath had been out with the young man 
in question, and, return by the plantations, where the hill is 
steepest, and not far from the chalk-pit you 

[illustration: “_he and the keeper buri the body._”] 

remark on yesterday, they came upon a man who, though not actual 
belong to the country, wa well known in it as a sort of travel 
tinker of indiffer charact and a notori poacher. mind this, I am 
not sure it wa at the place I mention; I onli now surmis it. On the 
particular night in question, my grandfath and the keeper must have 
caught thi man set snares; there must have been a tussle, in the 
cours of which, as subsequ circumst have led me to imagine, the 
man show fight, and wa knock down by one or the other of the 
two--mi grandfath or the keeper. I believ that after have made 
variou attempt to restor him, they found that the man wa actual 
dead. 

“they were both in great alarm and concern--mi grandfath especially. 
He had been promin in put down some factori riots, and had given 
order to the militari to fire, wherebi sever live had been lost. 
there wa a vast outcri against him, and a certain polit parti had 
denounc him as an assassin. No man wa more vituperated; yet now, in 
my conscience, I believ he act with both discret and pluck, and 
arrest a mischiev movement that might have led to much bloodshed. 
Be that as it may, my impress is that he lost hi head over thi 
fatal affair with the tinker, and that he and the keeper togeth buri 
the bodi secretly, not far from the place where he wa killed. I now 
think it wa in the chalk-pit, and that the skeleton found year after 
there belong to thi man.” 

“good heavens!” I exclaimed, as at onc my mind rush back to the 
figur with the fur cap that I had seen against the window. 

sir franci went on: “the sudden disappear of the tramp, in view of 
hi well-known habit and wander mode of life, did not for some time 
excit surprise; but, later on, one or two circumst have led to 
suspicion, an inquiri wa set on foot, and among others, my 
grandfather’ keeper were examin befor the magistrates. It wa 
rememb afterward that the under-keep in question wa absent at 
the time of the inquiry, my grandfath have sent him with some dog 
to a brother-in-law of hi who live upon the moors; but whether anyon 
notic the fact, or if they did, prefer to be silent, no 
observ were made. noth came of the investigation, and the whole 
subject would have been drop if it had not been that two year later, 
for some reason I do not understand, but at the instig of a 
magistr recent import into the division, whom my grandfath 
greatli disliked, and who wa oppos to him in politics, a fresh 
inquiri wa instituted. In the cours of that inquiri it transpir 
that, owe to some unguard word drop by the under-keeper, a 
warrant wa about to be issu for hi arrest. My grandfather, who had a 
fit of the gout, wa away from home at the time, but on hear the news 
he came home at once. the even he return he had a long interview 
with the young man, who left the hous after he had sup in the 
servants’ hall. It wa observ that he look much depressed. the 
warrant wa issu the next day, but in the meantim the keeper had 
disappeared. My grandfath gave order to hi peopl to do everyth 
in their power to assist the author in the search that wa at onc 
set on foot, but wa unabl himself to take ani share in it. 

“no trace of the keeper wa found, although at a subsequ period 
rumor circul that he had been heard of in america. but the man 
have been unmarried, he gradual drop out of remembrance, and as 
my grandfath never allow the subject to be mention in hi 
presence, I should probabl never have known anyth about it but for 
the vagu tradit which alway attach to such events, and for thi 
fact, that after my grandfather’ death, a letter came address to him 
from somewher in the unit state from some one--th name differ 
from that of the keeper--but allud to the past, and impli the 
presenc of a common secret, and, of course, with it came a request for 
money. I replied, mention the death of sir richard, and ask for 
an explanation. I did get an answer, and it is from that that I am abl 
to fill in so much of the story. but I never learn where the man had 
been kill and buried, and my next letter to the fellow wa return 
with ‘deceased’ written across it. somehow, it never occur to me till 
I heard your stori that possibl the skeleton in the chalk-pit might be 
that of the poach tinker. I will now most assuredli have it buri in 
the churchyard.” 

“that certainli ought to be done,” said I. 

“and,” said sir francis, after a pause, “I give you my word--aft the 
burial of the bones, and you are gone, I will sleep for a week in the 
bed in the gallery, and report to you if I see or hear anything. If all 
be quiet, then--well, you form your own conclusions.” 

I left a day after. befor long I got a letter from my friend, brief, 
but to the point: “all quiet, old boy; come again.” 




the ghost OF the count. 


not far from the alameda, in the citi of mexico, there is a great old 
stone building, in which onc live a veri wealthi and wick spanish 
count. the hous ha about four floors, and nineti rooms, more or less. 
the entir fourth floor is rent and occupi by a big american firm, 
and their bookkeeper, an american girl, ha given us the follow true 
account of the ghost that for year haunt the building. the second 
floor is unoccupied, as no one care to live there for obviou reasons. 
and the bottom floor is also unoccupied, save for lumber rooms, empti 
box and crate and barrels. and last of all is the great patio with 
it tile floor, where secretli in the night a duel wa fought to the 
death by the wick count and a famou austrian prince, who wa one of 
maximilian’ men. the count wa killed. 

No one know whi the duel wa fought; some say it wa becaus of a 
beauti spanish woman; some say that it wa becaus of treasur that 
the two jointli “conveyed,” and which the count refus to divid with 
hi princ “socio,” and more people--mexicans--shrug their shoulder 
if you ask about it, and say, “quien sabe?” 

“I saw a ghost here last night, miss james,” announc our cashier with 
much eclat and evid pride. 

So great is the shock that I gasp, and my pen drops, spatter red ink 
on my nice fresh cuffs, and (wors luck!) on the ledger page that I had 
just tot up. It is ruined, and I will have to eras it, 
or--something! wretch man! 

“I wish to good it had taken you off,” I cry, wrathfully, as I look 
at the bespatt work. “now will you just look here and see what you 
have done? I wish you and your ghost were in----” 

“gehenna?” he inquires, sweetly; “i’ll fix that--it won’t take half a 
minute. and don’t look so stern, els I won’t tell you about the 
‘espanto.’ and you will be sorri if you don’t hear about it--it would 
make such a good story.” (insinuatingly.) 

“then go ahead with it.” (ungraciously.) 

“well, last night I wa wait for west. He wa to meet me here, after 
which it wa our intent to hit the--that is, I mean we were go out 
together. (I nod scornfully.) and it seem that while I wa patient 
wait here, in my usual sweet-temp way, the blank idiot had hi 
supper and then lay down to rest himself for a while. you know how 
delic he is? (anoth contemptu nod.) unfortun he forgot the 
engagement, and slept on. He say he never awok until three o’clock, 
and so didn’t come, think I wouldn’t be there. meantim I also went 
to sleep, and might have snooz on until three, likewise, but for the 
fact that the ghost woke me----” 

“well? Do go on,” I urge. 

“the ghost woke me, as I said,” proce the simpleton, slowly. “it wa 
pass it cold finger over my face and groaning. really, it wa most 
extraordinary. At first I didn’t know what it was; then, as I felt the 
ici finger stroke my face and heard blood-curdl groan issu 
from the darkness, I knew what it was. and I rememb the stori of the 
princ and hi littl duel down in the patio, and knew it wa the ghost 
of the prince’ victim. By the way, you don’t know what a funni 
sensat it is to have a ghost pat your face, miss james----” 

“pat nothing,” I retort, indignantly. “I wonder you are not asham to 
tell me such fibs. such a ta-ra-diddle! and as for the man that the 
princ kill downstairs, you know as well as I do that he wa taken 
home to spain and buri there. why, then, should he come back here, 
into our offices, and pat your face?” 

“ah, that I can’t say,” with a supercili drawl. “I can onli account 
for it by think that the ghost ha good taste--bett than that of 
some peopl I know,” meaningly. “but honestly, I swear that I am tell 
you the truth--cross my heart and hope to die if I am not! and you 
don’t know how brave I was--i never screamed; in fact, I never made a 
sound; oh, I wa brave!” 

“then what did you do?” sternly. 

“I ran. por dios, how I ran! you rememb with what alacr we got down 
the stair dure the novemb earthquake? (I rememb onli too 
distinctly.) well, last night’ run wasn’t a run, in comparison--it wa 
a disappearance, a flight, a sprint! I went down the four flight of 
stair like a streak of blue lightning, and the ghost flew with me. I 
heard the patter of it step and it groan clean down to the patio 
door, and I assur you I quit thought I had made such an impress 
that it wa actual go on home with me. and the thought made me feel 
so weak that I felt perforc oblig to take a--hav a--that is, 
strengthen myself with a cocktail. after which I felt stronger and went 
home quit peacefully. but it wa an uncanni experience, wasn’t it?” 

“wa it befor or after take that cocktail?” I ask, incredulously. 
“and did you take one onli or eleven?” 

I am hard on the man, but he realli deserv it. ghosts! spirits, 
perhaps, but not ghosts. whereat hi feel are quit “hurted”--so 
much so that he vow he will never tell me anyth again; I had better 
read about doubt thomas; he never ha seen such an unbeliev woman 
in all hi life, and if I were onli a man he would be tempt to pray 
that I might see the ghost; it would serv me right. then, wrath 
departs, to notic me no more that day. 

not believ the least bit in ghost I gave the matter no more thought. 
In fact, when you fall heir to a set of book that haven’t been post 
for nineteen days, and you have to do it all, and get up your trial 
balance, too, or els give up your christma holidays, you haven’t much 
time to think about ghosts, or anyth else, except entries. and though 
I had been work fourteen hour per day, the 24th of december, noon 
hour, found me with a differ of $13.89. the which I, of course, must 
locat and straighten out befor depart next morn on my week’ 
holiday. por supuesto, it meant night work. noth els would do; and 
besides, our plan had all been made to leav on the eight o’clock train 
next morning. So I would just sit up all night, if need be, and find the 
wretch balanc and be done with it. 

behold me settl for work that night at seven o’clock in my own office, 
with three lamp burn to keep it from look dismal and lonely, and 
book and ledger and journal pile up two feet high around me. If hard 
work would locat that nasty, hate $13.89 it would sure be found. I 
had told the portero downstair on the ground floor to tri and keep 
awak for a time, but if I didn’t soon finish the work I would come down 
and call him when I wa readi to go home. 

He live in a littl room, all shut off from the rest of the building, 
so that it wa rather difficult to get at him. besides, he wa the veri 
laziest and sleepiest peon possible, and though he wa suppos to take 
care of the big build at night, patrol it so as to keep off 
ladrones, he in realiti slept so soundli that the last trumpet, much 
less mexican robbers, would not have rous him. 

and for thi veri reason, befor settl to my work I wa care to go 
around and look to lock and bolt myself; everyth wa secure, and 
the door safe fastened. So that if ladron did break through they 
would have to be in shape to pass through keyhol or possess fals 
keys. 

with never a thought of spirit or porteros, or anyth else, beyond 
the thirteen dollar and eighty-nin cents, I work and ad and 
re-ad and foot up. and at eleven o’clock, grazia a dios, I had the 
thirteen dollar all safe, and would have whoop for joy, had I the 
time. however, I wasn’t out of the wood yet, the sum of eighty-nin 
dollar be often more easi of locat than eighty-nin cents. the 
latter must be found, also, befor I could have the pleasur of shout 
in celebr thereof. 

At it I went again. after brain cudgel and more ad and prayer 
thought I at last had under my thumb that abomin eighti cents. 
eureka! onli nine cent out. I could get it all straight and have some 
sleep, after all! inspir by which thought I smother my yawn and 
again began to add. I look at my watch--ten minut to twelve. perhap 
I could get it fix befor one. 

I suppos I had work at the nine cent for about twenti minutes. one 
of the cash entri look to me to be in error. I compar it with the 
voucher--yes, that wa just where the troubl lay! eleven 
cents--ten--nine---- 

s-t-t! out went the light in the twinkl of an eye--a I sat, gape 
in my astonishment, from out of the pitchi dark of the room came the 
most dreary, horrible, blood-curdl groan imaginable. As I sat 
paralyzed, not dare to breathe, doubt my sens for a moment, and 
then think indignantli that it wa some trick of that wretch 
cashier, I felt long, thin, ici finger pass gentli over my face. 
malgam dios! what a sensation! At first I wa afraid to move. then I 
nervous tri to brush the icy, boni thing away. As fast as I 
brushed, with my heart beat like a steam-hammer, and gasp with 
deadli fear, the finger would come back again; a cold wind wa blow 
over me. again came that dread groan, and too frighten to move or 
scream, I tumbl in a heap on the floor, among the book and ledgers. 
then I suppos I fainted. 

when I regain my sens I wa still in a heap with the ledgers; still 
it wa dark and still I felt the cold finger caress my face. At 
which I becam thoroughli desperate. No ghost should own me! I had 
laugh at the poor cashier and hint darkli at cocktails. pray, what 
better wa I? 

I scrambl to my feet, the finger still stroke my face. I must 
address them--what language--did they understand english or spanish, I 
wondered? spanish would doubtless be most suitable, if indeed, it wa 
the ghost of the murder count----. 

“will you do me the favor, senor ghost,” I start out bravely, in my 
best spanish, but with a veri trembl voice, “to inform me what it is 
that you desire? Is there anyth I can do for you? because, if not, I 
would like veri much to be allow to finish my work, which I cannot do 
(if you will pardon my abruptness) if I am not alone.” 

(be the ghost of a gentleman and a diplomat, sure he would take the 
hint and vanish. ojala!) 

perhap the ghost did not understand my spanish; at ani rate there wa 
no articul reply; there wa anoth groan--again the finger touch 
me, and then there wa such a mourn sigh that I felt sorri for the 
poor thing--what could be the matter with it? with my pity, all fear wa 
lost for a moment, and I said to the dark all about me: 

“what is it that you wish, pobr senor? can I not aid you? I am not 
afraid--let me help you!” 

the finger move uncertainli for a moment; then the ledger all fell 
down, with a loud bang; a cold hand caught mine, veri gently--i tri 
not to feel frightened, but it wa difficult--and I wa led off blindly, 
through the offices. I could not see a thing--not a glimmer of light 
showed; not a sound wa heard except my own footsteps, and the faint 
sound of the invis someth that wa lead me along--ther were 
no more groans, thank goodness, els I should have shriek and fainted, 
without a doubt. onli the patter footstep and the cold hand that led 
me on and on. 

we--th finger and i--wer somehow in the great hall, then on the 
second floor, and at last on the stairs, go on down, flight after 
flight. then I knew that I wa be led about by the finger on the 
tile floor of the patio, and close to the portero’ lodge. simpleton 
that he was! sleep like a log, no doubt, while I wa be led about 
in the black dark by an invis hand, and no one to save me! I 
would have yelled, of course, but for one fact--i found it utterli 
imposs to speak or move my tongue, be a rare and uncomfort 
sensation. 

but where were we going? back into the unus lumber rooms, join onto 
the patio? noth there, except barrel and slab and empti boxes. what 
could the ghost mean? He must be utterli demented, surely. 

In the middl of the first room we paused. I had an idea of rush out 
and scream for the portero, but abandon it when I found that my 
feet wouldn’t go. I heard step pass to and fro about the floor, and 
waited, cold and trembling. they approach me; again my hand wa taken, 
and I wa led over near the corner of the room. obedi to the unseen 
will, I bent down and grope about the floor, guid by the cold finger 
hold mine, until I felt someth like a tini ring, set firmli in the 
floor. I pull at it faintly, but it did not move, at which the ghost 
gave a faint sigh. for a second the cold finger press mine, quit 
affectionately, then releas me, and I heard step pass slowli into 
the patio, then die away. where wa it going, and what on earth did it 
all mean? 

but I wa so tire and wrought up I tri to find the door, but couldn’t 
(the cashier would have been reveng could he have seen me stupidli 
fumbl at a barrel, think it wa the door), and at last, too 
fatigu and sleepi to stand, I drop down on the cold stone floor 
and went to sleep. 

I must have slept for some hours, for when I awok the light of dawn wa 
come in at the window, and I sat up and wonder if I had taken leav 
of my sens dure the night. what on earth could I be do here in 
the lumber-room? then, like a flash, I remembered, and, half 
unconsciously, crept about on the floor seek the small ring. there it 
was! I caught it and jerk at it hard. hey, presto, change! for it 
seem to me that the entir floor wa give way. there wa a sliding, 
crash sound, and I found myself hang on for dear life to a barrel 
that, fortunately, retain it equilibrium, and with my feet dangl 
into space. down below me wa a small, stone-floor room, with big 
box and small one rang about the walls. treasure! like a flash the 
thought struck me, and with one leap I wa down in the secret room 
gaze about at the boxes. 

but, alas! upon investigation, the biggest chest prove empty. the bad, 
wick count! No wonder he couldn’t rest in hi spanish grave, but must 
come back to the scene of hi wicked and deceit to make reparation! 
but the smaller chest were liter cram with all sort of 
things--big heavi spanish coins, in gold and silver--gold and silver 
dinner services, with the crest of the unfortun emperor; magnific 
piec of jewel armor and weapons, beauti jewelri and loos 
preciou stones. I deliber select hand of the latter, give 
my prefer to the diamond and pearls--i had alway had a tast for 
them, which I had never befor been abl to gratify!--and pack them in 
a wooden box that I found in the lumber-room. the gold and dinner 
servic and armor, etc., I left as they were, be rather cumbersome, 
and carri off, rejoicing, my big box of diamond and pearl and other 
jewelry. 

needless to say we didn’t go away for the holiday on the eight o’clock 
train. but I did come down to the offic and proceed to locat my 
miss nine cents. after which I unfold the tale of the ghost and the 
treasure--onli keep quiet the matter of my privat loot. Of which I 
wa heartili glad afterwards. for when the govern learn of the 
find what do you suppos they offer me for go about with the ghost 
and discov the secret room and treasure? ten thousand dollars! when 
I refused, state that I would take merely, as my reward, one of the 
gold dinner services, the greedi thing object at first, but I final 
had my way. and to thi veri day they have no idea that i--even i--hav 
all the beauti jewels. wouldn’t they be furiou if they knew it? but 
they aren’t apt to, unless they learn english and read thi story. which 
isn’t likely. 




the old mansion. 


down on long beach, that narrow strip of sand which stretch along the 
new jersey coast from barnegat inlet on the north to littl egg harbor 
inlet on the south, the summer sojourn at some one of the numer 
resorts, which of late year have sprung up everi few miles, may, in 
wander over the sand dune just across the bay from the villag of 
manahawkin, stumbl over some char timber or vestig of crumbl 
chimneys, show that once, year back, a human habit ha stood 
there. If the find rous the jade curios of the visitor 
suffici to impel him to question the weatherbeaten old bayman who 
sail him on hi fish trip he will learn that these relic mark the 
site of one of the first summer hotel erect on the new jersey coast. 

“that’ where the old mansion stood,” he will be inform by captain 
nate or captain sam, or whatev particular captain it may chanc to be, 
and if by good fortun it chanc to be captain jim, he will hear a 
stori that will pleasantli pass away the long wait for a sheepshead 
bite. 

It wa my good luck to have secur captain jim for a preceptor in the 
angler’ art dure my vacat last summer, and hi stori and 
reminisc of long beach were not the least enjoy featur of the 
two weeks’ sojourn. 

captain jim wa not garrulous. few of the baymen are. they are a sturdy, 
self-reli and self-control people, full of strong common sense, 
but still with that firm belief in the supernatur which seem inher 
in dweller by the sea. 

“the old mansion,” said captain jim, “or the mansion of health, for that 
wa it full name, wa built away back in 1822, so i’v heard my father 
say. there had been a tavern close by year befor that wa kept by a 
man name cranmer, and peopl use to come from philadelphia by stage, 
sixti mile through the pines, to ‘hawkin, and then cross here by boat. 
some would stop at cranmer’ and other went on down the beach to 
homer’ which wa clear down at end by the inlet. final some of the 
wealthi peopl conclud that they want better accommod than 
cranmer gave, so they form the great swamp long beach company, and 
built the mansion of health. i’v heard that when it wa built it wa 
the biggest hotel on the coast, and wa consid a wonder. It wa 120 
feet long, three stori high, and had a porch run all the way 
around it, with a balconi on top. It wa certainli a big thing for 
those days. i’v heard father tell mani a time of the stage load of gay 
peopl that use to come rattl into ‘hawkin, each stage drawn by four 
horses, and sometim four or five of them a day in the summer. A good 
mani people, too, use to come in their own carriages, and leav them 
over on the mainland until they were readi to go home. there were gay 
time at the old mansion then, and it made time good for the peopl 
along shore, too.” 

“how long did the old mansion flourish, captain?” I asked. 

“well, for twenty-f or thirti year peopl came there summer after 
summer. then they built a railroad to cape may, and that, with the 
ghosts, settl the mansion of health.” 

“what do you mean by the ghosts?” I demanded. 

“well, you see,” said captain jim, cut off a mouth of navi plug, 
“the stori got around that the old hous wa haunted. some peopl said 
there were queer thing seen there, and strang nois were heard that 
nobodi could account for, and pretti soon the place got a bad name and 
visitor were so few that it didn’t pay to keep it open ani more.” 

“but how did it get the name of be haunted, captain jim?” I 
persisted. 

“why, it wa thi way,” continu the mariner. “mayb you’v heard of 
the time earli in the fifti when the powhatan wa wreck on the beach 
here, and everi soul on board wa lost. she wa an emigr ship, and 
there were over 400 peopl aboard--passeng and crew. she came ashor 
here dure the equinocti storm in september. there wasn’t ani 
life-sav station in them days, and everyon wa drowned. you can see 
the long grave now over in the ‘hawkin churchyard, where the bodi 
were buri after they came ashore. they put them in three long trench 
that were dug from one end of the burying-ground to the other. the onli 
peopl on the beach that night wa the man who took care of the old 
mansion. He live there with hi family, and hi son-in-law live with 
him. He wa the wreckmast for thi part of the coast, too. It wasn’t 
till the second day that the peopl from ‘hawkin could get over to the 
beach, and by that time the bodi had all come ashore, and the 
wreckmast had them all pile up on the sand. I wa a youngster, then, 
and came over with my father, and, I tell you, it wa the awfullest 
sight I ever saw--them long row of drown people, all lie there with 
their white, still face turn up to the sky. some were women, with 
their dead babi clasp tight in their arms, and some were husband 
and wives, whose bodi came ashor lock togeth in a death embrace. 
i’ll never forget that sight as long as I live. well, when the coron 
came and took charg he began to inquir whether ani money or valuabl 
had been found, but the wreckmast declar that not a solitari coin 
had been wash ashore. peopl thought thi wa rather singular, as the 
emigr were, most of them, well-to-do germans, and were known to have 
brought a good deal of money with them, but it wa conclud that it had 
gone down with the ship. well, the poor emigr were given pauper 
burial, and the peopl had begun to forget their suspicion until three 
or four month later there came anoth storm, and the sea broke clear 
over the beach, just below the old mansion, and wash away the sand. 
next morn earli two men from ‘hawkin sail across the bay and land 
on the beach. they walk across on the hard bottom where the sea had 
wash across, and, when about half way from the bay, one of the men saw 
someth curiou close up against the stump of an old cedar tree. He 
call the other man’ attent to it, and they went over to the stump. 
what they found wa a pile of leather money-belt that would have fill 
a wheelbarrow. everi one wa cut open and empty. they had been buri in 
the sand close by the old stump, and the sea had wash away the 
covering. the men didn’t go ani further. 

“they carri the belt to their boat and sail back to ‘hawkin as 
fast as the wind would take them. Of course, it made a big sensation, 
and everybodi wa satisfi that the wreckmast had rob the bodies, 
if he hadn’t done anyth worse, but there wa no way to prove it, and 
so noth wa done. the wreckmast didn’t stay around here long after 
that, though. the peopl made it too hot for him, and he and hi famili 
went away south, where it wa said he bought a big plantat and a lot 
of slaves. year afterward the stori came to ‘hawkin somehow that he wa 
kill in a barroom brawl, and that hi son-in-law wa drown by hi 
boat upsettin’ while he wa out fishin’. I don’t furnish ani affidavit 
with that part of the story, though. 

“however, after that nobodi live in the old mansion for long at a time. 
peopl would go there, stay a week or two, and leave--and at last it wa 
given up entir to beach parti in the day time, and ghost at 
night.” 

“but, captain, you don’t realli believ the ghost part, do you?” I 
asked. 

captain jim look down the bay, expector grave over the side of 
the boat, and answered, slowly: 

“well, I don’t know as I would have believ in ’em if I hadn’t seen the 
ghost.” 

“what!” I exclaimed; “you saw it? tell me about it. i’v alway want 
to see a ghost, or next best thing, a man who ha seen one.” 

“it wa one august, about 1861,” said the captain. “I wa a young 
feller then, and with a half dozen more wa over on the beach cut 
salt hay. We didn’t go home at nights, but did our own cook in the 
old mansion kitchen, and at night slept on pile of hay upstairs. We 
were a reckless lot of scamps, and reckon that no ghost could scare 
us. there wa a big full moon that night, and it wa as light as day. 
the muskeet wa pretti bad, too, and it wa easier to stay awak than 
go to sleep. along toward midnight me and two other feller went out on 
the old balcony, and began to race around the house. We holler and 
yelled, and chase each other for half an hour or so, and then we 
conclud we had better go to sleep, so we start for the window of the 
room where the rest were. thi window wa near one end on the ocean 
side, and as I came around the corner I stop as if I had been shot, 
and my hair rais straight up on top of my head. right there in front 
of that window stood a woman look out over the sea, and in her arm 
she held a littl child. I saw her as plain as I see you now. It seem 
to me like an hour she stood there, but I don’t suppos it wa a second; 
then she wa gone. when I could move I look around for the other boys, 
and they were stand there paralyzed. they had seen the woman, too. We 
didn’t say much, and we didn’t sleep much that night, and the next night 
we bunk out on the beach. the rest of the crowd made all manner of 
fun of us, but we had had all the ghost we wanted, and I never set foot 
insid the old hous after that.” 

“when did it burn down, captain?” I asked, as jim relaps into silence. 

“somewher about twenty-f year ago. A beach parti had been roast 
clam in the old oven, and in some way the fire got to the woodwork. It 
wa as dri as tinder, and I hope the ghost were all burnt up with it.” 




A misfit ghost. 


everi boy with a knowledg of adventur literature, otherwis “novel 
of action,” know of the “phantom ship,” the spook of the high seas. 

but it ha not been known that ship themselv are haunted, and that in 
the servic of the unit state coast survey there is a vessel now in 
commiss that is by her own offic suppos to be haunted. 

yet the eagre, a 140-foot schooner of the coast survey, is look upon 
in the servic as a veri undesir vessel to be aboard of. about her 
there is an atmospher of gloom that wardroom jest cannot dispel. 

duti on board her ha been shun as would be a pestilence, and stori 
have been told by offic who have cruis aboard her that are not good 
for timid peopl to hear. offic have hesit about tell these 
uncanni stories, but they have becom suffici well known to make a 
billet to duti aboard the eagr unwelcom among the coast survey men. 

the mohawk wa launch june 10, 1875, at greenpoint, and she wa then 
the largest sail yacht afloat. 

william T. garner, her young millionair owner, wa veri proud of hi 
new craft, and all the then leader of new york societi were invit to 
particip in the good time afloat with which her launch wa 
celebrated. commodor garner, then but thirty-thre year old, and hi 
young wife entertain charmingly, and the trim, speedi mohawk wa 
christen with unusu merri festivities. soon after that she wa 
capsiz by a sudden squall off the land at stapleton, N. y., and six 
peopl were drown like rat in her cabin and forecastle. 

then the mohawk wa rais at a cost of $25,000 and purchas by the 
unit state govern for the servic of the coast survey. her name 
wa chang to eagre, for jack tar is proverbi superstitious, and 
with the old name it would have been imposs to ship a crew. 

lieuten higbi king describ hi initi experi when he wa 
assign to duti on the eagr in thi way: 

“she had her full complement of offic minu one when I board her at 
newport to complet the list. everi cabin wa occupi but the port 
cabin by the companion way, and to that I wa assigned. 

“we had a jolli wardroom mess that night, and I retir from it early, 
as I wa tire by my journey to join the vessel. the other who were 
still at the tabl regard my retir to the port cabin in absolut 
silence, have bidden me good-night. their silenc did not lead me to 
suspect anything, though I knew that the eagr had onc been the mohawk. 
My cabin door had the usual cabin lock of brass, and the porthol wa 
also secur fastened. there could have been no one under the bed or 
sofa, as beneath each wa a face of solid oak paneling. 

“I undress lazili and left the light burn dimli in my bracket lamp. 
I tri conscienti to go to sleep for I don’t know how long with my 
back turn to the light. the nois ceas in the wardroom after a time, 
and I knew the other had turn in, but I felt unaccount nervou 
and restless. I turn over and face the light, thoroughli wide awake, 
and there in the singl chair sat an elderli man, seemingli wrapt in 
deep thought. He wa dress in a blue yacht reefer, and had a long, 
gray beard. hi hand were clasp in hi lap, and hi eye were 
downcast. hi face wa not pale and ghastly, as the face of ghost are 
popularli suppos to be, but ruddi and weatherbeaten. 

“I regard him in scare silenc for I don’t know how long, though it 
seem an hour when he, or it, or whatev it was, disappeared. dure 
that time the ghost, and such I now believ it to have been, made not a 
motion, nor did it say anything. present I look again, and it wa 
gone. 

“at breakfast the other watch me critic as I took my seat. I had 
not intend to say anyth about my experience, for I thought then I 
had seen some sort of hallucin and strongli suspect that I wa 
verg on insanity. lieuten irv ask me if I had slept well. I 
repli that I had. ‘didn’t you see anything?’ he inquired. I then 
frankli admit that I had and describ my experience. then I learn 
that each one of the seven other present had tri the port cabin at 
one time or another, and each had seen the self-sam apparition. It had 
act in exactli the same way in each case, except in the case of 
irving, who shot at it with hi pistol, when it immedi disappeared. 
some of the other had been led by their curios to inquir if anyon 
lost on the mohawk resembl the figure, and found that none of the 
unfortun one at all fit the description. It had been dub by 
them the ‘misfit ghost.’ that one experi wa enough for me, and 
after that I, by courtesy, share the cabin of anoth fellow.” 

lieuten irv and other corrobor the stori of lieuten king, 
and as addit evid that the eagr is haunted, lieuten irv 
describ a new year’ eve experi of the eagre’ officers, that is, 
to say the least, novel in the way of supernatur manifestations. 

“it wa at mess. the first toast, ‘sweetheart and wives,’ had been 
drunk, as it alway is by yanke sailor the world over on occas of 
festivity. everyon wa feel happy, or, as thackeray ha it, 
‘pleasant,’ when suddenli the sliding-door separ the wardroom from 
the companion way close slowli with a loud, squeak noise. they had 
seldom been closed, and it took the entir strength of a man to start 
them from their rusti fastenings. yet upon thi occas they start 
easili and close tightly, while the offic jump to their feet in 
breathless astonishment. half a dozen men haul them open in haste, but 
not a soul wa behind them or anywher about. ‘it must be our old friend 
of the port cabin,’ suggest one, and in awe-stricken silenc the 
health of the ‘misfit ghost’ wa drunk.” 




AN unbidden guest. 


My cousins, kate and tom howard, marri at trinity, at easter time, 
conclud to commenc housekeep by take one of those delight 
expens furnished, unfurnish cottages, with which the fashion 
water place of w---- abounds, from whose rear window one might 
almost take a plung into the surf, the beach begin at the back 
door. they went down quit earli in may, be in a great hurri to tri 
their domest experiment; and, as the even were still cold, they 
spent them about the open fire, “spooning.” 

It wa upon one of those nights, about eleven o’clock, that they were 
startl by a noise, as of some small object falling, soon follow by 
the sound of heavi footsteps, and then quiet again reign supreme. At 
onc tom, poker in hand, boldli start in search of the burglar, 
follow by kate, wildli clutch at hi coat-tail, and in a state of 
tremor. they look upstairs, under the variou beds, kate suggest 
that in novel they were alway to be found there. 

the dining-room wa next explored, where all seem well, and, lastli 
the kitchen, where they found what wa evid a solut of the 
mystery. the burglar had enter by the back door, which wa found to be 
unlock and slightli ajar. the first excit subsiding, they 
return again to the dining-room, where tom, upon closer inspection, 
then discov that one of a pair of quaint littl pepper-pots, wed 
gifts, wa missing, and other small articl on the sideboard had been 
slightli disturbed. 

the next morning, when kate mildli remonstr with the queen of the 
kitchen for her carelessness, she receiv a shock by be told that it 
wa her usual custom to leav the door open, “so that it would be aisy, 
convani loik for the milkmaid.” they part with her, and a new maid 
wa engaged, whose chief qualif for the place wa that she wa 
most faith in the discharg of her duties, especi in “lock 
up.” 

while they mourn the loss of the pepper-pot, still it seem so 
trifl when they thought of that love repouss salad bowl, sent by 
aunt julia, which stood near by, that noth wa said of the loss 
outsid of the family, and the littl household settl into it normal 
state onc more of “bill and cooing.” 

about a fortnight later, tom start out one night with an old 
fisherman, one of the natives, and a local “character,” to indulg in 
that delight pastime, so dear to the heart of man, known as 
“eeling,” and, as the night wa dark, the eel were particularli 
“sporty,” so that it wa well on toward the “wee sma’ hours” when tom 
at last return to the cottage. 

He found all excit within. kate wa in hysterics, and the new maid, 
also weeping, wa industri appli the camphor bottl to her 
mistress’ nose. the burglar, or ghost, as they had now decided, the 
window and door be found to be secur lock thi time, had been 
abroad again, but had succeed in purloin nothing. hi royal 
ghostship had amus himself, apparently, by simpli walk about. 

“oh, tom! he had on such heavi boot and wa so dread bold about 
it,” said kate, tearfully. 

from that time kate becam nervou and refus to be left alone. tom 
start whenev a door creaked, and the “treasure” depart hurriedly, 
saying, “faith, the hous is haunted, sure.” 

after that kate spent her day in “girl hunting,” and her night in 
answer shadowi advertis that never materialized. they tri 
irish, english, dutch, and a “heathen chinee,” with a sprinkl of 
“color ladies” to vari the monotony. they seem about to becom 
famou throughout the length and breadth of the land as “the famili 
that chang help onc a week,” when they land treasur no. 2. 

shortli after her advent we were all ask down to w----, to help 
celebr their happiness, and incident to christen the new dinner 
set. We were not a littl surpris at find kate so pale and tom 
rather distrait. however, after a delight dinner, that should have 
fill with pleasur the most exact bride, we adjourn to the 
piazza, leav the men to the contempl of their cigars. We were 
enthusiast in our prais of the house, and congratul kate in 
secur such a prize, when, to our horror, she burst into tears, and 
said: “oh, girls, it’ a dread place; it’ haunted!” and then 
tear proceed with the details, until we all felt creepi and 
suggest the parlor and lights. 

It wa not until long afterward that kate discov that tom had also 
relat the “ghost story” to the men, that evening, to which ned harri 
had said, laconically, “rats,” and bob shaw laughingli remarked, “tom, 
old chap, you realli shouldn’t take your nightcap so strong.” 

about the first of juli the climax came. the ghost walk again, thi 
time take not onli the remain pepper-pot, but also a silver 
salt-cellar. evid he had a penchant for small articles, but unlik 
former times, everyth on the sideboard wa in the greatest disorder. 
aunt julia’ salad bowl wa found on the floor, and not far away the 
cheese-dish, with it content scatter about. thi time one of the 
window wa found half open. A week later a note came to me from kate, 
say that she and tom had gone to saratoga to spend the remaind of 
the season with her mother. 

the follow spring tom receiv a note and parcel from mr. b----, the 
owner of the hous at w----, which read as follows: 

dear mr. howard: I send you by express three articl of silver, 
which my wife suggest may belong to you, as they are mark with 
your initials, namely, two silver pepper-pot and a salt-cellar; 
they were found, the other day, dure the process of spring hous 
cleaning, in a rat hole, behind the sideboard. I forgot to have the 
hole stop up last spring, or to caution you against the water 
rats; the great fellow will get in, you know. kind regard to mrs. 
howard. 

veri truly, 

john b----. 




the next season the “ghost club” wa organized, the badg be a small 
silver rat, bear proudli aloft a tini pepper-pot. We thought 
offer tom the presidency, but he declined, with offend dignity, from 
the effect of which I think he will never fulli recover. 




the dead woman’ photograph. 


virgil hoyt is a photographer’ assist up at st. paul, and a man of a 
good deal of taste. He ha been in search of the picturesqu all over 
the west, and hundr of mile to the north in canada, and can speak 
three or four indian dialects, and put a cano through the rapids. that 
is to say, he is a man of an adventur sort and no dreamer. He can 
fight well and shoot well and swim well enough to put up a win race 
with the indian boys, and he can sit all day in the saddl and not dream 
about it at night. 

wherev he goe he use hi camera. 

“the world,” hoyt is in the habit of say to those who sit with him 
when he smoke hi pipe, “wa creat in six day to be photographed. 
man--and especi woman--wa made for the same purpose. cloud are not 
made to give moisture, nor tree to cast shade. they were creat for 
the photographer.” 

In short, virgil hoyt’ view of the world is whimsical, and he doesn’t 
like to be bother with anyth disagreeable. that is the reason that 
he loath and detest go to a hous of mourn to photograph a 
corpse. the horribl bad tast of it offend him partly, and partli he 
is annoy at have to shoulder, even for a few moments, a part of 
someone’ burden of sorrow. He doesn’t like sorrow, and would willingli 
cano 500 mile up the cold canadian river to get rid of it. 
nevertheless, as assist photographer, it is often hi duti to do thi 
veri kind of thing. 

not long ago he wa sent for by a rich jewish famili at st. paul to 
photograph the mother, who had just died. He wa veri much put out, but 
he went. He wa taken to the front parlor, where the dead woman lay in 
her coffin. It wa evid that there wa some excit in the 
household and that a discuss wa go on, but hoyt wasn’t concerned, 
and so he paid no attent to the matter. 

the daughter want the coffin turn on end, in order that the corps 
might face the camera properly, but hoyt said he could overcom the 
recumb attitud and make it appear that the face wa taken in the 
posit it would natur hold in life, and so they went out and left 
him alon with the dead. 

the face wa a strong and posit one, such as may often be seen among 
jewish matrons. hoyt regard it with some admiration, think to 
himself that she wa a woman who had been use to have her own way. 
there wa a strand of hair out of place, and he push it back from her 
brow. A bud lift it head too high from among the rose on her breast 
and spoil the contour of the chin, so he broke it off. He rememb 
these thing later veri distinctli and that hi hand touch her bare 
face two or three times. 

then he took the photograph and left the house. 

He wa veri busi at the time and sever day elaps befor he wa abl 
to develop the plates. He took them from the bath, in which they had 
lain with a number of others, and went to work upon them. there were 
three plates, he have taken that number mere as a precaut against 
ani accident. they came up well, but as they develop he becam awar 
of the exist of someth in the photograph which had not been 
appar to hi eye. the mysteri alway came under the head of the 
disagre with him, and wa therefor to be banished, so he made onli 
a few print and put the thing away out of sight. He hope that 
someth would interven to save him from attempt an explanation. 

but it is a part of the gener perplex of life that thing do not 
interven as they ought and when they ought, so one day hi employ 
ask him what had becom of those photographs. He 

[illustration: “_they left him alon with the dead._”] 

tri to evad him, but it wa futile, and he got out the finish 
photograph and show them to him. the older man sat stare at them a 
long time. 

“hoyt,” said he, at length, “you’r a young man, and I suppos you have 
never seen anyth like thi before. but I have. not exactli the same 
thing, but similar phenomena have come my way a number of time sinc I 
went into the business, and I want to tell you there are thing in 
heaven and earth not dreamt of----” 

“oh, I know all that tommy-rot,” cri hoyt, angrily, “but when anyth 
happen I want to know the reason why, and how it is done.” 

“all right,” said hi employer, “then you might explain whi and how the 
sun rises.” 

but he humor the younger man suffici to examin with him the bath 
in which the plate were submerg and the plate themselves. all wa as 
it should be. but the mysteri wa there and could not be done away with. 

hoyt hope against hope that the friend of the dead woman would somehow 
forget about the photographs, but of cours the wish wa unreasonable, 
and one day the daughter appear and ask to see the photograph of 
her mother. 

“well, to tell the truth,” stammer hoyt, “those didn’t come out as 
well as we could wish.” 

“but let me see them,” persist the lady. “i’d like to look at them, 
anyway.” 

[illustration: “_he show her the prints._”] 

“well, now,” said hoyt, tri to be soothing, as he believ it wa 
alway best to be with women--to tell the truth, he wa an ignoramu 
where women were concerned--“i think it would be better if you didn’t 
see them. there are reason why----” he ambl on like this, stupid man 
that he was, and of cours the jewess said she would see those pictur 
without ani further delay. 

So poor hoyt brought them out and place them in her hand, and then ran 
for the water pitcher, and had to be at the bother of bath her 
forehead to keep her from fainting. 

for what the ladi saw wa this: over face and flower and the head of 
the coffin fell a thick veil, the edg of which touch the floor in 
some places. It cover the featur so well that not a hint of them wa 
visible. 

“there wa noth over mother’ face,” cri the ladi at length. 

“not a thing,” acquiesc hoyt. “I know, becaus I had occas to touch 
her face just befor I took the picture. I put some of her hair back 
from her brow.” 

“what doe it mean, then?” ask the lady. 

“you know better than I. there is no explan in science. perhap 
there is some in psychology.” 

“well,” said the lady, stammer a littl and coloring, “mother wa a 
good woman, but she alway want her own way, and she alway had it, 
too.” 

“yes?” 

“and she never would have her pictur taken. she didn’t admir herself. 
she said no one should ever see a pictur of hers.” 

“so?” said hoyt, meditatively. “well, she’ kept her word, hasn’t she?” 

the two stood look at the pictur for a time. then hoyt point to 
the open blaze in the grate. 

“throw them in,” he commanded. “don’t let your father see them--don’t 
keep them yourself. they wouldn’t be good thing to keep.” 

“that’ true enough,” said the lady, slowly. and she threw them in the 
fire. then virgil hoyt brought out the plate and broke them befor her 
eyes. 

and that wa the end of it--except that hoyt sometim tell the stori 
to those who sit besid him when hi pipe is lighted. 




the ghost OF A live man. 


We were in the south atlant ocean, in the latitud of the island of 
fernando norohna, about 40 degre 12 minut south, on board the barqu 
H. G. johnson, homeward bound from australia. I wa the onli passenger, 
and we had safe round cape horn, with the baromet at 28 degre 18 
minutes, and yet had somehow miracul escap ani extrem heavi 
gale--had had light northerli and easterli wind till we reach 20 
degrees, and thenc the southeast trade were send us fast on our way 
to the equator. I sat on deck smoke my pipe, with a gloriou full moon 
shed it bright pathway across the blue waters, and chat with 
the first mate, a man some fifty-eight year of age, who had follow 
the sea sinc he wa a boy. for twenti year or more he had been mate or 
captain, and mani and vari were the experi he could relate. A 
thorough sailor and skill navigator, he wa as honest as the day is 
long--had a heart as big as an ox and wa an all-round good fellow and 
genial companion. some of hi yarn might be taken cum grano salis, yet 
he alway posit assur me that he “wa tell me the truth.” An 
account of a voyag that he made in a whaler from the southern ocean to 
new bedford seem to me worthi to be repeated. He had round cape horn 
six time and the cape of good hope twenty-six times, besid make 
mani trip across the western ocean and to south american ports. I give 
hi account as near as possibl in hi own words: 

“it wa in ’71 that I command the whaler mari jane. We had been out 
from home over three years, and had on board a full cargo of whale oil, 
besid 2,000 pound of whalebone, which wa then worth $5 per pound. I 
also had been fortun enough to find in a dead whale which we came 
across a larg quantiti of ambergris, and our heart were all veri light 
as we began our homeward voyage, and our thought all tend to the 
hearti welcom which we should receiv from wive and sweetheart when 
we reach our journey’ end. mani a night as I lay in my berth I had 
thought with great pleasur of the amount of money that would be come 
to me from the proce of our voyag when we arriv in new bedford. 

“I calcul that I had made $12,000 as my share of the proce of the 
whalebon and oil--to say noth of the ambergris, which I well knew 
would bring at least $20,000, and one-half of which belong to me. you 
can therefor imagin that I wa well pleas with myself as we went 
bound along through the southeast trades. We cross the equat in 
longitud 36 and soon after took strong northeast trades, and all wa 
go as well as I could wish. We had put the ship in perfect order, 
paint her insid and out, and you would never have recogn her as 
the old whale ship that had for three year been pli the southern 
ocean for whales. never shall I forget an old bull whale that we tackl 
about two degre to the south of cape horn--but that is anoth story, 
which I will give you anoth time. 

“we had just lost the northeast trade and were enter the gulf 
stream. I sat in my cabin with my chart on the tabl befor me roll 
up. I had just pick our locat on it, and wa think that in a 
week more I should be at home, surround by those near and dear to me, 
and relat to them the stori of my great good fortune. 

“it wa alway my custom to work up my latitud and longitud about four 
o’clock in the afternoon, and then after supper pick off her posit on 
the chart, have a smoke and perhap just befor retir a nip of grog, 
and then at 8.30 o’clock, as regular as a clock, I would turn in. 

“I am a great smoker, and thi day I had been smoke all the afternoon, 
besid have had two or three nips. We had a dog on board whom we 
call ‘bosun,’ who had been out with us all the voyage, and who wa 
afraid of nothing. He had endear himself to everi man on board, and 
when bosun ‘took water’ someth veri seriou wa in the wind. thi 
night as I sat in the cabin I heard a most dismal howl from bosun, and 
call out to the mate to know what wa the matter with the dog. He 
repli that he ‘reckon some of the men had been teas him,’ and the 
occurr soon pass from my mind. 

“suddenli I saw someon come down the after companion way into the 
cabin. I suppos at first it wa the mate and wonder that he had not 
first spoken to me, but then I notic that he wore cloth I had never 
seen on the mate, and as he advanc into the cabin I saw hi face. It 
wa the face of a man I had never seen in my life. He wa thin and pale 
and haggard, and as he advanc he look about the cabin and at the 
roll up chart on the table. there seem to be an appeal in hi eyes, 
and then there swept over hi face a look of intens disappointment, and 
befor I could move or speak, he had vanish from my sight. 

“now I am a veri practic man, and I at onc straighten myself in my 
chair and said to myself: ‘well, old man, you have smoke one too mani 
pipe to-day, or els you have had one drink too much, for you have been 
asleep in your chair and seen a ghost.’ I wa quit satisfi that I 
had had a dream, especi as I call to the mate and ask him if he 
had seen anyon come below. He said no; that he had not left the deck 
for the last hour, and the man at the wheel, directli in front of the 
door, wa sure no one had enter the cabin, so I convinc myself that 
I had had a veri vivid dream--though I could not help think of the 
matter all through the next day. 

“at eight o’clock the next even I sat in the same place with my work 
just finish and the chart lie roll up on the tabl befor me, when 
suddenli the dog’ dismal howl rang through the ship, and look up I 
saw those same leg come down the after companion. My hair fairli 
stood on end, and yet to-day sure I wa wide awake. I had onli smoke 
one pipe all day, and had not touch a drop of liquor. the same wan, 
emaci figur walk into the cabin, glanc inquiringli and 
appealingli at me, and again there spread over hi face that look of 
utter disappoint as if he had sought someth and fail to find 
it, and again he disappeared. I rush on deck to the mate and told him 
all I had seen dure the last two nights; but he made light of it, and 
assur me I had been asleep or smoke too much. He did not like to 
suggest that I had been drinking. still, I could see that the thought 
that came into hi mind wa ‘the old man ha seen ’em again.’ I gave up 
tri to convinc him, but request that the next night, from 8 to 
8.30, he should sit with me in the cabin. 

“how the next day pass I cannot tell. I onli know that my thought 
never left that ghostli visitant, and somehow I felt that the even 
would reveal someth to me and the spell be broken. I made up my mind 
I would speak to the thing, whatev it was, and I felt a sort of 
secur in the presenc of the mate, who wa a dare fellow and fear 
neither man nor the devil. neither rum nor tobacco pass my lip dure 
the next day, and eight o’clock found the mate and I sit in the 
cabin, and thi time the chart lay open on the tabl besid us. just as 
eight bell struck the dog’ premonitori wail sounded, and look up we 
both saw the figur descend the cabin stairs. We both seem frozen 
to our seats, and the strang weird of the whole proceed cast the 
same spell over the mate and me alike, and we were both unabl to move 
or speak. slowli the figur proceed into the cabin and glanc around 
without a word, but with the same expect look on hi face. hi form 
wa even more wasted, hi cheek sunken and hi eye seem almost out 
of sight so deepli were they set in their sockets. As hi eye fell on 
the open chart a look of suprem joy fairli irradi hi features, and 
advanc to the tabl he place one long, boni finger on the chart, 
held it for a moment and then again disappear from our sight. 

“for five minut after he had left us we sat speechless. then I manag 
to say: ‘what do you think of that, mr. morris?’ ‘mi god! sir, I don’t 
know--it’ beyond me.’ then my eye fell on the open chart and there 
where the finger had been wa a tini spot of blood, exactli on the point 
of longitud 63 degre west and latitud 37 degre north. We were then 
onli about fifti mile distant from that position, and immedi there 
came to me the determin to steer the ship there; so I laid her 
cours accordingly, and post a lookout in the crow’ nest. At five 
o’clock in the morning, just as the east began to grow gray, the lookout 
call out: ‘boat on the lee bow,’ and as we came up to it we found four 
men in it--thre dead and one with just a remnant of life left in him. 
We sew the three bodi in canva and buri them in the ocean, and 
then gave all our attent to restor life to the poor emaci 
frame, which, I then recognized, wa the veri man who for three 
success night had visit me in my cabin. 

“bi judici and care nurs life gradual came back to him, and 
in four days’ time he wa abl to sit up and talk with me in the cabin. 
It seem he command the ship promise, and she had taken fire and been 
destroyed, and all hand had to take to the boats. ten were in the boat 
at first, but their food had given out, and one by one he had seen them 
die, and one by one he had cast the bodi overboard. final he lost 
conscious and knew not whether hi three remain companion were 
dead or alive. 

“then he said he seem in a dream to see a ship and tri to go to her 
for help, but just as he would be go on board of her someth would 
seem to keep him back; three time in hi dream he tri to visit thi 
ship, and the last time there seem to come to him a certain 
satisfaction, and he felt that he had succeed in hi object. turn 
to my table, he said: ‘let me take your chart; i’ll show you just where 
we were.’ 

“‘stop,’ said I, ‘don’t take that chart, it is an old one and all mark 
over. mark your posit on thi new one.’ He took my pencil and knife, 
and care sharpen hi pencil. then, take my dividers, he 
measur hi latitud and longitud and place a pencil dot at a point 
on the clean chart. As he lift hi hand he said: ‘oh, excus me, 
captain, I cut my finger in sharpen the pencil and have left a drop 
of blood on the chart.’ 

“‘never mind,’ said I, ‘leav it there.’ and then I produc the old 
chart and there, in an exactli correspond place wa the drop of blood 
left by my ghostli visitor.” 

then look steadili into my face the mate solemnli added: “I can’t 
explain this, sir, perhap you can; but I can tell you on my honor it is 
god’ own truth that I have told you.” 




the ghost OF washington. 


It wa earli on christma morn when john reilli wheel away from a 
picturesqu littl villag where he had pass the previou night, to 
continu hi cycl tour through eastern pennsylvania. to-day hi 
intent wa to stop at valley forge, and then to ride on up the 
schuylkil valley, visit in turn the mani point of histor 
interest that lay along hi route. valley forge, hi road map indicated, 
wa but a short distanc further on. all around him were the hill and 
field and road over which washington and hi half-starv armi had 
forag and roam throughout the tri winter of 1777-8--one hundr 
and twenty-six year ago. 

It wa a beauti christma day, truly, and, as he wheel along, young 
reilly’ thought were almost equal divid between the surround 
pleasant sceneri and the folk at home, who, he knew veri well, were 
assembl at just about the present time around a heavili laden 
christma tree in the front parlor. the sun rose higher and higher and 
reilli pedal on down the valley, pass everi now and then quaint, 
pleasant-look farmhouses, mani of which, no doubt, had been built 
anterior to the period which had given the vicin it history. 

arriving, finally, at a place where the road fork off in two 
directions, reilli wa puzzl which way to go on. there happen to be 
a dwell close by. accordingli he dismounted, left hi wheel lean 
against a gate-post at the side of the road, and walk up a wretchedli 
flag walk lead to the house, with the idea of get instruct 
from it inmates. 

situat in the center of an unkempt field of rank grass and weeds, the 
build lay back from the highway probabl one hundr and fifti feet. 
It wa long and low in shape, contain but one stori and have what 
is term a gabl roof, under which there must have been an attic of no 
mean size. On come close to the house, a fact reilli had not notic 
from the road becam plainli evident. It wa deserted. He saw that the 
roof and side shingl were in wretch condition; that the window 
sash and frame as well as the door and door frame were miss from 
the open in the side wall where onc they had been, and that the 
entir side of the house, includ that part of the stone foundat 
which show abov the ground, wa full of crack and seams. At first on 
the point of turn back, he conclud to see what the interior wa 
like anyway. 

accordingli he went inside. glanc around the larg dust-fil room 
he had enter hi gaze at first fail to locat ani object of the 
least interest. A ricketi appear set of step went up into the attic 
from one side of the apart and over in one corner wa a larg open 
fireplace, from the wall of which much of the brickwork had becom 
loosen and fallen out. reilli had start up the step toward the 
attic, when happen to look back for an instant, hi attent wa 
attract to a singular-looking, jug-shap bottl no larger than a 
vinegar cruet, which lay upon it side on the hearth of the fireplace, 
partli cover up by debri of loos brick and mortar. He hasten back 
down the step and cross the room, take the bottl up in hi hand 
and examin it with curiosity. be partli fill with a liquid of 
some kind or other the bottl wa veri soon uncork and held under the 
young man’ nose. the liquid gave forth a peculiar, pungent and invit 
odor. without further hesit reilly’ lip sought the neck of the 
bottle. It is hardli possibl to describ the pleasur and satisfact 
hi sens experienc as he drank. 

while the fluid wa still gurgl down hi throat a heavi hand wa 
place most suddenli on hi shoulder and hi bodi wa given a violent 
shaking. the bottl fell to the floor and wa broken into a hundr 
pieces. 

“hello!” said a rough voic almost in reilly’ ear. “who are you, 
anyway? and what are you do within the lines? A spy, i’ll be bound.” 

As most assuredli there had been no one els in the vicin of the 
build when he had enter it and with equal certainti no one had come 
down the step from the attic, reilli wa natur surpris and 
mystifi by thi unexpect assault. He struggl instinct to 
break loos from the unfriendli grasp, and when he final succeed he 
twist hi bodi around so that he face across the room. immedi he 
made the remark discoveri that there were four other person in the 
apartment--thre uncouth-look fellow habit in fantast but rag 
garments, and a matronly-look woman, the latter stand over a 
washtub which had been elev upon two chair in a corner near the 
fireplace. To all appear the woman had been busi at her work and had 
stop for the moment to see what the men were go to do; her waist 
sleev were roll up to the shoulder and her arm drip with water 
and soapsuds. over the top of the tubs, partli fill with water, there 
were visibl the edg of sever well-soak fabrics. too add to hi 
astonish he notic that in the chimney-place, which a moment befor 
wa fall apart, but now seem to be clean and in good condition, a 
cheer fire burned, and that abov the flame wa suspend an iron 
pot, from which issu a jet of steam. He notic also that the entir 
appear of the room had undergon a great change. everyth seem 
to be in good repair, tidi and neat; the ceilings, the wall and the 
door; even the stairway lead to the attic. the open in the wall 
were fit with window sash and well-paint doors. the apart 
had, in fact, evolv under hi veri eyesight from a state of absolut 
ruin into one of excel preservation. 

all of thi seem so weird and uncanny, that reilli stood for a moment 
or two in the transform apartment, utterli dumbfounded, with hi mouth 
wide open and hi eye all but pop out of hi head. He wa brought 
to hi sens by the fellow who had shaken him growl out: 

“come! explain yourself!” 

“an explan is due me,” reilli manag to gasp. 

“don’t bandi word with the rascal, harry,” one of the other men spoke 
up. “bring him along to headquarters.” 

thereupon, without further parley, the three men march reilli in 
militari fashion into the open air and down to the road. here he pick 
up at the gate-post hi bicycle, while they unstack a group of three 
old-fashioned-look musket locat close by. when the young man had 
enter the hous a few minut before, thi stack of arm had not been 
there. He could not understand it. neither could he understand, on 
look back at the build as he wa march off down the road, the 
mysteri agenc that had transform it dilapid exterior, just as 
had been the interior, into a practic new condition. 

while they trudg along, the stranger exhibit a singular interest in 
the wheel reilli push at hi side, run their coars hand over the 
frame and handle-bar, and act on the whole as though they never 
befor had seen a bicycle. thi in itself wa anoth surprise. He had 
hardli suppos there were three men in the countri so total 
unacquaint with what is a most familiar piec of mechan everywhere. 

At the same time that they were pay so much attent to the wheel, 
reilli in turn wa studi with great curios hi singular-look 
captors. rough, unprepossess appear fellow they were, larg of 
frame and unshaven, and, it must be added, dirti of face. what remain 
of their veri rag clothing, he had alreadi noticed, wa of a most 
remark cut and design, resembl close the garment worn by the 
continent militiamen in the war of independence. the hat were broad, 
low of crown, and three-corn in shape; the trouser were 
buff-color and end at the knees, and the long, blue spike-tail 
coat were flap over at the extrem of the tails, the flap be 
fasten down with good-siz brass buttons. leather leg were 
strap around cowhid boots, through the badli worn feet of which, in 
place where the leather had crack open, the flesh, unprotect by 
stockings, could be seen. dress as he was, in a cleanly, gray cycl 
costume, reilly’ appearance, most assuredly, wa strongli in contrast 
to that of hi companions. 

after a brisk walk of twenti minutes, dure which they occasion met 
and pass by one or two or perhap a group of men cloth and outfit 
like reilly’ escorts, the littl parti follow the road up a slight 
inclin and around a well-wood bend to the left, come quit 
suddenly, and to the captive, veri unexpectedly, to what wa without 
doubt a militari encampment; a village, in fact, compos of mani row 
of small log huts. along the streets, between the buildings, musket 
were stack in hundr of places. over in one corner, on a slight 
emin command the road up which they had come, and cleverli hidden 
from it behind tree and shrubbery, the young man notic a batteri of 
field pieces. wherev the eye wa turn on thi singular scene were 
countless number of soldier all garment in three-corn hats, 
spike-tail coat and knee breeches, walk lazili hither and thither, 
group around crackl fires, or parad up and down the street in 
platoon under the guidanc of rag but stern-look officers. 

harri stop the littl process of four in front of one of the 
larger of the log houses. then, while they stood there, the long blast 
from a bugl wa heard, follow by the roll of drums. A minut or two 
afterward, sever compani of militia march up and ground their 
arms, form three side of a hollow squar around them, the fourth 
and open side be toward the log house. directli succeed thi 
maneuv there came through the doorway of the hous and step up the 
center of the square, stop directli in front of reilly, a 
dignified-look person, tall and straight and splendidli proport 
of figure, and have a face of great nobil and character. 

the cold chill chase one anoth down reilly’ back. hi limb sway 
and totter beneath hi weight. He had never experienc anoth such 
sensat of mingl astonish and fright. 

He wa in the presenc of gener washington. not a phantom washington, 
either, but washington in the flesh and blood; as materi and earthli a 
be as ever cross a person’ line of vision. reilly, in hi time, 
had seen so mani portraits, marbl bust and statu of the great 
command that he could not be mistaken. recov the use of hi 
faculties, which for the moment he seem to have lost, reilli did the 
veri commonplac thing that other befor him have done when place 
unexpectedli in remark situations. He pinch himself to make sure 
that he wa in realiti wide awak and in the natur possess of hi 
senses. He felt like pinch the figur in front of him also, but he 
could not muster up the courag to do that. He stood there tri to 
think it all out, and as hi thought becam less stagnant, hi fright 
dissolv under the process of reason hi mind pursued. To reason a 
thing out, even though an explan can onli be obtain by leav 
much of the subject unaccount for, tend to make one bolder and less 
shaki in the knees. 

the seri of strang incid which he wa experienc had been 
inaugur in the old-fashion dwell he had visit after 
inform concern the roads. and everyth had been go along in 
a perfectli normal way up to, the veri moment when he had taken a drink 
from the bottl found in the fireplace. but from that precis time 
everyth had gone wrongly. henc the infer that the drink of 
the peculiar liquid wa account in some way or other for hi 
troubles. there wa a supernatur agenc in the whole thing. that much 
must be admitted. and whatev that agenc was, and howev it might be 
account for, it had taken reilli back into a period of time more than 
a hundr year ago, and land him, bodi and soul, within the line of 
the patriot forc winter at valley forge. He might have stood there, 
turn over and over in hi mind, pinch himself and muttering, all 
the morning, had not the newcom ceas a silent but curiou inspect 
of hi person, and asked: “who are you, sir?” 

“john reilly, at your pleasure,” the young man replied, ad a 
question on hi own account: “and who are you, sir?” 

immedi he receiv a heavi thump on hi back from harry’ hard 
fist. 

“it is not for you to question the general,” the rag administr of 
the blow exclaimed. 

“and it is not for you to be so gay,” reilli returned, angrily, give 
the blow back with ad force. 

“here, here!” broke in the first questioner. “fisticuff under my veri 
nose! No more of this, I command you both.” To harri he ad an extra 
caution: “your zeal in my behalf will be better appreci by be 
less demonstrative. blow should be struck onli on the battlefield.” To 
reilli he said, with a slight smile hover over hi face, “mi name is 
washington. perhap you may have heard of me?” 

To thi reilli replied: “I have, indeed, and heard you veri well spoken 
of, too.” embolden by the other’ smile, he ventur anoth question: 
“I think my reckon of the day and year is badli at fault. An hour ago 
I thought the day wa christma day. how far out of the way did my 
calcul take me, sir?” 

“the day is inde christma day, and the year is, as you must know, the 
year of our lord one thousand seven hundr and seventy-seven.” 

reilli again pinch himself. 

“whi do you bring thi man to me?” washington now inquired, turn to 
harri and hi companions. 

“he is a spy, sir,” said harry. 

“that is a lie!” reilli indignantli interpolated. “I have done noth 
to warrant ani such charge.” 

“we found him in the widow robin’ house, pour strong liquor down hi 
throat.” 

“I had gone insid after inform concern the roads----” 

“which he wa get from a bottle, sir.” 

“if drink from a bottl of necess constitut be a spy, I fear 
our camp is alreadi a hotbed,” washington somewhat sage remarked, 
cast hi eye around slyli at hi offic and men. “tell me,” he went 
on, with sudden sternness, look reilli through and through, as though 
to read hi veri thoughts, “i the charg true? Do you come from howe?” 

“the charg is not true, sir. I come from no one. I simpli am make a 
tour of pleasur through thi part of the countri on my bicycle.” 

“with the countri swarm with the men from two hostil armies, ani 
kind of a tour, save one of absolut necessity, seem ill-timed.” 

“when I set out I knew noth about ani armies. the fact is, sir----” 
reilli start to make an explanation, but he check himself on 
realiz that the tell of ani such improb yarn would onli 
increas the hazard of hi position. 

“well?” washington questioned, in a tone of grow suspicion. 

“I certainli did not know that your armi or ani other armi wa 
quarter in thi vicinity.” reilli hesit for lack of someth 
further to say. “you see,” he final added, prompt by a happi idea, 
“I rode my wheel from new york.” 

“you may have come from new york, though it is hard to believ you came 
on that singular-look machin so great a distance. where is the hors 
which drew the vehicle?” 

reilli touch hi bicycle. “thi is the horse, sir, just as it is; the 
vehicle,” he said. 

“the man is crazy!” harri exclaimed. washington onli look the 
incredul he felt, and thi time ask a doubl question. 

“how can the thing be balanc without it be held upright by a pair of 
shaft from a horse’ back, and how is the motiv power acquired?” 

for an answer reilli jump upon the wheel, and at a consider speed 
and in a haphazard way pedal around the space within the hollow squar 
of soldiers. hither and thither he went, at one second nearli wheel 
over the toe of the line of astonished, if not frightened, militiamen; 
at the next, bear suddenli down on harri and hi companion and 
make them danc and jump about most alertli to avoid a collision. even 
the dignifi washington wa onc or twice put to the necess of 
dodg hurriedli asid when hi equilibrium wa threatened. reilli 
eventu dismounted, do so with assum clumsi by stop the 
wheel at harry’ back and fall over heavili against the soldier. 
harri tumbl to the ground, but reilli dexter land on hi feet. 
At onc he began offer a profus of apologies. 

“you did that by design!” harri shouted, jump to hi feet. hi face 
wa red with anger and he shook hi fist threateningli at the bicyclist. 

washington command the man to hold hi peace. then to reilli he 
express a great surpris at hi perform and a desir to know more 
about the bicycle. the young man thereupon describ the machin 
minutely, lift it into the air and spin the wheel to illustr 
how smoothli they rotated. 

“I can see it is possibl to ride the contriv with rapidity. It ha 
been put togeth with wonder ingenuity,” washington said, when 
reilli had replac the wheel on the ground. 

“and you, sir, it is but a toy,” an offic spoke up. “put our friend on 
hi bundl of tin and race him against one of our horsemen and he would 
make a sorri showing.” 

reilli smiled. “I bear the gentleman no ill-wil for hi opinion,” he 
said. “still, I should like to show him by a practic test of the 
subject that hi ignor of it is most profound.” 

“you would test the speed of the machin against that of a horse?” 
washington said, in amazement. 

“I would, sir. you have a good road yonder. with your permiss and a 
worthi oppon I would make the test at once.” 

“but, sir, the man is a spy,” harri broke in. “would it not be better to 
throw a rope around hi neck and give him hi deserts?” 

“the charg is by no mean proven,” washington replied. “nor can it be 
until a court martial conven thi afternoon. and I see no reason whi 
we may not in the meantim enjoy the uniqu contest which ha been 
suggested. It will make a pleasant break in the routin of camp life.” 

A murmur of approv went up from the mass of men by whom they were 
surrounded. while they had been talk it seem as though everybodi in 
the camp not alreadi on the scene had gather togeth behind the 
squar of infantry. 

“then, sir,” harri said, with some eagerness, “I would like to be the 
man to ride the horse. there is no better anim than mine anywhere. and 
I understand hi trick and humor quit well enough to put him to hi 
best pace.” 

“I confess I have heard you well spoken of as a horseman,” washington 
said. “be away with you! saddl and bridl your hors at once.” 

It wa the chain of singular circumst narrat abov which brought 
john reilli into the most remark contest of hi life. He had enter 
mani bicycl race at one time or other, alway with credit to himself 
and to the club whose color he wore. and he had everi expect of 
make a good show to-day. yet a reflect of the weird condit 
which had brought about the present contest took away some of hi 
self-possess when a few minut later he wa march over to the 
turnpik and left to hi own thoughts, while the offic were pace 
out a one mile straightaway cours down the road. 

after the measur had been taken, two unbroken line of soldier 
were form along the entir mile; a most evid precaut against 
reilli leav the race cours at ani point to escap across the fields. 
washington came up to him again, when the prepar were completed, 
to shake hi hand and whisper a word or two of encourag in hi ear. 
have perform these kindli act he left to take up a posit near 
the point of finish. 

the begin of the cours wa locat close to the batteri of half 
conceal field pieces. reilli wa now conduct to thi place. shortli 
afterward harri appear on hi horse. He leer at the bicyclist 
contemptu and said someth of a sarcast natur partli under hi 
breath when the two line up, side by side, for the start. To these 
slight reilli paid no heed; he had a strong belief that when the race 
wa over there would be left in the mutton-lik head of hi oppon 
veri littl of hi present inclin toward the humorous. the 
soldier’ mount wa a handsom black mare, fourteen and a half hand 
high; strong of limb and at the flanks, and anim by a spirit that 
kept her pranc around with continu action. It must be admit 
that the man rode veri well. He guid the anim with eas and 
nonchal when she rear and plunged, and kept her movement confin 
to an incred small piec of ground, consid her abund of 
action. 

“keep to your own side of the road throughout the race. I don’t want to 
be collid with by your big beast,” reilli cautioned, while they were 
await two signal from the starter. 

To thi harri repli in some derision, “i’ll give you a good share of 
the road at the start, and all of it and my dust, too, afterward.” and 
then the offic who held the pistol fire the first shot. 

reilli wa well satisfi with the condit under which the race wa 
to be made. the road wa wide and level, smooth, hard and straight, and 
a strong breez which had sprung up, blew squar against hi back. hi 
wheel wa gear up to eighty-four inches; the breez promis to be a 
valuabl adjunct in push it along. await the second and last 
signal, reilli glanc down the two blue rank of soldiers, which 
stretch away into hazi line in the distanc and converg at the 
termin of the cours where a flag had been stuck into the ground. 
the soldier were at parad rest. their unceas movement as they 
chat to one another, turn their bodi thi way and that and 
crane their head forward to look toward the start point, and then 
jerk them back, made the line seem like long, squirm snakes. At 
the end of the cours a thick bunch of militiamen clog the road and 
overspread into the fields. 

crack! the signal to be off. reilli shove asid the fellow who had been 
hold hi wheel upright while astrid of it, and push down on the 
pedals. the mare’ hoof dug the earth; her great muscular leg 
straighten out; she sprang forward with a snort of appar pleasure, 
take the lead at the veri start. reilli heard the shout of excit 
run along the two rank of soldiers. He saw them wave their arm and 
hat as he went by. and on ahead through the cloud of dust there wa 
visibl the shadow-lik outlin of the snorting, gallop horse, whose 
hoof beat sound clear and sharp abov the din which came from the 
side of the highway. the mare crept farther and farther ahead. veri 
soon a hundr feet or more of the road lay between her and the 
bicyclist. harri turn in hi saddl and call out anoth sarcasm. 

“I shall pass you veri soon. keep to your own side of the road!” reilli 
shouted, not a bit daunt by the way the race had commenced. hi head 
wa well down over the handle-bars, hi back had the shape of the upper 
portion of an immens egg. Up and down hi leg moved; faster and 
faster and faster yet. He went by the soldier so rapidli that they onli 
appear to be two streak of blurri color. their sharp rasp shout 
sound like the crack of musketry. the cloud of dust blew against 
the bicyclist’ head and into hi mouth and throat. when he glanc 
ahead again he saw with satisfact that the mare wa no longer 
increas her lead. It soon becam evid even that he wa slowli 
cut down the advantag she had secured. 

harri again turn hi head shortli afterward, doubtless expect to 
find hi oppon hopelessli distanc by thi time. instead of thi 
reilli wa alarmingli close upon him. the man ejacul a sudden oath 
and lash hi anim furiously. strain everi nerv and sinew the 
mare for the moment push further ahead. then her pace slacken a bit 
and reilli again crept up to her. closer and closer to her than before, 
until hi head wa abreast of her outstretch tail. harri wa lash 
the mare and swear at her unceasingli now. but she had spurt onc 
and appear to be incap of again increas her speed. In thi way 
they went on for some littl distance, harri use hi whip brutally, 
the mare desper struggl to attain a greater pace, reilli hang 
on with tenac to her hind flank and give up not an inch of ground. 

A mile is inde a veri short distanc when travers at such a pace. 
the finish flag wa alreadi but a few hundr feet further on. 
reilli realiz that it wa time now to go to the front. He grit hi 
teeth togeth with determin and bent hi head down even further 
toward hi front wheel. then hi feet began to move so quickli that 
there wa onli visibl an indistinct blur at the side of hi crank 
shaft. At thi veri second, with a face mark with rage and hatred, 
harri brought hi hors suddenli across the road to thet part of it 
which he had been warn to avoid. 

It is hard to tell what kept reilli from be run into and trampl 
under foot. An attempt at back pedaling, a sudden twist of the 
handle-bar, a lurch to one side that almost threw him from hi seat. 
then, in the fraction of a second he wa over on the other side of the 
road, push ahead of the mare almost as though she were stand 
still. the outburst of alarm from the throat of the soldier chang 
when they saw that reilli had not been injured; first into a shout of 
indign at the dastardli attempt which had been made to run him 
down, and then into a roar of delight when the bicyclist breast the 
flag a winner of the race by twenti feet. 

As he cross the line reilli caught a glimps of washington. He stood 
close to the flag and wa wave hi hat in the air with the enthusiasm 
of a schoolboy. reilli went on down the road slacken hi speed as 
effect as he could. but befor it wa possibl to entir stop 
hi wheel’ momentum the noisi acclam in hi rear ceas with 
startl suddenness. He turn in hi saddl and look back. As sure 
as st. peter he had the road entir to himself. there wasn’t a soldier 
or the ghost of a soldier in sight. 

As soon as he could he turn hi bicycl about and rode slowli back 
along the highway, now so singularli deserted, look hither and 
thither in vain for some trace of the vanish army. even the flag which 
had been stuck into the ground at the end of the one-mil race cours 
wa gone. the breez had die out again and the air wa tranquil and 
warm. In the branch of a nearbi tree two sparrow chirp and 
twitter peacefully. reilli went back to the place where the camp had 
been. He found there onli open field on one side of the road and a 
clump of woodland on the other. He continu on down the littl hill up 
which harri and hi companion had brought him a few hour previous 
and follow the road on further, come final to the fork in it near 
which wa locat the old farmhous wherein he had been taken captive. 
the hous was, as it had been when he had previous enter it, fall 
apart from age and neglect. when he went insid he found lie on the 
brick hearth in front of the fireplac a number of piec of broken 
glass. 

the end. 

* * * * * 

true ghost stori 

BY hereward carrington 

[illustration] 

the author of thi book is well known in both america and europ as a 
promin scientif writer on psychic and occult subjects. He ha 
been a member of both the english and american societi for psychic 
research for more than fifteen years, ha written over a dozen book on 
the subject, a number of which have been translat into foreign 
languag includ the japanes and arabic, and he ha lectur in 
london, paris, rome, venice, milan, geneva, turin, etc., befor 
scientif organizations. hi write are well known and have earn 
him a high place in psychic circles. 

In thi book he present a number of startl case which he ha 
discov in hi unrival investig of psychic mysteries. they 
are not the ordinari “ghost stories,” base on pure fiction and have 
no foundat in reality, but are a collect of incid all 
thoroughli investig and vouch for, the testimoni be obtain 
first hand and corrobor by others. 

the first chapter deal with the interest question =what Is a ghost?= 
and attempt to answer thi question in the light of the latest 
scientif theori which have been advanc to explain these 
supernatur happen and visitants. 

other chapter are: 

=phantasm of the dead.= 
=more phantasms.= 
=haunt houses.= 
=ghost stori of a more dramat order.= 
=histor ghosts.= 
=the phantom armi seen in france.= 
=bibliography.= 

=true ghost stories= is a book of absorb interest and cannot fail to 
grip and hold the attent of everi reader, whether he be a student of 
these questions, or mere in search of hair-rais anecdot and 
stories, he will find them here a-plenty. 

the book contain 250 page print on antiqu woven book paper, 
attract bound in cloth, with illustr jacket in colors. =price, 
75 cent by mail, postpaid.= 

J. S. ogilvi publish compani 

P. O. box 767. 57 rose street, new york 









end of project gutenberg' twenty-f ghost stories, by W. bob holland 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook twenty-f ghost stori *** 

***** thi file should be name 53419-0.txt or 53419-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/4/1/53419/ 

produc by david edwards, chuck greif and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi 
book wa produc from scan imag of public domain 
materi from the googl book project.) 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org/licens 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
