the project gutenberg ebook of the night land, by william hope hodgson 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the night land 

author: william hope hodgson 

releas date: januari 9, 2004 [ebook #10662] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the night land *** 




produc by suzann shell, maria khomenko and PG distribut proofread 




the night land 


william hope hodgson 


1912 




the dream that are onli dream 
prefac 

"thi to be love, that your spirit to live in a natur holi with 
the beloved, and your bodi to be a sweet and natur delight that 
shall be never lost of a love mystery.... and shame to be unborn, and 
all thing to go wholesom and proper, out of an utter great of 
understanding; and the man to be an hero and a child befor the woman; 
and the woman to be an holi light of the spirit and an utter companion 
and in the same time a glad possess unto the man.... and thi doth be 
human love...." 

"...for thi to be the especi glori of love, that it doth make unto 
all sweet and greatness, and doth be a fire burn all littleness; 
so that did all in thi world to have met the beloved, then did 
wanton be dead, and there to grow glad and charity, danc in 
the years." 




I 

mirdath the beauti 


"and I cannot touch her face 
and I cannot touch her hair, 
and I kneel to empti shadows-- 
just memori of her grace; 
and her voic sing in the wind 
and in the sob of dawn 
and among the flower at night 
and from the brook at sunris 
and from the sea at sunset, 
and I answer with vain call ..." 

It wa the joy of the sunset that brought us to speech. I wa gone a 
long way from my house, walk lonely-wise, and stop often that I 
view the pile upward of the battlement of evening, and to feel the 
dear and strang gather of the dusk come over all the world about me. 

the last time that I paused, I wa truli lost in a solemn joy of the 
glori of the come night; and mayb I laugh a littl in my throat, 
stand there alon in the midst of the dusk upon the world. and, lo! 
my content wa answer out of the tree that bound the countri road 
upon my right; and it wa so as that some one had said: "and thou also!" 
in glad understanding, that I laugh again a littl in my throat; as 
though I had onli a half-believ that ani true human did answer my 
laugh; but rather some sweet delus or spirit that wa tune to my 
mood. 

but she spoke and call me by my name; and when I had gone to the side 
of the road, that I should see her somewhat, and discov whether I knew 
her, I saw that she wa sure that lady, who for her beauti wa known 
through all of that sweet counti of kent as ladi mirdath the beautiful; 
and a near neighbour to me; for the estat of her guardian abound 
upon mine. 

yet, until that time, I had never met her; for I had been so oft and 
long abroad; and so much given to my studi and my exercis when at 
home, that I had no further knowledg of her than rumour gave to me odd 
time; and for the rest, I wa well content; for as I have given hint, my 
book held me, and likewis my exercises; for I wa alway an athlete, 
and never met the man so quick or so strong as I did be; save in some 
fiction of a tale or in the mouth of a boaster. 

now, I stood instantli with my hat in my hand; and answer her gentl 
banter so well as I might, the while that I peer intent and 
wonder at her through the gloom; for truli rumour had told no tale to 
equal the beauti of thi strang maid; who now stood jest with so 
sweet a spirit, and claim kinship of cousinhood with me, as wa 
truth, now that I did wake to think. 

and, truly, she made no ado; but name me frank by my lad' name, and 
gave laughter and right to me to name her mirdath, and noth less or 
more--at that time. and she bid me then to come up through the hedge, 
and make use of a gap that wa her own especi secret, as she 
confessed, when she took odd leav with her maid to some countri frolic, 
drest as villag maids; but not to deceiv many, as I dare believe. 

and I came up through the gap in the hedg and stood besid her; and 
tall she had seem to me, when I look up at her; and tall she was, in 
truth; but inde I wa a great head taller. and she invit me then to 
walk with her to the house, that I meet her guardian and give word to my 
sorrow that I had so long neglect to make call upon them; and truli 
her eye to shine with mischief and delight, as she name me so for my 
amissness. 

but, indeed, she grew sober in a moment, and she set up her finger to me 
to hush, as that she heard somewhat in the wood that lay all the way 
upon our right. and, indeed, someth I heard too; for there wa sure 
a rustl of the leaves, and anon a dead twig crackt with a sound clear 
and sharp in the stillness. 

and immedi there came three men run out of the wood at me; and 
I call to them sharpli to keep off or bewar of harm; and I put the 
maid to my back with my left hand, and had my oak staff readi for my 
use. 

but the three men gave out no word of reply; but ran in at me; and I saw 
somewhat of the gleam of knives; and at that, I move veri glad and 
brisk to the attack; and behind me there went shrill and sweet, the call 
of a silver whistle; for the maid wa whistl for her dogs; and mayb 
the call wa also a signal to the men-serv of her house. 

yet, truly, there wa no use in help that wa yet to come; for the need 
did be then and instant; and I nowis loath to use my strength befor 
my sweet cousin. and I step forward, briskly, as I have told; and 
the end of my staff I drove into the bodi of the left-ward man, so that 
he drop like a dead man. and I hit veri sharpli at the head of 
another, and sure crackt it for him; for he made instantli upon the 
earth; but the third man I met with my fist, and neither had he ani 
great need of a second blow; but went instant to join hi companions, 
and the fight thu to have end befor it wa even proper begun, and I 
laugh a littl with a proper pride, to know the bewilder that I 
perceiv in the way that the ladi mirdath, my cousin, stood and 
regard me through the dusk of the hush even. 

but, indeed, there wa no time left to us, befor there came bound 
up, three great boar-hounds, that had been loos to her whistle; and 
she had some ado to keep the brute off me; and I then to beat them off 
the men upon the earth, lest they maul them as they lay. and directly, 
there wa a nois of men shouting, and the light of lanthorn in the 
night, and the footmen of the hous to come run with lanthorn and 
cudgels; and knew not whether to deal with me, or not, in the first 
moment, even as the dogs; but when they saw the men upon the ground, and 
learn my name and saw me proper, they kept well their distanc and had 
no lack of respect; but, indeed, my sweet cousin to have the most of 
any; onli that she show no intent to keep distanc of me; but to have 
a new and deeper feel of kinship than she at first had shown. 

and the men-serv ask what should be done with the foot-pads; 
see that they were now recovering. but, indeed, I left the matter, 
along with some silver, to the servants; and veri sound justic they 
dealt out to the men; for I heard their cri a good while after we had 
gone away. 

now, when we were come up to the hall, my cousin must take me in to her 
guardian, sir alfr jarles, an old man and vener that I knew a 
littl in pass and becaus our estat abounded. and she prais me 
to my face, yet quaintly-wise; and the old man, her guardian thank me 
most honour and with a nice courtesy; so that I wa a welcom 
house-friend from that time onward. 

and I stay all that evening, and dined, and afterward went out again 
into the home-ground with the ladi mirdath; and she more friendli to me 
than ever ani woman had been; and seem to me as that she had known me 
always. and, truly, I had the same feel in my heart toward her; for 
it was, somehow, as though we knew each the way and turn of the other, 
and had a constant delight to find thi thing and that thing to be in 
common; but no surprise; save that so pleasant a truth had so natur a 
discovery. 

and one thing there wa that I perceiv held the ladi mirdath all that 
dear fore-night; and thi was, indeed, the way that I had my pleasur so 
easi with the three foot-pads. and she ask me plainli whether I wa 
not truli veri strong; and when I laugh with young and natur pride, 
she caught my arm suddenli to discov for herself how strong I might 
be. and, surely, she loos it even the more sudden, and with a littl 
gasp of astonishment, becaus it wa so great and hard. and 
afterward, she walk by me veri silent, and seem thoughtful; but she 
went never ani great way off from me. 

and, truly, if the ladi mirdath had a strang pleasur in my strength, I 
had likewis a constant wonder and marvel in her beauty, that had shown 
but the more love in the candle-light at dinner. 

but there were further delight to me in the day that came; for I had 
happi in the way that she had pleasur of the mysteri of the 
evening, and the glamour of night, and the joy of dawn, and all 
suchlike. 

and one evening, that I ever remember, as we wander in the park-lands, 
she began to say--half unthinking--that it wa truli an elves-night. and 
she stop herself immediately; as though she thought I should have no 
understanding; but, indeed, I wa upon mine own familiar ground of 
inward delight; and I repli in a quiet and usual voice, that the 
tower of sleep would grow that night, and I felt in my bone that it 
wa a night to find the giant' tomb, or the tree with the great paint 
head, or--and sure I stop veri sudden; for she grip me in that 
moment, and her hand shook as she held me; but when I would ask her what 
ailed, she bid me, veri breathless, to say on, to say on. and, with a 
half understanding, I told her that I had but meant to speak of the moon 
garden, that wa an olden and happi fanci of mine. 

and, in verity, when I said that, the ladi mirdath cri out someth 
in a strang low voice, and brought me to a halt, that she might face 
me. and she question me veri earnest; and I answer just so earnest 
as she; for I wa grown suddenli to an excitement, in that I perceiv 
she knew also. and, in verity, she told me that she had knowledge; but 
had thought that she wa alon in the world with her knowledg of that 
strang land of her dreams; and now to find that I also had travel in 
those dear, strang dream lands. and truli the marvel of it--th marvel 
of it! As she to say time and oft. and again, as we walked, she gave out 
word that there wa littl wonder she had been urg to call to me that 
night, as she saw me paus upon the road; though, indeed, she had 
learn of our cousin-ship before, have seen me go by on my hors 
pretti oft, and inquir concern me; and mayhap daintili irk that I 
had so littl heed of ladi mirdath the beautiful. but, indeed, I had 
thought of other matters; yet had been human enough, had I but met her 
proper befor I see her. 

now you must not think that I wa not utter stir by the wonder of 
thi thing, that we had both a dream knowledg of the same matters, 
of which each had thought none other knew. yet, when I question more, 
there wa much that had been in my fanci that wa foreign to her, and 
likewis much that had been familiar to her, that wa of no mean to 
me. but though there wa this, that brought a littl regret to us, there 
would be, time and again, some new thing that one told, that the other 
knew and could finish the tell of, to the glad and amaz of 
both. 

and so shall you pictur us wander and have constant speech, so 
that, hour by hour, we grew gladli age in dear knowledg and sweet 
friendship of the other. 

and truly, how the time passed, I know not; but there came present a 
hullabaloo, and the shout of men' voic and the bay of dogs, and 
the gleam of lanthorns, so that I knew not what to think; until, veri 
sudden, and with a sweet and strang littl laughter, the ladi mirdath 
to perceiv that we had miss the hour utter in our converse; so that 
her guardian (made uneasi becaus of the three foot-pads) had order a 
search. and we all that time a-wand togeth in happi forgetfulness. 

and we turn homeward, then, and came toward the lights; but indeed, 
the dog found us befor we were come there; and they had grown to know 
me now, and leap about me, bark veri friendly; and so in a minut 
the men had discov us, and were gone back to tell sir jarl that 
all wa well. 

and thi wa the way of our meet and the grow of our acquaintance, 
and the begin of my great love for mirdath the beautiful. 

now, from that time onward, even by even would I go a-wand along 
the quiet and countri road that led from my estat to the estat of sir 
jarles. and alway I went inward by the hedge-gap; and oft I should find 
the ladi mirdath walk in that part of the woods; but alway with her 
great boar-hound about her; for I had beg that she do thi thing for 
her sweet safety; and she to seem wish to pleasur me; but truli to 
be just so oft utter pervers in divers matters; and to strive to 
plagu me, as though she would discov how much I would endur and how 
far she might go to anger me. 

and, truly, well I rememb how that one night, come to the hedge-gap, 
I saw two country-maid come thenc out from the wood of sir jarles'; 
but they were naught to me, and I would have gone upward through the 
gap, as ever; onli that, as they pass me, they curtsey somewhat 
over-grac for rough wenches. and I had a sudden thought, and came up 
to them to see them more anigh; and truli I thought the taller wa 
sure the ladi mirdath. but, indeed, I could not be sure; for when I 
ask who she did be, she onli to simper and to curtsey again; and so 
wa I veri natur all in doubt; but yet suffici in wonder (have 
some knowledg of the ladi mirdath) to follow the wenches, the which I 
did. 

and they then, veri speedi and sedate, as though I were some rack-rap 
that they did well to be fear of alon at night; and so came at last 
to the villag green, where a great danc wa a-foot, with torches, and 
a wander fiddler to set the tune; and ale in plenty. 

and the two to join the dance, and danc veri hearty; but had onli each 
the other for a partner, and had a good care to avoid the torches. and 
by this, I wa pretti sure that they were truli the ladi mirdath and her 
maid; and so I took chanc when they had danc somewhat my way, to step 
over to them, and ask boldli for a dance. but, indeed, the tall one 
answered, simpering, that she wa promised; and immedi gave her 
hand to a great hulk farmer-lout, and went round the green with him; 
and well punish she wa for her waywardness; for she had all her skill 
to save her pretti feet from hi loutish stampings; and veri glad she 
wa to meet the end of the dance. 

and I knew now for certainti that it wa mirdath the beautiful, despit 
her plan of disguise, and the dark and the wench' dress and the 
foot-gear that mar her step so great. and I walk across to her, and 
name her, whispering, by name; and gave her plain word to be done of 
thi unwisdom, and I would take her home. but she to turn from me, and 
she stamp her foot, and went again to the lout; and when she had 
suffer anoth danc with him, she bid him be her escort a part of the 
way; the which he wa noth loath of. 

and anoth lad, that wa mate to him, went likewise; and in a moment, 
so soon as they were gone away from the light of the torches, the rough 
hind-lad made to set their arm about the waist of the two wenches, 
not wet who they had for companions. and the ladi mirdath wa no 
longer abl to endure, and cri out in her sudden fear and disgust, and 
struck the rough hind that embrac her, so hard that he loos her a 
moment, swear great oaths. and directli he came back to her again, 
and had her in a moment, to kiss her; and she, loath him to the veri 
death, beat him madli in the face with her hands; but to no end, onli 
that I wa close upon them. and, in that moment, she scream my name 
aloud; and I caught the poor lout and hit him once, but not to harm him 
overmuch; yet to give him a long memori of me; and afterward I threw him 
into the side of the road. but the second hind, have heard my name, 
loos from the tiring-maid, and ran for hi life; and, indeed, my 
strength wa known all about that part. 

and I caught mirdath the beauti by her shoulders, and shook her veri 
soundly, in my anger. and afterward, I sent the maid onward; and she, 
have no word from her mistress to stay, went forward a little; and in 
thi fashion we came at last to the hedge-gap, with the ladi mirdath 
veri hushed; but yet walk anigh to me, as that she had some secret 
pleasur of my nearness. and I led her through the gap, and so homeward 
to the hall; and there bid her good-night at a side door that she held 
the key of. and, truly, she bid me good-night in an utter quiet voice; 
and wa almost as that she had no hast to be gone from me that night. 

yet, when I met her on the morrow, she wa full of a constant impud 
to me; so that, have her alon to myself, when the dusk wa come, I 
ask her whi she would never be done of her waywardness; becaus that I 
ach to have companionship of her; and, instead, she deni my need. 
and, at that, she wa at onc veri gentle; and full of a sweet and 
winsom understanding; and sure knew that I wish to be rested; for 
she brought out her harp, and play me dear olden melodi of our 
childhood-day all that evening; and so had my love for her the more 
intent and glad. and she saw me that night to the hedge-gap, have her 
three great boar-hound with her, to compani her home again. but, 
indeed, I follow her afterwards, veri silent, until I saw her safe 
into the hall; for I would not have her alon in the night; though she 
believ that I wa then far away on the countri road. and as she walk 
with her dogs, one or anoth would run back to me, to nose against me 
friendly-wise; but I sent them off again veri quiet; and she had no 
knowledg of aught; for she to go sing a love-song quietli all the 
way home. but whether she love me, I could not tell; though she had a 
nice affect for me. 

now, on the follow evening, I went somewhat earli to the gap; and lo! 
who should be stand in the gap, talk to the ladi mirdath; but a 
veri clever-drest man, that had a look of the court about him; and he, 
when I approached, made no way for me through the gap; but stood firm, 
and eye me veri insolent; so that I put out my hand, and lift him 
from my way. 

and lo! the ladi mirdath turn a bitter of speech upon me that gave 
me an utter pain and astonishment; so that I wa assur in a moment 
that she had no true love for me, or she had never striven so to put me 
to shame befor the stranger, and name me uncouth and brutal to a 
smaller man. and, indeed, you shall perceiv how I wa in my heart in 
that moment. 

and I saw that there wa some seem of justic in what the ladi 
mirdath said; but yet might the man have shown a better spirit; and 
moreov mirdath the beauti had no true call to shame me, her true 
friend and cousin, befor thi stranger. yet did I not stop to argue; 
but bow veri low to the ladi mirdath; and afterward I bow a littl 
to the man and made apology; for, indeed, he wa neither great nor 
strong-made; and I had been better man to have shown courtesi to him; at 
least in the first. 

and so, have done justic to my own respect, I turn and went on, and 
left them to their happiness. 

now, I walk then, mayb twenti good miles, befor I came to my own 
home; for there wa no rest in me all that night, or ever, becaus that 
I wa grown deadli in love of mirdath the beautiful; and all my spirit 
and heart and bodi of me pain with the dread loss that I wa come 
so sudden upon. 

and for a great week I had my walk in anoth direction; but in the end 
of that week, I must take my walk along the olden way, that I might 
chanc to have but a sight of My lady. and, truly, I had all sight that 
ever man did need to put him in dread pain and jealousy; for, truly, as 
I came in view of the gap, there wa the ladi mirdath walk just 
without the border of the great wood; and besid her there walk the 
clever-drest man of the court, and she suffer hi arm around her, so 
that I knew they were lovers; for the ladi mirdath had no brother nor 
ani youth men kin. 

yet, when mirdath saw me upon the road, she shame in a moment to be so 
caught; for she put her lover' arm from about her, and bow to me, a 
littl chang of colour in the face; and I bow veri low--b but a 
young man myself--; and so pass on, with my heart veri dead in me. and 
as I went, I saw that her lover came again to her, and had hi arm onc 
more about her; and so, maybe, they look after me, as I went veri 
stiff and desperate; but, indeed, I look not back on them, as you may 
think. 

and for a great month then, I went not near to the gap; for my love 
rage in me, and I wa hurt in my pride; and, truly, neither had a true 
justic been dealt to me by the ladi mirdath. yet in that month, my love 
wa a leaven in me, and made slowli a sweet and a tender and an 
understand that were not in me before; and truli love and pain do 
shape the charact of man. 

and in the end of that time, I saw a littl way into life, with an 
understand heart, and began present to take my walk again past the 
gap; but truli mirdath the beauti wa never to my sight; though one 
even I thought she might be not a great way off; for one of her great 
boar-hound came out of the wood, and down into the road to nose against 
me, veri friendly, as a dog oft doth with me. 

yet, though I wait a good time after the dog had left me, I had no 
sight of mirdath, and so pass on again, with my heart heavi in me; but 
without bitterness, becaus of the understand that wa begun to grow 
in my heart. 

now, there pass two weari and lone weeks, in which I grew sick to 
have knowledg of the beauti maid. and, truly, in the end of that 
time, I made a sudden resolv that I would go in through the gap, and 
come to the home-ground about the hall, and so mayb have some sight of 
her. 

and thi resolv I had one evening; and I went out immediately, and 
came to the gap, and went in through the gap, and so by a long walk 
to the garden about the hall. and, truly, when I wa come there, I saw 
a good light of lanthorn and torches, and a great compani of peopl 
dancing; and all drest in quaint dress; so that I knew they had a 
festiv for some cause. and there came suddenli a horrid dread into my 
heart that thi might be the marriage-d of the ladi mirdath; but, 
indeed, thi wa foolishness; for I had sure heard of the marriage, if 
there had been any. and, truly, in a moment, I rememb that she wa 
come one-and-twenti year of age on that day, and to the end of her 
ward-ship; and thi sure to be festiv in honour of the same. 

and a veri bright and pretti matter it wa to watch, save that I wa so 
heavi in the heart with loneli and longing; for the compani wa 
great and gay, and the light plenti and set all about from the 
trees; and in leaf-mad arbour about the great lawn. and a great tabl 
spread with eat matter and silver and crystal, and great lamp of 
bronz and silver went all a-down one end of the lawn; and the danc 
constant upon the other part. 

and surely, the ladi mirdath to step out of the dance, veri love 
drest; yet seeming, to mine eyes, a littl pale in the loom of the 
lights. and she to wander to a seat to rest; and, indeed, in a moment, 
there to be a dozen youth of the great famili of the country-side, in 
attend about her, make talk and laughter, and each eager for her 
favour; and she veri love in the midst of them, but yet, as I did 
think, lack of somewhat, and a littl pale-seeming, as I have told; 
and her glanc to go odd-wis beyond the groupt men about her; so that I 
understood in a moment that her lover wa not there, and she to be 
a-lack in the heart for him. yet, whi he wa not there, I could not 
suppose, save that he might have been call back to the court. 

and, surely, as I watch the other young men about her, I burn with a 
fierc and miser jealousi of them; so that I could near have stept 
forth and pluck her out from among them, and had her to walk with me 
in the woods, as in the olden days, when she also had seem near to 
love. but, truly, what use to this? for it wa not they who held her 
heart, as I saw plain; for I watch her, with an eager and lonesom 
heart, and knew that it wa one small man of the court that wa lover to 
her, as I have told. 

and I went away again then, and came not near to the gap for three great 
months, becaus that I could not bear the pain of my loss; but in the 
end of that time, my veri pain to urg me to go, and to be wors than 
the pain of not going; so that I found myself one even in the gap, 
peering, veri eager and shaken, across the sward that lay between the 
gap and the woods; for thi same place to be as an holi ground to me; 
for there wa it that first I saw mirdath the beautiful, and sure lost 
my heart to her in that one night. 

and a great time I stay there in the gap, wait and watch 
hopelessly. and lo! sudden there came someth against me, touch my 
thigh veri soft; and when I look down, it wa one of the boar-hounds, 
so that my heart leaped, near frightened; for truli My ladi wa come 
somewher nigh, as I did think. 

and, as I waited, veri hush and watchful; yet with an utter beat 
heart; sure I heard a faint and low sing among the trees, so utter 
sad. and lo! it wa mirdath sing a broken love song, and a-wand 
there in the dark alone, save for her great dogs. 

and I harked, with strang pain in me, that she did be so in pain; and I 
ach to bring her ease; yet move not, but wa veri still there in the 
gap; save that my be wa all in turmoil. 

and presently, as I harked, there came a slim white figur out from 
among the trees; and the figur cri out something, and came to a quick 
pause, as I could see in the half-dark. and lo! in that moment, there 
came a sudden and unreason hope into me; and I came up out of the gap, 
and wa come to mirdath in a moment, call veri low and passion and 
eager: "mirdath! mirdath! mirdath!" 

and thi way I came to her; and her great dog that wa with me, to bound 
besid me, in thought, mayhap, that it wa some game. and when I came to 
the ladi mirdath, I held out my hand to her, not know what I did; 
but onli the tell of my heart that need her so utter, and crave to 
eas her of her pain. and lo! she put out her arm to me, and came into 
mine arm with a littl run. and there she bode, weep strangely; but 
yet with rest upon her; even as rest wa come sudden and wondrou upon 
me. 

and sudden, she move in mine arms, and slipt her hand to me, veri 
dear, and held her lip up to me, like some sweet child, that I kiss 
her; but, indeed, she wa also a true woman, and in honest and dear love 
of me. 

and thi to be the way of our betrothal; and simpl and wordless it was; 
yet sufficient, onli that there is no suffici in love. 

now, presently, she loos herself out of mine arms, and we walk 
homeward through the woods, veri quiet, and hold hands, as children 
do. and I then in a while to ask her about the man of the court; and she 
laugh veri sweet into the silenc of the wood; but gave me no answer, 
save that I wait until we were come to the hall. 

and when we were come there, she took me into the great hall, and made a 
veri dainti and impud bow, mock me. and so made me known to 
anoth lady, who sat there, upon her task of embroidering, which she 
did veri demure, and as that she had also a dainti mischief lurk in 
her. 

and truly, the ladi mirdath never to be done of naughti laughter, that 
made her dearli breathless with delight, and to sway a little, and set 
the trembl of pretti sound in her throat; and sure she must pull 
down two great pistol from an arm-rack, that I fight a duel to the 
death with the ladi of the embroidering, who held her face down over her 
work, and shook likewis with the wicked of her laughter that she 
could not hide. 

and in the end, the ladi of the embroid look up sudden into my 
face; and I then to see somewhat of the mischief in a moment; for she 
had the face of the man of the court suit, that had been lover to 
mirdath. 

and the ladi mirdath then to explain to me how that mistress alison 
(which wa her name) wa a dear and bosom friend, and she it wa that 
had been drest in the court suit to play a prank for a wager with a 
certain young man who would be lover to her, an he might. and I then to 
come along, and so speedi to offenc that truli I never saw her face 
plain, becaus that I wa so utter jealous. and so the ladi mirdath had 
been more justli in anger than I supposed, becaus that I had put hand 
upon her friend, as I have told. 

and thi to be all of it, save that they had plan to punish me, and 
had met everi even at the gap, to play at lovers, perchanc I should 
pass, so that I should have greater caus for my jealousy, and truli 
they to have a good reveng upon me; for I had suffer veri great a 
long while becaus of it. 

yet, as you do mind, when I came upon them, the ladi mirdath had a 
half-regret, that wa veri natural, becaus even then she wa in love of 
me, as I of her; and becaus of this, she drew away, as you shall 
remember, being--a she confessed--suddenli and strang troubl and 
to want me; but afterward as much set again to my punishment, becaus 
that I bow so cold and went away. and inde well I might. 

yet, truly, all wa safe end now, and I utter thank and with a mad 
delight in the heart; so that I caught up mirdath, and we danc veri 
slow and state around the great hall, the while that mistress alison 
whistl us a tune with her mouth, which she could veri clever, as mani 
anoth thing, I wot. 

and each day and all day after thi gladness, mirdath and I could never 
be apart; but must go a-wand alway together, here and there, in an 
unend joy of our togetherness. 

and in a thousand thing were we at one in delight; for we had both of 
us that natur which doth love the blue of etern which gather beyond 
the wing of the sunset; and the invis sound of the starlight 
fall upon the world; and the quiet of grey even when the tower 
of sleep are build unto the mysteri of the dusk; and the solemn green 
of strang pastur in the moonlight; and the speech of the sycamor 
unto the beech; and the slow way of the sea when it doth mood; and the 
soft rustl of the night clouds. and likewis had we eye to see the 
dancer of the sunset, cast her mighti robe so strange; and ear to 
know that there shake a silent thunder over the face of dawn; and much 
els that we knew and saw and understood togeth in our utter joy. 

now, there happen to us about thi time a certain adventur that came 
near to caus the death of mirdath the beautiful; for one day as we 
wandered, as ever, like two children in our contentment, I made remark 
to mirdath that there went onli two of the great boar-hound with us; 
and she then told me that the third wa to the kennels, be sick. 

yet, scarc had she told me so much; ere she cri out someth and 
pointed; and lo! I saw that the third hound came toward us, at a run, 
yet veri strange-seem in hi going. and in a moment, mirdath cri 
out that the hound wa mad; and truly, I saw then that the brute 
slaver as he came running. 

and in a moment he wa upon us, and made never a sound; but leap at me 
in one instant of time; all befor I had ani thought of such intent. but 
surely, My beauti one had a dread love for me, for she cast 
herself at the dog, to save me, call to the other hounds. and she wa 
bitten in a moment by the brute, as she strove to hold him off from me. 
but I to have him instant by the neck and the body, and brake him, so 
that he die at once; and I cast him to the earth, and gave help to 
mirdath, that I draw the poison from the wounds. 

and thi I did so well as I might, despit that she would have me stop. 
and afterwards, I took her into mine arms, and ran veri fierc all the 
long and weari way to the hall, and with hot skewer I burn the 
wounds; so that when the doctor came, he to say I have save her by my 
care, if inde she to be saved. but, truly, she had save me in ani 
wise, as you shall think; so that I could never be done of honour to 
her. 

and she veri pale; but yet to laugh at my fears, and to say that she 
soon to have her health, and the wound heal veri speedy; but, indeed, 
it wa a long and bitter time befor they were proper healed, and she so 
well as ever. yet, in time, so it was; and an utter weight off my heart. 

and when mirdath wa grown full strong again, we set our wed day. 
and well do I mind how she stood there in her bridal dress, on that day, 
so slender and love as may love have stood in the dawn of life; and 
the beauti of her eye that had such sober sweet in them, despit 
the dear mischief of her nature; and the way of her littl feet, and the 
loveli of her hair; and the dainti rogue-grac of her movements; and 
her mouth an enticement, as that a child and a woman smile out of the 
one face. and thi to be no more than but an hint of the loveli of 
My beauti one. 

and so we were married. 

mirdath, My beauti one, lay dying, and I had no power to hold death 
backward from such dread intent. In anoth room, I heard the littl 
wail of the child; and the wail of the child wake my wife back into 
thi life, so that her hand flutter white and desper need 
upon the coverlid. 

I kneel besid My beauti one, and reach out and took her hand 
veri gentl into mine; but still they flutter so needful; and she 
look at me, dumbly; but her eye beseeching. 

then I went out of the room, and call gentli to the nurse; and the 
nurs brought in the child, wrap veri softli in a long, white robe. 
and I saw the eye of My beauti one grow clearer with a strange, 
love light; and I beckon to the nurs to bring the babe near. 

My wife move her hand veri weakli upon the coverlid, and I knew that 
she crave to touch her child; and I sign to the nurse, and took my 
child in mine arms; and the nurs went out from the room, and so we 
three were alon together. 

then I sat veri gentl upon the bed; and I held the babe near to My 
beauti one, so that the wee cheek of the babe touch the white cheek 
of my die wife; but the weight of the child I kept off from her. 

and presently, I knew that mirdath, My wife, strove dumbl to reach for 
the hand of the babe; and I turn the child more toward her, and 
slip the hand of the child into the weak hand of My beauti one. 
and I held the babe abov my wife, with an utter care; so that the eye 
of my die one, look into the young eye of the child. and presently, 
in but a few moment of time; though it had been someway an eternity, 
My beauti one close her eye and lay veri quiet. and I took away the 
child to the nurse, who stood beyond the door. and I close the door, 
and came back to mine own, that we have those last instant alon 
together. 

and the hand of my wife lay veri still and white; but present they 
began to move softli and weakly, search for somewhat; and I put out 
my great hand to her, and took her hand with an utter care; and so a 
littl time passed. 

then her eye opened, quiet and grey, and a littl daze seeming; and 
she roll her head on the pillow and saw me; and the pain of 
forget went out of her eyes, and she look at me with a look 
that grew in strength, unto a sweet of tender and full 
understanding. 

and I bent a littl to her; and her eye told me to take her into mine 
arm for those last minutes. then I went veri gentl upon the bed, and 
lift her with an utter and tender care, so that she lay suddenli 
strang rest against my breast; for love gave me skill to hold her, 
and love gave My beauti one a sweet of eas in that littl time 
that wa left to us. 

and so we twain were together; and love seem that it had made a truce 
with death in the air about us, that we be undisturbed; for there came a 
drows of rest even upon my tens heart, that had known noth but a 
dread pain through the weari hours. 

and I whisper my love silent to My beauti one, and her eye 
answered; and the strang beauti and terribl moment pass by 
into the hush of eternity. 

and suddenly, mirdath My beauti one, spoke,--whisp something. 
and I stoop gentli to hark; and mine own spoke again; and lo! it wa 
to call me by the olden love name that had been mine through all the 
utter love month of our togetherness. 

and I began again to tell her of my love, that should pass beyond death; 
and lo! in that one moment of time, the light went out of her eyes; and 
My beauti one lay dead in mine arm ... My beauti one.... 




II 

the last redoubt 


sinc mirdath, My beauti one, die and left me lone in thi world, 
I have suffer an anguish, and an utter and dread pain of longing, 
such as truli no word shall ever tell; for, in truth, I that had all 
the world through her sweet love and companionship, and knew all the joy 
and glad of life, have known such lonesom miseri as doth stun me to 
think upon. 

yet am I to my pen again; for of late a wondrou hope ha grown in me, 
in that I have, at night in my sleep, wake into the futur of thi 
world, and seen strang thing and utter marvels, and known onc more 
the glad of life; for I have learn the promis of the future, and 
have visit in my dream those place where in the womb of time, she 
and I shall come together, and part, and again come together--break 
asund most drearli in pain, and again reunit after strang ages, in 
a glad and mighti wonder. 

and thi is the utter strang stori of that which I have seen, and 
which, truly, I must set out, if the task be not too great; so that, in 
the set out thereof, I may gain a littl eas of the heart; and 
likewise, mayhap, give eas of hope to some other poor human, that doth 
suffer, even as I have suffer so dread with long for mine own 
that is dead. 

and some shall read and say that thi thing wa not, and some shall 
disput with them; but to them all I say naught, save "read!" and have 
read that which I set down, then shall one and all have look toward 
etern with me--unto it veri portals. and so to my telling: 

To me, in thi last time of my visions, of which I would tell, it wa 
not as if I _dreamed_; but, as it were, that I _waked_ there into the 
dark, _in the futur of thi world_. and the sun had died; and for me 
thu newli wake into that future, to look back upon this, our present 
age, wa to look back into dream that my soul knew to be of reality; 
but which to those newly-se eye of mine, appear but as a far 
vision, strang hallow with peac and light. 

always, it seem to me when I awak into the future, into the 
everlast night that lap thi world, that I saw near to me, and 
girdl me all about, a blur greyness. and present this, the 
greyness, would clear and fade from about me, even as a duski cloud, and 
I would look out upon a world of darkness, lit here and there with 
strang sights. and with my wake into that future, I wake not to 
ignorance; but to a full knowledg of those thing which lit the night 
land; even as a man wake from sleep each morning, and know immedi 
he wakes, the name and knowledg of the time which ha bred him, and in 
which he lives. and the same while, a knowledg I had, as it were 
sub-conscious, of thi present--thi earli life, which now I live so 
utterli alone. 

In my earliest knowledg of _that_ place, I wa a youth, seventeen year 
grown, and my memori tell me that when first I waked, or came, as it 
might be said, to myself, in that future, I stood in one of the 
embrasur of the last redoubt--that great pyramid of grey metal which 
held the last million of thi world from the power of the slayers. 

and so full am I of the knowledg of that place, that scarc can I 
believ that none here know; and becaus I have such difficulty, it may 
be that I speak over familiarli of those thing of which I know; and 
heed not to explain much that it is need that I should explain to 
those who must read here, in thi our present day. for there, as I stood 
and look out, I wa less the man of year of _this_ age, than the 
youth of _that_, with the natur knowledg of _that_ life which I had 
gather by live all my seventeen year of life there; though, until 
that my first vision, I (of thi age) knew not of that other and futur 
existence; yet woke to it so natur as may a man wake here in hi bed 
to the shine of the morn sun, and know it by name, and the mean 
of aught else. and yet, as I stood there in the vast embrasure, I had 
also a knowledge, or memory, of thi present life of ours, deep down 
within me; but touch with a halo of dreams, and yet with a consciou 
long for one, known even there in a half memori as mirdath. 

As I have said, in my earliest memory, I mind that I stood in an 
embrasure, high up in the side of the pyramid, and look outward 
through a queer spy-glass to the north-west. aye, full of youth and with 
an adventur and yet half-fear heart. 

and in my brain was, as I have told, the knowledg that had come to me 
in all the year of my life in the redoubt; and yet until that moment, 
thi _man of thi present time_ had no knowledg of that futur 
existence; and now I stood and had suddenli the knowledg of a life 
alreadi spent in that strang land, and deeper within me the misti 
know of thi our present age, and, maybe, also of some others. 

To the north-west I look through the queer spy-glass, and saw a 
landscap that I had look upon and pore upon through all the year of 
that life, so that I knew how to name thi thing and that thing, and 
give the veri distanc of each and everi one from the "centre-point" of 
the pyramid, which wa that which had neither length nor breadth, and 
wa made of polish metal in the room of mathematics, where I went 
daili to my studies. 

To the north-west I looked, and in the wide field of my glass, saw plain 
the bright glare of the fire from the red pit, shine upward against the 
undersid of the vast chin of the north-west watcher--th watch thing 
of the north-west.... "that which hath watch from the beginning, and 
until the open of the gateway of eternity" came into my thoughts, as 
I look through the glass ... the word of aesworpth, the _ancient_ 
poet (though incred _future_ to thi our time). and suddenli they 
seem at fault; for I look deep down into my being, and saw, as 
dream are seen, the sunlight and splendour of _this_ our present age. 
and I wa amazed. 

and here I must make it clear to all that, even as I wake from _this_ 
age, suddenli into _that_ life, so must i--_that_ youth there in the 
embrasure--hav awaken then to the knowledg of _this_ far-back life 
of ours--seem to him a vision of the veri begin of eternity, in 
the dawn of the world. oh! I do but dread I make it not suffici clear 
that I and he were both _i_--th same soul. He of that far date see 
vagu the life that _was_ (that I do now live in thi present age); 
and I of thi time behold the life that I yet shall live. how utterli 
strange! 

and yet, I do not know that I speak holi truth to say that I, in that 
futur time, had _no_ knowledg of _this_ life and age, befor that 
awakening; for I woke to find that I wa one who stood apart from the 
other youths, in that I had a dim knowledge--visionary, as it were, of 
the past, which confounded, whilst yet it angered, those who were the 
men of learn of that age; though of thi matter, more anon. but thi 
I do know, that from that time, onwards, my knowledg and assured of 
the past wa tenfold; for thi my memori of that life told me. 

and so to further my telling. yet befor I pass onwards, one other thing 
is there of which I shall speak--in the moment in which I wake out of 
that youthfulness, into the assur awared of _this_ our age, in 
that moment the hunger of thi my love flew to me across the ages; so 
that what had been but a memory-dream, grew to the pain of _reality_, 
and I knew suddenli that I _lacked_; and from that time onwards, I went, 
listening, as even now my life is spent. 

and so it wa that I (fresh-born in that futur time) hunger strang 
for My beauti one with all the strength of that new life, know 
that she had been mine, and might live again, even as I. and so, as I 
have said, I hungered, and found that I listened. 

and now, to go back from my digression, it was, as I have said, I had 
amaz at perceiving, in memory, the unknow sunshin and 
splendour of thi age break so clear through my hitherto most vagu 
and hazi visions; so that the ignor of, aesworpth wa shout to me 
by the thing which now I _knew_. 

and from that time, onward, for a littl space, I wa stun with all 
that I knew and guess and felt; and all of a long while the hunger 
grew for that one I had lost in the earli days--sh who had sung to me 
in those faeri day of light, that _had been_ in verity. and the 
especi thought of that age look back with a keen, regret wonder 
into the gulf of forgetfulness. 

but, presently, I turn from the haze and pain of my dream-memories, 
onc more to the inconceiv mysteri of the night land, which I view 
through the great embrasure. for on none did it ever come with weari 
to look out upon all the hideou mysteries; so that old and young 
watched, from earli year to death, the black monstros of the night 
land, which thi our last refug of human held at bay. 

To the right of the red pit there lay a long, sinuou glare, which I 
knew as the vale of red fire, and beyond that for mani dreari mile the 
black of the night land; across which came the cold of the light 
from the plain of blue fire. 

and then, on the veri border of the unknown lands, there lay a rang of 
low volcanoes, which lit up, far away in the outer darkness, the black 
hills, where shone the seven lights, which neither twinkl nor move 
nor falter through eternity; and of which even the great spy-glass 
could make no understanding; nor had ani adventur from the pyramid 
ever come back to tell us aught of them. and here let me say, that down 
in the great librari of the redoubt, were the histori of all those, 
with their discoveries, who had ventur out into the monstrous of 
the night land, risk not the life only, but the spirit of life. 

and sure it is all so strang and wonder to set out, that I could 
almost despair with the contempl of that which I must achieve; for 
there is so much to tell, and so few word given to man by which he may 
make clear that which lie beyond the sight and the present and gener 
know of peoples. 

how shall you ever know, as I know in verity, of the great and 
realiti and terror of the thing that I would tell plain to all; for we, 
with our puni span of record life must have great histori to tell, 
but the few bare detail we know concern year that are but a few 
thousand in all; and I must set out to you in the short page of thi 
my life there, a suffici of the life that had been, and the life 
that was, both within and without that mighti pyramid, to make clear to 
those who may read, the truth of that which I would tell; and the 
histori of that great redoubt dealt not with odd thousand of years; 
but with veri millions; aye, away back into what they of that age 
conceiv to be the earli day of the earth, when the sun, maybe, still 
gloom dulli in the night sky of the world. but of all that went 
before, nothing, save as myths, and matter to be taken most cautiously, 
and believ not by men of saniti and prove wisdom. 

and I, ...how shall I make all thi clear to you who may read? the thing 
cannot be; and yet I must tell my history; for to be silent befor so 
much wonder would be to suffer of too full a heart; and I must even eas 
my spirit by thi my struggl to tell to all how it wa with me, and how 
it will be. aye, even to the memori which were the possess of that 
far futur youth, who wa inde I, of hi childhood' days, when hi 
nurs of that age swung him, and croon imposs lullabi of thi 
mythic sun which, accord to those futur fairy-tales, had onc 
pass across the black that now lay abov the pyramid. 

such is the monstrou futur of thi which I have seen through the 
bodi of that far-off youth. 

and so back to my telling. To my right, which wa to the north, there 
stood, veri far away, the hous of silence, upon a low hill. and in that 
hous were mani lights, and no sound. and so had it been through an 
uncount etern of years. alway those steadi lights, and no 
whisper of sound--not even such as our distance-microphon could have 
discovered. and the danger of thi hous wa account the greatest 
danger of all those lands. 

and round by the hous of silence, wound the road where the silent one 
walk. and concern thi road, which pass out of the unknown lands, 
nigh by the place of the ab-humans, where wa alway the green, lumin 
mist, noth wa known; save that it wa held that, of all the work 
about the mighti pyramid, it was, alone, the one that wa bred, long 
age past, of healthi human toil and labour. and on thi point alone, 
had a thousand books, and more, been writ; and all contrary, and so to 
no end, as is ever the way in such matters. 

and as it wa with the road where the silent one walk, so it wa with 
all those other monstrou thing ... whole librari had there been made 
upon thi and upon that; and mani a thousand million moulder into the 
forgotten dust of the earlier world. 

I mind me now that present I step upon the central 
travelling-roadway which span the one thousandth plateau of the great 
redoubt. and thi lay six mile and thirti fathom abov the plain of 
the night land, and wa somewhat of a great mile or more across. and so, 
in a few minutes, I wa at the south-eastern wall, and look out 
through the great embrasur toward the three silver-fir holes, that 
shone befor the thing that nods, away down, far in the south-east. 
southward of this, but nearer, there rose the vast bulk of the 
south-east watcher--th watch thing of the south-east. and to the 
right and to the left of the squat monster burn the torches; mayb 
half-a-mil upon each side; yet suffici light they threw to show the 
lumbered-forward head of the never-sleep brute. 

To the east, as I stood there in the quiet of the sleeping-tim on 
the one thousandth plateau, I heard a far, dread sound, down in the 
lightless east; and, presently, again--a strange, dread laughter, 
deep as a low thunder among the mountains. and becaus thi sound came 
odd while from the unknown land beyond the valley of the hounds, we 
had name that far and never-seen place "the countri whenc come the 
great laughter." and though I had heard the sound, mani and oft a time, 
yet did I never hear it without a most strang thrill of my heart, 
and a sens of my littleness, and of the utter terror which had beset 
the last million of the world. 

yet, becaus I had heard the laughter oft, I paid not over-long 
attent to my thought upon it; and when, in a littl it die away 
into that eastern darkness, I turn my spy-glass upon the giants' pit, 
which lay to the south of the giants' kilns. and these same kiln were 
tend by the giants, and the light of the kiln wa red and fitful, and 
threw waver shadow and light across the mouth of the pit; so that I 
saw giant crawl up out of the pit; but not properli seen, by reason 
of the danc of the shadows. and so, becaus ever there wa so much to 
behold, I look away, presently, to that which wa plainer to be 
examined. 

To the back of the giants' pit wa a great, black headland, that stood 
vast, between the valley of the hound (where live the monstrou night 
hounds) and the giants. and the light of the kiln struck the brow of 
thi black headland; so that, constantly, I saw thing peer over the 
edge, come forward a littl into the light of the kilns, and draw 
back swiftli into the shadows. and thu it had been ever, through the 
uncount ages; so that the headland wa known as the headland from 
which strang thing peer; and thu wa it mark in our map and chart 
of that grim world. 

and so I could go on ever; but that I fear to weary; and yet, whether I 
do weary, or not, I must tell of thi countri that I see, even now as I 
set my thought down, so plainli that my memori wander in a hush and 
secret fashion along it starkness, and amid it strang and dread 
habitants, so that it is but by an effort I realis me that my bodi is 
not there in thi veri moment that I write. and so to further tellings: 

befor me ran the road where the silent one walk; and I search it, as 
mani a time in my earlier youth had I, with the spy-glass; for my heart 
wa alway stir mightili by the sight of those silent ones. 

and, presently, alon in all the mile of that night-grey road, I saw 
one in the field of my glass--a quiet, cloak figure, move along, 
shrouded, and look neither to right nor left. and thu wa it with 
these be ever. It wa told about in the redoubt that they would harm 
no human, if but the human did keep a fair distanc from them; but that 
it were wise never to come close upon one. and thi I can well believe. 

and so, search the road with my gaze, I pass beyond thi silent 
one, and past the place where the road, sweep vastli to the 
south-east, wa lit a space, strangely, by the light from the 
silver-fir holes. and thu at last to where it sway to the south of 
the dark palace, and thenc southward still, until it pass round to 
the westward, beyond the mountain bulk of the watch thing in the 
south--th hugest monster in all the visibl night lands. My spy-glass 
show it to me with clearness--a live hill of watchfulness, known to 
us as the watcher Of the south. It brood there, squat and tremendous, 
hunch over the pale radianc of the glow dome. 

much, I know, had been writ concern thi odd, vast watcher; for it 
had grown out of the black of the south unknown land a million 
year gone; and the steadi grow near of it had been note and set 
out at length by the men they call monstruwacans; so that it wa 
possibl to search in our libraries, and learn of the veri come of 
thi beast in the olden-time. 

and, while I mind me, there were even then, and always, men name 
monstruwacans, whose duti it wa to take heed of the great forces, and 
to watch the monster and the beast that beset the great pyramid, and 
measur and record, and have so full a knowledg of these same that, did 
one but sway an head in the darkness, the same matter wa set down with 
particular in the records. 

and, so to tell more about the south watcher. A million year gone, as I 
have told, came it out from the black of the south, and grew 
steadili nearer through twenti thousand years; but so slow that in no 
one year could a man perceiv that it had moved. 

yet it had movement, and had come thu far upon it road to the redoubt, 
when the glow dome rose out of the ground befor it--grow slowly. 
and thi had stay the way of the monster; so that through an etern 
it had look toward the pyramid across the pale glare of the dome, and 
seem to have no power to advanc nearer. 

and becaus of this, much had been writ to prove that there were other 
forc than evil at work in the night lands, about the last redoubt. and 
thi I have alway thought to be wise said; and, indeed, there to be 
no doubt to the matter, for there were mani thing in the time of which 
I have knowledge, which seem to make clear that, even as the forc of 
dark were loos upon the end of man; so were there other forc out 
to do battl with the terror; though in way most strang and unthought 
of by the human mind. and of thi I shall have more to tell anon. 

and here, befor I go further with my telling, let me set out some of 
that knowledg which yet remain so clear within my mind and heart. Of 
the come of these monstros and evil forces, no man could say much 
with verity; for the evil of it began befor the histori of the great 
redoubt were shaped; aye, even befor the sun had lost all power to 
light; though, it must not be a thing of certainty, that even at thi 
far time the invisible, black heaven held no warmth for thi world; but 
of thi I have no room to tell; and must pass on to that of which I have 
a more certain knowledge. 

the evil must sure have begun in the day of the darken (which I 
might liken to a stori which wa believ doubtfully, much as we of thi 
day believ the stori of the creation). A dim record there wa of olden 
scienc (that are yet far off in our future) which, disturb the 
unmeasur outward powers, had allow to pass the barrier of life 
some of those monster and ab-human creatures, which are so wondrous 
cushion from us at thi normal present. and thu there had 
materialized, and in other case developed, grotesqu and horribl 
creatures, which now beset the human of thi world. and where there wa 
no power to take on materi form, there had been allow to certain 
dread forc to have power to affect the life of the human spirit. 
and thi grow veri dreadful, and the world full of lawless and 
degeneracy, there had band togeth the sound millions, and built the 
last redoubt; there in the twilight of the world--so it seem to us, and 
yet to them (bred at last to the peac of usage) as it were the 
beginning; and thi I can make no clearer; and none hath right to expect 
it; for my task is veri great, and beyond the power of human skill. 

and when the human had built the great pyramid, it had one thousand 
three hundr and twenti floors; and the thick of each floor wa 
accord to the strength of it need. and the whole height of thi 
pyramid exceed seven miles, by near a mile, and abov it wa a tower 
from which the watchmen look (these be call the monstruwacans). 
but where the redoubt wa built, I know not; save that I believ in a 
mighti valley, of which I may tell more in due time. 

and when the pyramid wa built, the last millions, who were the builder 
thereof, went within, and made themselv a great hous and citi of thi 
last redoubt. and thu began the second histori of thi world. and how 
shall I set it all down in these littl pages! for my task, even as I 
see it, is too great for the power of a singl life and a singl pen. 
yet, to it! 

and, later, through hundr and thousand of years, there grew up in 
the outer lands, beyond those which lay under the guard of the redoubt, 
mighti and lost race of terribl creatures, half men and half beast, 
and evil and dreadful; and these made war upon the redoubt; but were 
beaten off from that grim, metal mountain, with a vast slaughter. yet, 
must there have been mani such attacks, until the electr circl wa 
put about the pyramid, and lit from the earth-current. and the lowest 
half-mil of the pyramid wa sealed; and so at last there wa a peace, 
and the begin of that etern of quiet watch for the day when 
the earth-curr shall becom exhausted. 

and, at whiles, through the forgotten centuries, had the creatur been 
glut time and again upon such odd band of dare one as had 
adventur forth to explor through the mysteri of the night lands; for 
of those who went, scarc ani did ever return; for there were eye in 
all that dark; and power and forc abroad which had all knowledge; or 
so we must fain believe. 

and then, so it would seem, as that etern night lengthen itself upon 
the world, the power of terror grew and strengthened. and fresh and 
greater monster develop and bred out of all space and outward 
dimensions, attracted, even as it might be infern sharks, by that 
lone and mighti hill of humanity, face it end--so near to the 
eternal, and yet so far defer in the mind and to the sens of those 
humans. and thu hath it been ever. 

and all thi but by the way, and vagu and ill told, and set out in 
despair to make a littl clear the begin of that state which is so 
strang to our conceptions, and yet which had becom a condit of 
natur to human in that stupend future. 

thu had the giant come, father of bestial human and mother of 
monsters. and mani and divers were the creatur which had some human 
semblance; and intelligence, mechan and cunning; so that certain of 
these lesser brute had machineri and underground ways, have need to 
secur to themselv warmth and air, even as healthi humans; onli that 
they were incred inur to hardship, as they might be wolv set in 
comparison with tender children. and surely, do I make thi thing clear? 

and now to continu my tell concern the night land. the watcher of 
the south was, as I have set to make known, a monster differ from 
those other watch things, of which I have spoken, and of which there 
were in all four. one to the north-west, and one to the south-east, and 
of these I have told; and the other twain lay brooding, one to the 
south-west, and the other to the north-east; and thu the four watcher 
kept ward through the darkness, upon the pyramid, and move not, neither 
gave they out ani sound. yet did we know them to be mountain of live 
watch and hideou and steadfast intelligence. 

and so, in a while, have listen to the sorrow sound which came 
ever to us over the grey dunes, from the countri of wailing, which lay 
to the south, midway between the redoubt and the watcher of the south, I 
pass upon one of the move roadway over to the south-western side of 
the pyramid, and look from a narrow embrasur thenc far down into the 
deep valley, which wa four mile deep, and in which wa the pit of the 
red smoke. 

and the mouth of thi pit wa one full mile across, and the smoke of the 
pit fill the valley at times, so that it seem but as a glow red 
circl amid dull thunder cloud of redness. yet the red smoke rose 
never much abov the valley; so that there wa clear sight across to the 
countri beyond. and there, along the further edg of that great depth, 
were the towers, each, maybe, a mile high, grey and quiet; but with a 
shimmer upon them. 

beyond these, south and west of them, wa the enorm bulk of the 
south-west watcher, and from the ground rose what we name the eye 
beam--a singl ray of grey light, which came up out of the ground, and 
lit the right eye of the monster. and becaus of thi light, that eye 
had been mightili examin through unknown thousand of years; and some 
held that the eye look through the light steadfastli at the pyramid; 
but other set out that the light blind it, and wa the work of those 
other power which were abroad to do combat with the evil forces. but 
howev thi may be, as I stood there in the embrasure, and look at 
the thing through the spy-glass, it seem to my soul that the brute 
look straightli at me, unwink and steadfast, and fulli of a 
knowledg that I spi upon it. and thi is how I felt. 

To the north of this, in the direct of the west, I saw the place 
where the silent one kill; and thi wa so named, becaus there, mayb 
ten thousand year gone, certain human adventur from the pyramid, 
came off the road where the silent one walk, and into that place, and 
were immedi destroyed. and thi wa told by one who escaped; though 
he die also veri quickly, for hi heart wa frozen. and thi I cannot 
explain; but so it wa set out in the records. 

far away beyond the place where the silent one kill, in the veri mouth 
of the western night wa the place of the ab-humans, where wa lost the 
road where the silent one walk, in a dull green, lumin mist. and of 
thi place noth wa known; though much it held the thought and 
attent of our thinker and imaginers; for some said that there wa a 
place Of safety, differ from the redoubt (a we of thi day suppos 
heaven to differ from the earth), and that the road led thence; but wa 
bar by the ab-humans. and thi I can onli set down here; but with no 
thought to justifi or uphold it. 

later, I travel over to the north-eastern wall of the redoubt, and 
look thenc with my spy-glass at the watcher of the north-east--th 
crown watcher it wa called, in that within the air abov it vast 
head there hung alway a blue, lumin ring, which shed a strang light 
downward over the monster--show a vast, wrinkl brow (upon which an 
whole librari had been writ); but put to the shadow all the lower 
face; all save the ear, which came out from the back of the head, and 
bell toward the redoubt, and had been said by some observ in the 
past to have been seen to quiver; but how that might be, I knew not; for 
no man of our day had seen such a thing. 

and beyond the watch thing wa the place where the silent one are 
never, close by the great road; which wa bound upon the far side by 
the giant' sea; and upon the far side of that, wa a road which wa 
alway name the road By the quiet city; for it pass along that place 
where burn forev the constant and never-mov light of a strang 
city; but no glass had ever shown life there; neither had ani light ever 
ceas to burn. 

and beyond that again wa the black mist. and here, let me say, that the 
valley of the hound end toward the light of the quiet city. 

and so have I set out someth of that land, and of those creatur and 
circumst which beset us about, wait until the day of doom, when 
our earth-curr should cease, and leav us helpless to the watcher 
and the abund terror. 

and there I stood, and look forth composedly, as may one who ha been 
born to know of such matters, and rear in the knowledg of them. and, 
anon, I would look upward, and see the grey, metal mountain go up 
measureless into the gloom of the everlast night; and from my feet 
the sheer downward sweep of the grim, metal walls, six full miles, and 
more, to the plain below. 

and one thing (aye! and I fear me, many) have I miss to set out with 
particularness: 

there was, as you do know, all around the base of the pyramid, which wa 
five and one-quart mile everi way, a great circl of light, which wa 
set up by the earth-current, and burn within a transpar tube; or 
had that appearance. and it bound the pyramid for a clear mile upon 
everi side, and burn for ever; and none of the monster had power ever 
to pass across, becaus of what we did call the air clog that it did 
make, as an invis wall of safety. and it did give out also a more 
subtil vibration, that did affect the weak brain-el of the 
monster and the lower men-brutes. and some did hold that there went 
from it a further vibrat of a greater subtil that gave a 
protect against the evil forces. and some qualiti it had truli 
thiswise; for the evil power had no abil to caus harm to ani 
within. yet were there some danger against which it might not avail; 
but these had no cun to bring harm to ani _within_ the great redoubt 
who had wisdom to meddl with no dreadfulness. and so were those last 
million guard until the earth-curr should be use to it end. and 
thi circl is that which I have call the electr circle; though with 
failur to explain. but there it wa call only, the circle. 

and thu have I, with great effort, made a littl clear that grim land 
of night, where, presently, my listen heard one call across the 
dark. and how that thi grew upon me, I will set out forthwith. 




iii 

the quiet call 


now, oft had I heard tell, not onli in that great citi which occupi 
the thousandth floor, but in other of the one thousand, three hundr 
and twenti citi of the pyramid, that there wa somewher out in the 
desol of the night land a second place of refuge, where had 
gathered, in anoth part of thi dead world, some last million of the 
human race, to fight unto the end. 

and thi stori I heard everywher in my travel through the citi of 
the great redoubt, which travel began when I came upon my seventeenth 
year, and continu for three year and two hundr and twenti five 
days, be even then but one day in each city, as wa the custom in the 
train of everi child. 

and truli it wa a great journey, and in it I met with many, whom to 
know wa to love; but whom never could I see again; for life ha not 
space enough; and each must to hi duti to the secur and well-b 
of the redoubt. yet, for all that I have set down, we travel much, 
always; but there were so mani millions, and so few years. 

and, as I have said, everywher I went there wa the same stori of thi 
other place of refuge; and in such of the librari of those citi as I 
had time to search, there were great number of work upon the exist 
of thi other refuge; and some, far back in the years, made assert 
with confid that such a place wa in verity; and, indeed, no doubt 
did there seem in those by-gon ages; but now these veri record were 
read onli by scholars, who doubted, even whilst they read. and so is it 
ever. 

but of the realiti of thi refuge, I had never a sound doubt, from the 
day of my hear concern it from our master monstruwacan, who with 
all hi assist occupi the tower of observ in the apex of the 
pyramid. and here let me tell that he and I had alway an affin and 
close friendship one for the other; though he wa full grown, and I but 
a youth; yet so it was; and thus, when I had come to an age of 
twenty-on year of life, he open to me a post within the tower of 
observation; and thi wa a most wondrou good fortun to me; for in all 
the vast redoubt, to be appoint to the tower of observ wa the 
most desired; for thereby, even as in these day doth astronomy, wa the 
natur curios of man eas somewhat, even while thwarted. 

now, let me tell here also, lest it be thought that I wa unduli 
favour becaus of my friendship with the master monstruwacan, that 
there wa a sound justif for hi choice, in that to me had been 
given that strang gift of hearing, which we call night-hearing; 
though thi wa but a fanci name, and meant little. yet the peculiar 
gift wa rare, and in all the million of the pyramid, there wa none 
with the gift to a great degree, save onli myself. 

and I, becaus of thi gift, could hear the "invis vibrations" of 
the aether; so that, without hark to the call of our record 
instruments, I could take the messag which came continu through 
the etern darkness; aye, even better than they. and now, it may be the 
better understood, how much wa to be count that I had grown to listen 
for a voic that had not rung in mine ear for an eternity, and yet 
which sang sweet and clear in my memory-dreams; so that it seem to me 
that mirdath the beauti slept within my soul, and whisper to me out 
of all the ages. 

and then, one day, at the fifteenth hour, when began the sleep-time, I 
had been ponder thi love of mine that live with me still; and 
marvel that my memory-dream held the voic of a love that _had 
been_ in so remot an age. and ponder and dream thus, as a young 
man may, I could fanci thi aeon-lost one were whisper beauti into 
my ears, in verity; so clear had my memori grown, and so much had I 
pondered. 

and lo! as I stood there, hark and commun with my thoughts, I 
thrill suddenly, as if I had been smitten; for out of all the 
everlast night a whisper wa thrill and thrill upon my more 
subtil hearing. 

through four long year had I listened, sinc that awaken in the 
embrasure, when but a youth of seventeen; and now out of the 
world-dark and all the etern year of that lost life, which now I 
live in thi present age of ours, wa the whisper come; for I knew it 
upon that instant; and yet, becaus I wa so taught to wisdom, I 
answer by no name; but sent the master-word through the night--send 
it with my brain-elements, as I could, and as all may, much or little, 
as may be, if they be not clods. and, moreover, I knew that she who 
call quietli would have the power to hear without instruments, if 
inde it were she; and if it were but one of the fals call of the 
evil forces, or more cun monsters, or as wa sometim thought 
concern these callings, the hous of silence, meddl with our 
souls, then would they have no power to say the master-word; for thi 
had been proven through all the everlasting. 

and lo! as I stood, trembl and strive not to be tense, which 
destroy the receptivity, there came thrill round and round my 
spiritu essenc the throb of the master-word, beat steadili in the 
night, as doth that marvel sound. and then, with all that wa sweet 
in my spirit, I call with my brain elements: "mirdath! mirdath! 
mirdath!" and at that instant the master monstruwacan enter that part 
of the tower of observation, where I stood; and, see my face, stood 
veri quiet; for though he had not the power of night-hearing, he wa 
wise and thoughtful, and took much account of my gift; more-over, he had 
but come from the receiv instrument, and thought vagu to have 
caught the throb of the master-word, though too faint to come proper 
through the instrument, so that he search for me, in that I, who had 
the hearing, might listen for it, I being, as I have said, gift in 
that wise. 

and to him I told someth of my stori and my thought and my memories, 
and of that awakening; and thu up to thi present happening, and he 
hearken with sympathi and a troubl and wonder heart; for in that 
age a man might talk sane upon that which, in thi age of our would 
be account foolish and mayb the breath of insanity; for 
there, by the refin of art of mental and the result of strang 
experi and the accomplish of learning, men were abl to 
conceiv of matter now close to our conceptions, even as we of thi 
day may hapli give a calm ear to talk, that in the day of our father 
would have been sure set to the count of lunacy. and thi is veri 
clear. 

and all the while that I told my story, I listen with my spirit; but 
save for a sens of faint, happi laughter that wrap about me, I heard 
naught. and noth more all that day. 

here let me put down that, becaus of my memori and half memories, I 
would time and again disput with our learn men; they be in doubt 
as to the veriti of that olden stori of the day of light, and the 
exist of the sun; though someth of all thi wa set out, as of 
_truth_, in our oldest records; but I, remembering, told them mani tale 
that seem fairy-lik to them, and entranc their hearts, even whilst 
I anger their brains, which refus to take serious and as veriti 
that which their heart accept gladly, even as we receiv the wonder 
of poetri into our souls. but the master monstruwacan would listen to 
aught I had to tell; aye! though I spoke through hours; and so it would 
be, odd times, that have talk long, draw my stori from my 
memory-dreams, I would come back again into the present of that future; 
and lo! all the monstruwacan would have left their instrument and 
observ and recording, and be gather about me; and the master so 
sunken in interest that he not to have discov them; neither had I 
noticed, be so full of the thing which had been. 

but when the master came back to knowledg of that present, he would 
rous and chide, and they, all those lesser ones, would fli swiftli and 
guiltili to their variou works; and yet, so I have thought since, each 
with a muddl and bewild and thought air upon him; and hungri 
they were for more, and ever wonder and set question about. 

and so it wa also with those others--thos learn one who were not of 
the tower of observation, and who disbeliev even whilst they hungered. 
listen would they, though I talk from the first hour, which wa the 
"dawn," to the fifteenth hour, which wa the begin of the "night"; 
for the sleep-tim wa set thus, after other usag and experiment. and, 
odd whiles, I found that there were among them, men of extraordinari 
learn who upheld my tell as tale of verity; and so there wa a 
faction; but, later, there grew more to believe; and whether they 
believed, or not, all were readi to listen; so that I might have spend 
my day in talk; onli that I had my work to do. 

but the master monstruwacan believ from the beginning, and wa wise 
alway to understand; so that I love him for this, as for mani anoth 
dear quality. 

and so, as may be conceived, among all those million I wa singl out 
to be known; for the stori that I told went downward through a 
thousand cities; and, presently, in the lowest tier of the underground 
fields, an hundr mile deep in the earth below the redoubt, I found 
that the veri ploughboy knew someth concern my tellings; and 
gather about me one time and anoth when the master monstruwacan and 
I had gone down, regard some matter that dealt with the earth-curr 
and our instruments. 

and of the underground field (though in that age we call them no more 
than "the fields") I should set down a little; for they were the 
mightiest work of thi world; so that even the last redoubt wa but a 
small thing besid them. An hundr mile deep lay the lowest of the 
underground fields, and wa an hundr mile from side to side, everi 
way; and abov it there were three hundr and six fields, each one less 
in area than that beneath; and in thi wise they tapered, until the 
topmost field which lay direct beneath the lowermost floor of the great 
redoubt, wa but four mile everi way. 

and thu it will be seen that these fields, lie one beneath the other, 
form a mighti and incred pyramid of countri land in the deep 
earth, an hundr mile from the base unto the topmost field. 

and the whole wa sheathed-in at the side with the grey metal of which 
the redoubt wa builded; and each field wa pillared, and floor 
beneath the soil, with thi same compound of wonder; and so wa it 
secure, and the monster could not dig into that mighti garden from 
without. 

and all of that underground land wa lit, where needed, by the 
earth-current, and that same life-stream fructifi the soil, and gave 
life and blood to the plant and to the trees, and to everi bush and 
natur thing. 

and the make of those field had taken mayb a million years, and the 
"dump" thereof had been cast into the "crack," whenc came the 
earth-current, and which had bottom beyond all soundings. and thi 
underground countri had it own wind and air-currents; so that, to my 
memory, it wa in no way connect to the monstrou air-shaft of the 
pyramid; but in thi I may be mistaken; for it ha not been given to me 
to know all that is to be known concern that vast redoubt; nor by ani 
one man could so much knowledg be achieved. 

yet that there were wise and justli promot wind in that underground 
country, I do know; for health and sweet they were, and in the 
corn-field there wa the sweet rustl of grain, and the glad, silken 
laughter of poppies, all beneath a warm and happi light. and here, did 
the million walk and take excursion, and go orderli or not, even as in 
these days. 

and all thi have I seen, and the talk of a thousand lover in the 
garden of that place, come back to me; and with it all the memori of 
my dear one; and of a faint call that would seem to whisper about me 
at times; but so faint and attenuated, that even I, who had the 
night-hearing, could not catch it import; and so went, listen ever 
the more intently. and oft time calling. 

now there wa a law in the pyramid, tri and healthful, which held that 
no male should have freedom to adventur into the night land, befor the 
age of twenty-two; _and no femal ever_. yet that, after such age, if a 
youth desir greatli to make the adventure, he should receiv three 
lectur upon the danger of which we had knowledge, and a strict 
account of the mutil and horrid deed done to those who had so 
adventured. and if, after thi had pass over him, he still desired, 
and if he were account health and sane; then should he be allow 
to make the adventure; and it wa account honour to the youth who 
should add to the knowledg of the pyramid. 

but to all such as went forth into the danger of the night land, there 
wa set beneath the skin of the inner side of the left forearm, a small 
capsule, and when the wound had healed, then might the youth make the 
adventure. 

and the wherefor of this, wa that the spirit of the youth might be 
saved, if he were entrapped; for then, upon the honour of hi soul, must 
he bite forth the capsule, and immedi hi spirit would have safeti 
in death. and by thi shall you know somewhat the grim and horrid danger 
of the dark land. 

and thi I have set down becaus later I wa to make huge adventur into 
those lands; and even at thi time, some thought of the same had come to 
me; for alway I went listen for that quiet calling; and twice I sent 
the master-word throb solemnli through the everlast night; yet 
thi I did no more, without certainty; for the word must not be use 
lightly. but often would I say with my brain-el "mirdath! 
mirdath!"--send the name out into the darkness; and sometim would I 
seem to hear the faint thrill of the aether around me; as though one 
answered; but weakly, as it were with a weaken spirit, or by 
instrument that lack of it earth-force. 

and thus, for a great while there wa no certainty; but onli a strang 
anxious and no clear answer. 

then, one day as I stood by the instrument in the tower of observation, 
at the thirteenth hour there came the thrill of beaten aether all 
about me, as it were that all the void wa disturbed. and I made the 
sign for silence; so that the men move not in all the tower; but bow 
over their breathing-bells, that all disturb might cease. 

and again came the gentl thrilling, and broke out into a clear, low 
call in my brain; and the call wa my name--th old-earth name of 
thi day, and not the name of that age. and the name smote me, with a 
frightened of fresh awaken memories. and, immediately, I sent the 
master-word into the night; and all the aether wa full of movement. and 
a silenc came; and later a beat afar off in the void of night, which 
onli I in all that great redoubt could hear, until the heavier 
vibrat were come. and in a moment there wa all about me the 
throb of the master-word, beat in the night a sure answer. yet, 
befor thi I knew that mirdath had called; but now had surety. 

and immediately, I said "mirdath," make use of the instruments; and 
there came a swift and beauti answer; for out of the dark there stole 
an old love-name, that she onli had ever use to me. 

and, presently, I mind me of the men, and sign to them that they 
should continue; for the record must not be broken; and now I had the 
commun full established. 

and by me stood the master monstruwacan, quietli as ani young 
monstruwacan, wait with slip to make ani note that were needful; 
and keep a strict eye upon those others; but not unkindly. and so, 
for a space of wonder, I had speech with that girl out in the dark 
of the world, who had knowledg of my name, and of the old-earth 
love-name, and name herself mirdath. 

and much I question her, and present to my sorrow; for it seem 
that her name wa not truli mirdath; but naani; neither had she known my 
name; but that in the librari of that place where she abode, there had 
been a stori of one name by my name, and call by that sweet love-nam 
which she had sent out somewhat ruthless into the night; and the girl' 
name had been mirdath; and when first she, naani had called, there had 
come back to her a cri of mirdath, mirdath; and thi had mind her so 
strang of that olden stori which had stay in her memory; that she 
had answer as the maid in that book might have answered. 

and thu did it seem that the utter romanc of my memory-lov had 
vanished, and I stood strang troubl for sorrow of a love of olden 
times. yet, even then I marvel that ani book should have stori so 
much like to mine; not heed that the histori of all love is writ with 
one pen. 

yet, even then in that hour of my strange, and quaintli foolish pain, 
there came a thing that set me thrilling; though more afterwards, when I 
came to think afresh upon it. for the girl who spoke to me through the 
night made some wonder that my voic were not deeper; yet in quiet 
fashion, and as one who say a thing, scarc wot what they say. but 
even to me then, there came a sudden hope; for in the olden day of thi 
present age my voic had been veri deep. and I said to her that mayb 
the man in the book wa said to have had a deep tone of speech; but she, 
seem puzzled, said nay; and at that I question her the more; but 
onli to the troubl of her memori and understanding. 

and strang must it seem that we two should talk on so trivial a matter, 
when there wa so much els that we had need to exchang thought upon; 
for were a man in thi present day to have speech with those who may 
live within that red planet of mar within the sky, scarc could the 
wonder of it exceed the wonder of a human voic come through that 
night unto the great redoubt, out of all that lost darkness. for, 
indeed, thi must have been the break of, maybe, a million year of 
silence. and already, as I came to know later, wa the news pass 
downward from citi to citi through all the vast pyramid; so that the 
hour-slip were full of the news; and everi citi eager and excited, and 
waiting. and I better known in that one moment, than in all my life 
before. for that previou calling, had been but vagu put about; and 
then set to the count of a nature, blown upon over-easili by 
spirit-wind of the half-memori of dreams. though it is inde true, as 
I have set down befor this, that my tale concern the earli day of 
the world, when the sun wa visible, and full of light, had gone down 
through all the cities, and had much comment and set forth in the 
hour-slips, and were a caus for speech and argument. 

now concern the voic of thi girl come to us through the dark 
of the world, I will set out that which she had to tell; and this, 
indeed, but verifi the tell of our most ancient records, which had 
so long been treat over lightly: there was, it would seem, somewher 
out in the lonesom dark of the outer lands, but at what distanc none 
could ever discover, a second redoubt; that wa a three-sid pyramid, 
and moder small; be no more than a mile in height, and scarc 
three quarter of a mile along the bases. 

when thi redoubt wa first builded, it had been upon the far shore of a 
sea, where now wa no sea; and it had been rais by those wander 
human who had grown weari of wandering, and weari of the danger of 
night attack by the tribe of half-human monster which began to 
inhabit the earth even so earli as the day when the half-gloom wa upon 
the world. and he that had made the plan upon which it wa builded, wa 
one who had seen the great redoubt, have live there in the beginning, 
but escap becaus of a correct set upon him for hi spirit of 
irresponsibility, which had made him to caus disturb among the 
orderli one in the lowest citi of the great redoubt. 

yet, in time, he too had come to be tame by the weight of fear of the 
ever-grow hord of monsters, and the forc that were abroad. and so 
he, be a master-spirit, plan and build the smaller redoubt, 
be aid thereto by four millions, who also were weari of the harass 
of the monsters; but until then had been wanderers, becaus of the 
restless of their blood. 

and they had chosen that place, becaus there they had discov a sign 
of the earth-curr in a great valley which led to the shore; for 
without the earth-curr no refug could have existence. and whilst 
mani build and guarded, and care for the great camp in which all 
lived, other work within a great shaft; and in ten year had made 
thi to a distanc of mani miles, and therewith they tapt the 
earth-current; but not a great stream; yet a sufficiency, as wa 
believed. 

and, presently, after mani years, they had build the pyramid, and 
taken up their refug there, and made them instruments, and ordain 
monstruwacans; so that they had speech daili with the great pyramid; and 
thu for mani long ages. 

and the earth-curr then to begin to fail; and though they labour 
through mani thousand of years, they came to no better resource. and so 
it wa they ceas to have commun with the great redoubt; for the 
current had a lack of power to work the instruments; and the record 
instrument ceas to be sensibl of our messages. 

and thereaft came a million years, maybe, of silence; with ever the 
birth and marri and die of those lonesom humans. and they grew 
less; and some put thi to the lack of the earth-current, which dwindl 
slowli through the centuri of that eternity. 

and onc in a thousand years, maybe, one among them would be sensitive, 
and abl to hear beyond ordinary; and to these, at times, there would 
seem to come the thrill of the aether; so that such an one would go 
listening; and sometim seem to catch half messages; and so awaken a 
great interest in all the pyramid; and there would be turn up of old 
records, and mani word and writings, and attempt to send the 
master-word through the night; in which, doubtless sometim they 
succeeded; for there wa set down in the record of the great redoubt 
certain occas on which there had come the call of the master-word, 
which had been arrang and made holi between the two redoubt in the 
earli day of that second life of thi world. 

yet, now for an hundr thousand years, there had been none sensitive; 
and in that time the peopl of the pyramid had becom no more than ten 
thousand; and the earth-curr wa weak and powerless to put the joy of 
life into them; so that they went listlessly, but deem it not strange, 
becaus of so mani aeon of usage. 

and then, to the wonder of all, the earth-curr had put forth a new 
power; so that young peopl ceas to be old over-soon; and there wa 
happi and a certain joy in the living; and a strang birth of 
children, such as had not been through half a million years. 

and then came a new thing. naani, the daughter of the master 
monstruwacan of that redoubt had shown to all that she wa sensitive; 
for she had perceiv odd vibrat afloat in the night; and concern 
these she told her father; and presently, becaus their blood move 
afresh in their bodies, they had heart to discov the plan of the 
ancient instruments; for the instrument had long rusted, and been 
forgotten. 

and so they build them a new instrument to send forth a message; for 
they had no memori at that time that the brain-el had power to do 
thus; though, mayhap, their brain-el were weakened, through so 
mani age of starvat of the earth-current, and could not have obeyed, 
even had their master known all that we of the great redoubt knew. 

and when the instrument wa finished, to naani wa given the right to 
call first across the dark to discov whether indeed, after that 
million year of silence, they were yet compani upon thi earth, or 
whether they were in truth lonely--th last poor thousand of the 
humans. 

and a great and pain excit came upon the peopl of the lesser 
pyramid; for the loneli of the world press upon them; and it wa 
to them as though we in thi age call to a star across the abyss of 
space. 

and becaus of the excit and pain of the moment, naani call onli 
vagu with the instrument into the dark; and lo! in a moment, as it 
seemed, there came all about her in the night the solemn throb of the 
master-word, beat in the night. and naani cri out that she wa 
answered, and, as may be thought, mani of the peopl wept, and some 
prayed, and some were silent; but other beseech her that she call 
again and quickli to have further speech with those of their kind. 

and naani spoke the master-word into the night, and directli there came 
a call all about her: "mirdath! mirdath!" and the strang wonder of 
it made her silent a moment; but when she would have made reply, the 
instrument had ceas to work, and she could have no further speech at 
that time. 

this, as may be thought, occas much distress; and constant work 
they had between the instrument and the earth-current, to discov the 
reason for thi failing; but could not for a great while. and in that 
time, oft did naani hear the call of "mirdath" thrill about her; and 
twice there came the solemn beat of the master-word in the night. yet 
never had she the power to answer. and all that while, as I learn in 
time, wa she stir with a quaint ach at heart by the voic that 
call "mirdath!" as it might be the spirit of love, search for it 
mate; for thi is how she put it. 

and thu it chanced, that the constant thrill of thi name about her, 
woke her to memori of a book she had read in earli years, and but half 
understood; for it wa ancient, and writ in an olden fashion, and it set 
out the love of a man and a maid, and the maid' name wa mirdath. and 
so, becaus she wa full of thi great awaken of those age of 
silence, and the call of that name, she found the book again, and 
read it mani times, and grew to a sound love of the beauti of that tale. 

and, presently, when the instrument wa made right, she call into the 
night the name of that man within the book; and so it came about that I 
had hope too much; yet even now wa I strang unsur whether to ceas 
from hoping. 

and one other thing there is which I would make clear. mani and oft a 
time had I heard a thrill of sweet, faint laughter about me, and the 
stir of the aether by word too gentl to come clearly; and these I 
make no doubt came from naani, use her brain-el unwittingli and 
in ignorance; but veri eager to answer my callings; and have no 
knowledg that, far off across the black of the world, they thrill 
about me, constantly. 

and after naani had made clear all that I have set out concern the 
lesser refuge, she told further how that food wa not plenti with 
them; though, until the reawaken of the earth-current, they had gone 
unknow of this, be of small appetite, and care littl for aught; 
but now wakened, and newli hungry, they savour a lack of tast in all 
that they ate; and thi we could well conceive, from our reason and 
theory; but happili not from our knowledge. 

and we said unto them, that the soil had lost it life, and the crop 
therefrom were not vital; and a great while it would take for the earth 
within their pyramid to receiv back the life-elements. and we told them 
certain way by which they might bring a more speedi life to the soil; 
and thi they were eager to do, be freshli aliv after so long a time 
of half-life. 

and now, you must know that in all the great redoubt the stori went 
downward swiftly, and wa publish in all the hour-sheets, with mani 
comments; and the librari were full of those who would look up the 
olden records, which for so long had been forgotten, or taken, as we of 
thi day would say, with a pinch of salt. 

and all the time I wa pester with questions; so that, had I not been 
determined, I should scarc have been allow to sleep; moreover, so 
much wa writ about me, and my power to hear, and diver stori 
concern tale of love, that I had been like to have grown maze to 
take note of it all; yet some note I did take, and much I found 
pleasant; but some displeasing. 

and, for the rest, I wa not spoiled, as the say goes; for I had my 
work to do; moreover, I wa alway busi listening, and have speech 
through the darkness. though if ani saw me so, they would question; and 
becaus of this, I kept much to the tower of observation, where wa the 
master monstruwacan, and a greater discipline. 

and then began a fresh matter; though but an old enough trick; for I 
speak now of the day that follow that re-open of the talk between 
the pyramids. oft would speech come to us out of the night; and there 
would be tale of the sore need of the lesser redoubt, and call for 
help. yet, when I sent the master-word abroad, there would be no 
answering. and so I fear that the monster and forc of evil _knew_. 

yet, at times, the master-word would answer to us, beat steadili in 
the night; and when we question afresh, we knew that they in the 
lesser redoubt had caught the beat of the master-word, and so made 
reply; though it had not been they who had made the previou talk, which 
we had sought to test by the word. and then they would make 
contradict of all that had been spoken so cunningly; so that we knew 
the monster and forc had sought to tempt some from the safeti of the 
redoubt. yet, wa thi no new thing, as I have made to hint; save that 
it grew now to a greater persistence, and there wa a loathsom cun 
in the use of thi new knowledg to the make of wick and fals 
messag by those evil thing of the night land. and it told to us, as I 
have made remark, how that those monster and forc had a full 
awared of the speech between the pyramids; yet could they have no 
power to say the master-word; so had we some test left, and a way to 
sure knowledg of what made talk in the night. 

and all that I have told should bring to those of thi age someth of 
the yet unbegotten terror of that; and a quiet and sound thank to 
god, that we suffer not as human shall yet suffer. 

but, for all this, let it not be thought that they of that age account 
it as suffering; but as no more than the usual of human existence. and 
by thi may we know that we can meet all circumstances, and use 
ourselv to them and live through them wisely, if we be but prudent and 
consid mean of invention. 

and through all the night land there wa an extraordinari awaken 
among the monster and forces; so that the instrument made constant 
note of greater power at work out there in the darkness; and the 
monstruwacan were busi recording, and keep a veri strict watch. 
and so wa there at all that time a sens of differ and awakening, 
and of wonder about, and to come. 

and from the countri whenc come the great laughter, the laughter 
sound constant ... as it were an uncomfort and heart-shak 
voice-thund roll thenc over the lands, out from the unknown east. 
and the pit of the red smoke fill all the deep valley with redness, so 
that the smoke rose abov the edge, and hid the base of the tower upon 
the far side. 

and the giant could be seen plenti around the kiln to the east; and 
from the kiln great belch of fire; though the mean of it, as of 
all else, we could not say; but onli the cause. 

and from the mountain Of the voice, which rose to the south-east of the 
south-east watcher, and of which I have made no tell hitherto, in 
thi faulti setting-out, I heard for the first time in that life, the 
call of the voice. and though the record made mention of it; yet not 
often wa it heard. and the call wa shrill, and veri peculiar and 
distress and horrible; as though a giant-woman, hunger strangely, 
shout unknown word across the night. and thi wa how it seem to 
me; and mani thought thi to describ the sound. 

and, by all this, may you perceiv how that land wa awakened. 

and other trick there were to entic us into the night land; and onc a 
call came thrill in the aether, and told to us that certain human 
had escap from the lesser redoubt, and drew nigh to us; but were faint 
for food, and crave succour. yet, when we sent the master-word into the 
night, the creatur without could make no reply; which wa a veri happi 
thing for our souls; for we had been all mightili exercis in our 
heart by thi one message; and now had proof that it wa but a trap. 

and constantly, and at all hours, I would have speech with naani of the 
lesser redoubt; for I had taught her how she might send her thought 
through the night, with her brain-elements; but not to over-us thi 
power; for it exhaust the bodi and the power of the mind, if it be 
abus by exceed usage. 

yet, despit that I had taught her the use of her brain-elements, she 
sent her messag alway without strength, save when she had use of the 
instrument; and thi I set to the caus that she had not the health 
forc needful; but, apart from this, she had the night-hear veri 
keen; though less than mine. 

and so, with mani time of speech, and constant tell of our do 
and thoughts, we drew near in the spirit to one another; and had alway 
a feel in our heart that we had been given previou acquaintance. 

and this, as may be thought, thrill my heart veri strangely. 




IV 

the hush OF the voic 


("dearest, thine own feet tread the world at night-- 
treading, as moon-flak step across a dark-- 
kiss the veri dew to holier light ... 
thi voic a song past mountains, which to hark 
frighten my soul with an utter lost delight.") 

now, one night, toward the end of the sixteenth hour, as I made readi 
to sleep, there came all about me the thrill of the aether, as 
happen oft in those days; but the thrill had a strang power in it; 
and in my soul the voic of naani sound plain, all within and about 
me. 

yet, though I knew it to be the voic of naani, I answer not 
immediately; save to send the sure question of the master-word into the 
night. and, directly, I heard the answer, the master-word beat 
steadili in the night; and I question naani whi she had speech with me 
by the instrument at that time, when all were sleeping, and the watch 
set among the monstruwacans; for they in the littl pyramid had their 
sleep-tim to commenc at the eleventh hour; so that by thi it wa five 
hour advanc toward the time of waking; and naani should have slept; 
nor have been abroad to the tower of observation, apart from her father. 
for I suppos that she spoke by the instrument, her voic sound veri 
clear in my brain. yet, to thi question, she made no answer in kind; 
but gave a certain thing into my spirit, which set me trembling; for she 
said certain words, that began: 

"dearest, thine own feet tread the world at night--" 

and it well may be that she set me to tremble; for as the word grew 
about me, there waken a memory-dream how that I had made these same 
word to mirdath the beauti in the long-gon etern of thi our 
age, when she had die and left me alon in all the world. and I wa 
weak a littl with the tumult and forc of my emotion; but in a moment I 
call eagerli with my brain-el to naani to give some explain 
of thi thing that she had spoken to the utter troubl of my heart. 

yet, onc more she made no direct answer; but spoke the word again to 
me across all the dark of the world. and it came to me suddenly, that it 
wa not naani that spoke; but mirdath the beautiful, from out of all the 
everlast night. and I called: "mirdath! mirdath," with my 
brain-elements, into the night; and lo! the far, faint voic spoke again 
to my spirit through all the dark of eternity, say again those 
words. yet, though the voic wa the voic of mirdath the beautiful, it 
wa also the voic of naani; and I knew in all my heart that thi thing 
wa in verity; and that it had been given to me to be birth onc more 
into thi world in the living-tim of that onli one, with whom my spirit 
and essenc hath mate in all age through the everlasting. and I call 
with my brain-el and all my strength to naani; but there came no 
answer; neither sign of hearing, though through hour I called. 

and thu at last I came to an utter exhaustion; but neither could be 
quiet, nor sleep. yet, presently, I slept. 

and when I waked, my first memori wa of the wondrou thing which had 
befallen in the sleep-time; for none in all thi world could have known 
those words; save it had been the spirit of mirdath, my beauti one, 
look from abov my shoulder in that utter-lost time, as I made those 
word to her, out of an ach and a broken heart. and the voic had 
been the voic of mirdath; and the voic of mirdath had been the voic 
of naani. and what shall ani say to this, save that which I had in my 
heart. 

and immedi I call to naani, once, and again twice; and in a 
littl moment there came all about me the throb of the master-word, 
beat solemnli in the night; and I sent the master-word to give 
assurance, and immedi the voic of naani, a littl weak as wa it 
alway when she had not the instrument, but sent the messag with her 
brain-elements. 

and I answer her, and question her eagerli concern her say of 
the past time of sleep; but she disclaimed, and made clear to me that 
she had no knowledg of have spoken; but had slept through all that 
time of which I made to tell; and, indeed, had dream a veri strang 
dream. 

and for a littl while I wa confused, and meditated, not know what 
to think; but came suddenli again to a knowledg that naani' far voic 
wa thrill the aether all about; and that she would tell to me her 
dream; which had set strong upon her mind. 

and she told the dream to me, and in the dream she had seen a tall, dark 
man, built veri big, and dress in unfamiliar clothing. and the man had 
been in a littl room, and veri sorrowful, and lonesome; and in her 
dream she had gone nigh to him. 

and present the man made to write, that he might eas him by give 
express to hi sorrow; and naani had been abl to read the word that 
he wrote; though to her wake spirit the languag in which they were 
writ wa strang and unknown. yet she could not rememb what he had 
writ, save but one short line, and thi she had mind of in that he had 
writ the word mirdath above. and she spoke of the strang of thi 
thing, that she should dream of thi name; but suppos that I had fix 
it upon her, by my first callings. 

and then did I, with someth of a trembl in my spirit, ask naani to 
tell me what she rememb of the write of that big, sorrow 
stranger. and, in a littl moment, her far voic said these word all 
about me: 

"dearest, thine own feet tread the world at night--" 

but no more had she memori of. yet it wa a sufficiency, and I, mayb 
with a mad, strang triumph in my soul, said unto her with my 
brain-el that which remain of those words. and my spirit felt 
them strike upon the spirit of naani, and awak her memory, as with the 
violenc of a blow. and for a littl while she stumbled, dumb befor so 
much new and certainly. and her spirit then to waken, and she near 
wept with the fright and the sudden, new wonder of thi thing. 

and immediately, all about me there came her voic thrilling, and the 
voic wa the voic of mirdath, and the voic of naani; and I heard the 
tear of her spirit make pure and wonder the bewild and grow 
glad of her far voice. and she ask me, as one who had suddenli 
open the gate of memory, whether she might be truli mirdath. and I, 
utter weak and shaken strang becaus of thi splendour of fulfilment, 
could make no instant answer. and she ask again, but use mine old 
love-name, and with a sure in her far voice. and still I wa so 
strang dumb, and the blood to thud peculiar in mine ears; and thi to 
pass; and speech to come swift. 

and thi way to be that meet of our spirits, across all the 
everlast night. 

and you shall have for a memory-picture, how that naani stood there in 
the world in that far eternity, and, with her spirit have speech with 
mine, look back through the part-open gate of her memory, into the 
past of thi our life and age. yet more than thi she saw, and more than 
wa given to me in that age; for she had memori now and sight of other 
instances, and of other come together, which had some confus and 
but half-mean to me. yet of thi our present age and life, we spoke 
as of some yesterday; but veri hallowed. 

now, as may be conceived, the wonder of thi sureti which had come into 
my life stir me fierc to it completion; for all my heart and 
spirit cri out to be with that one who wa mirdath, and now spoke with 
the voic of naani. 

yet, how should thi be won; for none among all the learn men of that 
mighti pyramid knew the posit of the lesser redoubt; neither could 
the record and histori of the world give us that knowledge; onli that 
there wa a gener thought among the student and the monstruwacan 
that it lay between the north-west and the north-east. but no man had 
ani surety; neither could ani conceiv of the distanc from us of that 
refuge. 

and count all this, there wa yet the incred danger and peril of 
the night land, and the hunger and desol of the outer lands, which 
were sometim name the unknown lands. 

and I spoke much with naani concern thi matter of their position; 
yet neither she nor her father, the master monstruwacan of that refuge, 
had ani know either of our position; onli that the builder of the 
lesser redoubt had come out of the southward world in the beginning, as 
they had knowledg of by the records. 

also, the father of naani set that ancient compass to bear; for, as he 
made explan to us through the instrument, so great a power of the 
earth-curr must be our that, perchanc it wa our forc which did 
affect the pointer from steadfastness. for, indeed, the needl did swing 
in an arc, as we heard, that held between the north and the south; 
within the westward arc; but thi it had done ever with them, and so wa 
a veri helpless guide; save that, maybe, as we had thought, the forc of 
the earth-curr that wa with us, had in truth some power to pull the 
needl toward us. and if thi were so of verity, we made a reckon 
that set the lesser redoubt to the north; and they did likewise, and put 
us to the south; yet wa it all built upon the sand of guess-work; and 
noth to adventur the life and soul upon. 

now we, of curiosity; though a million time had it been done in the 
past ages, set the compass befor us, have it from the great museum. 
but, as ever in that age, it did spin if we but stir the needle, and 
would stop nowher with surety, for the flow of the earth-curr from 
the "crack" beneath the pyramid had a power to affect it away from the 
north, and to set it wandering. and thi may seem veri strang to thi 
present age; yet to that, it wa most true to the seem natur of 
things; and harder to believ that ever it did onc point steadfastly, 
to prove a guid of sureness, and unfailing. 

for, be it known, we knew the posit of the land by tradition, come 
from that ancient time when, in the half-gloom they had build the 
pyramid; they have known the use of that ancient compass, and with 
sight of the sun had name the positions; though we of that far futur 
day had forgotten the veri begin of those name of direction; and 
use them but becaus our father did a million year and more. and 
likewis we did the same with the name of the day and the night and the 
week and the month and the years; though of the visibl mark of 
these there wa noth but onli and alway the everlast night; yet 
the same seem veri natur to that people. 

now, naani, have heed to my constant questions, crave with an utter 
keen hunger that I might come to her; but yet forbad it, in that it 
were better to live and commun in the spirit, than to risk my soul, and 
mayhap die, in the foolish of tri to find her in all the 
dark of the dead world. yet, no heed had I taken of her commands, 
had I but known of a sureti the _direction_ in which she might be 
discovered; and gain some knowledg of the space between, for thi 
might be name by thousand of miles, or but by hundreds; though a great 
distanc it wa surely. 

yet, one other thing there was, that ha point in thi place; for when I 
sent my speech out into the night, use my brain-elements, I came to 
know that, whether I had a knowledg of the north, or no knowledg at 
the moment, yet did I turn oft with a sure instinct to that 
direction. and of this, the master monstruwacan took veri great note, 
and had me to experi mani a time and way, and so enclos about with 
screens, or with bandag across mine eyes, that I could not, save by 
that inward knowing, have ani knowledg to point me the way. yet would I 
turn northward veri frequent, by a certain feeling; and seem unabl 
of speech, if I were turn otherwis by force. 

but when we ask naani whether she had an unusu in thi matter, 
she could discov none; and we could but take note curious of that 
which affect my habits; and which truli I set to the attract of her 
spirit; for I had mind that she did be somewher out that way in the 
dark of the world; but yet wa thi no more than to suppose, as you 
perceive. 

and the master monstruwacan wrote a studi of thi matter of the 
northward of my turning; and it wa set out in the hour-slip of the 
tower of observation; and so it came to be copi by the hour-slip of 
the great cities, and made much comment, and much call up to me 
through the home instruments; so that with this, and the speech that 
went about concern my power to hear, I wa much in talk, and 
divers pleas and oft anger by overmuch attent and importunity. 

and now, whilst I ponder thi matter in all my spirit and being, how 
that I should some way come to naani, there befel a veri terribl 
thing. and in thi wise must I tell it: 

It wa at the seventeenth hour, when all the million of the mighti 
pyramid slept, that I wa with the master monstruwacan in the tower of 
observ take my due turn. and sudden, I heard the thrill of the 
aether all about me, and the voic of naani in my soul, speaking. and I 
sent the master-word into the dark of the world, and presently, I 
heard the solemn answer beat steadfastli in the night; and 
immedi I call to naani with my brain-elements, to know what thing 
troubl her in her sleep. 

and her voic came into my spirit, weak and far and faint, and so that 
scarc I could make to hear the words. yet, in a while I gather that 
all the peopl of the lesser redoubt were in veri deadli trouble; for 
that the earth-curr had fail suddenli and mightily; and they had 
call her from her sleep, that she might listen whether we answer 
their call by the instrument; but, indeed, no call had come to 
us. 

and they who had been of late so joyful, were now grown old with sorrow 
in but an hour or two; for they fear that the fresh come of the 
earth-curr had been but the final flicker and outburst befor the 
end. and, even in thi short while of our speech, did it seem to me that 
the voic of naani grew further off from me; and I felt like to have 
broken my heart with the troubl of thi thing. 

and through all that remain of that sleep-time, did I convers with 
naani, as might two lover who shall present part forever. and when 
the citi awoke, the news went throughout them, and all our million 
were in sorrow and trouble. 

and thu wa it for, maybe, a littl month; and in that time had the 
voic of naani grown so weak and far-off that even I that had the 
night-hearing, could scarc make real it meaning. and everi word wa to 
me a treasur and a touch upon my soul; and my grief and troubl befor 
thi certain part drove me that I could not eat, neither have rest; 
and thi did the master monstruwacan take upon him to chide and correct; 
for that, if ani were to help, how should it be done if I that had the 
night-hearing, and heard even now that the record instrument were 
dumb, came to ill-health. 

and becaus of this, and such wisdom as wa mine, I made to eat and 
order my life that I might have my full powers. yet wa thi beyond all 
my strength; for, presently, I knew that the peopl of the lesser 
pyramid were threaten by the monster that beset them; and later I had 
knowledg from faint, far word whisper in my brain, that there had 
been a fight with an outsid forc that had harm mani in their minds; 
so that in mad they had open the gate and had run from the lesser 
pyramid, out into the dark of the land about them; and there had 
their physic bodi fallen to the monster of those lands; but of 
their soul who may know? 

and this, we set assuredli to the failur of the earth-current, which 
had rob them of all forc and power; so that, in those few week all 
life and joy of live had left them; and neither hunger nor thirst had 
they, much, nor ani great desir to live; but yet a new and mighti fear 
of death. and thi doth seem veri strange. 

and, as may be thought, all thi made the peopl of the great redoubt 
think newli of the earth-curr that issu from the "crack" beneath 
the pyramid; and of their latter end; so that much wa writ in the 
hour-slip concern thi matter; yet in the main to assur us that we 
ourselv might each be free from a disturb heart; though some went 
foolishli to the other event, and spoke of a speedi danger to us, 
likewise; as is ever the way. but the truth of our own case lay, maybe, 
somewher between. 

and all the hour-slip were full also of imagin of the terror of 
those poor human out in the dark of the world, face that end 
which must come upon all, even upon our mighti pyramid; though, as most 
would believe, so far away in some futur eternity, that we have no 
caus to trouble. 

and there were sad poem writ to the peopl of that lesser redoubt, and 
foolish plan set about to rescu them; but none to put them to effect; 
and no way by which so great a thing might be done; and doth but show 
how loos peopl will speak out of an over-security. yet to me, there 
had come a certain knowledg that I must make the adventure, though I 
achiev naught save mine own end. yet, it were better to ceas quickly, 
than that I should feel, as now I did feel. 

that same night, in the eighteenth hour, there wa a great disturb 
in the aether about the mighti pyramid; and I wa awaken suddenli by 
the master monstruwacan; that I might use my gift of the night-hear 
to hearken for the throb of the master-word, which they had thought 
to come vagu through the instruments; but no one of the monstruwacan 
wa sensit enough of soul to account truli whether thi wa so. 

and lo! as I sat up in the bed, there came the sound of the master-word, 
beat in the night about the pyramid. and immedi there wa a 
cri in the aether all about me: "we are coming! We are coming!" 

and mine inward leap and sicken me a moment, so shaken wa I with a 
sudden belief; for the messag seem some way to come to me from veri 
near to the great redoubt; as that they who sent it were nigh to hand. 

and, forthwith, I call the master-word into the night; but no answer 
did there come for a while, and then a faint thrill of the aether 
about me, and the weak puls of the master-word in the night, sent by a 
far voice, strang distant. and I knew that the voic wa the voic of 
naani; and I put a question through all the dark of the dead world, 
whether she were within the lesser redoubt, and safe thu far. 

and presently, there came a faint disturb about me, and a small 
voic in my soul, speak weakli and out of an infinit distance; and I 
knew that far away through the night naani spoke feebly, with her 
brain-elements; and that she abod within the lesser pyramid; but that 
she too had heard that strang puls of the master-word in the night, 
and that message: "we are coming! We are coming!" and vastli had thi 
thing disturb her, wake her within her sleep; so that she knew not 
what to think; save that we were devis some method to come to them. 
but thi I remov from doubt, say that she must not build on vain 
hoping; for I would not have her doubli tortur by the vaniti of such 
believing. and, thereafter, have said such thing as I might, though 
few they were, to comfort her, I bade her, gently, to sleep; and turn 
therewith to the master monstruwacan, who wait in quiet patience; and 
had no knowledg of that which I had heard and sent; for hi hear wa 
but the normal; though hi brain and heart were such as made me to love 
him. 

and I told the master monstruwacan mani thing as I put my cloth 
about me; how that there had inde been the call of the master-word; 
but not by ani of that lesser redoubt; but that, to my belief, it had 
come from nigh about the great pyramid. moreover, it wa sent by no 
instrument; as I wot that he did guess; but, as it seem to me, by 
the brain-el of many, call in unison. 

and all thi did I set out to the master monstruwacan; and with 
someth uncertain of fear and troubl in my heart; yet with a blind 
expectation; as, indeed, who would not. though, no longer wa I shaken 
by that first thought of her nearness. 

and I said to the master monstruwacan that we should go to the tower of 
observation, and search the night land with the great spy-glass. 

and we did this, and lo! presently, we saw a great number of men pass 
over the electr circl that went about the pyramid; yet they came not 
_to_ us; but went outward toward the black and the strang fire 
and hideou mysteri of the night land. and we ceas from spying, and 
look swiftli at one another, and knew in our heart that some had left 
the mighti pyramid in the sleep-time. 

then the master monstruwacan sent word to the master watchman that hi 
wardership had been outraged, and that peopl left the great pyramid in 
the sleep-time; for thi wa against the law; and none ever went out 
into the night land, save the full watch were post to the great door; 
and at a due time, when all were wakeful; for the open Of the door 
wa made known to all the million of the great redoubt; so that all 
might be aware; and know that no foolish wa done without their 
wotting. 

moreover, ere ani had power to leav the pyramid, they must pass the 
examination, and Be prepared; and some of thi have I set out already. 
and so stern wa the frame of the law, that there were yet the metal 
peg upon the inner side of the great gate, where had been stretch the 
skin of one who disobeyed; and wa flay and hi hide set there to be a 
warn in the earli days. yet the tradit wa remembered; for, as I 
might say it, we live veri close about the place; and memori had no 
room wherebi she might escape. 

now the master watchman, when he heard that which the master 
monstruwacan had to tell, went hastili with some of the central watch 
from the watch-dome, to the great gate; and he found the men of the 
sleep-tim watch, with the warder of the gate, all bound, and stopt in 
the mouth, so that none could make outcry. 

and he freed them, and learn that nigh five hundr young men, from 
the upper cities, by the big of their chests, had come upon them 
suddenly, and bound them, and escap into the night through the 
eye-g in the top of the great gate. 

and the master watchman wa angry, and demand whi that none had call 
by the instrument of the watch house; but lo! some had made to call 
thus, and found them unabl to wake the record which lay in the 
central watch-dome; for there had been tampering. 

now, after this, they made certain new rule and law concern the 
order of watching, and made test of the lesser instrument of the 
inward pyramid, nightly, upon the come of the sleep-time, which was, 
even in that strang age, by tradit call the night, as I have given 
hint; though hitherto, until the way of my stori wa known, I have use 
a word for the sleep hour that wa yet not of that time; but somewhat 
an invent to make thi histori free from the confus of "night" and 
"day," when, in truth, it wa alway night without upon the world. yet, 
after this, shall I keep to mine use the luxuri of the true name of 
that time; and yet, how strang is it that the truth should be of so 
littl to our thinking. 

and so to go forward with my telling; for, though all thi care were now 
taken, it had no forc until afterward; and at thi moment were those 
poor foolish youth out in all the danger of the night land, and no way 
by which they might be succoured, or call back; save that fear or 
wisdom should come to them quickly, that they ceas from so wild an 
attempt. for it wa to make rescu of those in that other, unknown 
pyramid, out in all the dark of the world' night that wa their 
intent, as we had speedi knowledg from those boon friend that had been 
in the secret of their plot, which had seem to them great and heroic; 
and wa so, in verity, but that neither they who went, nor they who 
stayed, had a true awared of the danger they had deal with, be 
all naught but raw and crude youths; yet, doubtless, with the make of 
mani fine and great men among them. 

and becaus some had thu abet that which they knew to be against the 
law, which wa frame to the well-b and safeti of all, there were 
certain floggings, which might the better help their memori in the 
futur as to the proper of their action and wisdom. 

moreover, they who returned, if any, would be flogged, as seem proper, 
after due examination. and though the news of their beat might help 
all other to hesitation, ere they did foolishly, in like fashion, yet 
wa the principl of the flog not on thi base, which would be both 
improp and unjust; but onli that the one in question be correct to 
the best advantag for hi own well-being; for it is not meet that ani 
principl of correct should shape to the make of human signpost of 
pain for the benefit of others; for in verity, thi were to make one pay 
the cost of many' learning; and each should owe to pay onli so much as 
shall suffic for the teach of hi own bodi and spirit. and if other 
profit thereby, thi is but accident, howev helpful. and thi is 
wisdom, and denoteth now that a sound principl shall prevent practic 
from becom monstrous. 

yet, now I must hasten that I set down how it fare with those five 
hundr youth that had made so sad an adventur of their live and 
unprepar souls; and were beyond our aid to help them, who might not 
so much as make ani call to them, to bid them to return; for to do 
thi would have been to tell to all the monster of the land that human 
were abroad from the mighti pyramid. 

and thi would have been to caus the monster to search the youth out 
to their destruction, and mayb even to awaken the forc to work them 
some dread spiritu harm, which wa the chief fear. 

now, presently, through all the citi of the great redoubt, the news 
had gone how that five hundr foolish youth had adventur out into 
the despair of the night land; and the whole pyramid wake to life, and 
the peopl of the south came to the northern sides, for the great gate 
lay in the north-west side; and the youth had made from there, not 
straightli outwards, but toward the north; and so were to be seen from 
the north-east embrasures, and from those within the north-west wall. 

and thus, in a while were they watch by all the mighti multitud of 
the great pyramid, through million of spy-glasses; for each human had a 
spying-glass, as may be thought; and some were an hundr year old, and 
some, mayb ten thousand, and hand down through mani generations; and 
some but newli made, and veri strange. but all those peopl had some 
instrument by which they might spi out upon the wonder of the night 
land; for so had it been ever through all the etern of darkness, and 
a great divers and wonder of life wa it to behold the monster about 
their work; and to know that they plot alway to our destruction; yet 
were ever foiled. 

and never did all that great and terribl land grow stale upon the soul 
of any, from birth until death; and by thi you shall know the constant 
wonder of it, and that _sens of enemi in the night about us,_ which 
ever fill the heart and spirit of all beholders; so that never were 
the embrasur utterli empty. 

yet, mani beheld not the land from the embrasures; but sat about the 
view-tables, which were set properli in certain place throughout the 
cities, and so beheld the night land, without undu cranings, or pois 
of spy-glasses, though less plain-seen. and these same tabl were some 
form of that which we of thi age name camera obscura; but made veri 
great, and with inventions, and low to the floor, so that ten thousand 
peopl might sit about them in the rais galleries, and have 
comfort sight. yet thi attract not the young people, save they 
were lovers; and then, in truth, were they comfort seat for 
quiet and gentl whisperings. 

yet now, as may be supposed, with all the peopl of the mighti pyramid 
grown eager to look toward one part of the night land, the embrasur 
were hid in the crowds; and such as could gain no view therethrough, 
throng about the view-tables. and so wa it in all the hour of 
leisure; so that women had scarc patienc to attend their children; but 
must hasten to watch again, that lonesom band of foolish youth make 
so blind and unshap a trial to come upon that unknown lesser redoubt, 
somewher out in all the night of the world. 

and in thi wise pass three day and nights; yet both in the 
sleep-tim and the time of wake did great multitud ceas not to 
watch; so that mani went hungri for sleep, as in truth did I. and 
sometim we saw those youth with plainness; but other time they were 
lost to our sight in the utter shadow of the night land. yet, by the 
tell of our instruments, and the sens of my hearing, there wa no 
awared among the monsters, and the forc of evil, that ani were 
abroad from the pyramid; so that a littl hope came into our heart that 
yet there might be no tragedy. 

and times, would they ceas from their way, and sit about in circl 
among the shadow and the grey moss-bushes, which grew hardli here or 
there about. and we knew that they had food with them to eat; for thi 
could we see with plainness, as some odd, grim flare of light from the 
infern fire struck upon one or anoth strangely, and passed, and 
left them in the darkness. 

and who of you shall conceiv what wa in the heart of the fathers, and 
the mother that bore the youths, and who never ceas away from the 
northward embrasures; but spi out in terror and in tears, and mayb 
oft with so good glass as did show them the veri featur and look 
upon the face of son and son. 

and the kin of the watcher brought to them food, and tend them, so 
that they had no need to ceas from their watching; and bed were made 
in the embrasures, rough and resourceful, that they might sleep quickli 
a little; yet be ever ready, if those cruel monster without made 
discoveri of those their children. 

thrice in those three day of journey to the northward, did the 
youth sleep, and we perceiv that some kept a watch, and so knew that 
there wa a kind of order and leadership among them; also, they had each 
hi weapon upon hi hip, and thi gave to us a further plea to hope. 

and concern thi same carri of weapons, I can but set out here 
that no health male or femal in all the mighti pyramid but possess 
such a weapon, and wa train to it from childhood; so that a ripe and 
extraordinari skill in the use thereof wa common to most. yet some 
break of rule had there been, that the youth had each achiev to be 
armed; for the weapon were store in everi tenth hous of the cities, 
in the care of the charging-masters. 

and here I must make known that these weapon did not shoot; but had a 
disk of grey metal, sharp and wonderful, that spun in the end of a rod 
of grey metal, and were someway charg by the earth-current, so that 
were ani but stricken thereby, they were cut in twain so easi as aught. 
and the weapon were contriv to the repel of ani armi of monster 
that might make to win entranc to the redoubt. and to the eye they had 
somewhat the look of strang battle-axes, and might be lengthen by the 
pull out of the handles. 

now, the youth made, as I have told, to the northward; but had first to 
keep a long way to the north-east, that they might come clear of the 
vale of red fire. and thi wise they journeyed, and kept the vale about 
seven mile to the north-west of them, and so were present beyond the 
watcher of the north-east, and go with a greater freedom, and have 
less care to hide. 

and thi way, it may be, certain of the giants, wandering, perceiv 
them, and went swiftli to make attack and destroy them. but some order 
went about among the youths, and they made a long line, with a certain 
space between each, becaus of the terror of their weapon, and 
immediately, it seemed, the giant were upon them, a score and seven 
they were, and seem to be hair like to mighti crabs, as I saw with 
the great spy-glass, when the great flare of far and mighti fire threw 
their fierc light across the dark lands. 

and there wa a veri great and horrid fight; for the youth broke into 
circl about each of the giants, and mani of those young men were torn 
in pieces; but they smote the monster from behind and upon everi side, 
and we of the mighti pyramid could behold at time the grey, strang 
gleam of their weapons; and the jether wa stir about me by the 
pass of those that died; yet, by reason of the great miles, their 
scream came not to us, neither heard we the roar of the monsters; but 
into our hearts, even from that great distanc and safety, there stole 
the terror of those awesom brutes; and in the great spy-glass I could 
behold the great joint and limb and e'en, I thought, the foul sweat of 
them; and their size and brutish wa like to that of odd and 
monstrou anim of the olden world; yet part human. and it must be 
born to mind that the father and the mother of those youth beheld 
all thi dread fight from the embrasures, and their other kin likewis 
watched, and a veri drear sight wa it to their heart and their human, 
natur feelings, and like to breed old age, ere it due. 

then, in a time, the fight ceased; for of those seven and twenti giant 
brute there remain none; onli that there cumber the ground seven 
and twenti lumber hillocks, dread and grim. for the lesser dead we 
could not see proper. 

and we that were within the pyramid saw the youth sort togeth by 
their leaders, all in the dim twilight of that place; and with the great 
spy-glass I made a rough count, and found that there live of them, 
three hundred; and by thi shall you know the power of those few 
monstrou things, which had slain full two hundred, though each youth 
wa arm with so wondrou a weapon. and I set the word through the 
pyramid, that all might have some knowledg of the number that had 
died; for it wa better to know, than to be in doubt. and no spy-glass 
had the power of the great spy-glass. 

after thi fight, the youth spent a time have a care to their bodi 
and wounds; and some were made separ from the others, and of these I 
count upon fifty; and whilst the other made to continu their march 
toward the road where the silent one walk, these were constrain by 
one who wa the leader, to return to the pyramid. and in a little, I saw 
that they came toward us, wearili and with mani a halt, as that they 
suffer great wound and harm of the fight. 

but those other (mayb two hundr and fifti youths) went onward into 
the night land; and though we sorrow at thi thing; yet wa there come 
a huge pride into our heart that those raw ones, who yesterday were but 
children, had so held themselv in the battle, and done a great deed 
that day. and I wot that whilst their mother wept, easeless, their 
fathers' heart swell within them, and held somewhat of their pain 
away from them for a time. 

and all thi while, those wound youth came slowly, and rested, and 
came on again, the better help the worse; and a great excit and 
troubl there wa in all the mighti pyramid, to learn which were they 
that came, and they that went, and who lay out there quietli among the 
slain. but none might say anyth with surety; for, even with that 
great spy-glass in the tower of observation, they were not overplain; 
save when some light from the fire of the land flare high, and lit 
them. for they stood not up into the glare of the fires, as had the 
giants. and though I saw them with clearness, yet I knew them not; for 
there wa so mighti a multitud in that vast redoubt, that none might 
ever know the half even of their rulers. 

and about thi time, there came a fresh matter of troubl to our minds; 
for one of the monstruwacan made report that the instrument were 
record an influenc abroad in the night; so that we had knowledg 
that one of the evil forc wa out. and to me there came an awared 
that a strang unquiet stole over the land; yet I knew it not with mine 
ears; but my spirit heard, and it wa as though troubl and an 
expect of horror did swarm about me. 

and once, listening, I heard the master-word beat strang low, and 
I knew the aether to thrill about me, and a faint stir wa there in 
my soul, as of a faint voice, speaking; and I knew that naani call to 
me some messag across the night of the world; yet weak and come 
without clear meaning; so that I wa torment and could but send 
comfort to her, with my brain-elements. and present I knew that she 
ceas to speak. 

and, later, I heard that there wa a new matter forward in the redoubt; 
for ten thousand men had assembl to attend the room of prepar 
for the short preparation; and by thi we knew that those poor youth 
who stumbl toward us through the dark, were present to have help. 

and through all that sleep-time, there went forward the spiritu and 
the physic prepar of the ten thousand; and upon the morrow they 
slept, whilst an hundr thousand made readi their arms. 

and in thi space of time the two hundr and fifti youth that went 
toward the road where the silent one walk, had come veri nigh thereto; 
have gone veri warili and with some slowness, because, as may be, of 
the lesson of the giants. 

and to us in the pyramid, the instrument made known constantli that 
influenc which wa abroad, and which all those of the tower of 
observ thought to proceed from the hous of silence. yet, noth 
could we see with the great spy-glass, and so could come to no sure 
knowing; but onli to fear and wonder. 

and, presently, the youth were upon the great road, and turn to the 
northward. and beyond them, a great way, stood the hous of silence, 
upon a low hill at a certain distanc to the right of the road. 

By now, they that were wound had come to within, maybe, fifteen mile 
of the great redoubt; and the news went through all the cities, that the 
ten thousand men that were prepared, made to arm themselves. and I went 
down by the tower lift, and saw them come down by thousand from the 
room of preparation; and none might go nigh to them, or caus them to 
speak; for they were made ready, and were, as it might be, holy. 

and all the million of the mighti pyramid stood in their citi about 
certain of the main lifts, and watch those thousand go downwards, all 
in their armour of grey metal, and each one arm with the diskos, which 
wa that same veri terribl weapon, which all had train to. 

and I doubt not but that the young men of the pyramid looked, with 
long in their hearts, that they might have been among those that went 
forth to succour. yet, the older men had graver thought in their 
hearts; for the blood ran more soberli in them, and they had knowledg 
and memori of the peril. and by this, I would make clear that I speak 
less of the peril of the body, which is common to everi state of life; 
but of the peril of the spirit. 

and it may be thought by those of thi age, that it wa most strang 
that they of that, have all the knowledg of etern to aid them, had 
no weapon by which to shoot, and kill at a distance. 

but, indeed, thi had not been so in the past; as our histori did 
show; for some wondrou weapon there had been, that might slay without 
sound or flash at a full score mile and more; and some we had whole 
within the great museum; and of other but the part in decay; for they 
had been foolish things, and reckless to use; for we of that great 
pyramid, want not to kill a few of the monster that lay at a great 
distance; but onli those which came nigh, to harm us. 

and concern those same weapon that kill silent at a great 
distance, we had now littl knowledge, save that they did wast the 
earth-current; and no practic had we concern their workings; for it 
was, maybe, an hundr thousand year gone that they had been used, and 
found to be of no great worth in a close attack, and harm otherwis 
to the peace, in that they angered, unneedful, the forc of that land, 
slay wantonli those monster which did no more than beset the mighti 
redoubt at a great distance. for, as may be seen by a littl thought, we 
did veri gladli keep a reason quietness, and refrain from aught 
that should wake that land; for we were born to the custom of that 
strang life, and live and die in peace, for the most part; and were 
veri content to have security, and to be neutral in all thing that did 
not overbear us; but, as it were, alway armed, and ready. 

but concern the great and evil forc that were abroad in the night 
land, these we had no power to harm; nor could we hope for more than 
that we had secur from them, which inde we had; but the huge of 
their power wa about us, and we dare not to wake it; save through such 
extrem as had come to pass by thi folli of the youths; though, even 
now, we had no thought to attack aught; but onli to succour those 
wound ones. 

and concern thi simplic of weapons, which excit somewhat even 
my wonder in thi our present age, it may be that the power of 
chemistri were someway quaintli limit by condit in that age; and 
there to be alway a need to spare the earth-current; and hence, by thi 
caus and by that, we were brought, by the extreme, nigh to the 
simplic of the earli world; yet with a strang and mighti difference, 
as all may know who have read. 

now, presently, the word wa sent to everi citi throughout the great 
redoubt--a wa the law--that the great gate should be opened; and each 
citi sent it master, to form the full watch, as wa the law. and each 
went clad in grey armour, and carri the diskos. and the full watch 
numbered, two thousand; for there were also the watchmen. 

then the light in the great causeway were made dim; so that the open 
of the gate should cast no great glare from within into the night land, 
to tell the watcher of the north-west, and all the monsters, that 
certain human went out from the mighti pyramid. but whether the vast 
and hidden forc of evil had knowledge, we knew not; and they who went 
must but chanc it, rememb that they were prepared, and had the 
capsule. 

and the ten thousand that were prepared, went out through the great 
gateway, into the night; and the full watch stood back from them, and 
spoke no word, but salut silent with the diskos; and they that went, 
rais each the disko a little, and pass out into the dark. 

then the great gate wa shut; and we made to wait and to watch, with 
troubl and expect within our hearts. and at the embrasur mani 
did comfort the women of those men. 

and I went back, upward by miles, until I came to the tower of 
observation; and I look out from there into the night land, and saw 
that the ten thousand halt at the circle, and made arrang of 
themselves, and sent some befor and upon either hand, and so went 
forward into the night land. 

and after that, I went to the great spy-glass, and turn it toward the 
two hundr and fifti youth that were far off, upon the road where the 
silent one walk; yet for awhil I could not perceiv them, for all the 
road seem empty. but afterward I saw them, and they were clamber 
back into the road, have gone aside, as I thought, becaus of the 
pass of one of those silent ones, that I saw now at a distanc to the 
southward of them. 

there pass then, some three hours; and in that time I vari my 
watch between those far-off youths, and the ten-thousand that went 
forward to succour the wounded, that were now, maybe, scarc nine mile 
distant from the mighti pyramid, and the ten-thousand came veri close to 
them. and, in truth, in a littl while, they spi one the other, and I 
gathered, in spirit, someth of the rejoic of those youths; yet 
weak and troubl were they, becaus of their wounds, and their 
knowledg of failure, and their disobedi of the law. 

and, presently, they were surround by the ten-thousand, and carri 
upon slings; and all that bodi swung round toward the pyramid, and came 
back at a great pace. 

and, in the same time, I heard the sound that made them so swift to 
hasten; for there smote up through the night the bay of the hounds; 
and we knew that they were discovered. and I swept the great spy-glass 
over the land, toward the valley Of the hounds, that I might discov 
them quickly; and I saw them come lumbering, at a strang gallop, and 
great as horses, and it might be onli ten mile to the east. 

and I look onc upon the watcher of the north-east, and I saw and 
marvel that the great bell-ear quiver constantly; and I knew that 
it had knowledge, and gave signal to all the land. then did one of the 
monstruwacan report that a new and terribl influenc wa abroad in the 
land; and by the instrument, we had knowledg that it approached; and 
some of the monstruwacan call foolishli with weak voic to the 
ten-thousand to haste; forgetting, and desir onli their safeti from 
that which came near. 

then, look with the great spy-glass, I saw that there move across 
the land, from the direct of the plain of blue fire, a mighti hump, 
seem of black mist, and came with prodigi swiftness. and I call 
to the master monstruwacan, that he come and look through one of the 
eye-piec that were about the great spy-glass; and he came quickly, and 
when he had look a while, he call to the monstruwacan that had made 
report. and the monstruwacan answered, and repli that the influenc 
drew nearer, by the read of the instrument; yet of the thing itself 
the man had no sight. 

and I ceas not to look, and in a littl while, the hump thing pass 
downward into the vale of red fire, which lay across the land that way. 
but I watch steadfastly, and present I saw the black hump climb up 
from the vale of red fire upon thi side, and come through the night, so 
that in scarc a minut it had come halfway across that part of the 
night land. 

and my heart stood quiet with fear, and the utter terror of thi 
monster, which I knew to be sure one of the great forc of evil of 
that land, and had power, without doubt, to destroy the spirit. and the 
master monstruwacan leapt toward the home-call, and sent the great 
sound down to the ten-thousand, that they might attend, and immediately, 
he signal to them to beware. yet, alreadi I perceiv that they knew 
of thi utter danger that wa upon them; for I saw them slay the youth 
quickly, that their spirit might not be lost; for they were unprepared. 
but the men, be prepared, had the capsule, and would die swiftli in 
the last moment. 

I look again toward the hump, and saw that it came like a hill of 
black in the land, and wa almost anigh. then there happen a 
wonder; for in that moment when all had els gone quickly, that they 
might save their souls, out of the earth there rose a littl light, like 
to the crescent of the young moon of thi earli day. and the crescent 
rose up into an arch of bright and cold fire, glow but little; and it 
span abov the ten-thousand and the dead; and the hump stood still, 
and went backward and wa present lost. 

and the men came swiftli toward the mighti pyramid. yet, ere they were 
come to safety, the bay of the hound sound close upon them, and 
they face to the danger; yet, as I could know, without despair, becaus 
that they yet live after so enorm a peril. 

and the hound were veri nigh, as now I beheld with the great spy-glass; 
and I count five score, run with mighti head low, and in a pack. 
and lo! as the hound came at them, the ten-thousand drew apart, and had 
a space between the men, that they might have full use of that terribl 
diskos; and they fought with the handl at length, and I saw the disk 
spin and glisten and send out fire. 

then wa there a veri great battle; for the light that arch abov 
them, and held away the power from their souls, made not to protect them 
from thi danger of the lesser monsters. and at an hundr thousand 
embrasur within the mighti pyramid, the women cri and sobbed, and 
look again. and in the lower citi it wa told, after, that the 
peopl could hear the crash and splinter of the armour, as the hound 
ran to and fro, slaying; aye, even the sound of the armour between their 
teeth. 

yet, the ten-thousand ceas not to smite with the diskos; and they 
hew the hound in pieces; but of the men that went forth, there were a 
thousand and seven hundr slain by the hounds, ere the men won to 
victory. 

then came that weari band of hero back to the home shelter of the 
vast redoubt; and they bore their dead with them, and the youth that 
they slew. and they were receiv with great honour, and with exceed 
grief, and in a great silence; for the thing admit not of words, 
until a time had passed. and in the citi of the pyramid there wa 
mourning; for there had been no sorrow like unto thi through, mayhap, 
an hundr thousand years. 

and they bore the youth to their mother and to their fathers; and the 
father of each made thank to the men that they had save the soul of 
hi son; but the women were silent. yet, neither to the father nor to 
the mother, wa ever made known the name of the slayers; for thi might 
not be; as all shall see with a littl thought. 

and some did rememb that, in verity, all wa due to the unwisdom of 
those youths, who had heed not the law and their life-teachings. yet 
had they paid to the uttermost, and pass outwards; and the account of 
their deed wa closed. 

and all thi while did great number spi toward the road where the 
silent one walk, that they might watch that band of youth afar in the 
night land, who went forward amid those horrid dangers. yet, when the 
dead youth had been brought in, mani had ceas to look out for a time 
and had turn to questioning, and some had made inspect that they 
might know which had come back, and which lay out there where the giant 
had slain them, or went forward to more dread matters. 

but who of those that were abroad, were slain, or still went onward, we 
had but indiffer knowledge; though the men of the ten-thousand knew 
somewhat, have had speech with the wound youths, ere they slew them. 
and, as may be thought, these men were sore question by the mother 
and the father of those youth that were not account of; yet I doubt 
that few had much knowledg wherewith to consol them. 

now there wa presently, in the garden of silence, which wa the 
lowermost of all the underground fields, the end of those seventeen 
hundr heroes, and of the youth that they save and slew. and the 
garden wa a great country, and an hundr mile everi way, and the roof 
thereof wa three great mile above, and shape to a mighti dome; as it 
had been that the builder and maker thereof did rememb in their 
spirit the visibl sky of thi our present age. 

and the make of that countri wa all set out in a singl histori of 
seven thousand and seventi volumes. and there were likewis seven 
thousand and seventi year spent to the make of that country; so that 
there had unrememb gener live and labour and died, and seen 
not the end of their labour. and love had shape it and hallow it; so 
that of all the wonder of the world, there ha been none that shall 
ever come anigh to that countri of silence--an hundr mile everi way 
of silenc to the dead. 

and there were in that roof seven moon set in a mighti circle, and lit 
by the earth-current; and the circl wa sixti mile across, so that all 
that countri of quiet wa visible; yet to no great glare, but a sweet 
and holi light; so that I did alway feel in my heart that a man might 
weep there, and be unashamed. 

and in the midst of that silent country, there wa a great hill, and 
upon the hill a vast dome. and the dome wa full of a light that might 
be seen in all that country, which wa the garden of silence. and 
beneath the dome wa the "crack," and within it the glori of the 
earth-current, from which all had life and light and safety. and in the 
dome, at the north, there wa a gateway; and a narrow road went upward 
to the gateway; and the road wa name the last road; and the gateway 
wa name by no name, but known to all as the gateway. 

and there were in that mighti country, long roadways, and hidden method 
to help travel; and constant templ of rest along the miles; and 
groves; and the charm of water, falling. and everywher the statu of 
memory, and the tablet of memory; and the whole of that great 
underground countri full of an echo of etern and of memori and love 
and greatness; so that to walk alon in that land wa to grow back to 
the wonder and mysteri of childhood; and present to go upward again 
to the citi of the mighti pyramid, purifi and sweeten of soul and 
mind. 

and in my boyhood, I have wander oft a week of day in that countri of 
silence, and had my food with me, and slept quietli amid the memories; 
and gone on again, wrap about with the quiet of the everlasting. and 
the man-soul within would be drawn mightili to those place where the 
great one of the past etern of the world had their memori named; but 
there wa that within me which ever drew me, in the ending, to the hill 
of the babes; those littl hill where might be heard amid the 
lonesom of an utter quiet, a strang and wondrou echo, as of a 
littl child call over the hills. but how thi wa I know not, save 
by the sweet cun of some dead maker in the forgotten years. 

and here, mayhap by reason of thi voic of pathos, were to be found 
the countless token of memori to all the babe of the mighti pyramid, 
through a thousand ages. and, odd whiles, would I come upon some 
mother, sit there lonely, or mayhap compani by others. and by 
thi littl tell shall you know somewhat of the quiet and the 
wonder and the holi of that great countri hallow to all memori and 
to etern and to our dead. 

and it wa here, into the countri of silence, that they brought down the 
dead to their burial. and there came down into the countri of silence, 
mayb an hundr million, out of the citi of the pyramid, to be 
present, and to do honour. 

now they that had charg of the dead, did lay them upon the road which 
ran up unto the gateway, even that same road which wa name the last 
road. and the road move upward slowli with the dead; and the dead went 
inward through the gateway; first the poor youths, and afterward they 
that had given up life that they might save them. 

and as the dead went upwards, there wa a veri great silenc over all 
the mile of the countri of silence. but in a littl while there came 
from afar off, a sound as of a wind wailing; and it came onward out of 
the distance, and pass over the hill of the babes, which were a great 
way off. and so came anigh to the place where I stood. even as the 
blow of a sorrow wind did it come; and I knew that all the great 
multitud did sing quietly; and the sing pass onwards, and left 
behind it an utter silence; even as the wind doth rustl the corn, and 
pass onwards, and all fall to a greater seem quiet than before. 
and the dead pass inward through the gateway, into the great light and 
silenc of the dome; and came out no more. 

and again from beyond the far hill of the babe there wa that sound of 
the million singing; and there rose up out of the earth beneath, the 
voic of the underground organs; and the nois of the sorrow pass 
over me, and went again into the distance, and left all hushed. 

and lo! as there pass inward to the silenc of the dome the last of 
those dead heroes, there came again the sound from beyond the hill of 
the babes; and as it came more nigh, I knew that it wa the song of 
honour, loud and triumphant, and sung by countless multitudes. and the 
voic of the organ rose up into thunder from the deep earth. and there 
wa a great honour done to the glori of the dead. and afterwards, onc 
more a silence. 

then did the peopl of the citi arrang themselv so that from everi 
citi whenc had come a hero, were the peopl of that citi gather 
together. and when they were so gathered, they set up token of memori 
to the dead of their city. but afterward did charg artist to the 
make of sculptur great and beauti to that same end; and now did 
but place tablet against that time. 

and afterward the peopl did wander over that countri of silence, and 
made visit and honour to their ancestors, if such were deserving. 

and presently, the mighti lift did rais them all to the citi of the 
pyramid; and thereaft there wa someth more of usualness; save that 
ever the embrasur were full of those that watch the youth afar upon 
the great road. and in thi place I to rememb how that our spy-glass 
had sure some power of the earth-curr to make greater the impuls 
of the light upon the eye. and they were like no spy-glass that ever you 
did see; but oddli shape and to touch both the forehead and the eyes; 
and gave wonder sight of the land. but the great spy-glass to be 
beyond all this; for it had the eye of it upon everi side of the mighti 
pyramid, and did be truli an huge machine. 

and to me, as I went about my duties, or peer forth through the great 
spy-glass at the youth upon the road where the silent one walk, there 
came at time a far faint thrill of the aether; so that sometim I 
wa awar that there wa the beat of the master-word in the night; 
but so strang and weak, that the instrument had no wot of it. and 
when thi came, then would I call back through all the everlast night 
to naani, who wa inde mirdath; and I would send the master-word with 
my brain-elements; and afterward such comfort as I might. 

yet hard and bitter wa the truth of my helpless and weakness, and 
the utter terror and might of the evil forc and monster of the night 
land. So that I wa like to have brake my heart with pondering. 

and the silenc would come again; and anon the weak thrill of the 
aether; but no more the far voic speak in my soul. 




V 

into the night land 


now, after that destruct which had come upon the ten-thousand, and 
the fresh assur that wa upon us of the terror of the night land, it 
may be known that there could be no more thought to succour. though, in 
truth, those youth that went now upon the road where the silent one 
walk were far beyond our aid. 

yet might it be thought that we should have signal to them, call 
by the home-call, which wa that great voic which went forth from the 
machin abov the seal base of the mighti pyramid. but thi we might 
not do; for then we gave signal to the monster of that land, that some 
were even now abroad from the pyramid; yet we could no more than hope 
that the evil forc had no wot of them; for, in verity, none might 
ever know the knowledg or the ignor which those power did possess. 

yet, it must be kept to the mind that we knew even then there wa an 
influenc abroad in the land, strang and quiet; so that the instrument 
did not more than make record of it. and as I have sure set down ere 
now, we had belief that it did come from that hous of silence, afar in 
the night land, upon that low hill to the north of the great road. and 
mani among the monstruwacan fear that it wa direct upon the 
youths; but of thi there could be no surety; and we could but wait and 
watch. 

now, about thi time those poor youth did draw nigh to that part of the 
road where the silent one walk, where it turn more swiftli to the 
north; and they to be now at no mighti distanc from that grim and 
horrid house. 

and present we knew that the influenc had a greater power in the 
land; and I had an assured that it came from the house; yet no 
certain proof wa this. but I set out my feel to the master 
monstruwacan; and he had trust in them and in my power; moreover, he 
also had belief within himself that some secret power came out from the 
hous of silence. 

and some talk there wa at time that we send the home-cal into the 
night, to give warn to the youth of our knowledg and our fear; and 
to entreat them to make a safe endeavour to return swiftly. yet wa thi 
an error; and refus by the master monstruwacan; for it wa not meet 
that we put the soul of those youth in peril, until such time as we 
had certainti that they should be lost if we did not bestir ourselves. 
for, indeed, thi home-cal wa as a mighti voice, call over the 
world, and did have so exceed a noise, that it had immedi told 
all that land how that some were yet abroad from the great redoubt. and 
here will I set down how that the home-cal had no use in those ages; 
but had been a call in the olden time when yet the great flying-ship 
went abroad over the world. 

and there pass now a day and a night; and in all that time there 
ceas not great multitud to peer forth into the night land at the 
youths. for it wa known concern the influence, and all felt that the 
youth did draw nigh veri speedi to their fate; and much talk there was; 
and mani thing said, and much foolish speech, and kind intent; but no 
courag to go forth to make further attempt to rescue; which, in truth, 
call not for great astonishment, as I have sure writ or oft thought. 

and in thi place let me set down that the land was, as it might be 
said, waked, and unquiet, and a sens of thing pass in the night, 
and of horrid watchfulness; and there were, at thi time and at that, 
low roar that went across the land. and if I have not told the same 
befor thi time, it must be set to count against me and my telling; 
for, indeed, I should have writ it down befor thi place. yet is the 
difficulti of my task great; and all must bear with me, and entreat for 
me that I have courage, so that I may come at last to strength and 
wisdom to tell all that I did see. 

now, in the space of thi day and night, it wa known that the youth 
had not slept, neither had they eaten, save once, as they who had the 
watch through the great spy-glass did affirm. but they to hasten alway 
at a woeful speed toward the north, along that great dismal road, so 
that present they must cease, or slay themselv with their endeavour. 

and all thi did give sureti to our fear that they were under a spell 
from that horrid hous afar in the land; and we had an assur that 
thi thing was. for, presently, there came a monstruwacan to the master 
monstruwacan to report that there had come sudden a mighti influenc 
into the land; and in the same moment, as it might be, I spi through 
the great spy-glass, and did see those youth break swiftli from the 
road where the silent one walk, and begin to run veri swift that they 
might come quickli to the hous of silence. 

then did the master monstruwacan hesit not; but did send the 
home-cal across the world, aye, even to those poor doom one that 
hastened, unknowing, to the terror which did compel them. and 
immedi upon the sound, the master did send a messag to the natur 
eye, in set language, and made warn that they suffer themselv to 
be drawn to their destruct by a forc that came from within the hous 
of silence. 

and he besought them to put forth the strength of their spirits, and do 
battl for their souls; and if they could in no wise compass a victori 
over _that which drew them onwards_, to slay themselv quickly, ere 
they went into that hous to the horror of utter destruction. 

and in all the pyramid wa there a great silence; for the bellow of 
the home-cal bred a quietness, becaus of that which it did portend; 
and it wa swiftli known by the million that the master monstruwacan 
did plead for the soul of the youths; and there went forth, 
unknowingly, a counter-forc from the mighti pyramid, by reason of the 
prayer and soul-wish of the countless millions. 

and the counter-forc wa plain to my inward hearing, and beat all the 
aether of the world into a surg of supplication; so that it stun my 
spirit with the great power of it. and it seem to me, as it were, 
that there wa a vast spiritual-nois in all the night; and I spi 
tremblingli through the great spy-glass, and lo! the youth did ceas 
from their swift running, and were come togeth in a crowd, and had a 
seem to be confused; as might some who have wake suddenli from 
sleep, to find that they walk in their sleep, and had come to a 
strang place. 

then came there a great roar from all the million that spi from the 
embrasures--from nigh five hundr thousand embrasur they did look, 
and I count not the great view-tables. and the shout rose up like to 
the roar of a mighti wind of triumph, yet wa it over-earli to sound 
for victory. for the counter-forc which came from the intens of so 
mani will blent to one intent, wa brake, and the evil forc which came 
forth out of the hous did draw the youth again; so that they heed 
not their salvation; but turn onc again to their running. 

and the mighti pyramid wa full of a shaken silence, and immedi of 
lament and sorrow and horror at thi thing. but in that moment 
there did happen a fresh wonder; for there grew suddenli befor those 
poor youths, billow of mist--a it had been of pure white fire, shine 
veri chill; yet give no light upon them. 

and the mist of cold fire stay their way, so that we had knowledg 
that there fought for the soul of them, one of those sweet power of 
goodness, which we had belief did strive to ward our spirit at all 
time from those forc of evil and destruction. and all the million 
saw the thing; but some with a great clearness, and mani doubtful; yet 
were all advanc more in spiritu sight and hear than the normal 
peopl of thi age. 

but of them all, none had the night-hearing, to know a soul have 
speech in the aether half across the world. yet, as I have said, some 
there had been aforetim who were thu given the hearing, even as wa I. 

and there came a monstruwacan to the master monstruwacan to make report 
that the influenc had ceas to work upon the instruments; and by thi 
thing we knew that in veriti the forc which proceed out from the 
hous of silenc wa cut off from us, and from those youths; and we had 
assur that there fought a veri mighti power for the salvat of the 
soul of the youths. 

and all the peopl were silent, save for an underbreath of wonder and 
talk; for all were utter stir with hope and fear, perceiv that the 
youth had some chanc given unto them to return. 

and whilst the youth yet waver in their minds, as I perceiv with 
the great spy-glass, and the knowledg of my soul, and of my natur 
wit, lo! the master monstruwacan sent onc more the great voic of the 
home-cal abroad into the land; and immedi besought those youth 
for the sake of their soul and the love which their mother had for 
them, to come swiftli homewards, whilst they had yet thi great power 
to shield them, and allow them sweet sanity. 

and I thought that some did look toward the pyramid, as that they 
answer to the mighti voic of the home-call, and did read the messag 
which the master monstruwacan made to them. but in a moment they face 
about, seem to have a good obedi to one who did alway lead; and 
of whom I had inquired, and found to be one name aschoff, who wa a 
great athlet of the nine-hundredth-city. and thi same aschoff, out of 
the bold and braveri of hi heart, did make, unwitting, to destroy 
the soul of them all; for he went forward and leapt into the billow of 
the bright shine fire that made a barrier in the way of their 
destruction. 

and immedi the fire ceas from it shining, and gave way and sank 
and grew to a nothingness; and aschoff of the nine-hundredth-c began 
again to run toward the hous of silence; and all they that were with 
him, did follow faithfully, and ceas not to run. 

and they came present to the low hill whereon wa that horrid house; 
and they went up swiftly--and they were two hundr and fifty, and 
wholesom of heart, and innocent; save for a natur wayward of 
spirit. 

and they came to the great open doorway that "hath been open sinc the 
beginning," and through which the cold steadfast light and the 
inscrut silenc of evil "hath made for ever a silenc that may be 
felt in all the land." and the great, uncas window gave out the 
silenc and the light--aye, the utter silenc of an unholi desolation. 

and aschoff ran in through the great doorway of silence, and they that 
followed. and they nevermor came out or were seen by ani human. 

and it must be known that the mother and the father of those youth 
look out into the night land, and saw that thing which came to pass. 

and all the peopl were silent; but some said present that the youth 
would come forth again; yet the peopl knew in their heart that the 
young men had gone in to destruction; for, in truth, there wa that in 
the night which spoke horror to the soul of all, and a sudden utter 
quiet in all the land. 

but unto me (that had the night-hearing) there came a great fear of that 
which might be whisper into my spirit, out of the quiet of the 
night--of the agoni of those young men. yet there came no sound, to the 
hear of the soul; neither then nor in all the year that were to 
come; for, in verity, had those youth pass into a silenc of which 
the heart cannot think. 

and here will I tell how that the strang quiet which did fill all the 
land, seem to brood within the night, wa horrid beyond all the 
roar which had pass over the dark in the time that went 
before; so that it had given my spirit some rest and assur to hear 
but the far-echoing, low thunder of the great laughter, or the whine 
which wa use at time to sound in the night from the south-east, where 
were the silver-fir hole that open befor the thing that nods. Or 
the bay of the hounds, or the roar of the giants, or ani of those 
dread sound that did often pass through the night. for they could 
not have offend me as did that time of silence; and so shall you judg 
how dread wa that quiet, which did hold so much of horror. 

and sure it will be known that none had think now, even in idl 
speech, that ani should have power to succour the peopl of the lesser 
redoubt. neither, as I have said, had ani the knowledg of the place 
where it did stand. 

and so wa it made plain that those peopl must suffer and come 
unhelp and alon to their end; which wa a sad and dread thought to 
any. yet had those within the great pyramid come alreadi to much sorrow 
and calam becaus that some had made attempt in thi matter. and 
there had been for gain, onli failure, and the sorrow of mothers, and 
the loneli of wives, and of kin. and now thi dread horror upon us, 
which concern those lost youths. 

now, as may be conceived, thi _sure knowledge_ that we might give no 
succour to the peopl of the lesser redoubt, weigh heavi upon my 
heart; for I had, mayb with foolishness, held vagu hope and wonder 
concern our power to make expedit secretli into the night, to 
discov that lesser pyramid, and rescu those poor thousands; and abov 
all, as may be thought, had I the thought of that sweet moment in which 
I should step forward out of the night and all mysteri and terror, and 
put forth mine arm to naani, saying: "I am that one." and knowing, in 
my soul, that she that had been mine in that bygon eternity, should 
sure know me upon the instant; and call out swiftly, and come swiftly, 
and be again unto me in that age, even as she had been in this. 

and to think upon it, and to know that thi thing should never be; but 
that, even in that moment of thought, she that had been mine in these 
olden day of sweetness, might be even then suffer horror in the 
power of some foul monster, wa like a kind of madness; so that nearli I 
could seiz the diskos, and run forth unprepar into the evil and 
terror of the night land, that I should make one attempt to come to that 
place where she abode, or els to cast off my life in the attempt. 

and oft did I call to naani; and alway I sent the master-word beat 
through the night, that she might have assur that it wa inde I 
that did speak unto her spirit, and no foul thing or monster, spell 
evil and lie unto her. 

and oft did I make to instruct her that never should she be tempt 
forth from the shelter of that redoubt in which she did live, by ani 
messag out of the night; but alway to await the master-word; and, 
moreover, to have a sure knowledg that none that wa her friend would 
ever seek to entic her into the night. 

and thi way and that way would I speak with naani, send my word 
silent with my brain-elements; yet wa it dole and weari and 
dread alway to have speech into the dark, and never to hear the 
answer beat of the master-word, and the sweet, faint voic whisper 
within my soul. yet, onc and again, would I have knowledg that the 
aether did thrill about me, weakly, and to mine inward hear it would 
seem that the master-word did beat faintli in the night; and thereaft 
would my heart have a littl comfort, in that I had assurance, of a 
kind, that the love-maid of my memory-dream did still live. 

and constant, I put forth my soul to hark; so that my health fail me, 
with the effort of my harking; and I would chide my being, that I had 
not a wiser control; and so make a fight to do sanely. 

yet, day by day, did my heart grow more weari and restless; for, indeed, 
it did seem that life wa but a veri littl matter, against so great a 
loss as my heart did feel to suffer. 

and oft, at thi time and that, did there come a voic speak plainli 
out of the night, and did purport to be the voic of naani; but ever I 
did say the master-word unto the voice, and the voic had no power by 
which it could make the one answer. yet I jeer not at the voice, to 
show contempt of it fail to bewit me; but let the matter bide; and 
the voic would be silent a time; and again would make a call unto 
me; but never did I make speech with it (for therein lie the danger to 
the soul), but alway did speak the master-word to it silencing; and 
thereaft would shut the thing from my memory, and think onli upon 
sweet and holi matters, as it might be truth and courage, but more often 
of naani, which wa both sweet and holi to my spirit and heart and 
being. 

and so it wa as I have set down, there were monster without in the 
night that did torment me; having, it may be, intent to lure me unto 
destruction; or inde it doth chanc that they had no hope but to 
plagu me with malice. 

and, as may be thought, all thi consid of my trouble, and the 
give of my strength unto naani through the night of the world, that 
she might have comfort and help, did work upon me; so that I grew thin, 
plainli to the eye of those that love me. 

and the master monstruwacan, he that did love me, as I were hi son, 
chid me gently, and had wise speech with me; so that I but love him the 
more, yet without have gain of health; for my heart destroy me, as 
it doth if love be held back and made alway to weep. 

and it may be thought strang that my mother and my father did not talk 
also with me; but I had neither mother nor father those mani years; and 
thi thing I should have set down early; so that none should wast 
thought ponder to no end. but the blame is to my telling. 

now, concern my love-trouble, there did happen a certain thing which 
gave me to decide; for one night I wake from a sore troubl sleep, and 
it did seem that naani did call my name, mine olden love name, and in a 
voic of utter anguish and with beseeching. and I sat up in the bed, and 
sent the master-word into the night, with my brain-elements; and 
present all about me there wa the solemn beat of the master-word, 
answering; but weak, and gone faint, that scarc I might hear it. 

and I call again with my brain-el unto naani, that wa mirdath; 
and spoke to give her assurance, and to hast to tell unto me that which 
wa so wrong and piti with her. and who shall be amaz that I wa 
shaken with the eager of my spirit, in that it wa so long sinc 
naani had spoken clear within my soul; and now behold, her voice. 

yet, though I did call mani a time unto the everlast night, there 
came no more the voic of naani, speak strang within my spirit; 
but onli at time a weak thrill of the aether about me. 

and, at the last I grew madden with the sorrow of thi thing, and the 
sens and knowledg of harm about the maid; and I stood upright upon my 
feet, and I rais my hands, and gave word and honour unto naani through 
all the black of the night, that I would no more abid within the 
mighti pyramid to my safety, whilst she, that had been mine own through 
eternity, came to horror and destruct by the beast and evil power 
of that dark world. and I gave the word with my brain-elements, and bade 
her to be of heart; for that until I die I would seek her. but out of 
the dark there came naught but the silence. 

then I cloth me swiftly, and went up quickli to the tower of 
observation, that I might speak instant with the master monstruwacan; 
for my heart burn in me to intention, and to be do speedili that 
which I had set upon myself to do. 

and I came to the master monstruwacan, and told all to him; and how that 
I did mean no more to suffer in quiet and to no end; but to make 
adventur into the night land, that I find naani, or perchanc find a 
swift peac from thi my long troubling. 

now, when the master monstruwacan heard that which I had to say, it sat 
heavili upon him, and he besought me long and mani time that I refrain 
from thi thing; for that none might achiev so great a task; but that I 
should be lost in my youth befor mani day were gone by. yet to all hi 
speech I said naught, save that thi thing wa laid upon me, and even as 
I had promised, so should I make to act. 

and in the ending, the master monstruwacan perceiv that I wa set to 
thi thing, and not to be moved; and he did put it to me how that I had 
grown to leanness, with so much troubling, and that I should have wisdom 
to wait awhile, that I put on my full strength. 

but even as I was, so would I go; and thi I told to him, gently; and 
show how that the thing wa meet and help to the safeti of my soul; 
for that my strength wa still in me; yet wa I sweeter in spirit 
becaus that I stood lean and pure, and much poor dross and littl 
had been burn from me; so that fear wa not in me. and all do I lay to 
the count of my love, which doth purifi and make sweet and fearless the 
human heart. 

and becaus I wa even as I have said, so wa I the less in troubl of 
the forc of evil; for long and sore had been my prepar of spirit; 
and I wot that none had ever gone forth into the darkness, so long 
withholden from that which doth weaken and taint the spirit. 

and here let me set down how that the three day of preparation, which 
were proper to those that will to go forth into the night land, had 
for their chief aim the cleans of the spirit; so that the power of 
evil did have a less abl to harm. 

but also it was, as I have said, that none should go forth in ignor 
of the full dread of all that held the night; for it wa at the 
prepar that there wa made known certain horror that were not told 
unto the young; and of horrid mutilations, and of abas of the 
soul, that did shake the heart with fear, if but they were whisper 
into the hearing. and these thing were not set down in ani book that 
might be lightli come by; but were ward and safe lock by the master 
of the preparation, in the room of preparation. 

and, indeed, when I did hear that which present I wa to hear, I had 
wonder in my heart that ever ani went out into the night land; or that 
ever the room of prepar should have other than student that meant 
not to go forth, but onli to achiev some knowledg of that which hath 
been done, and mayhap shall be onc again. 

yet, in verity, is thi but the way of the human heart; and hath alway 
been, and will be so in all the years, for ever. for to adventur is the 
lust of youth; and to leav safeti is the natur wayward of the 
spirit; and who shall reprov or regret; for it were sorrow that thi 
spirit of man should cease. yet must it not be thought that I do uphold 
fight to the death or to mutilation, _between man and man_; but 
rather do sorrow upon thi thought. 

now, when the morrow came, if thu I shall speak of that which wa 
outwardli even as the night, though chang alway within the mighti 
pyramid, I went unto the room of preparation; and the door wa close 
upon me; and I underw the full preparation; that I might have full 
power and aid to come to success through all the terror of the night 
land. 

and three day and three night did I abid within the room of 
preparation; and upon the fourth day wa mine armour brought unto me; 
and the master of the prepar stood away from me, silent and with 
sorrow upon hi face; but touch me not, neither come anigh to aid 
me; nor have ani speech with me; for none might crowd upon me, or 
caus me to answer. 

and, presently, wa I clad with the grey armour; and below the armour a 
close-knit suit of special shape and texture, to have the shape of the 
armour, and that I might not die by the cold of the night land. and I 
place upon me a scrip of food and drink, that might keep the life 
within me for a great time, by reason of it preparation; and thi lay 
readi to me, with the armour, and wa stitch about with the mark of 
honour; so that I knew love women thu to speed me. 

and when all wa done and made ready, I took up the diskos, and bow in 
silenc to the master of the preparation; and he went toward the door, 
and open it; and signal that the peopl stand back; so that I might 
go forth untouched. and the peopl stood back; for mani had crowd to 
the door of the room of preparation, so that I knew how that my stori 
must be to the heart of all, in all the citi of the great redoubt; for 
to come unbidden anigh that door wa against the lesser law, and that 
ani er in thi matter, betoken much. 

and I went out through the door; and there wa a mighti lane of peopl 
unto the great lift. and about the great lift, as I went downwards, did 
the countless million stand; and all in a great silence; but have 
dear sympathi in their souls; yet loyal unto my safety, in that none in 
all the mighti pyramid did make speech unto me, or call out aught. and 
as I went downward through the miles, lo! all the aether of the world 
seem to be surg with the silent prayer and speed of those quiet 
multitudes. 

and I came at last unto the great gate; and behold the dear master 
monstruwacan did stand in full armour, and with the diskos, to do me 
honour, with the full watch, as I went forth. and I look at him, 
quietly, and he look unto me, and I bent my head to show respect; and 
he made silent salut with the diskos; and afterward I went onward 
toward the great gateway. 

and they made dim the light in the great causeway, that there should no 
glare go forth into the land, when the gate wa opened; and behold, they 
open not the lesser gate within the greater, for me; but did honour my 
journey, in that they swung wide the great gate itself, through which a 
monstrou armi might pass. and there wa an utter silenc all about the 
gate; and in the hush light the two thousand that made the full watch, 
held up each the diskos, silently, to make salute; and humbly, I held up 
the disko reversed, and went forward into the dark. 




VI 

the way that I did GO 


now I went forward for a space, and took heed not to look backwards; but 
to be strong of heart and spirit; for that which did lie befor me had 
need of all my manhood and courag of soul, that I come to the succour 
of that maid afar in the dark of the world, or meet my death proper, 
as it might need to be. 

and thu did I go forward steadfastly, and consciou in all my be of 
the emot of that part from my mighti home, and of the tender 
and wise that did underli so much curb rule and guidance. 

and my heart wa warm toward the master monstruwacan for that great 
honour, that he should come downward in armour to make one with the full 
watch, that he might uphold me to a lofti spirit at the moment of my 
going. 

and all that time as I went forward, wa the aether of the night about 
me, in tumult with the thought and blind wish of the great million 
I had but now left to my back. 

and, presently, as I steadi somewhat upon my emotions, I wa consciou 
of the exceed cold of the night air, and of the differ tast 
of it upon my lung and in the mouth; and it had, as it were, a wondrou 
keen sharp upon my palate, and did fill the lip more in the 
breathing; so that it may be suppos it had more bodi within it than 
that air which did fill the plateau of the thousandth citi where wa my 
home; for the air of everi citi wa of difference, and the greater 
between one that wa afar up and anoth nigh to the earth, as may be 
thought; so that mani peopl did migrat unto that level which gave 
them best healthfulness; but under rule, and with a guidanc of 
quantities. and not all that were lack of health; for, some are ever 
contrary. 

and here let me set down that, within the deep of the fields, there wa 
air utter vari and wonderful, that might charm one here and likewis 
sorrow anoth that were happier elsewhere; so that all might have 
suiting, did they but wander, and have reason to companion them. 

and thu did I go forward, full of new thought and olden memories, and 
fresh-break wonders; neither forget someth of doubt and fear 
more than a little. and again wa it most cun strang to be out 
there in the night land--though not yet afar--wher often had my fanci 
and imagin led me; yet until that time never had I touch foot, in 
all that life, upon the outward earth. and thi must be a wondrou 
quaint seem thought to those of thi present day. 

and so came I, at last, nigh to the circl that did go about the 
redoubt; and present I wa come to it; and someth astonish wa I 
that it had no great bigness; for I had look for thi by _reasoning_; 
have alway a mind to pictur thing as they might be truly, and henc 
come sometim to the wonder of a great truth; but odd while to 
error that other had not made. and now, lo! I did find it but a small, 
clear tube that had not two inch of thickness; yet sent out a veri 
bright and strong light, so that it seem greater to the eye, did one 
but behold from a distance. 

and thi is but a littl thing to set to the telling; yet may it give 
someth of the new of all; and, moreover, shall you have memori 
with me in thi place, how that oft had I seen thing and beast-monst 
peer over that same littl tube of light, their face come forward out 
of the night. 

and thi had I seen as child and man; for as children, we did use to 
keep oft a watch by hour upon an holiday-time, through the great 
glass of the embrasures. and we did alway hope each to be that one 
that should first discov a monster look inward upon the mighti 
pyramid, across the shine of the circle. and these to come oft; yet 
present to slink away into the night; having, in verity, no like for 
that light. 

and pride had we taken of ourselv to perceiv those monster which had 
most of ugli and horror to commend them; for, therebi did we stand 
to have won the game of watching, until such time as a more fearsom 
brute be discovered. and so went the play; yet with ever, it doth seem 
to me now, someth of a half-known shudder to the heart, and a child' 
rejoic unknowingli in that safeti which had power to make light the 
seem of such matters. 

and this, also, is but a small matter; yet doth it bear upon the 
inward of my feelings; for the memori of all my youth and of the 
mani beast that I had seen to peer across the light, did come upward 
in my mind in that moment; so that I did give back a little, unthink 
of what I did; but have upon me the sudden imagin of that which 
might come out of the dark, beyond. 

and I to stand a littl moment, and present had grown free in my heart 
to have courag of farewell; and so did turn me at last to the view 
of that wondrou home of the last million of thi world. and the sight 
wa an astonish and an uplifting, that inde there wa so mighti a 
thing in all the earth. 

and well might be that there were monster and forc gather togeth 
about that hill of life, out of all the dark of the world; for the 
thing wa as a mighti mountain that went up measureless into the night; 
and spread out upon the earth to the right and to the left of me, so 
that it did seem to hold all the world with it might. 

and in the nearer slope were there three hundr thousand great 
embrasures, as well I did know; there be in all the four side of the 
redoubt, twelv hundr thousand embrasures, as wa set out in the book 
of the schools, and upon the cover of atlas-book as they still quaintli 
to be called, and mani anoth place, as might be supposed. 

and half a mile upward wa the lowest tier of those great window-places, 
and abov that, countless other tiers. and a great light came out from 
them into the darkness; so that I look up into the night mani miles, 
and yet did see them in shine rows; and did make separ each 
embrasur from it fellow for a great way. but there grew yet more, 
abov in the mighti distance, so that they were lost in the upward space 
of the night, and did seem to me present but as a constant, glimmer 
fire, that did shape a shine peak into the black of the heavens, 
dwindl into the utmost height. and thu wa that everlast 
monument. 

then did it come to me that those littl things, which I did see to 
cluster against the embrasures, were in truth the countless million of 
the mighti redoubt; and thi I could make out with some plain in 
those lower embrasures, which were the more near to me than they above; 
for the peopl were set against the light within, yet were as small 
thing like unto insects, in that distance, and within so huge a bulk. 

and I knew that they look out upon me, and did watch through their 
spy-glasses. and I sent my gaze upward again along that great slope of 
grey metal, aye! upward again to where it strode glimmer into the 
blackness, and so at last to the littl star that did crown that wonder 
of the world in the etern night. and, for a little, I did stare 
toward that far light; for it came from within that tower of 
observation, where so late I had spend my life; and I had knowledg 
within my heart that the dear master monstruwacan did bend the great 
spy-glass upon me, through which so oft had I spied. and I rais the 
disko unto him, in salut and farewell, though I saw him not at all 
through that vast space. 

and my heart wa veri full; yet my soul but the stronger for it. and 
then, behold, I wa awar of a murmur in the night, come to me, dim 
and from afar off; and I saw the littl shape of the peopl in the 
lower embrasures, in constant movement; and I knew upon the instant that 
the multitud did take that salut unto themselves, and cri out and 
wave to me their farewells, or to come back--a may be. 

and, indeed, I wa but a lonesom person look up at that great 
mountain of metal and life. and I knew that I had danger to realis my 
plight; and I stay no more; but did rais the diskos, reversed, as wa 
but meet from one young man unto all the millions. 

and I look swiftli upward through those eight great mile of night, 
unto that final light which did shine in the black heavens; so that my 
friend should know that I thought of him that wa beyond my sight, in 
that last moment. and it may be that the invis million that were 
far up in the night, in the upper cities, did take that also to be a 
mean of farewel to themselves; for there came down out of the 
monstrou height, a far, faint murmur of sound, as of a vagu wind up in 
the night. 

then did I lower the diskos, and turn me about. and I breast strang 
against the air clog, and stept forward across the circle, into the 
lonesom of the night land. and I look no more behind; for that 
which wa my home did weaken my heart somewhat, to behold; so that I 
made determin that I look not again to my back, for a great while. 

yet, about me as I went, there wa constant surg in the aether of the 
world; and it did tell unto me how that those, my peopl and kin, had 
continu mind of me, both in prayer and wishings, and in a perpetu 
watching. and the same gave to me a feel as of be someth 
companied; yet, in a time, it came to me that thi disturb of the 
aether should tell to some evil forc how that I wa there abroad in the 
land. but how to stop thi thing, who should have power? for, of truth, 
had I been among them to make a full explain of the danger, they had 
been yet powerless to cease; for but to have such great multitud 
a-think upon one matter, wa to set a disturb about, as should be 
most clear to all. 

now, at the beginning, I did walk outward into the night land, somewhat 
blindly, and without sure direction; be intent onli to put a good 
space to my back, that I might cure somewhat the ach which did weaken 
my heart at the first. 

but, in awhile, I ceas somewhat from my overswiftness, and did put 
thought to my going. and I came quickli to reason that I should tri a 
new way through the land; for it might be that there wa an 
over-watch in that part which had been trod by the youths. 

and I began therewith to set thi thought to the practice; and went not 
direct toward the north; but to the north and west; and so in the end 
to mean to circl around to the back of the north-west watcher, and 
thenc to the north of the plain Of blue fire; and afterwards, as might 
be, have a true and straightway to the north; and by thi plan come 
a long way clear of that hous of silence, which did put more fear upon 
me than all els that wa horrid in the land. 

yet, as all will see, thi made to me a greater journey; though, in 
verity, it were better to go slowli and win to success, than to make a 
greater hast toward destruction; which was, indeed, sure to be mine 
end, did I not go warily. 

now it may be thought upon with wonder, that I did go so assuredli to 
the north; but I went thiswise, part by an inward knowing, and part come 
upon by much latter studying, within the pyramid, of olden books; and by 
reason upon all thing that I did observe, that had seem of 
veriti in them. 

and becaus of thi constant search upon one matter, I had come, but 
a while back, upon a littl book of metal, veri strang and ancient, 
that had lain forgot in a hid place in the great librari through ten 
hundr thousand years, maybe, or less or more, for all that I had 
knowing. 

and much that wa writ in the book wa common knowledge, and set mostli 
to the count of fairy-tal and suchlike, even as we of thi our age 
take not over-sur ani belief in myth of olden times. yet had I 
alway much like for such matters, perceiv behind that outer shell 
which did win alway so much unbelief, the kernel of ancient truth and 
happenings. 

and thu wa it, concern thi littl book which I had made discoveri 
of; for it told again, that which oft I had heard (even as we in thi 
age, read of the deluge) how that once, in a time monstrou far back 
from that, but utter futur to thi age of ours, the world did brake 
upward in a vast earth-quaking, that did rend the world for a thousand 
miles. 

and there came a mighti chasm, so deep that none might see the bottom 
thereof; and there rush therein an ocean, and the earth did burst 
afresh with a sound that did shake all the citi of the world; and a 
great mist lay upon the earth for mani days, and there wa a mighti 
rain. 

and, indeed, thi wa just so set in certain histori of the ancient 
world. also, there wa made refer to it, within some olden records. 
yet nowis to be taken with a seriou mind, to the seem of the 
peopl of the mighti pyramid; but onli as a quaint studi for the 
students, and to be set out in littl tale that did entertain the 
nurseries; or, as it might be, wise men and the general. 

yet, there wa this, about that small and peculiar book, that it did 
speak of mani of these things, as it were that it did quot from the 
pen of those that did have actual witness; and set all out with a 
strang gravity, that did caus one to consid it as meant to be inde 
the tell of truth, and to seem thiswis to have great differ 
from all that I had read befor concern those matters. 

and there was, further, a part in the end of the book, that did seem 
to be writ of a time that came afterwards, mayb an hundr thousand, 
and mayb a million years; but who shall say. 

and therein it did tell of an huge and mighti valley that did come out 
of the west, toward the south-east, and made turn thenc northwards, 
and wa a thousand mile both ways. and the side thereof were an 
hundr mile deep, and the sun did stand in the western end, and made a 
red gloom for a thousand miles. and in the bottom there were great seas; 
and beast strang and awesome, and veri plentiful. 

now this, as may be seen, wa as the talk of romance; yet did I turn my 
wit to their natur end, and made thu plain of it. for, in truth, I 
to have someth of belief, and it to seem to me that in a bygon 
eternity, when the world wa yet light, as in my heart I knew to have 
been inde a thing of verity, there wa a great and wondrou 
earthquake. 

and the earthquak did burst the world up, along a certain great curv 
where it had weakness; and there fell into the yawn furnac of the 
world, one of the great oceans; and immedi made of itself steam, 
and so brake upward again, and tore the earth mightili in it swift 
uprising. 

and thereaft there wa a mist and confus and rain upon the world. 
and, indeed, all veri seemli put; and not to be taken as a light tale. 

then, in that end of the book, there wa one that did write, have 
live in a vast later age, when the sun had come anigh to hi dying, and 
the upward earth wa grown quiet and cold and not good to live upon. and 
in that time the mighti chasm had been calm by the weight of an 
eternity, so that it wa now a most deep and wondrou valley, that did 
hold sea and great hill and mountains; and in it were great forest of 
kinds, and land that were good and healthful; and place given over to 
fire, and to steamings, and sulphur clouds; so that they held poison 
that had ill for man. 

and great beast were there down in that far depth, that none might see 
ever, save by a strong spy-glass. and such there were in the earli 
world, and had now been bred in the end by those inward forc of 
natur which did make the valley a place of good warmth; so that there 
was, as it were, onc more the primal world born to give new birth unto 
such olden monsters, and to others, new and peculiar to that age and 
circumstance. 

and all this, indeed, did the book give also; but constrain and 
difficult to take clearli to the heart, and not like to the wise plain 
speech of the earli tellings; so that I must even set it out here in 
mine own speech. 

and it did seem to me, by my reading, that man had come at one time to a 
great soft of heart and spirit through mani age of over-ease. but 
that the world did come to cold and unfriendliness, by reason of the 
sun' slow ceasing. 

and there wa presently, in naturalness, a race upon the earth that were 
hardy, and made to fight for their lives; and did perceiv that the 
mighti valley that cut the world in twain, wa a place of warmth and 
life; and so did make to adventur their bodi down that wondrou 
height; and were mani age come safe to the bottom; but did find safe 
place in the downward way where they built them houses, and made to 
live, and begot them children; and these grew up to that life of 
constant and great climbings, and of hard work upon the road, which 
wa the one intent of that people; so that the book did speak of them 
alway as the road makers. 

and thu did they make downward through the long year and the ages; 
and mani gener did live and die, and saw not the reach of the 
road down into that great vale that lay so monstrou deep in the world. 

but in the end they did come there with the road; and they were veri 
hardy; and they did fight with the monster and slay many; and they 
built them mani cities, through great year in the mighti valley, and 
did make the road from citi unto citi along that great valley, even unto 
the bight of the valley. and they found here a constant dark and 
shadow; for that the sun could not make a shine around that great 
corner. yet, even here they ceas not to make the road; but took it 
around, and a mighti way unto the north; pass it among strang fire 
and pit that burn from out of the earth. 

but there wa presently, such a power and horror of monster and evil 
thing in that valley of shadow, that the road maker were made to go 
backward into the red light which did fill the westward valley, and 
came from that low sun. 

and they went back unto their cities; and live there mayhap an hundr 
thousand years; and grew wise and cun in all matters; and their wise 
peopl did make deal and had experi with those forc which are 
distast and harm unto life; but they did thi in ignorance; for 
all that they had much wisdom; think onli to experiment, that they 
come to greater knowings. but they did open a way for those forces; and 
much harm and piti did come thereby. and then had all peopl to have 
regret; yet too late. 

now, presently, when an hundr thousand year had gone, or it may be a 
greater space; there came slowli the utter twilight of the world, as the 
sun to die the more; so that present it gave but an utter gloomi 
light. and there grew upon mani of the peopl of the citi of the 
valley, a strang and a wildness; so that strang thing were done, 
that had been shame to all in the light. and there were wanderings, 
and consort with strang outward beings, and presently, mani citi 
were attack by monster that did come from the west; and there wa a 
pandemonium. 

then wa an age of sorrow and fightings, and harden of the spirit 
and of the heart, for all that were of good fibre; and thi did breed a 
determin generation; and there grew up into the world a leader; and he 
took all the sound millions; and did make a mighti battl upon all 
foul and upon all that did harm and troubl them; and they drove 
their enemi down the valley, and up the valley, and did utterli 
scatter and put them to flight. 

then did that man call all hi peopl together; and did make it plain 
how that the dark grew upon the world, and that the foul and 
dread power abroad, were like to be more horrid when a greater gloom 
came. 

and he put to them that they build a mighti refuge; and the peopl did 
acclaim; and lo! there wa built, presently, a great house. but the 
great hous wa not proper; and that man did take all the peopl to 
wander; and they came to the bight; and there wa built at last that 
great and mighti pyramid. 

now thi is the sens and tell of that book; and but late had I read 
it; and talk somewhat of it with my dear friend, the master 
monstruwacan; but not overmuch; for I had taken so sudden a mind to go, 
that all els had drop from about me. yet, to us it did seem clear 
that there wa no life in all the invis upper world; and that, 
surely, that great road whereon the silent one did walk, must be that 
same road which the hardi peopl of that age did make. 

and it did seem wise to the master monstruwacan, and unto me, that if 
ani should find the lesser redoubt, they must sure do so somewher 
within the mighti valley; but whether the road that led into the west, 
where wa the place of the ab-humans, should bring me to it, I had no 
knowing; nor whether it might lie on the northward way. and I, maybe, to 
wander a thousand mile wrong; if, in truth, I were not into some 
dread troubl before. 

and, indeed, no reason of valu wa there to give me hope that the 
lesser pyramid lay either to the west, or where the road went 
north-ward, beyond the hous of silence. yet I did so feel it to be 
somewher to the north, that I had made a determin to search that 
way for a great distance, the first; and if I could not come upon aught, 
then I should have sober thought that it did lie westward. but in the 
valley someways, I had feel of assur that it must be; for it wa 
plain that the tell of the book wa sound in it bottom sense; as 
might be seen; for how should ani live in the utter bleak and deadli 
chill of the silent upper world that lay an hundr mile up in the 
night, hid and lost for ever. 

and strang is it to think of those wondrou and mighti cliff that 
girt us about, and yet were fast held from us in the dark; so that I 
had not known of them, save for the tell of that book; though, in 
truth, it had been alway suppos that we live in a great deep of the 
world; but, indeed, it wa rather held in belief that we abod in the 
bed of some ancient sea, that did sure slope gradual away from us, and 
not go up abrupt and savage. 

and here let me make so clear as I may that the gener peopl had no 
clear thought upon ani such matters; though there wa someth of it 
taught in the schools; yet rather thi and that, of divers conclusions, 
as it might be think of the teachers, after much study, and some 
ponderings. for one man, have a lack of imagining, would scoff, and 
another, maybe, to take it veri staidly, but some would build fanci upon 
the tell of the records, and make foolish and fantast that which 
had ground in truth; and thu is it ever. but to the most peopl of 
the pyramid, there wa no deep convict nor thought of ani great hid 
world afar in the darkness. for they gave attent and belief onli to 
that which lay to their view; nor could a great lot come to imagin that 
there had been ever ani other condition. 

and to them, it did seem right and meet that there should be strang 
things, and fire from the earth, and an ever-abid night, and 
monsters, and matter hid and tangl much in mystery. 

and veri content were the most of them; though some had in them the 
yeast of imaginings, or the pimpl of fanci upon them, and to these 
there seem mani possibilities; though the first to read out to sanity; 
and the second, to expect and have speech toward much that wa foolish 
or to no purpose. 

and of these vagu believ of the peoples, have I made hint before, 
and need not have much troubl to it now. save that, with the children, 
as is ever the way, those olden tale had much believing; and the 
simplic of the wise did mate with the belief of the young; and 
between them did lie the truth. 

and so did I make speed toward the north, have a strong sureti in my 
heart and mind that there were but two way to my search; for without of 
the valley, afar up in the dead lonesom of the hidden world, wa a 
cold that wa shapen readi to death, and a lacking, as I must believe, 
of the sweet, need air that yet did lie in plenti in that deep place 
of the earth. So that, surely, the mighti valley somewher to hold that 
other redoubt. 

yet, as I have said, I went not direct to my journey, but otherwise, for 
those sound reason which I did set down a time back. 




vii 

the night land 


now, as I went toward the north and west, I steer me warili for a 
great while, that I come safe of that great watcher of the north-west. 
and as I made forward, I put thought to all matter which must concern 
me; so far as I had imagin to see. and first I did consid the speed 
that I should keep; and found present that I did well to be moderate; 
for that I had befor me a great and mighti journey; and indeed, who 
might speak knowingli of the end thereof? 

and anoth matter, I did arrange; for I would make the time of my 
go forward, and the time of mine eat and sleep all to a 
wise and regular fashion; that, thereby, I might go a great way, with 
the less harm to my body; so that I should be strong when the need did 
come for my strength. and I made in the end that I should eat and drink, 
at everi sixth hour, and at the eighteenth hour sleep me until the 
twenty-fourth. 

and by thi mean did I eat thrice in that time, and have six hour of 
sleep. and thi seem veri good to me, and I did strive alway to 
manag thu in all my great journey in the night land. yet, as may be 
supposed, there were time oft and mani when I must watch without 
ceasing, and leav my slumber unto the future; for the land wa full of 
grim and dread perils. 

and, as doth be human, I brake my rule straightway in the beginning; for 
I ceas not to walk for one-and-twenti hours, hide and creeping, as 
the need did be in those place that were like to show me unto the 
watcher; and when I did think upon food, it did sicken me; so that I 
would eat by and by, as I made it within my thoughts. 

but when one-and-twenti hour had gone, I grew veri weari and someth 
faint; and wa forc that I look about for some place where I might 
have rest. and, in a littl while, I did see, away off, a small 
fire-hole, the like of which I had pass odd time even so early. and I 
made to come nigh to that part; for there would be warmth from the 
chill of the night land, and mayhap a place dri and conveni to my 
slumber. 

and when I came anigh, I saw that it wa a cheer place, as it might 
be said, amid so much gloom; for the hole wa but a few pace wide, and 
full of a dull, glow fire, that did bubbl somewhat, and throw off a 
small sulphur-smoke. and I sat me down, at no great way, and did place 
the disko on the rock to my hand. 

and I move not, awhile; but wa aweary, so that I had not the courag 
to eat, neither to drink; but must turn me and look back to the mighti 
pyramid; and, in truth, though I had come a veri good space, yet wa I 
so anigh to it, that I wa both cheer and put out of heart; for it did 
seem close upon me, by reason of it greatness, so that I, who had 
journey a hard and weari way, wa shaken with the great of the 
task that wa upon me. 

yet wa thi but one side of my heart; for it wa good to feel the 
near of my mighti home; and I knew that there did countless million 
make watch upon me, as I sat; yet did I make no sign; for it is not meet 
to make a constant farewell; but to go. yet wa it veri strang to be 
thu near, and to show such behaviour as were proper to one afar from 
all humanity. but so it wa that I order my ways; for it did seem 
proper to me; yet wa I happi to know that the dear master monstruwacan 
must, time and oft, have spi upon me through the great spy-glass; and 
mayhap did watch me in that moment. 

and it grew in me that I did act weakli to hold off from mine vittles, 
and show foolish befor my kind friend afar; and I did ope my 
scrip, and take therefrom three tablets, the which I chew and did eat; 
for thi wa a strong food, treat that it had but small bulk. yet were 
they not fill to the belly; and I made that I would drink well, that 
I might feel that someth wa therein. 

and to thi end, I shook from a strong and especi tube, a dust; and I 
caught the dust within a littl cup; and the air did make an action upon 
that dust, as it were of chemistry; and the dust did boil and make a 
fizz in the cup, and rose up and fill it with a liquid that wa of 
simpl water; yet veri strang to see come that way; but ordinari after 
a time. 

and in thi way, as might be seen, had I such food and drink in but a 
littl scrip, that might keep life within me for a great time. yet wa 
it a way of discomfort, and lack to the mouth and to the belly; but a 
suffici thing unto the need of the body, and good matter for a 
thank heart, in that dark and hungri land. 

now, when I had eaten, I did go over in their order, those thing which 
I did carry; for there was, besid the disko and that scrip of food, a 
pouch that did contain matter various. and these, I did look into; and 
afterward did take out a small compass that I had been give by the 
master monstruwacan, so that I might find of it work without the 
great redoubt; and, he had said unto me, that it might be that I should 
pass far off into the night land, and lose the mighti pyramid amid so 
great a countri and so plenti a darkness. then, perchance, if that 
ancient principl did still lurk within the machine, though turn no 
more to the north, but unto the pyramid, then should it guid my feet 
homeward out of the everlast night, and thu have onc more that 
ancient use which, as I do know, is common unto thi age. 

and thi wa a veri cun thing to have with me, if but it held 
servic to the earth-current, and a rare thing, which the master 
monstruwacan did make with hi own hand and much skill and pains, from 
an olden one that had place within the great museum, and concern 
which I have told somewhat, befor thi place. 

and I set the thing upon the ground; but it had no certain way with it; 
but did spin and waver constantly, and thi I made to consider, and 
rememb that I wa yet abov that part where, afar in the earth did 
spread the great of the underground fields; and I was, haply, but a 
littl way off from the "crack"; though a mighti way above. 

and it pleasur me to wonder whether the dear master monstruwacan did 
behold how that I made test with the compass; for the light wa good 
from the fire-hole; and the great spy-glass had a great strength. yet, 
had I no certainty; for, as I did know, from much watchings, there wa 
no sureti in the search of the land, by the glass; for there wa oft 
plain where you did think sure none should see, and anon a 
dull where might be thought that the sight went gaily. and thi may 
be plain to all; for the waver of the light from the strang fire 
wa not to be account to rule; but made a light here, and a dark 
there, and then did chang about, oddly. moreover, there were smoke and 
mist that did come upward from the earth, in thi place and in that; 
and had somewhil a greatness; but oft were small, and did lurk low, 
and had no power but to confus the sight. 

and, presently, I did put by the compass in my pouch, and made to 
compos myself unto sleep. but here would I now set down how that, in 
the end, after I had gone mani days' journey outward from the mighti 
pyramid, I did inde find it to draw the northward part of the needl 
unto it; and thi wa a comfort and a pleasur to my spirit; moreover, 
if ever I did get back, as I did think, it would be a matter for great 
interest unto the master monstruwacan; yet, in verity, were there other 
matter that should hold him more; for he wa right human, as all should 
know. 

and, moreover, concern thi same compass, I did find a fresh thing; 
for, after a yet greater time, as I shall set out in a due place, if I 
do but remember, which doubt is ever my fear to fret me, I came a 
mighti way from the redoubt, and, lo! fear that I might inde lose 
that, My great home, in the dark of the world, I did pull out that 
strang wonder of the needle, that I might have comfort by it homeward 
pointing. and I did discov a new power in the night; for the machin 
did point no more directward unto the great redoubt; but wa a point 
unto the westwards; so that I had knowledg that some great power afar 
in the dark of the world did sway upon it; and I had a childlik 
wonder that thi might be, in truth, that same power of the north, of 
which the books, and my memory-dream did tell. and, indeed, no doubt 
should there be upon thi matter; yet who might not have doubt in that 
time, that they should perceiv after an eternity, that ancient 
northward forc sway that small servant unto an olden obedience. and 
it was, as it were, a reveal unto me, how that to know within the 
brain is one matter; but to have knowledg within the heart is another; 
for I had alway known concern thi northward force; but yet had not 
known with the true mean of knowledge. 

and yet one other matter there wa to caus doubt, at that moment of 
thi new knowing; for it came to me that mayb the power of that lesser 
redoubt did begin to act upon the machine, even as the earth-curr of 
the great pyramid did hold yet a strong draw upon the needle; and 
were thi so, then did I not sure begin to stand anigh unto my 
journey' end; for that less power of the lesser redoubt could have no 
impud to pull, save that I had come to a close with it. 

yet, in truth, as I do now have knowledge, it wa the north that drew; 
and I do seem to make a great tell about thi littl matter; but how 
els shall I show to you mine inward mind, and the lack of knowledg and 
likewis the peculiar know that did go to the make of that time, 
and the peopl thereof, which is but to say the same thing twice over. 

and now, as I did say, I made to compos myself for sleep; and to thi 
end, I took a cloak-matt which did cross my shoulder and hip, and 
wrapt it about me, and lay down there in the dark of the night, by 
that strang fire-hole. 

and I lay the disko besid me, within the cloak; for it was, indeed, my 
companion and friend in bitter need; so that I had pleasur to feel the 
strang thing anigh to me. and as I did lie there, in those moment that 
do drows the soul, as it were that they do proceed as breath out of the 
mouth of sleep, I had a half-know that the aether did surg about me; 
and I doubt not but that there had watch my everi doing, mani of the 
millions, and had been humanli stirred, at my commend of my spirit 
unto sleep; and thu did shake the aether of the world about me, with 
their uniti of sympathy. 

and, mayhaps, I had some littl know of thi thing, as I did pass, 
drowsy, into slumber; and it is sure like that I slept the better for 
it. moreover, I wa wondrou tire and worn, and thu did sleep veri 
strong and heavy; yet I mind me that my last dim think were upon 
that sweet maid I did go to find. and in slumber did I have speech with 
her in dreams, and a strang happi about me, and all seem to be 
touch by fairy-light, and freed from the sorrow of life. 

and it wa from a sweet and love sleeping, such as this, that I wa 
wake suddenli by a great and mighti sound; and I came instant to a 
possess of my senses; and I knew that the mighti voic of the 
home-cal did go howl across the night. and, swift and silent, I slid 
the cloak from about me, and took the haft of that wondrou disko into 
mine hand. 

and I did look toward the pyramid, quickly, for a message; for I had a 
sure knowledg that there had a great need arisen, and that some terror 
came toward me out of the dark; els they had never wake all the night 
land to a know that an human wa abroad out of the mighti refuge. 

and even as I did peer toward the great redoubt, I could not abid to 
keep my gaze entir that way; but did take a larg and fear look all 
about me; yet could make to see nothing; and so did stare, eager and 
anxious, afar into the upper black of the night, where did shine 
that final light of the tower of observation; and the same while 
crouched, and hold the diskos, and make to glanc across my 
shoulders, and to watch for the message, and all in the same moment. 

and then, afar upward in the prodigi height, I did see the great, 
and bright and quick dart flash of a strang green fire, and did 
know that they spell to me in the set-speech a swift warn that a 
grey monster, that wa a great grey man, had made scent of me in the 
dark, and wa even in that moment of time, crawl toward me through 
the low moss-bush that lay off beyond the fire-hol to my back. and 
the messag wa sharp; and bade me to leap into the bush unto my left; 
and to hide there; so that I might chanc to take the thing to an 
advantage. 

and, as may be thought, they had scarc flash the tale unto me; but I 
wa gone in among the shadow of a clump of the moss-bush that did grow 
anigh; and I sweat with a strang terror, and a cold and excit shake 
of the heart; yet wa my spirit set strong to conquer. 

and lo! as I did crouch there, hidden, I saw someth come veri quiet 
out of the bush that did grow beyond the fire-hole; and it wa great, 
and crept, and wa noway colour but by grey in all it parts. and 
the glare from the fire-hol did seem to troubl it; so that it looked, 
lay it head to the ground, and spi along the earth, in a strang 
and brutish fashion; that it might overse the glare of the fire-hole. 
yet, I doubt that it saw beyond the fire with plainness; for, in a 
moment, it crept swift in among the bush again, and came out toward 
the edg of the fire-hol in anoth place; and thi it did thrice unto 
my left, and thrice unto my right; and everi time did lay it head to 
the earth, and spi along; and did hunch it shoulders, and thrust 
forward the jaw horridli and turn the neck, as a veri nasti beast might 
go, wanton. 

now, as you may think, thi manner of the beast-man did shake my courag 
mightily; for I did think each time that it did go inward among the 
moss-bushes, that it had made discoveri of me, and would make to take me 
in the back, from out of the dark of the bushes; and thi wa an 
uncomfort thing to consider, as other might think also, had ani 
been there in the bush with me. and then, in truth, did that same swift 
sens of mine hearing, prove help to my saving; for, behold, the 
thing did go back into the moss-bushes, after that last come out; and 
did seem to make as it had made a fail to discov me, and had no 
further intent, save to return unto the night; and I had thi thought 
truli in mine heart, and for mayb a minute; and then, lo! within my 
soul a voic did speak plain, and did warn me that the thing did make a 
great compass among the moss-bush about the fire-hole, have made 
discoveri of me; and it did go warili to take me in the back, from the 
other side. 

now, when I heard thi voic speak within my spirit, I had knowledg 
that the dear master monstruwacan made watch from the tower of 
observation, and did send the speech with hi brain-elements, have in 
mind that I had the night-hearing. and I trust the speech; for in the 
same moment of time there did beat all about me in the night the solemn 
throb of the master-word, as that it had been ad with speed, to give 
instant assurance. and I leapt quick from that clump of the moss-bush, 
unto another, and crouched, and made a watch all about me; and kept the 
ear of my spirit open, know that the master monstruwacan did also 
watch all, for me. 

and, suddenly, I saw a littl move of a bush that grew to the back of 
those bush in which I had been hid; and there came out of the bush 
that moved, a great grey hand, and move the moss of the clump where I 
had been, as it were that someth peer out of the move bush. and 
there follow the great grey head of the grey man, and the head went 
into the clump of the moss-bush where I had been. 

and I knew that I must strike now; and I leapt, and smote with the 
diskos; and the thing fell upon it side, and the great grey leg came 
out of the hither bushes, and twitch and drew upwards; but the head 
remain in the bush where I had been hid. and I stood away from the 
thing whilst it died; and in mine hand the disko did spin and send 
forth fire; as it were that it did live, and did know that it had slain 
a great and horrid monster. 

and present the grey man wa dead; and I went away from those bushes, 
unto the far side of the fire-hole. and I stood with the disko held 
high and spin and send out fire, that they within the mighti 
pyramid might know that I had slain the beast-man; for it might be that 
it lay too much in the shadow for them to look upon. 

but the master monstruwacan spoke not again to me; for, indeed, it wa 
not meet to do so, except it might save me from a sure danger; for, as 
you may know from my past tellings, there were power of the night land 
that did hearken unto such matters; and it wa like enough that there 
had been overmuch done, even thus, for my further safety. yet the thing 
could not be helped. 

and now that I wa a littl calmed, and eas from my fear, I could know 
that all that the aether of the night wa disturb by the glad of 
the million within the great redoubt; so that it wa plain how great a 
multitud had given note unto the fight; and their heart to beat in 
sweet sympathi and natur fear; so that I did feel compani and 
befriended; though, as it may be thought, someth shaken yet about the 
heart. 

now, in a littl time, I did gather unto me my wit and had myself to 
order; and I look to see how the hour did go, and I found that I had 
sure slumber through ten hours. and I reproach myself; for, 
indeed, I had slept oversound by reason of my have lack a regular 
way and time, as I had with a proper wisdom made to be my rule. and I 
resolv that I would obey the wit of my reason in all the futur time, 
and make to eat and rest in due season, as you will wot that I did 
befor intend. 

then, with a self-reproach heart, I went around the small fire-hole, 
and caught up my cloak and other matters. and I turn me toward the 
mighti pyramid, and did look onc upward along all the great slope, 
where it did go measureless into the far black of the everlast 
night; and I made no salutation; for I had so resolved, as you will 
know; moreover, I desir not to call forth ani unneed disturb of 
the aether of the world, which inde must be, did I make to stir the 
emot of the millions. 

and I turn me then away, and went off into the night, go swift and 
cautious, and bear the disko cunningli and almost, as it were, with 
a love for that strang and wondrou weapon that had so befriend me, 
and slain the foul grey man with one stroke. and I had feel that it 
did know me, and had a comradeship for me; and I doubt none will 
understand this; save, it might be, they of the olden day that did 
carri one strong sword always. yet wa the disko more than the sword; 
for it did in truth seem to live with the fire and the flame of the 
earth-curr that did beat within it. 

and it wa well acknowledg within the great redoubt, that none might 
touch the disko of another; for that the thing went crustily, as it 
might be said, in the hand of a stranger; and if ani made foolish 
of thi knowledge, and did persist much to such an handling, or make 
to use, the same would present act clumsi with the weapon, and come to 
an hurt; and thi wa a sure thing, and had been known mayb an hundr 
thousand years; or perchanc a greater time. 

and by thi it doth seem wise to believ that there did grow alway an 
affin between the natur of the man--which doth, as ever, includ the 
woman--and the disko that he did use in hi practice; and becaus of 
thi known thing, and that the place would elsewis be lumber with 
olden weapon of those that did die, it wa a law and usag that there 
wa place with the dead, the disko of the dead, there upon the last 
road in the countri Of silence, and wa thu made to give back unto the 
earth-current, the power that did lie in it. and thi doth seem to a 
careless thinker, as it were that I told onc again those olden custom 
of the ancient folk; but thi is otherwise, and had a sound reason to 
it; yet, if you do so believe, I doubt not but that a right human 
sentiment wa someth at the bottom, which is proper; for it is meet 
that love should mate with wisdom to mother comfort in our sorrows; and 
it is a warm thing to do aught for our dead; and none may say nay to 
this. 

now, as I did go onward into the night land, look ever to thi 
shadow and to that, it may be conceiv how my heart would stir with 
swift fear, at thi and that; and that my bodi would oft quiver to leap 
aside; and as swift discov that naught assailed. 

and so did I go forward, and alway with imagin and wonder 
concern what manner of uncouth be or brute might come out of the 
dark all about. yet, in all that time, there wa a certain 
proud of the heart, that I did come safe out of the power of the 
grey man, and did sure slay him. but, truly, it were well that the 
prais be considered, and not overmuch given unto me; for I had die as 
I slept, but that they of the great redoubt, had made a watch over me, 
and wake me unto my saving. 

now, presently, as I walked, I grew someth faint, and had knowledg 
that I did foolishly; for, indeed, I should have eat after my fight; yet 
may I be forgiven for thi forgetting, in that I had been much shake 
and put about. 

and I sat me down in a littl clear place among the bushes, and did eat 
three of the tablets, and did onc more shake forth the dust that did 
turn in the air to a natur water by a proper and natur chemistri of 
these matters. and after I had eat, I sat a littl while, and did think, 
and did look upward at the great slope of the pyramid in the night; and 
all the time did I listen with mine ear and with my spirit; and kept 
the disko across my knees, and look thi way and that, veri frequent; 
but noth came anigh. 

and so I rose presently, and went onwards, and walk for six hour 
toward the north and the west. and I made much to the west, for a 
little, that I might come clear of the north-west watcher. yet, after a 
space, I made to do foolishly; for I chang my mind about, and kept 
someth more toward the north, so that I should have a surer sight of 
that monster. 

and thi was, in truth, a rash and naughti thing to consider; for if I 
were but seen, then should that grim brute make a signal unto the evil 
powers, and I be met swiftli with destruction. but sure the heart is a 
strang and wayward thing, and given to quick fears, and immedi 
unto great and uncount rashnesses. and so I did go forward unwis 
to the northward of a safe and proper going; and it may be that an 
influenc wa upon me, and drew me thatwards; but who shall say. 

now, a great time I walked, and made a halt upon everi sixth hour, and 
did eat and drink, and look a littl unto the monstrou tower of the 
great redoubt; and afterward make strong mine heart, and go forward 
again. and alway I did go warily, and chiefli among the low moss-bush; 
but sometim out upon stoni ground, and oft across place where sulphur 
did puff somewhat from the ground in a low smoke, veri strong in the 
nostril and not like inwardly. 

and as I made onwards, I look alway to my right and to my left, and 
anon to the rear; yet made a constant observ of the mighti watcher, 
that I did begin to draw nigh unto. and oft did I stoop to crawl, and my 
hand did bleed somewhat; but after I wa troubl so, I put on the 
great glove that made complet the grey armour, and so wa shod proper 
to such journeying. 

and, presently, when eighteen hour did have pass sinc that my sudden 
awaken to the peril of the grey man, I did search about for a place 
to slumber; for I would keep wise unto my ruling, and go not over long 
lack of sleep; and by thi plan I should be the less like to 
sleep oversound, and so should set my spirit to listen whilst I did 
sleep; and by so much as my spirit should serv me with faith, should I 
have safety. and thi thing is plain, and want not more to the say 
thereof. 

and I came present unto a sudden place where the land did go downward 
brokenly, as that it had been burst a great while gone by the inward 
fires; and I look downward over the edg of that place, and went 
round about it, and did see present a ledg upon the far side, that 
wa difficult to come upon; yet a place of some littl safeti to ani 
that might go down to it; for it wa awkward to see, and did ani monster 
seek to come at me, I should have chanc of warning; and might go 
downward a greater way in time to my salvation. 

and by thi determination, I abode; and came down to that place with 
labour; but wa cheer of heart that I had found so sure a shelter. 
and I eat my three tablets, and drank the water that I did get from the 
powder. and so made to compos my bodi to sleep. yet, at thi time, a 
thought did come to me, and I made calcul afresh; and laugh 
somewhat at that my poor counting; for, indeed, I had thought to eat but 
thrice in the twenti and four hours; yet by my arranging, I wa made, 
indeed, to eat four times, as you shall see immedi by a littl 
thought. and thi thing came more strong upon my spirit than ani might 
think; for I did eat overmuch for the last of the food; though, in 
verity, it wa but littl to my belly; as you must all think, and have 
sympathi for my discomfort. 

and I consid a little, and had determin that I should afterward 
in my journeying, eat but two of the tablet to my meal; and thi wa a 
wise thought, and like much wisdom, a discompos thing. but so it was, 
and I set it down that you may know the arrang of my way at that 
time. 

now, in all thi while of meditation, I had been set my cloak about 
me, and wa fast set to my sleeping; for I had walk a weari way. and I 
lay me down upon my left side, with my back to the rock, which did 
overhang me someth above; so that I wa content to feel hid from 
thing that might pass by in the night. and I had the cloak about me, 
and the disko close against my breast, within the cloak, and my head 
upon my pouch and upon my scrip. 

and as I lay thu a moment easeful, I could see that so mighti wa the 
upris of the great pyramid that it wa not hid from me even thus, but 
did stand upward into the night, and did shine, and wa plain to be seen 
abov the further edg of that deep place where I did lie. 

and I fell upon sleep, look upward at that final light, where, as 
might be, the master monstruwacan did bend the great spy-glass upon my 
lonesomeness, as I lay there upon the ledge. 

and thi wa a thought of sweet comfort upon which to slumber; the which 
I did; but my spirit lay wake within my breast, and did listen 
through the night; and hark for all evil matter and thing that did 
make to come anigh. but also my spirit did whisper unto naani as I went 
into sleep; and so pass I into dreams. 

now, it may be thought that I did act with a strang valiance, in that I 
compos my bodi so properli to slumber, and with but a littl troubl 
of the heart concern the come of monsters. and in truth thi hath 
seem somewhat so to me, think sinc that time; but I do but set the 
thing that is truth; and make not to labour to an illus of truth; and 
so must tell much that doth seem improp to the reality. yet must all 
bear with me, and have understand of the hard of set forth 
with true seem the honesti of truth, which, in verity, is better 
serv oft time by time and cun lies. and so shall you understand 
thi matter so well as I. 

and present my spirit wake me there in the half dark of the night 
land; and I look swift about me, and upwards, and saw noth to 
fear. then did I peer at my dial; and made to discov that I had slept 
full over six quiet hours; and by thi I knew the reason of mine 
awaking; for it wa so great impress upon me by mine inward sens and 
being. and thi you shall understand, someways, who have thought, ere 
sleep, to wake to a certain time of the morning; and by understand 
shall you believ and give me all your kind hark and human sympathy. 

and I made to have a smart of going, which is ever hard to the newli 
waked; and I eat two tablets, the while my belli did cri out for an 
wholesom and proper filling; but I drank some of the water, and so did 
eas somewhat of my hunger. 

then did I wind my cloak to it shape, and put upon me my gear, which 
wa the scrip and the pouch, and the disko to my hip; and I clomb out 
from that place of rest. yet, befor I did come rightli up into the 
open, I peer about, and made some sureti that no evil brute wa anigh. 
and then I gat me out, and stood upon my feet, and look for a littl 
upward at the mighti slope of the great redoubt, which did seem yet 
veri nigh unto me, by reason of it be so monstrou in bigness. 

and I wonder whether in that moment the master monstruwacan did look 
down upon me, with the great spy-glass. and afterward I turn away 
swiftly, and went on into the night land; for it did alway make me 
shaken with lonesom to look upon my great home. and so I did go 
forward with a strong and uncar stride; but grew present to 
quietness, and to have back the proper caution of my going. yet had I 
not gone all foolishly, for I had taken the disko from my hip, ere 
this; so that I possess it handily. 

now there is one matter which shall seem but a small and natur 
occur unto you; yet wa strong upon me in that time; and thi thing 
wa that I did begin now to see the night land from the new outlook 
of my distanc from the mighti pyramid. and it wa as that a man of thi 
day did go from the earth to travel among the stars, and lo! should he 
not find them to shift upon hi vision; so that the great bear and thi 
and that shape of the star clusterings, should make a new order, as he 
did wander onwards; and so should he find that there wa naught that wa 
truli fixed, as he did befor then think; but all to alter accord 
unto the place whenc the looking! and thi thing shall be plain unto 
you, though no thought be put to the matter; for it is of an evid 
veriti that doth need not argument to expound. and so shall you have 
memori of me, there a-wand among those strang shape and wonder of 
that grim land, the which I had never but suppos to seem but as my 
memori did retain them, from the look of all my life within the 
great redoubt. and so it was; and ever there did thi thing and that 
open out to a new view, and the night land take to itself a constant new 
aspect to mine eye which had never until that time had but the one 
fix vision of the same. 

and you shall understand with me how that when, about the fourteenth 
hour of that day' travel, I did draw veri nigh unto the monstrou 
watcher of the north-west, it did seem so utter strang from thi fresh 
aspect that I had been like to think that I did see a new monster. for, 
in truth, when I did come at last to creep to within a mile of it, among 
the low moss-bushes, I wa confound that the mighti chin did come 
forward toward the great redoubt, even as the upward part of a vast 
cliff, which the sea doth make hollow about the bottom; for it did hang 
out into the air abov the glare of the fire from the red pit, as it had 
been a thing of rock, all score and be-weathered, and dull red and 
seem burn and blast by reason of the bloodi shine that beat 
upward from the deep of the red pit. 

and by the way in which I do tell upon it, you shall know that I did 
sure view it someth from the side at thi immedi time; for, in 
truth, it wa then that I did draw the nearer; and, moreover, I wa the 
more astonish at thi viewing, than I had been to the front; for it 
wa so utter strange, and shapen so differ from the brute that did 
hang in my memory. 

and a great time I did lie there upon my belly; and shaken by a fear of 
the beast; yet emboldened, as you may conceive, by have come to the 
side; and be hope in my heart that I wa veri secur within so 
great a shadow and the thick shelter of the moss-bushes. 

and sure it wa that I did creep more nigh, the while that I did look; 
for present I had a veri plain see of the great monster; and did 
know where I had gotten to, and therebi did acknowledg unto myself that 
thi wa an utter foolishness; and like, for all that ani might say, to 
lead unto destruction. yet, as all must know, there wa the first fear, 
and the ceas of thi fear, as I did wot that I wa so littl a thing 
to heed out there in the shadows. and present a gain of courage, 
and the prick of my be that did crave to see clear thi exceed 
wonder. and so wa I come close, more or less, have gone far upon my 
hand and knees; yet sometim to pause; but afterward on again. 

now by thi nearness, I wa the more truli abl to perceiv how that the 
bulk of the watcher did rise up into the night, like a hill; and the 
colour wa mostli black, save and inde where it did face to the red 
shine of the pit; and concern thi I have done telling. 

and so did I lie there, and stare a great while, part a small hole in 
the moss-bush that I might spi through the same. and the thing wa 
squat there, and might have root within the earth, so it did seem to 
mine imaginings, as I did stare with a dumb wonder. and there were 
monstrou wart upon the thing, and indent and a mighti rugged and 
lumpings; as it were that it did be pimpl with great boulder that 
were inbr within that monstrou hide. and where the shine from the 
pit of red fire did strike upon these, they did stand out into the 
dark away from the skin, as you of thi age shall see mountain of 
the moon catch a bright fire from the sun, and show plain upon the night 
of the moon. 

now, as I have set down, I did lie there and look a great while; and it 
came present to me that there wa uneas within the mighti pyramid, 
among the millions; for I did feel the aether of the world to be 
disturb by their distress; and so had a know that they had a 
cun ware concern the place where I did hide among the 
moss-bushes. 

and the thrill in the night did bring a wisdom into my head; for, in 
verity, as I have said, thi wa a foolish matter that I wa upon. and I 
gat a thought that the watcher might have an awared of the troubl 
of the multitudes; and, indeed, for all that I did know, it had a full 
knowledg of all my wandering; though concern this, I did think 
otherwis truli in my heart; as is a most human and proper way to make 
comfort the spirit, where doubt can have no eas from reason. 

and I made that I would go backward to a good distanc from the 
watcher, and go forward again upon my journeying, if but that I come 
safe from so unwis an adventuring. and as I did begin to return, it wa 
to me as that all my sens were newli awake; for I had a sudden know 
that I wa within the atmosphere, should I not call it, of the monster. 

and I gat an abrupt and horrid shake of the spirit; for I did feel in 
veriti that my soul had come too anigh; and that the beast had a sure 
knowledg concern me; yet did make to my destruct with no haste; 
but after that way and fashion that did seem proper unto it. 

and thi feel you shall understand the better, maybe, when I do tell 
that it wa to me as that the air all about me wa full of a quiet and 
steadfast life and keen intellig that I did believ to come forth 
from the watcher on everi side; so that I did feel as one alreadi within 
the gaze of some great and evil power. 

yet, though I had a great terror upon me, I made no foolish haste; but 
command my soul to courage, and put a guard upon my way of going, and 
so made a veri quiet journey for mayb two full miles; and afterward 
did allow myself someth more of haste; for I wa now grown easier in 
my spirit; and felt apart from the spirit of the great watcher. 

and after a longer while, I did leav that hill of watch to my 
rear; and wa gone onward into the night; yet, as may be known, with a 
vagu uneas and troubl to my heart, and a swift and frequent turn 
to learn sure that no evil thing came after me. for, as you may know, 
I could nowis have forgetting, concern that great quiet life which 
did seem to be live in all the air around that mighti bulk. for it had 
been all about me in the night, as I have told, and I to feel that I had 
been sure discovered! and thu shall you know how shaken wa my 
spirit, in verity. 

now, presently, at the eighteenth hour of that day' travel, I ceas 
from my journeying, that I might eat and drink; and I did sit a littl 
while, and look back upon the strang and monstrou thing which I had 
come beyond. and the great hump back and vast shoulder of the 
watching-th rose up into the night, black and cumbrou against the 
red shine of the pit. and thus, as you shall think, had that brute 
look alway unto the mighti pyramid, through eternity, and did ceas 
not from watching, and wa steadfast and silent and alone; and none did 
understand. 

and after I had eat, and drunk some of the water, I went onward for a 
full matter of six hour more; be mind to have no sleep until I had 
put a great way between me and the watcher. and in thi part of my 
journey did I come to the place where the silent one kill, as it wa 
name in the maps. and I observ a veri wondrou caution, and went away 
from it a little, unto the north, where I did see at a distanc the 
shine of fire-holes; the which did promis me warmth through my 
slumber. 

and here you must know that the place where the silent one kill wa an 
utter bare place, where all did seem of rock, and no bush did seem to 
grow thereon; so that a man might not come to ani hiding; though, in 
truth, there might be some hole here or there; yet wa none shown in ani 
map within the pyramid; neither did there seem to be ani such to me, as 
I did creep there among the moss-bush to the northward of the place, 
and look constant and fear toward it; so that I should see quickli 
whether ani silent one did move across all the grey quiet of that rocki 
plain. 

and concern thi same place where the silent one kill, it were well 
to make an explan how that there wa alway a littl and 
far-spread light over all that lonesomeness; and the light wa 
someth grey-seeming; as it were that a lichen might grow upon the 
rocks, and send out a littl uncomfort glowing, even as certain 
matter do in these times, if you do but know the place and the time to 
seek them. yet wa the light exceed weak, and veri cold and dismal, 
and did seem truli to show naught with a sureness; so that it did appear 
to the eye, if one did look fixedly, that there were shadow that did 
move here or there, as it were of silent beings; and none might know, in 
truth, whether thi shape of the grey wa to the cloud of the 
reason, or that the eye did see of reality. yet, if one did look with 
the great spy-glass, then might there be some sureti and plainness; and 
likewis wa it so, if one did have come suffici anigh to that 
uncomfort place, even as I then did be. and so you shall conceiv 
how that I did slide veri quiet from bush unto bush; for I had alway in 
all my life had a veri dread fear of thi place; and oft did I peer out 
into the dim grey light of the lonesom plain unto my left; and would 
think sometim to perceiv the shape of the silent one stood vagu 
and watchful; yet, on the instant, to see nothing. 

and thu I did go onward, and came present to a part where the grey 
plain did stretch out a bare into the night land to my front; so 
that my way ended, unless I did make a long pass round about. 

and I sat there among the moss-bushes, and did consider, and lookt out 
cunningli through a spy-hol of the bush in which I did sit. and I 
perceiv that the part of the plain which did jut bare into the 
land befor me had no great of size; but might be pass swiftli in 
but a littl running. and thi thing should save me a wearisom go 
round; so that I made to consid it with a seriou mind; and all the 
time did I search the bare grey befor me, and saw present that it 
wa sure empty. 

and I made to adventur myself across, run veri swift until I had 
come to the far side. and lo! as I did go to rise up out of the bush, 
mine eye were opened, as it were, and I saw that there wa someth 
amid the constant greyness; and I fell quickli into the bush; and did 
sweat veri chill; but yet did hast to look. 

and I saw now that there were, in truth, matter that did show vagu 
upon that part of the plain that wa befor me. and I did peer veri 
constant and anxious, and, behold, I saw that there wa face me, a 
great line of quiet and lofti figures, shroud unto their feet; and 
they move not, neither made they ani sound; but stood there amid the 
greyness, and did seem to make an unend watch upon me; so that my 
heart went unto weakness, and I did feel that there wa no power of the 
moss-bush to hide me; for, in verity, they that stood so silent were 
certain of the silent ones; and I wa veri nigh to the place of 
destruction. 

now, I move not for a time; but wa made stiff by the great of my 
fear. yet I wa present awar that the silent one came not toward 
me; but stood quiet; as that they did mind not to slay me, if but I did 
keep from that place. 

and there grew therefrom a littl courag into mine heart, and I obey 
my spirit, and took an hold of my strength and went slowli backward in 
the bushes. and present I wa come a long way off. yet troubl and 
disturbed, and veri strict to my going. 

and I made a great circl about that place where the plain of the 
silent one did come outward; and so did gain to the north-west; and wa 
thenc someth the happier in my heart; and went easily, and oft upon 
my feet; yet make a strong watch to everi side. 

and so I came at the last to a time when I had walk through 
four-and-twenti weari hours; and wa eager that I should come to a 
safe place for my sleep; yet did lack a happi belief of safety, in that 
I had come twice anigh to so grim trouble; and unsur I wa that I did 
not be secretli pursu in the night. and thi you shall believ to be a 
veri desper feeling; and a plight to make the heart sick, and to long 
with a great long for the safeti of that mine home. yet had I put 
myself to the task; and truli I did never ceas to the sorrow 
rememb of that utter despair that had sound to me plain in the 
last call of mine own love, out of all the mysteri of the night. and 
but to think upon thi wa to grow strong in the spirit; yet to have a 
fresh anxious that I did the more sure keep my life within me, and 
so come to that maid' salvation. 

now, as you shall mind, I had spi the shine of certain fire-hol 
somewhat to the northward, and had thought to make thereabout a place 
for my sleep; for, in truth, there wa a bitter of cold in all the 
air of night that did surround me; and I wa warm nigh to a slow 
happiness, by think upon a fire to lie beside; and small wonder, as 
you shall say. 

and I made present a strong walk unto that place where did glow in 
the night the shine of the fire-holes, as I did well judg them to be; 
and so wa like to have come over-swiftli upon my death, as you shall 
present see; for, as I came anigh to the first, I perceiv that the 
light came upward out of a great hollow among the moss-bushes, and that 
the fire-hol burn somewher in the deep of the hollow; so that I did 
but look upon the shine thereof. 

yet veri eager wa I to come to that warmth; and I made more of hast 
than care, as I did hint; and so came veri swift to the top of the 
hollow; yet wa still hidden by the kind of the moss-bushes. 

and as I made to thrust forward out of the bushes, that I might look and 
go downward into the hollow, there rose up to me the sound of a veri 
larg voice, and deep and husky. and the voic wa a dread voic that 
did speak as that it said ordinari things, and in a fashion so monstrou 
as that it were that a hous did speak, and, in verity, thi is a 
strang thing to say; yet shall it have the truth of my feel and 
terror in that moment. 

and I drew back swiftli from discov myself; and wa then all fear 
to move, or to make to go more backward, lest that I should give 
knowledg that I wa come anigh. and likewis did I shiver lest that I 
wa even then perceived. and so shall you have someth of the utter 
fear that did shake me. and I abod there, veri quiet, and move not for 
a veri great space; but did sweat and shake; for there wa a monstrou 
horrid in the voic that did speak. 

and as I crouch there within the moss-bushes, there came again the 
larg voice, and it wa answer by a second voice; and thereupon there 
arose, as it did seem, the speech of men that must have the big of 
elephants, and that did have no kind in all their thoughts; but were 
utter monstrous. and the speech wa slow, and it rose up out of the 
hollow, brutish and hoars and mighty. and I would that I could make you 
to hear it, and that you could but borrow mine ear for a littl moment, 
and forthwith be shaken with that utter horror and an afraidness, even 
as wa I. 

now, presently, there wa a veri long quiet, and I ceas at last a 
littl from mine over-fear; and later I did calm somewhat; so that I 
made to shift my position, which wa grown veri uneasy. 

and there wa still no sound from the hollow. wherefore, have a littl 
bold and much curiousness, and these despit my great fearfulness, I 
put forth mine hand, veri cautious, and did move the mossbush a littl 
from my face. and I went forward upon the earth, and did lie upon my 
belly; and wa by thi so close upon the edg of that place, that I wa 
abl to look downwards. 

and you shall know that I peer down into that great hollow, and did 
see a veri strang and horrid sight; for, in truth, there wa a larg 
fire-hol in the centr of that place, and all about the side there 
were great hole into the slope of the hollow, and there were great men 
laid in the holes, so that I might see a great head that did show out to 
my sight here, from one of those holes, and would seem to be that of a 
monstrou man heavi with sleep. and there I would see but the buttock 
of another, as that he did curl himself inward to hi brutish 
slumbering. and so wa it all about; and to my memori there were mayb a 
score of these holes; yet had I not time to the counting, as you shall 
see. for, after that I had made but a glance, as it were, at these 
sleep and utter monstrou men, I perceiv that there sat beyond the 
fire-hole, three great men, and they were each greater than elephants, 
and cover a larg part with a stiff and horrid hair, that did be of a 
reddish seeming. and there were upon them great seg and warts, as that 
their skin had been hide that had never known covering. and there wa 
between them the bodi of a mighti hound, so big as an horse, that they 
did skin; and I judg that thi beast wa one of those fearsom brute 
which we did call the night hounds. 

yet, as I should set down, they did noth in that time in which I 
lookt at them; but did sit each with a sharp and monstrou bloodi stone 
in hi fist, and did look to the ground, as that they heed not the 
earth or the food that they did prepare; but did listen to some outward 
sound. and you shall know that thi brought to me a veri swift and 
sudden terror; for I perceiv now the whi of their long silence; for, 
in verity, they had an uneas upon them, be subtli awar that one wa 
anigh, even as are the brute beast in thi manner and kind, as all do 
know. 

and I made to draw back, and win unto safety, if inde thi thing were 
to be done. and as I move me, it may be that I shook a littl earth 
into the hollow; for there was, indeed, a littl sift of dri dust 
below me, as I did wot, be veri keen to hear, by reason of my fright. 
and immedi did those three monstrou men look upward, and did seem 
to me to stare into mine eyes, as I did lie there hid amid the 
moss-bushes. and I wa so put in fear that I did clumsily, and sent 
anoth sifter of dust downward, as I did strive to go backward swift 
and quiet from the edge. and all the time I did look through the bush 
veri fixedli into the eye of the giants; and lo, their eye did shine 
red and green, like to the eye of animals. and there rose up a roar 
from them that did nigh slay my soul with the horrid of the noise. 
and at that roaring, all the giant that did lie in the hole did awake, 
and began to come outward into the hollow. 

now, I wa sure lost, and given over to destruction; for they had 
possess me immediately, but that in that moment, as I went backward, 
the earth gave behind me, and I fell into a hole among the moss-bush 
to my back, and I made first to come out veri hurried, and all choke 
with a dust of sand and ash; but in a moment I wa sane to know that I 
had come to a sudden hiding-place; and I lay veri still and strove 
neither to cough nor to breathe. and well for me, I came to so close a 
hiding; for there were all about me the sound of monstrou footsteps, 
running, that seem to shake the ground; though mayb thi to be an 
imagin bred of my fear. 

and shout of great voic there were; and the thud of huge feet 
all about; and the nois of the bush rustling; but present the 
search drew away to the southward. and I perceiv that there had sure 
fought for me some power of good fortune. and I came up out of the hole, 
veri cautious, and shaken and a moment weak with the beat of my 
heart; yet with a love thank for my salvation. and I gat me 
about, and went swift through the moss-bush to the north and west for 
three hours, and ceas not to run upon my hand and knees. and by that 
time wa I come a great way, and did have a sureti in my heart of 
present safety. 

and I ceas to run, and lay quiet; for, in truth, I did near swoon away 
with the hard of my travel. and inde as you shall know, I had 
slept not for seven-and-twenti hours, and had scarc ceas to labour in 
all that time. moreover, I had eat not, neither drunk, for nine hours; 
and so shall you conceiv that I wa truli a-weary. 

and, present I did slumber there as I lay, and all abroad to ani 
monstrou thing that should come along. yet did I wake unharmed, and 
found by my dial there had gone by a full ten hours, the while that I 
did lie there and sleep unwotting. and I wa sore perish with the cold 
of the night; for I had not the warmth of my cloak about me, and my 
belli wa veri empty. 

and I stood me up, and did peer about for ani dread matter, but all 
seem proper, and I began to stamp my feet against the earth, as that 
I would drive it from me, and thi I do say as a whimsy, and I swung 
mine arms, as often you shall do in the cold days; and so I wa 
present someth warmed. and I dismantl my cloak, and wrap it 
about me, and did feel that the disko wa safe to my hip. 

then did I sit me down, and did glow a littl with relish, in that I 
should now eat four of the tablets; for, indeed, these were my proper 
due, by reason of my shiftless fast ere I came so wotless to my 
slumbering. and the memori of that eat doth live with me now, so that 
I could near to smile; for the eager of mine inward wa proper and 
human; yet were even four tablet but a littl matter to so great an 
emptyness; and I drank a doubl portion of the water, that I might make 
less the void. and thi thing wa seemly; for, indeed, there were two 
portion due unto me. 

and when I had eat and drunk, I did fold the cloak onc more to shape 
across my shoulder, as I did carri it; and afterward I took the disko 
into my hand, and went forward again to the north and west. 

yet, as you shall know, I did paus a littl in the beginning, and peer 
to everi side for ani close danger; and then did look more abroad of 
that place; but could nowher see ani matter to have me to immedi 
fear. and afterwards, I look a littl while at the monstrou hump 
back of the watcher of the north-west; and it did grow to me how 
steadfast that thing did look toward the mighti pyramid; and thi set me 
to new hatr and horror of the monster, as you shall conceiv and 
believe. 

and presently, I look beyond the watcher, unto the vast mountain of 
the great redoubt; and I wa still seem close upon it; yet, in truth, 
gone a long and weari distance. but thi you shall understand wa by 
the great and utter height and bulk of that shine mountain of 
life. 

and strang and wonder it wa to me to think that even in that one 
moment, it might be that the dear master monstruwacan did look upon my 
face, through the great spy-glass. and I should not seem utter far to 
him, by reason of the power of the big glass. but to me, as I did look 
upward through the night, unto that far and utmost light in the upper 
black of the everlast gloom, it did seem doubli to me that I wa 
afar off and lost forev from mine home. and thi think did breed in 
me such a great and lonesom feeling, and a weak of the heart and 
spirit, that forthwith I took my courag close unto me, and did turn 
away quickly; and went onward to the north and west, as I have told. 

now I walk for twelv hours, and in that time, did eat and drink 
twice; and made onward again veri steadfast, and happi that all did go 
so quiet with me; so that it wa as if I had at last come to a part of 
the land that wa given over to quietness, and lack of monsters. 
yet, in truth wa I come to a wors place than any, maybe; for as I went 
forward, stride veri strong, and make a good speed, I did hear 
present a littl nois upward in the night, and someway unto my left, 
that had seem as that it were a strang low sound that did come down 
to me out of an hidden doorway above; for, indeed, though the sound did 
come from veri nigh, as it did seem no more than a score feet abov my 
head, yet wa it a nois that did come out of a great and mighti 
distance, and out of a foreign place. and I did know the sound; though 
never, as you may suppose, could I have heard it in all my life. yet had 
I read in one of the records, and again in a second and a third, how 
that certain of all they that had adventur from the pyramid into the 
night land to seek for knowledge, had chanc to hear a queer and 
improp nois abov them in the night; and the nois had been strange, 
and did come from but a littl way upward in the darkness; yet wa also 
from a great and monstrou distance; and did seem to moan and hum 
quietly, and to have a differ sound from all nois of earth. and 
in the record it wa set forth that these were those same doorway In 
the night, which were told of in an ancient and half-doubt tale of the 
world, that wa much in favour of the children of the pyramid, and not 
disdain by certain of our wiser men, and had been thu through all the 
latter ages. 

and I did seem to know the sound upon the moment; for my heart grew 
swift to understand. and it wa a veri dread uncomfort sound; and 
you shall know how it did seem, if you will conceiv of a strang nois 
that doth happen far away in the country, and the same nois to seem to 
come to you through an open door near by. and thi is but a poor way 
to put it; yet how shall I make the thing more known to you? So that I 
must even trust unto your wit and true sympathi that you shall conceiv 
of the full of my meaning. 

now, in all the histori of those that had adventur into the night 
land, there were but three sure record that did concern thi sound; and 
each did tell of a great horror; and of them that did hear the sound 
there had die the most part, out in the night land. and the record did 
make alway that they had come upon destruction, and not simpli unto 
death; but were destroy by a strang and invis evil power from the 
night. 

and of those that came aliv unto the pyramid, they had all one strang 
tale to tell, how that there were secret and horrid doorway In the 
night. yet how thi thing could be plain to them, who may know truly; 
save it be that the eye of their spirit did behold that which wa hid 
to the eye of the flesh. 

and there wa afterward writ a proper and care treatise, and did set 
out that there did be ruptur of the aether, the which did constitut 
doorways, as those more fanci one did name them; and through these 
shatterings, which might be liken unto openings--ther be no better 
word to their naming--ther did come into thi particular condit Of 
life, those monstrou forc Of evil, that did domin the night, and 
which mani did hold sure to have been given thi improp entranc 
through the foolish and unwis wisdom of those olden men of learning, 
that did meddl overfar with matter that did reach in the end beyond 
their understanding. and thi thing have I told before, and it doth seem 
proper unto my belief; for it is alway thus, and I have that same taint 
within me, as must all that have the zest of life. 

now, by thi that I have set down swiftly, to make a littl clear the 
sure horrid of thi sound, you shall know, even with me, the great 
horror that did come immedi upon my spirit; and I did know that my 
search wa sure like to have an end in that moment; and I bare mine 
arm, for my teeth, where the capsul did lie below the skin; and so wa 
readi to an instant death, if that destruct did come upon me. and in 
the same moment, I did fall silent, inward among the moss-bushes, and 
did begin to creep veri quiet toward the right; for, as you will mind, I 
had heard the sound over beyond my left. and all that time, as I did 
creep, there wa a great sick upon me, and it did seem that my mouth 
had weaken unto water; so that I could scarc hold my teeth tightli 
from unseemli clitterings. 

and I crept alway veri silent, and did often stare quick and pain 
over my shoulder, upwards, and thi way and that; but did never see 
anything; neither could I hear now the sound. 

and I went thiswis for a great hour, and wa like to faint through the 
effort of my care and the sore of my going. but upon the end of that 
long while, I grew someth easier in the spirit, and did perceiv that 
I wa save from the destruct that I had come so dread anigh. and 
thi thing, it may be, wa becaus that I did chanc to hear it, whilst 
yet it wa beyond, and befor I did come right unto it, to pass below. 
yet may I be wrong in thi thought, and do but make a guessing. but, as 
I shall here explain; after that time, I kept mine ear newli keen unto 
hearing; and did chide my spirit, for that it had not taken account of 
that sound a great while earlier. yet, as I did present conceive, the 
spirit had no power to hear that thing; which wa veri strange; but 
truli so. 

now, becaus that I went with a veri wari hearing, I heard the sound 
onc a far way off befor me, and I hid upon the moment, and went 
backward, and after a while, did judg myself to have come unto safety; 
and so it was, in verity, for I heard no more that time. and so did I 
come present unto the eighteenth hour, and did eat and drink, and made 
me a place of slumber in a littl hollow of a rock that stood upward out 
of the moss-bushes. and I slept for six hours, and afterward waked, 
and wa come to no harm. 

and after I had eat and drunk again, I did look outward over the night 
land, and with particular to that part that I did travel in, as it 
might be called, the yesterday. and I did observ it to be a veri bleak 
and desol country, and not given over to fire, or other warmth, nor 
to sulphur-vapours; but to be veri quiet, and with but a littl light in 
all it breadth. and I could conceiv that it wa no place for anyth 
of life to desire; but rather to avoid; and that countri did seem to be 
yet all about me; for I wa by no mean come clear from it at that time; 
though, northward, there wa a glimmer, as of fire-holes; and beyond 
those, the strang shine of the plain of blue fire. and, after that I 
had thought awhile, I did believ that I should meet no monster of 
natur life in all that countri of desolation, until I did draw nigh, 
onc more unto fire. and I conceiv that thi sound from out of the 
invis doorway might yet troubl me; but whether the quiet of 
that part wa becaus all of natur life did fear the sound, or becaus 
that there wa neither fire nor warmth, I do not say, have no know 
in thi matter; but may yet believ that it wa to be laid to both 
causes; and thi doth seem of common reason, as you shall agree. 

and when I had look a while unto the mighti pyramid, which wa now 
truli a great way off; for I had walk so mani weari hours; I turn me 
onc more to my journeying. and here let me observ that I had gone veri 
far; yet not so distant, as might be thought; for, oft, I did go less 
than one mile in an hour or mayb two hours, have to be of great 
caution, and oft to hide, and to go upon my belly, or to crawl, all as 
might be. and, further, as you may have perceived, I made not a straight 
forwardness; but did strike thi way and that way, be veri intent to 
escap the monster and evil forc that were all about. 

now, becaus that I believ that I travel in a place where wa 
sure to be discov those strang doorway within the night, I made 
an especi care of my going; and did stop oft that I might listen, and 
watch, and keep a veri strict ward in all the night about me. yet, as 
you shall see, thi serv not to prevent me from go forward into the 
fear of that which did haunt all the void; for, sudden, as I went 
carefully, I heard a faint hum nois come downward from the night a 
littl unto my rear; and the hum nois did grow more plain, as that 
a door were open slowli above, and did let out that sound ever more 
loud. and surely, after I did hear that, I could not doubt that a door 
were open upward there; for the nois did grow in such wise as you 
shall hear a distant sound come through, when a door truli is oped; for, 
if the nois had been made just in that place, it had seem to come 
from there; but thi sound, though it did come _through_ there, wa as 
that it did come outward from some far lost and foreign eternity. and 
thi I do struggl alway to make plain; and you shall not blame me that 
I think overmuch upon it; for, in truth there wa an horror so wondrou 
and drear about it, that I can forget not; but do strive alway that 
other should know with me that peculiar woe and terror that did haunt 
the night. 

now, as you will see, I had in truth gone past the place where the 
doorway in the night did open; yet had come to no harm; but rather it 
did seem that it open by chance, unwot that I wa anigh; or it may 
be that my quiet pass did disturb an evil power, so that it did even 
come to listen, or to make search. and all thi doth pass through my 
brain, as I do write, and it doth seem to me that my thought are but 
the thought of a littl child, befor so great a mystery; and that I 
touch not even the edg and fring of the truth with my thinkings, and 
so do ceas upon them; and will but go forward so plain as I may with my 
telling. now, as you may truli believe, when I heard that sound, and did 
understand that I had, in verity, come past beneath that place, I did 
sure sicken to an utter weak of bodi and heart, though it wa but 
for a moment; and then wa I swift hid within the close shelter of the 
low and thick moss-bushes. 

and I shook in all my being, and crept, shaking, upon my hand and 
knees, and did near totter to my face thrice, so weak gone wa I in that 
moment of terror; and I did have a wicked of forget in that 
time; for I bare not mine arm, to have the capsul to a readi for 
my death, if that did need to be; and thi wa an abomin 
foolishness, and I do shake now when I think upon it; for death is but a 
littl matter by the side of destruction; though, in truth, dread 
enough for all. yet, as it did chance, no harm came to me, and I gat 
away, as that some wondrou power did cast a viewless cloak about me, 
that I might be utter hid; and oft have I wonder whether thi wa 
truli so; but have no knowing. 

and, presently, I ceas from fleeing, and had some calmness, and did 
eat and drink; and so came to the comfort of a firm spirit, the which 
had been sore troubled, abov all understand causes, by that horrid 
sound upward in the night. and after that I had eat and drunk, I did 
rest a little; but afterward, went onward to the northward, go 
toward that place where the fire-hol did glimmer, the same be by 
thi time no great way off. 

then, as I did come anigh, I thought to hear onc again the sound in the 
night, and I stopt veri swift, and hid into the moss-bushes, and did 
listen; but did hear naught; and so wa hope that fanci did play upon 
me. yet, becaus of thi matter, I went upon my hand and knee for a 
good way; and so came at last nigh unto the shine of one of those 
fire-holes, the which I did see for so long. 

now, as you shall suppose, I went veri cautiou through the bushes, unto 
that red-shin fire; be careful, both that I did attract not ani 
evil forc that might listen in the night, and becaus that there might 
be some monster nigh to the fire-hole. but, presently, when I wa come 
so that I could peer through the bushes, I did see a littl fire-hol 
set in a small hollow, and there did no thing seem to lurk anigh; and 
the sight of that warmth did cheer me; for it wa long sinc I did have 
the comfort of such a matter. 

and when I had lain hid awhile, that I might watch all about, I saw the 
place to be safe and quiet; and I went out from the moss-bushes, and sat 
down a space from the fire, which did fill the pit in which it did lift 
and bubble. and the nois that it sent out wa strang and slow, and it 
did seem to gruntl gentli unto itself in that lonesom hollow, as that 
it had made a long and quiet grumbl there, through eternity. and oft 
wa it still, and made no sound; and again would give an odd bubbl in 
the quietness, and send off, as it did seem, a littl smoke of sulphur, 
and afterward fall onc more upon a quiet. 

and so I did sit there veri hush and restful, and the loneli did 
lie all about me, and the red shine of the fire-hol did glow soft in 
the hollow; and I wa glad to be quiet, for my heart wa weary. 

and there wa to my back a littl rock that did jut upward so high as a 
man; and the rock wa warm and pleasant to lean upon, and moreov did 
seem to guard me from behind. and there I ate and drunk, and kept veri 
still; and so wa present rested. and thi I did need, as you have 
perceived; for I wa gone sudden weari of the heart, as I did say; and 
thi might be becaus that I did never ceas to have destruct over me 
to companion my way, though as you will mind, I had been no more than 
twelv hour afoot, sinc my last sleeping. yet I doubt not you do 
understand. 

and present my heart grew strong again within me, and I had a warmth 
in my spirit; and I got up from the earth, and stretch out mine arms; 
and I saw that my gear wa safe upon me, and afterward did grip the 
diskos, as it were newly. 

then I went away from the fire-hole, and climb the far slope of the 
hollow, and went northward. and there were befor me mani of the 
fire-holes; for I did perceiv them to shine in the night for a great 
way; as it did seem that they were a path of red shine that led me 
onward to the north-west of the light of the plain of blue fire. 

now, I had a believ that I had come out of the countri where did lurk 
those horrid doorway in the night; and I went not with so utter a 
weight upon my heart; and did feel that naught should come now upon the 
back of my neck, which had been an odd and troublesom fanci whilst that 
I did creep through that countri of gloom. yet, as you shall know, I 
went with no foolish confidence; but with a great caution, and mine 
hear keen to hark, and a care to my steps, and did ever watch around 
me as I journeyed. 

and becaus that I went forward in thi proper and sedat manner, I had 
great caus for a thank heart, as you may perceive; for I had come 
after a long way to anoth of those hollow where did burn one of the 
fire-holes; and I made a paus upon the edg of the hollow in which it 
did lie, and look downward, keep guard within the moss-bushes, 
where they grew anigh to the top thereof. but there wa no live thing 
there to be seen, and I went downward, so that I should warm my bodi at 
the fire. and lo! as I stood upon thi side of the fire-hole, and turn 
myself about, I look present more keenli to the other side; for the 
yellow of the earth did seem a littl strang in one place. but I 
could see with no plainness, becaus that there aros a glare from the 
fire against mine eyes; and I went round, that I should look the better; 
yet with no fear or thought of evil in my heart. and, truly! when I wa 
come upon that far side of the fire-hole, lo! there wa spread out in 
the yellow sand of that place, a curiou thing; and I went more nigh, 
and stoop to look upon it; and behold it moved, and the sand all about 
did move for a great space; so that I gave back veri swift, and swung 
upward with the diskos. 

and, strangely, I heard the sand to stir at my back, and I look round 
veri quick, and the sand rose upward in parts, and sift back, and 
there came to my sight odd thing that did move and curl about. 

and immediately, befor I knew which way to go, I knew that the sand did 
shift under my feet, and did work and heave, so that I wa tottered, and 
wa shaken also in the heart; for I knew not what to think in that 
instant. then did I perceiv that I wa all surrounded, and I ran swift 
upon the heav sand, unto the edg of the fire-hole, and I turn 
there, and look quickly; for I did not know what thi new terror 
should be. 

and I saw that a yellow thing did hump upward from out of the sand, as 
it had been a low hillock that did live, and the sand shed downward from 
it, and it did gather to itself strang and horrid arm from the sand 
all about it. and it stretch two of the arm unto me; but I smote with 
the diskos, and I smote thrice; and afterward they did wriggl upon the 
sand. but thi wa not the end, as I did hope; for the yellow thing 
arose, and ran at me, as it might be that you should see a spider run. 
and I did leap backward, thi way and that; but the monster had a great 
swiftness; so that I did seem sure lost. 

then made I a strong and instant resolve; for I perceiv that I had no 
hope to slay thi thing; save that I should come at it in the body. and 
I put everyth to the chance, and made not to escap ani more; but ran 
straight in among the legs; and there were great hair like to spine 
upon the legs, and these had prick me to the death, but that the 
armour save me. 

now, I had done thi thing with a wondrou quickness; so that I wa 
under the mighti arch of the leg befor the yellow thing did wot of 
my intent. and the bodi wa bristl with the great hairs, and poison 
did seem to come from them, and to ooz from them strang in great and 
shine drops. and the monster heav itself up to one side, that it 
might bring certain of the leg inward to grasp me; yet in that moment 
did I smite utter fierc with the diskos--thrusting. and the disko did 
spin, and hum, and roar, and sent out a wondrou blaze of flame, as that 
it had been a devour death; and it sunder the bodi of the yellow 
thing, and did seem as that it scream to rage amid the entrail 
thereof; so wondrou wa the furi and energi of that trust weapon. 

and I wa cover with the muck of the thing; and the claw upon the 
leg seiz me, so that the grey armour did bend and crack to the might 
thereof, and I grew sick unto death with the pain within; but smote with 
the shine diskos, use my left hand weakly; for my right wa gript 
dread fast to my body. and lo! I wa sudden free, and a great blow 
did knock me far across the hollow, so that I wa like to have fallen 
into the fire-hole; but fell instead upon the edge, and came backward 
unto safety. 

and I turn me about, and the yellow thing did throw the sand all ways, 
as it did die; but had lost power to come upon me. and for my part, I 
lay weak upon the earth, and wa no more abl to fight; nor could I do 
more than breath for a great while; but yet came present to health, 
and made to examin my hurts. 

then I saw there wa no great wound anywher upon me; but onli an utter 
bruising; and I found upon my right leg that there wa a sharp and hairi 
claw clipt about it; but the armour had save me from harm of the horrid 
thing; so that I did but kick it free with my left foot, and thenc into 
the fire-hole. 

now, by thi time, that monstrou creatur wa dead; but I held off from 
it, and went upon the other side of the fire; for I wa yet sure in 
horror of it. and I sat for a time, and did think upon all matter that 
did concern me; and I saw that I should have not comfort of heart, until 
I wa wash clean from the taint of the monster. 

and I gat me up wearili to go forth into the night again, that I should 
make a search for a hot spring, of which I had come past many. and I had 
oft found them to be nigh unto the fire-holes; so that I wa trust 
that I should see one ere long. and lo! there wa a littl hollow just 
beyond, and scarc a hundr pace off; and in the hollow, there did 
shine three small fire-holes, and there wa a steam puddle, as did 
seem, beyond the third of the holes. 

now, befor I adventur downward into thi place, I went all about the 
topmost edge, and made a search of the moss-bush about; but found 
naught that should scare me. and afterward, I went all across the 
hollow; but did find no monstrou thing hid anywheres. yet, there wa 
that in the place that discourag me, and did keep me from strip 
mine armour, so that I should bath in the hot puddle; for I stept upon 
a small serpent, and the same did lap about my leg; but could do me no 
hurt, for the armour, which wa a veri bless protection. and I freed 
myself from it with the handl of the diskos. 

and becaus that I could not go nake to my cleansing, I tri first the 
hot of the water, which wa not over great, and afterward did take 
off the scrip and the pouch, and the cloak, and laid them with the 
disko upon the edg of the warm puddle. 

then I stept into the water, and wa immedi gone downward a great 
way; for, truli it wa no puddl as I had supposed; but a deep well, as 
you might call it, of hot and sulphuri water. and thi doth show how a 
man may act foolishly, even when he doth believ that he hath a great 
caution; and sure it is born in upon me afresh that none should trust 
over freeli unto unproven matters, the which shall you heartili agre 
with; but yet do as foolishly, accord to your light and characters. 
and so shall you laugh not over hardli upon me. 

now I had gone over the head, and, sure I do not know what deep 
wa there. yet, as you shall think, I stay not to consid upon thi 
matter; but made to climb out, and much shaken with my splutter and 
the smart of mine eyes; for, truly, the water wa strong with 
sulphur matters. yet, veri cleans wa it, as I did present see; for 
there wa no more ani taint or horrid upon mine armour, or the flesh 
of my face or hands. and I took the diskos, and wash it clean, also; 
and then the cloak, and afterward the scrip and the pouch, and the band 
of the same. 

and after I had done this, I wa mind to dri myself by the littl 
fire-holes; but when I wa come there, lo! mayb a score small serpent 
were about those places; and I wa strongli pleas that I should keep 
away. yet that I must warm and dri me in that desol and bitter night 
land, you shall agree. and to thi end, I put the scrip and the pouch 
upon me, and afterward took the disko readili into my hand, and ran 
quietli unto the hollow where I did fight with the yellow thing. and the 
cloak I bore in my left hand. 

now, when I wa gat there, I wa truli glad to think that there were no 
serpent in that place; and becaus that I had slain the monster of the 
place, how should it be that ani harm might come unto me; for truly, wa 
it not like that a creatur of such might should keep all that hollow 
unto itself, and slay ani that did come therein, and therebi preserv 
that place from all other horror; though, surely, until it did die and 
ceas to be, there had been no call for ani greater abomination. 

now, all thi did go through my brain, as I did sit to dri mine armour 
and my bodi and my gear, upon that side of the fire-hol which wa away 
from the slain monster. and I made present to think that thi would 
be a sure and proper refug wherein to sleep; for, truly, it must have 
gotten a place where none other creatur should be like to come to work 
me harm. and it must be that you do all see with me in thi matter, and 
commend me that I thought with properness. 

and so did I resolv that I put my disgust within my pocket, as we do 
say, and stay safe and quiet within that hollow. and thi thing I did 
surely, and did eat and drink; and present I went over to the dead 
monster, and made veri sure that it wa truli slain; which inde it 
was. and after that I had seen to thi matter, I return unto the 
fire-hole, and made a comfort place in the sand, for my rest; for I 
wa well dri by this. 

and I wrap the cloak about me, and took the disko to my breast, for 
a sure companion, as it had truli prove in my need. and I could think 
almost that it did nestl unto me, as that it knew and love me; but 
thi thing can be no more than a fancy; and I do but set it down as 
such, and that it doth show my feel and mind at that time. 

then, ere I did compos myself to slumber, I look about me, upward to 
the edg of the hollow, and I perceiv that I wa lost to the sight of 
the mighti pyramid; for I wa come so far off that it look not down 
from so wondrou a height, as you shall perceive; and moreover, the 
hollow wa someth deep. 

and afterward, as I lay my head back upon the scrip and the pouch, which 
were to me my pillow, I went to think a littl upon naani, as alway I 
did in my constant journeying; yet, presently, I strove sometim that I 
put her from my mind, that I should sleep; for a bitter sorrow and 
anxious wa oft upon me when that I did think upon her; and thi you 
may know; for truli I knew not what terror wa come to her, afar in the 
silenc of the night. and did I think overmuch, I should feel that I 
could have no calm need to sleep; but to need to walk for ever 
until I died, which could not be long; and so should I make a 
foolish of mine anxiou journey to do her true servic and to 
save her from destruction, if such did truli threaten. 

and I wa soon gone over to sleep, and wake not for seven hours, be 
much weari by the fight and the sore of my body, the which did put 
me into a great pain as I did rise upward from my slumber. but thi wa 
present someth less, and I eat two of the tablet and drank some of 
the water, and afterward did put my gear upon me, and went forward into 
the night, have the disko in my hand. and my heart wa glad that I 
had come safe through the time of my sleep. 

now I walk six hours, and did stop a littl to eat and drink, and went 
on again. and it wa in thi second third of the day that I saw afar to 
my right, two strang and wondrou men, and they did shine, as they had 
been made of a pale mist. and they came anigh, go veri swift, and did 
seem as that they were mayb forti feet high, yet have no thickness; 
and I hid downward into the moss-bushes. and they past me, so quiet as a 
cloud of thi day might go, and did appear to be, if I did guess, but an 
hundr fathom off; yet wa thi no sure thing; for their posit had 
no more sureti than shall a rainbow have in thi age. and so they were 
gone onward into the night, and did seem to come out of the north. and 
they did appear not to wot of me; and whether they were harmful, I know 
not, for they harm not me. 

and I lay there in the moss-bushes, until they were well gone away; and 
I had belief that they must be those same mist-men that were told of in 
certain of the olden records; but were never seen anigh to the pyramid; 
though I had thought, odd times, to see men, as of mist, through the 
great spy-glass, when I wa within the tower of observation. but they 
were alway a mighti way off; and some would say it wa but a bright 
vapour that did move; yet would other be in doubt, and so is it ever in 
such matters. 

and here let me take chanc to say how that it is a hard thing to speak 
of such happen to men of thi age, and to make the truth proper unto 
them; and becaus of this, oft am I tempt to say no word upon mani 
thing that I did see; yet must I tell my tale, or suffer from the 
weight of it within me. and so shall you hark to me and give me your 
sympathi and human understanding. and concern these mist-men, I have 
wonder oft whether they were the visibl shape of some of those mani 
forc that were abroad in the night land; for they did truli seem to me 
as that a thing of strang life were half shown to my human eyes; yet I 
do not know, and am but tell of my natur thought and ponderings. 

now, as I did say, those mist-men were never seen nigh unto the pyramid, 
and were, as I did hint, alway so far off that they were half given 
over to the fabl of the olden days, in the belief of the peopl of 
the mighti redoubt; and set about with an halo of unrealness, for none 
within the great pyramid had ever beheld them with surety. 

and becaus that now I saw them anigh to me, it wa born in afresh upon 
my spirit how greatli I had wander away, and how that I stood afar in 
the lonesom of that land of night; as it had been that a man of 
thi age did wander amid the stars, and perceiv a great comet to go by 
him veri close; for then he should know in hi heart how that he wa far 
off in the void. and thi I do say to you, that you may know somewhat of 
the emot of my heart in that moment. 

yet, present I shook free of my melancholi and lonesom and rose 
up out of the moss-bushes, and went onward. and, as ever, I thought much 
upon the maid that I did search for; yet strove to think quietli 
concern her state; els should I have turn to running, and wreck 
my bodi befor that I had gone ani great way. 

and that day, I pass seven larg fire-holes, and two that were small; 
and alway I came softli unto them; for there were oft live thing 
about the warmth. and at the sixth fire-hole, I did see that which I did 
think to be a great man, that did sit to the fire, with monstrou knee 
drawn upward unto hi chin. and the nose wa great and bent downward; 
and the eye veri large, and did shine with the light from the 
fire-hole, and moved, watching, alway thi way and that, so that the 
white part did show, now thi side and now that. but it wa not 
properli a man. 

and I went away veri quiet from that place, and look oft backward, 
until that I wa sure of safety; for it wa a veri horrid monster, and 
had that place to be for a lair, as I did judg from the smell thereof. 

and when the eighteenth hour wa come, I look about for a safe place 
to my sleep; and I kept away now from the fire-holes; for I did alway 
find the more life there. yet, when I came to my rest, I wa lack of 
warmth, by reason of thi care; and could scarc sleep at all, becaus 
that I wa so cold. yet manag someth of slumber after a while; but 
woke veri stiff, and wa glad to beat my hand and bestir myself that I 
should come to some warmth of life. 

and after that I had eat and drunk, I put my gear upon me, and took the 
disko in my hand, and went forward again upon my journey. and here I 
should tell that I wa come soon unto the north-west border of the plain 
of blue fire. and presently, I wa but a littl way off from it, and did 
go direct to the north; so that the plain wa alway upon my right. 

now thi plain wa a strang and fearsom place, as you shall see; for 
it wa as that a blue void did rise upward from the earth in all the 
countri of that plain. for, surely, the plain did not lumber with flame; 
but wa hid with a strang and inburn light, as of a shine 
atmospher of a cold blue colour. and it did throw no sure light upon 
the night land, as had seem proper; but wa a veri dreadful, cold 
shining, as of a lumin and blue void. and the moss-bush grew nigh 
to the edg of the plain, and did show to me black and strang against 
that horrid gloom of light. 

and you shall know that I could not see into the plain; for it wa as 
that the cold blue light wa a void that swallow all within it; and 
gave no power to the eye that aught should be perceived. and it stood 
between me and the mighti pyramid, and I could nowis see across. and I 
know not whether I do make all thi matter clear unto you; for sure it 
is no easi task. 

and present I had gone veri quiet upon my hand and knee through the 
moss-bushes; and I came near upon the edg of the plain, and hid there 
in a clump of the moss-bush, and peer forth and harked. and I heard 
constant voic that did call to one anoth across the plain; as it 
were that strang peopl of spirit did wander within that blue 
shining, and did make a call one to the other, and were all hid and 
held apart. and sure I could see naught, and did judge, as I have 
writ, that they likewis went blindly. and truli is thi a strang 
matter to set out; and easi to think on with doubt. yet as I did see, so 
have I told; for, in verity, there were sure hidden peopl of spirit 
scatter and lost afar upon that improp plain. 

and you shall judg that I kept safe hid; for whether thi might have 
ani natur explaining, or whether it wa a matter that did go utter 
beyond knowledg of man, I did not know; for sure in that strang 
land, it did like to be an horrid danger in ani case; and whether of 
some monstrou creatures, or of the evil forc of the land, I did 
wise to be away. 

and for two day I did make a safe coast of the plain of blue fire; 
and did keep well off, mayb two great miles, among the moss-bushes. and 
I made a veri good speed through the darkness. and at the eighteenth 
hour of each journey, I made a place for my slumber; and the first I did 
manag under a thick bush; but the second wa high upon the ledg of a 
rock that grew upward in the night amid the bushes. and, save that I wa 
bitter cold there did no harm come to me. and in all that time of 
journeying, I had no sight of the mighti pyramid; for the blind shine 
of the plain of blue fire wa ever between. 

now there had been certain littl matter in my journey besid the plain 
of blue fire, which I have not set down; for they were of no account, 
and do but repeat much that I have told before. and, indeed, there wa 
naught in that part of my journey, save that I did pass nineteen great 
fire-holes, and four small; and did observ no life besid any, save 
about one of the great hole that there wa no hollow around, and here I 
did happen to see some strang and ugli creatur so big as my head, 
that did have a look of the scorpion of thi age; but proport more 
squat and thick. yet, though they were naught to remark upon in that 
land, they had been but woeful bedmat to ani man; as you may think. 

and you shall know how it gave a rest to my spirit, that I did go so 
long with no troubl of the monster of the night, or the evil forc 
thereof. and I grew bolder to my journeying, and made ever a greater 
speed of going; and it wa like that I took present a less heed for my 
safety, which wa a wrong and foolish state. yet there came no harm unto 
me, in all that part of my travel. 

then, it wa in the sixteenth hour of the third day of my journey besid 
the plain, that I did come out beyond the end of it, and had fresh sight 
of the mighti pyramid, afar in the night upon my right. and I stopt 
there in a bare place among the moss-bushes, and did in a weak moment 
hold up the diskos, so that I make a salut unto the pyramid, mine home; 
for truli wa I so utter glad to behold it onc more. 

and in a littl while wa I awar that there wa a disturb of the 
aether of the world all about me; so that it did seem that there had 
been one at the great spy-glass to watch for my come into their sight 
from behind the shine of the plain of blue fire. 

and it wa like that news had gone downward through the citi of the 
great redoubt; so that they did print the word of it in the hour-slips; 
and by thi there would be mani great million think upon me, and a 
rush unto the embrasures, that they might spi out at me. yet I doubt 
that ani glass might perceiv me sure at so great a space, save the 
power of the great spy-glass in the tower of observation. but the 
emot of the million to reach to me. 

and you shall know that it did seem home and sweet unto me to hear all 
about me the shake of the aether of the world, and to be ware that so 
mani did think humanli upon me, and had prayer unto my safety. 

and it wa a strang thing to stand so utter far off in the night, and 
to look back to that everlast hill of light, that wa grown someth 
small by the distance, and to have sureti that I wa lookt upon through 
the great spy-glass, mayb by the kindli eye of my dear friend the 
master monstruwacan, and so keenli that he could, it might be, make 
almost to guess the look within mine eyes, as I did gaze backward unto 
that mine home. 

yet, though thi dear and home sympathi wa a sweet and companion 
thing to my heart, it came swift to my thought that I wa in a sore 
danger, if that they ceas not quickli to think so one upon me; for 
sure wa I not come over-near unto that _dreadful_ hous of silence; 
and well might so much emot of the million tell unto the horrid 
power that dwelt within, how that I wa even anigh. and so shall you see 
the mixt feel that came upon me everyway. 

yet, as it did chance, the aether wa quiet in a little; for it did 
need uniti of the million (be that they were untrain to their 
spiritu powers) to stir the aether. and so wa I more easi of mind, 
and went forward again upon my way. 

now, as it did chance, at the eighteenth hour, I wa come to a place 
where I heard a nois of water; and I went to my left, that I might come 
upon it; and there boil a hot fountain that went up out of the rock of 
that place. and the water rose upward in a column, and was, maybe, so 
thick as my body; and it fell unto the north, for the water came not up 
straightly, but did shoot out from the earth unto that way. and I saw 
the thing plain; for there were mani fire-hol all about, as you shall 
have wot from my telling; and so wa there a certain and constant 
light in that part of the land. 

and I follow the water that ran from the fountain, and tri it with 
mine hand; but found it to burn; and so did go further besid it; for 
present it should be no hotter than I did need. and it went onward, 
wind among the moss-bushes, and sent up a constant steam, that hung 
about it; and the steam made a red cloud about the way that it did go; 
for the light from the fire-hol made a shine upon it; and so wa it 
a wondrou pretti sight. 

now, presently, I tri the stream again, and found it to be nice 
warm; and I sat upon a littl rock, and took off my foot-gear, that I 
might bath my feet, which were gone someth tender; moreover, I did 
ach to have the sweet of water about me. and I made that I should 
bath my feet, and afterward find a place among the moss-bushes, and so 
eat and drink, and have my slumber. 

then, as I did sit there besid that warm stream, with my feet dabbl 
therein, I heard sudden, afar off, the voic of a mighti night-hound, 
bay in the night. and the sound came from the north-west of the plain 
of blue fire. and there wa afterward a quiet; and you shall see me 
sit there upon the rock by the side of that smoke river, and the 
steam all about me, and my feet within the love warmth of the water; 
and I veri still and frozen with a sudden fear; for, it did seem to me, 
in an instant, that the night-hound might sure be upon the track of my 
goings. 

and after that there had pass a littl time, the while that I did 
listen veri keen, lo! there burst out in the night, as it did seem 
scarc a mile off, the monstrou deep bay of the giant hound. and I 
knew sure that the brute did track me, and a sick and utter horror did 
fall upon me; so that I could scarc get my foot-gear upon me, onc 
more. yet, in truth, I wa not long to the matter, and wa to my feet, 
and did hold the disko ready; and veri desper I wa to the heart; 
for it is ever a fearsom thing to be put in chase, and the wors an 
hundr time when there is a sure knowledg that a deathli monster doth 
be the pursuer. 

now, I did stand there but a moment it did seem, to make an anxiou 
consid how that I might best assur me some chanc to live through 
thi swift come danger. and then did I think upon the stream, to use 
it, and I leapt quick therein, and did run veri strong down the middl 
part, which wa nowher so much as thigh-deep, and oft not abov mine 
ankles. and as I did run, there came again the bellow of that dire 
brute, following, and wa now, as mine ear did say, scarc the half of 
a mile to my rear. 

and I did run but the stronger, for the dread of the sound; and so, 
maybe, for a littl minute; and after that time, I stopt from mine heavi 
running, and went veri wary, that I made no loud splashing; for by now 
the monster-brut should be someth anigh to that place where I did 
enter the stream. and I look round, with a constant looking; but did 
see no sure visibl thing; though my fear did shape me an hound from 
everi shadow of the moss-bush about me. 

then, in a moment, I did hear the great beast; for it bay but a 
littl way up the stream, as that it had overshot the place where the 
scent did end. and immediately, I sank swiftli into the water, which wa 
there so deep as my knee, and turn upon my belly. and the water surg 
over my shoulders; for I kept my head above. and so I did look eager and 
fear through the steam into the shadow and the half-darkness, 
toward where I did think to see the night-hound. 

and in a moment I saw it coming; and it wa a littl vague, by reason of 
the smoke of the river; yet did seem black and monstrou in the gloom, 
and great as a mighti horse. and it went past me at a vast and 
lumbersom gallop; but I did not see it in that moment; for I dive my 
head down unto the rock of the river bottom, and held downward, until 
that I wa like to burst for sore long of breath. 

then I put upward my head, and took swift and deep breathings, and lookt 
about me, veri cautiou and fearful, as you can know. and I heard the 
night-hound cast round among the moss-bushes, and it did send up a 
wild and awesom baying; and I heard the bush brake and smash beneath 
it, as it did run to and hither. and afterward there wa a quiet; yet I 
move not; but stay there, veri low in the water, and did have a 
thank heart that it wa warm and easi to persist in; for I had sure 
die of a frozen heart, if that it had been cold; for, by thi time, you 
do know even with me, how bitter wa the chill of the land. 

now, I had been awhil lain thu upon my belly, and heard no sound from 
the monstrou hound. yet, I ceas not to be full of an horrid unease, 
concern the great beast; for I did better to know what it did, than 
to have no knowing. and, sudden, I heard the sound of it, run veri 
swiftli and come nigh; and it pass me, and did go up the stream; and 
there wa sure a quick stupor upon me; for I duck not my head under 
the water; but stay veri still; which as it did chance, wa mayb not 
such an utter foolishness; for my head did seem in that half-gloom to 
be, mayhap, no more than a littl rock in the water, and I made no move 
to tell of life; yet should the hound have smell me; and that it 
fail in thi matter, doth be a puzzl to me. 

and as the great night-hound past me, it tore the earth and the bushes, 
with the exceed strength that it put forth to run, and clod of the 
earth and stone of big were cast thi way and that by the feet of 
the hound, running. and so shall you have a littl knowledg of the 
strength of that beast. 

and the hound ran on into the distance, and presently, I heard it bay 
in the night. then I rose, and went onward, down the warm stream, and 
made a strong walking, yet keep alway to the water; and oft did stop 
a littl that I should listen; and alway I heard the night-hound a 
great way off in the night, baying, and seem that it did sure run 
to and fro, searching. 

now, I journey thu for twelv hours, and the bay of the hound 
make search, did never cease. and I kept alway to the water, as I 
did say, that I should leav no scent unto the hound. and by that twelv 
weari hour had gone, I found that I wa come anigh unto the hous of 
silence. and thi put me in great trouble; as you may perceive; for 
sure had mine whole effort been to the end that I should avoid that 
house, by a great way. yet had the hound driven me thu a-near. 

now I saw that the small river did go onward, and did make a breach 
across the road where the silent one walk; and I determin in my heart 
that I should leav the water, which wa now grown nigh to a bitter 
cold, in that it wa so long upon the face of the land. yet chiefli did 
I mind to leav the water, that I should come no more anigh unto that 
hous of silence; for the water did go that way. and I stood awhile, and 
did listen for the bay of the hound; but could hear it no more; and 
did have a sureti within me that it wa inde gone from search for 
me. 

then I came out of the water, and went forward, stoop and creeping, 
among the moss-bushes, go outward to the westward of north, so that I 
should go away so quickli as I might from the near of the house. 
yet, lo! I wa gone upon my hand and knee no more than an hundr 
fathoms, when I did find the moss-bush to ceas to the westward, for a 
great way, and there to be a great bare of rock, which, in truth, 
wa much shown thereabout. and I dare not to go outward upon that nake 
land; for then I had not been hid by the moss-bushes; but had stood 
plain there for all thing of the night to behold; and moreover, though 
I could nowis have a sure knowledg concern thi matter, yet did I 
hope within me that I should make a sure hide from the power of the 
hous of silence, did I but go veri low among the bushes. but, indeed, 
it wa like enough that naught could give me hiding; yet should I lose 
no chanc unto my safety. 

and becaus of this, I went backward among the bushes, and ceas to 
escap out unto the westward. and I found presently, that the 
moss-bush made but a narrow growth in that path, and grew onli for a 
while by the side of the great road; so that I wa sure fain to keep 
nigh to the road, that I have the cover of the bushes. 

and, in a while, I found the road where the silent one walk, to bend 
inward at the north of the hous of silence; so that it came right 
horridli close unto the house; for here the hill on which the hous did 
stand, wa veri abrupt and fell steepli unto the road. and so wa that 
dread hous stood up there abov me in the silence, as that it did 
seem to _brood_ there upon the land. and thi side did seem truli as the 
other; and equal lone and dreadful. and the hous wa monstrou and 
huge, and full of quiet lights; and it wa truli as that there had been 
no sound ever in that hous through eternity; but yet wa it as that the 
heart did think each moment to see quiet and shroud figur within, 
and yet never were they seen; and thi I do but set down that I bring 
all home unto _your_ heart also, as that you crouch there with me in 
those low moss-bushes, there besid the great road, and did look upward 
unto that monstrou hous of everlast silence, and did feel the 
utter of silenc to hang about it in the night; and to know in your 
spirit the quiet threat that live silent there within. 

and so shall you have mind of me, hid there among the bushes, and sodden 
and cold; and yet, as you will perceive, so held in my spirit by an 
utter terror and loath and solemn wonder and awe of that mighti hous 
of quiet loom abov me in the night, that I wot not of the 
miseri of my body, becaus that my spirit wa put so greatli in dread 
and terror for the life of my being. 

and also you shall have befor you, how that I knew in all my bodi and 
soul, that I stood anigh to that place where but a littl while gone 
there had pass inward so dread to an everlast silenc and horrid 
mysteri those poor youths. 

and after that you have mind you of this, you shall consid how that 
the memori of all my life held dread thought of the monstrous of 
that house; and now wa I anigh unto it. and it did seem to my soul that 
the veri night about it, held an anguish of quiet terror. and alway my 
mind did come back to the sheer matter that I wa so anigh. and thi 
thing I do say unto you onc and again; for truly, as you do see, it 
hath imprint itself deep into my spirit. yet shall I now ceas from 
say further in thi manner; for, surely, you shall never know all 
that wa in mine heart; and if I ceas not, I do but be like to weari 
you. 

and so did I hide and creep, and oft paus to a time of shake quiet; 
and afterward gather someth of new courage, and go onward; and peer 
upward at that monstrou house, stood abov me in the night. yet, as it 
did come about, I came present clear of that horrid place; for the 
road came round again unto the north, and I began that I made a better 
way through the moss-bushes; but never that I grew to much speed; for I 
had oft to go about, that I should miss a nake part here, and anoth 
there; for truli there wa an abund and bare of rock, so that 
the bush grew not so thick as I could wish. 

and in the space of five hour wa I clear of that house; and did have a 
greater eas about my heart; but yet wa not free to come to food nor to 
slumber, the both of which I did sore need; for I had slept neither 
eat for a weari time, as you do know. but first I must go further off 
from the house, and afterward come to some fire-hole, that I should dri 
myself and get warmth again into my body, which wa bitter cold. 

and now that I had come unto the northward of the hous of silence, 
there came to me a great wonder, which bred in me a mighti hope and 
gladness. for as I did go among the bushes, there broke sudden all 
around me in the aether, the low and solemn beat of the master-word. and 
the throb of the word wa utter weak; so that one moment I did say unto 
myself that I heard, and in a moment that I did not; yet had I no proper 
doubt in my heart. 

and I reason with myself, and with a great shake of excit and 
expect upon me, that the master-word came not from the great 
pyramid, which should have power to send it as a great forc across the 
everlast night; whilst that thi that throb about me wa faint and 
scarc to be known even unto the keen of the night-hearing, which 
wa mine. 

and, immediately, as I crouch low there, and thrill with the hope 
that wa bred in me, lo! there seem to come the far faint voic of 
naani, call with a littl voic within my spirit. and I thought the 
cri to have an utter of supplic within it; so that I grew 
desper to up and go to running; yet did curb such foolishness, and 
stay veri hushed, to listen. 

but I heard no more; yet wa shaken continu with the joy and hope 
which thi call did breed in me, for truli did it seem now that I wa 
right that I did determin to go unto the north; for sure wa I now that 
the lesser redoubt lay that way in the night. and it did seem plain unto 
me, that the hous of silenc had put a barrier between; and had power 
to withhold so weak a calling. and now had I come beyond the barrier. 
and I did perceiv in my heart how that naani had call off, mayb in 
the sad of despair; yet had the weak cri of her brain-el 
been held from me by the horrid power of the house; and surely, as I did 
think, it wa well named; for it did make a silence. 

and so shall you stay with me in your hearts, and take to ourselv 
someth of the new glad that held all my being; for it did seem 
truli that my bitter task and adventur should not in the end be 
offer to uselessness; and that I did truli draw unto that far place in 
the everlast night, where mine own maid did cri for me, that I should 
succour her. 

and ever as I went, did I hark; but there wa no more the low eat of 
the master-word in the night; not at that time. 

and presently, I spi outward to the west, as it did seem a good mile 
off in the night, the shine of a fire-hole; and I began to plan that I 
should come unto that place, and have warmth and dryness, and food and 
slumber. and, in verity, so set wa I to the need of these matter that 
if there did be a monstrou thing nigh to the fire--a wa so oft the 
case--then would I give battl unto it; for neither my joy nor my 
labour did serv to put warmth into my body; and I must sure come 
anigh to fire, or die. 

then, as I kneel upward among the moss-bushes, and made to lay a true 
cours unto the fire-hole, I perceiv that there came a be along 
the road unto my right; and I went low into the bushes, and move not; 
for truli I had seen that there drew nigh one of the silent ones. 

and I made a littl place that should let me to see; and I spi out, 
with an utter caution; and lo! the be came on veri quiet, and with no 
hurry. and in a time, it went by me on the road, and did take no heed to 
me; yet did I feel that it had knowledg that I stoopt there among the 
moss-bushes. and it made no sound as it went; and wa a dread thing; 
yet, it did seem unto my heart, as that it had no troubl of wanton 
malic to work needless destruct to any. and this, I crave strang 
that you to understand; for it wa so to me that I had a quiet and great 
respect for that thing; and did feel no hatred; yet wa veri dreadli in 
fear of it. and it wa huge in size, and wa shroud unto it feet, and 
seemed, mayb ten feet high. yet, presently, it wa gone onward down the 
road, and I wa no more troubl by it. 

then did I make no wast of time; but set off unto the fire-hole; and 
kept so much to shelter as I might; but wa oft made to run over bake 
places, ere that I should come to more of the bushes. 

and I came present nigh unto the fire-hole, and made a pause, and 
crept unto it, with a great care. and I found it to be in the bottom of 
a deep hollow of the rock of that part. and the rock wa clear look 
of all live matters, the which did make me to be glad. and I went 
round about the top of the hollow, carri the disko veri handily; but 
there wa nowher ani live thing; and I fear not to go downward into 
the deep hollow, and so unto the fire-hole, which lay in the bottom, as 
you have perceived. 

and when I wa come there, I made a close search of the rock, and found 
it wa veri sweet and warm; and there were no serpents, neither ani 
sting creatures; so that a certain comfort came upon my spirit. 

then stript I off mine armour and gear, and afterward all my garments, 
so that I stood nake there in the hollow. yet wa that place almost so 
warm as some mild oven, and I had no fear to suffer from the cold of the 
night land; but wa uneasi lest that ani monstrou thing should be anigh 
to come to take me so unawares. 

now I wrung the garments, and spread them upon the rock near unto the 
fire-hole, where it wa hot; and I did rub my bodi veri brisk with my 
hands, so that I glow into health and had no fear of a stiffness. 

and afterward, I did look to my food and drink, and to the matter in 
the pouch; but there had no harm come to any, by reason of the tight 
of the scrip and the pouch, that had kept off the water. and I eat and 
drank, there as I stood wait for the garment to come to dryness; and 
I walk about a little, as I eat; for I wa restless to be into mine 
armour swiftly. and now I did turn thi garment upward of the dri side, 
and now that; but did find them to steam, so that I turn them mani 
time befor they were proper. 

yet, in truth, they dri in but a littl while, and I gat me into them 
veri swift, and into the armour; and I felt the strength and courag of 
my spirit to come back into me, which had gone outward somewhat when I 
did stand there so naked. and thi feel you shall all have 
understand of; and know that you would have felt that way, likewise, 
had you but stood there in that land in so unhappi a plight. 

and when I had come into mine armour, I put my gear upon me, and took 
the disko into my hand, and did climb out of the hollow; for I would 
find a more secur place to my slumber, and did not dare to sleep in 
that place; for it wa beyond seven and thirti hour sinc that I did 
have sleep; though as I do see by my count, I have made it to seem but 
as five and thirty; yet wa a part consum in divers matter that I 
have not set down. and you shall mind how bitter had been my labour and 
weari in all that time; and I did know of a sureti that sleep must 
come heavili upon me; so that I wa sore in need that I should search 
out a safe place; for I should not be lightli waked, until that I had 
slept away the tired of my heart, and the weari ach from my 
body. and, indeed, I should mind you how that I wa not yet come perfect 
from the bruis which I had gotten from the fight with the yellow 
thing. 

and presently, when I had search but a littl while, I did find that a 
rock stood upward from a great clump of the moss-bush unto my left; 
and I went over to the rock, and made a search about it. and I found 
that there wa a hole into the bottom part of the rock, and I thrust the 
disko into the hole, and made the blade to spin a little, so that it 
sent out a light; but there wa no thing in the hole, and it did seem a 
dri and safe place for my sleep. 

then I turn me about, and went into the hole with my feet that way; 
and I found that it wa so deep into the rock as the length of two men, 
and just so wide as I could lie in it without have it to pinch me. and 
there I made my bed in the hole, and went swift unto my sleep, and 
scarc had but a moment even to think upon naani; and by thi thing 
shall you know how utter wa my weariness. 

now I wake of a sudden, and wa veri clear and refreshed. and I crept 
to the mouth of the hole, and lookt out; but there wa all a quiet 
round about, and noth to threaten. 

and I found that I had slept ten hours; so that I made a hast to eat 
and drink, that I should go forward swiftli upon my journey. and at that 
time, as in the time when I did eat, naked, in the hollow, by the 
fire-hole, I eat four of the tablets; and thi you shall understand to 
be rightli due unto me, in that I had gone so long fast in that my 
great journey to come safe from the hound, and to come past the hous 
of silence. and thi shall seem but a littl thing to you; yet wa it a 
wondrou import matter unto me, that had gone so long with an empti 
belly, and wa never satisfied. and neither should ani be, that had eat 
so littl as I did eat, and made to fill their belli alway with a drink 
of water. yet, I doubt not but that it did keep my soul sweet and 
wholesom and no use thing to the power of evil of the land. 

and when I had made an end of so great a gorging, and had ceas to be 
drunken with water, I gat my gear upon me, and took the disko into mine 
hand, and so went forth onc more toward the north. 

and presently, I wa nigh unto the road again; for it did curv 
someth westward a space beyond. and I wa sore tempt to go upon the 
road; for the ground wa rough and the moss-bush did catch my feet. 
yet did I stay among the bushes, though the road wa true and smooth, by 
compare. and by thi telling, you will perceiv that I walk onc more 
upright, and had given over to crawl between the bushes. and, in truth, 
thi wa so; for the land did seem veri quiet in all that part; and I 
had less of fear, now that I stood beyond the horrid uneas of the hous 
of silence. 

now, after that I had journey twelv hours, I saw that I wa come upon 
the commenc of a great and mighti slope, as that the world did 
slope downward alway toward the north. and I went on again, after that 
I had eat and drunk, as I did likewis befor thi at the sixth hour of 
that day' journey. 

and presently, I perceiv the road to cease; and sure thi did 
confound me; as that a man of thi age had come to a part where the 
world did end; for you shall know that the road wa that which had 
seem to go on for ever; and you shall mind the way of my life up till 
that time, and so shall you the better conceiv of my bewilderment, and 
as it were a feel of great strang unto one that wa overprest, 
as you would believe, with strang matters. 

yet, truly, wa thi all as the littl book of metal had told unto me; 
and so should I have been someth prepared; yet are we ever thu 
need eye-proof; and perhap it is more proper that it be so. 

yet, you shall perceiv me adrift somewhat as to direction; for I had 
steer befor thi time so that I should come to the north of the hous 
of silence; and afterward had shape my way by the road. but now wa I 
adrift, as it might be set down, in the wilderness. 

and so did I stand and consider, and present did look unto the far 
pyramid, which wa now a great way off in the night, and had seem but 
small by that which I knew it to be. and lo! as I did look, I perceiv 
that I could but see the high upper-point of the light of the great 
pyramid, where did shine the last light; and I wa confound afresh; 
yet in a moment I saw that the great of the slope did account for 
this. but here I should tell to you that the slope wa nowis steep; but 
did seem as that it should never cease. and mayhap thi is clear unto 
you. 

and I perceiv sure that the time wa come when I should make an 
utter part from the great redoubt; and the thought came veri heavi 
upon me. and in the same time I knew that the aether wa stir by the 
emot of the millions; so that I had knowledg they watch me with 
the great spy-glass, and did send word down unto the hour-slips; and by 
thi did the million know, and have a great think upon me in that 
moment. 

and you shall perceiv how utter lost and lonesom I did feel. and it 
wa at that time that I did test the compass, to comfort me, as I did 
tell befor this, and fear I must sure forget, when I did come to the 
proper place; yet have I mind me, as I did desire. 

and I saw now that the night land that I did wot of, wa hid from me by 
the slope. and I turn and look down the slope; and sure all befor 
me wa utter wild of a dark desolation; for it did seem to go 
nowhith but into an everlast night. and there wa no fire down 
there, neither light of ani kind; but onli dark and, as I did feel, 
eternity. and downward into that black did the great slope seem to 
go for ever. 

now, as I did stand there, look downward into the dark, and often 
backward unto the shine of the final light, and put to a horrid 
desolateness, behold! there came the low beat of the master-word in 
the night. and it did appear as that it had been sent to give me courag 
and strength in that moment; and did seem unto my fanci that sure it 
did come upward unto me from out of the mighti black into which the 
great slope ran. yet could thi have been but a belief; for the aether 
doth have no regard unto direct to show you whenc the spiritu 
sound doth come; and thi did my knowledg and reason know full well. 

and I made that I would send back the master-word, send it with my 
brain-elements, and so give news unto naani how that I did struggl to 
come unto her. yet did I have caution in time; for in verity, had I sent 
the master-word, then had the evil forc of the land wot that I wa 
out; and mayhap had come swift unto my destruction; and so did I 
contain my spirit and desire, and made to do wisely. 

yet wa I put in courag by the low beat of the master-word; and did 
listen veri keen, that some messag should follow; but there came none, 
neither did the weak throb of the word come about me again, at that 
time. and becaus that I wa now grown more to my natur state, and did 
feel that I should inde find the maid, I look onc more unto the 
great pyramid, long and eager and with a solemn heart; yet with no sign 
or salutation, as I wa befor determined. and afterward, I turn and 
went downward into the dark. 




viii 

down the mighti slope 


now I went downward veri quiet and slow into that darkness; and did make 
but a cautiou way; for now you shall know me truli wrap about with 
such a night as did seem to press upon my veri soul, and such as you 
shall never have seen nor felt; so that I did seem lost even from my 
self, and did appear as that I went present in unreal fashion, and did 
pass onward for ever and for ever through everlast night; so that odd 
while I did make to walk with random, as that I stept no more upon thi 
earth; but did go offward into the void. yet wa thi foolish of 
the mind set straight and proper each time that it did come about; for 
lo! I did kick against an upjut rock here, and fall upon a great and 
unseen boulder there, and so wa shaken veri quickli to a sound 
knowledg that I trode the hard and actual earth; and had no true 
deal with unreal matters. 

and ever I did go downward; and by thi onli did I have a guid to my 
way. yet, as you shall think, through reason of the utter dark I made 
scarc a mile in an hour or even two full hours; and so grew bitter by 
reason of mine unabl to go forward with a proper and free stride. 

but I did think me present upon a thing that I should do to light my 
path; and to thi end, I did make the disko to spin, odd whiles, and 
did look down the mighti slope, the littl way that the strang 
glisten of the disko did show, and so fix my path into mine inward 
remembering, and would go forward afresh, until that I wa shaken onc 
more by the darkness, and would fain to look onc again upon the 
blessed of light, and make me some knowledg of my way. 

and, truly, the light from the disko did seem astonish great, and 
thi to be becaus there wa so monstrou a dark all about me there 
forever. and thereaft would I go onward again, until the pain of my 
stumbl did bid me sure to have that sweet shine onc more unto 
my path. 

and so shall you perceiv my going; and sore and miser wa it unto 
the heart; and like to shake the courag of the spirit; yet, in verity, 
I had come through much, and did have intent to give way to no 
foolish of thought. 

and you shall well believ that I did make the light not more oft than I 
did sure need; for it wa no proper of wisdom to use the power of 
the diskos, save for mine extremity. 

now, presently, when I had done thiswis through six long and bitter 
hours, and it be now beyond the twentieth hour sinc I did last 
slumber, I sat me down there upon the mighti slope, in the everlast 
dark, and did eat two of the tablets, and made the water, and could but 
feel and hearken whether I did thi thing right and that. 

and when I had eat and drunk, I unfold my cloak, and wrapt it around 
me, and place the scrip and the pouch under my head; and the disko I 
took to compani me; and so fell swiftli upon sleep; yet did think 
earnestli but vagu upon naani, as I came unto slumber. 

and I slept all but six hours, and did waken veri sudden there in the 
utter dark; and I got me to mine elbow, and did listen veri keen; for I 
had wake immediately, as that someth had touch me or come nigh 
unto me; and I gript the diskos, and listened; but there did not even a 
littl sound come to me out of all that night. 

and present I had more assured that naught did make harm about me; 
and I sat me up in the dark, and reach for my scrip, and did eat and 
drink, there in that utter night; and fumbl somewhat, as you shall 
think. yet I wa done in a while, and got my gear upon me, and the 
disko into my hand, and so to my feet and forward. 

now all that day, I did have a strang uneas of the spirit, so that I 
stopt oft to listen, as that my soul told of someth nigh unto me that 
did follow veri quiet. yet did mine ear perceiv nothing; and so I 
alway to go downward again into the night that held the slope. 

and here should I tell how that in the earli part of the seventh hour, 
after I had eat and drunk, and went forward as ever, upon my journey 
down the mighti slope, I did have a veri sore tumbl against a sharp 
rock; for I put my foot sudden into a small hole, and thi did make me 
to pitch. and I wa utter shake by the fall and lay veri quiet for a 
time; for the rock had sure ript my body, but for the armour. 

and after that I wa someth renew of strength and spirit, I made 
that I should go no more upon my feet, but upon my hand and knees; and 
thu should I feel the way that I went, and have a less need of the 
diskos, which had not overmuch use to light my way, in that I shone it 
not often, and did guess more than I did perceive, as you may think. 

and so I crept all that day, which wa a bitter way of travel; yet had I 
done mani a sore mile thu through the night land. and when that I had 
gone downward for eighteen hours, and eat and drunk thrice, I ceas 
from my labour, and did feel about in the darkness, that I come to a 
level place for my rest; and so did find presently, a place not so bad, 
and did push and cast away such small boulder as had been like to irk 
me. 

then did I eat and drink, and afterward compos me to my sleep, and had 
mani a thought of naani, as I did drift unto slumber; yet also had I 
memori of the strang half-fear that had been with me all that day, as 
though someth went constantli near me in the dark. and becaus of 
this, twice did I rise unto mine elbow, and listen; but heard no sound 
to troubl me, and afterward did trust that I did but fancy; and so came 
at last unto slumber, that yet wa not over-restful, for truli I did 
listen even as I slept. 

and when I had been asleep scarc six hours, I wake again veri sudden, 
as I had done before, and had belief that someth did be anigh unto 
me; and I gript the diskos, and did hearken; yet wa there no sound that 
mine ear did wot of; neither aught that had power to be sure known of 
the spirit. 

and all that day wa as the day before; save that about the eighth hour 
I came near to fall into some monstrou pit in the great slope; but did 
onli fall with my breast upon the edge, and so drew back, and present 
did crawl all around it in the dark, and come safe unto the lower side; 
yet shaken and put more in troubl of spirit than before, and fear 
how I should go; for I knew not whether I had come among such things, or 
whether I had but few to sorrow me. 

and so you shall perceiv that I went over-cauti for a great while in 
all that utter dark; but did think at last upon a plan to go with more 
sureti and speed. but to thi I did need a cord, and sure I had no 
cord upon me; and if a boy be no boy that hath none such about him, 
shall not the same be said of ani man! and thi I did think, as I 
search me; for the say of that day had mani that were like to 
this. 

yet in the end I did compass my plan; for I did buckl the scrip and the 
pouch together, and took one of the strap from the pouch; and thi 
strap wa long and thin, and well suit unto my purpose. then I fixt a 
stone into the end of the strap, and buckl it there, and after that, I 
cast the stone befor me, as I went upon my hand and knees; and I did 
hold to the hither end of the strap, and so wa abl to have someth 
of knowledg whether there lay ani great deep immedi befor me, 
and thiswis to strive that I fall not down some monstrou cliff in the 
night. 

and so did I go, cast the stone continu to my front, down the 
slope; and thi you shall think to be a cumbersom fashion of travel; 
yet wa I in better case than in all the time sinc I had begun to go 
downward of the mighti slope in the everlast darkness. 

and at the eighteenth hour I did sleep; and wa wake strang befor 
the sixth hour, even as I had wake before. and thi did put alway 
upon me a new wonder and unease. yet did no harm seem to come unto me, 
and I did strive that I have no need troubl of mind. but that 
someth wa alway nigh unto me in the dark, I do truli believe; yet 
have I no know that it wa evil; for it harm not me. 

and three day more I journey thus, and did never ceas to creep 
downward weari upon my hand and knees; and the disko I had to my 
hip, and so shall you know how I carri it. and by this, as you do 
know, I had been on the great slope six day of utter dark; and did have 
no wot but that I went unto some dire and dread place; for, 
surely, I had gone for ever downward a monstrou way. 

and here, befor I tell further, I must set down how that the cold wa 
much gone from out of the air upon the slope; and the air wa grown, as 
it did seem, veri heavi unto my chest. and concern thi matter I 
should say something. for, if I do mind me, I have said not overmuch 
concern the air of the night land and the mighti pyramid; for truli I 
have been so set to tell my stori of all that I did truli see and 
adventur upon. yet, though I have said but little, you will sure have 
perceiv that the air of that far and chill time wa not as the air of 
this; but wa thin and keen within the night land, and lay not, as I do 
think, to a great height abov the land, but onli nigh to the earth. 

and as you do know through my tellings, there wa a wondrou differ 
between the air within the mighti pyramid, and that which lay without 
around the base; for upward beyond that, I did understand that there wa 
no outward air that ani should breathe; and so wa all the pyramid 
seal in certain wise in all the upper citi for ever; and whether it 
wa seal _utterly_ from the outward air at the base, I do not sure 
remember, if, in truth that I did ever bother my head to such matters. 

yet, if I be set proper in memori and understanding, we did draw air 
from the underground fields; but whether they gat ani chang or new 
of air from the night land, I have no knowledge; and do lament that I 
have no sure knowing. yet, as you shall believe, I could sure write an 
hundr book upon that wonder of the future, and be still lack in 
the half of all that there is to be told; and so do I tri to have 
courag to thi my task, and to have no over-trouble, becaus that I do 
tell but a littl of a great tale. 

and here in thi place will I set down how that the peopl of the 
pyramid were greater to the chest, methinks, than we of thi age; but 
yet do I have no oversureti in the matter; for well it may be that the 
reason of _this_ age doth blind within me somewhat the knowledg that I 
have concern _that_; for, in verity, is it not but a natur thing to 
believ those peopl to be great of the chest, so that they should make 
a proper deal with the thin air of that place and that time? and yet, 
as I do strive to make plain unto you, becaus that thi thing should 
be, by the make of my reason, I do the more distrust that reason 
shall make foolish my knowledge; for even a fool should suppos that 
which I have told; and the truth may be even otherwise. 

yet that the peopl of the _upper_ citi had great chests, I do well 
know; for thi wa a common knowledge; even as we of thi age do 
acknowledg the peopl of africa to be of blackness, or those of 
patagonia to be of great stature. and by thi one thing should ani know 
a man of the upper cities, from a man of the lower cities. and becaus 
that there grew thi differ among the peoples, there had been once, 
as ani could learn from the histories, a plan wherebi the peopl should 
be move upward and downward through the great height of the mighti 
pyramid, from thi citi unto that. yet had it met with great disfavour; 
and wa put out of force; and thi is easi to be seen as the natur way 
of the human heart. 

and here it doth occur unto me that it wa like enough to be a plan for 
health, besid of train of the mind, that each youth and maid wa put 
to travel through all the citi of the mighti pyramid; the which did 
take three year and two hundr and twenty-f days, as I have told 
befor this. for by thi plan, were they made to breath the air of 
everi height, and this, mayhaps, unto the good of their developing. and 
they also to discov that air which wa best to their need. 

and concern the air of the night land, you shall know that there wa 
in all that land no fli thing, becaus that the air wa grown veri 
thin; yet, as the record did show, there had onc been monstrou 
flying-brutes, that went over the land in mighti bounds; but thi wa in 
a long gone age; and we could but suppos that the record gave truth. 

and here you shall know that, when the monstruwacan did learn that I 
would journey through the night land, in search of naani, there had been 
some foolish and well-intend talk among them that I take a small 
flying-ship, that wa in the great museum besid the model of the great 
ships. for, truly, thi machin wa yet sound to go; for it wa made of 
the grey metal of the mighti pyramid, that did seem to have no power to 
cease. yet, in verity, I had no skill to manag this, neither had it 
flown, through an hundr thousand years; so that none did know the 
mastership of that art, which did be learn but by a constant practice, 
and oft made uneasi by fall that did wreck the machine, as I did 
know from the book of flying. and, moreover, as I have told, the air of 
the night land wa grown over-weak to uphold such a thing; which, I 
doubt not, had made the peopl of the pyramid to ceas from flyings, 
quit so much as that they did fear the forc of evil in the night. 

and if that there had been air and skill suffici unto thi purpos of 
flying, yet had I been wick with foolish that I should work to be 
hung upward in the night, for all the evil of the night land to behold. 
and though I had gone up some great way, yet the machin had sure made 
a great nois in the quiet of the etern night, as you shall 
suppose. 

now inde am I gone weari that I should need to tell so much concern 
the air of that time and place; for sure I do seem to make thi my 
stori as that I did make a lectur upon matter of chemistry; and so 
do I cast about, that I may not bother to tell more upon thi matter. 
yet, in truth, a littl more of my think and observ had I better 
set down here, and so be done with it. but you shall have patienc with 
me, and know that had this, my story, been no more than an idl tale, I 
had been free to make no labour with such matters. 

now there doth a wonder come to me whi that the road makers, who were of 
that far-off age which wa befor the age of the mighti pyramid, did not 
_fly_ downward from the upper world into the deep of the monstrou 
valley; but did instead build a road. 

yet it may be that the air of the upper world had grown thin a great 
age, so that they had truli forgot that onc man did have power to fly. 
but even if that they did have proper machin to thi purpose, sure 
it were a wondrou and fear thing to fli downward an hundr great 
miles; for they sure to have a dread that they never to rise again 
through so huge a deep. 

and, moreover, the downward world that wa the bottom of the great 
valley, wa full of monsters, as wa told in the littl metal book. and 
the monster were veri strang and unknown; and foreign to the whole 
world, that had never come unto the deep of the valley. and the valley 
had come, as you shall mind, when the earth did split; and thi thing 
was, in truth, like to be thought that same end of the world, which 
all nation have been taught to believ shall come. for in verity, when 
the world did split and burst, and the ocean rush downward into the 
earth, and there wa fire, and storms, and a mighti chaos, sure it wa 
proper to think that the end had come. yet wa it, in truth, but the 
begin of hope of a new etern of life; so that out of the end came 
the beginning, and life out of death, and good out of that which did 
seem a dire matter. and so is it always. 

yet doth thi go past my first wonder, which did concern the wherefor 
that they made not to descend in thing of flight. yet, maybe, shall my 
reason stand to show whi thi wa not. 

and again, mayhap it did chanc that some were wild adventurers, and did 
leap over the edg of the upper world, have to eas their flight 
certain contrivings, like to parachutes. and these you shall picture, as 
that you watch them to leap; and so shall you see them go downward 
into the gloom; and you shall see them for mayb ten miles, and mayb 
for twenti miles; and afterward shall they be lost utterli in that great 
deep, and seen no more of ani man for ever. 

but when the nation becam road-makers, and came downward slowli to the 
monstrou deep of the mighti valley that did split the world, then were 
they come there by millions, and with power suffici to fight against 
the beasts; and afterward to grow back again to an ancient civilizing; 
and so to the build of the great airship that were yet shown in the 
great museum of the pyramid. and here shall I ceas from these my 
think on thi matter; for indeed, who shall say what did be truli a 
reason for those peopl and what wa their need? and so do I come to no 
sureti by my wonderings. 

yet, as you do know, all thing do seem verili to go in a circle; for, 
behold, in time, they of the mighti pyramid, were likewis held off from 
the glori of the airships; and so were gone backward a great way, 
accord as we do look upon thi matter. and so hath thi been the way 
always, as you shall know who have studi and thought, and seen the 
true way and go of life. 

and now will I go forward in my telling; and here will set down a sure 
thing that I did perceive, both by mine ear and by my fingers; for, as 
I did make clear to you but a while gone, there had come a chang into 
the air as I did go downward of the mighti slope; and truli I wa come 
to a great and new deepness, even beyond that of the wondrou depth 
where did stand the last redoubt. So that I wa afar down and in a 
monstrou night. and the air here wa of a great thick and 
abundancy, even as it might be the air of thi our age; or mayb more or 
mayb less; for who may compar two matter with a sure guessing, that 
do have an etern to keep them asunder. and becaus that the air wa 
grown veri strong and apparent, it shall be, mayhaps, that it wa by 
reason of thi thing that the water, when I did make it, did fizz upward 
in a moment veri loud and plentiful, and did boil overward to the earth 
from out of the cup, and wet upon my hand. and sure thi thought did 
come veri keen to my reason, as I did fumble, each time of mine eating, 
there in the everlast night and lonesom of the great slope. 

and so shall you have knowledg now of thi and that thing which did 
come upon my thought, and of the littl and the big wonders, and all 
shall help someth to give unto you the ach of new and 
bewilder that wa constant companion unto me. 

now by thi time, as I have said, I wa gone downward ever for six great 
days; and I did seem as that I should present come to the middl of 
the world; for of go downward there wa no end. 

and then, when it did be that I wa near readi to believ this, I 
perceiv far off in the deep of the night a littl shine that wa yet 
weak and unsure. and I do not know whether I can truli give unto you the 
great astonish and pain of hope that did come upon me; so that I 
grew sick in all my be but to behold onc again the blessed of 
light, and to have help unto my belief that I went not downward to an 
utter desolation. 

and I stood upward from my knees, and did look veri earnest, and sure 
it did seem that a light wa there afar downward in the night; and again 
it did seem that I must be plagu by my hope and by my fancy, and that 
there wa nowher ani light. and then again I did see it veri clear, and 
not to be mistaken, and I had a shake to come upon me, and I gat me to 
a run, and made a great and mad speed down the dark slope. and lo! I wa 
not gone ani way, but I went headlong, and near brake myself; and could 
but hold my teeth togeth veri fierc and quiet until that the pain wa 
someth gone from me. 

and afterward, I gat me again to mine hand and knees, and went slowly, 
as before; and so for a great hour or more, and did look oft; and alway 
the light becam more plain to my sight; but ever to come and go, 
oddly-wise. yet did I go six hours, befor that I wa come anywis near 
to it. and by thi shall you know how great a space off it had been. and 
lo! when that I did seem sure anigh unto it, truli wa it still far 
away in the night; and I came not inde near to it until that I wa 
gone onward again for three hour more. and all that time did I yet go 
downward into the night; but the slope now did not be so utter dark. 

now, presently, I made a pause, and stood upward to my feet, so that I 
should the better perceiv the light. and lo! as I did look toward it, I 
heard a faraway sound in the dark, as that someth did set up a 
strang and monstrou pipe in the night. and immediately, I went to 
mine hand and knee among the stone of the slope, and kept myself low 
in the darkness, so that I should be the less plain to be seen, did ani 
monster approach. 

but there came noth to troubl me, and I went downward of the slope 
for yet anoth hour; and all the time that I did go, the sound of the 
pipe grew more in the great etern of the night upon the slope. 

and by thi time wa I come truli near unto the light; but yet did not 
behold it plainly; for it did burn beyond certain monstrou rock that 
stood between. and I went to the left for, maybe, the half of a big 
mile; and all the while that I did go, the pipe made a mightier 
whistl in the night; and it did seem present as that the earth sent 
forth the sound and revelri of wild roarings. and I went the more 
silent; and later did kneel among three rocks, and peer forth for a 
while upon the place befor me. 

and now, be come nigh unto the light--though yet it wa not unhid 
from behind the great barrier of the upris rocks, I perceiv that I 
crouch within the mouth of a mighti gorge; and the left side wa a 
great way off, and I saw it plain at while when the light did rise; but 
the light wa to the right, and it wa so wondrou great that it did 
make clear to me that a mountain wa to that side of the gorge, and 
went upward into the everlast night, as it did seem for ever. 

and afar down the gorge, I did see the shine of strang fires, faint 
and a great way off. and so wa I come at last to the bottom of the 
mighti slope. yet the gorg also to go downward, but not so great. 

and present I did go forward again; and so did open the point of the 
rocks, as the sailor do say. and I saw now that there gush forth a 
great blue flame from the earth; and the mighti rock stood about it, as 
that they were olden giant groupt there to some strang service. 

and concern thi flame I wa not overmuch astonish in my reason; 
for it had seem to me as I drew anigh, that the fire and the sound 
should be made by the roar and whistl of a burn ga that did 
issu forth among the rocks. yet, truly, though it did be a natur 
matter, it wa yet a wondrou sight, and set amaz on my senses; for 
the flame did dance, and sway whitherward monstrously, and sometim did 
seem that it dropt so low as an hundr feet, and afterward went upward 
with a vast roar unto the utter height, and did stand mighti and 
blazing, mayb a full thousand feet, so that the far side of the gorg 
wa lit, and sure it wa seven great mile off or more; but yet did 
show plain and wondrous. and the light did show me the flank of the 
mountain, that made the right hand side of the gorge, to go up 
measureless into the night. 

and so shall you perceiv that I stay awhil among the rock that were 
in the mouth of the gorge, that I should gaze upon thi thing; but 
afterward I lookt thi way and that way, so that I should have a know 
of the place where I wa come. 

and it wa a wild and stark and empti place, as you must perceive. and 
the far side did be great mile off, as I did say; and everywher there 
wa abund of rock and lonesomeness. and befor me there went the 
great and dim length of the gorge, and there were light here and light 
there, in a great distance, and oft--a it did seem--th quiet danc 
of light in divers places; but yet were these gone on the instant. and 
ever there wa a strong and vacant silenc upon that place. 

and presently, after that I had look onc more unto the mighti danc 
flame, and perceiv nowher ani life around it, I went onward down the 
quiet gorge. and for a great way as I journey wa my path lit by the 
danc of the blue flame; and oft should I seem to be go but dimli 
among the rocks, and my shadow faint and long; and lo! the flame would 
leap, and all the gorg come to a wondrou brightness, and my figur to 
shorten, and the shadow to be black and strong. and so shall you 
perceiv how I went. 

and oft did I turn me about to behold the danc of the great light; 
for it wa solemn to my spirit, even amid so much of great and 
eternity, to think upon that flame, and to conceiv that it had an utter 
age danc there at the foot of the mighti slope, unseen, through 
lonesom eternities. and thi I do tell unto you; that therebi may you 
have some knowledg of the strang and the bitter loneli of that 
place; which, in verity, did seem the express of all the lonesom 
of my wanderings. 

and all the time as I did go downward of the great gorge, there sound 
the blast of the roaring, that wa present afar to my back; and the 
mountain side did catch it here and in that place, and sent it offward 
with strang and improp echoings, as of a chill piping, or oddwis as 
hush whisper of monstrou creatures; so that I did oft stoop to 
hide a littl among the boulders; for truli I knew not but that some 
unnatur thing call from the dark of the mountain side. 

and for six hour I walk onward thus, and sometim did hide, have a 
sudden fear, as I have told. 

and presently, in a great while, the roar wa sunk to a far and 
monstrou piping; but in the end to no more than a far and uncertain 
whistling, that yet did catch strang echo in the night. and in the 
end there wa onli a quietness. and yet, as you do perceive, there had 
been alway a silenc in that gorge, as I have told, and thi to the 
despit of the whistling. and I do hope that you have understand with 
me in thi matter; for it wa truli as I have told, and there is no 
contrari of tell in thi matter. 

now in all thi time that I had walk in the great gorge, I had past 
four of the far light that I did see from the bottom of the slope; and 
the two first and the fourth were blue, but the third wa green; and all 
did danc and quake, and sent fit shine into the belli of the 
gorge. and there came also from them whistlings, and from the second one 
a low and strang moan noise; and I doubt not the ga did come 
oddli and with trouble. and I past these thing with no great thought; 
for truli they were no matter for notice, after that which I had 
beheld. 

now, as you shall mind, it wa sure in the earli third of the seventh 
day of my journey down the mighti slope that I saw the first shine of 
the monstrou ga fountain; and from that time until now had there past 
mayb sixteen hours. and, as you do wot, I had eat not in all my travel 
sinc that I had seen the light; so that I wa gone to a proper lack 
inward; and moreover, it wa full nineteen hour or more sinc that I 
had slept; and all that while had I laboured. 

and I ceas me from wandering, and lookt about that I should come to a 
safe and proper place for my slumber; and thi I saw veri quick; for 
there wa dri stone and rock everywhere, and no fail of hole and 
divers place to my purpose; so that I wa soon in a littl cave 
between two mighti boulders. 

and here I eat four of the tablets; for truli so mani were my due, and I 
had not been violent had I eat more. and afterward, I made some of the 
water, and it did fizz up in a moment; so that I perceiv that but a 
good pinch made a great cup-full. and thi I set to the count of the 
strong and heavi air, as I have told, which I did think to have a 
greater power of chemistry. 

and present I slept, have my gear about me as ever, and the disko 
to my breast. and as I went into slumber, I thought sweetli upon naani, 
as I had done, indeed, an hundr time sinc I wa come to the 
hope of the light of the gorge. 

now, whilst I slept, I dream that the master-word did present beat 
all about me in the night. yet, as I do mind, I wake not; and becaus 
that I continu to sleep, I have no sure know whether thi wa truli 
a dream, or an happening. and I mind me upon it, when I waked; but 
thi wa after that I had slept seven hours; and I could have no 
sure anywis of the matter; but onli that I wa come safe through my 
sleep; though heavi within my head and limbs, as that the air did call 
me unto a further slumbering, as is like enough. 

and after that I had eat and drunk, I put my gear about me, and the 
disko to my hip, for I need both my hand to the task of journey 
amid the great boulders. and I set forth again down the half-light of 
the mighti gorge, and through eighteen hour I made a strong going, save 
when I did paus at the sixth and the twelfth hour to mine eating. 

and by the eighteenth hour wa come, I wa veri readi to my food and 
slumber; and present I wa asleep in a place of the rocks. and that 
day had I past three and twenti of the danc ga fires; and five been 
like a white fire; but the other blue and green. and all did danc and 
made a strang and uncertain light within the great gorge; yet wa it a 
peac thing unto my spirit that there wa truli light, as you shall 
understand. 

and I slept six hours, and waked, and did want more sleep, as you shall 
think. but I eat and drunk and put my gear upon me, and went on downward 
of the gorge. 

and at the sixth hour, after that I had eat and drunk, I came to a part 
where the big ga fire did ceas to dance, and there wa a certain 
dark upon that place. yet wa it not a proper dark; for there came 
the glimmer of a flame here and the glimmer of a flame there, as that 
littl flame came upward between the stones, and did vanish, and come 
upward in anoth part. and so did light and die out constant and 
forev amid the stone and the boulder of that lonesom gorge; and 
made a low-spread light, so that it did seem unto me that strang 
shudder of light beat upward through the dark of that place. 

and I went onward, and a heavi fume did seem to hang in the air, and 
horrid gase to come upward from the earth in odd puffings; and anon a 
light would leap upward beyond the next stone, and afterward vanish, and 
there would be an hundr thousand such upon everi hand, run to and 
fore; and afterward for a moment an utter dark, and again the littl 
flame everywhere; so that it did seem I went one moment amid the heart 
of a strang countri of fire, and immedi through a countri of utter 
night. and thi wa to me strang and a peculiar matter. yet, as I do 
think, the gase did bother me the more; for they did seem as that they 
were like to hurt mine health utterly; for, in verity, oft did I seem as 
that I should choke and breath no more, by reason of the poison that 
came upward from among the stone and the boulders. 

and all that time, as they came or went, did the littl flame make 
small phlock of sound in the gorg as they did flash or die; and the 
sound did seem, to my likening, as stone cast into an utter silent 
pool; for they but made appar the everlast quiet of the gorge. 

and afterward, I came beyond thi place, and you shall see me go veri 
lonesom among the rock of the gorge, beyond. and by this, it wa come 
nigh unto the eighteenth hour; and I did find a place proper to my 
slumber, and did eat and drink, and wa quickli gone over unto sleep. 

and here, I should tell how that I had not an over-fear of evil power 
whilst I wa in the great gorge; for truli it did seem as that noth 
that ever did live came anigh to that wild and silent place of stone and 
rock; but that I journey through it alone, and wa sure the first 
that did go that way for mayb a million years. and thi feel that 
wa upon me, I do hope you to perceiv and take unto yourselves, and 
thu have an understand of my heart at that time. 

and as you shall know, I went alway unto slumber with sweet and with 
troubl thought of the maid. yet, for a great while, I had been put so 
mightili to the labour of my way that my heart did suffer less at thi 
time than should be thought; and truli it doth show me how I wa drawn 
unto that one with all my being, that I did sure think so oft and 
sweetli upon her amid so mani peril and matter of horror. and thi 
doth seem someth strang to say, when that you do consid that I wa 
adventur unto these same peril and horror but onli for the sake of 
the maid. 

and in six hour did I wake, as I did strive alway to set myself to do; 
yet wa I veri heavi and slow for a little, until that I wa more 
properli come to wakefulness. and surely, as I did think before, thi 
wa like to be put upon me by the weighti air of the place; but yet it 
might be that the ga which did float in the gorg wa upon my lungs. 
and also, as you have perceived, if but you have attend my way, the 
air wa grown warm, and oft were the rock pleasant to the seat, and all 
of these matter did contriv to make me slumbrous. 

now, presently, the ga fire did ceas utterli in the gorge, and I 
lookt downward, along that great place, and saw onli a greyness, but 
abov the grey there was, as it did seem, someth of a vagu and 
ruddi shine in the night. and thi did wake me to wonder what new 
thing lay before; so that I grew more eager among the boulders. 

and, later, when I had eat at the sixth and the twelfth hours, and gone 
on awhile, I came to a place where the gorg made a quick turn unto 
my left, and at the end of the turn wa a red and glow light that 
wa veri great and wonderful; so that I wa utter keen to come to that 
place, that I should discov what made the shining. and the place where 
I wa come then, wa veri dark, becaus that I wa nigh under the mighti 
wall of the mountain of the right side of the gorge. yet above, as it 
did seem to me, there wa a far red upward glow in the night. 

then did I go forward veri fast, and presently, in a good while, I 
discov that I drew near to a second great turning, that went to the 
right. and about the seventeenth hour, I came nigh unto the second great 
turning. and here did I put caution upon me, and crept for a while among 
the dark rock of that place, that I should come to a sight of that 
which made the monstrou red shining. 

and presently, I wa beyond the corner of the mountain, and did look 
downward into a mighti countri of seas, and the burn of great 
volcanoes. and the volcano did seem as that they burn in the seas. 
and the countri wa full of a great ruddi light from the volcanoes. and 
so shall you perceiv me there among the rock that did all stand upward 
strang and bold and silent in the red and monstrou glare of the light. 
and I, as it did seem, the one thing of life in all that desol and 
etern of rock and stone, there in the end part of the great gorge. 

and I peer forth into the wonder of the light, and wa full of 
thrill and fanci that I wa sure come to the place where the 
lesser redoubt had been builded. and immedi I knew that thi wa 
not so, for surer had not naani told how that they were in a land of 
darkness. and if thi did be so, truly, how wondrou and dread a way had 
I yet to go, if that thi countri of sea and mighti volcano stood 
between. 

surely, it did seem to me then as that I must wander search unto the 
world' end. and so shall you be compani unto me there with my troubl 
and my thoughts, and the immedi wonder and strang glori of that 
mighti country. 




IX 

the dark pyramid 


now in two hour more I wa come clear down out of the gorge, and stood 
in that country; and for all that I did feel fresh troubl and 
bewildered, yet wa I rejoiceful, as you may believe, in the surpris 
light and splendour of that sudden land. 

and befor that I had come down out of the great gorge, I had stood high 
within the mouth thereof, and lookt well out over the mighti country. 
and I had count seven and twenti great volcanoes, and thi doth not 
take heed of two monstrou rang of fire-hil that burn afar off, 
someth unto my right. neither doth it take account of an hundr 
thousand lesser place of fire. 

and truli it did seem a veri land of fire and water. for there wa a 
small fire-hil stood within a sea, as it did seem no more than a littl 
mile from that place where I did stand. and mayb a score to the back of 
it, spread all about. and here shall I do proper to tell concern the 
seas. for there were of these, that I did count at that time, three that 
were small, and a mighti sea that went onward for ever into the red 
light of the fire-hills, so that it wa gone utterli out of my sight, 
and did show no ending. 

and there rose up out of the seas, islands; and on the islands, 
volcanoes. but in other part the fire-hil did come upward straightli 
from the sea. and over the near sea, as it did seem, there lay a 
plentitud of steam, as that the sea did boil at while and in divers 
places. 

and there did seem to me, as it were within the red atmospher of that 
place, as that there were a mutter thunder, low and constant, shake 
the air, now from that distanc and now from this, and thi did I judg 
to be the voic of the fire-hills, speak with the fire that live in 
them. 

and you shall conceiv how utter new wa all thi unto me; for there wa 
in that countri a constant voic of the energi of life, so that the 
world-nois of thi our age wa even there again, and with a keen and 
undoubt apparentness; and the more so some ways, than now. 

and here shall I set down more close the thing that were readi to my 
gaze. 

and first, that it did much attract me, there wa a huge and blacken 
mountain unto the left of the mouth of the gorge, and the mountain did 
go upward into the night, mayb fifteen and mayb twenti miles. and 
there wa a mighti peak volcano that grew out from the side of the 
mountain so high up as five miles, as I did guess that height; and thi 
wa upon the far side. and abov thi there wa a second, mayb nine or 
ten great mile up in the black of the night that hung afar upward. 
and, as that thi were not great wonder enough, there did burn and glow 
two other mighti fire-hills, at an utter height, upon the left crest of 
that black mountain; and these were upward so monstrou a way, as that 
they did seem to make strang and smoulder sun within the night. and 
truly, as you shall perceive, thi wa a wondrou thing. 

and below these upward fire-hil there rose up from the earth vast 
mountain of ash and burn stuff, that had been cast forth by these 
perch volcanoes, and had pour downward unto the earth throughout 
eternity, and so to build grey and sombr monument unto the dread 
glori of time. 

and to my right there wa alway sea and sea and the red blaze of the 
fire-hills; but unto my left, there were mighti forests, and there rose 
upward here and in that place, as that they were beyond the great woods, 
monstrou fire-hills. and so do you take from me someth of that first 
impress upon my brain and sense. 

and after that I had come down out of the mouth of the great gorge, as I 
did tell a littl while gone, I came upon a pause; for, surely, which 
way wa the way proper unto my search. and I lookt about for a great 
while, and afterward did climb back into the gorge, and call myself 
foolish, that I had not thought to map my way ere I came down. 

and when I wa come up into the gorg again, lo! I saw that there wa 
but one way that I should go; for truly, as I have said, there wa onli 
the sea unto my right; but unto the left, where the shore did meet the 
seas, there seemed, so far as mine eye did tell to me, a clear way for 
a space. and mayhap, when I had come so far, I should even find a 
further way to go forward. and so did I descend again unto the countri 
of the seas, as I did ever call that red-shin countri of water and 
fire. 

and by, that I wa come again from the height of the gorge, it wa four 
and twenti hour sinc that I did last sleep; so that I wa fain that I 
should put into some nook, and come to slumber, as you shall well 
believe. 

and I found me a neat and proper place, where three great tree grew 
about a littl basin of rock that wa veri dri and warm. and here, after 
that I had eat three of the tablets, and drunk some of the water--th 
while that my belli did yearn, as ever, for proper eating-stuff--i made 
my bed in the littl basin of the rock, and lay me down, and did begin 
to think awhil upon naani; but wa gone over to sleep befor that I wa 
aware. 

and lo! I wa suddenli awake, and did find that I swam in a hot water; 
and a mercy, I did think, wa it that I wa not drown as I did sleep. 
and I gat me to my feet, and the basin wa full of water, hot and 
steaming, and pungent to the taste, as well I did know. and I perceiv 
now that the water pour in from a smooth slit upon the far side, and 
did come with a strang gurgl and bubbling, so that I conceiv some 
deep well to boil, and thu to drive upward thi water into the basin; 
and glad wa I that it did not boil as it came forth. 

and surely, now that I wa upon the dri land, and did consider, I did 
quickli suppos that the water had pour forth at season into the 
basin for an etern of time, and afterward did go back by fissur in 
the bottom of the basin; and thi to happen, as I soon did find, a 
littl beyond the length of everi hour; and, inde the basin to empti 
slow as I did watch. 

now, be much wetted, I stript off mine armour, have befor thi 
dipt out mine effect from the hot pool, and so did come down to the 
nake flesh, and I found a place where the rock wa hot, and here I did 
spread my garments. and whilst that they came to dryness, I gat me into 
the hot pool, and had a veri pleasant bathing, and did have no great 
fear of ani danger thing; for, as it did seem, I had sure left all 
such behind, within the night lands. yet did I have the disko upon the 
pool edg to my hand; for I had no proper assur in thi matter. yet, 
as it did prove, there were mani monstrou beast in that country; but 
never did I feel the near and horrid power of ani evil force; for 
these, as I do conceive, were congreg and gather about the mighti 
pyramid, be attract thereto by the great spiritu essenc of so 
wondrou a multitud of human gotten so close in one spot, even as 
shark do come after the ship that hath bullock within. yet, how that 
the evil power were given entranc unto thi state of our life, I have 
no sure knowing; yet have I put forward certain thought on thi matter 
in an earlier place; and more than such think is sure vanity; for 
there is no certainti in my reason concern the thing. 

now, present wa my cloth dry, yet befor this, I had come out from 
that bath, which truli wa nigh all gone backward into the earth. and I 
dress me again, and got my armour upon me, and afterward wa I in a 
more lightsom state of the mind; and yet veri readi to come again unto 
my sleep. and thi I did, and had six hour more besid the pool; and 
onc wa waken somewhat by the gruntl and bubbl nois of the 
water, that wa made as the pool did fill time and again. 

and when the six hour were gone, I wake veri well fit in my sens 
and feel to go forward again through that red-light country, and 
thi I did, after that I had eat and drunk. 

now all that day I went forward at a great pace; and the nameless wood 
were unto my left, and the shore of the sea unto my right. and oft did 
I find that the tree grew even into the water, so that oft did I go 
forward among the trees, and a veri wonder thing wa thi to me, that 
never had known befor in all my life, until I wa come into that 
country, how that a glad and wild mysteri doth live among forest trees. 
for there wa no such strang wild among the grove of the 
underground fields; though a solemn beauti in plenty. and the scent of 
the wood wa sweet unto my spirit, as you shall wot. 

now all the time that I did go, there wa the shore unto my right; but 
alway to my left, and around me oft-tim as I did say, the great 
forests. and as I did go, lo! there wa life in all those darksom 
woods, and live eye did peer out odd while upon me, and afterward go 
backward into the dark; so that I wot not whether to fear, or to have 
no heed of trouble. yet naught did come anigh to me, to make ani hurt. 

and thrice in that day did I come to littl fire-hil that burnt redly, 
and sent out fire and noise, so that I heard their troubl each time 
through the forest, befor that I wa come to them. and about each wa 
there a dead and desolation, where the fire had kill the big 
trees; yet, as I did observe, the quick life of littl plant did grow 
more nigh, as that they were born and live between the time of the 
fire-bursts. and thi I do take it that you perceive. 

and in that one day I past thirti and seven boil springs; but whether 
they boil truly, I do have no knowledge; onli that they sent out a 
great steam oft-times; and some did make a strong roar noise; so that 
to hear them afar off in the forest wa to think odd time that some 
wild beast roar strangely. 

now, when the eighteenth hour wa come, I sat me down, as I had done 
upon the sixth and the twelfth hours, and eat two of the tablets, and 
drank some of the water, which here did fizz veri rich and quick. 

and afterward I lay down to my slumber, for I wa greatli wearied. and I 
had chosen a place against a great rock, which wa so that no creatur 
might come upon me from behind. and I came easi upon sleep; but yet I 
did fix it upon me that I slumber onli with the body; for I did know, by 
the shine of the eye in the darksom woods, that strang creatur 
abod in the mighti forests. 

and ere I wa gone over to sleep, I thought upon naani, as I had done 
much all that day, as though her spirit did hover near unto mine, and 
did strive piti to speak with me. and thi I set out to you, that you 
shall know how it did seem unto me in my thought and fancyings. and as 
I lay there, I put a bless upon her, and a determin into my 
heart that I make a more desper speed of my going, if that might be; 
so that I come the sooner to that strange, and unknown place in the dead 
world where did stand the lesser refuge. and I wa then asleep in a 
moment. 

and lo! sudden I wa awake. and love wa the bright of that 
country, that did show me in a moment my danger, and did not keep me 
suspend in fear doubt, as did the grey dark and strang shadow 
and light of the night land. for I saw, on the instant that I got me to 
mine elbow, how that certain thing did crouch within the border of the 
trees, no more than a score pace off. and I perceiv in a moment that 
my spirit had been given knowledge, and had waken me. and I stared, 
the while that I did grip the diskos; and I saw that there were six 
squat men that were humpt at the neck and shoulder; and they did crouch 
all there in a row, and were someth hid by the shadows; and I 
perceiv that they watch me; and the eye of the men did shine like 
the eye of beasts; and so shall you know somewhat of the strang terror 
that came upon me. yet had I the disko and mine armour; and though my 
heart did shake a little, yet wa my spirit assur to conquer. 

now I gat me to my feet, and had the disko readi within my hand; and 
behold! I could not see the hump men, for they were gone from that 
place; yet never did I see them go, though I had kept my gaze veri 
steadfast upon that part where they did hide. and, as you shall 
understand, I wa near readi to believ that there had been noth 
there within the border of the wood; yet truli I knew that the men with 
the hump had been there, as I had seen. 

now, I look presently, and found that I had slept five hours; and I 
eat two of the tablets, as I did stand there, watchful; and afterward 
drank some of the water; and so wa readi to go forward again; for I wa 
grown veri anxiou to be gone from that place; and did have no knowledg 
but that those strang humpt men were but a littl way off, among the 
trees, and might come upon me in a moment; or, further, that they did go 
to call an armi of other hump men to my destruction. 

and after that I wa ready, and had my gear secur upon me, I set off at 
a great stride, and did hold the disko veri handy, and lookt thi way 
and lookt that way, and all the while made onward with speed; for, 
truly, I wa grown so lean and hard that it did seem to me that I had 
power to out-pac those men or aught els of their kind. 

and all that day, through thirti great hour did I go forward, at that 
stride, and did alway watch; and at everi sixth hour, I eat two of the 
tablet and drank a littl of the water, and went onward again. 

and so did I hope that I wa lost from those hump men. yet, though I 
did hope, my faith wa not thi wise; for twice and thrice did it come 
to me that there went thing through the wood to my left all that day, 
and did keep alway to a level with my speed; yet were alway hid. and, 
as you shall believe, thi did be a veri shake thing to my heart, and 
did make my hope of but littl account. 

now, becaus that I had no faith to compani my hope, I wa not easi to 
have slumber, until that I wa come to a place proper and safe. and so, 
as I have told, I went onward through thirti great hours; and, in truth, 
in all that while I did find nowher that did seem to fit my need. 

and lo! about the end of the thirtieth hour, I perceiv that there wa 
water ahead, besid the water of the sea that wa ever to my right. and 
I thought, maybe, that the sea did go inward at that part of the land; 
but it wa otherwise; for when I wa gotten to that place, I found that 
a river came into the sea, and did come out of all the countri that lay 
unto my left. 

and in the mouth of thi river, there wa a small island; and sure I 
did look across to the island, and think it a refug from the hump men 
that did sure play dog upon my going. yet, truly, thi wa but an idl 
thought, and my need wa that I should come to some way to cross over 
the river, that I go forward besid the great sea, which did stretch 
onward, as it did seem for ever, befor me upon the far side. 

and I knew not how to go across; for I had no power to swim, and had I 
swum, there were sure monster in that great and warm-flow river, 
as you shall believe. 

and I went upward of the river-bank, that I might come to some place 
where the river did narrow; and sure I had been like to walk a mighti 
distanc to thi purpose, but that I came soon to a second river that 
did enter the first, not a mile abov the shore of the sea; so that, as 
you do perceive, there wa the sea to one side of me, and thi second 
river unto the other, and the first river befor me; and thu wa I 
sore perplexed, as ani had been truli that wa in a like trouble. 

yet, as it did chance, the need to go forward, and the danger of the 
hump men, put wit into me, so that I lookt about for a tree that wa 
fallen. and there were many, yet great, so that I wa much weari and 
someth strain of the spirit, befor that I gat two littl tree 
unto the water. 

now, when thi wa done, I made me a rough pole of a young tree-plant; 
and afterward, I lash the two tree togeth with my belt and straps, 
and so had somewhat of a raft. 

and you shall pictur that, all the time as I did go about thi 
business, I wa veri heed lest the hump men should come upon me, 
ere that I wa gone free upon the water. and thi constant heed did 
doubl the labour of my work, as you shall perceive; yet, in the end, it 
wa done, and I readi to adventur over the river. 

and so I did push off with the pole, and I pusht and paddl mayb the 
half of an hour, for, inde it wa all a clumsi contriving, and mayhap 
I the more so in my labours. yet, presently, I wa come so far over, 
that I drew nigh to the island; and it did seem a wise and proper thing 
that I should have my slumber there, and afterward go onward to the 
farther shore. and thi I did; and after that I had eat and drunk, as 
ever, I lay down to sleep. and by thi time it wa three and thirti 
hour sinc last I did slumber; so that I wa bitterli awearied. 

and I had a great and rest sleep; for, truly, the island did seem a 
veri safe place; and, in verity, I came to no harm, though I wa as a 
dead man for nine great hours; and so shall you perceiv my weariness. 

and when I wa come proper awake, I eat two of the tablets, and drank 
some of the water; and afterward made an end of my voyage, and then did 
take back my belt and strap from bind the trees, and so forward 
again upon my way, and no more fear of the hump men; for, surely, I 
did think I had left them all upon the far shore of the river; though 
afterward I mind me that they might grow likewis upon the two sides; 
but yet wa I onli discov by those upon the one, as you do know. 

and all that day I went veri swift, and past mani strang matter and 
did coast upon wonder oft. and at the sixth and the twelfth hour did I 
eat and drink, as ever; and between the eighth and the fourteenth hour 
did I come past two mighti fire-hills, that made all the countri to 
trembl with their noise. and four time did monstrou creatur pass by 
me; but I wa swift hid, and came to no harm. 

and oft as I did go, were my thought upon the dear maid that I 
journey to save from destruction. yet, as you must see, alway were my 
think brought sharpli unto my going; so that scarc wa I ever set 
off to ponder upon naani, but that there came some danger or wonder to 
give me heed to my way. and becaus of this, as you have learned, I wa 
more put to plan free of the instant troubl and peril of my way, 
through all that mighti journey, than to have quiet chanc for thought 
of love unto mine own. yet, truly, wa not my journey one whole thought 
of love unto naani? and, that peril made oft dumb my brain, wa but the 
truer song unto my maid. 

and at time I wa among trees; but oft did go past unnumb boil 
spring and small fire-hills; and oft wa the air full of the nois of 
the littl fire-hills, and the roar of the boil springs; but there 
came no harm unto me. 

and a thousand time did I perceiv thing that had life; and I made a 
veri cautiou way; though with a great speed and clever of go 
that made my heart glad. 

and oft did I come to part where a great life held the trees, and green 
stuff did flourish exceedingly, and the air rich and full and wondrou 
sweet; so that I wa fain to think how that in some far-off time, it 
might be that our children' children should come down unto thi 
country, when the upper valley of the night land wa grown to an utter 
chill and lack of air; and here build them a new refuge, if, inde 
ani should come clear of the evil forc and the monster that did live 
about the mighti pyramid in the night land. yet, how should they come 
clear of those things; so that thi is, as you do perceive, no more than 
a thought that did rise vagu in me. and yet, again, who shall say 
what may be? 

and onward I did pass, and I do mind me how that I saw the lower fire 
of that countri to burn veri fierce; and thi I set to the rich of 
the air; but yet with no sureti of knowledge; and do but tell the same 
that you shall see the oddment of thought that went oft across my 
brain, and so have so much knowledg as I, concern thi and that. 

now, a littl befor the eighteenth hour wa come, I came out from among 
the trees, and the sea wa downward of a great cliff unto my right, for 
I had gone upward for a long and weari hour. and I did see now a thing 
that made me to be cautious, and yet that did hold my heart to go 
swiftli to perceiv the thing; for it wa veri strange. 

and I went forward quickly, yet with a wise care; and so wa come 
present more nigh. and I perceiv that the thing was, in part, a high 
rock, veri tall and point and mayb an hundr feet high; but 
afterward I did find it to be more. and there wa a monstrou great 
thing upon the top of the rock, that did seem veri strange; and I stopt 
and lookt, and afterward went forward again; and so for a time, until 
that I wa but a littl way off. and now I saw that there did seem to be 
a mighti long rock laid across the topmost part of the upstand rock, 
and yet had a veri strang and shape appearance; and did seem upon the 
underpart to be as that I had lookt befor upon it. and upon the upper 
part, there grew tree and green things, even as these did grow upon odd 
ledg of the upstand rock. yet, for the most, the rock wa veri 
stark, as that a blast had blown upon it, and made it bare. 

now, when I had lookt for a while, I bethought me that thi should be a 
safe and proper place for my slumber, if that I had power to come safe 
to the top. and when I had thought thi thing, I began at onc to climb 
up the rock; and I found that the rock wa veri high; so that in a while 
I wa come a great way off the earth, and yet wa not come to the top of 
the rock. and becaus that I wa awearied, I lookt about for a safe 
place to mine hand, and lo! there wa a shelf of the rock veri nigh, 
that went inward a littl to the side. 

and I gat me to thi ledge, and did eat and drink, and present I 
slept, and scarc had thought of naani in the moment of my slumbering; 
for a great weari wa upon me, the which I do think to have come by 
reason that I wa not yet proper rest from the task of the day that 
wa gone befor that one. 

now I wake veri sudden, mayb seven hour after; and I had knowledg 
within me that my spirit did wot of some nigh danger. and I gat upward 
from the rock, veri quiet, and had the disko readi in my hand. and I 
lookt swift about me in the moment that I did wake; yet did see nothing; 
for there wa naught on the ledg with me. 

and I crept to the edge, and lookt downward, and lo! I did see that 
there came up the rock two hump men; and they did climb veri swift and 
silent; and I perceiv that they smell me, and came to destroy me. 
and I made readi the disko to do battle, and ceas not to look 
downward. and I saw how that the hump men did seem to be humpt by 
reason of their be so monstrou thick and mighti of the neck and the 
shoulder, as that they had been human bulls. and I saw that they were 
veri strong, and by the speed of their climbing, I knew they were swift; 
and so did I make steadi my attent and my heart to the save of my 
life; for truli I did know that I should be dead in a little, or they. 

now I stept back a space from the edg of the rock, and had the disko 
veri ready; for it wa need that I should kill one of those brute men 
speedy, that I have no danger that one take me in the back, whilst that 
I fight with the other. 

then, in a moment it did seem, there came upward of the rock edge, the 
great and brutish face of the man. and in that moment that I slew him, I 
did note curious how that he had larg teeth upon each side of the 
mouth; and wa awar that he had come so quiet as a great cat. and in 
the backward part of my brain, I bethought that even thus, maybe, wa 
primal man, so that a strang and secondari question and wonder 
did live in that part of me; and I did learn from these scarc consciou 
reason that I wa of belief the thing wa truli a man; but veri 
crude and dangerous. and sure it is strang that I had all thi 
thought in that littl moment; but in veriti so it was; though I doubt 
not but I better it with after thoughts, when a while had gone. 

now the first man die ere hi great hair breast wa come upward over 
the rock; and he sank back, and sag and fell dully, and I heard him 
bodg downward from rock to rock, veri lumbersome; and so in a moment 
wa silence. 

then did I look thi way and that way of the ledge; for the second humpt 
man wa not yet upon me; and I fear that the paus did mean a cun 
mischief and strategy. and when a littl time had past, and all the 
while I wa readi with the diskos, and naught did come upward to harm 
me, I stept veri soft to the edg of the rock-ledge, and lookt downward; 
but there wa nowher ani thing to see. 

now, for a littl moment, I did think that the brutish man had run off, 
be fear by the death that I did deal unto the first; yet I put thi 
from me at once; for I did wot that such a creatur did not be like to 
fear in such wise; but wa rather set to some horrid cun of attack, 
as I did fear, and wa somewher below me among the hole of the great 
rock. 

then I did think sudden that he might be gone upward, so that he should 
come down upon my back, and I lookt upward of the mighti rock; but did 
see naught; and afterward I stoopt forward a great way beyond the edge, 
so that I should perceiv whether the man did hide beneath. and, behold! 
he wa there below me, and crouch under the rock-shelf, readi to hi 
spring. and in that moment, he made unto me with so mighti a leap as ani 
tiger should give. and he came half over the edge, and gript the disko 
by the handle, in an instant. 

and sure I had lost that trust weapon, or been pull over and cast 
into the depth, but that the disko did spin, and the earth-curr did 
make live the handle--a wa intended--sav where the "grip" wa set. 
and lo! the man gave loos the handl veri swift, for it had burn and 
shaken the creatur sore. and I stagger back, with the effort I had 
made to withhold the diskos; and the brutish man came upward again over 
the rock edge, and leapt at me. yet he gat me not; for I sprang unto my 
right, and made a blow with the diskos, even as I did leap. and the blow 
came someth short; but yet harm the humpt man with a gash upon the 
belly, veri sore and horrid among the great brown hair of the man. and 
immedi he sprang after me; but I smote full at the face; so that he 
leap back from the strang roar and blaze of the diskos, and yet wa 
harmed; for he gat not right free of the blow; but did be cut veri sore 
on the mighti and hair arm. 

now, see that he wa someth fear of the weapon, I ran in upon 
him, and smote again at the face; yet wa the man gone out of my reach 
befor that the blow did reach; for, truly, he wa quick as a panther. 
and immediately, he did leap unto the end of the ledge, where it did 
join upon the rock; and he caught the live rock between hi two hands. 
and truli the rock must have been splitten there; for he tore out a 
monstrou lump, so great near as my body; and did run upon me with the 
rock abov the head of him. 

now, I perceiv I should be smash in a moment, if that I did not slay 
the man veri quick. for so mighti wa he, that he did leap thi way and 
that way after me, as though the great rock did cumber him no more than 
it had been but a light matter. 

and you shall perceiv that I leapt thi way and that way, to avoid the 
man; and twice did strike him; but yet wa fear to brake the disko 
upon the rock, which the man did use as a shield each time that I did 
make a blow. and all the while, I did act to escap when that the man 
should cast the rock, as I did conceiv at the first to be hi intent. 
yet, truly, it wa as that he had no wot that a rock may be thrown; 
for he strave onli to come at me with the rock, that he should crush me, 
as with a monstrou club. and, in verity, what should a man do against 
so horrid an attack. 

and time and oft did I leap now to the right and now to the left, and 
again in a moment, I did cut the humpt man; but the blow wa someth 
turn off by the great rock in the hand of the man; yet so strang and 
mighti wa the power of the diskos, that it shore away a small portion 
of the rock, and did come to no hurt in itself. 

and, sure I had present fail in wind and limb, becaus of the 
leap and charg that I did make; and becaus of the weight of the 
armour, that wa not overmuch, yet to be considered; but that I faint 
not, wa by reason of the wondrou hard and lean that I wa 
grown to, with so constant a journey and strait living; for the 
tablet did keep the strength in a man, though, truly, they eas not 
the yearn of the belly. 

and lo! even the brutish man did grow weary, and the hot breath and 
body-stink to come from him; and sure who shall wonder, for alway he 
did rush to and fro upon me, with the monstrou rock to crush me. and 
sudden, I leapt unto the right of the man, think within me that I did 
perceiv a chanc that I should cut him upon that side; but, truly, he 
wa less aweari than I did know; for he came veri sharp upon me, and 
had me between him and the wall of the rock; and sure I had no room to 
make escape, and had die in a moment, but that I made a sudden sham 
toward the left with the diskos, as that I should leap that way. and in 
the same instant, I did go to the right with a strong bounding; and 
immedi did come in upon the humpt man from that side; and I put my 
fortun of life to the stroke, and stood anigh to the man, and I smote 
him across the middl part, befor that he did wot of my intent. and the 
blow slew the man veri surely, and did nigh cut the mighti creatur in 
twain. and sure he fell, half leap even as he died, so that the 
monstrou rock that wa in the hand of the brutish man, did crash down 
almost upon my feet, and I leapt veri high that I should escap the 
thunder of the rock; for in verity, I wa near slain in that last 
moment of the life of the humpt man. but yet I live and came free of 
death, and did have a relief of happi about my heart, as you shall 
believe. 

yet, truly, I wa much shaken; and a littl weak took me, so that I 
wa fain to go down upon the rock-shelf, that I have back my strength. 

and presently, I wa grown steadi again, and I took my gear, and did 
hast down the rock, and so wa come present to the earth again. and I 
saw the first of the humpt men that I did slay, lie veri quiet a 
littl off from the bottom of the rock; so that I went round upon the 
other side to avoid the man; for it wa no pleasur to mine eye or to 
my heart. and, truly, it did troubl me alway to make a death. 

and when I wa come round upon the other, which wa the seaward, side of 
the rock, I perceiv that I wa yet shaken; and I rememb that it 
were wise to eat and drink and rest a little, befor that I did go 
further upon my way. 

now, as I did sit there at the bottom of the rock, I look upward at 
the strang crown thereof; and until that time, I had been taken up with 
the fight and with gaze thi way and that to see whether there came 
other of the hump men to work me an harm. 

but now that I wa given some eas of the mind and of the body, I saw 
plainli that I knew the thing that lay upward upon the rock; for the 
shape had been someth strang and half-known to me even befor that 
moment, as that I had a vagu knowledg concern it; but yet with no 
surety. and now, truly, I did know in a littl instant that the thing 
wa one of the olden flying-ships, the which, as you shall mind, there 
were certain in the great museum of the mighti pyramid. 

and surely, I wa readi to wonder whi that I had not seen the thing 
plain befor that moment; yet wa thi like to be becaus that there wa 
a shadow upon the other side of the great rock; but upon thi side there 
wa a littl fire-hil a way off to the cliff edge, and thi did throw a 
warm light that made a glimmer upon the dull metal of the ship' bottom, 
which wa uncov to my sight, and wa sure of that same deathless 
grey metal that made the great redoubt. 

and yet, as you shall believe, even as I said thi thing to my mind, 
that the strang matter upon the top of the rock wa truli one of the 
olden air-ships, I did feel that I should be proper to doubt; for it wa 
a veri wondrou thing to perceiv a thing common to man, in that utter 
strang country, and after that I wa gone so far off from the mighti 
pyramid. yet, in verity, I did know in my heart that it wa inde that 
which I did perceiv it to be; and I did stand and walk to and fore and 
look upward constant; for I wa veri keen that I look well upon it. 

and truly, as I did look from thi place and from that place, it wa 
scarc a thing for wonder that I had not wot it to be an air vessel; 
for there were great tree and abund of earth and live matter 
upon the topmost side of the ship; so that none could easi perceiv it 
to be aught save a great and desol rock that did lie upon the other 
rock. yet, truly, it wa as I have told; and present I did make to 
climb upward of the great rock, that I should come to the air vessel to 
enter it. but yet wa thi not proper; for I had sure no duti save to 
go forward forever, until that I found the maid; but yet did I spend a 
littl while to thi search of the ship; and I do but set down that 
which I did, and with a seriou spirit. and truly, as it doth here occur 
to me, I do be ever seem a seriou young man, as you mayb shall have 
grown to think; but yet wa I to a dread and seriou business, and the 
strain did be too great upon me and the troubl too much prest upon my 
heart to give me much of laughter, as you do sure perceive, and so you 
to give me your ear and your understanding. for, indeed, befor that I 
did lose mirdath my beauti one, I wa not over-grave; but so young 
and joyou as any. 

now it took me a great time to go upward of the rock; for it wa so 
monstrou steep and high. yet, present wa I come nigh under the 
bottom of the ship; and here I did perceiv that she had been sore 
batter in that far-off age when she did come upon the rock; for, 
surely, as I did perceive, the peak of the rock wa through the bottom 
of the ship, so that the metal wa burst thi way and that, and veri 
plain to be seen in some parts; but in other place the earth and 
grow matter did make a hiding. 

and after that I had climb thi way and that way, I perceiv that I 
must come to the topmost part by the plant that did hang over, and grow 
downward. and after that I had pull upon them, to know that they were 
strong to hold me, I went upon them, and wa soon to the top of the 
ship. yet, truly, I might so well have been upon the earth; for the ship 
wa cover abov by the earth and dust of a monstrou age of years; so 
that I wa like to need much time to dig downward unto the ship; and 
becaus of this, I consid a littl while, and afterward made no more 
to search her; but did go downward again, that I should come onc more 
to my journey. yet, as you shall think, it wa with a queer thrill of 
the heart, and with strang thought upon the end of those that did 
come, maybe, to a bitter and lonesom die in that ship of the air, in 
that far-off time when she did fly. 

and surely, it did seem to me as I went downward of the great rock, how 
that the flying-ship had been there for an hundr thousand years; and 
that mayhap the sea did live all about the rock in that age; and truli 
thi wa no improp thing to think, for it wa like that the sea had 
been monstrou high and great in those days; so that the rock wa but a 
littl island in the midst of the sea; and now wa the sea gone small 
from a great sea to lesser seas, and thi through an etern of years. 
and always, as it doth seem to me, had the ship lain upon the rock, and 
lookt quiet and silent over the chang and wonder and the lonesom 
of all that countri of fire and water, for ever. 

but how the air-ship did come upon the rock, how shall I know; save, 
maybe, it doth seem as that she might have flown low over the sea in 
that olden age, and come hard upon the rock, because, maybe, there wa 
one to the helm that did steer unwittingly. and again, it shall well be 
otherwise, and I do but set down mine odd thoughts; and such as they be, 
they have no especi use, save that they do show to you the differ 
work of my mind at that time, as I did go downward. and so to set 
you the more in possess of all that I did have knowledg of. 

and presently, I wa come again to the earth, and did go forward with a 
great speed, so that I should wast no more of that day. yet, oft did I 
think upon that ship hid there upon the mighti rock, under the wondrou 
quiet ash of eternity. 

and I went eighteen hour walking, and in all that time I did see no 
more of the hump men; yet three time wa I put in a sudden danger, 
for there went past me thrice, between the fourteenth and the 
seventeenth hours, great fli monsters, that were wing veri ugly, 
and did go, as I thought, in a great bounding, rather than that they did 
fli proper as doth a bird. yet I suffer no hurt from these; for I wa 
swift to hide between the great boulder that were veri plenti in that 
part; but no trees. for I wa gone now past the forest of trees; there 
be none sinc that I had gone through a veri shallow river, that I 
came to about the thirteenth hour. and thi had I waded, and sound my 
path with the staff of the diskos; but I had kept mine armour upon me, 
lest there be things, even in water so shallow, that might bite and work 
harm upon me. but I gat through pretti quick, and had no hurt done me. 
now I had eat, as ever, at the sixth and the twelfth hours; and by that 
the eighteenth hour wa come, I wa nigh again unto a forest, that came 
down to the shore that went alway upon my right; and I to be veri sore 
and wearied, as you shall know; for I had fought veri desper after my 
waking, and afterward climb the great rock, and then again to journey, 
so that it was, by this, nigh to one and twenti hour sinc that I did 
sleep. 

and surely, I lookt thi way and that way, constant, and did see no 
place proper to my slumber. but afterward, I consid I did be a fool, 
to lack such; for truli the tree were plentiful, and I could climb a 
great one, and strap my bodi safe, and so have a sure bed for my rest. 
and I did thi thing, and went upward into a great tree, and did tie my 
bodi to the tree, with my belts; yet I eat and drank befor that I went 
up the tree. 

now when I wa fast upward in the tree, and had made a bed upon a 
monstrou branch, and had the disko readi upon my hip, so that it 
should not fall but be nigh to my hand, I lay a littl while think 
upon naani; and I went not over to sleep immediately, which wa strange; 
yet mayhap becaus that my bed wa so uncertain. 

and I consid veri grave how that it wa a monstrou long while 
sinc that I did hear the master-word from the dear maid; and truli I 
wa come a dread way from mine home, which wa the mighti pyramid; 
for I had gone onward for ever through five and twenti great day of 
travel, and wa not yet come to ani place that did appear like to be 
that place where the maid did abide. 

and it did seem that I might even wander onward in that great countri of 
fire and water for a time beyond all that I had befor gone; and thi 
thought did put a great weight of troubl and weari upon my heart; 
for the maid had been in sore need of me, and I did feel sudden to be 
all adrift in the wilderness. but befor thi time, it had seem as 
that I sure went aright. and mayhap your sympathi shall tell you just 
how I to feel in the heart. 

and after that I had lain there veri awkward, and thought upon all 
matters, I mind me that I would tri the compass again upon the morrow; 
but had no great hope of the machine; yet did be will to tri aught 
to see where I had gotten to. and truly, as it did come to my mind, if 
that the compass did point a littl as I did wot it wa use to point in 
the lesser redoubt, then, in verity, I wa sure come someth more 
anigh to that unknown place of the world than I did dare to believe. and 
thi to be plain to you. 

then a littl time did pass in which I did wake and sleep, and wake and 
sleep, a little; but with no sureti of sleep; but as that I wa veri 
tire of the heart, and did but lie too weari to come properli to 
sleep. 

and odd while I did lie with mine eye half to open, and did look veri 
dream upward among the dark branch of the tree, as they did show 
black and pretti against the red of the shine that came from the 
sea; for there wa stood a great and bright-burn fire-hil in that 
part of the sea that lay off the shore from me. and abov the glare of 
the fire-hill, there wa the deep night that did brood for ever abov in 
a monstrou black gloom of eternity, and did make the red smoke of the 
volcano to show deep and mighti and thunderous-seeming, afar up in the 
great dark. and the red and shine smoke did but show the utter 
huge of the night, that had been upon the world through the great 
ages. 

and, in verity, as I did lie there so dreamful, it did come to me afresh 
how wondrou strang wa mine adventure; and how that I did lie warm and 
aliv in a countri of red light and smoke seas. and, truly, as I did 
rememb and consider, there wa a great and lost world abov me, upward 
through the dark ... mayb an hundr and fifti great mile up in the 
grim night. 

and thi thing did strike me veri solemn, as I did lie; and I do trust 
that you conceiv how that there was, in truth, afar abov in the 
etern and unknown night, the stupend desol of the dead world, 
and the etern snow and starless dark. and, as I do think, a cold so 
bitter that it held death to all live that should come anigh to it. 
yet, bethink you, if one had live in that far height of the dead world, 
and come upon the edg of that mighti valley in which all life that wa 
left of earth, did abide, they should have been like to look downward 
vagu into so monstrou a deep that they had seen naught, mayhaps, 
save a dull and utter strang glow far downward in the great night, 
in thi place and in that. 

and surely, as you shall have seen, I have set the great deep of the 
valley to be, maybe, an hundr and fifti mile of night; for, as you do 
mind, it wa conceiv that the valley of the night land wa an hundr 
mile deep, and mayhap to be more; and I had come from that place 
downward of the mighti slope, and of the gorge, a veri great way. yet, 
in verity, I do believ in my heart thi measur wa utter wrong; for 
I think the deep to have been monstrous, beyond these mile that I do 
give; yet have I no prove of thi belief, and do set it down for no 
more than it is. 

now, presently, I had ceas from these vagu think and half 
dreamings, and wa gone truli to sleep. yet, nowis did I sleep veri 
strong; but did seem to come anigh to wakefulness, thi time and that. 
and, as it did chance, thi wa mayhap a veri good thing for my life; 
for I did present come awak more surely, and did turn on the great 
branch; for there wa a nois in the air, that wa not the nois of the 
great fire-hill. 

and the nois did grow, veri heavi and lumbersome. and, in a moment, 
there came seven hump men, run among the trees, as that some 
monstrou thing did pursue. and immedi they were beneath the tree 
in which I did lie; so that a great fear came upon me, and I loos the 
belt from the branch, that I should be free to fight. 

and, directli upon this, I saw that the men did leap upward into the 
tree, beneath me; but not as that they did wot of me or make to come at 
me; but as that they did pay a great heed to some creatur or happen 
that wa far off among the trees. and surely, the nois did seem to come 
from that part, and did grow loud and mighty, and the hump men did all 
crouch veri silent, and did make no nois or motion one to the other; 
but were quiet upon the lower branches. 

and, as I did look now more to my ease, I perceiv that they had each a 
great stone, and bloody, that did seem as that it were split to a 
certain sharpness, even as a stone doth break veri natural. and they 
carri the stone under thi arm or under that arm, so that they had 
their hand free to all matters. 

and, alway the nois did come the more anigh, and I saw that a hump 
man did come run from among the trees, and did run beneath that 
place where the seven hump men did be on the branches. but they made 
no sign to the man, to save him; yet truli it wa veri plain that some 
monster pursu the man. 

and immedi I saw how thi thing was; for the hump man upon the 
ground, did not run so fast as might be; and I conceiv that he did act 
to make some creatur to come after him, to pass under the men within 
the tree. and sure thi thing did prove to be; for there came veri 
quick, a great and ugli thing, that had an ugli way of put down the 
feet, and did have seven feet to each side, which wa veri strange; and 
the back wa as that it were horny, and the belli of the thing did seem 
to brush heavi upon the earth, and it grunted, as it went, and shook the 
earth with the weight of it; so that a monstrou nois came from it, 
upon so hasti a journey. and I did wot that it wa not such a thing as 
did properli pursu after matter of food; but did rather eat of that 
which did need littl haste, but a monstrou strength, to gain. and that 
it did so make after the man, wa in truth becaus that it had been 
wound and made fierce; for, indeed, there came blood from the creatur 
from great wound upon the back; but how these were made, I could not 
know in that instant. 

and it did go under the tree in which I wa hid; and in that moment when 
it past under the tree, the seven hump men did leap out of the 
branches, and did catch to the brute by the great horn of the spine; 
and I saw that the wound were in the joint of the spine, as wa plain 
when the back did work, with the go of the creature. and the seven 
hump men took the sharp stone from under their arms, and did strike 
veri brutal in the wound that were in the joint of the spine; and the 
creatur roar and cried, and went onward into the tree at a great 
speed; and in all the time that it ran, the hump men ceas not to 
strike with the stones. 

and sudden, when it wa gone a distanc off, it did roll veri swift over 
upon the back, first to the right, as that it would go that way; so that 
the hump men did leap off upon the other side. and immedi the 
creatur roll to that side; and there ran clear of the brute onli four 
of the hump men; so that I knew that three were slain. and afterwards, 
they that lived, ran beyond the beast, and gat up into a second tree, 
and the one that wa chased, did entic the creatur to follow, and so 
did teas it onc more to pass beneath the other men; and they veri 
swiftli again to the back of the creature; and so from my sight, 
strike with the great stones, and the beast bellow veri loud and 
piteous. and how mani of the hump men there were to the begin of 
that strang hunting, I know not; but sure there were few that live 
to the end. 

and sure there were such thing as thi thing in the begin of the 
world, and again wa it thu in the end; and I did ponder thi a littl 
while, as I did sit upon the great branch, and hearken unto the sound of 
the hunting, that wa now gone a great way off, and wa present beyond 
my hearing. 

and afterward, I gat me to the earth, and did look thi way and that 
way, to see that no beast wa anigh, neither ani of the hump men; and 
afterward, I eat two of the tablet and drank some of the water. 

and when I had gat thi far to a readi for my going, I mind me 
that I should tri the compass again, as I did intend. and sure the 
machin did point between the north and the south, upon the westward 
arc, even as naani had told unto me; yet, as it did seem, with somewhat 
more of a southward point than she had made me to think. and becaus 
of thi tell of the compass, a great eas came upon my spirit; for, 
surely, wa not thi but a sure sign that I did go direct unto that 
hidden place of the world where the lesser refug did abide; but yet wa 
not come over-close, so that the pull of the mighti earth-curr of the 
great redoubt wa someth stronger than in the place where wa the 
littl pyramid. 

and all thi did I think veri swift to myself, and had a glad uplift 
of the heart, as you do perceive; so that I went forward upon my 
journey, with a great stride, and did scarc fear ani strang thing that 
all the countri did hold, in that moment. 

and I went all that day at a strong pace, and did be oft tempt to send 
the master-word unto naani; yet did keep from so foolish an acting, the 
which, mayhaps, had brought straightway upon me an evil power, and had 
given me to destruct when that I wa near come to the succour of the 
maid. and it wa thi quick and constant fear of the evil forc of the 
night land, that did keep me ever from call unto naani, lest that 
they should discov me, and follow after; and this, I doubt not, you to 
know by now so well as I. 

now, by the sixth hour, I wa come into a part of the countri where 
there were an exceed abund of steam fountain and spray and 
great upboil of water in basin of rock; and the air did be full of 
the sound and the roar of the boil and the spoutings, and of a 
hot mist and spray; so that, truly, I had scarc the power to see to my 
front, nor to ani side. 

and here, presently, I made a pause, and did eat and drink, and 
afterward went forward again; and I did keep the shore of the sea alway 
to my right, and so did go proper to my way; yet with no great ease; for 
the sea also did steam veri strong in that part, and becaus of thi 
great fog of steam, I wa sure much labour to make a great speed, 
lest unse I go headlong into an hole of the boil water. 

and in the ninth hour, I did go clear of the hot boilings, and wa come 
again free of the mist and the steam, and might look with mine eye to 
my going. and, surely, as I did perceive, I wa come to the end of the 
great sea that had been ever to my right; for it did go against the feet 
of great and monstrou mountains, that went upward for ever into the 
night, and did seem as that they were the hither wall of that strang 
countri of fire and water. and so wa I stood there veri much taken upon 
doubt; for how should I go farther. 

and after that I had been there a while, in a bewilder of doubt and 
of wit, I went to the left, along the feet of the mountains; and truli 
thi but of common sense; for how might I go ani other way, save I go 
back again! 

and at the twelfth hour I eat two of the tablets, and drank some of the 
water, and went forward onc more. and lo! at the fifteenth hour, I wa 
come to a place between the mountains, even an upward gorge, veri dark 
and gloomy, and without light for a great way. 

and, in verity, I did not want to go up the gorge, in that it wa so 
dreari a place and narrow and horrid and drear-seeming, after the light 
and wide of the countri in which I did yet stand. 

and presently, I did go past the mouth of the gorge, that I should learn 
whether there went anoth way out of that country. and thiswise, for a 
great hour more, along the feet of the mountains, and did present come 
to a monstrou black river, that was, maybe, a mile wide. and it to be 
veri shallow, and seem as that the water scarc to cover the mud of 
the bottom. and here and there a great steam did come from it, and 
spirt and moundings-up of the mud in mani places, and monstrou 
babbl and puffings-up of strang smoke, as that a great heat went 
beneath it in thi place and in that. 

and sure it went backward into the countri for a mighti way, so far as 
my sight did go; and I did think it to be no river, but truli a further 
sea. and there wa no way across; for there were no tree anigh, to make 
me a raft, neither might I wade across; for it might be shallow here and 
deep there, and the mud be in all places. and, moreover, I had been like 
to be caught in one of those upburst of mud, even did I have a raft 
to go upon. and becaus of all these things, I gat me back again to the 
gorge, and present I did go upward into the darkness. 

now, I went upward veri steady, save that I did stumbl oft, and did go 
through six great hours. and truli it did seem that I went in an utter 
dark, becaus that I had been awhil in so constant a light. 

and, by that I had been six hour in the gorge, I wa gone right away 
from the countri of the seas, and did be as that I wa back into some 
place that wa like to the dread of the night land. for there were 
in thi place and in that place of the gorge, red fire-holes, even as in 
the night land. yet not mani until that I wa come a great way up of the 
gorge. and there did be life of horrid thing about the fires, as soon I 
did wot; so that I made to keep off from them. yet, as you shall 
perceive, I must come oft pretti near, becaus that the gorg wa 
nowher scarc an hundr good pace across, and did oft come veri 
narrow, so that I did come oft anigh to the fire-holes, whether that I 
did heed to or not. 

and all that time, and ever, did the gorg go veri sharp upward, so that 
it wa a veri weari thing to make great trial of speed, as you shall 
know. but yet I went so fast as I could do; for I wa grown sudden veri 
excit about the heart, and to feel as that I did sure draw anigh to 
that strang and hid place of the world, where wa the lesser refuge. 

and when I had gone upward through six great hours, as I did say, I took 
caution for a place proper to slumber; for I wa sure veri wearied. 

and I saw a place presently, afar upward of the dark side of the gorge, 
upon the right, where a ledg of the rock did show in the glare from 
one of the fire-hol that made a gloomi light in that place. and I 
climb unto thi ledge, and did find it to be secure, and awkward to 
come upon. and presently, after that I had eat and drunk, I did compos 
myself unto sleep, the which came veri speedi upon me, whilst yet I did 
believ I thought onli upon the sweet of the maid. and truli it had 
been someth over three and twenti hours, sinc last I did sleep; so 
that I wa greatli awearied. 

and in six hour I wake and did eat, and did climb downward again to 
the gorge, and so unto mine upward journey. 

now, as you do perceive, when that I wa come properli a great way up 
the gorge, and had come among the fire-holes, there wa no more an utter 
darkness, for the dull red glare of the pit beat upward upon the black 
side of the rock-mountains, that did make the side of the gorge; so 
that oft I did see both side veri plain in the lower parts; yet of the 
height of the gorge, who might know aught; for the black side did go 
upward for ever into the everlast night. 

and becaus of the light from the fire-pits, I did see, time and oft 
about the fires, horrid monsters, both that were snakes, and other like 
to scorpion so great as my head; but no more than these for a long 
while. and afterward I perceiv that sure other matter did move 
among the rock of the gorge; so that I did keep the disko veri readi 
in mine hand; yet had truli no use for it all that day. 

now I eat and drank at the sixth and the twelfth hours, and went onward 
at a veri strong speed. and at the sixteenth hour, I did seem as that I 
knew the aether to be stir about me, and the beat of the master-word 
veri faint upon mine inward ear. and immediately, a wondrou great and 
love thrill did wake all my being; for surely, I said, thi wa the 
spirit of my love, call unto me with her brain-elements. and, indeed, 
thi wa a veri proper and sensibl thinking; for had the master-word 
been sent from the mighti pyramid, I had been like to hear it veri 
plain, by reason of the forc of the earth-curr which wa with them 
and to their command. but, as you do know, the earth-curr wa nigh 
gone from the peopl of the lesser refuge; so that they were over-weak 
to make ani proper calling. and thi I have spoken of befor thi place. 

yet, in a littl while, as I did stand veri hushed, that I should hark 
the better, I wa come to doubt whether that I did truli hear the 
master-word. and one moment I did say that it had sure beat in the 
night about me; and immedi would I be just so unsure; and so in a 
while I gat onc more to my journey, and had doubt in my heart; yet, as 
you shall conceive, more of hope. and becaus of thi thing, I went 
onward for thirti great hour from the time that I did wake; for my 
heart wa excit within me. and when that I had gone so long forward as 
this, I did see how that I did foolishly; and I lookt about for a place 
for my slumber; and I found a small cave that wa clean and empty, as I 
did discov by the shine of the disko which I made to spin a littl 
time. and the cave wa in the cliff of the mountain that made the right 
side of the gorge, and wa nigh twenti good feet from the bottom of the 
gorge, and hard to approach. 

and when I wa come secur into the cave, and sure that it wa proper to 
my purpose, I eat four of the tablets, as wa just and nice to my belly, 
and did afterward drink some of the water, and so to my slumber; and all 
the while, veri sweet and strong in my thought upon naani; so that 
sure I wa a littl time befor that I had myself rightli unto sleep. 

and I slept six hours, and did wake, for I had set my spirit hard unto 
such wakening; yet wa I still greatli yearn for sleep. but thi did 
go somewhat, when that I had fought a littl with my need. and 
afterward, I eat two of the tablets, and drank some of the water, and 
did gat my gear upon me, and wa present down unto the gorge; and so 
again to my journey. 

now in all that day I did go with a veri stern speed; for it did seem as 
that my soul did know for sureti that I wa truli come someth nigh 
unto that hid place in the night where I should find mine olden love 
again. and the sweet hope that wa bred of the call that had seem 
truli to sound about my spirit, wa in all my being, and more sure on 
that day, than befor that I had slept. 

and I went thirti hour in all, even as before, ere that I did come 
again to sleep, and I eat and drank at everi sixth hour, so that my 
strength should abid within me. and by that I wa come to the end of 
the thirti hours, I wa sore awearied, and gat me upward of the 
monstrou cliff that did make the left side of the gorge, have 
perceiv in a place a great ledg of the rock, that did seem veri 
proper for my purpos of slumber. 

and when I wa come upward upon the ledg of the rock, I saw that there 
did seem something, like to a mighti spider, that did stay half without 
of a hole in the back part of the ledge. and I smote the thing gentli 
with the diskos, so that it wa veri quickli dead; and afterward I 
search well about; but did gladli perceiv that there abod there no 
other horrid creature. 

and I eat two of the tablets, and drank some of the water; and did 
afterward make me readi for slumber, as ever. but now I did put the 
cloak well about me; for truli there wa grown a chill into the air of 
the gorge; and here also will I tell how that it did seem unto me that 
the air wa gone someth from that great thick and strength which 
had been with me in the past day of my journeying. 

now I wa gone so tired, that I fell upon sleep in a moment, yet with a 
dear thought and anxious, concern naani; but wa so starv of the 
bodi for slumber, that even mine anxious kept me not awake. and I 
wa then so fast with sleep that I knew naught for eight hour of veri 
sound slumber. and then did I awake, and veri thank of the heart that 
no evil beast or creep thing had come upon me whilst that I wa so 
utter lost in sleep. 

and now, truly, wa I someth fresh and ready; and I ate and drank, 
and had my gear onc more upon me, and so down into the gorge. and 
afterward, I went upon my journey for eighteen hours, and did paus but 
a littl while at the sixth and the twelfth hour that I should eat and 
drink. 

and when the eighteenth hour wa nigh come, I perceiv that the natur 
of the gorg wa grown veri horrid and dank. and in verity, I did feel 
as that afar upward in the night the black mountain that did make the 
side of the gorg had come together, and did make a monstrou roof 
unseen in the utter height. 

and thi thing I do tell, onli as of my belief; for I have no veri sure 
proof. yet, truly, my reason doth say likewise; for there did oft drip 
water upon me out of the darkness, even though I walk in the middl 
way of the gorge; and how should thi thing be, save that there went an 
overreach of the sides, that should let the mildew down upon me. 

and in thi place, and for more than eleven great hours, there were 
fire-hol and fire-pit onli in thi part and in that, and each a great 
way off from another. and they burn veri dull, and did seem to throw a 
fume of sulphur into all the air, as that there wa no freedom abov for 
the stink to pass away. and in everi place were the rock of the gorg 
veri thick and slipperi with strang growths; so that it wa a sorrow to 
walk upon them. and all that time wa there an heavi wet and 
slow in the air; and a smell, besid the stink of the fire-pits, as 
that I did go forward through a place where dead thing did be. 

and for a great time there wa a horrid darkness, as it had been that 
the air wa grown thick with the fume of the fire-pits, as I do 
believe; and besid thi thing there was, as I have said, but a dull 
fire here and anoth there; so that it wa like that there should be a 
heavi dark. and becaus that it wa so utter black, and becaus that 
there were growth upon the rock in the bottom of the gorge, I did go 
but slowly, and with pain of stumblings; and alway with the stink of 
that place to troubl me half unto a sickness. 

and sudden, as I did go past one of the fire-pits, I saw that the fire 
made a dull shine upon some monstrou thing that did move befor me, 
upon the far side of the fire. and I came in one moment unto a swift 
silence, and hid among the rock of the bottom of the gorge. and I lookt 
veri cautiou at the thing that move beyond the fire, and sure I had 
seen no thing so monstrou sinc that I had come free of the night land; 
for it wa as that some huge creature, like to the hull of a great ship 
did move down out of the dark of the upper way of the gorge. and it went 
by the fire-hole, and onward into the dark of the lower way of the 
gorge; and I had perceiv somewhat of it, as it did go past the fire, 
and, surely, it wa black and beslimed, and utter great in height and in 
length, and it went alway without noise, so that I had not known it to 
be there, but that I saw it plain with mine eyes. and, truly, if I do 
say that it wa somewhat as that I had seen a monstrou slug-thing, 
sure I should use wise and proper word to make known to you thi 
horrid brute. 

and I stay veri quiet a time, and afterward I went upward again of the 
gorge, and did use a new caution to my way, and saw that the disko wa 
free upon my hip; for even thu I did carri the weapon, be that I 
must use both hand to my way, and to save me in my stumbl and 
slide over the slipperi rocks. 

and onc it did seem to me that some great thing move in the darkness, 
and I went downward among the rocks, and stir not my bodi for a great 
while; and sure am I that there went some live monster past me, that 
did stink as a loathsom grave. and afterward, I went on again. 

and three hour did I go thus, and came at last to a place where a 
fire-hol did shine more ruddy; and I did look well about me, that I 
should perceiv that part of the gorg the better. and as I stood there, 
veri quiet, away off from the fire, so that it did show no great light 
upon my person, I did note how utter still wa that place; and thi to 
take me anew, as though it had come fresh upon me. and here, there would 
be the drip of water, and again in that place, and again elsewhere; and 
all veri solemn and veri dismal. and the silenc to be constant. 

and presently, as I lookt, now to thi way and again to that, I saw that 
there wa a monstrou slug-th laid upward against the black side of 
the gorge, as that it had stood up on end; and the one end of the 
monster went upward beyond the light from the fire-pit; but the other 
part did come down and trail into the gorge, as a long hillock, veri 
ugli and black and beslimed. 

and I near sweat with a disgust and horror of the thing; but afterward I 
had more courage, and spi well upon the brute. and surely, it move 
not at all, ani more than the side of the cliff of the gorge; and I 
conceiv that it stood not upward upon ani feet; but clung to the rock, 
even as you shall see a slug to go. and for a great space I wa veri 
quiet and move not, neither did I make to hide, but stood there veri 
stupid. 

yet, in a time, I had more of courag which brought strength unto my 
heart, and I began again to go upon my way, but with an utter caution, 
and I then to creep for a weari time upon my hand and knee among the 
dank and weari rock and boulder that lay in the bottom of the 
gorge. and thrice between four hour wa I pass by hidden and 
monstrou thing in the horrid dark place of the gorge; yet with no 
noise, save, as it might be, the odd rattl of a rock in thi place and 
that; but with an utter and dread stinking. and I to be quiet as 
they went, as you shall think. 

and each time now that I did go by the fire-pit and fire-hol that lay 
odd-way in the gorge, I did paus and search about me with mine eyes, 
veri cautious, and oft now did I perceiv how that the monstrou slug 
creatur did lie in thi place and in that against the cliff of the 
gorge. and I did go then utter still, from thi space to that space 
among the rocks, and oft upon the flat of my belly, and with a constant 
heed that I make not mine armour to knock against the boulders. 

and alway as I did go, there wa a monstrou stench, and the choke of 
sulphur smoke veri oft. and here and there, as mine heart doth 
believe, there were utter great cavern within the mountain to the 
right and to the left; and of thi thing I have some small proof; for 
onc I did go by a place where a fire did burn, as it should be a 
fire-hole, afar inward of the mountain side upon my right; so that I saw 
in a moment that I look in the dark through the mouth of a mighti 
cave-place; and I went past veri quick and silent, for I knew not 
whether ani horrid thing should come forth out of that place to slay me. 

and, truly, as I did think, if there did be one such place, there were 
like to be many; and mayhap the slug came forth from those caverns, 
where, as I did conceiv there wa naught save an etern drip of 
water and the foul growth of thing in all parts. yet is thi last but 
a thought, as I do say, and you shall wise take it for no more than 
that. 

now, I came clear of the dark and the slime and the stink in 
about twelv hour after the time that I did think the mountain to be a 
roof unto the gorge; and the air wa now free and did seem as that some 
life and health did abound in it; and the fire did be more plentiful, 
and burn veri bright and clean, and threw all their fume upward, so 
that there wa no more ani bitter pain of sulphur within my throat. 

and surely, it wa with a thank heart that I went onward, and with a 
good speed; for there wa much of light all about me, in that there 
burn an hundr fire-pit here and in that place; so that I saw clear 
befor me and behind, and conceiv that the slug did abid onli in the 
close part of the gorge. and oft I did take the air veri full into my 
lungs, for the sweet of it, after the horrid stench that I had 
abod all those hours. 

and presently, when I wa come free of the roof part of the gorge, 
mayb some three good hours, I lookt for a place proper to slumber; for 
it wa sure someth over three and thirti hour sinc that I did 
last come upon sleep; and I wa utter worn and lost of strength with so 
much of creep and hark for monsters, as you shall believe; 
moreover, about that time I had gone bitter long while between 
slumber through more than an hundr hours, as you shall have 
perceiv from my tellings. 

now, presently, I saw a small cave that went inward of the side of the 
gorge. and I lookt into the cave, and found it to be sweet and clean, 
and veri dry. and there wa a small fire-pit off from the mouth of the 
cave that did throw a good light for my purpose; so that I saw there wa 
no creep thing or horror in the place; and I went in, and made to 
prepar for my slumber. 

but truly, when I wa come to look upon myself, I wa utter soil and 
did seem as that I stank with the slime and disgust of the dark part of 
the gorge, where I had gone upon my hands, and upon my belly. and 
becaus of this, I wa set that I should not eat or come to sleep, 
without I wash me. 

and I went out from the cave, and there wa a spring near to the 
fire-pit, as wa oft in that part of the gorge. and the spring wa hot 
and did fill a hollow of the rock, veri quiet and with a fume of 
sulphur, as I did bend abov it. and I wash mine hand and face and 
mine armour and gear, in the hot spring, and did dri me with my 
pocket-cloth; and so wa sweeten and put to happi of mind. 

and I went back into the cave, and did sit in the mouth of the cave, 
with the disko to mine hand; and I eat four of the tablets, for I wa 
gone a mortal long while without, and afterward I drank some of the 
water. and as I did eat and drink, I lookt out upon the light of the 
gorg befor me, and with a cheer and compos heart. 

and I saw present that there came certain creatur out from their 
holes, even as it might be that they were part rats; but veri strang 
looking, and not properli such. and some did lie about the fire-hole, 
and some did hunt about in the rocks; and one came presently, and had a 
snake by the neck. and it stood upon the snake, and did eat it, even 
while that the snake did lash about upon the rock. and the snake did 
lash until that it wa nigh all eat; and a veri strang thing thi wa 
to see, and someth troublesom to the pity. yet wa I glad to 
perceiv that there were enemi to the serpent of that place. 

and when the rat creatur did make an end of the snake, it made across 
to the spring, and did drink the hot water a while; and afterward back 
unto the fire, and there laid down anigh to the edge, and seem veri 
sweetli comfort of the belly, which, in truth, wa much otherwis with 
me. and, after that, I saw mani creatur that went about the fire, and 
did have warmth from the fire and drink from the spring; and sure I 
did ponder that the peopl of thi our age should say, if they had 
stood with me, that provid had made nigh togeth the warmth and the 
drink that were need unto life (for it wa grown to a bitter chill 
now in the gorge). but rather did thi thing seem to me otherwise, that 
these creatur did be but of their circumstance, and if that it had 
been anoth way, then had they grown of their wit to meet it to their 
mean of life. yet, as some would say, the argument do but meet, and be 
the same thing. and neither way do I care in thi place; but do no more 
than to show unto you the work of my brain, in thi way and that, as 
I made my journey. 

now, presently, when I wa done eating, and come veri readi to fall upon 
sleep, I went out from the cave and gat me certain boulders, the which I 
did carri into the cave. and when I wa come back for the last time, I 
put them veri secur in the entrance-way, that no small sting 
creatur come at me as I slept. and after that, I made ready, and went 
to my sleep, have sweet thought and slumbrous, of the maid. 

now I slept veri quiet that time, and wa not over troubl with the 
chill of the gorge, which wa but littl in that place, both by reason 
of the fire-pit and becaus that the cave did help to keep my warmth to 
me. and I had a deep slumber for eight hours, and wake then pretti 
tired, but strong to go upon my way. and after that I had sat a littl 
while, I came full to wake and afterward did eat two of the 
tablet and drink some of the water, the which I did, sit in the 
mouth-part of the cave, after that I had cast free the boulders. 

and afterward, I gat my gear upon me, and I went again upon my journey. 
and the gorg did continu veri light and cheerful, with the shine of 
the fires; and oft there did be a littl steam that did hiss from thi 
part or that of the bottom of the gorg and did blow veri quaint and 
noisi in the quiet of that place. and oft there did be hot pools, and 
everywher the great boulder in the bottom way, and to the right and to 
the left the black and mighti side of the gorg that did go upward for 
ever into the everlast night. 

and so I did go, and had eat and drunk at the sixth hour, and gone 
onward again. and, lo! at the eighth hour, I did thrill sudden with a 
wondrou great thrilling; for, in verity, it did seem to me that the 
master-word did beat softli about me, out of all the night of the world. 
and all my heart did throb with great glow of joy; yet wa the beat 
of the word unsure, so that I knew not truli whether my spirit had 
inde heard aught, for there wa immedi a silence, as ever, about 
mine inward being. yet, as you shall believe, there wa a new hope and 
strength of courag in all my bodi and soul. 

and I went forward veri swift, and all renewed, as it were; and my 
strength and hope did make naught of ani terror that should lie to bar 
my way, neither did I have further heed of the boulder that lay alway 
upon my path, but did go over them with quick leapings, and a wondrou 
and thrill eager of the heart within me. 

and, sudden, in the end of the tenth hour, I perceiv that the mighti 
wall of black that made the side of the gorg did be no more 
there, and that I wa come truli upon the end of the gorge. and I near 
trembl with hope and astonishment; for when I wa gone a littl way 
on, I had ceas to go upward ani more, and wa come clear out from the 
mouth of the gorge, and did peer forth across a mighti countri of night. 

and it did seem to me as that I wa come to a second land of strang 
matters, even as the night land where did lie the wonder of the mighti 
pyramid. and surely, I did think within my heart that I wa come at last 
to that far and hidden place of the world where did be the lesser 
redoubt. but yet wa there no place in all that night where did tower 
the shine light of the lesser pyramid, the which I did hope vainli to 
perceive. and becaus that I saw them not, a great heavi came upon 
my spirit for a time; but afterward the heavi did go; for I put 
reason to help my courage, and did plan thi caus and that to show whi 
that I wa not come to sight of the shine embrasur of the lesser 
redoubt. but yet wa there left an ach of doubting, as you shall well 
conceive. 

now thi land wa veri new and strange, and had a great light in thi 
part, and a wondrou grim dark in that. and I did paus a great 
while to determin how that I should go properly. and present I 
bethought me of the compass, and did draw it forth, and set it upon the 
earth, that I should see how it did act. and truli it did go almost as 
naani had told to me; so that I wa veri sure in all my be that I wa 
in veriti come anigh to the hidden refuge. but yet did the compass give 
me no proper guid to my way; so that I wa no more wise to thi end 
than before, onli that I had the comfort of that which it did seem to 
assure. 

and, in a littl while, I went forward into the land, and did hope that 
I should come present to some matter to help my choice. and I went 
first toward a certain great glow of fire that lay befor me, and did 
seem join to anoth great glare that went afar to my left. 

and I found the ground of that land to be veri fair for my feet, and to 
have in thi place and that certain bushes, even as it did seem to me, 
of the kind that we name moss-bush in the night land, as you do know. 
and I made a veri good speed, and went thu until I had gone for mayb 
six long hours. and by that time, I wa come anigh to the glow of 
light; and did keep now a strong caution to my going; for truly, as I 
did know from the tell of the maid, there were veri horrid and 
dread power in that land, and I did well to rememb that I wa come 
again to part where might be the destruct of the spirit. now I made 
a pause, and lookt toward the glow light; and it seem to me that 
for a monstrou way unto the right and unto the left, there did be 
sure a great, hid valley in the earth befor me. for the shine did 
seem as that it came up from out of a valley, as that there burn a 
deep light in such a place; but yet wa I all unsure, and had no proper 
know whether inde there did be ani valley there, but onli a strang 
and lumin shine that did come upward from the earth. 

and I made no great hast now to go unto that place; but went down 
sudden into the bushes, and lay upon my belly, and had a new great fear 
upon my spirit. and presently, I part the bush a little, and made a 
place for spying. 

and I look a great time unto the place of the light, and now to thi 
part and now to that. and sudden, I saw, as it did seem, a monstrou 
head within the glowing; for the glow did seem at while as that it 
swept to and fore, as should a shine smoke that went obedi to a 
quiet wind: and so to hide and again to uncover. and in a moment I lost 
the great face, and wa all unsur that ever I had seen aught. 

and lo! in a littl minute, I did see it again; but whether it did be 
the shape of some utter monster of eternity--even as the watcher about 
the mighti pyramid--or whether it did be no more than a carven mountain 
of rock, shape unto the dire pictur of a monster, I did have no 
knowing. but I made that I should get henc veri quick, and I did turn 
me about in the bushes, and went upon my hand and knees; and so came at 
last a great way off. 

now, presently, I came again upon my feet, and did take a new look 
around that land. and I had the mouth of the gorg to my back, and thi 
I perceiv by the shine of the fire-pit that made the place shown to 
me. 

and to the left of the gorg wa an utter blackness, as I did conceiv 
of black and monstrou mountains, through which the gorg did come. and 
to the right side of the gorg there were mani low volcanoes, that went 
alway along the feet of the great mountain that made the right wall of 
the gorge. and I saw the feet of these dark mountains, becaus that the 
light from the littl volcano made a glare upon the lower slopes. 

and so shall you have some know of that part of thi second land of 
night. 

and a good way off, wa the shine that I had journey unto, and the 
shine went into a distant light through a part of the land that lay 
afar to my left, for it stretch a great and strang way toward me, out 
of the leftward gloom, and came unto my front, and so away into an utter 
distance. yet, though it wa so great, you shall not think that it made 
ani huge light in the land; but wa rather as that it had a shine made 
unto other ends; for it made not a great light in the land. 

and you do now perceiv someth roughli how the land did seem to my 
back part and unto my left, and somewhat befor my face. and becaus 
that I did think to have no profit to my search, if that I went to the 
left, I made attent unto the right. and here there wa much of 
darkness; yet oft the shine of fire-hol in thi place and that amid 
the darkness. and, as I did look, it grew veri plain upon me how great 
wa the spread and drear wide of that countri of night; and how 
that I did be an utter lonesom person in all that dark. and so shall 
you be with me in sympathi of the utter great of my task, and know 
of the fear that did breed, odd whiles, that I should search until I 
die, and never find. and you to give me good human understanding. 

now I made no more to delay, but went unto the right, and did keep the 
chain of the littl volcano someth level to my course; though a 
great way off. and I went thu with a strang grow of hope, and an 
excitement, for ten hours, and had eat not then for more than twenti 
hours, and sure not sinc the sixth hour of that day and thi becaus 
that I wa so utter shaken from my calm of going. 

and at the tenth hour, I went utter weak, and did seem sure as that I 
must swoon. and lo! I bethought me how that I wa gone so long without 
aught for my belly. and surely, when I wa quiet a time, I eat four of 
the tablets, and in a good while did feel all renewed, and would rest no 
more, after that I had drunk some of the water, but went onward; for, in 
verity, my spirit did be as that it had slain me, if that I had lain 
down at that time. and thi becaus hope wa so fierc in me; for I to 
feel inde that I wa come near to the maid. 

and I went ten hour more, until that I did truli totter upon my feet, 
with utter and dread weariness; for I had gone now through someway 
of forti great hours, and had been foolish in mine eat and drinking, 
as you have perceived; but yet wa thi to be forgiven; for I wa as 
that I should come ani littl minut upon the wonder of the lesser 
pyramid, shine afar in the night. yet, truly, there wa nowher 
anyth that might be liken unto it. 

and I lay down there, just as I did be, and with no proper heed to my 
safety. and I wa gone asleep in one moment, as it did seem; and wake 
not for twelv hours; and then did come suddenli unto knowledge; and 
thank wa I in the heart that no monster had come upon me in that 
dead-tim of slumbering. and I eat four of the tablets, as wa sure 
due unto me, and drank some of the water, and so gat forward again into 
the night. 

and truli I wa mortal stiff and did ach for a great while, and thi 
did be in part becaus that I had wrap not the cloak about me, ere I 
slept; for the land wa bitter cold and did make the blood veri chill. 

now when I had gone onward through six hours, I ate and drank; for I did 
mind now to be wise and keep my strength good within me. and I went 
onward again at a veri great speed, and full of an excitement. and 
surely, I did be glad at last that the tablet were so easi gone in the 
mouth, and unfil to the belly; for I had been without power and 
patienc to eat proper victual. 

and at the tenth hour, I saw that there rose a red-shin out of the 
land befor me, as that it came upward from a mighti pit. and I made 
slow my way, and so, when I wa gone on for two great hour more, I saw 
that monstrou figur went about, against the red glare of the shining. 
and I gat me down into the bush which were veri plenti in that 
part. 

and I stay there for a certain while, and made a watch upon the 
red-shin and the figures; and, truly, it did seem to me that there 
were horrid giant in that land, even as in the night land. and 
afterward, I crept away, and went outward from the littl volcanoes, 
into that part of the land that wa dark, save, as you do mind, for the 
glare of fire-hol in thi part and that. 

and I went now with an utter care; for the giant had put a new caution 
into my heart, and I did sure mean that I should live to rescu mine 
own maid, and have joy through all my life. and thereafter, I went with 
the disko in my hand, and at each hour that wa the sixth, I eat two of 
the tablets, and drank some of the water, and so did keep my strength 
veri good within me. 

now, presently, I wa come to a place where the land did go downward a 
great slope, and there wa a differ in the earth that went beneath 
my feet, and no great plenti of the bushes; but onli one in thi place 
and one in that, and nowher ani fire-hole. 

and I gat me down and did feel the earth with my hands, and lo! I did 
find present smooth stones, and afterward olden shells. and 
immediately, a great delight took me; for naani had told how that the 
lesser pyramid stood someth nigh to the shore of an ancient sea, that 
wa long dri up in the year of eternity. and sure it might be that 
I wa come down into the dri bottom of that same olden sea, and should 
present have sight of the littl pyramid. 

and becaus that hope wa put so fresh into me, I went forward through, 
maybe, thirti hours, across the olden sea-bed; but in all that time I 
had no sight of the light of the lesser redoubt. and a great troubl 
began to take me; for, indeed, naani had not told me how great wa the 
sea; and it might be that I should wander a weari age across it, 
befor that I come to the far side. 

and it did come to me, presently, how that I should be wise to see that 
my way wa veri straight, so that I wast not my strength in useless 
wanderings. and I had a great care now to observ that the red-shin 
did be alway upon my right, to my rear; and by thi reason cun 
did I make to steer veri nice through the great gloom of that place. 

now, as I did go across the bed of the great sea, I heard strang 
sounds, now in thi part of the darkness, and now in that; and oft did 
there be a noise, as if thing did run thi way and that way in the bed 
of the sea. and once, afar off in the night, there did be a strang and 
horrid screaming; so that I did know truli that the monster of that 
land were out, and did go about in the dark. 

and, as you shall perceiv and understand, I wa all unknow of the 
lore of that land; so that I knew not what to think of thi strang 
sound or that, neither knew I what they might portend, but onli that, as 
I did say, there were monster abroad. and I could do no more than have 
my way forward with an utter care always, and be veri readi with the 
diskos, or to hide, each as mayb accord to the need. 

and, surely, I went one-and-forti hour that day, and eat and drank 
after everi sixth hour. and befor this, in the seven-and-thirtieth 
hour, I heard a great roar and bellow in the night, come nigh 
unto me; and afterward the thud of monstrou feet, as that a giant 
ran past me in the darkness, and did make a chase of some creature. and 
the thud of the feet and the roar went far off into the night; 
and there did seem present to come back to me from a great way, a 
littl screaming; but of thi thing I had no surety; and I abod veri 
hush in a clump of bush, until quiet wa come again all about; for 
there had been an utter frighten sound in the horrid voic and in the 
thud of the great feet. 

now, in the one-and-fortieth hour of that day, I came upon the farther 
shore of the olden sea. but lo! there wa nowher ani light to tell me 
aught of the lesser refuge. and truly, a great doubt and bewilder 
took me; for, indeed, I could not perceiv how it might be that I saw 
not the light of the embrasur of the lesser pyramid. and a great 
despair took me; so that I sat down there upon the shore of the olden 
sea, and had no heed of anyth for a while. 

but afterward, I ate and drunk, and went into a clump of bush, and wrapt 
the cloak about me, and so went fast unto sleep, with the disko handi 
to my breast. and, in verity, the pain of the despair and the 
bewilder of mine heart did make rather for sleep, than to keep me 
wakeful; for, indeed, I wa half stun of the brain and of my courage; 
and did seem now the farther off from the end of my search than ever 
I had been. 

and I slept six hours, and wake then, sudden. and I lean up upon mine 
elbow in the bush, and hark veri quiet, perchanc some nois had 
shaken my sleep from me. but, indeed, there wa nothing, onli that I wa 
wakeful, and did mind me of my troubl of failure. yet now, I did invent 
thi thing and that thing to make natur account that I wa not come to 
the lesser redoubt; and so had hope again within me; yet much also of 
doubt and bewilderment. 

and I eat two of the tablets, and drank some of the water, and again to 
my journey. and I made that I should keep along the shore of the sea, 
the which I did through twelv hours, and wa then still so much in 
doubt as ever. 

and I ceas from my journeying, and lookt about me over the land, and 
lo! I did note how that a weak and strang shine wa in the air of the 
land, at a great way; as it had been that a far spread and faint 
glow made a littl glare into all the night unto my left and befor 
me. 

now I ate and drank, and made to steadi my spirit; for I did fear lest I 
should feel utter lost in all the night of the world, and to know not 
where to make ani more my search, and so to grow desper in despair. 
and thi thing you will understand. 

and afterward, I did make across that land, unto the place where it did 
seem that the dull shine wa someth bright. and I went thu through 
eighteen hours, and did make paus at each sixth hour, and ate and drank 
veri resolute; though, in verity, it did seem as that even so small a 
matter as the tablet did be like to choke me. and by thi is it plain 
to me how great an anguish wa come upon my spirit, lest that I wa all 
astray, and should have no joy to succour mine own. 

and thrice in the time that I did go, there did be a run of feet 
amid the darkness; and odd while strang and horrid cri in the 
night; so that I put a forc upon my despair, and hid me; for, indeed, I 
had no right to lose care of my life, if there did be ani chanc yet 
that I find the maid. 

and lo! in the eighteenth hour, which wa truli the thirtieth of that 
day, I found the shine in the night to be grown veri plain, and an 
utter stink of sulphur; and truli I did be awar that the land went 
upward. 

and I made upward through seven hours, and the light did grow more 
plain, and wa of a dull redness, veri sombr and heavy. and in the end 
of six more hours, I ceas to go upward, and did know of a strang low 
sound, that did be like to no other sound that ever I did hear; and wa 
like to a dull roar that did never have ceas through eternity. 

and I went forward unto the light, and the land to be now as that I went 
over an upland plain. and I did go thu through five hours, and the low 
roar did grow ever upon mine ears. and truly! even as I did shape my 
thought to take a caution for my body, I went upward again a little, 
and came out upon the edg of a mighti cliff, and the low and constant 
roar did moan upward against me with an everlast muttering. and I 
lookt downward a monstrou way, and sure there wa spread out a mighti 
sea, as it did seem, of dull fire, as that a red-hot mud did lap veri 
deep and quiet below me in all that night. 

and I lookt outward across the strang sea, and the far side wa hid 
from me; for, surely, there were dull and solemn cloud that came off 
the sea, and hid the distanc from me. and the cloud to glow a littl 
redly; and so to rise, and present to blacken into the night. and I 
lookt to the right and to the left, and it wa plain that the black 
cliff did stretch out both ways, and did go downward ever into that 
monstrou sea of slow fire. and there were great headland that went out 
into the fire, as into a sea; and the fire did lap veri quiet about 
these, and where the fire lapt about them, there did shine and spirt out 
green flame and vapour at divers times. 

and, indeed, as I did perceive, I wa come to an upward sea of fire, as 
it were the deep inward of a low and utter monstrou volcano, that wa 
flat of the top and utter big across. and, in verity, I did look 
downward into the fire of the inward earth, and a veri wondrou sight 
wa it, to stand there alon upon the cliff of that everlast sea. 
and a great heat came upward from the dull and grim fire of that gloomi 
sea, and a reek of sulphur; so that I wa like to be choked, and did go 
backward from the edg of the cliff. 

and surely, I wa come to the end of that dark land upon that side, and 
had nowher perceiv the lesser pyramid in all the night of my travel. 
and a new despair came upon me; for, indeed, it seem I wa come all 
astray in the night of the world, and did nowis have ani know 
whether I stood near to the countri of the lesser redoubt, or whether 
that I wa gone half across the world unto a strang place. 

and, then, as the despair troubl my spirit and dull the beat of 
my heart, a sudden thought did light up a fresh hope within me; for, 
indeed, as you do know, I wa come upward of a great height, and did 
sure have a huge view over all that land; and mayhap the lesser 
pyramid did lie somewher in a valley, if, in verity, it did be 
anywher at all in that country. and I turn me from the cliffs, and 
lookt backward over all the night of the land; but there wa nowher in 
all that countri the shine of the light of the lesser pyramid. 

and lo! of a sudden I did know that there wa someth in the night. 
and I stared, with a veri keen and anxiou look. and behold, there wa 
the black shape of a great pyramid afar off in the night, that did show 
against the shine of the distant light; for it did stand between me 
and the far-off fires. but until I wa come to that place, whenc I did 
look, I had not stood to have it plain against the shine upon the 
other side of that land. 

and how I did feel in that moment, I have no word to set out unto you. 
but sure wa my heart graciou with thankfulness, and I readi to leap 
with joy and hope, and all my bodi thrill with an excit that 
would not have me to be silent; so that, suddenly, I began to shout 
foolishli across the night. but I came soon to wisdom and silence, as 
you shall think. 




X 

the maid OF the olden day 


now, as you shall perceive, all mine utter despair wa turn in a 
moment into an huge glad and a great hope; so that it did seem to me 
that I should be with my dear one in but a littl while. yet wa thi an 
over-hop and expectation, and wa not like to have a swift satisfying; 
for, truly, I wa made awar of naught, save that I did perceiv the 
shape of a great pyramid, go upward into the night. 

and I knew that the pyramid did sure stand upon an hill in the midst 
of that dark country, for onli so might it show so great and high. and I 
set me to run swift downward into the land, so that I should make a 
strong go unto the pyramid. 

and I ran for a few littl minutes, and lo! I fell headlong, and did 
truli feel as that I had brake my neck with the hard and pain of my 
fall. and I had no power to go forward ani more for a great while; but 
did just be there where I did fall, and veri helpless and moan a 
little; so that ani creatur had been abl to slay me, if that it had 
come upon me in that time. 

yet, presently, I wa abl to sit upon the earth, and did hold my neck 
with my hands, and afterward the pain went away; so that I gat onc more 
to my feet. but now I went forward veri wisely, and had, moreover, an 
anxious in my heart; for, indeed, how did it be that the pyramid wa 
so utter dark, if that it did be the lesser refuge, in truth. and 
immedi there did rise in me a fear that it should be some hous of 
evil in the dark of that land, or some wick forc work a pretenc 
and a bewilder upon my sight. yet, truly, the thing wa plain now 
against the far-off fire of the land; and I did have littl thought but 
that it should be, in verity, the lesser refuge. 

now in the first moment that I did perceiv the dark pyramid, I had been 
without wit, save to run veri quick and blind unto the place; for you to 
rememb how long I had made so great a search. and afterward, I had 
been mind to call unto naani with my brain-elements, send the 
master-word, and my speech after to tell how that I wa come unto her. 
but now I did heed to have caution, and to discov what thi dark 
should truli mean. 

and so did I go downward again into the night of that land, at the first 
with a carefulness; but present with a fierc eager and expect 
of the heart, the which had been dull a littl time with the horrid 
shake and pain of my fall. 

now I had climb unto the upper plain of the great volcano in, maybe, 
thirteen hours; but I went downward of that great hill in ten, and had 
made a greater speed, but that I wa sore shaken and unsure, by reason 
of my fall. 

and in the end of the tenth hour, I perceiv that I wa come again to 
the great plain of the land; and I had no more ani proper sight of the 
refuge, becaus that it wa upward afar in the dark of the night. 
yet wa I abl now to see that there went a bulk between me and the far 
shinings, and did know that thi great thing wa sure the hill on 
which the pyramid did stand. 

and I went four hour across the land, and did pass in thi place and 
that, fire-hol that made a littl red-shin in the night; and 
becaus of the fire in those far part and a-near, there wa not an 
utter dark. 

and when I wa gone four hour toward the pyramid, I could no more see 
the distant shinings, for the bulk of the hill-bottom stood up between, 
and made all a black that way. and by thi thing, I did guess that I 
wa come nigh unto the hill; but yet wa a great hour more befor that I 
came to it. and in that five hours, sinc I wa come down from the great 
volcano, there had past me thrice and again, the sound of thing 
run in the night, and onc there did be a sound as of a giant 
roar afar, and a strang and horrid screaming. 

now I began to go up the hill. and, at the first, an utter excit 
took me in the heart; so that I could have shout the name of the maid 
aloud in the night, with vain hope that she should hear me and make 
an answer. but thi state went from me veri swift, as I did go upward, 
and there came a caution again about me, and a cold of fear, as that 
my spirit did wot of someth that my heart did not perceive. 

and, presently, I wa come upward almost to the top of the hill, the 
which took me nigh three hours. and surely, when I wa come that I could 
see the grim of the pyramid, go upward veri desol and silent 
into the night, lo! an utter shake fear did take me; for the sweet 
cun of my spirit did know that there abod no human in all that 
great and dark bulk; but that there did await me there, monstrou and 
horrid thing that should bring destruct upon my soul. and I went 
downward of the hill, veri quiet in the darkness; and so in the end, 
away from that place. 

and I wa four great hour befor that I wa come clear away from the 
hill, and I did feel that there wa not ani safeti for my spirit in all 
that land. and sure I went a littl blindly, in the first, and did go 
with no heed unto my way. 

and presently, I wa upon the shore of the olden sea, and had no know 
how that I wa come there; for, surely, I did think it to be a great way 
off. but now I do think that the dri bed of the sea did curv around 
unto that place, or that there did be two, or more, olden sea in that 
countri of night. 

now, presently, I sat me down, veri weak and bewildered; for it wa as 
that my heart did lie dead within me. and, in verity, you shall perceiv 
how thi thing was, for I did know by the tell of my spirit that 
there abod evil thing in the dark pyramid upon the hill; and I doubt 
not but that destruct had come upon the peopl of the lesser 
pyramid, and that evil creatur and power did now abid in that place. 
and if thi thing did be truli so, I wa come over-l to the save of 
the maid; and with thi thought I wa veri glad that some evil thing 
should come that I should fight with it and die quickly; for there wa 
naught then in all the world to make me glad to have life. 

and so shall you know the utter desol that wa in my heart; and, 
truly, I can perceiv both the wise and the unwisdom of my 
reasonings; for, indeed, I did have no _sure_ know that the dark 
pyramid did be truli the lesser refuge. but yet, in verity, my spirit 
did know with a certain sureness, and there wa no doubt concern thi 
thing, in all my being. 

and, after that I had sat there awhile, I did mind me suddenli that I 
should send the master-word through the night; for, indeed, how els 
might I ever know whether naani did yet live; though, in truth, I had 
little, save desper hope in thi matter; but yet did rememb how 
that I had seem odd time of my journey to hear the beat of the 
master-word with my spirit, out of all the dark of the world. and, in 
verity, if naani answer not to the word, but there came instead an 
evil power to destroy me, I should but ceas me of mine utter 
heart-ache. 

and I stood me upon my feet, and look outward about me into the 
black of that land. and I sent the master-word with my 
brain-elements; and immedi I call naani, thrice, send the call 
with my brain-elements. 

and lo! in a moment, as it did seem, there broke around me out of all 
the mysteri of night, low and solemn, the master-word, beat in the 
night. and immedi there did sound within my brain a far, small 
voice, veri lone and faint, as that it had come from the end of the 
world. and the voic wa the voic of naani and the voic of mirdath, 
and did call me by mine olden love-name. 

then, indeed, I did near to choke with the utter affright of joy that 
did take me in the heart, and also I wa shaken with a mighti 
excitement, and my despair wa gone, as that I had never known it. for, 
in verity, naani did live and did call unto me with her brain-elements; 
and sure I had not heard the voic of mine own for an utter age of 
grim labour and dread. 

and the voic was, as I did say, as that it came from one that did be in 
a far place of the earth. and, in verity, whilst I stood daze with a 
great joy that the maid did live, I knew within me, concern the fear 
that she wa utter far off; and what peril might come anigh to her, 
befor that I should stand to her side, to do battl for her life and 
well-b and mine own joy. 

and lo! in the same moment, and befor that I made further speech unto 
naani, I did wot that someon did be a littl way off from me, in the 
bushes, where a fire-hol did burn anigh to me; and it wa as that my 
spirit knew thi thing, and told of it unto my brain. and I made no 
answer unto the maid, across all the dark of the world; but went veri 
swift into a great bush that wa nigh to the fire-hole, upon thi side. 

and I lookt through, into the open space that did be about the 
fire-hole. and there wa a littl figur that did kneel, sobbing, upon 
the earth, besid the fire-hole; and truli it wa a slim maid, and she 
did seem as that she hark veri desperate, even whilst yet she did sob. 
and surely, mine own soul did _know_, all in one white moment of life. 
and she there, unknowing, and hark unto a cri of the spirit, that she 
did think to come through all the desol of the night--even from the 
mighti pyramid. for oft, as I did perceive, had she cri unto me in all 
that lonesom month, and known no answer; neither that I wa make a 
desper way unto her; for, indeed, her weak wa great, so that she 
had no power to throw the word strongli afar, neither to make plain her 
spiritu cri through ani mighti space of the aether. 

and lo! I drew in my breath, and set my teeth a moment, to steadi my 
lips; and I said: "mirdath," out of the bush where I did be, and use 
natur human speech. and the maid ceas from her weeping, and lookt 
thi way and that, with an utter new fear, and with a frighten hope 
that did shine with her tear in the light from the fire-hole. and I 
divid the bush befor me, and went through the bush, so that I came 
out befor her, and did be there in my grey armour; and I did paus 
then, and wa all adrift in myself; for my heart said that I should take 
thi maid into mine arm again; for that I wa come again to be with 
mirdath after an utter lost eternity. but yet wa I all paused; for 
truli she wa naani and she wa mirdath, and she did be a stranger in 
mine eyes, and veri dainti and pretti and shaken with woe and sore 
troubl and grief. 

and in that same moment of my come unto her out of the bush, she 
scream and fell back from me, and strove weakli to gain unto the 
hither bushes; for, truly, she knew not what wa come upon her in that 
first littl moment. and immedi she saw that it did be an human 
man, and no monster to slay her, and in that instant I said the 
master-word unto her, aloud, that she should have knowledg of peac and 
help. and I told my name, and said I am that one. and she knew thi 
thing, even as my lip made the sounds. and she cri out someth in 
an utter broke voice, and ran unto me, and thrust her two small hand 
into my charg and keeping, and fell thenc into a great sob and 
shaking, so that I wa all in troubl to eas her; but did keep a 
silenc and held fast her hands, for I had not on mine armour gloves. 

and she lean against me, veri weak, and seem wondrou like to a 
child. and lo! in a while she ceas to sob, and did but catch her 
breath thi time and that, but said no word. and I bethought me that she 
did suffer of hunger, for I perceiv that she had been long wander 
and alone, and wa come unto the end of hope, when that I did come. 

and the maid stood there yet silent, for she might not yet command her 
mouth to speak. and she trembl as she stood. and I open my left 
hand, and lookt at the hand within my palm, and sure it wa utter thin 
and wasted. and I made no more pause, but lift mine own and set her 
easi upon the earth, with an hump of smooth rock unto her back. and I 
stript off my cloak veri quick, and put it about her, for she wa scarc 
cover with her cloth that had been all torn among the bushes; so 
that part she shook with an utter chill, and part becaus of weakness, 
for she wa nigh to be starv unto her death, and destroy with her 
grief and lonesomeness. 

and I took from my back the scrip and the pouch, and I gat a tablet from 
the scrip, and brake it into my cup, and with the water I made a littl 
broth veri swift upon an hot rock that wa to the edg of the fire-hole. 
and I fed the broth unto the maid, for truli her hand did shake so that 
she had spilt it all, if that I had done otherwise. 

and she drank the broth, and wa so weak that present she did fall 
again to sobbing, yet veri quiet; so that I strove not to be troubl in 
the heart; for, indeed, thi thing wa but reasonable, and not caus for 
me to have an anxiousness. but I put my hand under the cloak and took 
her hand into mine and held them strong and firm; and thi did seem to 
bring someth of peac and strength unto her; so that present the 
trembl and the weep went from her. and, indeed, the broth wa 
sure help in thi matter. 

and presently, I knew that her hand did stir a littl within mine, and 
I loos somewhat of my grip; and immediately, she graspt my hand with 
a weak and gentl grasp; but lookt not yet at me; onli did stay veri 
quiet, as that she did gather her strength within her. and, indeed, I 
wa content; save that an anxious of the heart did stir me thi 
time and that, lest some monster should come upon us. and becaus of 
thi trouble, I did hark about me, now and oft, and with a new and 
strang fear of danger, becaus that now mine own wa given unto 
my charge; and sure my heart would break, if that there came ani hurt 
unto her. 

now, of a sudden, the maid did make as that she would rise, and I loos 
free from her, to give help. and she gat me by the hand, and slipt 
sudden to her knees, and did kiss my hand, and did begin again to weep. 
and sure I wa so utter abash that I stood veri stupid and let her 
do thi thing. but in a moment I drew free from her; for thi thing 
might not be. and I gat me to my knee likewis befor her, and took her 
hands, and kist them once, newli humbled, as it were; and thu should 
she know all that wa in my heart, and of mine understanding. and she 
did but sob the more; for she wa so weak, and utter move unto me, 
becaus that I had come to her through the night of the world. and thi 
thing I knew, though no speech had yet past between us. and I gave up 
her hands, lest she need them for her tears; but she left them to lie in 
my palms, as she did kneel there; and she bow her head a littl over 
her weeping; but did show that she wa mine, in verity, unto the veri 
essenc of her dear spirit. 

and I took her into mine arms, veri gentli and without caress; but 
present I stroke her hair, and call her naani and mirdath, and said 
mani thing unto her, that now I scarc do wot of, but she did know them 
in the after time. and she wa veri quiet in mine arms, and seem 
wondrou content; but yet did sob onward for a great time. and oft did I 
coax her and say vagu thing of comfort, as I have told. but truli she 
did ask no more comfort at that time than that she be shelter where 
she did be. and truli she had been lonesom and in terror and in grief 
and dread, a great and horrid time. 

now, presently, she wa grown quiet; and I made to put her comfort 
in the cloak against the rock, that I should have freedom to make her 
more of the broth. but yet she did nestl unto me, with a littl sweet 
wistfulness, that made warm my heart in a most wondrou fashion; for 
sure she wa mine own. and she to begin to say odd word to me. and so 
to have gentl obedience, and to rest quiet against the rock, the while 
that I did make the broth. yet ever her gaze did follow me, as I knew; 
for I must look oft her way. 

and I took the broth to her, and she drank it, use her own two hands; 
and I sat by, and eat three of the tablet and drank some of the water, 
for truli it wa a foolish great time sinc last I had eat. 

now, in a while, the broth did make bright the eye of the maid, and she 
did begin to talk; and at while had pauses, becaus that she lack of 
strength, and there wa more to be told than an human may have the 
heart-strength and cun to make plain. and twice she did come again 
to sobbing; for, truly, her father wa dead and the peopl of the 
lesser redoubt all slain and dispers through the night of that land. 

and I learn that an evil forc had made action upon the peopl within 
the lesser redoubt; so that some, be utter weak by reason of the 
fail of the earth-current, had open the great door, and gone forth 
into the night. and immedi there had come into the lesser pyramid, 
great and horrid monsters, and had made a great and brutish chase, and 
had slain many; but some had escap forth into the night. 

and with these had come naani, after that her father, the master 
monstruwacan, had been slain by a shaggi man, veri brutal and monstrous. 
and there had been three maid with naani, when that she made escap 
into the night; but there had come certain creatur upon them, as they 
did sleep among the bushes, and had stolen two, and the other maid had 
run off, as did naani, and they had neither met the other ani more. 

and thi dread happen unto the peopl of the lesser redoubt, had 
been a great while gone, as it to seem to her; but she had no mean to 
tell me how long thi time should be; for, in verity, how should she 
make a count. yet had it been a dread long while unto her; and I found 
presently, that she had been lost through all that time that I did make 
my journey unto her; for, indeed, thi thing I discov by ask 
concern my call unto her. and she had heard none that did come to 
her, in ani time sinc she had escap out of the lost refug into thi 
dread land. 

yet, in verity, oft had she callen unto me, until that her heart did 
grow sick with the desol of her lonesom and her utter 
forsakeness. and her call had told unto the evil thing of the land 
that she did be in thi part and that; for there had come thing and 
beast in search for her; but have the gift of the hearing, she had 
known of their approach, most whiles, and had come free from them; yet 
oft-tim with piteou and fear run and hide among the rock 
and the bushes, so that she had grown afterward to make no call unto 
me, save odd whiles, lest she bring the monster upon her. and, indeed, 
as you do know, naught had come plain unto me, for she wa so utter weak 
that she had no power of her brain-el to send the word afar or the 
tell of her spirit. 

and becaus that she wa so sore chased, she had come nigh to be 
naked, even as I found her; for the bush and the rock had torn her 
garment from her, and she had naught with which to make ani proper 
mend of them. and for food she had eat the moss upon the rocks, and 
odd strang berri and growths, and had drunk of the water of the hot 
springs; and oft had she been made utter sick, becaus of the sulphur, 
or somewhat, of the water and, maybe, the poison of odd plants. yet, as 
I did think, it wa like that the first did save her life from the 
second; but in thi thing I do make onli a guessing. 

and in all that dread time, sinc that she had come to be quit 
alone, she had heard a score drear things; for there had been onc the 
slay of a young maid nigh unto her, by some brute out in the dark 
of the land; and thrice and more had she heard the feet of peopl 
run thi way and that, and the tread of giant pursuing. and by thi 
tell I did understand those thing which mine ear had told to me as 
I did go across that land, and sure a new piti and sorrow and horror 
did come upward within me. and the maid told me how that she came onc 
upon certain of the peopl of the lesser redoubt, as they did hide 
among the bushes; but they ran, with no heed to her call that she 
did be human, even as they; and by thi is it plain the sore and 
dread panic that wa upon the heart of such. 

and the bitter chill of the land had made her to strive alway to be nigh 
unto the fire-hol that were veri plentiful; but even as thi did be 
need unto her, so wa it a thing that drew the monstrou brute of 
that land, even as I had found in the night land, and in the upward 
gorge. and becaus of this, she wa oft made to stay afar off in the 
utter cold of the night. 

yet, in truth, odd while she did be so desperate, that she would make 
the venture, and so mayhap have a time of warmth; and becaus of this, 
she had been nigh slain in her sleep, twice and thrice. moreover, there 
were snake about the fires, though not over-plenti in all parts, and 
there did be spider-crab and monstrou scorpions. 

and, indeed, even as she had lain by the fire-hole, veri weak and 
seem near unto her death, even thi time when my call had come unto 
her to stir her unto life and bitter knowledg of despair, even then wa 
she all surround by creatur that were like to crabs, that did squat 
all about her, and did but wait for her to die; so that she had been 
fear to sleep, lest they destroy her in her slumber. 

and by thi thing, she had known that her death wa sure nigh; and lo! 
out of all the night of the world had come the beat of the master-word, 
strong and powerful, beat as a low and spiritu thunder out of all 
the dark of the night. yet had she thought of me, onli as speak from 
the far-off mighti pyramid; so that the cri had brought naught of hope 
unto her, but onli a newer and more known despair. and, behold, in a 
littl minute, there had come her name, spoken sure with the tongue; 
and a name that wa differ from the name that my spirit had said 
after the beat of the word. and immediately, I had come out of the bush, 
and she had fallen back in a sudden great fear that a monster wa stolen 
upon her; and then did see a young man in grey armour, and did know in 
one instant that I wa that olden one of her memori dreams, and the one 
that had spoken unto her in the spirit across half of the dead world, as 
it did seem. and now wa I come through all that unknown desol and 
affright, to succour her. and she wa immedi safe; but yet all 
broken becaus of her weak and her utter joy and her sweet honour 
for me. 

and thi is the chief of that which she did tell unto me; and the way 
that she had seen and did regard the marvel of thi our come together. 
but, surely, no man wa made ever to be worthi of the way that she did 
look upon me, or of the word that she did say unto me in her weak 
and happiness. now, with the maid have speech concern the 
spider-crabs, I lookt present well around, and surely, in a minute, I 
saw that they were not gone away; but did be a circl of silent and 
steadfast watch and impud and horror all about us. and sure 
thi thing put an anger and disgust upon me; so that I gat to my feet, 
and went unto the border of the light, and I spurn thi littl monster 
and that, and did truli kick mayb a dozen, befor that they were 
content to be gone. and by thi thing shall you know of their calm and 
foolish assurance; but yet were they seemingli without courage; for they 
made not to attack me. yet a true crab of thi day been wish to pinch 
me, had I put my toe forth unto it. 

now, I went back to the maid, and she did laugh with a little, weak 
gleefulness; so that I perceiv that she wa like to be a veri joyou 
maiden, if but I did have her in health. and I made her anoth cup of 
the broth, and she drank it veri easy. and afterward, I made a veri 
stern and play order that she must sleep, and, indeed, she to need it 
sore, for she wa gone again from her excitement, and her weak upon 
her; yet veri happi and content and without fear. 

and I made a smooth place for her, and put the pouch and the scrip to be 
for a pillow, and I did lay her there veri quiet and sweet in the cloak, 
and cover her feet; but, indeed, I saw first that they did be sore cut 
and without ani gear to them; so that I perceiv that mine own had worn 
out her foot-gear utter in her lonesom journeyings, and in run from 
brute that did come to find her. and so I to know more in the heart, 
somewhat of the true dread and fear that had companion mine 
own. and I wa mind then that I would wash and bind up her feet; but 
yet wa she so utter worn, that I did prefer that she sleep so soon as 
she might, and afterward, when she wa come wake again, then should I 
take a proper heed of her feet. and truly, they were veri small and 
shapely. 

and presently, she slept; and, surely, I doubt whether she had slumber 
so peac and proper for a great month; for she never to have known 
when ani evil thing should come upon her in her sleep. and thi to be a 
veri dread feeling, as you do know well; for you do know how I had 
been in thi same matter. 

now, while naani did sleep, I stript off mine armour, and took off mine 
under-suit, which wa name the armour-suit, and a veri warm and proper 
garment, and made thick that it should eas the chafe of the armour. and 
afterward, I put on the armour again; but the suit I folded, and laid 
besid the maid; for, truly, she wa nigh unclothed, by reason of the 
bush and the rocks, that had rent her garment all-wise. 

and I stood watch for the maid, the while that she did slumber; and 
sure she went ten long hours. and I walk upon thi side of the 
fire-hol and now upon that, and did oft cease, that I might hearken 
both with mine ear and with my spirit; for, truly, I wa all waken to 
a new care and delight, and did have a fresh and doubl fear of ani 
horrid creatur or forc of evil. and thi shall be veri plain to you. 

and in the end of ten long hours, the maid wakened, and I ran to her all 
joy that she wa come again to knowledg and to be that I could talk 
with her. 

and she sat upward and look at me, and there wa new light and 
movement in her, so that I knew her strength wa come back into her. and 
for a littl minute, she said naught unto me, the while that I did ask 
how she did be; and she lookt at me veri keen, so that I wonder some 
wise in a daze, what wa in her mind. 

and she askt me, of a sudden, how long it did be sinc that I had slept. 
and have not thought to put away her asking, becaus that the question 
wa over sudden, I said four-and-eighti hours, which should be three 
day and the half of a day of four hour and twenty; and thi thing I 
knew, becaus that I kept alway a veri care count of the hours, 
lest that I get all adrift, and know not how long I wa taken to come to 
thi place and that. 

and, truly, even as I told thi thing to the maid, I wa grown veri 
quaint in the head; for, indeed, I wa gone a wondrou while without 
slumber, and had done much and bitter work in that time; and befor then 
had been much lack of rest, as you do know. 

and, sudden the maid cri out something, and tost the cloak from her, 
and had me into her arms, and did heed not to have ani foolish shame of 
her nakedness. and, in verity, I knew not how I wa gone so strange; but 
do see now that I wa nigh to swoon for lack of slumber and rest. 

and she kept me veri steadi for a little, and afterward help me to be 
laid upon the ground; and she put the scrip and the pouch under my head; 
and so I did lie veri calm and restful, and did be the more so, becaus 
that I wa grown so tire in the heart, the which did make my head to be 
veri husht, as that all the world wa grown veri quiet in a moment. 

and the maid did mind then that she did lack to be properli covered, and 
she gat the cloak, and put it about her, and did afterward sit a littl 
besid me, and did rub my hands. and presently, I wa someth more to 
myself, and she did grow more happi of her mind, and made to give me 
someth for my stomach; for, indeed, I wa grown those late hour to 
be foolish and to have no wise to proper eating. 

and she did lift my head, the while that she did take the scrip from 
under, and kept me veri sweetli upon her knee, and so until she had gat 
free a pack of the tablets, and the flask and the cup; for I had put all 
matter back into the scrip befor naani had gone unto sleep, and 
becaus of this, I had not been abl to eat or drink aught, save by 
waken her, as you perceive; for, inde I had put the scrip and the 
pouch under her head for a pillow, as I have told. 

and she would not bide that I should do aught; but onli did ask 
concern the make of the water, and wa wondrou amaz to see how 
the powder did fizz up and becom water; and indeed, she had too much 
into the cup, for, truly, it rose up and ran to the ground. and when she 
had done thus, and ceas to marvel, she put three of the tablet into 
the water, and made me a broth, even as I had made a broth for her; but, 
indeed, I wa in no need, and had done veri well to eat the tablet and 
drink the water. yet, truly, I wa not wish to lack the love of her 
way, as you may think. 

now while I did drink the broth, I did be veri rest upon the earth, 
and mine head against mine own maid; and I did mind me now that I tell 
her concern the armour-suit that I did mean for her wear. 

yet I said not that I had stript it from me, for then she had been like 
to say nay, and to troubl that I wa like to come to a chill, as is the 
way of a woman. but, indeed, I might so well have told her, for truly, 
she did know on the moment, and set to a littl unto weeping; yet veri 
gentl and sweet, and did kiss me as I lay there, and say such thing as 
should make a young man the better to have heard, if but that hi own 
dear love doth say the same. 

and she would nowis wear the garment; but yet in the end I prevail by 
gentl reason and becaus that I wa her master, as I wa born to 
be; and moreover, her own sweet sens did show that I spoke for wisdom; 
for how should she come through all the bitter way before, if that she 
had not a strong and close-mad garment; and as you do mind, her 
cover did be in utter rags, as I have told; yet veri sweet and 
clean, as I had known; so that I ween she had stript oft in the lonesom 
night, and washt her garment in thi or that hot spring of the sulphur 
water and other matters. 

and, in verity, alway she wa much given to washings, as I did soon 
perceive. 

now, presently, I did be veri well again; but with a sore slumber that 
did press upon my head. yet, ere I should sleep, I did mean that I bath 
her feet and bind them with ointment and with my pocket-cloth; and truli 
her feet were veri small and pretty. 

and I sat me up, talk my head from her knee; and told her of mine 
intent. but, in verity, she did but throw her arm about my neck and 
give me one love kiss, and laught so hearti that I did think to do 
thi thing when inde she wa the better abl to mind it, and I the 
better suit to have me to my rest. and, surely, thi wa veri true, 
and I made no ado, save to give her the ointment; but lay back, and did 
be quiet. 

now I did be upon my right side, and she went to my back, and took the 
cloak from about her, and spread it upon me, and afterward stoopt over 
veri dainty, and kist me, and bade me to go veri swift to my sleep, for 
that she did mean to make her toilet and to get into mine armour-suit. 

and I made no foolish in thi matter; yet told her to eas the cloak 
a littl about me, so that I should have room to take the disko from my 
hip; and thi thing I did, and took the disko to my breast, as wa my 
habit; and sure I saw that her eye did look at me with a littl 
shining, becaus that I had so strang and fierc a bed-mate. 

and I made her to promis that she keep a veri keen harking, the which 
wa like that she should do, and to call me on the instant that she did 
perceiv ani uneas in the night. and after that, I shut mine eyes, that 
I should not shame her, and put out mine arms, and kist her onc and 
turn from her unto my slumber; and she away to my back that she might 
be modest to her needs. 

and surely, I wa asleep in but a littl moment, and with a great love 
and delight in my heart and in all my being. 

and, truly, I wake not for twelv great hours. and when that time wa 
gone, lo! I came awake, and sure the maid did sit besid me, so bonny, 
and so winsom and pretti that mine arm went unto her in a moment, and 
she into them, and gave me a love and tender kiss; and afterward slipt 
away from me, veri sensibl and loving; and did stand up and turn about 
to be lookt at. for she did wear the armour-suit, and sure it wa 
loos upon her; but yet veri pleasing, be close-knit. and I to my 
seat, from lying, that I might see the maid the better. and, in verity, 
I must kiss her again; for she did be with her hair all about her, that 
she look pretti unto me; and her littl feet did be bare, and so that 
they made my heart new tender to look upon them; for truli she wa utter 
lost of foot-gear. and I to my knee to her; and she, not to deni me, did 
come to be kist again. 

now when I found how great a time I had slept, I did scold mine own; but 
yet, as she did say, I must have long slumber if that I go so long 
wakeful, els should I lose my strength. and I askt how oft she had eat, 
and she told me but the once, and that six hour off. 

and on thi I did scold again; but sure she put a veri pretti finger 
sudden upon my lips, so that I might do naught but laugh, and kiss that 
same finger. 

and, after that, we did eat and drink, and made plans. and onc I did 
comfort the maid; for, indeed, her sorrow did rise in her, becaus that 
her father wa come unto hi death, and the peopl of the lesser 
redoubt all destroyed, and adrift in the night amid the monster of that 
land. 

and, in verity, I wa set that we go quickli out of that place, ere 
there came an horrid destruct upon us; and, surely, there should 
scarc be ani human, beside, in all that land; for there must have come 
death upon the chief of those that did make escape. 

and after we had eat and drunk, I did count the pack of the tablets, 
and wa thank in all my be that I had been care and deni my 
belly; for I did perceiv that there were left enough for our needs, if 
that we made a good speed, and did not fear to be empty. and of the 
water-powder, as it might be named, there were left two full flasks, and 
somewhat of that one that I had drunk from, all my journeying. and by 
thi thing you shall perceiv that we did not be like to die for the 
need of such matters. 

and here, as it doth occur unto me, I do ponder how it did be that we 
had no thought to slay ani small creatur for our food; but, mayhap, we 
had no knowledg thi way; for surely, they did not thi thing to my 
know in the mighti pyramid. but yet, as I have said befor this, I 
have not all knowledg of the do of the peoples. but, in verity, I 
never saw joint meat in all the time of that far life that I do wot of. 
yet, had we but slain somewhat for our hunger in that great wandering, 
we had been less empti in the belly. 

now, befor that we should do aught beside, we must contriv that naani 
have some gear for her feet; and to thi intent, I did make a search 
into the pouch, and sure I found that there did be a chang pair of 
inner shoes, that were made to go within mine own shoe of the grey 
metal. 

and at thi I wa wondrou glad, and did make the maid to sit upon a 
littl rock, while that I made a fit of the shoes. and, surely, they 
did be utter big and clumsi upon her littl feet; so that I wa in 
surpris to know how great is a man, besid a maid. but in the end I had 
a cun thought, for I cut off all the side of a strap, throughout the 
length of the strap, veri thin and careful, and so had a lace to tie the 
boot around the tops, which were soft and easi for such a purpose. and 
after that, I stood away to look at the maid, and neither she nor I were 
truli pleased; for, indeed, she wa too pretti to be so hid and muffled. 
yet were we glad otherwise; for now she might go without hurt to her 
feet. 

and afterward, we packt our gear, and she did make a bundl of her torn 
garments; for, truly, they might be proper somewis to our need. and so 
we to begin the way out of that desol land. 

and we went forward togeth across the land, and the journey wa no 
more a weariness, but of a close and sweet joy; yet did I have a new 
anxiousness, as you do perceive, lest that ani monster come to harm mine 
own. 

and we went twelv great hour in the bed of the olden sea, and did eat 
twice in that time. and sure the maid did grow utter weak and weary; 
for she wa not come proper unto her strength; yet did she make no odd 
say to tell me of thi thing. but indeed, I did know; and I stopt in 
the thirteenth hour, and took her into mine arms, even as I should carri 
a babe; and I went forward with her, and did hush her protest with a 
kiss, and afterward she did but nestl unto me and shelter against my 
breast. 

and I bade the maid to sleep; but, indeed, she had no power to thi end, 
for her bodi did ach veri sore; but yet did she strive to give me an 
obedi in thi thing. and in the eighteenth hour, when that I stopt 
to have food and drink, sure she did be awake, yet had she been utter 
silent; and I made to scold her; but she gat from mine arms, and did go 
upward upon her toes, and put her finger against my lip veri naughtily. 
and afterward she did be impud unto me, and did deni me to kiss her. 
but she went unto my back, and did open the scrip, and gat me to my 
food, even as a quiet and proper wife should go. As she did be so sedat 
that I knew she had mischief her heart of harmless kind. 

but afterward thi did pass sudden into weeping; for she had a quick and 
sore memori of her father and of the destruction; and I took the maid 
into mine arms, and did let her be there veri gentle, and made not to 
kiss or to comfort her; but yet to give comfort. 

and present she ceas from weeping, and did slip her hand into mine, 
and I to keep it within, veri soft and quiet; and afterward, she began 
to eat her tablets, yet alway she did be veri husht; so that I did be 
quiet also, and feel as that my love did be round her as a shield. and I 
knew that she had knowledg of thi thing in her heart. 

and oft I hark into the night of the land; but there wa nowher ani 
sound, or disturb of the aether, to troubl me. and the maid in mine 
arm did know when that I harked; for in verity, she had the 
night-hear and the understand spirit that doth be need to such. 
and odd while did I look down to her through the gloom that did be 
about us; and present I did perceiv that she lookt up to me, out of 
mine arms. 

and I kist her. 

now, in all that day, we had come nowher upon ani fire-hol in the bed 
of the olden sea; and truli I did ach to be nigh unto the warmth of 
such; for I did feel the cold of the land, becaus that I wa weary, and 
becaus that I had not the thick of the armour-suit below mine 
armour to warm me. 

and the cloak did be about the maid; for I had fear that she should 
grow cold as I carri her. yet, now she did know subtli that I wa come 
to feel the utter chill of the land; and she gat from mine arms, and put 
the cloak about me, and afterward came again into mine arms. and I let 
the cloak bide there, and drew it forward to be around her, also. yet, 
truly, I wa joy that I did be cold, as you shall perceive. for it 
wa sweet to the heart to bear somewhat of that dread chill for mine 
own; and she half troubl and likewis with understand of my heart, 
becaus that I wa less cloth than I had been. 

now, in a littl while, the maid did pack the scrip; and so we did make 
readi again to go forward, for I wa grown anxious, as you may suppose, 
that we should come to some fire-hole, that we have a place for sleep 
that had warmth and light; for, truly, the cold of the land did be drear 
and horrid. 

and I stoopt to take the maid into mine arms, that I should carri her; 
but she did say nay, that she did be well rested. and I not to gainsay 
her, for she did mean the thing, as I perceived, and I had no desir to 
forc my way upon her, save when I saw truli that she did seem to go 
unwisely. and, indeed, when such did be the case I did strive with her, 
onli with a nice reasonableness, as you shall know. 

and the maid walkt by my side, and wondrou silent; but yet veri nigh to 
me, so that I knew she did be veri full of love to me, and of that 
quaint and sweet humbl that love doth breed odd while in a woman 
when she doth be with her man, if but that man be also her master. and 
presently, I perceiv that the cloak did be over mine own shoulders, 
and I took it and would have put it about the maid; but truli she did 
not allow this; and when I did be stern with her, that she obey me in 
thi matter, she did stand upon her toes, that she might kiss me, and 
pull my head down, and sure she kist me and coax me that I wear 
the cloak, els should I give pain to her, in that I did sure be cold 
becaus she did wear the armour-suit. 

yet, I would not hark to thi thing; so that the maid did be truli in 
trouble. and first she made a threaten that she wear but her olden 
garment that did be onli rags, if that I did persist. but thi I saw to 
be foolish and scarce-meant, and did as much need to smile at her as 
that I did think to scold her; but I did be firm that she wear the 
cloak. 

and lo! she went sudden into crying; and thi had been beyond my 
thoughts. and truly, it set me all adrift; for I perceiv that she did 
be greatli distrest concern thi matter, when I had conceiv that 
she did but mean thi thing for tenderness' sake. but mine heart help 
me to understand, and I saw how she did be truli shamed, in her sweet 
womanhood, if that I help her not in thi matter; for she did feel 
that she wa made to do hurt unto that one that wa her love. and thi 
thing I do pray you to think upon, that you understand; for, indeed, 
until that I wa made to think, I had not seen it thiswise, for her. 

and in the end, I came to agreement with the maid, that we wear the 
garment hour by hour, in turn; and she to wear it the first hour and I 
to wear it the second hour; and so to go forward. 

and truly, thi did be an happi arranging; but yet she stampt her foot a 
little, as I put the cloak about her. and thrice in the hour did she ask 
me concern the time that wa gone; and surely, when the hour wa but 
up, she had the cloak off in a moment, and went to my back and cast it 
upon my shoulders, and after to my front, and made it fast upon my 
breast; and so eager and naughti wa she to this, that I took her by the 
shoulders, and shook her, somewhat, even as she had made to stamp at me; 
yet mayhap with more of laughter. and she to take no heed at all; but 
to button the cloak and be veri sedate. yet, in verity, I caught her up 
into mine arms, and kiss her, for a sweet and naughti maid; and she 
veri willing, now that she had gotten someth of her way. 

but yet in an hour, I did have the cloak about her, again; and so did 
straiten matters, as you shall conceive. 

now, when we had gone forward, through five great hours, I perceiv 
that the maid did be utter worn, but yet did make presenc that she wa 
unwearied. and becaus I saw how she did be, I did heed and be anxiou 
onli that we come to some rock, to be for our safe refuge, and mayhap 
there to find an hole or cave, that should be somewhat to keep our heat 
about us; for there wa nowher ani fire-hol anigh in all those hours. 

and presently, we came to a part where there did be rocks, and we went 
to and fro in the gloom, and came in the end to a place where the rock 
did go upward into the night, as that it had been a small and ancient 
cliff. 

and sure in a while I found a hole that did go inward of the rock; 
and the hole did be abov mine head; yet when I wa come to it, and had 
made the disko to spin therein, that I should have light to see whether 
there did be ani creatur or creep thing in the hole, I wa well 
pleased; for truli it did be sweet and dry. 

now the maid had cri out a littl to see the sudden shine that did 
come from within the hole, when I made the disko to spin, and becaus 
of the low roar of the weapon. but I answer her that there did be 
naught to have fear concerning; and so wa she peac again, but yet a 
littl trembl when that I came down to her; for, indeed, the disko 
did make alway a strang sound and a quaint and drear shining, as 
you do know; and she did be fear for me that some evil forc had come 
upon me out of the cave; for she had neither knowledg nor conceiv 
that ever there did be so wondrou a weapon in all the world. 

and I gave the maid an help upward to the littl cave, and came after, 
myself; and so we did be in a veri nice and cosi place, that did not be 
easili gotten at by ani monstrou thing. and sure I wa utter glad for 
such a place, so that both should have safeti that we might sleep in the 
same hours. 

and, in truth, thi wa a need plan; for if one had stay wake to 
keep a watch for the other, then had our sleep taken us doubl hours; 
and thi thing might not be, els should our food be done, and we to be 
twice so long as need be, ere ever we did come unto the refug of the 
mighti pyramid; and I utter weari and anxiou of the heart and spirit 
that I bring mine own soon unto the safeti and glori of my mighti home, 
and so free from the destruct that did hang abov our two soul for 
ever in that land, and the peril that did be everywhere, save in the 
last redoubt. 

now when we were come into the hole of the rock, the maid did slip the 
scrip and the pouch from my shoulders; and she gat out the tablets, and 
made some of the water, and did be veri swift and natty, and all to the 
despit of the gloom that did be utter in that littl cave. 

and we eat each of us two of the tablet and drank some of the water; 
and I made jest with the maid how that the tablet did be proper for 
strength, yet veri lack to fill the belly; though, indeed, I name it 
otherwise. 

and she to agree, and did pat mine arm, and did tell me how that she 
should cook me a monstrou tasti and great meal when that we were come 
unto the mighti pyramid. and immedi afterward, she did make to 
laugh upon me, and to name me impud for so much thought unto my 
feeding; and afterward again to silence, and to pat my hand. 

now, when that we had made an end of eat and drinking, I wa veri 
readi for sleep; for, truly, it wa six and twenti great hour sinc 
that I did last slumber; but for the maid it did be eight and thirti 
great hours; for, as you do mind, she had made no sleep when that she 
did lie in mine arm for six hour of our journeying. 

and I made how we should sleep; and put the cloak about the maid; but 
sure she did refuse, veri piteous, and seem to have also somewhat 
of doubt and puzzlement. but in thi thing I did be veri stern and 
intending; for she did not be over-warm clad, as you do know, and 
moreover, she wa but a littl one, while I did be wondrou hardy. 

and, in verity, I made her to obey, and gave her the scrip and the pouch 
for her pillow; and she, as it did seem to me, to sob to herself a 
littl in the gloom of the night. but yet did I stay my heart a littl 
stern to mine intent. and I wrapt the cloak about her, and set the scrip 
and the pouch veri nice beneath her head; and afterward, I knelt over to 
kiss her, befor that I came unto mine own slumber. yet did she turn her 
mouth from me, and did put her hand abov her face to ward me off, the 
which did griev me; for truly, I did heed alway that I should never 
thrust my love upon her in her lonesomeness; but onli let it be to her 
for a shield and for all comfort unto her heart. 

and I turn my back, and went a pace away and lay down; for truli there 
did be no way els but to be near unto the maid, for it wa but a littl 
cave. and I lay veri husht, becaus that I wa so sore in the heart. 
yet, truly, I could not come unto my slumber, for I wa so disturb in 
my love; and I stay veri quiet mayb for a great hour; and did fight 
that I shake not mine armour to jingl with the utter cold that did 
make me to tremble. but the maid did sleep veri sweet and calm, as I 
perceiv by her breathings. 

yet, in verity, the maid did be so much awak as I, and with some sweet 
and naughti intent of the heart, as my spirit did sudden perceive. and I 
lay veri husht, and did wait to discov what thi thing might be. 

and I made my breath to seem as the breath of one that did sleep, 
even as that naughti maid did make pretending. and surely, in a while I 
did know that she move veri quiet, and came unto me; and I made yet 
that I slept veri sound and strong; though the cold did nigh to conquer 
all my quietness. 

and in a moment I perceiv the intent of the maid; for I did feel the 
cloak spread over me with a wondrou gentleness; and afterward there did 
be a soft kiss put upon my hand; and the maid back then to her pillow; 
yet, as I did hear, she brought it someth more nigh to me; as that 
she did crave to be near unto me that wa her own love. 

and I sat up, and I put forth my hand suddenli and took the maid into 
mine arms; and she to nestl unto me so that I did be wordless, becaus 
that I love her so utter. 

and presently, I felt her to stir in mine arms; and I loost her 
somewhat; for I did be alway veri mind that I impos not upon her 
dear liberti of maidenhood. yet she made not to go from me, but onli to 
gather the cloak about her; so that we did both be in the cloak. and she 
askt whi thi might not be; for sure it did be mad that one should 
starv and the other be veri nice in warmth. and, indeed, thi did be 
but wisdom; yet it might not come the first from me. 

and I said to mine own that thi thing should be; and she reach out, 
and brought the scrip and the pouch, and place them for a pillow for my 
head, and told me that I should put my head thereon. and I askt her how 
thi did be right; for she did need a pillow the more than I. but she 
bid me to bide, and to have obedi in my turn. and when I wa so, she 
spread the cloak over me, and afterward crept under, and did lie down 
besid me, and did seem as that she wa asleep in one moment. 

yet, though she did be so sedat and matter-of-the-fact, as we do say, 
while that she wa wakeful, she did yet nestl unto me veri sweet and 
childlik in her sleep. and sure I did want to kiss her; but yet did 
refrain from my love; for, truly, I did well that I treat her veri 
gently, at such a time, as you do perceive. and, in verity, such a maid 
doth make a rever in the soul of a man. 

now, presently, I wa gone over unto sleep; and in seven hour I waked; 
and in that time had the maid slumber through eight hours; yet did I 
intend that she be not disturbed, until that we were areadi to the 
journey. and I slipt from under the cloak, and put it round her, veri 
gentle. yet it to be as she did miss me, even in her sleep; for it to 
seem to me that she put out her arm in the darkness, and she made a 
littl moan in her slumber. yet, in a moment, she did be quiet, and 
afterward I put the cloak about her again. 

and I went then to the open of the littl cave, and put forth my 
head, and lookt well about, and hark a long while; but there stir 
noth in the night thereabout; neither did my spirit wot of ani matter 
for troubl unto us. 

and presently, I gat out two of the tablets; for, as you do know, the 
maid had given me the scrip and the pouch to be my pillow, so that I had 
power to come at these matters, without awak her; but for her own 
part, as I did learn after, she had use her torn garment to be for a 
pillow; yet had made no explaining, as you do mind; and sure thi wa 
one of her naughti whimsies; and mayhap she had been so full of a 
play happiness--a doth take the heart betimes--that she had made a 
littl mysteri where there did be no mystery; and thi but to releas 
her joy, and so to say master thing unto me, out of her impudence; 
and afterward had meant that she tell me; but yet wa gone unto slumber, 
ere that she did mind her. 

yet, sinc that time, a new thought hath come unto me that she did mean 
in the first that she should come into mine arm to sleep, and therebi 
need no pillow. but afterward, it may hap that she saw with a sudden 
olden wisdom, all in one moment; and afterward did act lovingly, yet 
with understanding. and so did chang from her intent; yet with no 
improp of modesty; but onli with a nice of sense, which she 
did make no talk of; but yet did have. and surely, how oft is a man thu 
wise ordered, unknowing. 

and to ceas from these thinkings, and to go forward, I eat two of the 
tablets, and afterward made some of the water. and lo! the fizz of 
the water wake the maid; and I knew that she reach out veri sudden to 
me; but afterward knew in a moment what did make the sound, and that I 
did be up and make readi for the journeying. 

and she gat up in the darkness, and said my name, and came unto me, and 
kist my forehead in the dark; and immedi she ran her hand gentli 
downward of my left arm, and when she came to the cup, she took it from 
me, and slapt my hand, veri dainty. and afterward I knew that she took a 
sip from the cup, and then did turn that side to me, and so gave me to 
drink, and did scold me that I had not wake her to tend to my needs; 
for sure she did be mine own, to have her duti to me. 

and after that I had drank, she took the cup, and did finish it; and she 
gat two of the tablets, as I did think, and came afterward and sat upon 
the rock to my side, and did nestl somewhat against mine armour, and 
took mine arm and set it about her; and so did make to eat. 

but first she put her tablet unto my lips, in the dark, that I should 
kiss it; and sure thi wa an olden way of mirdath My beauti one; 
so that I did be all shaken of the heart. and I kist the tablet; and 
immedi she nestl unto me, and did begin to eat. 

and truli it wa as that etern had been roll backward; for I had 
discov the soul of mine olden love in thi dainti maid to my side. 
yet, in look had mirdath been of an utter differing; but, in veriti 
naani wa wondrou lovely. but, though I to be so stirred, I did be 
silent; for my heart wa veri full of memory. 

and as the maid eat, she slipt her finger between mine, curl them 
softly; and sure her finger did be veri little; and she stir mine 
olden memori again in thi thing. and sure I wa dumb befor my 
memory. 

and presently, she put up the second tablet, as I did think, that I 
should kiss it; and I kist it, as before. yet, ere she did begin again 
to eat, I did wot suddenli that she hid some intent from me. 

and I caught her hand veri quick in the dark; and her finger did close 
upon the tablet, veri guilty; so that I perceiv that I had guess 
aright. and I open her fingers; and I found that there did be but the 
half of a tablet within her hand. and sure she had taken but that one 
tablet, and had given me the one end to kiss, and afterward the other; 
so that I should suppos she did eat two proper and complet tablets. 

and I perceiv that she had done thi thing secretly, be mind that 
if she eat alway but one tablet, then should I never lack, even if that 
we did be over-long come unto the mighti pyramid. 

and I askt how oft alreadi had she eat but one, for two. and she 
confess in a veri quiet voic that thi did make the fifth time. and I 
wa so angered, that I took her hand and whipt it thrice, so hard that 
she had scream if that she had been ani coward. and she said noth 
to me, neither went away. 

and she began again to eat the half of the tablet, and did eat it from 
the other hand, as I to be aware, becaus that her left hand did be 
hurt. and she wept not, but wa veri quiet by me; and present I knew 
that she kist the whipt hand secretli in the dark. 

and afterward, I put mine arm again about her; and she did be there in 
it, veri sober and happy. and when she had made an end of the first 
tablet, I gave her the second, and she eat it veri quiet and content. 

and present I talk with her, and show her how that thi thing did 
hurt my heart, even as she had been hurt that I did be cold garmented, 
the while that she did be warm. and I show her the wicked that she 
had done, that she did play so foolish with her life and strength; and 
well might she be weak and all a-lack. 

yet, did I think a littl sweet impud came into her, as I told her 
concern her wickednesses. and I took her then into mine arms, and I 
show her how that I knew all the unselfish and wonder of her 
heart; and I kist her, and truli her lip did have a love glad 
humbl as they came unto mine; so that it wa as that I had not kist 
her truli until that moment. and I made her to promis that she never 
deceiv me in such matter again. and inde she promised; but yet with 
no readi tongue. 

and afterward, we made proper for the journey; and when we had gotten 
our gear together, I went downward of the rock, and gave the maid help 
to come down. and when we did stand at last upon the bottom of the rock, 
I askt naani how she did feel, and whether her feet did hurt. and she 
answer that she did be veri well and had no sore in her feet. 

and we went forward then, and she close unto me; and odd while with low 
speech, but more oft with silence, becaus that we did need that we hark 
alway for ani danger or horror; and also there did be so utter a silenc 
upon that part of the land, which did be the bottom of the olden sea. 
and we eat and drank at the sixth and the twelfth hours; and in the 
fifteenth hour, we came upon a great slope of the earth; and lo! it did 
be the far side of the sea. and we went upward for a long hour; and so 
came to the upward part, and did be abl onc more to look over the 
great of that land. 




XI 

the homeward way 


now, truly, it did seem veri light, after the horrid and lonesom gloom 
that did lie all-way in the bottom of the olden sea; and I saw that I 
wa come out upon a part of the land that did be sure to the right of 
that place where I made entri into the sea-bed, on mine outward going. 
and there did be a great plenti of fire-holes, so that mine heart wa 
warm to see them; yet did I mind to be wari in come unto them; for, 
as you do know, there did so oft be life of thi kind and that about 
these fires. 

and I lookt now down to the maid, and she upward to me, and did come 
more anigh to me, and truli she did be most wondrou pretti and sweet; 
yet did seem veri aweari and pale in the face; so that I made blame 
upon myself that I had overwalk her; for, in verity, I do think that I 
wa so strong and hard as that I had been made from iron; and she but a 
dear and tender maid. yet did she refus that I should so reproach 
myself; and did but stand anigh to me and look at me with eye that were 
veri beautiful. and so I put mine arm about her, and kist her; and 
afterward lookt again over the land, that I should shape out our further 
journeying. 

and from that place where I did stand, there spread out all befor me 
the blue shine that I had seen from the mouth-part of the upward 
gorge; yet did it be a great way off. and, indeed, I should tell you in 
thi place, that it wa by the glimmer of thi shine within the sky 
of the night that I had steered, as we did come across the olden 
sea-bed. and, truly, it wa but a broad thing to go toward; but yet did 
serv me, in that it told me that I went toward the far side of the 
sea-bed, and made not to go all about in blind circl in the night. 

and after that I had consid a while, I did know somewhat where the 
gorg should be, and perceiv that I should go unto my left; but not 
overmuch, for inde I saw the red-shin of the giants' hole that lay 
at a great space that way; and sure I must go so that I miss the 
place of the giant so much as I might, and in the same going, come not 
overnear unto the blue-shin that lay befor me, across all the far 
part of that country; for, in verity, I mistrust the place where that 
shine did be. 

now when I had gain somewhat of knowledg where should be found the 
mouth of the upward gorge, I put mine arm about the maid, where she did 
stand so nigh to me, and veri husht, the while that I had lookt about. and 
I point outward over the dark land unto my left, and told her that the 
gorg did be somewher that way, a great distanc off; yet utter out of my 
sight, and onli to be known that it did be somewis there by the thing 
that I did mind of, concern my way after I came into the land. 

now the maid, have stood veri quiet, had lookt all that time about 
her; and so had come to some know of the place where she did be in the 
land, for she to know the land someways, as you shall think. and she askt 
me how I did mind to go; and truli I said, so straight as we might; but yet 
so that we come neither too nigh to the shine nor to the great red 
fire-pit of the giants. 

and the maid bade me to look in the way that I did mind to go; and I 
lookt, but yet there wa noth save, as they did seem, certain 
fire-hol that had a green-shin about them. and she set out unto me 
then, how that there did go a tract of bad ga in that part of the 
land, that should be utter poison unto any; and thi had been well 
known in the lesser redoubt, by the read of their instruments. and 
where the ga did go, there wa there a green-shin about the 
fire-holes. 

and she show me how that the place of the ga went a great way unto 
the north-west, so that I learn now somewhat how the land did lie, as we 
do say in these days. and it wa in all the north-west that the great 
blue-shin did burn. and I askt naani how they name this, and she told 
me by no name, save but the shine. 

and mine own made veri earnest to warn me, regard the shine; and urg 
that we go no more that-ward than should be need to our lives--th 
which, indeed, wa no wish of mine. and her reason to be that the fix 
giant did be within the border of the shine, and all hid in the light 
thereof, save when the burn mist did roll thi way or that. and I 
took a great heed of thi thing, and did guess that these fix giant 
were somewhat even as the great watcher that were about the mighti 
pyramid, as you do know. and immedi I mind me of that utter 
monstrou face that I did see amid the bright smoke of the shine, when 
that I came first into the land; and sure thi had been one of the 
fix giants, that naani told me were forc of great and veri horrid 
evil. 

and I askt mine own how far the place of the ga went across the land; 
and she point and made further explaining. and, in verity, in the 
end, I saw not how I should come that way to the mouth of the gorge, if 
that I would keep off-ward from the shine. yet, in a moment, naani askt 
me how I did come across the land, when that I search for her. and, 
truly, as I show her, I had walk then by a sweet chance, or guiding, 
alway upon the far side of the place of the gas, and so unto the olden 
sea bed; and wa in thi way come free of the gas, and all unknow of 
it. 

and at thi telling, the maid said that we go downward again into the 
bed of the olden sea, and walk some great hour below the shore, but in 
the way that should take us unto the south-west, and so until we were 
come beyond the place of the gas. and afterward up again into the land, 
and then to have an utter caution that we escap the watch of the 
giant who did be ever about the great red fire-hole. and by thi plan 
veri speedi to the entering-part of the upward gorge. 

and, truly, thi did be veri good and sound, and such as I should have 
plan in a moment; for, indeed, I am not over-slow in such matters; 
onli the maid did be veri eager and quick; and it wa veri sweet to me 
that she should thu plan; for, in verity, I love alway the sound of 
her voice, and to hear her have speech and to plan and think, and so to 
show me the work of her inward self and her dear qualiti and human 
niceness. and to have part and lot alway with me in all thing and 
thinkings. 

and, we shape to thi plan that naani made; but at that time, as you do 
mind, it wa somewhat of seventeen hour sinc last we had slumber; and 
the maid wa sore wearied, as I did see. and I show to her how that it 
did be wise that we have our rest veri soon, and so forward again in new 
strength and ability. 

and the maid did soon agre with me; for inde she wa veri weary; and 
we made it that we should ventur unto one of the fire-hol that lay no 
great seem away, a littl upon our right, which wa the northward-way 
of that land. 

and we went toward the fire-hole; and, truly, it did be further off than 
we had thought; for it wa a good hour befor that we came anigh to it; 
and, indeed, it to prove a veri great and red-glow shine that went 
upward into the night, out of the hollow place where it did burn among 
rocks. 

and when we were come near unto it, I made a sign to the maid that she 
be utter husht; and I took the disko from mine hip, and went forward 
befor her; and afterward to my knee and hands, and beckon backward 
to mine own, that she do likewise. 

and we came thi way to the edg of the hollow-plac where the fire-hol 
did burn; and so were abl in the end to look downward. and truli it wa 
a great fire that burn in the earth in that place; yet, as I perceiv 
veri swift, there did seem nowher ani monstrou thing about the fire, 
the which set some peac upon mine heart; but yet not overmuch; for it 
wa come fresh upon me that we did well to stay afar off from the fire 
of the land, in that it wa about the fire that all live thing did 
congregate. 

and I lookt a great time, and the maid crept unto mine elbow, and lookt 
with me; and afterward we harked, veri keen, into the night; but there 
wa nowher ani troubl of the air or of the aether of the land. yet I 
spoke quiet with the maid, and show unto her how that we did well to 
stay off-ward from the fires; but, truly, she wa so utter cold and 
chill, that she did beg that we go down by the fire-hole, even should it 
be that we stay no more there than should put a warmth through the utter 
chill of our bodies. 

and, in verity, I wa so bitter cold that I wa all weak to go besid 
the fire; yet, truly, I do think that the shiver of the maid wa 
that which did forc my heart, to go against the teach of my head; 
so that in the end, we came down into the hollow, and veri swift unto 
the fire. 

now, truly, it doth seem a strang thing to be so diverse-mind as 
this, when that, as you do know, I had been so long a-search for a 
fire-pit; and mayhap you shall perceiv the better how my heart and 
brain did be contrary, when that I tell to you, now, how that I have 
belief that my spirit did even then be subtli set to warn me. and, also, 
as all do know, it doth be easi to forget thi warn and that of 
experience; by which saying, I do mean that, oft as I had come to know 
the danger that did be alway about the fire-holes, yet when I did be 
far off from them, and mine own broken and a-shiv with the chill of 
the land, the danger did seem but a small thing and afar off from my 
mind, and unreal; but the cold to be doubli real. yet, when we did come 
even unto the fire-hole, then did come again all about my heart the 
truth of those danger that had seemed, but a while gone, so little. 
and, indeed, I do hope you perceiv me in thi thing, and how that I 
strive alway to set unto you the utter truth, so that you shall go with 
me all the way, and lend me your nice understanding. 

now, when we were come down unto the fire-pit, I went thi way and that 
among the rock that did be in the bottom of the hollow, so that I 
should perceiv whether there did be ani live creatur there hid, that 
should mayhap come out, unknown, to work us harm. 

but, indeed, I discov noth of ani greatness; yet I saw three 
snakes, and there were, beside, two scorpion-creatures, as I did name 
them, that neither went backward from me, nor came against me; but did 
bide where I saw them, each in an hole of the rock. 

and becaus I had seen these things, I saw that we should not do wise to 
sleep nigh unto the fire-hole; for the creep thing did mortal like 
the heat, and should be like to come upon us in our slumber. and, 
indeed, thi did but uphold my caution, that we should be well 
actioned, if that we chose some other part to our rest. 

yet, as you shall suppose, I said naught unto the maid concern the 
creep and the poison things; for I did mean that she have rest and 
happi the while that we did stay besid the fire-hole; and 
afterward, I should tell her, and so she be the more readi to see the 
proper that we go elsewher to our sleep. but, as you to understand, 
if that she not to see wise and be still intent to the fire-hole, I 
should have her to obey; for sure she wa mine own, and I did love her 
and did mean alway to have her to safety. 

now, presently, the maid wa someth warmed, and afterward, she slipt 
the scrip from my shoulder, and so had food and drink veri swift to my 
need. 

and we sat together, and eat and drank; and the maid veri sweet and 
quiet, as she did begin to eat her second tablet; and, truly, I had 
know that she did rememb in all her bodi that I had whipt her. and, 
indeed, she did be utter mine. 

and oft as we did eat and drink, I lookt thi way and that, so that no 
creep thing should come anigh to us; and presently, when we had made 
an end of our food, the maid saw that I did look about, and she then 
veri swift to catch some of mine unease, and to stare over her shoulder. 
and, indeed, in a littl while she saw a snake go among the rocks; and 
she then to be veri eager that we find some place that should be secur 
from creep things. and we to begin then to look for such. 

but in the end, we stay in the hollow, for we found a littl cave that 
did be in an upstand rock of the hollow, and the upstand rock was, 
mayhaps, an hundr good feet off from the fire; for the hollow wa veri 
great. and the cave did be a hole that wa thrice my height up from the 
bottom rocks; and it wa dri and sweet and with no creep thing within 
it, neither did there be ani place to hide such therein. 

and when we were gotten into the hole, sure it did be veri sweet and 
cozy; for the shine of the fire-hol did shine therein; and sure we 
had felt it a veri haven, but that there wa ever the fear of the land 
upon our hearts; and upon mine the more than upon the maid; for, truly, 
mine own did seem to trust me utter; and to seem that she fear not ani 
evil monster, but to have sureti that I had power to succour her in all 
ways. and truli thi trust had been veri sweet unto my heart, if that I 
had lack somewhat of my terror for the safe home-go of mine own. 

and we slept that night as we had done before, and share the cloak over 
us; for truly, the fire-hol made no great warmth unto us; yet wa it 
less bitter in that part than in the dark of the land. 

and by that we had come unto sleep, it wa twenti good hour sinc last 
we had slumber; and truli we did be veri wearied; but yet came unto our 
rest with our spirit set anxiou to harken on danger the while that we 
did sleep. 

and we slept seven hours, and did know suddenli of some matter that had 
need to waken us; and lo! in a moment I did wake, and the maid in the 
same instant of time; and there wa a great scream and cri out in 
the night, that sure affright us both; yet did hurt our heart the 
more; for it did be the utter cri and terror of poor human in the 
night of that land. yet might I do naught; but onli wait that I learn 
more of the matter; for my duti wa unto mine own, and I had no leav of 
rash ani more. 

yet, as you do suppose, I wa all shaken to go downward of the rock, and 
afterward to climb out from the hollow, that I should give some help 
unto they that did need help; but yet might I not leav the maid. 

and immediately, there wa a great roar in one part of the night, and 
again anoth roar in anoth part of the night; and lo! in a moment 
the roar did be answered; and the roar were the sound of big 
and huski voices; so that it did seem that we hark to men so big as 
hous that did run and shout in the night. 

and the maid did begin to shake, and I put mine arm about her, and drew 
her backward into the hole so that she did be into the shadow; and she 
to trembl like one that wa broken in courage; for, truly, she had 
heard those sound oft in the night in all the long and dread month 
that she had wandered. 

and, indeed, I wa all shaken in my courage; for it did be the shout 
of giant that I heard; and you do know somewhat of the utter horror and 
terror that did be alway in the heart that did harken unto those 
monstrou voices, for you do know my tale. 

and there came in a moment, a dread scream out in the night, and 
the scream did be the scream of a young maid that doth be slain 
veri brutal. and my heart sickened, becaus of mine own; but my spirit 
did swell with a strang and utter anger, as that it should burst my 
body. and the maid to my side broke into an utter sobbing. 

and the scream of the maid afar off in the dark did end veri sudden; 
but in a moment there did be other scream in divers places, and the 
hoars shout of the great men and the thud of mighti feet that 
ran thi way and that, a-chase. 

and the cri of the human came nearer, and the thud of the 
great feet. and, in verity, in a littl minute, it did seem unto me that 
the sound did be right upon the hollow; and I crept forward, and peer 
out. and I felt the night to be full of peopl running; and immedi 
there pass by the hollow a cluster of human that ran ever, and 
scream and gasp and wept, panting, as they ran. and the shine of 
the fire-hol made them plain seen and clear, and they did be both men 
and women, and were but in rag or utter naked, and all torn by the 
rock and the bushes, and did seem, indeed, as that they had been wild 
thing that did go by so swift and lost. 

and mine heart troubl me with the pain and long that it did know; 
so that I had gone in a moment after those people, but that I should 
leav mine own and put her to peril. and even while that I felt so utter 
in thi thing, there came a great thud of monstrou feet; and there 
ran four great men out of the night, and went past the hollow veri 
quick. and three did be dull colour and seem much hair and 
brutish; but the other did be an horrid white, and livid-blotched; so 
that it did seem to my spirit that there went by, a thing that did be a 
veri man-monst fill of unwholesom life. and sure they did be gone 
from out of the shine of the fire, in one moment, as we do say; and 
again into the night to their dread chasing. 

and when the thud of their feet had gone a long way off over the 
land, I heard them bellowing, and afterward a far away screaming, that 
did have a death note in it; and I knew that those dread brute-men 
did be take the life from some poor wild humans; and afterward there 
did be the silenc again. 

and, surely, it did come to me with a fierc impati of sorrow, that 
those peopl did be without spirit of courage; els had they turn them 
upon the giants, and slain them with their hands, even if that all had 
die to compass that slaying; for, truly, they should all die anywis by 
the giant-men; and they had die then with somewhat to comfort their 
hate. 

yet, as I do know, the peopl of the lesser redoubt had long been born 
of parent that were starv of the earth-curr through an 
hundred-thousand year and more, and becaus of thi thing, they did 
sure lack somewhat in all ways. yet wa naani otherwise; but thi not 
to prove aught, save the rule, as we do say. 

now, sudden, as I stoop veri husht and troubl in the mouth of the 
littl cave, I knew that mine own sob dryli in the back part of the 
cave. and I had gone to comfort her, but that in the same moment, I saw 
a nake maid run veri swift over the edg of the hollow, and did look 
over her shoulder, as she ran. and she came to the bottom, and crept in 
under a ledg of rock that did be in that place; and she did seem utter 
worn, and gone of the spirit, and desperate. and I perceiv in the same 
instant whi that she did go stealthi and swift in that fashion, and to 
cower, as for her veri life; for there came a squat, hair man, so 
broad as a bullock, who did come silent down into the hollow, look 
thi way and that, even as a wild beast doth peer, veri sudden. 

and the squat man had instant know of the place where the maid did 
be; and ran in upon her, with no sound. 

and I paus not; but leap all the great way unto the bottom of the 
hollow, which did be, mayhaps, twenti good feet and more; for mine anger 
wa upon me, and I did mean that I save that one, though I did be 
powerless to give succour unto those others. 

and I fell strong upon my feet, and had no harm of my limbs, for all 
that the leap did be so high. and in that moment, befor that I had time 
to save the maid, the squat man ript her; and she cri out onc with a 
veri dread scream, and wa suddenli dead in the hand of the 
brute-man. 

and my heart made my blood to burn with wrath in mine eyes, so that I 
had scarc power in that instant to see the squat man, as I ran upon 
him. and the roar of the disko fill all the hollow, as I made it to 
spin, as that it did rage with an anger, and to be glut of the man. 

and the man came round upon me; and thought, mayhaps, to deal with me, 
as it had dealt with that poor maid, but not all thatwise, as you must 
know. and I swung the diskos, and it did seem to sing and to cri eager 
in my hands. and I smote at the squat man, even as it did leap silent 
upon me, as a tiger doth leap, make no sound. but I gat not home the 
blow; for the man dropt sudden down upon the hands, and the blow went 
overwards. and the brute-man caught me by the legs, to rip me; and I cut 
quick with the diskos, and it did have but one monstrou talon left unto 
it. and immediately, it cast me with the other, half across the hollow, 
and I fell with mine armour clang mightily, and the disko did ring 
like a bell. 

and by the gracious of all good things, I wa harm not by that 
monster throw; but wa to my feet in one instant, and had not loos the 
disko from my hand. and the beast-man did be upon me with two quick 
boundings; and I stood up to the man, and it made no sound or cri as it 
came at me; and there did a great froth of brute anger and intent come 
from the mouth of it, and the teeth came down on each side of the mouth, 
veri great and sharp. and I leap and smote, so that my blow should 
come the more speedy, and the disko took away the head and the shoulder 
of the squat man; and the dead thing knockt me backward, with the spring 
that it had made; but it harm me not greatly. yet afterward I did know 
how sore and bruis I did be, in all my bodi and being. and I came back 
veri swift against the man; but it did be truli dead and greatli horrid. 

and I went from the dead monster, and did go, all heart-shaken, unto the 
dead maid. and I took the torn bodi of the maid, veri sorrowful, and 
cast it into the fire-hole. 

and I turn me then that I should look unto the cave, that I should 
know that all did be well with mine own, and whether she did have seen 
the horror, or be gone into a swoon. 

and lo! mine own did run toward me; and she had in her hand my 
belt-knif which I did give her, befor that time, to be a weapon for 
her defence. and I perceiv that she had come to be mine aid, if that 
I did need such. and she did be utter pale, yet veri steadfast and not 
seem to tremble. 

and I made to take her from that place; but she went beyond me, and 
lookt at the monstrou bulk of the squat man; and wa veri silent. and 
she came back unto me; and still so silent. and she stood befor me, and 
said no word; but my heart knew what she did be thinking; for I am not 
foolish, to have lack to know what did be in her heart; though mine 
effort had not shown itself that way unto me, befor that moment. and I 
had no pretend of modesty, but receiv with glad and a 
strang of humbl the honour that her eye did give to me; for, 
indeed, she did be so, that she might not give word to her joy of me and 
her glad respecting, the which is so wondrou good unto the heart of all 
men that do be love of a dear and honest maid. 

and she said nothing, neither then nor afterward; but I did be honour 
all my life after, when that I did anytim mind me of the way that mine 
own lookt upward at me in those moments. 

and afterward she did need and allow herself to come unto mine arms, 
that I hold her from the trembl of heart which did come to her, after 
that there did be no need for courage; for sure we had both seen a 
veri dread thing, and there wa a great horror upon us. 

and I climb upward again to the littl cave, and did help naani; and 
when we were come there again, we did rest awhile. and present we eat, 
each of us, two of the tablet and drank some of the water, and inde 
we were both utter thirsty. 

and in about an hour, after that we had hark veri keen a time, we came 
downward again from the cave, and had our gear with us; and we came up 
out of the hollow, and set forward with a great caution unto the olden 
sea-bed. and we came there in two long hours; for we went veri slow and 
with constant harkings; for the fear of the monstrou men wa upon us. 
but there came no harm anigh, neither did we perceiv ani disturb in 
the night of the land. 

and we went down an hour into the olden sea-bed, and did go now the more 
swift; for our fear wa someth eas from us, becaus that we had 
come away from that place where we had perceiv so great and dread an 
hunting. but yet had we all care about us; for the giant sure to be 
everywher in that land; but yet, as I do think, they to roam more oft 
anigh to the fire-holes; for the human did sure wander in such parts, 
that they have warmth of the fires. 

and after we had gone downward an hour into the sea-bed, we turn 
somewhat unto the south-west, and went for twelv great hours, and did 
never be ani huge space from the shore; for it did run that way, as you 
do know. and I made to steer by the shine of the land, and with 
advic from mine own. 

and in the end of the twelfth hour, I did count our distance, make 
that we did walk somewhat of a certain speed; and by the tell of the 
maid, we did be sure come beyond the place of the land where the 
poison ga did lie. 

and by this, it did be someth after seventeen hour sinc we did 
sleep; and sure we did be veri readi to have rest; for we had gone 
forward strongly, and with anxiousness; and truli my hurt did be come 
upon me, so that my whole bodi did ache; for the quick fight had been 
bitter, and I had been thrown veri hard and brutal; and, indeed, it wa 
wondrou that I had not been all smashed, onli that the armour did save 
me. 

and thi doth show truli how hard and strong I did be; and naani did 
speak upon this, and wa oft a-wonder, and at that time did beg me that 
I make some rest to cure my hurts; for she had not conceiv that a man 
did grow so strong and hardy; and, in verity, the men of the lesser 
redoubt did be soft-mad and lack of grimness, as I did perceive, 
both through my reason and from her tellings; for they did lack the 
strong life that doth breed where is the beat of the earth-current, as 
we to have in the mighti pyramid. and thi thing I have said somewis 
befor thi time. 

and becaus that we did be so wearied, I said unto naani that we find a 
place for our slumber, and she veri willing, as I have shown, and to 
counsel me likewise. 

yet did we search about in that gloom for a great hour more, and found 
no cave or hole to give us a safe refug for our sleep. 

and when that we could not find such, I told naani that we should put 
the boulder together, somewhat, and so have them about us, that we be 
greatli hid; and, in truth, even as I began to tell her my plan, she did 
have the same word in her mouth, so that we caught our littl fingers, 
there in the dark of that grim land in the end of the world, even as she 
and I had done oft in the earli years, befor that eternity, when that 
she did be mirdath the beautiful. and we did both be silent, and after 
that we had wish veri solemn and earnest, we said each a name; even as 
lad and maid shall do in thi age; and so to laughter and kist one the 
other. and truly, the world doth seem not to alter in the heart, as you 
shall think. and thi wa what I did find. 

and we set-to, and gather togeth the boulder which did be veri 
plenti in that part. and she carri those that did be thin and flat, 
and I to roll those that did be great and round. and I made a place that 
did be long and narrow; and afterward, I set the flat stone round the 
sides, that there be no littl hole by which ani creep thing should 
come inward to sting us in our sleep. 

and afterward we gat inside; and sure it did be veri cozy, as we do 
say; but yet not so secur as I did wish, onli that I could not shift to 
plan aught better. and, indeed, it should keep off from us ani small 
thing, and should be like to save us from ani monstrou brute tread 
upon us; but otherwise, it did be but a poor affair. 

now we eat two of the tablets, each, and drank some of the water, even 
as we had done in the sixth and the twelfth hours; and afterward we 
share the cloak for our slumber; and we kist veri sedat and loving, 
and charg our spirit that we wake if that ani horrid thing should 
come anigh to us in our sleep; and afterward we did be gone veri swift 
to slumbering, and suffer no harm. 

and I wake seven hour after, and sure I did ach veri bitter, as I 
did move my body; for the bruis did be gotten hold of me. 

and I slipt away from the maid, veri gentle; for I had mind that she 
sleep a while more, as I did mean that we make a great journey that day. 

and after I had hark a while, and perceiv that there wa no evil 
thing anigh, I went outward of the stones. and I walk to and fore and 
move mine arms, that I be eas somewhat of the stiff and ache; but 
sure it did seem that mani hour must go ere I should make ani speed 
of travel; for I did be all clumsi and slow and nigh to groan with the 
pain of go and aught that I did. 

and I mind me that I should do somewhat to eas thi thing, lest that 
I caus us both to come to an harm by stay over-long in that land. 

and I went back into the stones, and gat an ointment from the pouch, 
that I did carry. and sure the maid did yet sleep. and I went outward 
of the stones, again; and stript off the armour, and all my garments; 
and I rub my bodi with the ointment, and sure the pain did be so 
that I groan at thi time and that; but yet must I rub good and strong 
so that I die not of the cold of the land; and besid I wa greatli 
anxiou to cure myself. 

and sudden, as I did rub veri strong and savage, and heed so well as 
I might that I groan not, the maid did speak close besid me. and, 
indeed, she could see me but dimly, and had wake sudden to hear my 
groaning, and I wa not to her side. and immedi she had thought 
that some evil thing harm me, and wa come in an instant that she be 
with me. 

and she care not that I did be naked; but wa utter in anger that I 
strove to do thi thing alone, and with none to aid me, and all 
uncov to the chill of the land. and she ran back into the stones, 
and brought the cloak and put it about me; and wa so anger that she 
stampt, and had no impudence, but rather as that she did be mind to 
have tears. 

and she sent me back into the shelter of the stones, and gather 
mine armour, and brought these thing after me. but the disko I took in 
my hand. and she took the pot of the ointment from me, and made me to 
lie, and she rub me veri strong and tender, and kept me warm with 
the cloak; and sure she wa a wise and love maid, and utter mine 
own. 

and in the end, she askt me how I was, and I said that I did be 
different; and she hurri me that I be cloth veri quick; for she did 
be sore afraid that I should come to a chill. 

and when I wa gotten again into mine armour, she came to me, and show 
me where I did lack wisdom, and spoke veri straitli and gentl and 
serious; and afterward kist me, and gave me my tablets, and to sit 
besid me. and we eat and drank; and I with a new loving unto mine 
own; and she somewhat as that she did mother me; but when I put mine arm 
about her, she did be onli a maid. and we did be thus, with but littl 
talk and a great content. 

and afterward, we gat our gear together, and went from that littl 
refug that we had made; and in a while we did go upward out of the 
olden sea-bed. 

and when we were come again to the top of the shore, the which we did in 
two good hours, I lookt over the land, a time, with mine own anigh to 
me. and I perceiv that the great red fire-pit of the giant did be no 
mighti way off unto the south and west; and sure in a littl moment, 
we saw that there went monstrou figur against the shine of the mighti 
fire-pit; and we stoopt unto the earth; for it did seem that the light 
did be like to show us stand there, though truli we did be afar off, 
as you perceive. yet, mayhaps, you do share with us the utter horror and 
distress that those horrid men did cast about the heart, and so have a 
kindli understand of our fear. 

and over all the land, in thi place and that, there did be the small 
shine of littl fire-hol and pits, that did be alway red, save in 
that part where the poison ga did lie, the which we had now come safe 
past. 

and beyond the fire-holes, wa the great shine, that lay from the west 
unto the north of all that land; and, in verity, we did need that we 
steer so that we come not anigh to it, neither unto the great red 
fire-pit of the giants; neither unto the low volcanoes, which were 
beyond the great red fire-pit, as you do know, and someway unto the 
mouth of the upward gorge. 

and the way of our journey wa between the west and the south-west of 
that land; and to be made with cun and wisdom, that we come clear of 
all unseemli danger unto mine own. and I askt her concern thi thing 
and that of the land; and sure she told me so much of terror that I 
wa half in a wonder that ever I did live in the end to come unto her. 

and it wa becaus of the thing that she set out to me, that I 
perceiv how we must come nowis anigh to the low volcano that were 
upon thi side of the mouth of the upward gorge; for it had been known 
alway in the lesser redoubt that there went veri horrid men in that 
part that did be call wolf-men; but whether there did be ani such 
thing in that age, she had no knowing; for she told me the thing that 
did be set down in the record and the histories; and truli no man of 
the lesser redoubt had found heart in a thousand great year to make a 
journey through the land, for the desir of glad and dread 
adventuring, such as our young men did be oft set to; though it wa not 
all such that went. 

and becaus there did be no adventur for so monstrou a space of 
years, there wa no certain new knowledg of the land of that age. and 
thi thing is plain to you, and need not of mani words, which do so 
irk me. 

and naani set out to me how that the shine wa conceiv to be a land 
where evil did live for ever, and whenc came all those forc of evil 
that did work upon the lesser refuge. and afterward, she did quiet; so 
that present I perceiv that she did weep to herself, becaus that 
her memori wa all new-stir by my questionings. and I took her veri 
gentl into mine arms, as we did be there kneel upon the earth. 

and after that time, I askt her no question, save as it did be need 
to our health and life; yet oft did she tell me thi thing and that of 
her knowledge, to be for mine help and guiding. 

now we went forward, go a space toward the north-west, so that we 
come the more clear of the place where did be the great red fire-pit of 
the giants. and we journey with a care alway that we show not 
ourselv over-plain unto the light that shone over the land from the 
great pit; and oft we did creep a while over thi stark place and that; 
and went nimbl amid the bush that grew oft in great parts. 

and we made six hour thi way, and did then have pause, that we eat and 
drink; and truli it wa nine hour sinc first I did wake; yet had we 
made no pausing, becaus that we were so set to our journey to come 
clear of the place where did be the giants. 

and after that we had eat and drunk, we went onward again; and made now 
unto the south-west; for we did heed that we go no more unto the 
north-west, becaus that should bring us over-near to the shine. 

and in the fourteenth hour of that day' travel, we came to a part where 
the land dipt downward into a broad valley; and sure it did be veri 
dark down there, and did be seem shallow, yet truli of a great 
deepness; but we went that way, becaus that it did be a weari long 
journey to go around the place where the valley did be. 

and the valley had a differ dark from the gloom that went alway 
in the olden sea-bed; for the gloom of the sea-b did be ever of a 
greyness; but the gloom of thi valley had a greater dark within it; yet 
did the air seem more clear. 

and we went downward three hour into the valley, and stopt then that 
we eat and drink; and truli I had not paus then; but that mine own did 
insist; for our method did be like, else, to go all adrift, and we to 
be lack of proper strength. 

and thi wa wisdom of the maid; but I to be a littl irked-lik and 
restless; and thi mayhap becaus that my blood did itch me, becaus 
that it did be so full of the poison of my bruises. 

and it wa gone now of seventeen hour sinc last we did sleep; but yet 
did we be readi to go forward, that we come so quick as mayb out of the 
dark of that valley; for there did seem nowher ani fire-hol to make a 
light; onli that in thi place and that, there did be a littl blue 
shining, as that there burn a strang ga in thi part or that. 

now, in two hour after the time that we did eat, we stopt, both of us, 
veri sudden; for there did be some vagu and curiou sound in the night. 
and we went veri swift to the earth, that we be hid, and harked. but did 
hear nothing. 

and in a while, we to go onward again; yet there did be an uneas upon 
our spirits; for our spirit did perceiv someth afar off in the 
night; but yet had we no sureti in thi matter. 

and we went forward through a great hour more; and did pass in that 
time, two place where the blue-shin did be; and truli it seem as 
that a low ga hung to the earth in thi part and that, and made a slow 
burning, have neither nois nor spurtings; but slow, as that it did 
smoulder and be all to shine and luminous. and oft there did be a strong 
smell of a bitter gas, veri horrid in the throat. 

and in the end of anoth hour, while that we were a space off from one 
of those gas-shinings, there went past us at a distance, as it did seem 
people, run in the night; as that they did be lost spirits; yet with 
a rustl veri soft; so that they did be like to be barefoot. 

and I thought mayhap that these did be some of the peopl of the lesser 
pyramid; yet did they be onli as that shadow went among the 
blue-shinings. and I ponder a moment, whether that I send my voic 
over the valley, to question what they did be; but yet had caution, and 
hark through the utter silenc of the night; for I had no sureti of 
aught. 

and, surely, in that moment that we hark veri keen, there did be a 
sound afar off in the night of the land; and it wa as that we had heard 
the sound before; and, in verity, our spirit had perceiv the sound, 
those two hour back; and now our bodi did wot, and perceiv that we 
had known it subtli befor that moment. and the sound wa as that 
someth went spin in the night. 

and a veri great terror came upon the maid; for she did know the sound; 
and the sound wa that which did show that one of the great evil forc 
of the land did approach; and the sound had been known alway in the 
lesser refug to show thi thing. and, indeed, mine own spirit had been 
half to know that a power of evil did come through the night; but yet 
wa the assur veri terrible; for how should I protect mine own. 

and the spin came toward us, and wa present in the valley; and it 
came swiftli across the dark of the valley. and my heart wa all broken 
within me, becaus that there had been happi with us, but a littl 
time gone; and now there did be our death anigh. 

and mine own gave me the knife that I had given to her; mean that I 
slay her, in the last moment; for she did heed even in that moment that 
she be not gash horridli by the terror of the diskos. and I took the 
knife. and I kist not mine own; but stood there, veri shaken and 
desperate, and gript her fast unto me, scarc heed the hard of my 
gripe; and alway I lookt unto the way of the come of the sound. and 
present did unbar my wrist where the capsul did be. 

and the sound of the thing spin came anigh, across the valley; and 
my heart did dull and my spirit go black with my desperateness, becaus 
that thi thing must be, and becaus that I could nowher see hope that 
I should save mine own. 

and, of a sudden, the maid put up her arms, and pull me downward, and 
kist me onc on the lips; but I wot not whether I kist her; for I did 
burn with despair and wa all adrift in my being. yet wa there a sharp 
comfort that mine own die did be so nigh. 

and the maid stood gentli against me; so that she did be conveni unto 
my hand. and afterward I rememb thi thing; and do you pray that you 
be never to have such a matter on your hearts! but, indeed, there wa a 
wonder in thi thing, besid the horror; so that my memori doth be alway 
know of thi wonder; and mayhap you do see with me, and love mine own 
also in your hearts. and in the moment that the maid stood thus, as I 
have told, I perceiv sudden that there did be a littl glow in the 
night, and the glow wa pale and horrid. and there wa no more ani 
sound of the spinning; onli there did be, as it were, the trunk of a 
great tree, that did show in the glowing; and the trunk of the tree came 
toward us across the darkness. 

and I turn the maid from the tree, and she did flutter a littl in my 
hands, as I did know, scarce-knowing; for she perceiv that she did be 
go to die in that moment. and I had my bodi thu between the evil 
thing and the maid. and lo! the tree came no more anigh to us; but went 
backward, and the pale glow did fade, and the tree no more to be 
seen. 

and I cri unto the maid, veri husky, that we did live; for that the 
evil power wa gone off from us; but she answer not, and did be heavi 
against me. and I held her, and lookt alway about us, lest the tree come 
in upon the other side. 

and, as I lookt thi way and that, I saw naught; and afterward, in a 
moment, I search the night above, lest that the thing come from 
above. and, behold, I saw that there abod over us a clear light, as it 
were a clear burn circle, abov us in the night. and my heart did 
leap with an holi joy and an utter great thankfulness; and I wa no more 
in fear of the tree; for, in verity, there fought for our soul one of 
those sweet power of goodness, that did strive ever to stand between 
the forc of evil and the spirit of man; and thi matter have I shown 
to you, befor thi time. 

and concern thi holi defense, I have thought that it should not, 
mayhap, to have had so strong a power to save us, if that we had shown 
an over-weak and fear, but becaus that we did rather stand so well 
as we might to make battl of escap from so dire a destruction. 

and, surely, thi doth seem but a sane think unto me; but yet without 
proof, and to be said to you, onli as the shape of my thoughts. and 
thi the chief end of that happening, that the holi circl did truli 
deliv us, and burn through twelv great hour abov us; and by this, 
do I know that the evil power hover anigh, to destroy us, all that 
while; for, indeed, it doth not be proper of reason to suppos that such 
an utter wondrou thing did be needlessli over us, save to be a shield 
of great and love forc against a wait evil thing. and sure you 
do see thiswis with me? 

and, truly, so soon as my spirit and reason perceiv that we did be no 
more to suffer from the evil thing, I rememb that I did know that 
mine own had swooned. and, in verity, you shall mind how that she did 
face her death so utter sweet and brave, and had given no cry, but made 
quietli to help me in that dread moment, and did stand brave and 
gentl to the stroke. and so fell into a swoon, as you have seen, 
becaus that she did suffer an hundr death as she did stand so brave, 
wait to be slain, for the blow did be so long delayed, yet to come in 
ani moment. 

and I gat her to come-to unto her life again, and I set the love tale 
veri swift to eas her, and sure with love and warmth, and kist her 
with a great joy. and I show how I did honour her for her good 
courage. 

and she to weep a little, with the eas come so sudden upon her; and 
afterward to kiss me upon the lip an hundr times, and to need that 
she be veri safe in mine arms, becaus that I had meant that I do so 
dread an offic to her. and sure I do wonder whether you perceiv all 
that did be then in her heart. 

and the holi light that did be over us, she did watch with a sweet 
of awe; and rest did come more great upon her in the heart, as she did 
learn how sure wa the seem of that love power to deliv us. 

and, presently, we made forward again in the valley. and did go 
steadfast, and newly-lov each to the other, and so through twelv 
great and body-weari hours; but our heart could never be done sing 
within us, nor our hand to ceas from the hand of the other, becaus 
that we did so crave each unto the beloved. 

and in the ninth hour, a monstrou way off in the dark of the valley, 
there did seem as that there went a far and dread scream in the 
night. and it did be as that our spirit perceiv the sound of 
someth spin in the night; yet faint and a great way off; but yet 
had we no sureti that we did truli hear the sound of the spinning; onli 
we did be so shaken in the heart, for truli there wa some horror done 
unto humans, downward in the mighti dark of the valley. and to think 
upon the sound of the spinning, wa to be in a shake troubl of the 
spirit; and to bless the quiet and holi light that went abov us in all 
that time; and to ach onli that it should stay to be to our protecting. 
and sure it did be plain that there were the sign of great forc in 
that land. 

and three hour after that time when we did hear the far-off screaming, 
we were come up over the edg of the valley, and did be onc more unto 
such light as did be gener in the land; and truli it did seem a 
wondrou lightness, after so utter a dark. 

and we did be all exhaust, and mine own drew her feet so weari that it 
wa as that she must go no more, until we did rest; for inde it wa 
three and thirti hour sinc last that we had slept; and a bitter 
troubl and work there had been in that space, as you do know. 

now we had eat some of the tablet a few hour back, as we did walk, and 
had drunk some of the water; but had made no rest; for we did crave onli 
that we come free of that valley. and now it wa need that we rest, 
if but a littl time. 

and I mind that we find some place where I should have a hot pool, 
that I be abl to bath naani' feet. and, surely, we came in a while to 
a hollow-place, and there did be two dull-burn fire-hol in thi 
place, and a hot-bubbl spring, the which did seem to be a rare thing 
in that land; so that we were the more fortun to perceiv it. 

and I made mine own to sit, with her feet in the hot-spring; for it wa 
not over-hot, and did seem pretti natur to my taste, as I did prove in 
the first. and also I did search about the hollow, lest there be ani 
harm creatur near-by; and thi you will have truli supposed, becaus 
you do know the method of my journeying. but yet did I not have so much 
care as did be proper; for I wa so dull in the mind, by reason of my 
weariness; but, indeed, there came naught to work us ani harm; and so we 
came to no suffering, through mine ach and dullness. 

and I sat besid the maid, and made her to eat a tablet, and saw that 
the cloak did be nice about her, and her head to rest against my knee, 
and I laid the palm of my hand to be as a pillow, becaus of the armour, 
to eas the hardness. 

and I eat with the maid, and we both drank after; and so there came 
back somewhat of our strength. then I took the maid' littl feet, and 
rub a portion of the ointment from the pot all about them, veri 
gentl and constant; and so did they be new-rest and eased; and she 
present fit again to the journey; for I wa strong set that we go 
quickli henc out of that land, and stay no more there to sleep, lest we 
come unto destruction. 

and when we had rest an hour, I put the shoe again upon the maid, and 
made them secure; and so gat my gear about me, and made to the journey. 

and lo! as we did leav the hollow, I lookt upward unto the holi light; 
and behold it wa gone from us, and by thi thing I suppos that we had 
come free of instant danger; but yet did there be to me a seem of 
naked and unprotection, as you must perceive. 

and becaus that the light wa vanished, I wa the more set that we come 
speedi out of the land. and we went forward at a strong speed, and had 
the great red fire-pit of the giant to our rear unto the left, and a 
mighti way off in the night; but yet I did wish it the further. and 
befor us, wa a small ridg up of the dark land, as I did judge, 
becaus that our view of the light and the shine wa bounded; and to 
our left at a great way the low volcanoes, and somewhat to our right, 
across all that part of the land went the cold and horrid glare of the 
shine. 

now, in a littl while, I felt that the ground did be slope upward 
befor us a little, and by thi thing I saw that I had known aright, for 
that there did be a ridg that hid the land somewis over unto the part 
where I lookt to find the mouth of the upward gorge. and we went up thi 
slope at a strong pace, becaus that I wa so eager that I find where we 
did be in near unto the mouth of the upward gorge. 

and surely, I wa someth forgetful, in mine eagerness, and came 
somewhat ahead of mine own, who did make to hide from me that she did 
begin to lag, becaus that her new strength wa near gone from her. 

and sudden there did be a veri dread cry, to my back; and I came 
round in one instant, so quick as a light doth flash; for it wa the 
voic of mine own, and all my be did suddenli burn with fear that 
kindl through me in a moment of thought. 

and lo! mine own did struggl terribl with a yellow thing which I 
perceiv to be a man with four arms; and the man had two arm about the 
maid, and with two did make to choke her unto death; for she cri out 
no more. 

and I came unto the man with a quick leaping, and stopt not to pluck the 
disko from my hip; and sure I did be veri strong, and mine anger and 
rage to make me monstrous; for I caught the two upper arm of the man, 
and brought them backward in an instant, so fierc and savage, and so 
wrencht upon them, that I brake them in the shoulder of the man. 

and the man roar and shriekt, even as a wild and dread beast should 
cri out, and came round upon me with the two lower arms. and sure it 
wa a mighti and brutish thing, and so broad and bulkt as an ox, and the 
lower arm were huge and greatli haired, and the finger of the hand 
did have the nail grown into horrid talons, as that they should grip 
veri bitter. 

and it caught me by the thighs, to rip me upward, as I did fear; but yet 
thi did not be the intent of the man; for in a moment it caught me 
round the body; and on the instant, I gat the man by the great throat, 
and the throat did be haired, and so great as the neck of a bull. and I 
strove with mine armour hand that I choke the man, and sure I made 
it to suffer great trouble; yet, I could not harm it in the life. 

and so I did be an horrid minute, and fought with the beast, with no 
more than the strength of my body; and it wa as that an human went with 
hi hand to slay a monster so strong as an horse. and the breath of the 
man-beast came at me, and did sicken me; and I held the face off from 
me; for I had die with horror, if that it had come more anigh; and 
sure the mouth of the man wa small and shape so that I knew that it 
did never eat of aught that it did slay; but to drink as a vampire; and 
in truth, I did mean that I chop the man to pieces, if that I have 
chanc to the diskos. 

and I did sway thi way and that, as we did struggle; and sure it wa 
as that the man had never made to use the lower arms, save to hold unto 
prey, the while that it did use the upper arm to strangle, as I do 
think. for all that weari minut of the fight, the man made not to loos 
from me, that it should tear my hand from their grip to the throat; but 
made vain wag with the arm that I brake, as that it would use 
these to the attack; but sure they had no more power to do hurt. 

and sudden, it put forth an utter power about my body, so that mine 
armour did be like to crack; and truli I had die in a moment; but for 
the strong of the armour. and the man hug me thu for an horrid 
time, the while that I did hold off from me the brutish face, and gript 
veri savag into the hair throat. 

and lo! the creatur did work slow in the brain, and in the end loost 
from me, abrupt, and went back with a leap, so that my hand did be ript 
from the throat of the beast. and in one instant it did be back unto me, 
and gave me no moment to free the diskos. but I made anew to fight, and 
shape as I had learn in the exercis of mine upbringing; for truli I 
had been alway deep in practic of such matters. and I slipt from the 
great hand of the man, as it did tri to take me by the head; and I hit 
the man with mine armour fist, and put a great power and skill to the 
blow. and I went instant to the side with a swift stepping, and evad 
the man, and I smote the man again, and took him veri savag in the 
neck; but all the while grown veri cold and brutal and cruel; for I wa 
set to the slaying. and the man-beast came round on me; and lo! I slipt 
the gripe of the great hands, and my bodi and my leg and mine arm did 
work togeth unto that last blow; so that I did hit so hard as a great 
hammer. and I gat the beast in the throat, and the beast went backward 
to the earth, even as it did think to hold me. 

and lo! in a moment, I wa free, and I pluckt forth the disko from my 
hip. and the yellow beast-man grunt upon the ground; and it rose up 
again to come at me; and it stood and did grunt, and did seem as that it 
wa gone mazed; for it did make other sounds, and an horrid screeching, 
so that truly, by the way of it, I conceiv that it cri out unknown 
and half-shapen word at me. and in a moment, it came again at me; but I 
cut the head from the beast-man, that wa in veriti an horrid monster, 
and the man died, and wa quiet upon the earth. 

and truly, in that moment, the distress of mine effort and mine utter 
tired and the ach of the bruis took me; so that I do sure think 
I rockt as I stood; but yet wa my head strong to think and my heart set 
in anxiousness; for I wot not how great an hurt had been done upon 
mine own. 

and I ran to her, and came to where she did be upon the ground; and 
sure she wa all huddled, and had her hand veri piteou to her 
throat, that did be so pretty. and it did shake me in that moment that 
she wa truli slain; for she wa gone so utter still and as that she did 
be broken unto death. 

and I took her hand from her throat, and sure it did be a littl 
torn; yet not to be much, or so that it should loos her of her dear 
life. and I strove that I steadi the trembl of my hands; and I gat 
free of mine armour gloves; and made that I feel whether her throat 
did be deadli hurt; and, in verity, it seem not so; onli that my hand 
did so shake, becaus that I wa so frighten for mine own, and becaus 
that I wa but new come from the battle; and becaus of this, I had not 
power of touch to assur me. 

I made then that I quieten my breath, which did yet come veri full and 
laboured; and I put mine ear abov the heart of the maid, and lo! her 
heart did beat, and the horrid of my fear went from me in a moment. 

and I had the scrip from my back veri speedy, and some of the water to 
fizz, and I dash the water upon her face and upon her throat; and 
sure there did be a littl quiver and an answer of her body. 

and I strove with her for a while more; and she came unto her life 
again; and in the first, she wa all a-lack, as you may think; and 
immedi she began that she remembered, and she then to shake. 

and I told her how that the four-arm man wa sure dead and could 
harm her no more; and she then to weep, becaus that she had been put 
to such shock and horror, and held by so brutish a thing. but I took her 
into mine arms, and so she did come present to an ease; and I 
perceiv in all my be that she wa as a littl ship that doth lie in 
harbour; for she did cling and nestl unto me; and did be safe with me 
in all her heart and bodi and belief. and sure she wa mine own, and I 
to have glori in that knowing. 

and presently, I put her from mine arms, to lie; yet so that she might 
not perceiv the bodi of the yellow beast-man. and I made clean the 
diskos, from her sight, and afterward I put on the scrip; and I took the 
maid to mine arm again, and had the disko in my hand besid her. 

and she made protest that she should truli walk; for that I wa all 
a-weary, and she come to her strength again. and, indeed, I carri her 
a certain way, and did then put her down to her feet; and truli her 
knee did so trembl that she had not stood, let be to walk! and I 
caught her up again; and I kist her, and I told her that I did be sure 
her master, in verity, and she mine own baby-slave. and truli you shall 
not laugh upon me; for I wa so human as any; and a man doth talk thi 
way with hi maid. 

and she did be quiet and sweet and to obey wisely; for she wa gone veri 
weak. and thiswis we did go; and I to say love words, in the first; 
but afterward I did heed more of my going, now that she wa someth 
eas and at rest within mine arms. and I did peer everywher about, 
lest that some other evil thing come outward of the bushes, to have at 
us ere I did ware. and, truly, the bush grew here and there in that 
place, veri plentiful, in great dumpings. 

and present I wa come to the top part of the ridge; and lo! a great 
glad took me, and some amazement; for there did be the light that 
did be in the mouth of the upward gorge, and they did show me that I wa 
come anigh to that place. yet had I fear that we were sure a dozen 
great mile off; and now I to learn that we did be scarc of two or 
mayb three, as I did judge. 

and I told thi thing to the maid; and she rejoic in mine arms, with a 
deep and quiet thankfulness. and I set forward then at so good a pace as 
I might; and I wa come into the mouth-part of the upward gorg in about 
an hour; and sure I did be veri weary, for it wa beyond six and 
thirti hour that we had gone sinc last we did sleep; and there had 
been sore labour and terror to our share in that time, as I have told. 

and I turn in the mouth of the gorge, and told mine own, veri gentle, 
that we did take our last look upon that land. and she askt that I put 
her down to her feet; and I put her down. and therewith we stood in that 
place, and mine arm about her; and so did I support the maid, the while 
that she lookt silent over the dark of the land. 

and present she askt me in a veri husht voice, whether that I knew 
where the lesser pyramid did be in all that darkness; for she wa all 
adrift of her bearings, and wa as a stranger, becaus that she had 
never lookt upon the land from that place, befor then. and I show her 
where I thought the pyramid to stand hid in the everlast night; and 
she nodded, veri quiet, as that she did think thatwise, also. 

and so a time did pass, and I knew that naani said good-by forev unto 
all that she had known of the world in all her life; and she did be 
whisper a goodby in her soul unto her dead. 

and I wa veri husht, and deepli sorrow for the maid, and did 
understand; for in verity, there should no other human look upon that 
land of terror through all the quiet of eternity; and the maid did lose 
all her young life into that blackness, and the father that wa her 
father; and the grave of her mother; and the friend of all her years. 
and there went death in the land, even then, after those that did live. 

and mine own shook a littl within mine arm; so that I knew she strove 
that she be brave, to weep not; but afterward, she made not to ceas 
from her tears; and truli I wa there, to be her understanding; and she 
did be sweet and natur ever with me; for she wa mine own, and did be 
hourli the more so. 

and presently, I move a little, to sign that we go downward of the 
gorge; and she stay me one moment, that she look onc more over all 
that land; and afterward, she submitted, and turn with me, and did 
break into veri bitter sob as she did go stumbl besid me; for 
the sorrow of memori did fill her; and she wa truli a veri lonesom 
maid in that moment, and had come through much dreadfulness. 

and in a minute, I stoopt and lift her; and she wept in mine arm 
against mine armour; and I veri silent and tender with her; and carri 
her downward of the gorg for a great hour more. and present she wa 
grown calm, and I knew that she slept in mine arms. 

and in thiswis we made farewel of that dark land, and left it unto 
eternity. 




xii 

downward OF the gorg 


now I carri the maid an hour downward of the gorge, as I did say; and 
I wa then grown so weari that I near fell, as I walked, and stumbl 
everywhile, becaus that I had lost somewhat of guid in my feet, the 
which did show mine utter alackness. 

and I saw that I must come veri swift to a place for slumber, or that I 
did be like to fall headlong with the maid; for I nigh slept as I walkt. 

and I began that I give attent to the side of the gorge; and sure 
I had gone that hour all in a dream; for I wa fresh-waked, as it were, 
in that I did give my will to perceiv aught; and when I did come to 
have power to attend, I knew that I had gone, even as a sleep-walker; 
for the gorg did seem a fresh matter unto me, and as that I had come 
awak sudden to find myself a-walk in that strang and narrow place. 

and presently, I saw somewhat where I did be; for I mind the memori of 
mine outward journey, and truli I have a good power to know and rememb 
a way that I have gone. and I saw that there wa a great and ruddi 
fire-hol anigh to me; and I wa all sure that I had perceiv certain 
cave in the wall of the gorge, near to that fire, as I past it on mine 
upward way; and I had been given a mighti long of heart at that time, 
that it be given to me that I should bring safe mine own out of the 
peril that beset her, and have her unto just such a place for her 
slumber, on the way of our journey backward. 

and sure I tell you thi thing as a child in pleasure; for, truly, it 
wa a wondrou happi matter that my desir should be like to have a 
true ending; as, indeed, it did seem wa truli to be, if that my memori 
had set me aright. 

and I went onward somewhat; and lo! I to be right, for the littl cave 
did be there, a littl past the great fire-hole; and there were seven of 
them in the left side of the great cliff of the gorge; and one did be as 
that it were veri cozi and a place of sure safety, if that we could win 
unto it. 

and truly, as I did conceive, we had come safe from the evil forc of 
that land; but yet did I mind that there wa no sureti in thi thing; 
and neither did I know but that some monster should come downward of the 
gorge, out of that land; and so work our deaths, as we did sleep; if 
that we have no sure place for our slumber. and, indeed, I had wish 
that we were come a greater way downward of the gorge, but thi might 
not be; for I wa all adrift with weariness. and truly, if that we gat 
upward to the top-most cave, there did be few monster that should have 
power to come at us, ere we be warn of their coming. and afterward 
they should be like to come upward against the diskos; and thi should 
be inde a thing difficult, as you shall conceive. 

now it did be need that I wake the maid, and I kist her, as she did 
be in mine arms; and sure that dear one did kiss back again in her 
sleep, and wa yet asleep. and truli I did love her with all my being; 
and I kist her again, and shook her veri gentle, and so had her to 
wakefulness, and told how we did be come to a place fit for our slumber. 

and she to look about, veri sleepy, as I set her to her feet; and then 
to upbraid herself that she did over to slumber, the while that I did 
labour with her carrying. and, in verity, I kist her again, as she did 
stand make to steadi herself, and look so pretti with the sleep 
that did lie yet in her eyes. and she to kiss me veri dear and all mine; 
and even then scarc proper come to wakefulness; and did say with 
someth of a littl dear abandon, that she did love me utter and 
forever. 

and afterward, I climb to the topmost of the caves, and told mine own 
the while that she walk up and down a little; so that she come to a full 
awakedness; and thi I wa care to, becaus that she should have a 
need of all her power that she come safe upward unto the cave. 

and when I wa come to the cave, lo! it did be so sweet and dry, as did 
make glad my heart. and there did be a warmth in the cave, as that there 
went a fire somewher through the rock anigh. and the light from the 
fire-hol did make a reflect inward, and so thi did seem a place 
safe, and fit to our slumbering. 

and I came downward unto naani, call that the cave wa veri proper 
for our use; and present I gave her mine aid to the climbing, and so 
we came in the end safe into the cave; and truli we did feel veri safe 
and happy. 

yet, befor we did sleep, I set free the scrip and the pouch, and took 
the strap and went downward again into the gorge; and I gat a good 
boulder, so heavi as I might carry, and strapt it to my back, and came 
upward again to the cave, and the maid veri grave and anxious, lest that 
I slip to my hurt. and when I wa come to the cave again, I set the 
boulder in the mouth of the cave, and did balanc it so light upon the 
edge, that a touch should send it roll downward. 

and by thi devising, I conceiv that ani beast or monstrou thing that 
should climb upward whilst that we slept, should be like to set the 
rock adrift, and mayhap the rock to work an harm to such, but the 
chief end to be that I should be swiftli wake by the noise. 

and then I did turn that we go to our slumber; and lo! the maid had 
spread the cloak upon the rock, that we should sleep upon it; for truli 
there did be no need that we have it now to our covering, becaus that 
the cave did be so warm as I have told before. 

and surely, there did be no caus either that I should have the cloak 
for a bed; for how should I perceiv ani soft from the cloak, 
through all the stern of mine armour; but yet did I see that the 
maid had made a couch that should be for the two of us, and did be so 
sweet and natural, and to lie by me; but yet to preserv her sweet 
modesty, and to do the thing with no thought, save that it wa natur 
to our hearts; and that she did long alway to be anigh to me; but yet, 
mayhaps, scarc full consciou that her heart did prompt her in thi 
thing. 

and, in verity, I love her veri dear. 

and surely, naani show me the where that I should lie upon my side; 
and when I had obeyed, she kneeled, and kist me on the lips, veri sober 
and loving; and she lay down then upon the cloak besid me; and truli we 
had both gone to sleep in one littl minute, as I do think. 

now I did be wake twelv great hour after, by the fizz of the 
water; and lo! when I lookt, the maid wa not besid me; but did make 
readi our simpl eat and drinking. and she laugh at me, veri sweet 
and tender, becaus that she love me so, and did be so glad to have me 
awak to her; and she came over to me, and kist me, veri bright and 
love upon the lips. 

and after that she had kist me, she kneel besid me, and lookt at me, 
veri dear and tender; so that I knew in a moment that she had wake a 
while gone, and watch me, somewis motherlike, as I did sleep. but how 
I knew thi thing, I am not sure, save that my spirit did know, or that 
her thought did have tongu unto mine. 

and truli I need that I be so loved, and all of you to say like with 
me; and I put up mine arm to her, as I did yet lie; and she not to deni 
me, but came into mine arms, and did snuggl there so sweet and happi 
and gladly, and with so true a delight, that it did be plain how she did 
love in all her bodi and spirit to be anigh to me, as I to her. yet, 
truly, as you do mind, the armour did be upon me; so that I fear to 
take her veri strong in mine arms, lest I hurt the dear maid; and sure 
the armour did be a stern matter for her to nestl unto; but yet, 
mayhaps, did the stern someth pleas her womanheart, and yet, 
again, mayhap to lack. 

and presently, she made that she would go from me, and I loos mine 
arm from her veri ready, becaus that I did heed alway that she have 
full sweet liberti of her dear maidenhood; and I to be watch 
suffici unto thi end, yet alway honest and wholesom and not 
over-pond even in thi my care; and thi proper intend you 
shall ever perceive, if that your heart do strive to hearken unto my 
heart, which doth speak alway befor you. 

and the maid went from me, over to where she had put the cup of the 
water, and the tablets; and I to make to rise, that I look that the 
boulder did be safe untouch in the mouth of the cave. but she call 
unto me that I lie backward; for that she did mean gentli to spoil me 
that once; and that I have no heed to the boulder or whether there did 
be ani monster or beast anigh in the gorge; for that the boulder did be 
safe as I did balanc it; and nowher ani creatur to sight in the 
gorge; for she had lookt oft, sinc waking, to thi end. 

and truli I obeyed, and lay back, and did like that I should be spoilt, 
as we do say. and naani brought the cup of the water, and the tablet 
over to me; for she gat them from the scrip befor I had it to my 
pillow, in that while when I had gone downward for the boulder. and 
surely, even when she brought the cup, she would not have me to rise; 
but took my head upon her knees, and kist me onc veri dainti on the 
lips, and I veri happi to be so loved, and wish no otherwise. 

and she took a tablet and kist it and gave it to me; and afterward 
touch anoth to my lips, and had that to be for her own. and so we 
eat and were veri glad and happy, someway as children are happy, and 
our heart all at ease. 

and presently, we eat each our second tablet, in the same wise as the 
first. and truli I did be kist more than once. and afterward, we drank 
each of the water. 

and when we had made an end, naani told me that I move to stand; and 
sure I wondered; and I stood up, and lo! I near cri out with the 
pain of my bruisings; for I wa all gone stiff in my sleep, and as that 
I did be more sore than ever; and thi to be becaus I had fought again, 
as you do know, and sure had been hurt more by the four-arm man than 
I had known. 

and I perceiv then that naani had suppos that I should be thu 
pained, and had given dear thought to the matter; and truli she had the 
pot of the ointment, ready, if that I did be veri bad, that she rub me. 

and she gave me aid with mine armour, and afterward eas me with my 
garments; and sure I did be utter bruis in the body, by reason of 
the violenc of the yellow beast-man. and the maid had somewhat so 
tender and sweet in her eye as she look upon the bruisings, that I 
did be veri happi and to glow with contentment. 

and she had me to lie, and made me in comfort with the cloak, so love 
and grave, so that I wa as a child that doth be care of by hi mother. 
and she did rub me veri skil and gentl for a great hour, until I wa 
all refreshed. and in veriti she wa a love wise maid. 

and as the maid minist unto me, I lay alway veri restful, and 
hark to the low sound of the mutter of the fire-hol that did be in 
the bottom of the gorge; and alway I did feel as an happi child that 
doth be cloth in love and guid in wisdom. 

and presently, when that the maid had end her dear care, she put by 
the ointment, and gave me her hand veri dainty, that she mean to aid me 
to rise; and sure when I wa come again to my feet, I wa all eased, 
and to have movement with no great pain; and truli thi made me wondrou 
pleas and to feel new couraged; for I had been troubl that I should 
be so helpless, in that I did be the protector of mine own. 

and when I had tri my limbs, and found them to be in command and 
ready, I lookt about for my garments. and lo, the maid brought me my 
spare body-vest, from the pouch, and had it upon her arm, to give to me. 
but sure she deni me a moment, of the vest, and stood befor me, and 
had an admir and wonder, veri sweet and honest, becaus that my arm 
did be so great and hard with muscles. 

and, indeed, I did be veri strong, as you have perceived; for I did be 
alway in affect of the exercis that were taught in the upbring 
of all the peopl of the mighti pyramid; and by thi explaining, you 
shall understand that I wa like to be strong; but indeed, I owe the 
straight and shape of my bodi to the mother that bore me. and 
afterward, in all my life, had I taken pride of my bodi to be of health 
and to have strength; and sure thi is a matter veri fit for pride; 
and to be told brave and with honesty. 

and the admir of the maid wa veri sweet to me; and, in verity, I did 
be to deceive, if that I said otherwise. and in a moment, she dropt my 
body-vest, and put out her hand to me that I take her into mine arms. 

and I took the maid into mine arm with a great glad and with 
somewhat of humbl that I wa nowis good enough to hold her, for my 
heart wa young, and I love her veri dear and youthful. and she did lie 
there veri quiet and happy, a little; and sure I did find present 
that she kist the great muscl of my breast, veri sweet and sly, where 
her face did be press against it. and lo, in a moment, she came free of 
mine arms, and gave me an aid with my garments, and afterward with mine 
armour. 

and when that thi wa done, she stood off from me; and she lookt at me, 
half shi and half of sweet and naughtiness. and she came then in a 
moment, and put her hand upward to my shoulders, and so stood her 
eyelid someth down over her eyes; and did steal a littl look up, 
thi time and that. and lo! in a sudden moment, befor I did wot, she 
wa to her knee befor me, and did weep; and I down veri swift to kneel 
with her. 

and I askt not whi she wept; for I perceiv that she did have joy and 
glad happi and sweet troubl of her man; and that she did be a true 
woman, and one part of the woman did worship, so that she did be 
strang humbl and nigh to be shy; and anoth did love, and need that 
she be anigh to me; and a third to have a calm wisdom. and all did now 
be a-tremble, togeth in her heart; and I knew that I did be truli an 
hero to her, though but usual to all others. and my heart wa wondrou 
proud and wondrou humble, so that I wa in the same moment uprais and 
to feel dreadli unworthy. but I made no pretend to discredit myself 
to her, but onli did resolv that I win alway her dear respect; and I 
did be natur and truth of my manner and without foolish denial of 
her sweet worship, for she wa utter mine own, and it did be a piti 
thing if that I seem otherwis than an hero unto her. 

but of you I ask kind understanding, and to call me not a thing of 
conceit becaus that I did understand; for truli I knew my faults, even 
so well as you, that do know all of my going. and you to look backward 
upon the love-days, and to mind how that your maid did ever to make you 
great in manhood with her dear belief and uplooking; and so shall you 
conceiv of all my feelings; for we do be all so human in thi matter, 
and to meet on a dear natur ground, as you will say. 

and, truly, in a littl time, mine own did be steadied, and wipe her 
pretti eyes, and nestl to me a while, veri husht and to need that she 
be close. and I to have her gentl against mine armour, and to be in my 
heart as that I did be her father and her lover in the one man, and 
sure to be silent and joy that I lived. 

and present I slipt her shoe from her littl feet, with my right 
hand, the while that she did rest within my left arm; and I condemn 
myself that I had thought not more swift to thi end; but inde I had 
thought upon it while that naani rub me, and had intent thiswise; 
but afterward forgat, as you shall understand, that have been with me 
alway. and truli mine own did be hurt that I say aught to my blame; and 
I to cease, but yet to feel reproach by my heart. 

and when I had lookt to the maid' feet, I tie on her shoe again; and 
we gat togeth our gear. and afterward we came down from the cave, with 
a great care, becaus that it did be so high up in the cliff of the 
gorge. 

and afterward, we made downward of the gorge, and had a good care to our 
going, and so much of speed as we could make, that we come someth off 
from the dark land of the lesser redoubt, so quick as we might. 

and in six hour we had gone veri well, and we stopt then that we eat 
and drink; and afterward, I lookt again to the feet of the maid. and I 
bath them in a great rock basin of warm water that did be anigh to the 
place of our eating; and afterward I put the ointment about them veri 
thorough and gentl and for a good while; and so she had some eas and 
comfort. 

and afterward, we made onward again; but now we did go pretti easy; for 
I had consid the note of mine outward journey, and so did 
perceiv that we should be but six or seven hour off that part of the 
gorge, where did be the slugs. 

and I wa mind that we rest and sleep, ere that we make through that 
dire and dread place; for that we should be twelv great hours, and 
more, to go through, and to have no rest or pause, until that we did be 
safe outward again, as you shall think. and so did we need to be strong 
and well rested, and thi to be wise also for the feet of the maid. 

now sure the maid did be in delight of the fire of that part of the 
gorg where we were come, and she had besid a rest of the soul, in that 
she had feel that there did be no evil forc to troubl us to our 
destruction; and I bother her not yet awhil with tell of the 
horrid place that we should to journey through in a while, as you do 
know. 

and so we did go, and alway with a good caution, lest that some beast or 
creatur should come upon us; and alway with the fire-hol befor and 
behind, and in the air of the gorg the littl whistl of steam that 
did spirt out in thi place and that; and a good warmth in mani parts, 
by reason of the fires; and odd while a smell of sulphur; but not 
greatly, nor to our trouble. and alway the low mutter of the 
fire-hol and pits, and the red lights, and the danc of the shadow 
when that we did go by a fire-pit where the fire did frisk and burn 
lively. and upon either side, the grim wall of the gorg go up 
measureless into the night. 

and so we were gone presently, pretti comfortable, for six good hours, 
sinc last that we eat; and we made halt, and eat and drank; and I 
show the maid how that we should make a short journey that day, and 
sleep, and so be readi to the horrid journey through the dark part of 
the gorge, where the slug did be. 

and we made search then, that we have a safe place to our slumber; and 
sure I perceiv where we did be; for we came upon that same cave 
where I did sleep after that I wa come free of the slugs; and that we 
were come no farther, doth show how easi did be our present going, and 
thi you do know. and there did be the spring where I washed, and the 
fire-hol anigh, and truli they were not like to be gone away, as you 
shall say! yet did we exclaim, veri natural; for the maid did be so deep 
in interest of the matter of my coming, and to be at onc that no other 
place should serv for our rest and slumber. 

and, indeed, thi wa a natur thing, and the place so good as any, 
save that I did wish it had been upward unto a high place of the gorge, 
as you shall understand. but yet might we block the mouth-part of the 
cave with boulders, somewis as I did before, and so to have a defenc 
against ani thing that should make to enter upon our sleep; or at the 
least to be wake by the fall of the boulders. 

now mine own went inward of the littl cave, which did be veri light 
from the fire-pit that wa to the front; but befor that she did go, I 
made a swift search of the place, that there should be no creep 
thing; and truli it wa sweet and free. and the maid did be strang 
taken that she should come to the verit place where onc I did lie 
on mine outward way; and truli I do understand, and so shall mani that 
do have these feel about matters. and afterward, we went unto the 
hot spring that wa in the hollow of the rock, anigh to the fire-pit. 
and I saw that there did be no snakes, neither ani of the rat-th 
anigh; and so I had the maid to sit veri comfort on the side of the 
pool, and I freed her shoes, and bath her feet, and afterward rub 
them veri steadi with the ointment; and so for a good time, and alway to 
keep a look out upon the gorge. 

and presently, when that I had taken a love care of her pretti feet, I 
tie the shoe again upon the maid, and so back to the cave; and the two 
of us to carri boulders, accord to our strength. and when we had a 
sufficient, we build a rough and clumsi wall, after that we were gone 
into the cave; and the wall rose nigh to fill the mouth of the cave, and 
made us to be somewis in darkness, but yet to feel in safety. and I had 
a good heed to make the chink of the wall veri close in the bottom, so 
that no small creep thing should come through unto us whilst that we 
slept. 

and afterward, naani set the scrip and the pouch to be for my pillow; 
but had the bundl of her torn garment to be for her own purpose. 

and I perceiv that she had the water-powd and a pack of the tablet 
to her hand for our waking, that she might prepar our food, and mayhap 
to wake a littl befor me, so that she have all readi to greet me from 
my sleep. but, indeed, I said naught to show that I knew; for I saw that 
thi thing did give her a dear pleasure, and truli it wa veri sweet to 
have her to these gentl duties, that did be to her so sure and quiet a 
delight. 

and mine own bade me that I lie; and she put the disko upon the outward 
side of me, to mine hand; and with a dainti and fear touch; for the 
weapon did be veri dread unto her thoughts; but yet a comfort 
thing to abid for our defence. and afterward, she cover me with the 
cloak, and kist me veri sedat upon the lips; and then to her own side, 
and to come veri nice and happi under the cloak, and so to her rest. 

and present she did sleep, as I perceiv by her breathings; and 
sure it did seem to my spirit that she had an utter and dear content 
in thi arrang of our slumber, so that she did be all at peac in all 
her being, becaus that she did be nigh unto me, that did be her own 
love. 

but, indeed, I could not sleep for a time; and surely, in a while, mine 
own did nestl unto me in her sleep, so sweet and dear as a child, and 
likewis as that it did be her right to be so anigh unto me; and I to be 
that I should put mine arm about her, but inde I move not, neither 
did I kiss her, as I did wish; for truli I should be veri manli with 
mine own maid that did be so trust and utter mine in her sleep. 

and present I wa over unto slumber also, and stir not for eight 
good hours, and did wake then to the hiss of the water, so that I 
knew mine own wa awak befor me, as she had planned, and wa make 
readi that we eat. 

and when she saw me move in the half-light, she gave out a littl word 
of joy, that I did be again to knowledg of her; and she came over, and 
put her arm about my neck, and kist me veri loving, thrice upon the 
lips. and, in verity, it came to me in that moment that I had been kist 
a while gone in my dreams, but scarc to know it; yet I perceiv now 
that mine own had taken a naughti advantag of my slumber, that she 
kiss me to her own pleasure; yet did the maid say no word of her 
naughtiness; and I to be likewise; but to resolv that I waken, mayhaps, 
on the next time, and so catch her in her sweet and secret delight of 
me. 

and, truly, thi doth sound quaint; but to be true. 

and I rose, and took down the half of the wall that did be across the 
mouth of the cave, and afterward lookt out; but there wa no sight of 
ani horrid thing in the gorge, save that one of the rat-th did 
slumber, veri gorged-seeming, upon the side of the littl fire hole. 

and afterwards, we eat and drank; and the maid then to rub me, as 
before; for I wa greatli stiff on my waking, as you shall think; but 
she came not into mine arm presently, as I did hope; but onli kist my 
shoulders, when that she had finished, and so bid me to dress. 

yet, after that I wa drest, and had mine armour full upon me, she must 
come unto me, and she slipt her two small hand into the one of mine, 
and so stood by me, veri silent. and sudden she put up her lip veri 
quiet and passionate, that I should kiss her; and she kist me once, as 
it did be as that her spirit kist mine, and all her be came unto me; 
and she gave me but that one kiss, and afterward slipt her hand veri 
gentl from mine, and made to the gather of our gear. 

but truly, I that love her so great, knew that a tumult of love did be 
hid in her heart. and, indeed, she look onc at me in such wise, that 
I grew near to a true humbl of heart becaus of the honour and love 
that did be in her eyes. 

and surely, it is a veri littl thing to die for such an one as mine own 
did be. and by thi saying, shall you perceiv my heart in that moment, 
and that I did pant, as it were, that I do some deed of love to show my 
love. and truli thi is but a natur desir and human, and the caus 
proper to the uplift of manhood. and sure you shall all mind you of 
such feel in the past love-days, that I do pray should be never 
past. 

and when we had our gear together, I left it in the cave, and took mine 
own over unto the hot pool that wa anigh to the fire-pit; and she to 
exclaim upon the rat-th that did be yet a-slumb upon the side of 
the fire-pit; and I to say that the thing did be no caus for fear, but 
rather, indeed, a good friend, in that it wa a devour of snakes, as 
you shall mind. 

and while that we talked, I bath the littl feet of naani; and surely, 
as I dri them upon my pocket-cloth, I wa taken that I should kiss 
them; and sure I kist them, and they did be veri shape and dainty, 
and all eas of travel by the care that I did take to thi end. 

and afterward I rub them with the ointment for a good while, and so 
had them again into the shoes, and the maid veri quiet, after that I had 
kist her feet that did be so dainty, but yet with a sweet naughti in 
her way, as my heart perceived, though she did nothing, neither said 
anything, to thi end; and wa truli veri obedient, and orderli to all 
my wishes. 

and we went back then to the cave, and the maid put the pot of the 
ointment back into the pouch, and she buckl the pouch and the scrip 
upon me; and the disko I had upon my hip; for I went nowis anywhere, 
without it, as you shall suppose. and she had the littl bundl of her 
cloth for her burden, and truly, I wa readi that she should carri so 
much; for we did be to act wisely, and she well abl to carri so small a 
thing, and I better to have my hand alway free to the disko and to the 
need of the way. 

and we went downward of the gorg at a strong speed, for there did be 
somewis of fifteen hour good journey, ere that we come out upon the 
far side of that place where the monster did be, and thi did be three 
hour to the upward begin of that place, and twelv hour journey 
then, in the least, that we should take to go through again into the 
light of the gorg below. and thi I did reckon from my note of mine 
upward journey, as you do know. 

and I made all clear to the maid, of the thing that did be befor us, 
and made not to hide the danger and horror, but yet to make not overmuch 
of the same. and she to walk close besid me, veri sweet and trustful, 
and to say that she fear naught, so that I should be there to have 
care of her; but onli that she did fear harm for me; and yet to have 
confid that I should slay all hurt thing that should be like to 
troubl us. and, truly, I did kiss her for her dear belief and love. 

now, in the middl part of the third hour, the air of the gorg did 
begin that it wa heavy, and to have a seem of fume that stang 
someth upon the throat, odd whiles. and there were present less of 
the fire-holes, and soon, as we did go the more downward, the begin 
of a great gloom, and to have smoke therein that made us to feel husky. 

and in the end of the fourth hour, we were come truli far downward 
within the gloom; and to be as that we grope in a fog of distaste; and 
to know not how we went with ani surety; for oft there did be an utter 
dark about us; and awhil the shine of a dull-glow fire-pit upon 
our sight, that did show us the gloom and dread of that place. 

and we went alway veri husht, and the maid to my back; but I did halt 
now and thi time, and make to know how she did be; and sure she 
whisper veri brave to me through the dimness, and onc did slip her 
hand into mine, and I to take off mine armour glove for a littl 
moment, that I hold her hand, and give her nice assurance. but, in 
verity, there wa terror in mine heart, that did be a terror far beyond 
the troubl of mine upward way; and sure I wa shaken newli with everi 
danger, lest that I should lose mine own, or she to come to ani hurt. 
and, indeed, you shall perceiv how I did be; for so should you be in a 
like case, and, in truth, it doth be an utter anxious and suffering. 

now when we had been two hour in the dark part of the gorge, I smell 
of the dread and horrid stink that you do wot of. and sure a great 
fear came upon me; for I perceiv that we did come among the monsters, 
or that one came anigh to us. 

and I whisper unto the maid that she halt; and we stood veri husht a 
while, and sure the stink did grow, and to be veri dread in the 
nostrils, so that I felt mine own maid to shake somewhat with the fear 
and disgust that thi thing did make in us. and present the stink 
did eas somewhat from about us; but whether there had gone past us a 
monster slug, I have no sure knowing; for there did be no fire-pit anigh 
to that place; so that there wa a great dark all about. 

and sure there wa a great slow and wet of the air, and dismal 
drip that made desol in the silence; and the feel of strang 
growth upon the boulders, as you do know, and oft an horrid slime and 
dankness; and the stink to be everywhere, so that we knew a constant 
disgust and fear. and alway the fume of sulphur, that did seem, in 
verity, to beat down upon us, utter heavi and sore upon our lungs. 

and so went we onward amid the smell that did be as of dead things; and 
oft did we make paus and hark, and had a great care as we did go by the 
dull fire-hol and fire-pits, that we should make no show of 
ourselv in the light. 

and sudden, as we did go by a great pit that burn veri deep and red, I 
reach back and caught mine own by the arm, and I set her gaze unto 
the right side of the gorge, which wa beyond the fire. and the maid 
went veri still, as she did see the thing that wa there; for in veriti 
it wa utter monstrous, and did shine veri wet-look in the light of 
the fire. and truli it move a littl with the head, thi way and that, 
stretch through the dark and the shadows, as you shall see a slug to 
move, and with no speed or sound, and nowis seem heed of aught. 
but yet did I fear that it smell us, if thi might be; and this, as 
you shall think, to be a veri natur fear. 

and alway, as I do mind, it seem to go blindli somewise, or to have 
that slow and strang move that doth make one to think of a blindness; 
but whether it did be truli blind, how shall I say; onli that it wa an 
utter monstrou brute, so great as the black hull of a ship, and veri 
dread unto our hearts. 

and we move not for a while, save that I pull mine own down into the 
hide of the boulder of that part; and she to put her hand veri 
anxiou unto me; yet not to be comforted, as I did half to think, but to 
persuad me, lest that I go to some adventur that should set me in a 
surer danger. and thi I perceiv in a littl moment, and love her for 
her care. 

but, indeed, I had no mind to aught, save that we come clear of that 
place; and I watch the monster, through place between the boulders; 
and surely, in a littl while, it sway the great head veri slow and 
quiet unto the cliff that did make that side of the gorge; and the brute 
set unto the cliff, and began that it went upward with a strang move 
of muscl that did go wavewis under the wet and horrid-gleam hide. 

and so, in a littl time, it wa gone quiet against the cliff, and the 
head-part did be upward in the dark above, so that it did be from 
our sight. but the monster bodi did be plain for a great way, and wa 
seem clung to the cliff, and to come downward out of the dark, as 
that it did be a great black ridg of soft and dread life upon the 
face of the cliff; and the tail wa someth less bulked, and to taper, 
and did trail outward into the gorg upon the boulders. 

and sure the thing did seem as that it slept, but that odd while the 
tail did lift a littl off the boulders, and curl somewise, and 
afterward come down again upon the boulders, mayhap in thi place and 
mayhap in that place, as we did watch, all hid. 

and it wa as that our sens and our spirit did assur us that the 
thing had no wot of us; but sure our fear did nigh to equal the 
comfort of thi sweet reason, and to make us think otherwise. 

yet, in a time, I made that we go forward togeth through the space 
that did be among the boulders. and I went creeping, and the maid to 
follow likewise. 

and oft I did pause, and made a watch upon the monster; but truli it 
move not, save as I have told; and I kept a great heed upon the maid, 
that she follow alway close unto my feet. 

and in the end we came safe from that place where the monster did be 
clung unto the great cliff in the night. 

and we went then for two great hour without adventure, save that onc 
the maid touch me that we pause; for that someth went by us where 
we did be in an utter dark place of the gorge, and no fire-hol anigh. 

and I knew that the thing did be near, even as the maid toucht me. and 
caught I the maid in the dark, and thrust her under the side of a 
boulder; and I crouch then befor her, with mine armour, that I should 
protect her from ani brutish thing. and the disko in my hand, and 
afterward an horrid time of waiting. 

and the stink of that part of the gorg grew veri dreadful, so that it 
did be as that we should not breathe, with the horror of the stink. and 
there went past us some horrid and utter monster, that made neither 
sound nor anything, save that there seem a strang nois that might be 
the breath of a great thing; but yet did be all uncertain, in that 
the side of the gorg cast the sound thi way and that, in an horrid 
whisper of echoes; so that we did not know whether the sound be made 
nigh to us, or afar upward in the etern of the night, where I did 
suppos the mountain to be join over the gorg in a monstrou roof in 
that part. 

and presently, the strang nois die in the upward height, and all 
about us; and the utter disgust of the stink went from us; so that we 
knew that the monster had gone past us, and did make downward through 
the dark gorge; and mayhap then to some lone and dread cavern of the 
world, as I did think. 

and, indeed, as I do mind, I had a sudden wonder at that time, and other 
whiles, as it did chance, whether thi way did be truli the olden way 
that the peopl of the lesser refug did travel in the olden days. and 
surely, as I did suppose, they had come some other way, or the gorg to 
be differ and less dread in the far-off years. and thi thing you 
shall agre with me to be a reason thinking. 

and after that the monster had gone a good while we went onward again, 
and with a great caution; and dread alway lest that we come upon that 
monster, in the darkness; but yet did we know by smell, and by all our 
consciousness, whether that we came nigh unto one of the monster slugs. 

then, in the end of the fifth hour in the dark part of the gorge, we 
came by the mouth of that great cavern, upon our left; and you to 
rememb the same. 

and I made paus in the darkness, and had the maid veri gentl by the 
arm, that she should look with me. and I whisper how that I past thi 
place, to my right, upon mine upward way, and how that I did think 
there to be a-plenti of monster cavern within the mountain that made 
the side of the gorge, and that, mayhap, the slug-creatur had there 
an home in such places, or came up, it might be, from some utter strang 
deep and mysteri of the great world. 

and the maid did bide veri close unto me, and silent, whilst that I 
whispered; for the terror of the place did be on her, yet not to make 
her lack of courage, but yet to put a monstrou awe upon her and a 
great and natur fear; and I likewise, as you do know. 

and we stay there, where we did be, a littl moment, and look 
downward into the bowel of the monster cavern; and the shine of the 
fire-hol beat over the cavern in the near part; but there did be an 
utter mysteri and deathli dark beyond the shine of the pit that did be 
within, as you shall remember. 

and, in verity, as we stay but to glance, I perceiv that there lay 
hump thing about the fire, and some to be black-seeming, and some to 
have a seem of whiteness, but with no sure in the colour to mine 
eyes. 

and there came a move in one of the humpt things, so that it did be as 
that an hill did wake unto an horrid life. and immedi I knew that 
the hump did be some utter monsters, mayhap even the great slugs, 
a-slumb about the fire-pit that did burn in that strang deepli 
cavern. and I saw that I did ill for our lives, that I should paus even 
for a littl moment to such staring. 

and immedi I whisper to mine own that we go with all our speed; 
for, indeed, I knew not whether that our near had wake that 
monster, or whether that it had but wake by chance. and truly, I wa 
utter eager that we be gone from that place, so swift as we might. 

and we went on then through all of the sixth hour that we did be in the 
slug part of the gorge, as I name it unto myself. and in all that hour, 
there did noth harm come anigh; only, as I did know presently, 
there came an uneas upon our spirits, but yet to be veri littl at that 
time, and we to be scarc know of it. and alway, as we went, there 
did be dark for the most, and odd-whil a vagu murmur of the 
night far above, as it did seem; and present the dull glare of a 
fire-pit to shine out far off below us in the gorge, and to seem veri 
dim and unreal unto us, by reason of the smoke and the fume that made 
a haze and a distast in the gorge. 

and presently, the murmur of the night to grow somewhat, and, 
afterward, the sound of the mutter of the fire-pit to come unto us; 
and the murmur to die unto our ear that did be hear now onli the 
dull muttering, and so we to know that the murmur of the night did be 
truli the far-off mutter of the fire-holes, and our eye to guid our 
hearing, and our reason to explain and knit the sounds; and so we to 
pass by the fire-hol with a great quiet and caution and ever with 
watchfulness, as you shall suppose. and afterward again into the dark; 
and present again the murmuring, to tell that we came unto anoth of 
the fire-pits, that wa yet afar off in the gorge, and made dim echo 
in the night. 

and alway we went veri watchful, and in grim fear; but with 
steadfast and good intent to win forth out of that desol and 
horror, and have alway so great a speed as the dark and the 
danger and the troubl of the way did allow. 

and in thi place I will make explan whi that I speak somewhil of 
fire-pit and otherwhil of fire-holes; for the hole did be those 
fire that burn nigh to the brim of the holes; but the pit were those 
place where the fire wa deepli in the earth. and thi thing I give for 
your enlightenment, even on a small matter; so that you shall have a 
clear knowledg to abid with me all the way; and you to agre of thi 
for wisdom, and I to be pleas that you so agree. 

and here also, I should tell that there did not come a mutter from 
all of the fire-hol and the fire-pits; but mayhap from thi one, and 
mayhap not from that one, accord to the way of the fire therein. and 
thi shall be plain unto you. 

and so shall you see us go, and the smoke and the bitter of the 
sulphur to be all about us; and oddwhil the murmur of a far-off 
pit, and oft the utter silence; and to pass thi time a lonesom 
fire-hole; and afterward the utter dark, or the half-gloom, all as might 
chance, accord to the near of the fires. and upward in the 
everlast night, the grim mountain to make a roof over us, as I did 
suppose. 

and all thi while did the unease, of which I have told, make upon us; 
so that, presently, mine own whisper unto me the thing that alreadi my 
spirit did half to perceive, that there came after us through the night 
some harm thing, that did be sure no great way off, as I did feel 
within me, and the maid to have a likeway belief. 

and, truli I thought at onc upon that brute that did wake downward in 
the mighti cavern, where did be the great inward fire-hole, as I have 
told; but whether thi did be true knowledg that we did be chase in 
the dark by that thing, or whether there came after us some other 
monster, I could have no sureness; but onli that we did be chased, and 
of thi I had assuredness. 

and I set the maid befor me, that I have myself readi to the danger 
that followed; and we made forward again then, so quick as we were 
abled; and she went veri wisely; for she had good wit and had note the 
way of my leading. 

and we went thu until the end of the seventh hour. and surely, in that 
time, we heard the murmur in the night which told of a fire-hol 
somewis befor us; and soon to have the red glare plain to our eyes, 
and the nois of the murmur to die away into the nearer mutter of 
the fire; and so present to be anigh; and we to make forward with a 
good speed, becaus that we fear utterli the thing that made quiet 
chase of us through the night. 

and oft I did look backward, and smelt the air, that I know whether it 
did be a monster slug-beast that chase us; but there did be no 
wors of the smell, to tell me aught. 

and alway, I did be fret in the heart, that we could make no greater 
speed; but, indeed, as you shall perceive, our go did be but a slow 
thing in the dark places, and even thu we had mani a sore tumbl and 
bruising. 

and by this, we were come almost unto the fire-hole; and immediately, I 
saw that I knew the place, for there went upward besid the fire, a 
great jagged of rock, that I had seen upon mine upward way. 

and surely, I caught the maid in an instant, and bent her, and she quick 
to obey with her body. and we were both immedi hid downward among 
the boulders. and thi I did, becaus I mind how that there did be 
mani of the monster nigh to thi same fire-hole, as I did go upon mine 
upward way. 

and we went forward then with an utter care; but yet to keep onward, 
becaus that there did be somewhat in chase of us. and, in verity, when 
that we were come opposit unto the fire-hole, I saw that there did be 
seven of the monster slug against the far side of the gorge, and did be 
all set upon their belli against the cliff, and their horrid head to 
be hid in the upward dark, and their tail to lie veri great and 
soft-seem in the bottom of the gorge, upon the boulders. 

and, lo! the maid toucht me, and she drew me to look upon the near cliff 
of the gorge. and truli there did be three of the brutish thing laid 
upward there, and a fourth did be hump somewhat upon a great ledg 
that did be upward of the gorge, and just to be plain to our eyes. 

and surely, it wa as that we did be all surround by such monsters, and 
to make the heart sink, and fear to lie upon our hopefulness. but, 
indeed, the maid show a good spirit, and I to have fierc determin 
that we come free of that gorge, and afterward, in time, unto our mighti 
home. 

and we made forward again, and did go creep among the rock and the 
boulders; and so came present past that place, and had not wake the 
monsters, if that inde they did truli sleep. 

and I made halt a moment upon the far border of the light from the 
fire-hole, and I lookt backward up the gorge, perchanc that I should 
see the thing that follow us. but, indeed, there came noth out of 
the dark of the upward gorge, so that I knew that there did be some safe 
space to our backs, which did be truli a comfort thing. 

and here I should tell how that there wa no great stink in that 
place where did be so mani of the slug-beasts, and thi to puzzl me; 
and in the end to make me think that some of those horrid thing did 
stench more great than others; but yet I to have no certainti in thi 
matter, as you do perceive. and, truly, thi thing troubl me; for I 
had been comfort that my nose should tell me when that the thing that 
made chase of us should draw nigh in the darkness; and now, in verity, I 
knew not what to have for assurance; for the awared of the spirit 
wa but a vagu thing, and no more in such a matter, than a feel as 
of an inward warning. 

and we went onward then for a great hour, and with an horrid uneas upon 
us; and thrice we did go by fire-pit in the darkness; and alway I made 
paus upon the far side of the light, that I should look backward; but 
did have no sight of aught; yet did my spirit or my fear warn me with 
new fear, and a greater sens of nearness; and the maid to confess also 
to thi thing. 

now, we saw not ani of the slug for a long while, neither had there 
been ani about the three fire-holes; and the air of the gorg wa grown 
someth sweet and free somewhat of the stench of dead-seem things; 
but yet to be veri bitter with fume and smoke and sulphur stinks. 

and lo! in the middl of the tenth hour, as we did go, pain and with 
anxious in a veri dark place of the gorge, there came unto us again 
the smell that told to us that one of the monster did be anigh. and 
sure we had both a great fear, in that we had belief that it did be a 
sign that the thing that made chase, did draw near upon us. but yet did 
I to use my reason also, and to know that the stink might be from some 
monster that we were come nigh to in the dark of that place; and I 
whisper thi unto the maid, and she to say, veri husht, that it might 
be so; but to have no belief; and I to be likewise, as you do see. 

and we pusht forward at a new speed, and had mani bitter falls, so that 
we did be all bruised; but not to know it at that time, becaus that our 
fear did be so keen. and oft we made a littl paus and harkt; but there 
did be onli the dismal drip of water from on high; and present the 
murmur of the night, that told that we drew near unto a new firepit. 

and sure thi wa a great easement to our spirits, in that we should 
have light to perceiv our danger, and mayhap to win free. but to be in 
that utter dark, wa a thing to break the courage, and to breed belief 
that we did be utter helpless, and all wrapt in horror and despair. 

and the stink grew ever, as we made forward; so that I knew not whether 
there did be great monster besid the fire-pit that wa to our front, 
as I have told, or whether it made plain the advanc of the pursuer. 
and we onli to be abl to make our best speed, and to be weari with hope 
that we rush not blind into death; and alway to be chill in the back 
with the belief that the thing that made chase did be veri close in that 
utter dark, and to gain upon us. 

and we knew not whether to make our belief to be the tell of the 
spirit or the utter of our fears; and so shall you perceiv our 
plight; and we but to be abl to make forward. and, in verity, the 
dread of that time doth shake me now to think upon, and you also, 
if that you have gotten my tell to your hearts, so that your human 
sympathi doth be with me. 

and there came present to our ear the far mutter of the fire-pit, so 
that veri soon the murmur wa lost to us in the night, and onli the 
slow mutter to be plain. and the dull loom of the fire shone afar 
off, through the night and the smoke and fumings; and we to a great 
speed, and to pant with fear; but yet with a fresh of hope again to 
sweeten us. 

and we came nigh to the fire-pit, and lo! the smell did be grown veri 
drear and foul; but there did be no slug-beast near the fire. and by 
this, we perceiv that we did be truli in an utter danger, in that the 
pursuer did be upon us, and the stink to tell thi to be truth, and 
our spirit to have warn us veri strong and proper. 

and I stopt near to the fire-pit, which did be great, and veri 
red-glowing; and I lookt upward of the gorge, into the night of the 
gorg that we did come from; but the monster wa not yet upon us to work 
our death. and I lookt to the side of the gorge, and the maid to have 
the same thought that did be mine, that we climb the mountain that made 
the side of the gorge. 

and I lookt veri keen first to thi side, and then did run overward, 
that I look more close upon the other; and afterward back again; for it 
did seem that we should have a greater eas upon the side that we did 
be. 

and I askt the maid whether that she did be prepared; and she to be veri 
white and wearied, and all besmirch with the dank and growth upon 
the boulder and the hidden pool of the gorg and the drip of the 
waters; but yet did she be sound in her courage, and to show that she 
had all belief and abid in me, and her judgement likewis to be with 
mine, in that her own reason did approve. 

and I took the bundl of her torn cloth from her, for it did be at 
her girdle, and like to troubl her movings; but she to refuse, veri 
determined, in that I did be alreadi over-burdened. and I to be firm in 
my deciding, and to make her to yield the bundle, the which I hookt unto 
the "hold" of the diskos, where it did be to mine hip. 

and the maid to be there, a littl figure, and white in the face, and 
strang angered, and her anger mixt with hidden acknowledg that I 
did be her master, and half to be mind that she move not from where 
she did stand, and part to be reason and fear of the hidden 
beast; and in part also to thrill in her womanhood unto the man that did 
be so master unto her. and all to pass in a littl moment, and we to 
be to the gorg side, and busi veri eager to the climb. 

and the maid to be first, as I did heed, and I to follow, and have 
constant look to the task and to her safety, and alway to be bitter 
anxiou for our speed to be good, and to be anxiou the more then, lest 
that mine own should slip; for there did be an horrid wet upon the 
side of the gorge, as you shall have guessed, and horrid growth that 
blotch the great rock mightily, and made an utter slipperiness, if 
that they did be trod upon; and we to have to come so clear of all such 
matters, as we might, and yet to be speedi for our lives, and likewis 
to lack no care and thought to the set of our hand and of our feet 
in place fit to the lift of our weight. 

and truli you shall see that we went veri desperate, and I to give word 
to the maid that she look not downward, the which I wa urgent upon, 
lest that she come giddi in the heart. but I, as you shall think, could 
scarc to keep from fear peer below, so that I learn speedi 
whether the pursuer did come yet into the light of the fire-hole, 
beneath. 

and presently, the maid did gasp veri weak and troubl with the 
sore of the climb; and I came higher, and set mine arm about her, as 
we did be there upon the face of the cliff; and she stopt veri still a 
littl while, and an eas did come to her, and an assur of safety. 
and surely, I kist her there where we did be in that upward place, and 
her lip did trembl unto mine; and her courag and strength to come 
back into her, so that in a minut she did make onc more to the 
climbing. 

and we came present to a place where a great ledg did be, that jut 
out from the mighti cliff, and wa sure a huge way abov the gorg 
bottom. and the ledg sloped, and there were on the ledge, great stone 
and boulder that did make lodgement there through eternity. 

and I lookt veri care to our way, and saw that we did be in the path 
of a mighti rock that wa over-nigh unto the edg of the shelf-place, 
and did put fear upon me, in that it seem that it should come down 
with great thunder upon us, if that we but shook the place where it 
did be. 

and I caught the maid veri swift and gentle, and shape our path unto 
one side of that great rock, and did present lose my fear, when that 
we did come safe from under it. 

and in a minut after, we were come upward upon the ledge, and a veri 
safe place it did seem, and sure as that no monster should be abl to 
come upward upon us. and thi I did tri to make for comfort unto 
ourselves; but that we both to know how that the great slug could lie 
up against the side of the gorge, and sure it did be like that they 
should be abl to come upward clear of the gorge, and so to the place 
where we made to have safety. and I had no thought to deni thi thing, 
when that it wa clear to my brain; but set rather that we should have 
some way to fight the monster, if that we did be discovered. 

and I thought in a moment upon the stone that did be about; and the 
maid in the same moment cri out that we should push the big rock down 
upon the slug that we believ to have chase of us, and indeed, the rock 
to be a great weapon, if we could but stir it, as you shall think. 

and alway, as we talked, veri hushed, we lookt downward into the 
deep of the gorge, unto the upward end of the fire-light; but there 
came no thing yet unto our knowledge, onli that the stink did rise up 
to us through that great distance. 

and the fire-pit to seem now a veri small burning, and to give no great 
light up to us; and we neither to be abl to see veri clear of the 
gorg bottom, in that the haze of the fume and the smoke wa in the air 
of the gorge, and made uncertainty; and we to be nowis proper free of 
the smoke, even where we did be. 

and we watched, veri set with anxious and fear expect of the 
monster; and did be both yet lost of breath, and the maid that she made 
her word someth broken for a littl while. 

and lo! in a moment, naani cri out veri low and sharp that the thing 
did come; and I to see a move of somewhat, in the same instant, in the 
gorg that lay upon the upward side of the fire-pit. 

and immedi I saw the great and monster head of the beast come 
forward into the shine from the pit; and the head did be of a blotch 
white, and to have the eye upon great stalk that came from the forward 
part of the head; and the stalk to be set downward, so that the eye 
lookt upon the bottom part of the gorge. and sure thi doth be veri 
horrid-seem to the mind of thi age, but yet to have a less 
strang unto the two of us that had seen mani horrid sights, as you 
do know. 

and as the monster came forward the more into the light, I saw that the 
great and utter mighti bulk did be all of that same whiteness, that did 
be so set over with blotch and a seem of unhealth. but, truli the 
colour wa proper to a creatur that did abid in so great a darkness, 
as you shall say, yet had those slug that we did see, been black and 
shining, for the most, as I have told; and thi to be as I saw, and I 
not to heed here that I tri unto explain in thi place; els should 
I be never eas of my task, as you do see. 

and the monster slug came onward, and as it did go, it set the stalk of 
the eye in among the boulders, as that it did search; sway now thi 
way and now that way, from side to side of the gorge, and alway it 
push the stalk of the eye inward among the boulders; and so to go 
forward, searching. and truli it wa veri dread to see the thing make 
search for us, and to go so steadfast to so dread a purpose. 

and, indeed, I saw it not so plain as might be, becaus of the haze of 
the fume and the smoke that did lie in the air of the gorge, as I have 
told, and made someth vagu the sight at thi time and that; but yet 
we did both see a strang thing; for when that the great white bodi did 
be come half into the light, the slug-beast set out a big tongu among 
the boulders, after that it did peer thereunder; and the tongu did be 
veri long, and white, and someth thin-seeming; and the monster lap 
inward in a moment a great snake from among the boulders, and the tongu 
did hold upon the snake, as that there did be sure teeth or rough 
upon the tongue; but yet the distanc to be too great for ani sureti of 
the sight, as you do know; and moreover, there did be the uncertainti of 
the haze within the air. 

and the slug took the snake inward, all as it did lash and wriggle, and 
swallow it in a moment; and, in verity, that snake did be a big and 
horrid creature, els had it been not so plain to our sight; but it did 
be as a worm unto the monster, and gone instant. 

and immediately, the slug-beast went again to searching, and the head to 
sway from thi side unto that side of the gorge; and by the wide and 
eas of thi sway shall you perceiv the utter great of the 
beast. 

and alway, as it did come downward of the gorge, it thrust the stalk of 
the eye inward among the boulders, look all ways; and oft the breath 
did come from it, as a cloud; and the stink to rise up unto us, veri 
plain and an abomination. and again, we saw the beast set the tongu in 
among the boulder of the gorg bottom; and it lickt forth a snake that 
did seem so thick as a man in the body, and the snake to thrash in the 
great white tongue, and to be immedi drawn inward, and gone utter. 

and surely, as the thought did stir in me, there did be a great merci 
over us, in that we did not die by such a serpent in some dark and 
horrid place of the gorge. but yet, as it is like to be, mayhap the 
snake did be onli anigh to the fire-holes; yet doth it be anywis a 
wondrou thing that we had come so free of them alway; and truli to 
learn, wa to be given a new terror. 

now the monster wa come fulli into the shine of the fire-pit, and wa 
upon thi side; and the fire to make a shine against the side of the 
slug, so that odd while I did perceiv veri plain the huge wrinkl 
and muscl of the skin, as the beast made onward. and alway it did 
search, thrust in the eye-stalk among the boulders. 

and sudden, it made pause, and did begin that it brought all the mighti 
bodi together, and humpt itself, and brought the head-part round unto 
the bottom of the cliff that made thi side of the gorge. and it 
gather itself, and afterward did lengthen upward against the cliff, 
and begin to climb. and lo! I saw that the beast did scent of us, and 
made to come upward to destroy us. 

and as the mighti hill of the bodi did come into length against the 
great cliff-side, the beast set the eye-stalk into thi cave and that, 
as it did go, and into all crannies; and so lengthen upward veri 
straight and monstrou and dread unto us, and did be as a white and 
mildew hill, that had an horrid life. and the stink to come up, so 
that we did be like to lose our breath with the dread of it, as 
you shall think. 

and surely, for a moment, I look unto the rock upon the ledge, and 
thi way and that way, and upward unto the everlast dark that did 
be abov us, and again unto the great rock that did seem to quiver upon 
the edge, as I have told. and I wa grown utter desper in a moment; 
for, truly, it did seem in that instant that there did be no power in 
the world that should slay so utter mighti a monster. 

and immediately, even as I did despair, I had run veri swift unto the 
great rock, and the maid with me, both veri strain and shaken with the 
horror of the thing that did make upward unto us so sure and intent. 

and I set my strength unto the rock, and heaved; but inde the rock 
gave not from the place where it did be; so that I had a dread 
despair; for I saw that it did be more secur than had seemed. and the 
maid lent her strength unto mine, and we heav together, with sore 
pantings, and littl cri to guid our endeavour and becaus we could 
not be contain in that moment. 

and sure it seem that the great rock moved, and lo! as we strove 
togeth to the task, there came a vast and sudden grinding, and the 
rock to ceas from our shoulders, and to be gone from us, or scarc we 
did wot of the happening. and the rock went over, and rush downward 
upon the monster, and with mighti crashings, as it did grind and crush 
the face of the cliff-sid with a quick and constant thundering. and I 
caught the maid, as she did stagger upon that dire upward edg becaus 
that she had set her strength so utter to the endeavour, and the rock to 
be gone so sudden, as you do see, and she to be like to follow after. 
and she clung unto me, and I to hold her veri safe as I lookt down upon 
the fall of the rock. and behold! the great rock smote the monster in 
the humpt part of the back, below of the head, and did enter into the 
monster, even as a bullet doth strike, and wa gone instant from my 
sight into the vitals. 

and there came a mighti sound of anguish from the monster; and the 
monster did loosen from the cliff, and to crumple, as it did seem, and 
sink backward. and a great steam of dread breath to go upward from 
the beast, and a reek; and it made again the strang and horrid nois of 
pain, and the gorg to be yet full of the echo of the rock thundering, 
and with the nois of the rock there wa now mingl the horrid sound 
of the death-cri of the beast. and the gorg to be fill with dull 
and dread echoings, as that an hundr monster die in thi place 
and that of the dark in the gorge, and all to be bred of the nois 
of that mildew hill a-dying. 

and the echo ceas not for a while, even after that the monster did 
be utter quiet; for truli they came present from far upward and 
downward of the gorge, out of all the etern of the night, and to be 
as that they came backward veri faint out of lonesom miles, and out of 
the strang deep of unknown cavern of the world. and so in the end 
to silence; and the far bottom of the gorg to be fill with a white 
and horrid hill, veri dreadful, and that did yet quiver to show the 
slow of death. and alway a dread reek and stink to fill all 
the air, even unto the height, as of the grave. 

and I stood upward in that far, high place, and held the maid veri 
strong and tender; and she to have cover her ear from that dread 
crying; and to be yet shaken with the great and horror of the die 
of the monster, and the near that she did come unto falling, as you 
have seen. 

and present she came less to tremble, and did weep veri easeful, even 
as a babe doth weep; and I, mayhap, to be not over-steady, as you shall 
think; but yet to have a great glad set in my heart, and a triumph, 
and an utter grace of thankfulness. 

and I held mine own, veri tender and sure, as I did say; and she veri 
soon to be eas of her trouble, and the shock to be someth gone from 
her. and she lookt up at me, and slipt her arm upward about my neck, 
and pull me downward unto her, that she might kiss me. 

and we to talk then, of the go down; and sure thi did seem a great 
and danger task; for, truly, we had come upward pretti easi in the 
excess of our fear; but how we might go down, with our blood cool, I did 
be all in doubt. 

yet, befor that we did aught else, I led the maid upward on to the safe 
part of the ledge; and we sat there, veri quiet and weary, and she did 
be lean against me. and we eat, each of us, two of the tablets, and I 
to scold and coax mine own to thi end, and she to obey and to be better 
afterward, becaus that she had eat. and we drank some of the water, and 
did rest a time longer. 

and presently, our courag and strength wa come back into us; and we 
packt the scrip again, and the maid set it fast to my back; and we went 
then to the edg of the shelf, and lookt downward, thi way and that; 
and surely, there did be no way to go, save the way we came; onli that 
we might shape our downward climb to bring us a littl below that 
place where the dead monster did be. 

and I saw by mine own heart and by the pale of the maid, that we 
should do well that we consid the thing no more; but make to the task. 

and I went immedi over the edg of the shelf, upon my belly, and I 
bade naani to follow. and we began then that we go downward; and, in 
verity, we went downward for, mayhap, a great hour; and I gave help 
alway unto mine own, as I could; and she to come after me veri brave, 
and made that she hold back her fear, and come downward of that cliff, 
that did be oft like to a mighti wall. and surely, even as we came down, 
I marvel how we did ever go upward, even though fear did aid us; but, 
indeed, I do think it doth be easier to climb safely, than to come 
backward; for thi is how I have found. 

and we made rest thrice upon ledg of the cliff. and afterward came 
downward again; and alway veri slow and with exceed heed where our 
hand and our feet did go, that we slip not suddenli to our death. 

and once, as I did see, the maid wa lost of all her strength, and did 
be go to fall, becaus that she did be all gone into a sudden 
weak of the head in an instant. and she did be silent, even in that 
moment, the which doth be marvel unto me, and to give me a strong 
pride of her, as you shall understand, if that ever you have loved. and 
surely, I came upward, in a moment, that littl space that wa between, 
and had mine arm about mine own veri swift, and held her hard and fierc 
against the cliff; and thi I did that she should feel how that she 
could never fall; and immediately, her strength and her dear courag 
came back into her; and I kist her, there against the mighti cliff; and 
afterward she did have power again to come downward safe. 

and present we were come to the gorg bottom, and mayb an hundr 
pace down the gorg from that place where did be the dead monster, all 
sunk into an ugli and horrid heap, so great as a small hill. 

and a dread stink did hang in all that part of the gorge, by 
reason of the slug; and sign of disgust, as you shall think; and the 
great and mildew bodi of the thing yet to settl and twitch, as I did 
look, as it did come properli unto death in all that mighti bulk. and 
everywhere, the skin of the beast did be set into great wrinklings, and 
horrid blotch to be upon the improp white thereof; and truli I 
did be in hast that I turn the maid away from that thing, and that we 
hast downward of the gorge. 

and we went then for two good hours, and alway I did hearten the maid, 
and she to go veri husht and trust by me; but truli I did be in an 
anguish of heart, becaus that I wa newli awar that there did be such 
great and dread serpent in that part of the gorge, as you do also 
know. and I wa not over-fear for myself, but for the maid that did 
have no armour to protect her dear body. and becaus that I wa so set 
with thi trouble, I took the maid present into mine arms, that I 
carri her, and so to have her clear of aught that should lie among the 
boulders. 

and, in verity, mine own did show an anger veri surpris and 
determined; for I said not whi I should carri her--fear to give her a 
greater unease--but onli that she did be weary, and I veri strong and 
willing. 

and, indeed, I could not bring her to reason, without I told her, which 
wa not mine intent; for she did refus me to carri her; and said that 
truli I had need of no ad burden unto my labours. 

and when she saw that I would not be move by her reasonings, she made 
to win upon me by her love ways; but, indeed, I onli kist her; and 
went forward with her in mine arms. and she half naughty, that I did be 
so heedless of her wishings, and somewis hurt also; and so to be silent 
in mine arms; yet mayhap to be someth stir in her nature, that I 
did be steadfast to mine intention, despit that her will did be 
contrary. 

and thi I do believ to be truth, becaus that, afterward, I do think 
that she lay there in mine arms, onli as a woman that doth be in the 
hand of her master that hath all her love. 

and in thiswis we went forward. 

and in the end of the two hour that we did go, there wa come the end 
of the dark part of the gorge; and we to be outward of that mighti roof 
of the mountains, as I do think it to have been; and the air to be free 
of the stink of the monsters, and the fire-hol to be veri plenty, and 
their smoke to go upward veri proper; so that we had no more the 
bitter of their fume in our throats. 

and there did be a pretti good light, to go by the contrast of the past 
hours; and I set mine own again to her feet, and made that she keep to 
my rearward, so that if there did be ani serpent to our path, they 
should come first under my feet, and thiswis to work no harm to me, 
becaus of mine armour, neither to naani, mine own maid. 

now by thi time, it wa somewhat of nineteen great hour sinc we did 
sleep; for we had been a long while make that we come safe from the 
slug; and, indeed, we had come downward with a less speed than I did go 
through upon mine upward way, as you shall mind; and thi to be that 
mine own did not have the hard strength that wa in my bodi to the 
endur of great labour and stress; and thi sure all to be plain 
unto you that have been with me in all my journey. and, moreover, there 
must be kept to mind the three hour that we had gone, ere we were come 
proper into the dark part of the gorge; and so all to be rememb unto 
you; and also you to mind that we did be wake a time, ere that we set 
forward upon that day' journeying. 

and we did go almost in joyous-wise, becaus that we were come safe out 
of that dread place; and surely, odd while I did feel the hand of 
mine own naughti one to be hookt veri pretti and sli into the backward 
part of my belt, as that she did make a pretend that she drive me 
befor her; and sure thi doth be a strang thing to tell upon; for 
there did be no knowledg of the olden hors in all the etern of that 
dark world; but yet, maybe, some dear olden memory-dream did set her 
hand unconsci to thi pretti work. 

and, in verity, onc I turn veri sudden, and had her swift into mine 
arms, as she did pretend to drive me; and she to laugh with a sweet and 
joyou gurgl against mine armour; and I to heed that I hurt her not, 
becaus I did be like an iron man that should put arm about a tender 
maid. 

and we lookt alway now for a place that should be proper to our rest and 
to our sleep; and when it did be close upon the end of the twentieth 
hour of that journey, the maid show me a cave that was, mayhap, fifti 
good feet upward in the right side of the gorge. 

and I lookt about, and saw that there did be two fire-hol anigh, and a 
warm spring to make a basin of water, that did lie between the fires; 
and all veri well set to our need, as I did perceive; for, indeed, we 
did be utter besmirch with the filth of the slug part of the gorge, 
and to need that we be nice and fitli washed, befor that we have ani 
comfort of our selves. 

and I bade naani to wait a littl minute; and I lookt well up the gorg 
and well down the gorge; and lo! there did be no thing to set me in 
unease; and I told mine own that she keep a sharp and steadfast 
watching, and not to heed me; and thi I said, becaus I knew she did be 
like otherwis to look at me and be over-anxious, as I go upward to the 
cave; and, indeed, she to be better anyway in watch of the gorge, and to 
cri out to me, if that anyth came anigh, whilst that I went upward. 

and I made upward to the cave; and wa come there pretti quick; and 
truli it did be good for our purpose, and fresh-seem and dry, and to 
have no hole that I could see for the hide of creep things. 

and I call down gentli to the maid that the cave did be proper; and 
she to show her gladness, and to be look upward at me, instead of the 
way of the gorge, as I set her; and truli she did be a dear and human 
littl maid, and utter mine; so that I did find a new joy in each small 
lack of wisdom, and thi just so much as that she had done a wondrou 
proper thing. and truly, you shall say, there wa some proper to her 
heart, in that she could abid not but to watch me. 

and I went quickli down to mine own; for there wa alway an uneas upon 
me, save when I did be nigh to her, in chanc of trouble. 

and when I wa come down to her, the maid did be seem a littl in 
thought; and afterward show me how that she did be all in a piti 
disgust of the dirt and slime and the drip of the gorge, that did 
be on her, and had made her garment utter wet and bemired, so that she 
did feel that her veri bodi wa a repuls unto her. 

and I saw how it did be with naani; and I went to the warm pool, and 
felt that it did be not over-hot, and afterward found the deepness, by 
the handl of the diskos, and thi to be scarc of three feet, and the 
water veri clear to show me the bottom, so that it wa sure a nice 
and proper place to be for such a purpos as I did think. and I set some 
of the water to my mouth, use my hand; and truli there did seem no 
hurt chemic in the water; and therefor wa I eas that the maid 
should have the desir that I did see to be in her mind. 

and I saw that I should be help to mine own, if that I make the 
arrang of thing to be in mine own hands. and I went back unto the 
maid, and told her that the pool wa veri nice to be for a bath-place; 
and that she to hast to wash herself, whilst the gorg did be free of 
ani creatur or monster. 

now I saw that naani wa troubled, and fear that I did be go to 
leav her, and yet did be paus a littl in her words, to show me all 
that she did wish. 

and surely, I stoopt and kist her, as she did look so wist in her 
littl puzzlement; and immedi I remov her troubl veri natural, 
and told that I should stand guard anigh to her, the while that she 
bathed. and, truli she did be at eas on the moment, and mayhap 
someth surpris to know wherefor she had been someth a-lack to 
ask me. but, in truth, it did be veri natural. 

and I told her to be so quick as she might, which wa a needless thing 
to say, yet to start her; and she to go quietli to obey me; but first to 
take the cloak out of the hold upon my shoulders, and to unfold it, and 
so to the pool. and I to stand with my back thatwards, and to lean, 
ready, upon the diskos. 

and present she did be in the water, as I knew; and I to be her man, 
veri sure and gentl to her and sedate. and truly, as you shall think, I 
did love that I be to stand guard to her in her dear maidenhood; and 
she, after that she wa cheer and warm by the delight of the water, 
to sing veri low and happi to herself, where she did be to my back. 

and, sudden, the sing to cease, and the maid screamed; and I to have 
no thought of improp modesti but turn instant to the maid. and in a 
moment, I saw what did troubl her; for there came a serpent out of the 
water; and the maid to be all adrift with natur modesty, and with her 
fear of the serpent. and I wa come into the pool in a moment, in mine 
armour, and did lift the maid, nake and wet into mine arms, and had her 
instant from the water, and upon the side of the pool; and there I wrapt 
the cloak about her; and ran veri quick and kill the serpent, as it 
did go offward among the boulders. and sure it did be so thick as 
mine arm, and to have come from some hole that did be hid in the bottom 
of the pool. 

and I came back then to mine own, and took her into mine arms, and set 
the cloak well about her; and she to cri and to trembl with the shock 
and disturb of the thing; but soon to be eased, and readi to laugh 
with me. 

and so she wa come proper to her happi again, and I veri gentl 
and joyou with her, for truli my heart had been sick that she had come 
so nigh to that horrid danger. 

and I eas the scrip from me, and open it, and made her to take two 
of the tablets, and she to refus to eat, save I compani her also; and 
inde I did be veri willing, for truli my belli wa alway empty. and 
she to be veri glad to eat, becaus she did be clean now, and to have no 
more disgust of herself. and afterward, we drank some of the water. and 
soon we did be finished, and she to ask for her girdl that I did give 
her with the knife, as I have sure told. and she belt the cloak veri 
grace about her; and lookt veri dear and pretti with her littl bare 
feet; and her hair veri love upon her shoulders, for she did wear 
alway in the gorg the line of my head-piece, and so had her hair dri 
and sweet. 

and, in verity, I did mind now, how that she did look veri beauti in 
her bath, as I had gone to succour her from the snake; and I to be 
nice wholesom in thi remembering, becaus of my love, but yet to be 
know that I wa sweetli stir to new things; and did not know 
befor that a maid lookt in the same moment so holi and so human. and 
afterward, in odd whiles, I remembered; but never to think overmuch, 
becaus that I did feel inwardli that I should be gentli wise in such 
things; and you to understand my heart in this, if that ever you have 
loved. 

and surely, the maid brought me from my dream veri sensible, in that 
she had me to stand; and she wa gone about me veri swift and natti with 
her pretti fingers, that she eas me of mine armour. 

and afterward, she bade me to strip and wash, whilst that she keep watch 
for me of the gorge. and she took the diskos, and lean upon it, veri 
brave and proper; but yet, as I do think, with somewhat of roguish 
within her, veri deep hid, and scarc known unto herself. 

and I warn her to be veri wise with the great weapon; for it did fit 
onli to fight in my hands, and did be like to caus harm to ani that 
should meddl with it or make to use it, save me. 

and naani to nod that she did hear me, and to be half in fear of the 
thing, and half to feel that it did be friendli to her; and so to stand 
guard for me; and truli to seem a veri sweet and slender maid, despit 
the big of the cloak; and the great weapon to seem more great in her 
small hands; and to mind me how strong I did be. and sure you shall 
think me in conceit; but truli I did be glad to be so strong; and a 
proper thing for pride, if that there be no scorn for other therein. 
and you to agre with me in thi thing, or to be lack of sympathi and 
good human understanding. 

now I washt me, not by go down into the pool; for inde I did not 
wot whether there be ani more snake hid there in some other hole. and 
the way I washt, wa that I dipt my head-piec into the hot pool, and 
pour the water over me, and rub my bodi veri strong with my hands; 
and there to be, surely, some certain chemic in the water that aid 
mine efforts; for the water went veri smooth under my hands. 

and when I wa done, I washt my pocket-cloth veri speedi in the pool, 
and wrung it, and did then wipe my bodi so dri as I should; and 
afterward I wrung the cloth again, and set it about my loins, and so to 
be as proper as I might. 

and I did call to the maid that I wa proper, and she to come then and 
kiss me; and she gave back to me the diskos, and set me that I stand 
anigh to the nearer fire-hole, and so to be that I should guard her, and 
in the same time be come free of the chill of the gorge, which wa not 
great in that place. 

and sure I did mean that I help her; but she would have no help in her 
work that she did say to be her glad right; but bade me that I to mine 
own work to be her dear protector, as she did call me. and I to lift 
that wil one into mine arms, a moment, and to give her a veri love 
hug, and for that time to have no fear that I harm her, becaus that I 
wa freed of the hard of the armour about me, as you do know. 

and sure she to feel veri dear and pretti in mine arms, and she kist 
me the onc with a littl passion of love; and immedi to want to go 
from me; so that I freed her in a moment, as wa ever my way. and she 
then to paus a small space off from me, and lookt at me with a light in 
her eyes, and half to put out her arm that she be taken again into 
mine; but so to cease, ere she yield to her heart; and turn from me 
immedi to the task of the washing. 

and she took first my body-vest, and washt it veri quick and clever in 
the pool, and afterward came over by me, and spread it upon the hot flat 
rock anigh to the fire-hole. 

and she got then my chang body-vest from the bundl of her torn 
garments, where she did put it to be washt on opportunity, even as now; 
and mayhap to like that it should lie in her bundl with her own 
garments, for so, as I do mind, the thought came to me veri natural; but 
she to say naught to lead me thus; yet to be a veri honest and dear 
maid, and to have littl secret way of love, as I did perceive, that I 
did not be told of. 

and she washt the second body-vest, and set it to dri by the first; and 
afterward did likewis with all my garments, and came then to the 
wash of her own. 

and lo! as she spread it also to the drying, there came to mine heart 
that the maid did have onli thi one rough and thick garment, that did 
be the armour-suit, as I have told. and sure it did be dread that 
she have the hard of that strong knit and fibrou garment to be 
next to her dear body, and I to be in comfort with the soft of my 
body-vest. 

and I wa all anger in a moment, that she had gone thiswise, while 
that I had been gentled, as it might be. and I bade naani take the 
second vest to her own use when it did be dry. and she to look upward 
from where she did turn the garment upon the hot rock; and to mean in 
the first to deni me. but inde she wa quick to see that I did be 
truli in anger; and mine anger to come becaus that I wa hurt that thi 
did be, and becaus that I wa shame that she had gone so rough-clad, 
the while that I had no thought to the matter. and moreov becaus that 
she had known her lack, and did not tell me of the thing. 

but yet I did have a great tender in the backward part of mine 
anger, becaus that I perceiv all the unselfish and delight of her 
love that did be about thi littl matter, as you shall see, if you have 
gone alway with me. 

but mine anger yet to be someth hard, becaus I did see that I have 
need to watch the maid, that she put not her dear bodi to pain, that I 
might come unknow to some littl pleasur or ease, as did be now as 
I have shown. and truli it did be sweetli done in love; but to be 
somewis lack of judgement; and so shall you know somewhat of the way 
that I did be angered, and to have understand with me; but if you 
have not, you shall think it to be naught, and that the maid did need 
onli that she be kist, and to be shaken a littl in playfulness, and 
warn to heed that I did be earnest; and mayhap you to be somewis 
right, and not to guess far off from the inward deep of my heart. 
but yet it doth be veriti that I wa truli angered, and fit to shake 
mine own, and in the same moment to be utter tender unto her. and sure 
thi doth be all a contradiction, and the human heart to be a wayward 
thing, whether it doth be of a man or of a woman. 

and naani, as I do think, to have love the chafe of that rough garment 
for love' sake, and to go veri humbl and loving, as I lookt at her; 
but in veriti to be never gone from the sweet naughti that did be 
alway in her heart, and to plan even in that moment some new and secret 
servic unto me, that should be for her quiet joy, and to be hid from 
me, until that my wit should come upon it to uncov it. and in veriti a 
young man doth want that he whip hi maid and kiss her, and all in the 
one moment. and, indeed, he to have delight in both. 

and she obey me that time, as alway when I did be earnest, without 
more word. and sure that naughti one did know how I love her. 

and the maid washt then her torn garment that did be in the bundle, and 
had gotten soil by the slime of the dark part of the gorge. and she 
put these to dry, and afterward wash mine armour and the scrip and the 
pouch and the cloak-hold, and all such matter of our gear; and so to be 
present done. 

and she wa heed then that she turn the garment upon the hot 
rock; and afterward did attend to my bruisings. and when she did rest, I 
lookt to her pretti feet, and rub them veri gentl and constant with 
the ointment; and sure they did be pretti well; but I to _like_ that I 
should tend them, and to have joy to feel their littl within my 
palms, and sure she did know how it did be with me; for present she 
took her feet inward under the cloak; and I, maybe, to look someth 
woeful; for she put one out presently, when that I did the least expect, 
and slipt it veri cosi into my hand; and sure I kist her naughti toes; 
and she then to be veri sedate. 

now, presently, when naani found the garment to be proper dry, she gave 
those to me that were mine, and bid me to turn my back and be drest veri 
speedy. and lo! in a littl time, when I wa nigh done, she came over 
and stood befor me, and wa drest again in the armour-suit, and to look 
veri slender and dainty. and she lookt at me, so that I put out my 
hands, that I kiss her; but she went from me, veri proper, and brought 
mine armour, and gave me help with it, and alway veri grave and quiet; 
but yet to have naughti underneath, as I did believe. 

and when I wa full armed, she took my hand, and set mine arm about her 
waist, and she lean her head against my breast, and put up her lip to 
be kist, as that she did be a child maiden; yet when I kist her, she did 
be a woman, and to kiss me veri dear and loving, and to look at me then 
from under her eye-lids; and sudden to make a dainti growling, and to 
pretend that she did be a fierc thing that should be like to eat me; 
and I to be utter feared, as you shall think, and to be scarc abl that 
I kiss mine own pretti fierc one, becaus that I did laugh so hearty, 
and to be so taken with a surpris that the maid did show thi new 
playfulness; and in the same moment to be stir and wake anew that 
she did be so love and grace in mine arms, and to make her naughti 
growl so pretti that I did be eager that she make it again; but she 
to do thi play onli as her mood did stir her. 

and she made then that she would go from me, and I to loos her, as 
ever; and she bade me that I guard her the while that she washt the 
outward part of the cloak; for the inward did be clean, and the cloak 
proof to water; but the outward part to be someth need of washing. 

and surely, when thi wa made clean, it dri veri quick, becaus that 
the water went not into it; and whilst that it dried, I gave mine own an 
aid upward unto the cave, and afterward I pass up the gear, and the 
cloak when it did be dry; and so came upward also myself, and brought 
with me a boulder, that I balanc veri light in the mouth of the cave, 
so that it should fall, if that anyth toucht it; and thi plan you do 
know of; for I use it before, as I have told. 

and truli we did be utter wearied, and the time to be someth beyond 
three and twenti hours, sinc last we had slumber. and the maid had the 
scrip and the pouch set to be for my pillow, and the bundl of her torn 
garment to be for her own. and she to have me to my pillow, and to tuck 
the cloak about me, and the disko to my hand; and afterward to kiss me 
veri sedat upon the lips, and then to come in under the cloak, with a 
quiet and love happiness, as I did know; and to be gone to slumber 
veri content and sweet. 

and I wake eight good hour after, with the fizz of the water in 
mine ears; and lo! mine own did be wake and to make readi our 
breakfast; and I came upward upon mine elbow, to see whether that the 
boulder did be unmoved; and inde it wa not touched. 

and mine own saw that I wa come awake; and she ran to me, veri dear and 
glad, and kist my lip veri eager and loving. and surely, as she kist 
me, I did feel that she had taken again a naughti advantag of my 
slumber, and had kist me as I did sleep; but truli I said no word of my 
thoughts; for I did mind that I should wake sudden one time, and so to 
catch her in this, and to call her then mine own, and that she did be a 
rogue; and all as you shall know, that have loved. 

and I scold the maid a little, in that she had not wake me; but I 
said not that I would attend to the duti that she did heed to; for I 
knew that she had joy of these things, in that she did love to do aught 
that should be done unto me. and when I scold her, she to make but a 
littl mouth at me, as we do say, and to put her tablet to my lips, 
that I kiss them, and she to kiss mine; and so to our breakfast. 

and when we were done, we gat togeth our gear, and went downward from 
the cave, and began again to journey. and we went eighteen hour that 
day, and eat and drunk at everi sixth hour, as ever. 

and in the fourteenth hour, I perceiv that I did be like to overtravel 
the maid, though I made alway to have a less speed than did be natur 
unto me. and sure then, I took her up into mine arms; and she to 
refuse, and to be troubl that I should so carri her; for she did think 
that I wa like to be weari by the task. 

and I to take no heed to her pretestings; but to laugh gentli with her, 
and to carri her, even as a babe in mine arms; and she to love that she 
be in mine arms, if but she be abl to have assured that I come not 
to weari through her. and truli it did be a dear love task, and to 
be set unto the need of mine especi heart. 

and I carri mine own then for four hours; and in the eighteenth hour 
we were come to that part of the gorg where did be the ledg where I 
kill the spider, ere I slept, as you shall mayhap to mind. and here I 
aid the maid to climb, and we had the same ledg that night to be our 
refuge; and did sleep veri happi and unharmed, and alway with our 
spirit set to warn us, if that harm did make to come nigh to us. 

and we went then through three day of eighteen hours' journey each; 
and alway I did carri mine own, from the twelfth unto the eighteenth 
hour of each journeying; and thi to be veri dear unto me, and to give 
me a new rejoic that I did be strong and easi to carri mine own; and 
she to lie in mine arm veri content, when that she perceiv how that I 
did be so glad to go thiswis and that I had no weari by the 
carrying. 

and thu I did rest her feet, and wore not her dear and slender bodi 
overmuch with the vigour of my going; and wa abl to make a veri good 
speed. 

and mine own, thi time and that, to make say of impud unto me, 
and to hide her naughti lips, when that I should kiss them; and to have 
quaint nestl unto me, and odd while to kiss me veri dainti when 
that I did be go thought of the way. and sure never did there be 
so dear a maid as mine own; so that I did go mani a mile, and to be 
scarc that I knew that I wa gone ani way, becaus of the stir of 
my heart and the content of my spirit. 

and oft as we did go, there were great scorpion in the path, and odd 
while they to have no heed to go from my way; but to be so great as my 
head, and veri fat and lazy, so that sure I kickt a good number, from 
my path, even as you shall kick a ball with the foot; and three I burst 
in thi way. and truli it did be well that I had on me mine armour, els 
had they been like to sting me veri quick unto death; for they were so 
great. 

and likewise, in thi place and that, there were snakes; but none to 
come anigh to me; and I to choos alway the open goings; for I did think 
there to be mani hid snake and lesser monster in the dark place 
between the great boulders. and alway, when the maid did walk, I to go 
before, that I see clear her way, and thi thing to be but a matter of 
wiseness, as you shall think. 

and odd whiles, as I did carri mine own, she to talk a littl with me of 
her memory-dream of the olden days; and mayhap you to think it strang 
that we said not overmuch on thi wise; but the way of our journey to 
have been so utter bitter, as you have seen; and we to be more of that 
far age, than we did be of thi present age; and thi present life to 
seem but a dream of memory, and we to be set then with the real of 
that life. and thi telling, indeed, to be a plain thing to your 
understanding. yet did we have a greater talk to these ends, when that 
we were come free of the gorge; but yet, oft there to be an odd say 
and a sweet memory, like to an olden and forgot fragranc of dreams, to 
pass between mine own and me. and do you to set your sympathi of 
understand with me in thi thing, and to know how holi these thing 
did be, and far off, and to hold memory, as a mist that doth shine with 
golden lights, that did make an holi pain upon the eye of the spirit, 
even as a quiet dawn of thi day doth set a pleasur of vagu pain upon 
the heart. 

and once, as I did carri the maid, I saw that she wept a little, veri 
husht unto herself; and I to say naught; for I saw that it did be a 
natur sorrow for her father, and for the dead peopl of the lesser 
redoubt; that did be left for ever unto the desol of eternity. and 
so, becaus I did be wise to leav her be, she to be eas presently, 
and to wipe her eyes, quiet and secret, and mayhap to think that I did 
not perceive; and then to nestl unto me; and so to be the more mine 
own. 

and about the middl part of the second day, we came past the cave where 
I did sleep on the upward journey; and I to tell naani, and she to look 
upward to the cave, and to wish that she might come a moment into it; 
onli that it did be twenti good feet upward, and I to desir that she 
run no risk of her dear life, when that there did be no need. 

and so to go onward; and odd while to see strang thing a-lurk among 
the boulders; but none to come anigh to us; yet did I keep the disko 
veri readi in my hand, as you shall think; and had mine eye alway to 
look upon everi side, and mine ear to be wary; and to use my spirit 
alway to mine aid. 

and surely, as we did come lower in the gorge, the maid wa all 
a-wond at the warm that did grow, and someth disturb in the 
first, by the new thickness, as it did seem, of the air. and she to 
wast some of the water, becaus that it did fizz up so quick, even as 
I, until that she wa come use to thi newness. and all thi to be veri 
plain unto you. 

and in the end of everi journey, we slept eight good hour in a safe 
place; and so to go onward again; and the maid to grow veri eager as I 
did tell her thi thing and that of the countri that we did come 
downward unto. 

and she askt me questions, time and oft, and much I told her, and she to 
think upon it with a grow wonder and desire, even as a gladsom child 
that hath never seen the sea, and doth be told that it shall present 
be there. and thi to be but to shadow the way that naani did be; for 
truli she did be a veri live and eager maid, in all things. 

and we to be still within the gorge, and to go constant by the 
fire-hol and the fire-pits, and to see the flame leap upward in thi 
place and that, so that the mighti wall of the gorg would show veri 
plain in an instant; and immedi to come the shadow again, and 
afterward the leap of the flames. and so did it be forever. and oft 
the mutter of the fire-pits; and oft the utter quiet and the shadows. 

and thi time and that there did be a snake to go by us, and the 
scuttl of the monster scorpions; and mayhap a move in the shadow 
of the great boulders, that did tell me there went mayb some peculiar 
monster in that place; so that I did be veri wary, and to have the 
disko alway ready. 

and when the fourth day wa come, I show the maid, in the sixth hour, 
the ledg that did be my first sleep place, when that I wa enter 
into the gorge. 

now presently, in the eleventh hour, after that we had gone five hour 
in a gloom, there did show afar off a shining; and I caught the maid, 
and I pointed; and she also to perceiv that it did be sure the 
shine of the light of that great countri that I did tell upon. 

and immedi we did begin to run downward, and with sore stumbl 
in thi place and that; but not to halt us; for we did be so mad as two 
children for the gladsom light. 

and we came down present in the twelfth hour of that journey into the 
warm light and wonder of the countri of the seas. 




xiii 

homeward BY the shore 


now we came present out of that sad and dreari place that did go 
inward of the great mountains, and which I have name the upward gorge; 
and we to halt soon between the feet of the mountains, beyond the 
mouth-part of the gorge. 

and naani alway to look everi way about her, and to breath veri quick, 
and her eye to be gone bright with wonder and the see of new things, 
and the come of freedom from so great a dread. 

and she turned, now, and did look upward into the dark of the gorge, and 
to spi upon the great mouth thereof, and to be fear then, and must run 
a greater way downward into the light of the countri of the seas; 
and to come onc more to pause, and to look backward, and with an awe 
and a reliev soul; and so again to the wonder of the spread countri 
and the great sea; and did near to laugh and cri in the same moment, 
with the amaz and glad and great astonish that did be upon 
her. and she to turn constant thi way and that, and to be never ceas 
of looking, and of deep breath of the wide air; for never in that 
life had she been in a broad place of light, as you shall have 
perceived. 

and we to feel, both, that there did be no more need to talk husht, as 
we did alway in the gloom and narrow dark of the gorge. and sure she 
to shout, as a child that doth tri an echo; and her voic to go veri 
pretti into the distance, and to be lost afar off in that country. 

and lo! in a moment, an echo to come out of the dark mountain to our 
backs; so that we lookt round veri sudden; but whether the echo did be 
truli an echo, or some strangeness, or some unnatur call to come 
downward out of the gloom and horror of the gorge, we did be all unsure; 
and inde must run downward a while more, until that we did be all 
breathed, and to halt present where we did feel to be utter free of 
the gorg and of the strang that did seem to our minds, in that 
moment, to lie upward in the dark of the great mountains. 

and sure we did took about for a flat rock to be for our use, and we 
came present to a place nice to our purpose, that did be yet upward 
over the land; and we climb up on to the rock and sat thereon to have 
our food and drink. 

and as we eat and drank, we did sit veri close and happy; but yet to 
have a wise look about anigh to us, so that we be caught by no danger 
of the humpt men, or by ani other danger that might be. 

and alway, the maid did question, and did stare afar over the country, 
and to have a shine wonder and joy of the sea, and to be stir in 
all her being, so that she wa pain with vagu and sudden memories, 
that did be as strang dreams, and all mixt with pleasur and pain. and, 
indeed, she sudden to weeping, and to need that she be in mine arms, 
until that she know herself onc again; and so to her dear natur joy 
and way. 

and oft did mine own speak upon the clear wonder of the air, as it did 
seem to her; and to me it did seem likewise, that had live my life also 
in a dark land, as you do know. 

and she to break sudden from her rapture, and to set back her speech an 
etern with vagu words, and memori so olden and englamour that 
they did be as moonlight that onc hath shone. and in a moment she to be 
forward again into that far futur time and speech, and all her be to 
be close unto me, and oft in a solemn silenc of the heart. 

and the great of the sea to call unto her with an olden voice, and 
to half waken her; and I with her to be thu half-wakened, yet had I 
been not thu as I did come mine outward way; but truli I did stir to 
the stir of the maid, and all mine olden thought that did be my 
memory-dreams, to come afresh upon my spirit. 

and so we two to sit there all shaken with dream that did concern 
happen of the olden world that did lie upward in that dread night 
which made a mighti and deepli roof over that country. and sure I am 
dumb, in that I have no speech to make known to you all the troubl 
and stir of our spirit that we did know in that moment. 

and far off, by miles, beyond the feet of the mountain, where went the 
shore of the sea, upon our left, there wa a great mist and steam; and 
thi to be that mist and steam that I did come through on mine outward 
way; and naani to ask concern it, and I to tell her so much as I 
knew, and how that we must inde come present through it, upon our 
journey. 

and she to be in wonder of the volcano that did burn in the sea, and 
in thi place and that of the wide country, and the height and grand 
to exalt her, and in the same time to give her a strang humbl of 
her mind; so that present I did take her into mine arms, for I must 
kiss her, becaus that she did be so utter a sweet maiden, and love 
with interest and naturalness. and truli she to kiss me in turn; and to 
make her question between her kissings; and thi to be becaus she 
did yearn for a greater know of the country; but also, as I do half 
to think, becaus she did be sweetli impud unto me; and thi to be of 
her joy. 

and presently, she to kiss me thrice veri passion and warm upon the 
mouth; and immedi to take my shoulders, with her small hands, that 
did seem so pretti upon my broad and upon the metal of the armour. 
and she to strive thu that she shake me to a speedier answering; and 
she, all that while, to be full of a dear naughtiness, and to need that 
she be kist veri hard. 

and I to answer her; but after mine own fashion which did be a word 
between each kiss that I gave to her. and she veri quick and naughti to 
put her hand between our lips; and I then to kiss the palm, that did be 
in my way, and did be veri small and pretty. and she, when I had no 
thought, to open her finger veri quick, and kiss me through between the 
fingers, and immedi to shut the fingers, so that I did be stopt 
from the same. 

and afterward, I made her to stand upon the rock, and I set free her 
hair over her shoulders; and I took then the boot from her, so that her 
littl feet did show bare and pretty. and she, at the first, half to 
refus me; but afterward to stand veri dear and obedi that I should 
have my way with her; and to be a littl shy, and the more pretti 
becaus of her sweet blushings. 

and surely, when that I had her to my likings, I stept back a littl 
pace, and lookt at her. and she to look again at me, veri quaint and 
naughty; and then to turn her about, veri grave; and to make pretend 
that she did be a dummi figure. and, surely, when she did be come right 
round, and to face me again, and had a veri sedat look, she stretch 
out her pretti foot, all in a moment, and put her pink toe sudden upon 
my lips; and I to be so in surprise, that I had not wit to do aught, ere 
she had them back swift from me. and she then to make one glad spring 
into mine arms, and to want that she be hugged, and to be love veri 
great. and I to laugh, all tender; for I love her so utter, as you do 
know; and I to tell her, as you sure likewis to have told your maid, 
that I want a pocket sufficient, that I might have her therein alway 
anigh to my heart; and thi thing I to say to her, as a man that doth 
love, shall say it; and you to know the way of it so well as I. and she 
to laugh veri mischievous, and to tell me that she should truli tickl 
me, if that I carri her thatwise; aye and to pinch me, too. and I to 
have no answer, save that I shake her, veri gentle, but inde she to 
kiss me veri naughti on the mouth, in the midst of my shaking; and 
truly, what shall a man do with such an one. 

and she then to want to be more sedat and to be set down upon the rock; 
and she to make me to turn around, so that she should come at the pouch, 
which did be upon my back. 

and she gat thenc the comb that wa a fitment, and did comb her pretti 
hair, and I to sit and talk with her, and to jest, with a heart that did 
be so light as it had not been for a great while; for though I did dread 
the humpt men and the monstrou anim of the countri of seas, I had 
not ani abid horror of aught that I had seen in that country; for 
there seem a natur in all things, so that I did have no 
loathing; neither ani fear of an evil force. 

and presently, when that the maid had comb her hair, she to bind it 
upon her head; but I to ask that she leav it upon her shoulders, 
becaus that it did be so pretty; and she to smile at me, and to be 
happi to my pleasuring. 

now we did be truli sedate, and to set our gear together; and I to put 
the boot upon the maid; and afterward we to begin again to journey 
downward into the countri of the seas. 

and we went at a good pace; but not to bring us to ani great weariness; 
for it wa mine intent that we rest for our slumber upon thi side of 
the place where did be the steam of the boilings, that wa anigh to the 
shore of the sea, as you shall mind. 

and we at thi time to be pass along the feet of the mountains, unto 
the place of the steam; and to go thiswis for six good hours, and still 
to be a great hour off that part; for we went not so fierc as did be 
the speed of mine outward way, which wa utter strong, as you do mind, 
that have gone with me in all my journey. 

and so, when we had walkt six hours, we did be gone someth beyond the 
eighteenth hour of that day' journeying; and to be veri readi to our 
slumber. 

now, present we found a tall rock, veri hard to climb, that had a flat 
top so great as may be twice my length everyways; and thi to be veri 
good to our purpose. and when we were come safe to the top, we to eat 
and drink, and present to sleep, and to have the cloak under us, as 
did be the will of the maid; for the countri did be utter warm and nice, 
so that we had no occas for covering. 

and surely, we waked, both of us when that we had slept seven good 
hours; and we sat upward, and lookt newli each at the other; and to be 
as that we did each see the other anew in that good light, and to have a 
fresh joy each in the look of the other. and she to come into mine arms, 
and to kiss and to need that she be kist; and truly, we both to have our 
need; but yet to be someth the more hungri of the other, for the 
having. 

and mine own then to make our breakfast; and the water to fizz veri 
strong and surprising; and we to eat and drink, and to be utter happi 
each with the other, and to talk on thi thing and that, and the maid to 
look about, as we eat; and she to look afar off at the wonder and the 
new of the countri to her knowledge; but I to look near, lest there 
be ani danger that might be anigh. 

and in a while, mine own to draw my gaze to the mountain that the gorg 
came through. and, in verity, now that I did look in ease, I to see with 
her how that they did be truli monstrous, even as a monstrou wall that 
did go upward for ever until that they were gone out of the light of 
that country, into the dark night of the deathli upper world, that did 
be lost an eternity. and I to mind that I had some vagu thought 
thiswise, on the outward way; but now I to have ease, and the maid to 
speak with, and so to perceiv odd matter the more. and I to tell you 
thi littl thing, so that you shall perceiv the way that rest 
did be upon me, by compar with the outward going. 

and, truly, we had no great speed with our talk and with our eating; but 
in the end did make somewhat to hurry, becaus that we did be consciou 
that we lean to slackness. and indeed, we came down then pretti speedi 
from the rock where we did sleep; and had forward to our way at a good 
pace. 

and when we had gone a while, we to begin to hear the far hiss of the 
steam and the nois of the upward burst of water that did boil; and 
the sound to be veri strange; but I to have heard it before, as you do 
know; so that it to troubl me the less than the maid. and I to assur 
her; and she to come nigh to me, and thiswis we to enter present into 
the steam. 

and we went then for more than three hours; and I had the maid to my 
back, that I should be the first; and thi I did, that she have no 
danger to walk into a boil pool in the mazing of the steam, which 
wa everywhere. and I to be someth guid in my path by the shore of 
the sea which did be unto our left alway; onli that we could see neither 
the sea nor otherwise, except that we go so close that we near into the 
water. 

and, truly, the sea to seem to boil in parts, and there to be hot pool 
in all places; so that who should say with eas whether we did go by one 
of the great hot pool or by the true sea. and this, our constant 
puzzle, shall be likewis to you; and you to perceiv how that we did go 
utter wary. 

and about us from everi part there did come the strang burst and 
shriek and whistl of the boil of the water break upward from 
the deep world. and odd while the sound to be as of great monsters; 
and the earth to shake under us; and other-whil there to be a hush and 
onli the steam about us, and somewher in the distanc and uncertain 
a low pipe of some steam cranny, veri strang and lonesome-sounding. 

and when it did be somewher nigh upon the fourth hour, we came out of 
the thick steam; and the pipe and the roar to be to our rearward; 
and soon the steam to be gone thin, as but a mist, and the nois to be 
veri far-seeming; and present we to be come clear out into the air of 
that country. 

and the maid now to perceiv the trees, which did be in great forest 
unto our right hand, while that the shore of the sea did go alway upon 
our left. and she to be utter in wonder of the trees; and to need that 
she pluck branches, and smell of them and look at each leaf; and so to 
be all stirred; for never in that life did she to have seen such a 
matter as those great tree did be; but yet to be all stir by vagu 
memori that did seem no more than dreams. and you to think but a 
moment, and to perceiv how the thing did be with her; and you to have 
been likewis stirred, if that you did be so strang wake in a corner 
part of the heart; though but a littl matter to wake you. 

now when the sixth hour did be full come, we made a halt in a wise 
place, and had there our tablet and the water; and afterward, the maid 
bid me that I take her unto a warm pool that did be near by, and to ask 
that I turn from her, but yet to be anigh for her protector, as I did be 
ever. 

and so she to wash and to make herself happi with a sweet clean that 
did be proper to her; and afterward, when she did be done, she to act 
watch whilst I to mine; and to help me in all matters, that she wa 
able; and truly, I to be happi inde that she did so have delight to 
attend upon me and to treat me mother-wise; yet truli with her 
maid-heart not all hid, as you have perceived, thi time and that. 

and sure thu did we go alway in these matters; and oft that I have 
not space to have told; and oft that you shall remember, if that I do be 
too full of other happen to give heed to tell upon. 

and afterward we to our journey again; and to talk upon thi thing 
and that thing; and I to be watch as we talked, and to tell the maid 
that she keep her eye wary, but yet not to be of unease. 

and when we did go thiswis for seven good hours, we were come nigh 
oppos to the bright-burn fire-hil that did be offward in the sea, 
and had made me a warm light in that time when I did sleep in the tree, 
as you do remember. and truly, as I shall here mind you, we did be past 
seven hour come to thi place, from the part where the steam did be; 
yet had I gone that space upon the outward way at a speed that wa 
greater; but truli I might not set so great a pace to the maid, save, 
mayhap, odd whiles; and thi thing I beg that you have alway in your 
mind, and so to understand whi that we did be oft long upon thi part of 
the journey and that, by compar with mine outward going. 

and, in verity, I had set off our hour for food, becaus that I saw we 
did come nigh to the place where the tree did be; and I to know that the 
maid should like to eat and drink anigh to that place, and to know that 
I did sleep there. 

and sure I took her to the tree, and when that I told her, she to beg 
me that I indulg her and that we go upward to that branch where I did 
sleep, and there to eat our tablets. 

and I to be willing, and to enter into her wishing; for, indeed, there 
wa no danger in the climb, and I to go alway below her, so that I could 
be sureti for her safeness. and we came up to the great branch; and she 
to make how we should sit, and I to have to show just where I did lie, 
and she to look veri close, and to see that my weight had sure mark 
the hard of the armour upon the bark; and she then to be upon that 
branch alone, as she did eat and drink; and to look outward at the light 
from the fire-hill, and to be veri husht, and to think, and I not to 
disturb her with speech. 

and when she did be done, she gat from the branch, and kist the place 
where I did lie; and lo! in a moment a thought came into her, and she 
drew her knife, and cut out a piec of the bark, and put it into her 
breast to be for a keepsake; and so to seem somewis contented. 

and truly, I told her about the great beast, when we were come down 
again to the earth; and she to cri out and to show me that there did be 
yet the mark where the belli of the monstrou beast did brush upon the 
earth, as it ran, and moreov the broken place of the foot-marks; and 
she by thi to see how great a beast it did be; but yet did it be a 
littl thing besid the slug; onli that it did be a thing of horn and 
hard of skin, as you have perceived. 

and truly, I do mind how that the observ of the maid did bring veri 
keen to me how that there had past but seventeen day sinc that I did 
go onward from thi place; and thi to seem veri strang and scarc 
credibl unto me; for I had thought it, somewise, as a great time; and 
truli thi to be becaus it wa so mark by stress of the mind and 
great happenings; and you to agre in thi thing. but yet, also, we 
shall truli mind that those time that I have call days, did hold oft 
the hour of two days, and mayhap three, as you do remember. now we 
went onward then to our journeying; and I to make to carri the maid, as 
ever, after that she had walk twelv hours, though she did walk 
thirteen hour thi time as you have seen. and she to say that she go 
now upon her own feet through the next six hours, and so to eas me from 
the labour that did be need to carri her. 

but I to know how that she did be like to be all gone of her strength 
thiswise, in but a day or two, and we to make the better speed, if that 
I keep to my way, and to have her to walk twelv hour of everi journey, 
and afterward to come into mine arms; for, truly, she did be bred less 
hardi than I, as you shall think from all that I have told concern 
the peopl of the lesser pyramid; and moreov she wa yet someth 
weakened, as I did think, by the dread month of her lonesom and 
escapings, befor that I wa come to succour her. 

and truly, as I did carri her, the maid did make remark of her 
wonder concern me, in that I did be so hard of my bodi and set in 
the determin of my mind. and, in verity, I did be exceed strong 
and of great hard of body; and mayhap my will did be somewhat thi 
way also, els do I think I had never born to come unto mine own 
through so much desolation. and I to smile veri happi upon her; for I 
did love that I wa so strong, and veri truli in delight that mine own 
maid did take glad in thi thing. and you to mind how you did be 
also in the love-days; and so to have nice understand of my 
natur and human pride. 

and sure the maid did nestl unto me, as she did talk; even, somewise, 
as a child shall come nigh to the mother, but yet also as a maid doth 
love to be nigh unto her man, if that she doth truli love. and I to lift 
her more nigh to my lips; but she to refus to kiss me, and to be a 
sweet impertin that did lie in mine arms; yet when I did make to 
lower her again to the way that had her easi to carry, she to slip her 
pretti face veri snug under my chin, and to kiss me there, after her own 
fashion; and afterward to be will that she be as usual into mine 
arms. 

now, as I set the maid again comfortable, it seem to me that she wa 
someth tender; and sudden it came to me that mayhap the armour to be 
veri hard and pain unto her; and I to ask thi thing of her, in a 
moment; and she to see that I would not be put off; and so to tell me. 
and, truly, I wa utter anger with myself; and somewis also with her, 
in that she did not waken mine unthinking to thi thing. 

and I set her instant to the earth, and made her to bare her shoulder 
to me; and truli they did be much bruis where that she had lain so oft 
in mine arms, against the hard of mine armour. 

and I to be so anger that I near shook her, and she to see how I did 
be, and that she did be nigh to be shaken, becaus that I wa grown so 
angri that she should let herself come to thi foolish hurt, that yet I 
did know wa veri dear unto her secret heart. and, in truth, she put up 
her lip to me, veri sudden, and with a strang naughtiness, that she 
have her own way with me to tempt me from mine anger, that yet she did 
half to like. and, in verity, I near slapt her then upon her pretti 
shoulders, but that she ceas from her tempt of me; and instead she 
turn her shoulder to me, even as a child, that I button her garment 
for her. 

and surely, when I had button her garment, she came round unto me, and 
close her hand, so that it did be a littl fist, even as I did love her 
to do, becaus that it wa so small besid my great hand. 

and she slipt her shut hand into mine; and sure I let it stay within, 
veri quiet, and made not to close upon it, as I did wont. and the maid 
did move her hand around in mine, that she make me to take notic upon 
her, and to grasp her littl fist. yet I did be veri stern, for I wa 
truli angered; and neither did I put her hand from mine, nor made to 
hold it; but onli to let it bide; yet, truly, I to be someth stir 
in the heart-part by her pretti ways. 

and in a littl while, she took her hand from out of mine, and did have 
dare to be cold unto me. and mine anger then to be quaintli renewed, 
and to think that she did well need to be whipt. and she made a naughti 
and foolish impud upon that which I said to her; so that present I 
did say that she did need such as should make her to heed her manners; 
but yet, as you shall conceive, I to know inwardli all that time how 
that even thi true naughti did not stir me to proper anger; but 
more that it made me master and to lack not that I make her to know 
truli that I did be her master; and in the same time to be strang 
touch in a veri deep and secret place of my heart. and truli love doth 
have strang act upon the heart. 

and the maid to ask me in a veri sauci fashion that did be intent 
to anger me, what I did mean that she to need. and truli I said that she 
did go the way to earn that she be flog like ani boy, and I to mean 
actual all that I did say, which doth someth amaz me now; but, as I 
do know, I yet to be constant stir inwardli by her belov quaint 
that did be alway so dainty, even when that she did mean her naughti 
to be truli to anger me. 

and lo! when I told the maid thi thing, that she did well go to earn a 
sharp reproof, she turn in a quick instant, and came close to me, all 
tender and small and to need to be nigh to me. and she slipt both her 
close hand into the one of mine, and truli they did be littl fists. 
and becaus I could be no more stern with mine own, I put mine arm about 
her, and she did nestl to me, so that all my be did want to be a 
shield about her. 

and she to hark veri quiet and humbl to my counsellings; and in the 
end did be so strang husht that I lookt down to where her pretti face 
did be hid against mine armour, as she did love to do, when that I did 
be those odd while a littl stern with her. and I held her face away 
from mine armour; and sure she did be smiling, veri quiet and naughty; 
so that I perceiv that she did be good onli for that time, and did be 
like to show again thi wrong and impud spirit. yet I not then to 
be in troubl of the future; but to hope onli that I do wisely, if that 
she show again thi waywardness. and, truly, I to perceiv now that I 
did be veri young; but, anywise, as you do know, I to act alway from the 
natur tell of my heart. 

and I shook naani a little, for thi naughti spirit which did not be 
gone from her. for I perceiv that my manhood had but stir the woman 
in her to that strang quick humbl that had seem to be a 
quench of her wayward unwisdom; and truli it had not been stilled, 
but onli sunken for a littl moment in the upris of her dear nature, 
which had respond unto me. 

and the maid to look at me from under her lids, as I did shake her with 
gentleness; and I to know that mine own did be a wondrou maiden, full 
of all life and spirit, and to be held wise and to be loos wisely, 
all as did be for the best to bring out the uttermost of her good 
which did be in all her being, and to be veri lovely; and to make me 
feel as that I did be a giant that held a white flower veri tender; but 
I to feel also that I did be her master. and thi mayhap you to 
understand, if that you look into your hearts. 

and by all my telling, you to know that I did be veri dainti with mine 
own maid that did be all of daintiness; but yet I to be masterful, as 
did be my nature, and a veri proper way it did be with the maid, so that 
she did be alway reason in the main; and thi to come out of her 
love, which did have pleasur to know that I did be master unto her, all 
in the same while that she did fight to show that I did be otherwise. 
and truly, and in part by thi same showing, you shall perceiv that her 
naughti to come likewis from her love, and the way that my natur 
did work upon her. 

now I to shake the maid veri gentle, as I have said, and with much that 
did be of play, but in the same wise there to be also somewhat of tender 
reproof. and surely, that naughti maid to spring veri light upon her 
toes, and had kist me sudden and dainti upon the mouth, befor that I 
did wot. 

and I to put mine arm about her, and to give her a littl hug; and 
immedi then to matter that did be practical; for I wa eager to 
have come across that stoni part of the journey, that did be befor us, 
as you do know, befor that we look for a place for our slumber. and 
thi eager of hast to be, becaus of the great bird thing which I 
had seen to go bound over that waste, when that I wa upon mine 
outward way. 

and, surely, after that I had thought a littl moment, I bid the maid 
that she dress in her torn garments, so that these should be over the 
top of the armour-suit, and thiswis to make a soft thick upon the 
top of the armour-suit, that should act for a cushion between mine 
armour and her dear body. 

but indeed, the maid would nowis to do thi thing; and I not to make 
her, becaus that my heart perceiv how it did be with her. and her 
reason to be someway mixt, as doth be proper in all humans, and the 
more so when that it doth be a maid that hath reasons, as you to know, 
if that you have ever held such dear pervers in your arms. 

and she, as I could know, to be strang in love that her gentl bodi 
be bruis by the hard of mine armour; and if thi might not be, she 
to be not wish that she wear her torn cloth upon her neat suit and 
so to seem careless and to lack to be dainti in mine eyes; for, indeed, 
she did be alway to wash herself and to make tidiness; and she to have a 
way now that she did set the armour-suit upon her, that had it to seem 
different, and she to have set a littl sprig from the tree upon her 
breast, and in her girdle, and so to seem the more of a maid; and sure 
a man doth know and love these things; but not alway to have full 
know how that they be done. and, indeed, you to be likewis with me 
in thi thing. and we all to think we know, but somewis to be just 
a-lack when that it doth come to the proof. 

and, in verity, the maid to find a way that she be eas of the hard 
of the armour; and I to have come to the same thing in the same moment; 
but truli I do think she had been abl to think upon it a long while, if 
that she had been so desired. 

and truly, thi wa but that I fold the cloak veri thick across mine 
arm and breast, and to take her then into the littl nest that did be 
prepared. 

and, surely, now that the maid might no more have her secret wish that 
she lie close against mine armour, she to be helpful, and to have the 
cloak fold so in a veri quick while; and so to be into mine arm 
again; and we to be onc more upon the journey, and she to nestl to me, 
as that she did hunger to be nigh to me; and she to talk with me, odd 
whiles, and odd while to be silent. 

and once, I to think that she wept a little; and to know that she did be 
like to think upon her father and her own peoples; but she to have her 
face turn to me, so that I could but guess upon thi thing; and she 
veri soon to be husht again of thi sorrow, and to lie content in mine 
arms. 

and once, when that I had carri her for three hours, she to ask me 
that I kiss her; and truli I did kiss her, veri gentl and with 
reverence, becaus that my heart did understand the holi that did be 
in her heart in that moment. 

and, surely, as I kist her, she to kiss me veri tender; and I to know 
that some olden memori did be like to stir in her. and in a moment, she 
to take her lip from mine, where she had let them to nestl veri light, 
and did whisper mine olden love-name; and I then to look at her, and her 
eye to shine as the olden star that did shine in the olden summers. 

and I to be too shaken even that I kiss her. but she to put her arm 
about my neck, and to look steadfast into mine eyes. and immediately, 
after that she had lookt awhile, and I to have ceas from walking, she 
to put her hand upon each side of my face, within the metal of mine 
head-gear, where the guard did come down at the sides; and she to kiss 
me veri sober upon the lips; but yet to mean utter by that kiss. and I 
not to return the kiss; for I saw that it did not be her need. 

now, in the begin of the fourth hour, as I did go with the maid, I 
to see afar off one of the half-bird monsters, that I did see befor 
upon thi place where there did be naught save great stone and boulder 
for a great way that did be mani miles. 

and truly, I to hide veri swift with the maid, where two great boulder 
did come together; and sure the bird-creatur to go past at no great 
way, and to go with a great bounding, that did be half of flight and 
half of leaping, as that it did be too weighti in the bodi to make to 
fli proper. 

and, indeed, I to have a sudden memori how that there did be a pictur 
in some book that I did read in the mighti pyramid, where it did show 
such a bird-th as this; and to make remark in the book that these 
thing had been seen no more in the night land for a score thousand of 
years, or more; and to be extinct, as we do say. 

but, indeed, now I do think that they did be come downward to that warm 
country, a great while gone, and so to have new life and to breed 
through a great age, and thi way to have set a pattern unto the humans. 
and, in verity, it might be that in some age that did be far after that 
time, the human to find some way to journey from the pyramid, and to 
build a new refug in that deep country; and mayhap the human thiswis 
to have a new space of life, after that all the night land did be dead 
and lost in the bitter frost of eternity. but this, indeed, to be no 
more than an odd thought; for how might ani great multitud pass the 
monsters; and I to ask that you take it for noth of fact, but onli as 
of my suppositions; and thiswis to come back again to happenings. 

now, when the bird-th did be gone a long way off, I to go forward 
again with mine own, and to have a new care, and to look veri swift and 
frequent everyway. 

and, truly, it did be as that the creatur did inhabit that part of the 
country; for in an hour after that, I to see a good score. and, I to 
free the disko from my hip, and to have it readi in mine arm besid 
the maid; and so to journey. 

and mani time I to have to hide with mine own, and to crouch low among 
the rock and the boulders; and thi way to escap free of all for a 
great while. 

yet, when that the fifth hour did be nigh gone, I heard a nois sudden 
to my back, as we did go over a clear space. and, in verity, there did 
be one of the monster that came upward over certain rock that were to 
my rearward; and sure it to have been stay hid there, or resting, 
and to have heard us or to have smell us; but anywis then to have 
knowledg of us, and to come with low and brutish heavi boundings, veri 
lumbersome, after us. 

and I lookt everyway in a moment; but there wa nowher ani shelter 
anigh. and the maid to leap sudden from mine arms, that I be free with 
the diskos; and I to look swift to her, and to see that she have her 
knife readi in her hand, that she might chanc to aid me. but sure I 
might not fight in eas of mind, if that mine own did be needless in 
danger; and I caught her veri quick by the waist, and set her upon the 
ground between my feet. and she to make half to refuse; but I to have no 
time for explaining, and to be sharp that I have her safe; so that I 
gave her a littl shake that did sudden to make her feel the strength in 
me; and she then to be instant quiet in my hands, and to let me that I 
set her upon her face, and to cast the thick cloak abov her; and in a 
moment to be stood over her, and to set down the visor of mine 
head-gear, lest that the bird-monst strike me in the face. 

and surely, the bird-th did be scarc an hundr good pace off; and 
to make two lumber and monstrou bounds, and to come at me. 

yet, truly, it made sudden a pause, becaus that the disko did roar and 
send out fire, as I made it to spin; but in an instant the great thing 
to come in at me upon the left side, and to strike me veri hard with the 
bill, that did be so long as mine arm, and had sure gone through my 
body, if that I had been naked. and the bill of the monster rang upon 
mine armour; and it smote me twice thiswise, so that I stagger veri 
sick and shaken. but in a moment, as it made to draw off, that it should 
come the more hard upon me, I swung the disko veri sure and quick, and 
I smote the bird-th abov the place where the great seeming-leathern 
wing did join upon the right side, as it should be the shoulder of the 
bird-monster. and, in verity, the monster gave out a mighti squarking, 
and went backward thi way and that, and beat all about upon the stones, 
and did strike with the great bill at the place where it did be hurt. 
and I heed that I end it swiftly; and I ran in upon it, and the 
creatur to strike at me with the great bill, veri savage. but I jumpt 
speedi to thi side, and again to that, and so in a moment to have 
chanc to come in surely. and truli I split the skull of the 
bird-thing, so that it die veri quick and wa gone from pain. 

and the bird-creatur lay all spread upon the stone and the rock of 
that place; and sure it did be as that it were leathern, and made 
somewis as a bat doth be of thi age, in that it did have no feathers. 

and, truly, it lookt mighty, where it did be spread; and inde the bodi 
to be full so big as the bodi of a young horse; and the bill to be veri 
deadli and sharp and cumbrous, as you to have guessed. and I to be all 
and utter thank that it did be there, dead, in the stead of mine own 
body. and the thing yet to twitch and stir a little, as the life did go 
from it. 

and sure I wa back then veri speedi to the maid, and she to be 
kneel upward to watch me. and I took her into mine arms, and lookt 
well about; and made then forward again. 

and about the middl part of the sixth hour of cross that rocki land, 
I saw that we did draw near unto the shallow river, that you shall mind 
I came over, after that I had done with the olden fli ship. and in 
all that time, sinc the bird-monst to come after us, I had seen but 
two more, and they a great way off, so that I guess that I wa come 
beyond that part where they did go veri frequent. 

and I to wade over the river, and to carri mine own upon one arm, the 
while that I did sound my way with the staff of the diskos; and truli I 
came across veri easy, save that I did have to go around somewhat, where 
that the river did seem to have a deep place. 

and when that we had crost the river, it did be full one and twenti 
hour sinc that we slumbered, as you shall know, if that you but count 
a little; for you do mind that we spent a certain time within the tree, 
as I have told; and thi not to have been proper count into the time 
of our journeying. 

and surely, the maid to have been veri quiet, sinc that I did show my 
strength a littl to her, when that I made her to lie, that she be safe 
from the bill of the bird-monster. but she not to be anywis in anger 
upon me; but only, as I do think, that the woman in her did be someth 
fresh wake unto me; and she to be veri content that she be quiet in 
mine arms. 

now the place that we were come to, wa much spread with boulders; but 
yet to have the begin again of the forests, as you to remember; for 
I to have made some small remark of the land in thi part, upon mine 
outward way. and we lookt about for a fire-hole, that I should dri my 
lower garments; and truly, we had not past mani in a great while; but we 
to be in fortune, that we came soon upon a littl fire-hil that did be 
no more than so high as a man, and to have the rock all hot about; so 
that thi did be a good place to our purpose. 

and I kist the maid, and set her down out of mine arms; and when that I 
had lookt well about, and seen that there did be naught to our sight to 
give us to fear, the maid to help me with mine armour; and afterward 
with my garments, and to eas me all way that she could think of with 
helpfulness. and she set the garment of my lower part to dry, and 
whilst that they did be drying, she to make readi the water and the 
tablets, and to have me to sit besid her, in my body-vest and gear, and 
we to eat and drink veri comfort in the warm hollow that wa 
someth anigh to the small fire-hill. 

now, truly, I did be veri hungri that time, and inde to be alway so, 
for the tablet did be veri unfil to the belly, as you do well know 
from my tellings. and when that I did be finished, I saw that the maid 
lookt at me somewis oddways, and sudden she to come into laughter, and 
askt me whether that I did be veri empty; and in the same moment there 
to be a wondrou dear look within her eyes; so that I perceiv that 
there went a mother-not under her impudence. 

and she to yearn, as I could know, that she have some way to feed me; 
but truli there did be no way, for we thought not to make to slay aught 
for our purpose, and we did be fear that we eat ani root or plant, 
lest that we be ill. and thi to seem strang to my spirit of thi our 
age, but to be natur unto that; so that I do think I did be so long 
bred from the primal obtain of food, that I did be all lost to that 
which should seem natur unto the peopl of thi earli age of the 
world; though we truli to think that the world doth even now be old; and 
thi to have seem a true thing unto everi age that ever did live. 

now, besid that we did lack somewis to think seriou that we slay 
someth to eat, in that the tablet did actual suffic to our 
strength, I to believ that there did be some other reason that I do 
forget, and mayhap never to have thought plain upon; but which to be set 
within me as an instinct, as we do say; and thi to mean, if that I tri 
to set it in other words, that the tablet did keep the bodi and the 
spirit in such condit that the forc of evil did have the less power 
to act upon us. 

yet, have I no rememb that I wa taught in the prepar that I 
eat naught, save the tablets; and thi mayhap never to have been set 
upon me; but to have been as a thing that doth never need to have been 
told; even as you shall not tell a grown man in thi age that he shall 
refrain from dung, and eat onli wholesom matter. 

and truly, I to hope that I have made thi thing somewis clear unto 
you; for, indeed, it doth be someth hard to set out; for everi age 
hath the subtleti peculiar to that age; and these to be hard to the 
understand of other ages, but yet to seem plain and utter natural, 
even without thought, unto the peopl of the age. 

and sure all thi to be plain to you, and to be over-plain; for, in 
verity, I tell to you, and over-tell, until that I should be weary; and 
mayhap you to be the more so. and, indeed, I not to blame you; but onli 
to hope that your understanding, which doth mean also in gener your 
hearts, doth be with me all along my way. and, indeed, thi my tale to 
be not easi told. 

and, in verity, I to be back now unto the maid a-laugh upon me, and in 
the same moment deepli love and a-lack that she could not feed me, and 
I to laugh with her, and to have understand with her, as you to know; 
and, indeed, I to have an heart that doth be made someway natur unto 
understanding; so that even though I be dead when you read this, my 
tale, you to feel that we be friends, and to know that could I meet with 
you in piti trouble, I to have understand and love to you, if that 
you be not utter brutish; and even-so, I to be sorrow that you should 
be brutish, and to have understanding, in that I to know that by 
develop you to becom wise unto sweet and charity, and in love 
with all dear things, and kind piti of the rest. and thiswis you to be 
in human sympathi with me, becaus that you do feel that I be honest 
with you, and somewis even now to your elbow, as you read. and thi to 
be writ now, and you mayhap not to be born a great while yet; but in the 
end to read and to have understand with me, and to know how I did 
love mine own. and so we to go forward again, the closer, in that we do 
be the more knit in dear human sympathy. 

and sure the maid kist me veri nice on the lips, and did promis again 
how that she should make me a great meal when that we did come to our 
mighti home; and, indeed, as she to say, she to join with me, and we 
both to be naughti glutton for that once. and, surely, I laugh gentli 
at the maid, becaus that she should be so dainti a glutton; but for my 
part, I to feel that I could eat an horse, as we do say in thi age. 

and by that we had eat and drunk and talk awhile, and lookt oft about, 
so that we know that no brutish thing came near, to our hurt, the maid 
to tell me that my garment did be dry; and she then to give me aid that 
I dress veri quick; and afterward she to help me with mine armour, the 
which she did wipe after that we had eat and drunk; and she to have had 
joy that she do thi thing, and all thing for me; and to have use a 
part of her torn garment to thi end. 

and so, truly, I to be cloth and arm veri speedy, and to feel eas 
and the more sure in my mind; for in verity, I wa alway in unease, when 
that I did not be readi that I be abl to meet ani horrid brute that 
should be like to come upon us. 

now, when that I did be into mine armour again, the maid to set the 
scrip and the pouch upon me, and all the while I scarc to be loos of 
the diskos, as ever. and we then to our way, which did be that we find a 
place proper to our slumber. 

and when that we did be gone all-ways, and no cave proper to our sight, 
we found a great tree, that did be set off alone, and had a plenti of 
branches; but none that did be near to the bottom-part. 

and surely, I gave the maid a lift, and held her up so far as mine arm 
did go, so that she might stand upon the palm of my hands, and be 
steadi against the trunk of the tree; and she thiswis to have a hold 
upon a branch, and so to go upward. 

and, truly, when that she wa safe, I loos one of the strap from the 
pouch and the scrip, and I cast thi up to the maid, and she set it 
strong about the branch. and when I had caught the downward end, I went 
upward veri easy; and afterward took loos the strap; and thi way we 
did be someth safe, as you shall see. 

and we climb upward then, and so came to a part of the tree where the 
branch did be veri thick together; and we made here a place for our 
slumber, and the maid set the cloak over the branch that did be so 
close, and afterward we lay down; but first I set the strap about her 
waist, and thenc to a branch, and she to refus sleep until that I be 
likewise; so that we did be both veri safe from ani fall. 

and she kist me, and we then to our slumber, and veri weary; for it did 
be two and twenti hours, by this, sinc that we had sleep. 

now we had eight hour in which we slept utter; and we both to awake, as 
it did seem in the same moment; but truly, I to think that mine own did 
be wake befor that time; for, indeed, as she put her arm veri 
dainti about my neck, that she kiss me, I did have a quick and sudden 
knowledg that I had been kist oft in my sleep, and thi to have been 
but a littl while gone. and surely, it did seem to me that mine own did 
have a sweet and content mischief inward of her eyes; but yet she to 
be veri sedat outward, and to kiss me love and dear, and then we to 
our breakfast, upon the cloak. 

and afterward, I climb to the topmost branch of the tree, and lookt 
well over the countri all about; but there wa no brutish thing to my 
sight in ani place, neither near nor far. 

and I came down then to the maid, and told her how that there wa 
quiet of life all about. and we had our gear together, and went 
downward to the earth, and I to help mine own, and thi way she to be 
safe. 

now, as we went forward upon our journeying, I perceiv that the maid 
had a wayward air; and truly, I thought that she did have her heart all 
set toward naughti and mischief; and in the same moment that I wa 
in thi belief, I did know in mine understand that thi did spring 
from the work of my natur upon the natur of mine own maiden. 

and naani to walk, in the first, besid me, and to have no word for me, 
becaus that she did be so fill with the stir of her naughtiness, 
that did be in the same moment veri sweet unto me, and yet to waken all 
that did be master within me. and she to be that she did know, and 
to delight, in her secret heart that she waken that which did be 
master in me; but yet in the same moment to be strong determin that 
she be not master by me. and sure thi to seem contrarywis in the 
words; but to be clear to the heart, if inde you have ever been love 
by a dear maid of an high spirit. 

and abov all this, the maid did be fill with a love for me, that did 
beat and danc in all her being; and thi in truth to overweigh all; but 
yet from thi same thing her dainti naughti to be born, because, as 
I did say, my manhood to stir all her natur up-wis in sweet troubl 
that did be half of rebellion, and half that she did ach that she be 
close unto me in mine arms. 

and, in verity, you to be with me in all these things, if that you have 
had the love-day besid a dear and dainti maid, of an high and pure and 
natur spirit; so that if you be old these days, even but the light 
merriment of a pass maiden to bring a pain of wonder and golden 
memori upon your heart. 

and presently, I saw that mine own put a littl space between us, as the 
naughti did work in her, as my heart to know; and she to be offward 
from me a little. and she still to have no speech with me; but in a 
littl to begin that she sing in a low voice; and to have her pretti 
bodi veri upright and lithesome, and to go forward with a wondrou 
dainti swing, so that my heart told me that she did all be stir with 
small thrill of defianc unto me, and with thrill of love; and 
she to have the triumph of her maidenhood and of her womanhood, as it 
were both to contend in her and to thrill upon her tongue, and to show 
out the lilt and pretti warfar of her spirit that did go danc and 
dearli naughti in her breast. 

and sure I went, veri lift in my heart, and astir; for it did be 
wondrou to me that thi love maid did be so utter mine. and to see 
but the way that she set her feet to the earth, and the way that she did 
lift them sure and dainty; and the way that her bodi did be poised, and 
the way of her head; and the way of her naughti and the sweet 
and the love that did be wrapt in with all, did make me want that I have 
her in mine arms. 

but yet, I not to do this, becaus that in the same time that she did so 
stir me to love and admirings, she to set somewhat els in me at 
variance, so that I did half to feel stern with her, for I perceiv 
that she had that naughti then within her, that she did be like to 
have a real intent of impertin unto me, so that she should be 
naughtili outrageous, and to have no heed to my advisings, neither unto 
my desires, unless that I set my hand upon her, to _make_ her to obey. 

and truly, you that have had dear maids, shall follow mine explainings; 
but unto others, I know not whether they shall understand, until they 
too have been possess of one that shall set all their heart adrift, 
even as thi one that did be mine own. 

and sudden, I to know that naani did chang from her low sing unto an 
olden air that had sure not been heard in all that eternity. and in 
verity, for a littl while, I not to know whi that it did so shake all 
my heart; nor what it did be; nor whether that I had truli heard it 
before, or onli to think so. 

and, surely, it did be as that the silenc of the olden moonlit world 
did steal all about me; and sudden, I to know that the maid did sing an 
olden love-song of the olden world, and to go halt a littl as she 
sang, becaus that the word did steal someth odd-wis through the 
far veil of her memory, even as a song doth come backward out of 
dreams. 

and I to feel all my blood to seem to trembl in my veins, and my throat 
to be troubled, as with vagu sob that did be the ghost of forgotten 
tears. and the dim sorrow that had come so swift and strang upon me, to 
be likewis steep in golden mist of the love that I onc did love; 
and the glamour to be come all fresh upon me, and I to know in that 
moment how much we do forget, even when that we do believ that we have 
all memori and all sorrow within our hearts. 

and I lookt unto the maid, someth dimly, becaus of the way that I 
did be; and I perceiv in a moment that mine own did weep as she 
walked; but the less with pain than with the strang anguish of memory, 
that doth have in it tender and sorrow and love and all that hath 
been and all that did never be, and all to make a vale unto the spirit, 
where doth be both a dim grey and a warm and everlast light, and 
an utter speechlessness, and the low and far music of forgotten songs, 
that do come downward over the shadowi mountain that do be build of 
year and forgetfulness, and yet made to be seen with the light of that 
our memory, which doth cast so mani husht shadows. 

and surely, as I did say, the maid did weep as she went; but not to be 
cast down; but rather that she held her head upwise, as that she did 
walk in a glory. and the song to come oft-broke, and oddly, and to set 
her voic to littl human quiverings, as her memori did shake her sweet 
spirit unto tear afresh; and she to walk with her pretti head upheld 
and as that she did go in a triumph; and the tear to come down 
strang upon her face, and all her soul to be there, pure and 
wondrous, and in the same time both troubl and glad. 

and thi thing to be veri dear and amazing; and she to be as that she 
not to know then that she sang; but as that she did be lost in her 
thoughts, as we do say, and thi to have come sudden upon her, out of 
all her uplifted of spirit, that had been like to make her veri open 
unto all subtil and subtl power of thought and inward stirrings, as 
you shall think. 

and again the song to come full-remembered, and fresh, as that thi 
etern did be but the yesterday of that moment. and mine own to be 
all in a sweet mad with those half-dream memories, and the wonder 
and pain of all that no man hath ever said, and that shall be never 
said; and of the utter lost years, and all that hath been lost, and all 
forgotten great and splendour, and the dread of parting, and 
the loveli of beauti thing that do be hid in the abyss of the 
years. 

and it did be sudden to my quicken fancy, that there did be low echo 
all about us, of the voic of dear beauti one that have died; for 
so did memori set a strang and love mysteri about my spirit in that 
moment, that I did be all shaken so much as mine own. and I to be as 
that I drew my breath anigh to tears, and did be there with naani amid 
the quiet spare of the tree and the rock of that part of the land; 
but yet did be to see half dimli that I stood within a light, even as 
the light that doth be the wonder of olden sunsets; and I to be, in the 
same time, both _that_ man and _this_ man that now doth write; and to 
have besid my spirit but one maid, that I did lack to know whether I 
say to her naani or mirdath; for though the two that have been mine own 
did be different-seem to the eye, there to be but the spirit of one 
maid besid me in that moment. 

and surely, I did be there, all shaken unto the see of visions, as it 
did seem; so that the land about me to have grown half as that it did 
lack that it be real unto my sight, becaus that I lookt inward unto 
land that did be of memory. and lo! in a moment thi to go; and I to be 
in that countri of the seas, and to look newli unto naani, and she to go 
as I have told; and there to be the lonesom tree and the rock in all 
part for a great way about. 

and sudden, as I lookt at mine own, she to come round unto me, and she 
held out her arms, and did gaze at me with such a love, as that she were 
transfigured, and to need strang that she be in mine arms; and 
surely, I to an holi need that I have her unto me, becaus that, after 
all, there did be no wonder so great as that wonder, that when all did 
be said I did have mine own, after that all etern had nigh past. 

and, in verity, we ran each to the other, and did be silent, becaus 
that there wa no speech of word by which we could say aught of all 
that did be in our hearts. and truli you to be with me in understanding; 
for you too, mayhap, to have suffer thiswis of dumbness; even if that 
it hath not been so great. but yet to make you to know. 

and presently, we grew quiet in the spirit; and mine own to come back 
again to her joyousness, and to go besid by me, as we made forward. 

and presently, naani to begin that she look at me with dear impud 
again, that did be veri sweet unto me; but yet to be like to lead unto 
defyings. 

and truly, by these thing shall you know the spirit of mine own maid; 
and there to be none to me that ever did be like her. but, indeed, you 
to think thatwis of the maid that you did love; and all the world to be 
think each these thought of one dear maiden that doth be the one 
maid in all the round world. 

and thi to be the love nice of the human heart; and I not to have 
ani grumbl thereat; but yet, surely, you shall say that thi maid that 
did be mine own, did be veri dear and lovely. and, in verity, I to show 
my human heart in thi thing; for you likewis to want that I think your 
maid to have been just so dear, and the more so. and inde we ever to 
be go these ways; and to have good comradeship of understanding, 
becaus that we have all love and suffer joy and had utter belief in 
a dear one. 

and sure a defying to come present into the way that the maid 
did go, and she to walk a littl offward from me; and truli I lookt at 
her, both with love and yet with somewhat that did be to reprov her 
gently, and all in the same moment that she to make my heart stir 
with her sweet naughtiness. 

and she to look sudden at me; and to be that she half to intend to run 
to kiss me; but also that she be mind in the same moment that she set 
herself up impertin against me. and, in verity, she made me to 
harden my natur a little, as manhood doth make a man to do; and thi 
becaus of the rebellion that I knew to be in her; and she likewis to 
know. but she hid her eyes, when that I shook my head, half with play 
and half with earnest; and wa then impud unto me; and gone from that 
in a moment to her pretti singing, and her naughti walk apart. but 
she no more to sing an olden love-song. 

now, in a while, we past a basin of rock, in a place among the trees; 
and there wa a warm spring bubbl in the rock, and the basin to be 
full of water, veri warm and with some smell of chemistry. 

and the maid told me that she would wash, and I to think it a good place 
for that end. and when I had tast the water, I found that it did seem 
smooth and proper for our intent, as that there did be a veriti of an 
alkali in it. 

and truli we washed, and after that I wa done, the maid bid me that I 
turn my back; and I to do this, and she to mock me veri naughti whilst 
that I could not see her, and to seem veri quiet; for indeed, I heard no 
splash of water, though I stood off from her a long while, and she 
alway to say naughti thing unto me, as that she did mind truli to have 
me angered; for, indeed, she did have a plain intent that she mock at 
me, and to eas not her wit. and surely, after that I had stood a great 
while, I askt the maid when that she did be like to be done; but she to 
say that she wa nowis end of her toilets. and I knew veri sudden 
that she made foolish upon me also in thi matter; and I turn 
upon her, and lo! she did be sit upon a littl rock, veri sedate, 
even as when she had bid me turn from her; and to have made no more 
forward, but onli to have been there at ease, that she keep me turn 
away to pleas her naughti mood, and all the while have a doubl liberti 
to have impud upon me. 

and, in verity, I did be a littl angered; but scarc that I did know 
it; for I did love her veri great, and wa stir inwardli with her 
dear and that she did look just that-wis that I knew not whether I 
to need to kiss her, or to shake her; and truly, how should I know; for 
my heart did ach that I have her to mine arms; but my brain to say that 
she did go over-far in the joke; and truli you to see that I did not be 
unreasonable, neither to be lack of grace; for inde I do think that 
I wa sway all-ways, becaus that I saw all the dear way that her 
pretti natur did work; and to conceiv of her mood and to understand 
and be stirred; but yet to shape a littl in my manhood unto hardening, 
and in my judgement unto sternness. 

yet, truly, I scold mine own with no more than a littl jesting, and 
did be nice and gentl with her, becaus she did be so dear, and I to 
know just-wis her mood and the caus and work of it. 

and I told her that I did love her, and that she hasten now and let us 
again to the journey. but, indeed, she onli to make a face at me, so 
that I did be near like to shake her unto sedateness. and she then to be 
both merry, and a rogue, as we do say, and to stop her ear and again to 
sing veri gleeful; and all so that she might not hear aught that I said. 
and sure she lookt a veri dainti rebelli one. 

and I went then straightway to her, and took her hand from her ears; 
and I kist her pretti ear veri gentl that I not to deafen her. and I 
kist her lip as she did sing; and afterward shook her, that she be not 
such a sweet torment. but thi to have no success that way; for she onli 
to put out her toe to be kist; for her foot-gear wa off from her feet. 
and, indeed, I laughed, even as I made to frown; and truli I kist her 
pretti toes, and tri then to coax her to go forward someth speedi 
with her hair, and to be readi to the journey. but she onli to sing, and 
to refus to be sedate. 

and, in verity, in the end, I caught her up in mine arms, and had her 
bundl in my hand, and so went off with her veri sudden, with her hair 
all loos upon me in a love and soft shining, and her feet bare as 
they did be. 

and thi action I made, becaus that I wa grown truli a littl stern 
with mine own; for, indeed, she did half to need that she be whipt unto 
properness, as you shall think, that have seen how she did be thiswis 
onli becaus that her natur did be stir strangely, and her womanhood 
and her maidenhood to be all unto war, and in part to make a rebellion 
against me that she did know glad to be her true master; but yet she to 
be thus, even though she did be so glad. 

and thi to act so that she did be in the same moment both sweet and 
wise and yet to show a dainti foolish and a true naughti that 
did make me to feel somewhat of a real anger; but yet did have me to 
know that all my be did be stir by her; so that I did think with 
one thought that she did be veri foolish, and with anoth that she did 
be love wayward. 

now, when that I took the maid up so quick, and made off with her, she 
to give a littl gasp and to submit to me with a quick humbleness; but 
immediately, she to regain her courage, and to be outrag of me. but, 
indeed, I took no heed, onli that I wa like to shake her; and did know 
also that her hair did be wondrou pretti upon mine armour. and she soon 
to lie veri quiet and easi in mine arms, and to be demure. 

and I to have a half knowledg of somewhat amiss; but yet to have no 
sureness, neither to think much upon thi vagu feeling. 

and when that I had gone a good mile, she to put up her lip to be kist; 
and I to kiss her veri loving, for she wa so dear. and she then to say, 
veri ordinari like, that I should do wise now if that I went back for 
her foot-gear, which truli I had lack thought to notice, when that I 
did pick up the maid. 

and I saw that she had known thi thing all that while, and had made 
that mile of carri all a wast and a foolishness, becaus of the 
naughti rebellion which did be in her. and lo! I set her instant to the 
ground; and she gave out a littl cri as she saw that I did be gone 
somewis hard and stern with her. 

and inde I pull a small branch from a tree that did be near, to be 
for a switch as you shall whip a boy with; and I held her with my left 
hand, and in veriti I laid the switch thrice veri sharp across her 
pretti shoulders, that she know all that she did need to know. and she 
seem to be ceas in a moment from her perverseness, and did nestl 
veri quick unto me, that had whipt her; and did need that she be 
wondrou nigh unto me. and, truly, how shall even a young man flog such 
an one. 

and the maid to be veri husht against mine armour, and to resist that I 
look into her face that did be prest so anigh me. but presently, I use 
a littl and gentl force, and so to look into her face someth 
sudden. and truly, that one did be smile veri naughti and dainti to 
herself; so that I perceiv that I had not truli whipt her enough; but 
yet I could harden my heart no more at that time; for, in verity, there 
doth be a strang half-pain in the bosom, if that you have to flog a 
maid that doth be utter thine, and thi to the despit that there hath 
been--a then--no proper of anger to have for an after 
self-reproach. 

and surely, I to have done thi thing onli of a stern intent and 
steadfastness, that I steadi mine own maid unto wisdom; but yet to have 
been helpt by a littl anger, becaus of the thing that she had done. 
yet, alway, my love did be so strong, that mine anger never to have 
aught of bitterness, as you shall have seen, and to understand. 

and we went back then for the foot-gear of the maid; and she to be veri 
husht in mine arms; but yet, as I perceived, not to be quiet, of an 
humbl littl heart, but onli of the chanc that her natur did be 
stir that way for the while. 

and truly, when we were gone back, the foot-gear did be there to the 
side of the pool, and the maid gat shod veri speedy, and would have no 
aid; and afterward did up her hair veri tight upon her head, to have it 
utter from my sight; and thi to be for a perverseness; for she knew 
that I did love to see it pretti upon her shoulders, or if that she must 
do it, that she do it up veri loos and nice; and truli you to know how 
I mean; onli that I have no skill of such matters; but yet a good tast 
to admirings, if that the thing be aright. 

and I to say nothing, as I look at her; and she present to make a 
quick glanc unto me, to see whi I did say naught. and I shook my head, 
smile at her waywardness; but she to look away from me, and to seem to 
be set to fresh naughtiness. 

now we went forward then upon our journey; and alway the maid to walk 
onward from me; but yet to have no other impudence, neither to sing. 

and I to go kindli with her; but yet to think that she did lack somewhat 
to know that I did be truli her master; and I to wonder a littl whether 
she did know proper that my gentl with her did be not of weakness, 
but born of understand and love, and the more proof that I did be fit 
to possess and to guid her. 

and truli thi wa the thought of a young man, yet lack not of reason 
in the bottom part, though mayhap to be someth clumsy-seem unto 
the mind of a maid; and to be veri human to my years; and you to have 
been likewise, if that you have tri all-way with a dear one, and she 
to be yet over-wilful, so that you to wonder whether she did truli know 
how you did understand. 

and sure a maid doth know much that doth be in the heart of a man, if 
that she be true woman in her own secret heart. and oft she doth know 
more of her man than her man doth wot of himself, and to go her own 
divers way that she search out and bring forth and waken all that is 
the inward be of the man that she doth love. 

yet, when that she have stir you in the deep that you scarc to 
know, she to be all fearful, and in the same moment to have no fear; and 
to be in rebellion, and in the same moment to be most strang humble. 
and all to be born of love, and natur in action upon nature. 

and more than thi how shall I have learn of the heart to tell you; 
for, in verity, there doth be much in these few lines, if that you know 
to read. and sure you to know, or to learn; but if neither, then have 
you gone short of joy and the true inward of life. 

now thi way I did be, as I have told; and the maid to be quietli 
naughti in perverseness, as also I have set out; yet to have a strict 
mind to her duties, and to go now wondrou sedat upon the journey; yet 
alway apart. and likewise, when that the sixth hour did come, and we to 
our halt, as ever, she to be veri speedi and nice that the water and the 
tablet be readi for me; but yet to have no word; neither to eat by me; 
but again a littl apart, and not to share the water, but to make a 
brew to herself, when that I had done. 

and likewise, the maid held not up her tablet to be kist, as alway; but 
eat them, quiet and meditative, and with littl nibblings, as that she 
did ponder upon other matters, or mayhap to be not hungry. 

and these thing I saw, as we eat and drank in a silence; and I to look 
at the maid, somewis sad in the heart, and someth stirred; and I to 
say to myself wisely, yet as a young man, that she did not yet be taught 
suffici that I wa her master. and thi you to perceive. 

and she never to seem to look at me; but to be quiet and demure, and to 
have her eyelid someth down upon her eyes. 

now, presently, as I thought upon the matter, I saw that I do well that 
I take no heed of mine own; but to let her to come to a natur end of 
thi naughtiness, that did be, in the same time, both pretti and a 
littl foolish; so that in half I condemn it and in half I wa 
stirred; and alway I love the maid veri dear, and had a good 
understanding; and there to be also an interest in my heart at thi new 
side that she did be showing. and also, she to stir me odd while unto 
masterfulness; and so you to know pretti well how it did be with me in 
the matter. 

now, surely, I found thi plan, that I attend not to the maid, to have 
someth of success; for I knew present that she did look upward at 
me, slyly, from under her pretti eyelashes; and after, to be demur in a 
moment; and thi to go forward for a while; yet I to show no heed. 

and in a while, I saw that she gave attent to her garments, in the 
way of nattiness; and afterward, she took down her hair, and made it up 
then veri loos and pretti upon her head; so that she did be veri 
lovely, and to tempt mine eye that they look alway at her. but, indeed, 
I did make as that I had no heed that the maid did shape her hair 
differ upon her head. 

and she veri soon then to speak, and to have the lesser gear together, 
and to make that she attract me. but truly, I wa veri nice with her; 
yet to keep her now a littl off from me in the spirit; and so to teach 
her that-wise, that she wa somewhat of a dear naughti maid; but also, 
as I do think, I wa thi way, becaus that in part I would teas her, 
in great love of her pretti and her make up to me; and so mayb 
even that I make her to be the more defi of me. and thi to be as 
that I also lack somewhat of reason; for I did strang that I think 
that she need to be whipt, and in the same time that I go to make her 
the more deserv of the same. 

yet, thi to be the truth, as I know it; and sure to be the natur 
wayward of love. but yet, there did be also in the backward part of 
my wisdom, an intent that I be wise and care with mine own; and I 
sure to have no full realis that I did be like to set her further 
unto pervers than yet she did be. 

now, after that I had shown well that I lack to heed the maid, I found 
that I did be look oft at her; and she to be so dear and pretty, and 
to be all husht, that truli I could not bear that I be longer silent to 
her advancements. 

and I ceas then from pretending, and would have had her into mine 
arms; but she to be now in sweet dignity, and to keep me off with veri 
sober graces. and becaus of this, I to feel someway that I did be 
someway in blame; and surely, now that I consid it, I can see that I 
wa someth act upon, even as had been the maid; and so we two to 
be; and a most human pair, as you to say; and somewhat both a-lack; but 
indeed, we did be veri wholesome, and in utter love each of the other; 
and mayhap both then to perceiv someth of the sweet foolish 
within us that did be as yeast a-work in us; for I thought that naani 
did smile a littl to herself. but, surely, thi clear-seeing, to be but 
for an odd time; and afterward we each again to earnest in our way 
with the other; but alway, even when we did make to show indifference, 
we to be someth troubl inwardli with sweet flash of our 
bewild natures. 

now, though I have shown you that I to know that I did be not utter free 
of thi most strang and natur foolishness; yet you to perceiv that I 
tell thi onli that I have utter truth of all thing that did happen; 
for, in verity, becaus that I wa someth subtli touch thi way at 
whiles, yet wa thi no full excus of the maid; though, in the same 
moment, you to perceive, that there did be onli the half of me to think 
that she did need to be excused; for, in truth, mine understand went 
alway, in the main, with the work of her nature; and had a natur 
sympathi with her dear whimsies; but also, as you to know, I to be 
stir constant in my manhood by her naughti defyings; and to be 
troubl in my natur sense, when that her whimsi made her to act 
that she be like to come unto aught of harm. 

and sure now you to see all the way of my heart, and to have 
understand in thing that do follow. and alway you shall mind that I 
did love her utter, and to crave alway that I be a shield unto her; 
though truly, there doth be, mayhap, somewhat in me that doth act to 
make me a littl stern seem in my love; but yet not oft so; as you do 
know, that have gone with me in all my tellings. 

now, we went then upon our journey; and the maid to be somewhat befor 
me, and offward to the side, upon my right; and to have no speech with 
me, but to make a good pace, and to be veri dear and grace as she 
went. 

and now we did pass thi thing of strangeness, and now that; and these I 
did point out to her, and made some tell concern the same, have 
the memori of mine outward way, and how that I did see these thing 
then, when that I wa all in suffer of so lonesom a doubt. 

and she to hark alway veri intent, and to move her head nice and 
intelligent, to show that she heard me; and onc I saw that she lookt 
sudden at me with a dear light in her eyes; but thi to be done in a 
moment, and she to be again silent-seem and in her new pervers of 
dignity. 

and sure she did seem so utter sweet in thi new way of naughtiness; 
but yet I did think, odd whiles, that I should like to shake her unto 
dear humbl and her usual way. 

and in the twelfth hour, we made halt again, and had our food and our 
drink; and the maid to serv me veri clever and quiet, as that I did be 
her lord, and she an husht slave. and I saw that she made a constant and 
naughti mock upon me; and truly, as I did half think, she to need that 
she be in care that I not treat her sternly, as shall a slave-master, 
and to give her that which she did ask for so mute and impudent. but 
alway she did stir me mightili to have her to mine arms, and to love her 
veri dear. 

and presently, we did be again to our way; and to be yet silent; so that 
I scarc knew whether to have patienc with mine own, or whether that I 
take her and speak serious with her to ceas thi play, which did 
begin a littl to dispirit me somewhat strangely. 

and in the end I went over to her, as we did walk, and I put mine arm 
about her, and she to yield to me without word, and to hark veri quiet 
to my speech of reason and gentl sayings, and to hide whether she 
did be stir inwardly, or not; though, indeed, my spirit to know that 
her spirit did never be afar off from mine in all deep matters; but onli 
thi thing to be to the top, and to set somewhat between us that did be 
both a sweet and a trouble. 

and alway, as I talk with the maid, I saw that she did make naughtili 
to act as that I did be a slave-master, and she but a chattel to me; for 
she to be husht befor me, and neither to yield her slender bodi will 
to mine arm, nor to resist me; but onli to be still, as that she had no 
say in thi matter; and as that I wa like to beat her at my 
pleasure, or to withhold my hand, all as might chanc to be my desire. 
and thi I perceiv wa the shape of her actions, so that all her 
dumb and her quiet obedi did be but a way to say thi thing to 
me; and all to have come from her love of me and that she did be shaken 
in her natur by my manhood, and so to be but a new form of her 
naughtiness, that did have thi chang when that I whipt her. 

and all this, you to perceive, that have gone with me. 

and I saw that she would not ceas from thi perverseness, but made a 
dumb and naughti and hidden mock upon me, veri dainti and constant, and 
scarc to be truli perceived, save by the inward sense. and truly, I 
grew someth anger afresh, and to feel that she did need that she be 
shaken so stern that she come unto the realiti that I did be her man and 
natur master; yet alway in love. 

and sure I loos her then, and went off a pace to her side; and we 
again to go forward thiswise; yet she soon to have a greater distanc 
between us, which she made veri quiet and natural; but, indeed, I saw 
what she did. 

now, about the fourteenth hour of that journeying, I saw befor us, in 
the far distance, the rock upon which did be the olden fli ship, that 
you shall remember. and presently, as we came more nigh, I lookt oft to 
mine own; and I saw that she did be stare that way, and to be in 
wonder; but yet to say naught to me. 

and soon, as we came veri close, I did want that I tell her about the 
ship, and of mine adventur there, and of the wonder of that olden 
ship, set there through eternity. 

but in the first, I hesitated, as you shall think, becaus of her way; 
but truly, my heart knew that her heart did be proper unto me; and, 
moreover, I should be small in my nature, if that I let ani petti 
put a silenc upon me; though, in verity, if that the maid had not been 
inwardli love to me, I had been that I had told her no word; and thi 
to be veri natural, whether it be of small or not. 

and when that we were come besid the great upris rock, I made halt, 
and the maid to halt with me; and I show her how that the thing upon 
the rock did be an olden fli ship from the mighti pyramid. and in the 
first, she askt no questions; but did be quiet and but to show with 
littl nod that she did be greatli interest. 

and I to show to her how that thi olden ship did be there mayhap an 
hundr thousand years; and to have been there, as it did seem to us 
(that were of that age) sinc the begin of the world; though, in 
verity, our two spirit did know that the begin of that age, did be 
truli the end of this, as you also to know. 

and much I told mine own, and afterward concern the two humpt men 
that did come after me; and she alway to be silent, until that I spoke 
of the fight; but then to come round upon me veri swift, and with a dear 
light in her eyes; and had askt, befor she did wot, whether they did 
hurt me. 

and surely, thi to have been the first thing of her olden sweet 
natur that she did say for a great while, and I to be so in 
delight, that I had her into mine arms, and kist her veri loving, all 
in a moment, and she to submit with a nice gladness, and to nestl unto 
me, and all unwit that she did be gone from her waywardness. 

yet, in verity, she did be a naughti maid; for she mind in an instant 
that she did forget her pose unto me; and lo, her lip did be no more to 
search unto mine, but to be as that they did be kist onli of my will, 
and she to have no more live nestl unto me, but onli to be quiet in 
mine arms. and I lookt into her face, and her lid to be down somewhat 
over her pretti eyes, and she did look veri husht and demure; so that 
truly, I knew not whether to shake her or again to kiss her. 

but in the end I loost her, and made then that we go forward; yet, 
indeed, she did rather stay awhile, to hark further concern the olden 
ship and of mine adventurings; but she did then to mind that she obey as 
a slave shall obey; and truly, I did punish her, in that I told her no 
more; but went forward at a good pace, and had some natur wonder how 
that I deal with such a maid, if that I spare to shake her. 

and surely, I thought then again that I leav her be, and so to have her 
present again to her old and natur way. 

now, in a while, I lift the maid into mine arms, that I carri her, as 
ever, through the last part of each journey, and so to have her never 
over-tir for the morrow. and she for a moment to resist; but instantli 
to give unto me, and to lie quiet in mine arms, as that she had no 
say in aught that did be done, but must alway obey. and, indeed, you 
to see how dearli pervers she did be. 

and I went on then through four hour from that time, and lookt oft upon 
everi side, and walkt quietly; for truli we were come now into a part of 
the countri where I did feel that there might be near some of the humpt 
men. 

but I saw nowher anyth to put me in dread. 

and alway as we journeyed, there did seem a great still in all the 
countri near about; and afar off the low mutter of the great fire-hills, 
in thi place and that, and a drows as of life and warmth about us, and 
everywher the air veri rich and plentiful. 

and presently, when that we did be come down from that high place where 
did be set the rock and the olden ship, we came in among the tree that 
came veri nigh to the shore for a great way; and oft as we did go, there 
were clump of small fire-hil that did cast fire and noise; and oft 
the roar of monstrou spring a-boil; and then again the smell of the 
wood about us, and oft still in odd place the low near sound of a 
littl fire-hill, that did burn, lonesome, in some clear space of the 
woods, in thi place and that; and afterward we to be gone onward again 
into the dull low mutter that did be in all the air of that country, and 
that did but make a seem of silence, becaus that it did be so far 
and constant. 

now, about the eighteenth hour I to note that the nois of the great 
fire-hil grew more loud; and I saw present over the trees, afar 
upward in the great night and gloom that did lie above, those two mighti 
fire-hil that I did feel to make the earth tremble, in that part, upon 
mine outward way. and sure I have told someth of thi before; and 
you to remember, if that you but think a littl moment. 

now, it may appear strang that I speak thiswis of see the two hill 
of fire; as that I had perceiv them sudden. but, indeed, I had been 
long abl to see them both, yet to have had no attent to them, 
becaus that they did be a great way off, and becaus they did be but 
two hill of fire, in a countri that did be plenti with such. 

and, truly, I not to have said aught about them, onli that our path did 
take us now by their feet, and I to see them, as it were, newly; and to 
have nice eas of heart to perceiv how that they did be a wonder unto 
the spirit and the brain for all time. 

for it did be as that the earth had a constant shake within mile of 
them, and that a monstrou forc of natur did be in that place. but yet 
there to be no desol around, as you should think; but in all part 
a wondrou grow of tree and great plant in abundance. 

and the tree to grow upward upon the shoulder of the mountain; and 
there to be no fall of hot rock and ash, as you to think; but all 
veri sweet and wholesome, as that the mighti valley made a chimney to 
the mountain, and mayhap to others, so that their waste, if that they 
had such, did go free. but, indeed, you shall take no heed of thi 
explaining, save as an odd think that hath come to me, and to be 
without foundation. and there to be no sureti of the reason to this; 
onli that there did be no fall of ash in that part, as I do know. yet 
in other part of that countri the fire-hil did make new mountain of 
the matter that did come from them; but thi not to be alway so; and 
there to seem to my knowledg no caus to order whi thi did not be 
constant; save that my guess to be right, or naught to be blown from 
some. but, indeed, I to be sure onli of that which did be plain to mine 
eyes. and mayhap there to be no mysteri in the thing; but a score of 
natur explainings, if that I did know, or had patienc to think long 
enough upon such. 

now when that the eighteenth hour did be proper come, we to be anigh to 
the great hills, and there to seem nowis ani danger of fall fire, so 
that I sought about for a place for our slumber. 

and I found a cave in the side of a big rock; and the cave wa dri and 
comfortable, and had the mouth about a score feet abov the earth. and 
when that I had climb and lookt well into the cave, I gave the maid an 
help, and had her safe into that place; and she then to prepar the 
tablet and the water, the while that I brought up a boulder from below, 
to set veri light balanc in the mouth of the cave. and thi I meant 
for a signal to fall, if that ani creatur should climb upward into the 
cave, while that we did sleep. and surely, you to know thi plan; for I 
did it before, as you to have learned. 

and the maid sat near to me, and eat her tablet veri quiet and with a 
demur naughtiness; but yet to be also in wonder, and to gaze outward at 
the great fire-hills, and to be in awe, as I did know. 

and I put my half-ang and my play from me, and told her of mine 
outward journeying, and how I did go by these same mighti fire-hills, 
that did seem as mighti torch to light me in my search, and to have 
held a new strang and wonder over my path. 

and she still to be silent, but yet to look at me twice or thrice with a 
veri dear and love way; though she did hide her eye in a moment, when 
that she saw that I perceiv her. 

and soon the maid spread the cloak for our sleep; and while that she did 
this, I lookt well about for ani creatur that might be anigh; and I had 
an especi thought unto the humpt men; but, indeed, there wa naught 
living, unto my sight, and nowher did I see anyth to put me in fear 
for our lives. 

and truli I had a great view from that place; for we did be in an 
upward rock that stood in a high part, and the cave to be twenti good 
feet aloft, as I have told; so that all made to set us in a lofti place. 

and the cave to look toward the two mountain that did rise upward no 
more than twelv good mile off from us, as I do think; and the countri 
between to be somewis as a mighti park; for it wa spread much about 
the feet of the great fire-hills, and did be bare in thi place and 
that, as that rock did make the earth nake there, or the fall of 
some later fire to have wrought thus. and between the bare parts, there 
went strang and romant woods, seen mistily, and in part the gleam 
of waters, as that hot lake did be half shown among the broken forests. 

and present the land did go upward with a monstrou sweep, and wa 
then in great terrac in the height, and tree to grow veri plenti 
upon the mountains, in sundri parts; and so those two mighti hill to go 
upward to meet the everlast night; and present to show strang 
upland that did be seen veri wondrou and queer in the light that did 
glow from the vast glow of the fire that did be a crown upon the 
hills, that did seem in veriti to be that they burn halfway between 
that known world, and the lost olden world, that wa mayhap two hundr 
great mile abov in the everlast night and etern of darkness. 

and I lookt upward for awhile, and wa much held by the mighti upland 
that did be on high; yet did lie utter far below the burn crest of 
the mountains, and show vagu and sombr and dread seeming, becaus 
that they did be so lost upward, and to have the mysteri of the red 
shine and of the shadow upon them, and to seem to slope far under the 
great fires, but yet to be a place where no life should ever come, 
becaus that they did be so monstrou a way upward beyond the great 
shoulder of the hills, the which did be themselv a huge way up. and 
truly, I should give you somewhat of the affect of those grim and 
unknown uplands, if that I said they did seem to my fanci to be a place 
where a sorrow thing might wander lost forever. but whi I to think 
thi thing, how shall I say; and do tell it to you, onli becaus that it 
doth seem to hold in the thought the grim and utter desol of 
those high and lonesom lands. 

and by this, I wa done looking, and turn me about, and so did find 
that mine own did stand silent, and wait that I come to my slumber. 
and surely, I lookt at her; but she did have her lid someth 
downward, when that she saw me turn; and so in the end, I said naught, 
but went to my sleep, and had the disko veri handy, as ever, besid me. 

and I then to know that mine own did lie down besid me, to my back, as 
alway, and thi to gladden me, as you shall think; for I perceiv 
afresh how thin did be the crust of her naughtiness; and I to be alway 
stir and touch in the heart by her love naturalness, that did 
need alway that she be near to me, save when she did play thi 
naughti upon me along the way. 

and I saw that she had no mind to be pervers whilst that I did slumber; 
but must now be nigh unto me, and quietli loving; though nowis truli 
ceas from her naughti act that I did be as an hard slave master, 
becaus that I had whipt her; yet she to have somewhat a truce with me, 
as my heart did know. but, indeed, she not to kiss me good-night upon 
the mouth, in her dear usual and sober fashion. 

and sure I did lie awhile, and ponder upon the maid and upon all her 
ways; and I perceiv that she kist me not, onli becaus that she did 
not be abl to break utter from her perverseness, that did come from the 
stir of her nature. and truly, I did love her, and wa half mind 
that I turn about to her, and take her a moment into mine arms; but yet 
to abid from this, becaus that I wa set that I wait awhile, and to 
bring her to me thiswise, mayhaps. 

and presently, I knew that the maid kist mine armour, veri quiet and 
shy, becaus that she must kiss me; yet to be intent that I have no 
knowledg of thi pretti act. but, indeed, I did know in all my being, 
and did be newli tender unto her; yet to say naught, and to wait. 

and thu I knew present that her breath did go easy, so that I 
perceiv that she wa all content and gone over unto slumber, somewis 
as a littl child that doth be weary, and doth sleep without care, and 
with happi assurance. 

and, in verity, did a man ever to have so sweet and gentl a maid, that 
did be in the same time so troublou and perverse. 

and I to lie yet awhile, and to note the constant trembl and shake of 
the rock that did be under us; and thi to be alway thu as I did lie, 
and to be the more plain, becaus that I did be quiet in thought. and 
this, as I conceived, did come from the earth-shak that wa made by 
the inward fire of the world, the which did make a vagu troubl in all 
that part of the land. 

and then in a little, I wa gone over into sleep, and wake not for 
seven good hours; and then to hear the fizz of the water, veri brisk 
and cheerful, and so to have mine eye open in a moment, and to know by 
my time-keep or dial, that wa somewhat like to a watch of thi age, 
that I had slumber through seven good hours. but thi to be learn 
after that I had lookt to see whether mine own did be well, and whether 
that the boulder did balanc in the mouth-part of the cave. 

and surely, there did be noth in harm; for the boulder wa there, as 
I did put it; and the maid a littl off from me, and did make readi the 
water and the tablets, that we eat befor our journeying. 

and I rose then, and in the same moment I did know that my mouth had 
been kist whilst that I slept; and the know to come to me vague, as 
that I had been kist in my dreams. 

and I lookt over toward the maid; but she to have her lid someth 
down upon her eyes, and to seem veri demure; so that I saw her 
naughti wa come again upon her. yet, truly, I could not bear that I 
not to have her into mine arms; for, indeed, her pervers did seem 
as that she did the more tempt me unto her. and thu I came to her in a 
moment; but she neither to resist me, nor to give herself unto me; but 
onli to be still in mine arms, and to do no more than submit veri quiet. 

and becaus of this, I loost her unkist, and wa silent, and a littl to 
be angered, even whilst that my heart perceiv the way of the work 
of her heart. yet truli I ach now that she come back to her dear 
natur fashion. 

and I eat my tablet and drank some of the water; and the maid to do 
likewise. 

and afterward, I lookt well from the mouth of the cave; but did nowher 
see aught to put me in troubl for our safety, though, truly, as 
present I saw, there went an herd of strang creatur afar off in the 
northwestward part, which did be that way of the country, beyond the 
feet of the mountains, toward the in-land. 

now, when that I wa someth assur of the safe of the way, I gat 
the disko to my hip, and the maid to have the scrip and the pouch readi 
to my back, and her bundl to her hand; and so all to be ready. 

and I went downward from the cave, when that I wa girt, and gave aid to 
mine own; and so to be soon upon the journey. 

and surely, as we went onward, and I to look about me with 
different-se eye from my look on mine outward way, I to see how 
wondrou thi part of the land did be; and how that it did be truli like 
a great and wondrou park, that did be made of the skill and labour of 
godlik things; and truli thi to show my feeling, as I lookt all-ways. 
and all that part did be bred of the inward forc of the world, and did 
be burn clear in thi place, and upheav in that, and made to an hot 
lake in anoth part; and odd while there to go a great steam fountain, 
that did whistl a lone song forever. and anon there to be a small 
wood, and again a wood; and oft the quiet of great and strang 
trees, that did stand alone. and here, and in that part, a littl 
fire-hill, that did be sure no greater than an house, and we to pass 
seven of these in but three hours. and two to glow veri steadfast, and 
to make no vigour of burning; but the five other did burn veri strong, 
and sent out a smoke and ash, and made a small desol all about 
them; and of these five, there did be one that cast stone oft and 
again, so that they went upward with a strang loud noise, and fell in 
thi place and that, all about, so that we came downward more nigh to 
the shore, that we be a good way off. 

and here, as I do mind, there wa a strangeness, in that there did be 
mani tree that had stone set in the branches; and thi to be plainli 
the work of the littl fire-hill; and I to think it but someth new 
come, els sure there had been no tree within all that space that it 
did throw; but yet, mayhap, I am wrong in this; for all thing did seem 
that they grew veri easi in that country; and inde thi to be for 
surpris to me, onli that I saw it with mine own eyes, as we do say. 

and alway as we did go, there were sign of inward life and forces; so 
that we but to stand quiet to feel that the earth did trembl gentli in 
mani parts. 

and present there sound for a great while a low and dull boom 
sound; and thi we found to be from a place amid certain great rock 
toward the mountains; for there came thenc a mighti up-spout of 
boil water, that went so high as an hundr feet, and oft to be 
thrice so high, and belch a great steam; and there went up in the jet 
of the water, a great rock, that wa so big as an house, and did danc 
and play in the might of the water, as that it had been no more than a 
thing veri light and easy. and when that the water fell, as it did oft, 
the rock to go downward with the dull boom that we did hear. 

and I mind how that I had heard the boom upon mine outward way; but 
had been then someth more to the shore, so that it had been less 
plain to mine ears, as you shall suppose; neither had it been then to my 
sight, as now it did be to us becaus that we were come mayhap the half 
of a mile more toward the in-land of the country. 

and truly, we lookt awhil at thi huge great fountain and up-boiling, 
and came nearer unto it; but yet to be a larg space off, becaus of 
the way that it did throw out a spatter of small stone odd whiles. 
and sure the thing did cough and roar in the deep earth, and anon to 
gruntl gentli and to sob and gurgle; and lo! to come forth in a moment 
with a bellow, veri hollow and strange, and the great rock to go 
spin upward, and all a-shin in the light from the volcanoes, and 
wa so round as a monstrou ball, and polish by the fret of the 
waters, so that I saw it had sure danc in the great jet through a 
weari time. 

and anon the jet to ceas and to go downward with a great sough and 
thunder of waters, and the danc rock to fall downward from that 
height which did show veri huge, now that we did be come so near. and 
the rock sure to fall backward into some deep pit, whenc came the 
waters, and as it fell, there wa again the dull booming. but whi the 
rock brake not, I could not perceive, save that it did alway fall into a 
boil up of waters, and had no hurt from the rock of the place whenc 
it wa come. 

and the maid and I both to have stood a while, that we stare at thi 
thing; for it did be more strang than I have made you to know; but now 
I did make to our journey again, and did think the maid followed; but 
lo! in a moment, when that I lookt, she wa to my back, and went toward 
the great boil fountain. then I stopt veri swift, and call to her; 
but she did take no heed of me, and went onward veri naughty, unto the 
danger of the great boil of the jet, and the constant fli out of the 
stones, that you do know. 

now, even as I stood and lookt, the maid drew nigh to the place where 
the water did thunder; and the jet in that moment to bellow, so that I 
knew it came upward again. and I ran then after the maid, and she to see 
me, and began likewis to run from me toward the monstrou fountain; and 
sure I did think that I had done well if that I had whipt or beat her 
proper befor thi time; for truli it did be as that her naughti had 
gone nigh unto somewhat that did be near to a wayward madness, so that 
as I did perceiv all her natur did sure work in her toward some deed 
that should be for regret; and thi to come, becaus that she did be 
someth pusht from her dear balanc by her loving, and by the act 
of my manhood upon her, so that her natur both to be in rebellion 
against me and to need me, and all in the same time. and this-way, she 
to be in an inward turmoil, and to be readi foolishli that she put in 
danger her belov life, if onli therebi she to make me someth 
adrift, and in the same moment to have some eas of her perverseness. 
and, in verity, you to know all this, becaus that I have shown the 
work of her heart to you befor thi time. 

now, I caught the maid among the great rocks, which did stand all about; 
and befor her there did be a monstrou pit whenc came the upburst 
of the water; and the water to go upward befor our face in a mighti 
column, so that it did be as that a sea shot up on end, into a pillar of 
live water, and went upward forever, as it did seem in that moment. 
and how we should be saved, I knew not, for the water did be as that it 
overhung us, and should come down upon us and smother us in one moment, 
forever. and the roar wa in our ear and shook all the air of that 
place with sound, as of an harsh and dread thunder; and there wa a 
scald of beaten water, as fine as an haze, all about us. 

and I had the maid in one instant into mine arms, and I ran veri swift, 
with a fierc running, that I have her away speedy, and so made forlorn 
trial that I save her life. and lo! as I went from under that huge and 
dread overhang of the great waters, there came downward from the 
height a great stone that had been cast by the jet, and it burst upon 
the rock to my back, and certain of the flinder did strike and ring 
upon mine armour, and made me to stagger as I ran. but I held the maid 
crowd safe against my breast, and she did not be hurt; and truli I wa 
yet abl to run, and did save mine own, and brought her out from under 
that grim spouting. 

and I put the maid down then to her feet; and she not to know how near 
that she had given us to death, neither of the way that the fragment 
did strike me; for she laugh veri naughti and gleeful. but truli I 
laugh not; for my heart had been nigh husht with terror for her; so 
that I did be yet sick in my spirit, and mayhap also someth shaken by 
the blow that I gat from the broken stone. 

and, in verity, I to have meant that I flog her, veri sharp, if that 
there be no other way that I might bring her to reason; for, in surety, 
as you to see, she to be act so wild as a child, and so unreason 
as onli a maid-in-love; and I to know that she did have to be brought 
back from thi way of spirit, even though I have to hurt her pretti 
body, that I bring her again to her dear natur wiseness. 

yet, indeed, I could not whip her then, becaus that she did laugh so 
joyous, though with a naughti heart, and did look so wondrou dainty, so 
that even her defi did but seem that which my heart desired. and 
you, mayhap, to have been someth likewis in the love-days. yet I 
pled and reason with her to be a wise maid; but, indeed, she onli to 
make a gleeful mock of all that I did say. 

now I went forward again, for I wa not harm by the stone, onli that I 
did be shaked, as you shall think. and the maid to go offward from me, 
and to sing, and did oft danc naughtili as she went. but truly, I did 
be silent with her, for I wa but human, and did lack that she come to 
mine arms, and love me, becaus that I had pluckt her safe from that 
place. and, indeed, thi to be but a natur desiring; and you to have 
understand with me, and to know that you also to have thi lack and 
need, if that you to have done aught for love of your maid, and she to 
deni you a word of love tenderness. 

yet, in verity, I to be even then abl to perceiv with mine inward 
senses, how that the maid did have a wondrou up-pour of love for me, 
but yet did be so perverse, and the more so, mayhap, becaus that her 
love did so urg her unto love admit that I did be her man. and 
she, maybe, to have meant that she be the more humbl presently, but yet 
to go naughtili awhil more, and not, indeed, to have had the power 
within her at that time, to have come unto me, and cast off her 
waywardness, and askt that she be in mine arms, as all my heart did 
desire. 

and so, as I have told, I went silently, and mayhap with a littl 
dullness, that did be part of anger and part of hurt and part of that 
same strang love-foolish from which the maid did suffer. and truly, 
thi doth be veri contrary-seeming, onli that you have seen my heart; 
and all inde the more human, that it doth be so contrariwis to the 
brain-reason; and all to be desired, els did a man be no better than an 
ant or a weari machine. 

and thi to be truth and wholesom as you shall perceive, if that 
you look deep enough, and do modifi reason with heart-understanding; 
for, in verity, how shall that which we call reason, bring ani to the 
full and the great knowledge. and thi doth be a power of holi things, 
and doth be a child that is born of love and reason, and in the one to 
hold the two, and to know all thing is the gift of thi power; so that 
no man may walk truli that hath onli the first, neither ani man do utter 
wise that hath onli the second. 

and surely, I to ceas from these thoughts, and to my tellings; and you 
to your hark and dear sympathy. 

now, when the sixth hour did be come, we made a halt and eat and drank, 
and afterward went onward again, and so came present clear of the two 
monstrou fire-hills; and their great nois to be present to our rear, 
and likewis that quiet countri that did be round their feet, and did 
seem so utter husht and strang and doubli so, becaus of the upward 
nois of the mountains, and becaus of the slow and subtl earth-shak 
that did be so constant, and becaus of all those thing that I have 
told. 

now, when we had made halt, the maid had done her hair veri uncom 
upon her head, and had lookt slyli to see whether I did note; but truly, 
I took no heed; so that in the end she had it again in a pretti fashion, 
and did sing naughtili and with an heart of mischief, as she did shape 
it loos and wondrou nice about her head. 

and I still to have no word for her; neither to show that I did watch 
her with love and somewis a quaint pleasur of her perverseness, even 
whilst that I did strive by silenc and an aloof that I bring her to 
my side, as she did be in the first days; for truli I did ach that she 
be near unto me, and to ceas from her wayward that did put a 
distanc of spirit between us, as you to perceive. 

and so we did go forward again, as I have told, and the maid did strive 
that she make me to give attent to her naughtiness, for she did walk 
alway offward from me, and did sing aloud, and truli they did be song 
strang unto me, but yet to be of love, and much as the song of thi 
age; for, truly, there doth be but one song upon all the earth, and she 
but to sing it in divers ways. 

and she did oft to make littl glanc toward me, and did pout veri 
pretty; and in a moment come someth toward me, as that she did be 
humble, and would be forgiven; but all to be in a naughti mockery; so 
that, in verity, I lookt not at her, save odd whiles; but did go forward 
alway, and made as that I had no heed of her doings. 

and sure thi did present to stir her to a new defi and to a 
pretti anger; for she did sing other song of impudence, that she did 
fit veri clever about me; and thi way to have a constant impertinence. 

and so we did go, and I never to speak with the maid, but to wonder when 
that she cease, or how long it should be ere that I did run swift to her 
and have her into mine arms, that I shake her and kiss her, all as my 
heart did desire. 

and when that the twelfth hour did be come, we made halt again and eat 
and drank; and the maid to serv me veri intent, and hand me the water, 
the while that she went down upon her knee, as a slave; but when I would 
have laugh gentli at her mockings, and taken her into mine arms, she 
went from me veri sudden and cold, and wa afterward silent and did sit 
apart from me. 

now I also did be silent, and in the first becaus that I wa a littl 
pained, and also becaus that I did be new touch with the 
love-foolish that did troubl mine own. 

but afterward, I ceas from these feelings, and did be intent to 
anoth matter; for it did seem to my spirit that there wa some danger 
anigh to us; and I had a thought of the humpt men, and lookt well about, 
and did beckon the maid to come nigh, becaus that the tree did be 
plenti thereabout, to hide ani creature. 

but mine own came not over to me, so that I loos the disko from mine 
hip, and went that I be nigh to her. and she made that she saw me not; 
but did set the gear together, and had it present a-readi for the 
journey, the while that I did look all-way among the trees; but inde 
I saw naught. 

and when that I had the gear upon me, and the maid her bundle, we went 
forward again; and I to be veri wary, and bid the maid keep close to my 
side; but indeed, she would not obey, and went offward among the trees, 
so that I wa all an-haunt with dread for her, and ran and caught her, 
and talkt wise with her; but inde she did not hark to me; but did 
run off in the moment that I loost her. 

and I caught her again, and I took one of the strap from around the 
scrip and the pouch, and set it about her pretti waist, and the end I 
held in my hand, and so had her to obey me in thi thing which did be 
need to her safety. 

and the maid to go with me veri husht for two great hours, and I alway 
to look well about. and in the end of that time, the maid did begin to 
sing impudently, and I did ask her that she be a quiet maid, lest that 
she bring danger upon us; but she to be the more impudent. 

and lo! as I did strive that I look all-ways, lest ani harm did come 
upon us, and in the same moment to reason mine own from her pretti 
folly, she did grow veri husht, so that I lookt round upon her in an 
instant. and truly, she had cut the strap with her belt-knife, and did 
run away veri swift among the trees. and sure my heart did slow a 
littl in my breast, becaus that there did seem someth a-mov in the 
dark of the shadows, where the tree did grow thick, and the maid did 
run that way in her foolish and waywardness. 

and I ran hard after the maid, and did call her, not over-loud, lest I 
bring somewhat upon her; but she to have no heed, and to run veri light 
and swift, so that I caught her not for the half of a minute, as it 
might be; for she wa gone ahead, and I did be a littl cumber with 
mine armour. 

and lo! when I caught her, I shook her, and point inward among the 
trees, for it did seem even then to me that someth move there; but 
she to struggl in my hand a moment, and afterward to be still, and to 
ask with an insol and a defianc whether that I did mean to flog my 
chattel, the which she did call herself in her naughtiness. 

and, in verity, ere I did know, she had twist from me, and did run with 
a true wicked straight toward that place where somewhat had seem 
to be a-move. and I ran then with all my strength, and with a fear 
and an anxiou heart. and becaus I put all my strength to the matter, I 
caught the maid in a moment, ere she did be gone ani way; and she again 
to fight to be gone from me. but I took her into mine arms, veri strong, 
and I ran outward from that place where the tree made a darkness. 

and surely, when I wa come again to where the tree did be more spare, 
I saw that I wa come nigh to that river which I crost on the raft, as 
you shall mind; and truli I did be glad, and to feel safe in a moment. 
yet I wa firm now to my purpose; for I set the maid to the earth upon 
her feet, and kept my hold veri sure upon her; for I did mean that I 
whip her, befor that her love-foolish bring her needless unto 
death. 

and I took the belt from her pretti waist, for it did be but a light 
strap, and I whipt her veri sharp over her shoulder with the belt. and, 
truly, she did make to nestl unto me in a moment, as that other time 
when that I whipt her; but I stay her from this, and I set the belt 
thrice more across her shoulders, veri sharp, so that she to learn 
wisdom at once, and I to be free for ever of thi need to pain her, 
which did hurt me veri strange. 

and the maid to stand veri quiet, now that I did keep her from come 
unto me; and her head did be someth bent, so that I knew not whether 
I did mayhap have flog her over-hard; for I did be someth lack 
in knowledg whether that a maid be veri easi hurt. 

and I stoop and lookt into her face; and lo! she did be smile 
naughtily, and kist me in a moment veri sauci upon the mouth, ere I did 
be aware; and afterward, she laugh and made tri to make a bitter mock 
upon me, and askt when that I should be pleas to ceas from whip 
my chattel; for that then she should run away immedi into the wood, 
and to trust the humpt men that they protect her from me. 

and surely, I lookt at her veri grave; for I perceiv that she did not 
truli jest, but made to anger me, and did be half in a strang anger 
herself, and someth adrift; for she had not been whipt enough, but 
onli to stir her rebellion utterly. and I saw that if she be not set 
right then, ere she leav my hand, she to be like to have some new 
foolish that should take her unto her death, even as she had come 
overnear already, as you to know. and thi to be becaus that her natur 
did be stir so that her natur wise wa all overset, and she to 
be that she do aught of unwisdom that should come to her, becaus of her 
pretti love-foolishness, which did now be made the more strong, by 
reason of the half-ris of her anger. 

and thi way, as I have known, I perceiv that, for her dear sake, I 
should not let my loving weaken me in that moment. and, in verity, I 
shift my hand and loos the fasten of her garment, so that her 
pretti shoulder did be bared. and her face to chang sudden, and she 
lookt up at me an instant, with a littl gasp; so that I knew she did be 
all unbroken, as wa mine intent; but she did not yet have learn 
deepli in her heart, all that I wa mind that she to learn; for even 
in that moment, she made a sound that show she did tri to mock me; but 
truly, she did not know in that instant whether to mock or to weep; 
though she did tri to suppos that she had yet an heart for mockery. 

and I set the belt thrice across her pretti shoulders, where they did be 
bared; and sure the blow did be veri stern and sharp. and lo! in one 
moment mine own broke into an utter weeping, so that I took her instant 
into mine arms, and did hold her strong and gentl against mine armour. 
and she to be as a child in mine arms, and did sob veri strang and 
bitter, as that she did be all undon in the heart. 

and present she did be quiet in mine arms; though I to feel how she 
did yet tremble; and she did cling tight unto me, and her face to be 
against mine armour. 

and afterward, when that she had ceas to tremble, I kist her, and 
sure her mouth did be veri humble, and her lid to be downward, and 
she to be someth pale. and she then to be awhil more in mine arms, 
veri quiet; and so to come unto her dear self. and lo! presently, she to 
want to kiss me of her own accord; and she put up her lips, veri sweet 
and as a love maid, that I kiss her. and sure I kist her, with an 
humbl and a master love; and a strang pain to be about my heart, as 
you shall suppose; but yet my heart and my reason both to approv mine 
action; and the maid to be but the more mine own, and to have come again 
to her dear natur wisdom. 

yet, as you shall know, there to be for a long while a strang and mix 
pain, in my bosom, both dread and tender, becaus that I had been so 
stern with mine own maid; so that even while that my heart and my reason 
did approv me, my heart to make somewhat of reproach. and thi to have 
been someway of foolishness; but yet human of our nature, and an 
wholesom troubl to the spirit, if that thi troubl be not allow 
to shape our action to ani harm weakness. 

now, in a while, the maid did come to composedness, and to be veri 
gentl and sweetli natural. and she made present that she would have 
me to loos her; and afterward, she turn her back to me, even as a 
dear child, that I fasten her garment again upon the shoulders. and she 
did be both shi and glad, and humble, and in dainti pride of submission, 
and utter mine own. and surely, as I did thi thing for her, I perceiv 
that she lookt with a great shyness at the belt which did be yet in my 
hand. and when that I had made an end of fasten her garment, she did 
nestl unto me for a while, and afterward stood away and made shyli to 
show me that I put her belt again about her pretti waist. and I saw that 
she did be somewhat a-lack yet that she touch the belt, becaus that I 
had whipt her with it. 

and truli you to perceiv how her heart did be in thi matter; but if 
you not to know, then how shall I to tell you; and do but bid you ask 
your own maid; though, in verity, she to be like that she but laugh at 
you, and leav you so wise as you be now; for the way of the heart of a 
maid doth be most hid to the maid, and she but to know the desire, and 
to lack the ending. but truli she doth know when that a man shall set 
the truth of her heart befor her. 

now, when I had buckl the belt veri nice again about mine own, we went 
backward a space, until that we found the bundle, which she had dropt, 
when that she ran off from me. and I saw also the portion of the strap, 
which she cut; and so all to be found. 

and we went then at a good speed toward the river; for I wa still 
mind regard the seem of movement which there had been among the 
trees; and veri wish that we have a raft made with haste, so that we 
might come to the littl island, where I did sleep before, upon the 
outward way, as you shall remember. and I thought to have our slumber 
again in that place, and to make that day' journey someth short, 
becaus that the island wa near, and a good and safe place for our 
sleeping. 

and I told the maid concern the island; and she to be in great 
delight and interest, becaus that it did be one of those halt of mine 
outward going, and did be all eager as a child, when that I said we 
should truli have need of a raft to come to the island. 

and we came downward to the shore of the river, and, indeed, there did 
be those two same trees, that had been my raft, there upon the shore of 
that place. and I show these to mine own, and truli she did nigh to 
weep upon them, becaus of her dear emot and love, and did cut a 
small branch therefrom, with her belt-knife, and put the branch where 
she did put the piec of bark; and thi to be for a remembr and an 
after-delight and pondering. 

now we lookt well in all parts, that we find some other small tree that 
should be fallen; and the maid did climb a rock that did be near, with a 
flat top, so that she might search out around. 

and present she cri out to me that there did be a tree to our 
purpose, and but an hundr pace away; and she to go with me to show 
me, and to aid, if need be; but, inde I carri the tree veri easy, 
and had it with the others; and afterward, we went about again for 
branches, and these I cut from live trees, use the disko with care 
and wiseness. 

and with these branch to be for cross-pieces, and our belt and the 
strap for binders, I set the tree togeth into a raft, and made it 
pretti good for our need, and so that no monstrou thing in the river 
should have chanc to snap upward between the tree at my dear one. 

and when the raft wa done, I gat it to the water, and the maid did lend 
her strength; for the thing wa heavy, as you shall think. and when thi 
wa done, I push a sharp branch downward into the shore, and I hookt a 
branch of the raft about thi mooring, and so did be nigh readi for the 
voyage. 

but first I did need a pole to push the raft, and did wonder now where 
the other did be gone, that I cut upon the outward way; for I had set 
the pole with the two trees, as I did mind, have some vagu thought 
that mayhap I should live to come that way again. 

and I had a littl strang uneas that the pole did be gone; but scarc 
to know that I did be troubled, yet to set me to a new haste. and I bid 
the maid put the scrip and the pouch and her bundl secur upon the 
raft; and in that time I lookt well about for a sapl tree that should 
do my purpose. and I saw that there grew an odd one a littl to the side 
of the flat-topt rock that the maid had lookt from; and whilst that I 
cut it, the maid did come to watch, and made pretti chatter in the time 
that I trim the branch away. 

and lo! whilst that I did be part divid in mine attent between her 
dear talk and my work and an hast that did be born of that littl 
uneas that wa come upon me, my spirit to seem to be awar that there 
came a danger anigh to us; and the maid to have thi same knowing; for 
she ceas her speech, and lookt at me with somewhat of trouble. and lo! 
in that moment, as I balanc the pole in my hands, there came the nois 
of a sudden bound to our backward part, where the tree did grow 
someth anigh. 

and I turned, instant, and lookt; and behold! there did be upon us an 
humpt man, veri lumpish and mighty; and he stretch out hi hands, and 
ran at me. and I had no time to the diskos, which did be upon the earth 
to my feet; and I smote the humpt man with the point of the pole that 
did be in my hands, and the point took him veri strong and horrid in the 
breast, and enter in, so that the humpt man gave out a strang 
howling, that did be half seem of an anim and half of an human. and 
he clutch at the pole that did so hurt him, and I stoopt veri swift 
for the diskos, and had it in a moment. and the humpt man tore the pole 
out of hi breast, and in the same instant I ript him from the head 
downward, so that he did be nigh in two halves; for I had no merci in 
mine act, even though my heart did be someth sorry. 

now, even as the man died, there did be a sound of run in the wood 
befor me; and lo! I turn veri speedi to the maid, and she wa there 
to my back, and had her belt-knif drawn in her hand; for she had it in 
her bosom, where she had put it when that I took her belt for the raft. 

and I caught the maid about the waist with my left arm, and wa come 
with her to the top of the rock in two great houndings. and I set her 
there upon the rock, and turn again to the way I came and swung the 
disko free; for indeed, I had seen that there did come a number of the 
humpt men among the trees. 

and there came run from the wood, mayhap a great score of the humpt 
men; so that it did seem to me that we did be go to die; for how 
should one stand against so many, and they so quick and strong, as you 
shall mind. 

yet, in verity, I had no despair; but did be mixt in the heart with a 
great fear for mine own, and a strang and exult glad that I 
should do that day some deed for mine own maid; and truli thi to be the 
pomp of love and the heart-cri of the barbarian, as you shall say. and 
thi maybe; but truli I did be proper human, and to make no excus 
becaus that I wa natural; neither have I hid anywher aught that I 
did think and feel. 

and whether that you approv or not, if that you condemn me, you to 
condemn all humanity, and to have vain word and vain regrettings; for 
these thing that be name for faults, do but be the complement of our 
virtues, and if that you slay the first, you may chanc to wither the 
last; for now I speak of thing as they be now, and as they did be then; 
and nowis of love ideal that do live chief in the mind, and so much 
in mine as any, as you to know, if that you have gone with me all along 
my way. 

and surely, I must ceas from my thinkings, and go forward with my 
telling; for the humpt men did come forward at a wondrou quick run, and 
did swarm upward on to the rock, as that they did be panthers; and they 
made no outcry; but came silent to the killing; and I saw that they did 
be someth smaller than he that I had but then slain. and, in verity, 
I did be all knit in that moment with speed and cleverness; for I split 
the head of three, with but quick turn of my wrist, as I did wield the 
diskos. and I kick the face of another, in the same time, with my 
metal boot, so that he died; for there did be all my strength and all my 
skill work then for our salvation. 

now all thi to have been done in but a few beat of the heart, as I 
might say; and these men to have been in the front of the attacking. yet 
there did be no space to have breath; for there leap three more of the 
men upon the rock; and one smote me with a great piec of rock that he 
carried, so that mine armour did seem as that it crackt, and I to be 
driven backward upon the maid; yet had slain one of the humpt men, even 
in that moment. 

and surely, my dear one caught me in her arms, behind, and steadi me, 
so that I fell not; and I slew the humpt man with the rock, even in that 
moment whilst mine own held me, as he came again to strike me. and I 
then to be firm again upon my feet, and did spring at the third of the 
humpt men; and sure there wa no room that he should be abl to avoid 
me, even did that be hi intent; and he came at me with a great leap. 
and I stood strong, look clearli to my work; and I swung the disko 
with both my hands, and the blow took the humpt man in the middl part, 
and split him, whilst that he did be yet leaping. and in that instant 
there reach over the edg of the rock, two of the humpt men, and gat 
me by the feet; so that I wa pull sudden to my back veri hard and 
bitter; and thi to be done, even whilst that the bodi of the humpt man 
did be yet in the air. and the bodi came forward over me, and did be 
utter dead already, and fell down upon the rock beyond me, and roll 
horridli and went over the edg of the rock. 

and I did be all shaken and someth bemus by the hard of my 
fall; and the hand of the two humpt men pluckt me sharp to the edg of 
the rock, the while that I did strike vagu to wound them; but did 
onli chip the rock, and fortun that I harm not the weapon. 

and lo! in the moment that they had been like to have me downward to 
the earth into their midst, I to make a good stroke, for I cut the 
shoulder of one veri dreadful, so that he loos me; and immediately, I 
kick veri fierc with my freed foot, and sure I nigh crush the 
hand of that other with my metal boot; and he likewis to ceas from 
drag upon me. 

and immediately, I knew that mine own did be help me that I get 
instant to my feet again; for I wa yet someth dazed. 

and there came then a rush of the humpt men up the rock; and truli it 
did be a glad thing for our live that they might come up onli upon but 
one side; for the other side did be utter steep and smooth worn; and 
thi to have been unto our saving, as you shall think. 

and I stood up to the rush of the humpt men, and did smite hard at them, 
with a quick circl of the diskos, so that the great weapon did glow 
and roar. and they gave back from the blaze and the sound of the diskos; 
and sure then I ran in upon them, whilst that they did be someth 
bewildered; and I gat the foremost man full upon the head, so that he 
did be dead befor he did know what thing happened. yet, in verity, thi 
did be a dread moment to me; for the humpt men leap in at me upon 
everi side in an instant of time; and I did be struck upon my head-piec 
and upon my back and breast with the stone that certain of them did 
carry, so that I rockt as I stood, and did near to swoon, and mine 
armour to be all dint and bent upon me, and I truli to seem that I had 
come to the time of my dying. 

and lo! in that moment of time, there did come to my daze sens a low 
and bitter cri of anguish from the maid; and thi to set all my life 
aglow in me. and, in verity, there went a strang grey of furi 
befor mine eyes, and I then to fight as I did never fight before; and I 
did smite as it did seem forever. and the grey did eas from mine 
eyes, and the maid did have her arm about me as I stood, and the dead 
men to lie heapt upon the rock, and mine own to steadi me, for I did be 
near slain and the blood did go from me, and mine armour wa all broke 
upon me by the smite of the sharp stones. 

and I lookt someth slowli upon mine own; and she to know that I would 
ask whether that she did be harm anywise; and she to be veri brave 
with me, and to tell me that she did be well; and she to be all slain in 
the heart, becaus that I did be so hurt; but truli I had fought a good 
fight, and did lack onli to know that she come to no harm. now my wit 
did come back into me veri soon; but I did be utter weak, and scarc to 
stand; so that I did mind onli that I get mine own safe unto the raft, 
and to put off then from the shore. 

and I walkt slow to the edg of the rock, and lookt well about, that I 
learn whether the humpt men did be all gone away; and the maid did 
steadi me. 

and lo! there came up in that instant the last of the humpt men, and 
they were five and did creep veri stealthy, that they have me in 
surprise. and I loost from the maid, for I saw that I must come upon 
them whilst that I had ani strength left in my body; and they now to 
leap upward unto me, so that I gat the first upon the head, and he to go 
backward dead; but truli I did be more weak than I knew; for I sway 
upon the edg of the rock, and sudden I went downward to the earth; and 
did be there upon my knees, and my back to the rock. 

and, in verity, the humpt men did come in upon me veri swift; yet did 
they give back from the diskos, which I swung to and fro, so speedi as I 
might, for my weakness, which did be so utter that I could nowis come 
to my feet to stand. 

and mine own came down swiftli from the rock, and ran past the humpt 
men, and I to make that I shout to her to go to the raft; but truli I 
had no voic in my body, and did be dumb and weak, and did know that I 
should be gone forev from mine own in a littl moment, and she to have 
none to protect her, neither to know the way of our journey, save by 
reason. 

and behold! mine own did shout to the humpt men, and I perceiv that 
she made to draw them after her; for she ran to and fore and did shout 
continually. but, indeed, the humpt men had no heed of her; but did make 
alway to come at me; and surely, in that moment, one of the humpt men 
reach me, and smote me so shrewd that sure he nigh crackt hi 
monstrou hand upon mine armour, and did drive me backward upon the 
rock, and to make me bleed afresh, so that I wa all in a daze and near 
swoon away. and the humpt man caught at the diskos; yet, in verity, he 
loost it on the instant, for it did burn and shake him veri sore; and 
immediately, he smote me again, and so made to end me. 

and lo! in that moment, the maid ran right in among the humpt men, and 
she struck the man that strove with me, and drove her belt-knif onc 
and again through hi arm, veri savag and determined. and surely, the 
man turn upon her, and he caught her by her garments, and he ript her 
two garment utter from her, so that they came away and she did be free. 
and behold, mine utter despair for her did give me a new strength, so 
that I shout to her that she run instant to the raft; and I cut the 
humpt man in twain, and did fall back then into a part swoon against the 
rock. and lo! the maid ran out from the humpt men; but they neither to 
know whether that they follow her or that they come in upon me; and as 
they did pause, she to call to them, and to tri that she tempt them from 
me toward the wood; for she had no thought of her life, but onli that 
she free me and save me; and I too weak even to have power to command 
her to the raft; and she, truly, to have no heed to such command, even 
did I thu to call again. and there I did be, half-gon out from thi 
life, and lookt at her with eye that did scarc wot, save as in a 
dream. 

and lo! the humpt men ceas sudden that they heed her; and the three 
that did be left came veri sli unto me, and with slow and cunning; 
for they wot not whether I did be dead, or but a-wait for them. and 
the maid perceiv that they came not after her; and she let out a great 
cri that did be distant-seem in my dull ears, and came back, naked, 
and run veri swift. and she ran by me as death should run, white and 
silent and her face set unto despair, and her eye utter intent. and she 
struck her belt-knif into the shoulder of the near humpt man; and the 
man howl and turned, and she did leap to the side, and the humpt man 
ran at her. but lo! she leap again thi way and that, and utter 
silent, and so quick as a light doth seem to danc all way in a moment. 
and the two other men did join with the first, that they catch her; and 
behold! she went about, and did run right away among the trees, and the 
three men did come after her, run veri lumbersome, yet with a great 
speed. 

and the maid had the knife in her hand, and I knew that she did mean to 
slay herself presently, when that she could run no more; and in that 
moment it seem that my heart burst; for that I should never more see 
mine own maid forever. and there came some power of movement into me, 
and I came forward from the rock and fell over upon my face. and I gat 
again to my knees, and began that I creep after the maid, and I did 
shout in whispers, for my voic had no more power to call. and the maid 
went from my sight among the trees, as a far white figure, that did run 
veri swift, and wa present lost utter to my sight; and the humpt men 
did go after; yet even in my weakness, I perceiv that two did go 
someth clumsy, as that they had been hurt in the fight; and they to 
be the rearward of the chasing; but he that the maid did cut with the 
knife wa to the fore, and did run veri strong; and sure they were all 
gone inward of the tree with a dread speed, and were lost from me. 
and the world did becom sudden an empty and a great horror, and 
there wa no sound in all the earth, as it did seem. and I knew that I 
wa come to my feet, and did run toward the trees, and the disko did 
trail from mine arm by the hold-buckle; and the ground did be as that it 
move and shift under me, and I not to feel where I trod, but did onli 
peer desper and lost among the trees; and, as I to know now, I heard 
my voic call strangely; and afterward there wa a thunder in mine 
ears, and I came downward upon my face. 

and I did know present that I wa alive, and there to be some dread 
terror at my heart; and sure I did rememb and sicken and gat my 
head from the ground. and I lookt among the trees; but there did be 
nothing, and everywher there did be a strang silenc and a dim of 
unreal seemings. and I knew that mine own wa gone from me, and had 
sure died. and the earth did be all stain about me with my blood, 
and I did be utter glad; for I to need death. 

and I swoon again and wa lost to my pain; but did live present to 
know. 

and there wa a littl strength come into me, and I gat my head up 
somewhat from the ground, and did peer among the trees; and my head did 
be too heavy, and my face came against the earth onc more. and becaus 
that I could not hold up my head, I roll my head a little, until that 
my cheek did be to the ground, and I to look thiswise, so well as I 
might; but there did be nothing; and afterward, I roll my head again 
to the other cheek, and so to stare veri weak and desperate, and not 
abl to look proper to my front. and lo! there went someth among the 
trees, and did show white in the gloom of the wood; and did come through 
the trees. and I not to believ in the first that I did truli see aught; 
and sudden I to know that I saw somewhat. and behold! my heart did bound 
in me, so that all my bodi did waken; for I knew that mine own maid did 
run slow and stagger toward me, through the wood. and I did be now 
upon my knee and upon my hands, and did begin again to creep and to 
bleed; and did make littl call to mine own, that had no sounding. 

and mine own drew nigh, and did rock and stagger, and did strike anon 
against the trunk of the trees, as that she did be gone near blind with 
her running. and in a moment she saw me, and that I did yet live and did 
come unto her; and she made a strang and love cri unto me, with a 
great glad and with an utter weakness. 

and she came running, and wa lost with faintness, and did sway thi way 
and that, stumbling; and she went sudden to the earth, and did be still. 

and I crept onward so speedi as I might, and the earth to seem alway as 
that it move from my hands, and to slide; and this-seem to be of my 
weakness; for my hand and my knee went everyway, and my head to be 
that it kept nod forward veri stupid to the earth. 

and lo! as I came anigh unto the maid, where she did lie so quiet, I saw 
that someth move in the wood, and wa running. and truli it did be 
an humpt man, and came forward veri silent and with a quick slyness, as 
that he did track the maid secretly; for he lookt alway to the earth. 
and I perceiv that he wa that one of the humpt men which the maid had 
cut with the knife; for the blood did show upon the shoulder and the 
breast; and thi bleed mayhap to have slow the man; so that mine 
own did be like to have suppos she had come utter free; yet he to have 
found her, by tracking, as I perceived. 

and I strave to my feet, that I should come to the maid, befor the 
humpt man; and sure I gat upright, and went with a strang running, 
and did roll, and lo! I fell immediate, ere I wa come to her. and the 
humpt man to run also; and sure it did be a dread race; for I went 
creep and did be weak and as that I wa of lead. and the humpt man 
came veri swift and brutish; but I came the first to mine own maid. and 
I rose up at the humpt man, upon my knees, and I swung the diskos, and 
the great weapon did roar in my hands, as that it did know and did live. 
and the humpt man ran in upon me; but I smote him truli with the diskos, 
and he ran past me, all blundering, and fell and die upon hi face, a 
littl way off. 

and lo! my wound had brake out into a great bleeding, and my head did 
roll upon my shoulders. and I lookt down dull, yet with an utter great 
love upon mine own; and there did be no proper wound upon her; but yet 
wa she all bruis and knockt and mark with the trees, and where she 
did fall in her running. and she did be there, veri still and dear, and 
I to have brake my heart with love for her, but that I did be so dulled, 
as I have told. 

and I fought that I should be strong a littl while more against my 
weakness; and I strove that I set mine ear gentli upon her breast, that 
I should listen for her heart. but my head did go downward someth 
clumsi and heavi upon her; and I then to hearken, and sure she did 
live and her heart did beat; though, in verity, mine ear did have at 
first a thundering; but afterward a quiet in them, that made the 
sound of her puls to seem an utter long way off; and veri faint it 
did be. and surely, in that moment, even as I harked, I wa gone over 
into a deadness, and had no more knowing; neither to have even a 
knowledg that I did be slipt from my senses. and, behold, the maid did 
lie swooning; and I to be there in my broken armour, and my head upon 
the breast of mine own, and likewis to know naught; and about us the 
quiet of that country, and the far nois of the great fire-hil 
that did sound through eternity. 




xiv 

ON the island 


now I came unto my senses, and did be in pain and a great forget 
and bewilderment. and I strove that I rise; but did be held by a strang 
force, that did be sure my weakness, as I to know afterward. 

and I wa upon my back; and a littl sound did be near me, as that 
someth did pant. and I turn my head, veri slow, becaus that I did 
so lack of strength. and lo! I saw that the maid did be anigh to me, and 
did be yet naked; and did pant, and pusht hard and desper with a 
great pole, which did be sure that one which I had cut when that the 
humpt men came upon us. and therewith I rememb all, and perceiv 
that I did be upon the raft, and the maid to push the raft along with 
the pole. 

and, at that, I made a littl sound with my mouth; but the maid not to 
hear me; for she did look backward, as I should think to the shore; and 
her face did be veri set and anxious; and there to be a far nois of 
howling, that I knew to be the voic of the humpt men; and so to 
perceiv that the maid had come unto her senses, and had gat me somewis 
to the raft, whilst that I did yet be swoond. and thu to save me ere 
the humpt men had come. but, in verity, how she did thi thing, I never 
to learn; neither she to know, but onli that her love did give her a 
great and desper strength that she save me, that did be her man. 

and afterward, mine own maid did tell me how that she had come into her 
senses, and did be there upon the earth, and somewhat did be upon her 
breast; and she saw that it wa my head which did be heavi upon her, and 
I to be sure gone out from thi life; for I wa so still. 

and she came from under me, and did eas me out upon the earth, and her 
heart nigh brake, becaus that I wa so be-bled, and my blood to have 
stain all that did be near. but when she had gat me restful, she saw 
that I did sure live; and a great hope to spring in her heart. and 
oft, as she had eas me, she had lookt about, and there did be naught 
to the sight, save the bodi of the humpt man anigh, and the other dead 
about and upon the flat-top rock, as you to mind. 

and she ran then veri speedi to the raft, and brought water from the 
river in my headpiece, and she dasht the water upon me; but I to have no 
power to come unto my senses. and lo! in that moment, she to know by 
some subtil tell of the spirit, that there came some danger anigh; 
and she then to make that she save me, or that we die both of us 
together. and she strave with me, and did carri and draw me that 
weari way unto the raft. and she gat me on to the raft; and she ran 
then for the pole that did be besid the rock; and whilst that she took 
the pole, she perceiv her torn garments, that did be yet in the hand 
of the humpt man, even as she had slipt them to escap him. and she 
caught the garment veri hasti from the hand of the man, and ran then to 
the raft; and she pusht the raft out from the shore, and leap aboard; 
and behold! as she made to use the pole, there came a sound out of the 
wood. and there ran from the wood the two humpt men that did yet live; 
and they to have trackt her, after that she did run from them; and they 
ran downward to the shore, veri silent and intent upon her; but she to 
work with an utter despair, and to have the raft a good way out, ere 
they did be come. and surely, they either to have no power of swimming, 
or to know that there did be a dread in the water; for they made not to 
come after; but did stand and stare veri stupid, and afterward to howl; 
and thi howl I did hear when that I wa come unto myself upon the 
raft, as you do know. and by thi telling, you to be so wise as I; for 
more I know not, save odd thing that I did learn afterward, that did 
but set my love more holi unto mine own maid; and these to have been but 
small matter of love-thought that we did have together; and scarc 
clear unto my remembering. 

and lo! even as I hark unto the howl of the humpt men, the sound 
did grow more faint and far off; for the maid work veri desper with 
the pole. and I did feel that I would help her; but yet wa so a-lack; 
and surely, even as I did mean to rise, I wa gone again utter from my 
senses; and that dear nake one did pilot me safe and love unto the 
safe harbour of the littl island, that you do mind; and had no 
thought unto herself; but onli that she save me. and I to be there, 
scarc offward from my death, and to have no know of aught, and no 
more power to help or to be a shield unto mine own; but did be onli an 
helpless man, that had sure died, save for the care of My beloved. 

yet did I fight a good fight, and have alway a great joy in the 
remembering. 

now, I mind noth veri clear after thi for a great time; but onli of 
pain and weariness, and of half wake and time when I did know 
naught, and other when that I did be awake, yet did have no realness, 
either in myself or in ani land or place; and all to come back strang 
and vague; yet with a constant know that there went love about me, 
and a great and gentl watchfulness; so that I wa eas when that the 
black mist of my weak did upris about me to swamp me; and I wa 
made to know hope, when that unknown despair did live stealthi within 
me. 

and lo! there came a time when I waked, and did be freed of uncertain 
burden and peculiar woe and that still haze through which great 
ach did come constant upon me. and surely, I wa laid veri nice upon 
somewhat that did be soft, and there went a sweet quiet about me, 
and an health drows did grow in my bones. 

and slowli I perceiv that the maid did kneel besid me, and did look 
upon me with so great a love and glad that it did be as that I drank 
in health and a drowsi joy and peace. and surely, she stoopt and kiss me 
with an utter gentl love, upon my mouth, and her tear to go sweet upon 
my face; and truli I kist her again, with an utter content. 

and she took my head in the comfort of her arm, and gave me somewhat 
that I drink; and when I had drunk, she kiss me onc again, so light as 
that a pretti wind did blow hush upon my lips. and my head she made 
easy; and lo! I wa gone over unto sleep, even as she tend me. 

and thrice do I mind that thi to happen; and at the third time, I knew 
that my strength wa come someth into me again; and I move my hand a 
little, thi way and that; and she to know that I did need her to hold 
my hand; and she to do this, and I to go into sleep again, even while 
that I look sleepy, yet with all my love, into her eyes. 

and when I wake for the fourth time, I did whisper that I love her; 
and sure she broke into a sudden weeping, and did hold my hand veri 
dear against her breast. 

and when I wake for the fifth time, I to know how thing did be about 
me, and that I did lie nake in the cloak, and did be all bandag about 
my body; and the bandages, as I did know afterward, did be from the torn 
garment of the maid. 

and I look at the maid, and knew that she did be drest again, and did be 
in the garment that I did give to her, as you to mind; which did be 
that one, and the inner, that the humpt man tore from her, and which she 
had slipt, that she escap from the man. 

and afterward, I found that she had made a veri cun mend of the 
garments, whilst that she did sit so utter long besid me to tend me; 
for she had gotten thread from her torn garments, and had made needl 
from thorn that did grow on the littl bush of the island; and the 
thorn did brake oft, and she then to have another, and so to persist an 
hundr times. and thi way she did be drest veri nice and dainty. 

and mine own maid perceiv how that I lookt with interest at her, and 
did mind, veri natural, how that I last to have seen her; and she then 
to blush gently; and did kiss me, that she have her pretti face 
someth from mine eyes. and truly, I to wish the more that I be 
strong, that I kneel in a glad rever unto her; for thi way did be 
my love, and ever so; and you likewise, that have truli loved. 

now I did begin that I grew veri steadi unto my strength, again, and 
mine own maid did tend me alway, and she gave me a broth of tablet and 
the water at set times, by the tell of my timepiece. and oft she 
washt me and did chang the bandages, and did wash and dri the bandages, 
that she use them over again; for we did be so lack for such matters, 
as you to know. 

and on the fifth day, I wa come utter to ease; and did be wondrou 
happy, and mine own to make pretti talk unto me; but had me to be alway 
quiet, becaus that I did be yet so weak. 

and on the sixth day, I to be let answer mine own, and to say how great 
I did love her, the which mine eye had said alway, while that I did lie 
in silence. and I to be assur by the maid that she did be in health, 
and recovered; but indeed, I saw that she wa gone veri thin, and that 
her eye did be weary, even while that they had so great a love and a 
glad to me. 

and I made mine own to bring her tablet by me, as she did alway, and 
when that I had kist them, and she to have eat and drunk, I bade her to 
make me the broth ready; and when she had made the broth, I askt that 
the disko be set anigh to me. and afterward, I bid her to my side, and 
had her to lie by me; and I took her pretti head upon mine arm, and told 
her that she to lie thu and to sleep, and to have no fear that she 
weari me; for that I to be but the more rest to have her so, besid 
me. 

and she in the first to troubl that she be too heavi for mine arm; but 
truly, I show that my strength wa someth come back to me; for I 
prest her gentl unto me, and she then to nestl content, and to be gone 
into an utter sleep, and to have been in a sore need of the same. 

and mine own did sleep for twelv great hours, and had scarc ani life 
in all that time, save when onc she did make a littl and gentl 
moaning, and did afterward set her pretti face more nigh to me in her 
sleep. and surely, I had neither weari nor lonesomeness; but did lie 
with an utter content; and did look downward upon the maid, where she 
did sleep in the hollow of mine arm; and truli she did be most wondrou 
love and dainty; and the good of her face did seem as that it made 
an holi about my heart, so that my spirit wa uplift in a quiet and 
constant glori of love. 

and I drank a part of the broth at the third hour, and at the sixth 
hour, and at the ninth hour, when that I finish it; and my right arm 
did be free to thi purpos and to the diskos; and sure I did twice 
and thrice set my hand upon that great weapon, as to a true comrade; 
and, in verity, I could think the weapon did know and did love me. and 
thi think to be becaus I did be so uplift, as I have told; yet 
truly, the disko did be a strang and wondrou thing, and did be alway 
thought to have an one with the man that did use it. 

and in the twelfth hour, the maid awok sudden, and came upward out of 
mine arm, all in a sweet haste, that she know that I did be well; and 
she did be eas wondrous, when that she saw how I laugh with a quiet 
joy but to see her dear eyes, and her pretti trouble. yet did she be in 
reproach to herself, when that she lookt to find how the hour had past. 
but, indeed, I did make a mock stern with her; and forbad that 
she even to say one littl word more upon thi matter; but to be glad 
that I did be so utter happy, and she likewise. 

and truly, when I had said this, that impud maid did set her littl 
fist against my nose, and to threaten me. and, in verity, I laught so 
hearti that the maid did be in fear I should set my wound again to 
bleed, and did reproach herself again; but, in truth, I came to no harm. 

and when that I could speak, I askt the maid whether that there had been 
brother to her, becaus that she did play so natural. and thi I askt, 
not thinking; and lo! in a moment I perceiv my thoughtlessness; but 
said naught, save to take the hand of mine own, that she know utter that 
I did not be heartless. and she to nod veri quiet, and afterward kist my 
hand, and slipt from me. and I knew that she wa gone a littl way off, 
lest she weep; and I did be in troubl for her and for mine a-lackness; 
but truli I could do naught, onli that I call veri gentl unto her. 

and she to return soon, and did smile love and cheer upon me; but, 
indeed, I saw that she cover her weeping, whilst that she had made me 
new broth. yet, befor I would take the broth, I would have her to mine 
arms; and she to submit veri glad and happy, but to keep her pretti 
weight from me, lest she hurt my woundings. 

and afterward, we both to eat, and be happi in glad talk. 

and presently, I did sleep; but would have her to be nigh to me, even 
though she did be wakeful; and so we to be utter content together. 

now, the seventh day, as it might be called, wa a wondrou happi time; 
and when I waked, the maid did be sleep as a child to my side, and 
her face nestl against me. and she to waken in a moment; for thu had 
she drows and watch through all the hour whilst that I had slept. 

and we then to eat and to drink together, after that mine own had made 
me easi with a gentl wash and care. and I now to be allow that I 
have my tablet whole, and the water afterward, as when that I did be 
well; and thi to pleas me, as you shall think; for I did ach that I 
be strong veri speedy, that I have power to guard mine own maid again, 
and to go forward with our journeying, that I have the maid unto the 
safe of the mighti pyramid; and surely, now that I had my tablet 
whole, I to feel that I did grow near unto fit again; and moreover, 
they did satisfi my hunger the better than the broth. 

and the maid to give me my tablet oft, so that I eat a great many; and 
I did make her to count; and sure there did be sufficient, if that I 
get strong pretti quick. and so I made no refus of the tablets; for I 
did need them, that I make blood again within me, els should I be 
lacking, when that there came ani need anigh. 

and we kist each the tablet of the other, and did drink from the same 
cup, and did be utter happy; and did be part like children, but also to 
be man and maid. 

and presently, the maid did shift my bandages, as alway, and washt me 
proper, and had me into comfort. but she did keep me alway veri 
low-lying; and truli I scarc to mind; for I wa not gotten enough of my 
strength, to give me to feel irked. and further, as you shall think, 
there did be that love one with me alway; and did make sweet quip 
unto me, and talkt and did laugh, and oft did come into singing; for she 
did be so sweetli joy that I wa in life and did mend so proper. 

and afterward, she went off from me a little, to her toilet; but I to 
ask that she be so swift as might be, and she to promis veri merry; and 
she came back in a littl while, and her hair to be in a love cloud 
about her shoulders, and her pretti feet yet to be bare from her bath, 
which she had in a pool beyond some bushes; and she to say that I did be 
so impati a man, that she to be forc that she do the half of her 
dress with me; but truly, she came thiswis onli becaus she to know 
how I did delight in her thus, and to watch the way that she set up her 
abund of hair; and she to be hungri also that she be with me, and to 
love me that I watch her, even while that there did be oft a littl and 
quaint stir of shyness in her dear heart. 

and I had her to come besid me, and to sit anigh to my hand; and I made 
present that I did scold her, becaus that she had no proper care to 
her pretti feet; and I bid her to set her feet toward me, that I look 
the more close at them. and she to be a pretti rogue, and did think I to 
mean to kiss them--and truli not to think alway wrong--but I then to 
have anoth planning; for I had pluckt a hair veri sli from her head, 
and she but to have said an oh! to me, and to have thought no more. but, 
indeed, when that she gave her feet to me, I held them so strong as I 
might, and I bound her pretti toe togeth with the hair; and sure 
she did be a captiv unto me, and we to laugh, as that we to be both 
children. and afterward she stole back her feet from me; but, in verity, 
I knew that she had a wondrou heed that she brake not the hair that 
bound her; but did sit besid me bound in that pretti way; but yet to 
hide from me that she did not brake the hair. 

and she then to do her hair upon her head, veri lovely; and afterward, 
I put up my hands, and took it down again; and she then to kiss me and 
to ask how that she should ever have it proper upon her head, if that I 
did alway so teas her. 

and she then to take her hair, and did set the abund of it upon both 
side of my face, and then to kiss me, as I did look up at her, from out 
of so much beauty. 

and afterward she cut a lock of my hair, and a lock from her own dear 
head; and she did plait the two lock together, so that our hair did 
blend and be together; and afterward she hid it in her bosom. but I did 
be then out of content, and would have done likewise, onli that it did 
so weari me to uphold my hands; and she to cut a second lock from my 
head, and a second tress of her own most love hair; and she made me to 
kiss the hair that did be from her, and she then to kiss the hair that 
did be from me; and afterward, she did plait them together, and gave 
them to me. and I set the hair, for that time, under the great bandag 
that went over my heart; and truly, she did be then the one that lackt 
content; for she to say that the second plait did be kist, and the 
first to lack; but I to refus to exchange; so that we made up a 
quarrelling, and did present have to be kist, unto forgiveness. and, 
truly, have you not likewis known such glad foolishness, when that you 
were in the love-days. 

and she then to make me to be quiet, and to keep my hand downward from 
her hair, becaus that the uplift did prove overmuch to me; and she 
took my great hand then, and did threaten how dread she use me, if 
that I be not humble. and truly, I said that I did be an humbl man; and 
she then to hold my hand with but one small one; and surely, her hand 
did be so small that she not abl to hold me, save by the thumbs. and 
she then with her free hand to cover mine eyes, so that I might not see; 
and whilst that she did hold me thu so utter helpless, she to kiss me 
veri dainti and impud upon the mouth; and afterward she loost me, and 
did be demure. 

and we did be then silent a space; and presently, I put forth my hand, 
that did be veri great, yet to be gone white and to tremble, becaus 
that I did lack so utter of blood. and the maid to know what I did mean, 
and she clench her hand into two fists, and set them both into my one 
hand, and sure they did be littl fists; and I then to be happy; for 
thi did be a wondrou pleasur alway unto me; and she to have her lid 
a littl downward upon her eyes, and to be quietli happy. and, truly, 
how I mind it all so plain. 

and afterward, I did plagu her veri gentl that she to be all a-lack, 
if that she did tri to use her hand to aught, becaus that they did be 
so small. and she in a moment to have her two arm veri dear about my 
neck, and did kiss me with an utter love and tender upon the mouth, 
and afterward went from me, lest that she have me to overset myself. 

and I did then to make her to sit by me, and I did tell her a tale how 
that a young man did onc live in the olden days, and did meet with the 
one maid upon all the earth. and how that they love and did be married, 
and she to die, and of the utter and desper mad of grief that 
nigh destroy the man; and how that he sudden to wake into the futur 
of the world, in a new time, and did come to learn that hi own did also 
to live in that time. and he then to make that he find her; and did 
truli come unto her. and how she did be differ in her beauty; but yet 
to be utter lovely. and the man did hold an utter rever to the maid, 
that had been hi wife in the olden dream-days, so that hi rever of 
love did live in him like a constant pain and anguish of sweet and 
trouble, and of holi thought that did be bred of her love 
companionship, and of hi memories.... but, in truth, I gat not further 
in the tale than this; for mine own did have come sudden into weeping, 
and had gotten to her knees, and did hold my hand against her breast, 
and did put her hand gentl upon my lips. and, in a moment, she to 
whisper somewhat through her tears; and there to be dear motherhood 
within her face; and a sudden shine of memori in her eyes, that had 
been near dreadful, onli that it did seem to be to her as that she were 
part dreaming. and the strang and solemn pain did come also unto me 
through the part-open gateway of my memory. and I to rememb veri 
clear and with an anguish in that moment. and I told mine own how that 
the babe had gone onward, after that the belov had died. and there did 
be then an utter quiet upon us. 

and lo! sudden the maid did bend unto me, and I to take her into mine 
arms, out of the vagu dream of her memory-dreams. but, ere she did 
be come outward entir from the haze of the past, she to tri to set 
somewhat into word concern thi memory-vis of the babe; but 
someway to be strang dumb. and I did be silent likewise, becaus of 
all those thing that did be between us forev and forever. 

and presently, she kist me, and wa herself again; and she went from me 
to attend unto our food. 

now, that did be truli a love day; for I to have gat suffici of 
strength that I did be abl to have interest, and talk with mine own 
maid; and she now to be well rest, and to have eas in her dear heart 
concern me. 

and sure we oft to laugh, and did make jest utter glad and foolish. 
and indeed, I do mind how that I askt mine own an olden puzzle, that did 
come out of the vagu of my memory-dreams. and she to be like a 
person that doth hear a strang familiar thing; and lo! sudden she to 
say, as that she gat knowledg from beyond eternity, that it did be when 
that he wa a littl hoarse. and you to know the jest, and to have 
troubl it oft at school; but, in verity, it did be a strang thing to 
have from our memori out of all the deep of time. and we, in truth, 
never in that age to have seen or to have known that ever there did be 
an horse, or to mind the like of one. and thi to be but a littl 
matter; yet of strang and peculiar interest, as you to agree. and, 
indeed, we did both to look one at the other, when that we had ended, 
and did wonder what an hors did be; yet in the same time did have a 
vagu inward knowing. 

and so we to look ever backward through dim ages; and sure we gat 
present from jests, unto solemnness; and the maid to be nigh again 
unto tears. and, in truth, I then to bring our thought and our speech 
forward from the abyss of the years, and did ceas from memory-dream 
for that time; and so to have the maid again in joy; yet mayhap 
someth wist odd whiles. 

and presently, I to tell the maid an hundr thousand thing concern 
the mighti pyramid, of which I had so oft said somewhat; but never to 
have gat so great a chanc as thi unto a plenti of time and so nice an 
one in the way that our mind did go. 

and surely, the maid did be eager in a moment, and did be husht; and 
again to ask constant concern all matters. 

and, in verity, there went a great while thi way; and the maid to have 
an utter wonder and excit of all that I to tell; for truly, it did 
be as that a man of thi age should come downward from a great star in 
the heavens, and to tell of wonder and new things; and you to 
understand how she did feel. 

and of all thing that did most have a happi unto the maid, I to 
perceiv that the great life and human of the million to dwell 
within her imagin as a cloud of warmth and quiet joy; for I did show 
thi thing to her, so well as I wa able; and, in truth, you shall tell 
me in honesti whether that I have made the same likewis clear-seen unto 
you? 

and she, as you shall mind, did be a maid that had grown all her life in 
a refug that did be shaken with hauntings, becaus that it lackt the 
power of the earth-curr to protect; and with a peopl that did be 
weak-conceiv through great thousand of years; and where love did 
bloom someth faded, even in youth; and youth to have lack of the 
life-blood of an utter joy, such as did be our and likewis to mani 
that did be of the mighti pyramid. 

though, truly, there did go million then, as now, that did never to 
know love; though the name did be in their mouths, and they to have 
belief that the sweet kernel did be in their hearts; but, in verity, 
thi to be love, that your life shall bound in you with abundance, and 
joy dwell round you, and your spirit to live in a natur holi with 
the beloved, and your bodi to be a sweet and natur delight that 
shall never be lost of a love mysteri that doth hold a perfect peac 
each unto the need of the other; and all to be that there go round 
about you a wonder and a splendour all the day and the night that you 
shall be--th man with the woman, the woman with the man. and shame to 
be unborn, and all thing to go natur and wholesome, out of an utter 
great of understanding; and the man to be an hero and a child befor 
the woman; and the woman to be an holi light of the spirit and an utter 
companion and in the same time a glad possess unto the man. and lo! 
if one to die, then the soul of the other shall fail; and that one never 
to have full life again, in that bitter parting. and thi doth be the 
true human love; and all els that be not like to thi with the man and 
with the woman, doth be but a borrow of the name of love for that 
quiet desiring, which is but an endur besid love, which doth be 
between they that be not mate both in their soul and in their bodies. 
and thi tell to take no heed to those base join that be made for 
purpos of wealth or desir or other piteou ends; for, in verity, 
these to have no more deal with the thing that I do tell upon, than 
hath the merchant of goods, or the _need_ of a glutton. but the thing 
that I do have upon my heart doth be that dear and uplift power of 
love, which I to set forth in thi mine own story; for, in truth, I to 
have known love, and to need death when that I be part from mine own. 

now, surely, mine own did come twice and thrice unto weeping, as I did 
tell of thi thing and that, which did set her memori backward unto the 
way of the lesser redoubt. and presently, I did ceas from my tellings, 
becaus that she did so be gone into pain of her memories. but, indeed, 
she then to beg me that I go forward again; for, truly, she to need in 
the heart that she know, and to strive to be no more in grief for the 
telling. 

and I then to say on, and did tell upon the might and wonder and great 
olden delight of the underground fields, that were below the great 
redoubt, as you do know. and I told how that they went downward an 
hundr strang miles, that did be dug of the labour of million and of 
the year of eternity. 

and I set out unto mine own concern that there did be wondrou 
villag spread through that great and hidden countri that did be in the 
underground; and how that great million of the peopl did live there, 
and made a constant labour in those deep land and countries, that did 
be truli so monstrou in all as an huge continent. 

and I show mine own how that there did be wondrou process that did 
be learn in the ages; and how that water did be made in chemistry; and 
truli she to nod to this, becaus that she did mind upon the powder that 
we did use; but truli the powder to have to be made in the first, as you 
shall think; and we but to advantag ourselv of that which did result, 
and I to speak to her of the make of the powder, rather than of the 
way that it afterward to make chemistri with the air, unto water. 

and I told the maid how that there did be mighti underground pipe that 
went across the night land, and did be, mayhap, oft so much as twenti 
great mile deep in the world, and did come upward into the sea of the 
land; and all to have been made secret and hid from the monster of the 
land, as I to know from much read of the histories. 

and mine own then to tell me that they did lack to have ani such great 
wonder below the lesser redoubt; but that there did be utter monstrou 
caverns, where that there had been alway a strang and uncouth countri 
of husbandry, and lit from the earth-current; and they also there to 
buri their dead. and all had been a-lack through great thousand of 
years, as she did know of their records, and had grown dim-lit and 
lonesome, and a land of deep to starv the spirit with an utter 
strang and discomfort, where that the men went quietli as ghosts, 
through mani ages; and all a place in dire want of sound and laughter. 

yet thi all to have been sure differ a monstrou age gone, when 
that the earth-curr did be a power in the lesser redoubt, and the 
human to be in plenty, and of good and natur health and courag of 
life. and, truly, to mind upon that place, doth alway to set a fresh 
wonder in me, that mine own did be so love and wholesom of spirit and 
wise and in knowledg and good forc of her being. but so it did be with 
her; and she to have been sure alway that one that did be mine own. 

and I then to tell mine own maid concern the lowest field, which did 
be the countri of silence, and wa the place of memori unto all the 
great millions, where did linger and bide the ghost of an hundr 
billion grief and the drift thought of sorrow hearts; and there 
to live a great hallowed and a mysteri of silenc and an holi 
and a greatness, as that it did be the express of all that doth be 
nobl and everlast that ever did come out of the heart of man and all 
the lost dead of eternity; so that the spirit of a man did seem to go on 
great wings, unto love and splendid resolvings, if that he but to walk 
lone awhil in that country, that sure did be never lonesom unto 
the spirit. 

and lo! the maid did be all husht, as I did speak, and did look downward 
unto me with her eye veri bright, and love with the think and 
tear that did stir within her. 

and sudden she to ask whether that I did make my resolv to my journey, 
whilst that I walkt in that place; and she to look veri intent and 
beauti upon me, as she did question. and, indeed, I saw that she to 
mean a love prais unto me, as you to perceive; and truly, I did feel 
a littl strange, as that I did be both glad and shi in the same moment. 
and she then to eas me of ani answer; for she gat upward upon her 
knees, and she put her two hand to the side of my face, and bid me to 
look into her eye and to know that she love me with her soul and with 
all that did make her to be. 

and afterward, she kist me veri gentl upon the forehead, and did be 
then husht awhile, as that she to be in thought; yet oft she did look 
downward at me, and did have a beauti of love and honour within her 
eyes, so that they alway to shine, as she did look at me. 

and presently, the maid did sit again besid me, and slipt her two hand 
into the one of mine, as did be ever my desire, and she to love that she 
give me thi delight, and likewise, she to have joy to herself in thi 
lovingness. 

and we then again to have talk; and I did tell mine own somewhat of the 
histori of the olden world! and she did have dim memories, as in dreams, 
of the day of light; yet scarc that she could believ it of truth. but 
she to have knowledg of the olden love day within her spirit, and to 
mind that there did be alway, as it did be, a love and golden light 
upon the world; but she not to know truli whether thi to be but the 
holi glamour-light that memori doth set about a past loveliness; and to 
have no rememb of the sun; but yet to be made readi by her memori 
unto believing. and I to know of certainty; but yet even I that do tell 
thi My tale, did but perceiv the day of the light, as in a far and 
vagu dream; and to rememb it but in the chief by the glori of lost 
sunset that had cast an holi upon my heart, and of the hush of 
dawn that had made readi my spirit in the gone age to look quietli 
unto my death. 

and sure you to go with me in all thi thing, and to have felt within 
your own spirit that uplift wonder that doth shake the soul with the 
lost begin and with the unknown end, when that you have lookt 
through the sorrow of the sunset, and stood silent befor the quiet 
voic that doth make promis in the dawn. 

but, in verity, we that had near lost our memori of the sureti of these 
great wonders, did have memori of love; and thi to be most beauti 
unto my heart; for it but to show the more how that love doth live 
forever, and doth make an holi in all places; and doth give 
companionship and satisfying; so that to have love, is to have all, and 
to have escap thi wonder is to have miss to have lived. 

and I to find then that mine own did have no knowledg of the way that 
the world did be in that futur age; and did lack to know that there 
abod mightili abov us in the everlast night, the dead stark of 
the world, where did be--mayhap two hundr great mile abov us--snow 
and the etern desol of a lost world, that did be onc the love 
world of the olden days, which did be now given over unto night and 
silence. 

and mayhap there did wander upward there memory, and did go companion 
by grief. but, indeed, I to delight to think that hope and love did 
build hous of joy about the dead; and there to be no true death; but 
onli the die of days. yet, surely, thi doth be sorrow enough unto the 
heart and the soul, if that they did be day when love did make a 
mysteri of light about the spirit, and the belov to have been anigh to 
make ever a sweet wonder unto the heart. 

but I to ceas from these thoughts; for we to face our life brave and 
wise, and to take both the sorrow and the joy unto our developing, and 
to hold up the face with courag when that grief doth come anigh; and to 
see that we grow not to bitterness, but unto sweet wholesomeness. and 
there to be joy again, and we then the better abl to have that delight 
into our hearts; for how shall joy ever to come truli again to that 
heart which bitter hath made a place for the abod of sorrow. 

and truly, I to ceas from these think also; for my stori to wait 
upon me, and these thing that I do say do be plain unto you, and to 
have no need to the telling. 

and so did I tell mine own maid of the thing that I did learn from the 
littl metal book; and she to be in a constant wonder and delight and 
with an awe and new upon her. and sudden, there did some olden 
memori stir within her; for she askt me, in one instant, whether that I 
did rememb when that the citi did move alway unto the westward. 

but truli I had no rememb of thi thing, and did look at her 
awhile, with somewhat of a troubl upon me; for, that there should be 
aught lack in my memori of those time that we did be togeth upon 
thi world, wa a fear unto me, and a vagu sorrow alway, if that I did 
but to let my thought go that way; though, indeed, I did ever strive to 
wiseness, and did have knowledg that there doth be an heart-wear and 
despair and needless troubl in vain regrets; but yet these to be 
natur unto the spirit, if that you to know love; and do be but the 
complement of the love-joy, and mayhap to have a use unto the sweeten 
of the spirit, if that they be not let to over-rid the reason. 

and whilst that I did look unto mine own, that she help me to remember, 
she did strive with her memory. but in the end, did fail to come unto 
aught of clearness, save that she did see, as in a far dream, yet veri 
plain, a great metal roadway, set in two line that went forev unto 
the set sun; and she then sudden to say that she did see in her 
memori the sun, and she to have a strang and troubl amaz upon 
her. and there did be citi upon the great road; and the hous did be 
strange-seeming, and did move forward etern and at a constant speed; 
and behind them the night did march forever; and they to have an even 
pace with the sun, that they live ever in the light, and so to escap 
the night which pursu forever, as she did tell, and a dread and 
terribl chill that did live in the night. and there did be citi far 
forward in the morn sunshine, that did have gone befor at speed, and 
set the husbandri of the world, and to be finish and gone forward 
again ere that certain of the latter citi did come to that place to 
the reaping; and the night to come present to that place; but thi not 
to be for some part of a year after that the crop were taken. but how 
long thi might be, she not to remember. 

and all thi the maid did say to me, as out of a strang dream, and I to 
have set it down, and to have made it so clear to you as she to have 
told it; and sure it doth be plain then that she to speak of a time 
when that the day did be grown to a monstrou length, becaus that the 
world did turn but slow and weary. 

and it to be a sureness, as you shall perceive, that but to stand still 
in that age of which naani told, wa to be left present in an utter 
night and chill, that should last mayhap a great and weari year. and, in 
verity, it doth seem that all human did travel forev in that 
strang age, when that to stay wa to die unprepar in the bitter 
night, and to go forward, wa to be forev in the sun. and truly, thi 
doth be so strang seem to me, as to you. 

and much I question the maid, and did have an hurt within my heart, 
and a pain of jealousi and sad to grow in me; for sure she did 
speak of some life that she did live, when that I did be elsewhere, 
either in life or unknowing. and, in verity, what man then should have 
taught mine own to love him? and she then mayhap to have had no 
rememb of me. 

and truli I question veri desperate, and the more so becaus that I 
wa yet weak, and lack my strength to be composed. but she neither to 
rememb me nor ani other man of that time; and to have no memories, 
save these bare thing that she to have spoken out so strange, and which 
did come sudden unto her out of all the deep of the year and the 
lost sorrow and joy and wonder of that which doth make a world of 
humans. 

and sure my question brought a distress upon mine own, both 
becaus that she did be troubl by the way that my love did bring me to 
thi strang anguish, and becaus that she also to have pain, and a 
sudden fear that there did be ever a time when she not to have known me, 
or to have permit the arm of another. 

and she did then strive that she be both wise and strong, and to give 
help unto me, and to take reason unto her own easing. and truli she to 
show how that she did be all unknow of ani love in that far backward 
time; but it to be possibl in reason that she to have gone to another, 
in natur course, the while that her heart did yearn alway in vagu 
troubl unto her own, that her spirit did mayhap never to have 
forgotten. and, truly, thi doth be the way of life, and a bitter thing 
and a sorrow to joyou love to think upon; yet I here to be set to the 
tell of truth, and to have heed to all that reason doth show to be. 

but mine own did also have us both to rememb that there did be equal 
right to think that she had die mine own maid in that life; for that it 
did be not out of reason to think that she had been void-heart unto 
all men, becaus that she had known in her spirit that she did onc to 
meet her own, and did be thereaft untun unto all other men that ever 
did live. and thi all to be in a mist, and we to go vainly. and of her 
will, she did think that no man did ever to have possess her, save I; 
yet thi to be mayhap onli the prompt of her love; and she then to 
kiss me, and to say that there did be no sureti in aught, but onli that 
we did have been togeth before, and have born a love so great that it 
did live through eternity; and we to be now together, and mayb all els 
to be but dreams. 

and truli I did have a fierc hope that thi be so; and the maid 
likewis so to hope, yet to be less bitter with rebellion than I, though 
in pain upon the thought; for she did be so utter and dread glad and 
in happi thank that we did be now come togeth again in the end; 
and did mean that she conquer all that should be like to set a grey 
upon our joy, and to be steadfast unto thi end. 

and I afterward to be likewis in wisdom, when that I wa come the more 
to strength, and to mind that I suffer vainli for that which did have no 
surety, as I have shown; and moreov I did have no power upon the past, 
either to learn aught or to mend aught; so that I did go the way of an 
human, and did shake free from these broodings, and strove unto 
forgetfulness; which, in truth, doth be both a terror and a 
mercifulness, as doth chance. and I kist mine own maid, with somewhat 
more of the year within my love; and she to kiss me veri sober and 
dear; and to desir onli for my happiness, and to be utter mine own. 

now, we then to eat and to drink, and the maid to see me unto comfort in 
all things, and my bandag all right; and she then to make that she 
have on her footgear and her hair to be bound; but inde I bid her that 
she to dare do thi thing, when that she to know how I did delight that 
her littl feet be bare to mine eyes, and her hair most love upon her 
shoulders; and she to be veri happi that I so to have an utter pleasur 
in her dear beauties, and did sit besid me again, and set her feet veri 
sli where they did be anigh to my hand; for she to know that she did be 
mine own, and I to be her master, and she to have joy that she to have 
to render her beauti unto me; for she did be that true complement unto 
me that the heart of a man doth ach for eternally. 

and so, presently, did end that love day of quiet speech and 
togetherness; and the maid did prepar me for my slumber, and she then 
to lie anigh to me, and her head to rest gentl besid me, so that her 
pretti face did be near unto my breast upon the right side; and she to 
give me at the first a love and sober kiss that did be somewis to set 
a guard upon her tenderness, and afterward did sleep content and gentle, 
as that she did be in the same moment a child and a woman. 

and I also to come unto slumbering; yet did know vagu how that mine 
own did rise a littl upon her elbow, thi time and that, and look veri 
love into my face, that she have assur of my comfort and 
well-being; and onc I did waken, proper, and lookt at her, and she then 
to kiss me gentl upon mine eyelids, and bid me to sleep; and so did 
come herself unto her sweet slumber. now when that I did come to my 
proper wakening, I to hear the fizz of the water, and to know that 
the maid did be risen a good while, and had made her toilets, as I 
perceiv in a moment, when that she came unto me; for her hair did be 
in a love cloud upon her shoulders, all comb and made readi against 
my waking; and she to have bathed, as I supposed, in some warm pool that 
did be among the bush upon the island; and she now to slip her 
foot-gear, that her feet be bare unto me, as I did love, and to stand a 
moment, and her eye to twinkl gently. and I lookt at her with love and 
honour in mine eyes, as you shall know, and she to have danc of sweet 
pleasur in her heart, that I so to look upon her with holi and with 
natur love, and sure the last doth be unnatur if that it do lack 
the first; but my love did burn upward out of my being, so that the 
flame of my spirit did light the fire of my heart, and my reason to add 
coal unto that fire that hath live for ever, and doth be as that it 
shall be never quenched. 

and mine own in a moment did kneel besid me, and, truly, someway in 
her deep intens unto me; for our love did make all the world holy, 
and she to be both uplift and as that she must give all the humbl 
of her heart unto the great of my love; and thi she to feel, and 
her deep and utter love, to make it as that she did be all a passion of 
humbl unto me, so that in her soul I did rise in that moment upon 
the wing of my love, and to seem that I did be all the world and all 
time and all place and all that ever she did need unto her. 

and she put out her arm to me, and her eye did shine with those tear 
that do never be shed; and lo! in a moment, she did be upon my heart, 
and we two to be husht togeth in content; for our need did be in the 
other. and truly, where there do be two togeth with love, there doth 
be neither lack nor need; but etern fulfilment. 

and in veriti thi to be my hope for that which doth come 
afterward--that all doth be lead unto so glad a joy as this, and that 
all pain and grief and all that doth make the shape of life, doth be 
but a process by which we be etern perfect from live unto 
living, unto each fulfil that doth be but the doorway unto greater 
fulfil in the beloved. 

and, presently, mine own maid did loos herself gentl from me, and 
washt me and tend me; and veri husht and tender, and someth 
down-rid of her dear and love eyes. 

and we then to eat and to drink together, and joy so great and quiet did 
be upon us, that it did be as that we had gone into an etern of peac 
and an utter content. and surely, as the thought did stir in me, it did 
be of beauti that we did be both of us true unto the other, in that 
life, and I never to have kist a maid, until that I kist mine own, and 
she to have been likewise, and to have fend all men from her, becaus 
that they did be stranger unto her inwardness, and so we two to be so 
utter together, both in that our spirit did be knit, be each the 
complement of the other, and becaus that we had no secret pain of 
rememb things, to set ani apart between our hearts. 

and in verity, I to think back then upon my jealousies, that I have 
told, and to know that mine own did never to have given herself lightli 
to any, neither to have taken lightly; and her spirit to have been alway 
mine through all the everlasting; and mayhap thi to be how all peopl 
shall come to be in the length of time, onli that to us had come the 
great wonder that we did earli meet; though thi also to bring that 
utter pain, which doth seem to slay, when that onc you have known the 
beloved, and to be parted. 

and so I to think, and did present ponder with a great and strang 
piti upon they that did not yet have met the beloved, and they mayhap 
not to have kept all for the beloved; but to have been light with that 
which doth be the treasure, becaus that love had not come to show them 
that they did unknowingli squander the strang and holi glori which doth 
be the possess of they that shall come to the belov and say, all 
that is thine have I kept for thee. and the belov to know and to have 
peac in the remembering. but what doth be the peculiar sorrow of they 
that have gone over-lightly, when that they shall meet the beloved; for 
then shall there be a constant and inward regret, as a thorn in the 
heart, that they not to have observ alway that holi care of all which 
doth pertain unto love; and they nigh to moan in the spirit, _if they 
had but known, if they had but known._ yet, in the end, of their pain, 
shall they grow unto all loveliness, if that now they have truli come 
upon love, and to live with love; for thi to be the especi glori of 
love, that it doth make unto all sweet and greatness, and doth be a 
fire burn all littleness, so that did all in thi world to have met 
the beloved, then did wanton be dead, and there to grow glad and 
charity, danc in the years. 

and there to be yet one thing upon which, mayhap, I not to have thought 
sufficient; for it doth be this, that they who did err, as I have shown, 
shall be the greater for their _pain_; and let thi be to cheer you, if 
that you have done foolishly, and thought not upon that day when the 
belov shall come; for pain is but the voic of develop or 
destruction; and truli you to suffer the first, if that love doth work 
in you; but truly, the more that you have lacked, the greater shall be 
your pain; for the more chang there doth need be in you. 

and so would I have you now to think, and to know that the belov shall 
come, and so shall you live in glad care of all your being, that you be 
abl to come unto the belov in that day, and to say with beauti and 
human joy in your heart, even as I have said; and thu shall you miss 
that bitter pain. but yet, truly, you to be like to heed not this, until 
that love doth come upon you; and I therefor to ceas from thi vain 
set of mine inward reasonings. 

but truly, when that day be come, as I have told, you to know how that 
there went alway with me in thi mine own stori which I tell, the 
simplic of truth; and how that I did be mind onli that you to know, 
and therebi that you have gentl wisdom that you lay not up pain for 
that day. yet, if you do lack to go with me, you to need that develop 
which shall then come upon you. 

and so shall you perceiv how my thought did go to and fro, as I did 
eat with mine own; and so in the last I to find that I did think veri 
serious; and I then to cast from me thi pondering, and to have that 
utter joy which did be upon us, and to seem that it did fill all that 
strang countri of seas. 

and lo! after we did be done of eat and drinking, which did be but a 
littl time, as you shall think, the maid did eas me to an upward 
sitting, and had my back veri nice to an olden stump which did be light, 
and she to push unto me. 

and mine own did sit then besid me, so that mine arm did come most 
natur about her; and she there to be nestl all gleeful and content, 
so that my heart did be doubli tender unto her. and I took the abund 
of her hair, and set it about my neck, and upon my breast, so that it 
did near to cover me in the upward part; and we both then to laugh as 
that we did be two children, becaus that love did make us so utter 
young in the heart; and our hand to be hid under the beauti of the 
maid' hair, and I to have her then that she explain just how great she 
did love me; and you that go with me, do know how that thi doth be a 
delight that is never done, neither to be set onli into words. 

and all that day we did be wondrou happy, save onc when we saw that 
there were humpt men upon the shore, about the flat-topt rock where did 
be the fight; but what they did there, we not to be abl to see, onli 
that present they went away; and inde seem to have no thought unto 
us, neither ani knowledge; and so did be gone again into the forests; 
and we saw no more of them, after that time. and afterward we to be lost 
utter in happiness. 

now, upon the tenth day, I did be so come into health that I to walk a 
littl way to and fore upon the island; and mine own did go with me, and 
so I to pace a good while, and afterward to rest again. 

and mine own then to bring mine armour to me, which she had scour veri 
nice; but truly, the armour did be sore broke and bent, and did be 
jag inward thi place and that, with the monstrou strength of the 
humpt men, when that they did strike me with the great sharp stones. 

and, in verity, how I should ever come again to wear thi protection, I 
to be in doubt. yet, truli it had been a wondrou suit of strength that 
had kept my life within me when that I had been so deadli beset; and I 
to know that it to be yet like to save both our lives, if that we could 
someway straighten it, and eas the broken jag from wound me afresh. 

and I thought a time, and the maid with me; and afterward we gat that 
stump upon which I had leant, and had thi to be for an anvil; and we 
found then smooth stone of differ sizes, and these to be for 
hammers; and we wrought all that day, with restings, upon the armour; 
and surely, we beat it into a veri good shape, from the inward, and the 
broken part we beat smooth, so that they should not wound, and in the 
end to have mine armour fit to go upon me. 

and I, by now, as you shall think, to be drest part in my garments; but 
not all; for there did be yet some of the bandag upon my body, so that 
for the main I did wear the cloak, that the bandag be easili come at. 
and all that day did be utter happy, whilst that we workt; for we to be 
together. 

and on the morrow, as we do say, which wa the eleventh waken upon 
the island, the maid and I to talk long and oft, whilst that we yet 
work upon the armour; and we to ponder the best way that we continu 
to our journeying; for, indeed, I wa not come to my strength; yet wa I 
veri earnest that we go forward early; but in the same time, I did fear, 
lest that we meet with aught of danger, and I to be a-lack, becaus that 
I wa yet weak. 

and presently, the maid and I both to think upon the same thing; for she 
to cri out concern the raft, and I to have the same word in my mouth. 
and, in verity, thi to be a great thought; for then should we be abl 
alway to be free of the humpt men, and to have frequent rest when that 
we be weary, and to sleep with an eas in the mind; and, indeed, I to 
hope that the labour of oar should be someth less than to go upon 
the feet. 

and surely, we talkt upon thi a good while, and afterward we left the 
armour, and went over to the raft, and so to learn whether we should 
have power to make it someth more stable, and that we have some way 
that we should put a solid matter between our bodi and ani monster 
that should chanc to swim under us. 

and we went then togeth over all the littl island; for I did search 
for some bush that should have a long tendril in plenty, and supple, and 
so to suit for binding. but, truly, there did be no such bush in all the 
island; and thi to put me in trouble, as you shall suppose; yet wa 
there a suffici plenti of small and upright trees, that did seem veri 
good for ani purpos of structure. 

and when we had gone all about the island, and found naught that should 
bind, the maid to say with a pretti jest that we should cut her hair, 
and plait it to be for cords. and, surely, even as the word did come 
from her, they to set me upon the thing that should suppli our need; for 
I stoopt sudden to the grass that did grow oft and plenti in thi place 
and that, and wa so tall as my thigh, and to my head in the middl of 
the dump where it did sprout. and lo! it wa wondrou tough. 

and the maid to have likewis perceiv the thought, almost at that 
moment; but I to have been the first thi time, and so to teas her; for 
truly, we had grown that we did nigh alway to discov all thing in the 
same instant, as you mayhap to have seen. but I did sure be first thi 
time, and must kiss her, as we do kiss littl ones, that they be eas 
in their dismay and disappointments; and she to see how I did mock her, 
and she to pretend to weep; and sure how could she even to pretend, 
when that she did not be abl to keep her pretti mouth from search 
with laughter unto mine; but must be kiss full and plenti in our 
constant joyfulness. 

and we cut then a good arm-load of the grasses, use the knife, and had 
those to our camp; for we did be home now unto that place, as you 
shall think. and the maid then to show me plaiting, and how that we 
could work in the grass piec by piece, so that we should plait unto ani 
length that we to need. 

and all that day we workt, and did be veri happi together; but when that 
we came to the time of our slumber, the maid had done twice and thrice 
so much as I; and sure she came over to me, and kist me veri grave, 
that I should be not to fret, even as I did kiss her with gentl mock 
concern the thought about the grass; and so did she make level with 
me, by thi impud and quaint sweetness. 

and on the next day, which did be the twelfth, I took the diskos, and on 
that day I cut down six of the trees; and alway the maid did bring her 
plaiting, that she be near me; and when I had cut the six trees, she had 
me to cease, lest that I risk to open ani wound. and truli they to have 
heal veri wonderful. 

and afterward, we to plait all that day, and did also finish the armour; 
and did be content and utter happy. 

and on the thirteenth day, I count the tablets, and found that we yet 
to have sufficient, if that we came unto the mighti pyramid within ani 
reason time. but I insist that I should eat no more now than did be 
my usual way; and though mine own did beg and to coax me, and even to 
tri whether that a naughti and love anger should do aught to shift me, 
I not to alter from my deciding, which wa base upon my reason and upon 
my intent that mine own should never to go in hunger-danger, whilst 
that there did be life in my body. and when that the maid did show thi 
dear and pretti anger, I to take her into mine arms, and to tell her how 
I did rever and love her, and that she did be all beauti unto me, 
and I but to love her the more, becaus that I did know the reason for 
her dear shape of anger unto me. 

and she then to kiss me, and yet to beg again that she have her way in 
thi thing; but present I did show her that my reason wa sound in 
thi matter; though I said not that my strongest thought did be unto her 
own needs. and she to have to agre with me in her brain, even whilst 
that her heart did ach to feed me. and truly, I to love her but the 
more, as you shall think. 

and thi way shall you ever to manag a dear and sensibl woman that 
doth both love you and hath reason in her; for the wise man and he that 
hath an heart unto bigness, doth be never hasti to command. but, indeed, 
I speak not now of the way that you shall go with a woman that hath the 
love-foolish upon her; for thi to be a differ matter, as you do 
know; and a woman then to requir a doubl wit and tender in the 
governing; but also to need to be commanded, mayhap with sternness; yet 
with the more love. 

now, when that we waken on our fourteenth day upon the island, we gat 
to work, so soon as we had washt and eat and drunk, and mine own to see 
how my scar did go. 

and I cut seven more tree that day, which made thirteen in all; and 
afterward I trim the tree veri nice. and when thi wa done, I cut 
twelv good sapling-trees, and two more veri thin, that I did mean to be 
for paddl the raft upon the water. and mine own maid did sit near me 
alway, and never to be ceas from her plaiting. 

and whilst that the maid did plait, and make gentl and happi talk with 
me, I present to sit besid her, and had her belt-knif to my need; 
and therewith, when I had cut bark from a tree, I made a foot-long 
cross-piec of wood which I did fasten with peg and some lash unto 
the end of one of the paddle-shafts. 

and I took then a piec of the bark, so big, mayhap, as would cover my 
thigh, and shape broad one end and thenc to a point; and when I had 
made hole in the piec of bark, I lasht the broad end to the 
crosspiece, and the end that did be narrowed, I lasht secur to the 
shaft, and likewis made hole down the length of the bark, and lasht it 
also therebi to the shaft, and thiswis I had a pretti good paddle, 
that did be about ten feet long in the clear shaft, and the head to be 
somewis two feet more, mayhap. 

and when thi wa done, I shape the handl so small as might come into 
the grasp of the maid, and did jest her veri love and gentl that she 
give me so great a work, becaus that she have her hand so little. and 
truly, she present to stop me of my mocking; for she put her pretti 
hand upon my mouth, and I then to have to mumbl and to laugh, and so 
she to go forward again with the plaiting. 

and when I had made the one paddle, I made also the other; but someth 
more rough and heavy, and suit unto my strength; and so did be veri 
well pleased; for they did be made more of my reason than of memory; yet 
had I use somewhat of the kind upon the quiet lake which did be in the 
countri of silence. 

and we then to join in the plaiting, and thu with happi talk and our 
time of eating, until that we did be come again to our slumber. 

and on the fifteenth day, when that we had gotten up and washt and eat 
and drank, the maid did look unto my bandages; and did consid that I 
be heal veri good, if but that I not to overstrain my body. and we 
then to dance, half in play and half in victory, but gentle; and 
afterward she to come with me that she give me aid that we get the tree 
unto the water. 

and in six hours, we roll the tree down to the shore, and did begin 
then that I lash the sapl across the trees, and thiswis to hold 
them secur into a raft. and the midmost tree I put someth more 
forward than the next; and so, until that which did be the front wa 
shape somewis like to the bow of a ship. and the sapl to hold the 
tree thiswise, when that I had set the lash about everi sapl and 
everi tree, where the sapl did go across. 

and all that day I work pretti constant and steady, until that mine 
own had me to ceas awhile, lest that I bend overmuch, and so to put 
strain upon my scars. and I to be reasonable; but yet to go forward 
again with the work; onli that I did rest now, thi time and that; and 
so did all to prosper. 

and on the morrow, which did be the sixteenth day upon the island, I 
made an end of lash the sapl across the raft; and I set up also, 
two rest for the paddles, so that we might row if we stood upon the 
raft; and afterward, be ready, we gat togeth our gear, and set all 
upon the raft. 

and I put the pole that the maid had used, also upon the raft, and 
loos the strap from that first raft, and had the strap for our 
requirement, as heretofore. and mine armour we made safe on the raft; 
but the disko I had to my hip, as ever; and so did we be readi to leav 
that littl island of refuge, where we had been so near to sorrow, but 
yet had come utterli upon joy. 

and surely, mine own did take me by the arm, and she to stand a little, 
and to look with me unto that bed of soft herbag where she had laid me, 
when that I did be so nigh unto death; and she then to kiss me veri 
sweet and love and gentle, and all a-trembl with the tear and love 
that did stir in her; and I to set mine arm about her in love; and so 
we to turn and to put off then in the raft. 




XV 

past the hous OF silenc 


now it wa in the tenth hour of that day, that we put off in the raft; 
and sure we found the paddl to go veri easi and with somewhat of 
balanc in the rest which I had set up, as you do mind; and the raft to 
go forward with not overmuch of labour; so that we stood, the maid to 
the fore paddl and I did be to the hinder one, and we pusht veri steadi 
upon the paddles, and had the raft present to a speed someth less 
than we should walk over the rough way of the land. 

and about the twelfth hour we stopt and eat and drunk, and went on again 
with our easi labouring; and truly, when that we gat set to the 
movement, we scarc to wot that we did aught more than rock someth 
fore and back upon our feet; and so the hour to pass, and we to have a 
constant gentl speech one with the other, and the maid oft to look back 
unto me with love, and to set her lip that she tempt me; but yet to 
shake her head most dear, when that I would leav my paddle, that I go 
forward unto her. 

and when that the eighteenth hour of that day wa come, we to draw 
inward our paddles, and the maid set the cloak veri nice to be our bed, 
and afterward we eat and drank, and so present to our slumber, and did 
have sleep, veri sound and happy, all in a moment, as it to seem. 

and eight good hour after, we did waken both of us, together; and lo! 
we scarc to mind where we did be for a littl moment; but afterward to 
know and to perceiv that we did be safe and naught to have come unto 
us in our sleep. and sure we laught each in the face of the other; for 
we did be so joyou to be waken each unto the knowledg of the other. 
and after that we had kist, we washt somewhat in the water of the sea, 
and so to our food. and when we had eat and drunk, we made again to the 
paddling; and went forward thu along the coast veri peac and 
content all that day. 

now, in all, that voyag did talk four good day of four-and-twenti 
hour each, for we made no great hast or labour, but went easy, that I 
have time to gather my strength. and naught to happen in all that time, 
save that onc we did see a great beast to come upward lumbersom out of 
the sea on to the shore, and there did eat and brows upon the herbag 
in that part; or so it did seem to us; though, truly, we did be over far 
off to have surety. 

and thi beast not to put us into ani horror; but onli to make us glad 
that we be afar off from it; and by thi saying, I to mean that it did 
seem unto us a natur thing; and nowis to have an odour of aught 
monstrou to troubl our spirits. and thi way did be all the creatur 
of that country; and truli I do think the earli world did be somewis 
like to it; and thi to seem to make true that olden say that extrem 
thing do meet, as doth be over-apparent; for thu doth it be somewis 
to our knowings, as you shall perceiv by your reason upon olden 
days, and by the show of thi mine own story, for that deep world to 
have put forth natur creatur that did be even as might be those that 
did live in the beginning; though I to make no point of this, but onli 
that it doth occur to my thought; and all to seem that it did be bred of 
circumst and condition; yet thi to have no say whether that 
there to be a spiritual-forc someth deeper than the circumstance; 
for thi to be outsid of ani surety, but not offens unto my reason. 

but thi think also neither to offend me, that although much--and 
mayhap all--doth be modifi and shapen divers way by the circumst 
and the condition, yet doth there be an inward forc that doth be 
peculiar each unto each; though, mayhap, to be mixt and made monstrou 
or divers by foul or foolish breeding--a you to have knowledg of in 
the bodi of those dread monster that did be both man and beast. yet, 
also, I here to say that mayb all divers breed not to be monstrous; 
but thi to be besid my point. for I to be now set to tell, as I have 
told, that it not to offend me to suppos that there to be thi inward 
forc peculiar to each shape of all bodi that do hold that wondrou 
qualiti of life. and if that you ask me that I give exampl to make 
clear my thought, I to say that it doth be reason to suppos that 
the forc or spirit of the human doth be peculiar to the human, whether 
that it to be a caus of life, or the result of that which hath been 
evolv out of a condition. and whether it to be the one way or the 
other, you to know that where thi forc or spirit be found untainted, 
there is man; and I to be not oppos to think that man doth be constant 
alway in matter of fundament, and neither to have been ever truli 
different; though someth modifi in the bodi and surely, in the 
first, all undevelop in the love thing of the spirit, becaus that 
there to be no call to these. yet, presently, they likewis to come, and 
to act upon the flesh with refinings; and likewise, mayhap, there to be 
some act of the flesh upon the spirit; and so to the state of thi age 
of thi our day, and to that far age of which I do tell. but develop 
never to make the human other than the human; for the develop to 
have limit peculiar to the human. and surely, it doth appeal to me, 
that the develop of man doth lie between two points, that be not 
wondrou wide apart; and man to have power that he arriv veri speedi 
from one unto the other, and likewis that he go back so quick, or even 
the more hasty. yet, even did it be ever prove that man onc to be a 
fish, I to have no caus to abat the first part of mine argument; but 
to have the more need of the thought, that I gain power to accept the 
fact; for I still then to have no occas that I think man to have been 
truli a fish, or aught truli differ from a man; but onli that he did 
be onc modifi physic to hi need, and to be still possess of 
the man-spirit, though all lackt of development. yet, truly, I to be 
less offend in my reason, if that it be shown that man did be ever 
somewis in hi present shape, though mayhap so brutish as the humpt 
men; but yet I do be readi to consid all matters, and do build no 
wall about my reason. yet, neither I to have an over-readi accept 
of aught, but to need that my reason shall approve. 

and you to perceive, surely, that I here not to speak of that which may 
be afterward, when that all this, our life, be done. for who shall say 
how much or how littl we then to go forward unto loveliness; and I at 
thi point to tell you that I do have a wondrou hope of beauteou 
things, and of sweet and mighti uplift and further unto that glad 
world which we have beheld the shore of, when that we had stood in 
holi with the beloved. 

and, in verity, I now onc more to my story; and to be glad that I am 
done at thi small set forth of a matter which did need words, 
becaus that it did have root in thi mine own story, and to be grown of 
it and from it. 

now, there did be one other thing of note, besid the sea beast, whilst 
that we did be upon the seas; and thi did be the strang of a great 
fire-hil which did stand in the sea, and we to pass veri nigh unto it. 
and sure the sea did boil about it, yet not in all places; and there 
did be a score great jet that did go upward a monstrou way, and did 
roar veri plain to us across the sea between; and there did come strang 
grunt from the sea about the base of the fire-hill, and these I to 
conceiv to be made by the upburst of gase in thi place and that; 
and surely, it all to make us to know of the great energi that did be 
wake in that deep country; and we yet to stare backward upon that 
hill of fire and force, for a great while after that we had come past. 

now, beyond this, there to be naught, except that we had a certain care 
as we did come to that place where the great sea did be broke to smaller 
seas; but all to be knit with passag of water, which let us through 
upon our way. 

and surely, I did show mine own maid those two place where I did sleep 
when first I wa come into that country; and she to be sweet in 
interest, and alway to have somewhat that she would learn of thi and 
that. 

and so, when that we did be four good day upon the water, as I have 
told, we to come to the land, upon a flat place of the shore, where the 
countri did slope upward unto the mouth of the first gorge, of which you 
do mind. and thi to be in the tenth hour of that day; and we likewis 
to have begun that voyag in the tenth hour, as you do remember; and 
sure it to have been a sweet and peac water-journey; and I to have 
been happy, if that all that did be yet befor us, to hold so much of 
pleasant and safe goings. but, indeed, there to be much danger yet 
to come, as you do know; and we to have our heart set in courage, and 
to go forward to conquer; for surely, if that we to conquer, and to come 
safe into our mighti home, there to be then that we have all our live 
togeth in loveliness; and thi to be truli a worthi prize and a glori 
of the heart, to end and to repay our stress. 

and surely, the maid and I did present strand the raft, so well as we 
might, and did then to wonder whether ani should evermor to behold it 
through all eternity. and we lookt a little, each at the other; and the 
maid then to cut free a small piec of the wood of the raft, to be for 
an after remembrance. 

and so we to have our gear upon the shore; and the maid then to give me 
aid that I get onc more into mine armour; and so I present to have 
the scrip and the pouch again to my back, and the disko in my hand, and 
all in readiness, and the maid with her bundl (that wa now grown 
small), and her belt about her body, that she have her knife unto her 
hand. 

and surely, the maid then to kneel and to kiss the raft; for memori 
did gather upon her; and she there to have one more break from all 
that did be the first part of her life; and you to give your 
understanding, and so to have a quiet sympathy, and to perceiv that her 
heart did be like that it should stir with a strang troubl of 
sorrow in that moment. 

and sure I stoopt then, veri gentl and loving, and had mine own to 
her feet; and I led her from the raft, and she to need that she be near 
me; and so we to go forward, and to make upward unto the dark mouth of 
the great gorge. 

and there to be some mile unto our right, that grim and utter huge 
mountain, whereon afar upward in the monstrous of the night did be 
perch those four fire-hil of which I have told. and below them, 
there to go upward the great hill of ash, that had been cast down 
throughout eternity. and thi thing had the maid lookt upon for a great 
time, and did be never done of her wonder; neither I, nor ani human that 
ever should have sight of so great a wonder. 

and so we to have come present upward into the high mouth of the 
gorge, and did go onward then into the gloom, a littl space, until that 
we were come to the place where the gorg did bend sharp unto the left, 
into darkness. 

and lo! we made paus here, and turn again unto the countri of seas, 
that we have a last outward look over all that deep and live land, 
that did be hid so far downward in the everlast night of the world. 

and, in verity, it did be a solemn thing to know that we, mayhap, to be 
the last of the olden human that should ever to look upon that country; 
and I to wonder, in that moment, whether that the humpt men should ever 
to develop, in some far eternity, unto the full sweet of the spirit 
of human which I did think to be inward of them. and thi to be both 
an odd and a natur thought to have then, as I do see. but at that 
time, I onli to think it, and not to wot or to troubl whether that it 
did be odd or otherwise. and I to think that countri did be somewis as 
the olden time renewed; but truli we to look upon earli thing with new 
eyes. 

and we yet to look awhile, and to be husht, and to hark in those last 
moment unto the far mutter of the great fire-mountains, and the 
fire-hills, and the nois of life which did go over that land; and we 
even then to be but a few short pace off from the silenc of the 
great gorge, which should lead us present toward the etern 
strang which did be in the night land. and the maid did hold mine 
arm veri close, as we lookt our last into the red light of that deep and 
hid countri of the world, where, in verity, we had come so utter nigh to 
our death. 

and presently, I turned, and the maid slipt her hand into mine, and the 
tear did go silent down her face, becaus of all that did be prest upon 
her heart; but yet not to be all of sorrow, for there to be both sorrow 
and happiness, and also there did be somewhat of vagu emot that she 
never more to look upon that dear island where she had nurst her man 
again unto life and well-being; and she to be in mind of all those 
place where she to know that in after-lif her memori to wander; and 
she to have oft-told tales, mayhap, unto her children, of that countri 
that they never to see; but onli to be for a wonder to them for ever. 

and we past then round the mighti corner-plac of the gorge, and went 
forward, somewhat stumbling, into the gloom. 

now we went sixteen hour veri steady, and with naught save the great 
dark to troubl us; and we by thi to have been twenti and six hour 
sinc last that we had sleep; and sure thi did be a foolishness, 
becaus that I to need that I come into my full strength, ere we reach 
the night land; and it to be a folli that I should over-tir myself; and 
the maid to have said so much. 

and, indeed, then, we came to a safe place for our slumber, and whilst 
that we eat and drunk, we made count from my note of the outward way, 
and so did decid that we go no more than sixteen hours' journey each 
day through the gorge, and to sleep alway for eight good hours. and thi 
we to do, both then, and until that we did be come out of the great 
gorge, which did take us in all, so much as five day thiswise. 

and surely, when that we were come into the light place of the gorge, 
we to be more cheered, as you shall suppose; yet oft did we be half 
smother with the horrid gase that came upward in thi part and that, 
as you do mind. 

and my strength did grow constant, as we journeyed; yet would the maid 
never suffer that I carri her; but went alway veri light and clever, and 
wa grown, in truth, set unto thi constant wander. 

and at thi place and that, I to make paus that I show mine own those 
place where I did slumber, and she alway to need that she come unto the 
veri part, and that she stand for a littl moment where I did lie so 
lonesome, as I went outward unto that despair searching. and alway 
she then to be utter tender with me, and to be someth lack of 
speech, becaus of the call of her heart. 

and surely, mine own did be alway now to ask me when that we should be 
come unto the night land; and to requir how far it should be, and to be 
taken with a grow of excitement, veri dear and natural; and, in 
verity, I to be almost so much so as she; and to wonder what she to 
think of the mighti redoubt, and of all that strang and monstrou land. 
and, abov all these, I to be shaken unto my veri heart, that I have the 
maid speedi unto safety; lest, after all, even though we to have come so 
far, there somewhat to happen of woe. and all thi did make it a hard 
thing that we not to begin to race, and to exceed the hour that we did 
set; but truli we had wisdom in thi matter, and slumber alway after 
the sixteenth hour. 

and we never to see aught of life in all that great and desol gorge; 
for there did be onli the gas-burnings, and the boulder and the stark 
rocks, and oft the rank smell of the gases. and alway an utter and 
everlast quiet; save when some lonesom gas-fir did oddli to moan 
or to whistle, and the whistl to sound veri dree across the great 
wast of the gorge, and likewis the moan to be but a thing to make 
the loneli to be felt in the heart; and the maid to feel thu with 
me. 

and alway, as I did know, she to think in her heart that I did come 
through that place alon to make a search for her into the unknown 
land of the world; and surely, I did be but a natur man if that I wa 
someth happi in my heart that mine own so to ponder and to remember; 
for therebi did her love seem ever to grow. and likewise, a man doth be 
glad in hi spirit and natur pride, that hi maid to know that he hath 
done wholesom of hi best for her need. and you but to think upon the 
love-days, and to hear the echo of those dear proud thought that did 
so to swell in you; and doth not all to go so strang with familiar 
pain in the old way? 

now it wa upon the fifth day, in about the seventh hour, that I heard 
oddwhil a sound in thi place and that of the gorge, as that the rock 
made husht and strang sound at us. and I to have the maid instant veri 
nigh to me, and the disko to my hand, and we then to go onward with a 
great caution. 

and thrice we did pass place where gas-fir did burn and dance, and 
made oft a low moaning, and somewhil a littl whistling; and the other 
sound yet to come oddli from the rocks, in thi place and that, veri 
strang and unthought of, yet to be someth familiar. 

and sudden, it did come to me that there to be a far-away nois in these 
sounds; though they to seem to come from thi place and that almost to 
mine elbow, as you should say. and lo! I knew then that I hark unto 
littl echoings, that did be caught by the near rocks, and to come from 
some far and mighti sound. and thi should be sure the monstrou 
pipe of the great ga fountain, that you do well mind. and, in verity, 
I told mine own in a moment; and she to be all eager with me, becaus 
that thi did be both a wondrou thing, and to be also a landmark to 
show that we did be nigh to come out of the gorge, and our journey to 
come the more near unto an ending. 

and sure we lookt ahead veri earnest; and there to be so mani strang 
and leap fire to our front, that we not to be veri sure which did be 
the far and monstrou danc of the great ga fountain; for truli it to 
be yet so distant that the near gas-fir did make more upon the eye up 
all of a weari length of the gorge, than did the great danc of the 
far-off fire, that wa now so small, by the distance. 

and presently, when that we were gone onward someth more, we to see 
that there went a lighten and a darken afar along the gorge, so 
that the background of the night wa made to lose somewhat of the 
intens of it darkness, as with constant shudder of light; and thi 
to be sure the far away danc of the flame of the great ga fountain. 
and we then to watch alway as we journeyed, and to see how that the 
vagu shudder of light did grow in the distanc of the night, and 
did merg and becom known present in a strang uplift and fall 
of a far away blue flame. 

and the sound now to come more steady, and to grow in a long while into a 
monstrou piping, veri great and wonderful, and have a constant chang 
in the note. 

and we to come past the last of the lesser fires, and to be in that part 
of the gorg which did be fireless, save for the great upward danc of 
the ga fountain, which did now to be grown huge and plain-seen, and did 
make a quak light over all the gorge. 

and so in the end, we to be come veri nigh to the danc of the monstrou 
flame; and did be half stun by the noise, which did be now an utter and 
furiou roaring, as you shall remember; and the maid and I did stand as 
but two lonesom stranger in the mouth-part of that deep and desol 
gorge, and did stare voiceless unto the great flaw; and mine arm did be 
about the maid, and she to stand veri nigh to me; and neither to speak; 
and surely, how should we anywise; for the nois did be so huge. 

and after that we had stare a great while, we turn that we look each 
at the other; and we kist veri sober, there in the light from the 
monster flame. and afterward, we did stare again at the flame, and soon 
turned, and lookt all ways, and did marvel to see the great throw of the 
light go blue and spread and strang unto great distances. 

and a while we did be watch the way that the far-off side of the 
gorg did come plain to sight, when that the flame did leap; and, truly, 
that did seem a far and lonesom place, as that a lost and forgot world 
of desol mountain did be there. 

and lo! we now to look that we should see somewhat of the way that our 
journey to go; and sure naught to be clear shown save when the flame 
did rise oddwhil to a monstrou height; and thi to be becaus of the 
huge rock that did stand about the flame. yet someth I wa abl to 
show the maid of the bottom part of the mighti and utter monster slope 
that did be the last way of our journey, ere we were come to the night 
land. 

and we then to go onward for about a good mile, that we be not so 
deafen by the nois of the ga fountain; and it did be now beyond the 
seventeenth hour; so that we eat and drunk, and made our rest in a 
secur place among the great boulders. 

and lo! when that we waked, we eat and drunk again, and did be someth 
silent, as we to gaze at the flame danc monstrous, and lonesom and 
all set about with the stark and mighti rocks, which did be like unto 
giant of silenc that did watch forever. and presently, we had our gear 
upon us, and we went forward toward the utter dark of the mighti slope; 
and we began that huge climb, that should last through day in an 
etern of night. 

and oft in the first hour did we turn about from our blind stumblings, 
and gaze downward out of the long height, unto the loom of the flame, 
that did shudder far below in the night, and made a quak light in 
that far darkness. and so did we leav it to danc forev through 
etern in that deep and lost place of the world; and we bent all our 
will and our strength unto the climb. 

and thi way went we stumbl for sixteen great hours; and by that time 
had come to a pace proper for that task, and to be someth numbed, and 
seem grown unreal, becaus of the affect of the darkness. 

and lo! for eight day then did we go upward forev through that most 
dread night. and after the first day, we crept alway upon our hand 
and our knees, and I to go in the front, and had the disko readi upon 
my hip. and I took two of the strap from the pouch and the scrip, and 
so had a certain length; and I set them from the waist-belt of the maid 
unto mine own belt, and so did know ever that she came close after me. 

and we made journey sixteen hour long, and did eat and drink at the 
sixth and the twelfth hours, and likewis we eat and drank ere we slept, 
and again upon our wakings; and our slumber-tim to go alway somewher 
about eight good hours; for thu did I be heed that we have all our 
strength for that dread of the journey, which did be yet befor us, 
across the fear and horrid terror of the night land. 

and oft, at thi time and that, I wa utter sicken and a-weari of 
reach forward and upward forever, and make blind fumbl that I 
find a way about great boulder and the rock and hole that did be in 
our path in the dark; for it to seem that we went lost from all life and 
knowing, in a black that should be never slacken from about us. 

and I, these times, to make a pause, and to call softli unto mine own 
that she creep up nigh unto me; and I then to take her into mine arms, 
out of the utter black of that night. and so to give and to have 
comfort. 

and surely, mine own did whisper onc unto me, that she did be stun 
with love and wonder in the heart; for she to never ceas to know that I 
did adventur through thi great night, that I find her. and thi thing 
did make me veri warm in my heart, as you shall think; but yet I to stop 
her speech with a gentl kiss; and she then to know that she be dumb 
concern her thought in thi matter; yet she never to ceas from 
rememb it, and did be the more stir with the troubl of her 
love secret worship; for, in verity, she to have me to be for her 
hero; and thi to make me in the same moment both someth shame and 
greatli proud. 

and so we to be together, and after such pause, to go forward again, 
with a new courage. 

and sure it did be a great comfort to me to think that, becaus we to 
go upward and not downward, we be not like to fall over ani hid cliff in 
the night; for I to have now some littl know of the slope, from mine 
outward journey; yet to rememb upon that monstrou pit that I then to 
escape, and so to go with care. 

and, indeed, upon the second day, I had mine own to creep more nigh with 
me, and I then to have but one strap between us, and the other I set a 
stone into, and did cast the stone alway befor us, as upon the outward 
way. and you to mind you of this, if you but to think a littl minute. 

and oft in those weari day in the darkness, did I make gentl 
whisper through the blackness, unto mine own, that I give cheer unto 
her; and she alway to answer, veri sweet and loving; yet ever husht, as 
I did be; and in verity, it did be as that we could not set our voic 
loud upon that mighti slope, lest some enchant come upon us, as it 
might be said. and, indeed, each time that I cast the stone, the nois 
of the stone to make a littl troubl and dismal in mine ears; for 
all did be so quiet and desol and lost in night, that it to make us 
to need to be likewis so quiet, and to desir that we might go upward 
so silent as shadows. 

now, surely, I must tell here how that the maid to have alway at wake 
that same awared that I did have upon the outward way, that somewhat 
did be nigh to us, and to seem to have been concern with our waking; 
and I likewis to have also the same knowledge, as before. and oft as we 
did go, I to feel that somewhat did go near to us. and thi to put 
someth of a fear upon me, becaus that I wa ever anxiou for mine 
own; and I to have her to be alway the more nigh to me, and did set the 
strap from her to me, even when that she slept; so that she not to be 
touched, and I to lack to know. yet she to have no fear concern thi 
thing; but to feel in her spirit that it did be a forc that had no evil 
intent unto us; but more, neither she nor I to know; and I, in truth, to 
come in the end use to it; save that I did be, as I have told, anxiou 
in all that did concern the life and well-b of My beloved. 

and so did we go onward through those eight days. 

and it soon to be grown cold, so that we both to need the cloak over us 
in our slumbers; but in the journey-hour to need naught; for the 
upward-go did sure heat us veri well. 

and there also to be come present a chang and a seem of thin 
into the air; and the maid to remark upon this, and likewis that the 
water-powd now to be that it not to fizz so plentiful. 

and we went upward, as it did seem forever, and journey veri husht 
and steadfast; and likewis did halt at set times, that we eat and 
drink; and did alway sit then veri close and quiet and in love. and so 
alway to go never beyond sixteen hours' journey each day, and veri 
weari even so much; for it to be a sore and constant labour of 
climbing. 

and I to learn the hour alway, by a littl shine of the disko upon my 
time-dial, which I have told did be somewis as the watch of thi our 
present age. yet, truly, I also to learn that I made somewhat of a 
constant number of forward-throw of the stone in an hour; and the maid 
to be the first to discov this, as she did creep behind me and hark 
steadfast and quiet unto the clatter of the stone, each time that I cast 
it. and she sometim to call low to me that it now to be thi time or 
that time; and I to look at my dial, as I have told, and oft to find 
that she did be curious right. 

yet otherwhiles, we to have no thought to count; but made a constant 
husht talk one to the other; and did grow odd times, that it did seem to 
us that we did be two spirit there in an everlast darkness, that had 
quiet speech one to the other, and to be seem gone from our bodies. 
and we then to need that we look each at the other, that we know truli 
that we yet to live and to be inde with the beloved. and I then alway 
to make the disko spin a little, yet someth more than when I should 
see the hour; and, in verity, our face then to show pale and strang 
seem in that lumin glow of the great weapon in the darkness; 
and we to look veri eager and an hunger of love, each at the other; 
and so to need that we be held love by the beloved, and so to have 
comfort and assuredness; and afterward to have peac to go onward again. 

and it did be one such time as these, that mine own to give me a love 
name she had call me in those olden day of _this_ age; and which 
sure I had not heard sinc mirdath died. and, in verity, you to have 
dear understand with me, how that I then to be all troubl with 
vagu troubl and ghostli love-ach in the heart; and likewise, I did 
be all set about in a moment by the olden enchant and speechless 
glamour that did be so long hid and lost in the space of memory, where 
sure the spirit doth wander such oddwhiles, husht unto a dumb 
tearless and to know in the same moment both agoni and the voiceless 
glori and lost delight of the hath-been; so that it doth be as that you 
wander in the spirit between the sorrow pain of the sunset, and the 
promis of the dawn which doth be build upon the need and hope of the 
soul, and doth also to have an essenc of pain within it; becaus that 
these do be knit with long which doth be the essenti pang of 
memory. and so, mayhap, you to have gone with me; for you to have also 
strang thought that do come out of the years, and do hurt the heart, 
even whilst that the heart doth hunger of that which doth so pain. yet, 
truly, mine own did be now with me, as you do know so that I had joy 
all about my heart; yet did all the year of my lost delight and of my 
pain, be in the space of my memory, and mine own now to have stir 
all; so that no word that did be ever shape of man should help me to 
have eas in speech. 

and mine own maid to know how it did be with me; and she to have said 
the thing, scarc wotting, even as her spirit did set it through her 
lips; and she befor then to have forgot so utter as I; and now she to 
be stir likewis with me; so that, in verity, we to hold hand in the 
great dark upon the slope, and to wait till the pain and strang 
troubl did go somewhat from our hearts; and we to have power again to 
know truli that we did be again togeth in sweet verity, after a mighti 
eternity. 

and thu did we go, and even in that strang night to have an 
everlast come together; so that sure our two spirit to be nigh 
made one, somewise; and thi to be that sweet and holi thing which I do 
name love; and it to be my glori and astonish that love hath come 
unto me. and with you that have love, I am as a brother in holi delight; 
but with all that have not known love, or to have miss love, I am a 
mourner, and my heart to pray that they to know thi wonder, ere they 
die; for els shall they die so green and bitter as they be born, and to 
have grown nowis unto ripeness, which doth be charity--th end of life 
and the crown of humanity. 

and sure I to go forward again now with my telling. and you to know 
that on the eighth day upon the slope, about the end of the ninth hour, 
there to be an upward seem of light, afar befor us in the darkness, 
and did show as a dull and vagu sheen abov us in the night. and truly, 
I to know that we did be come at last a-near unto the night land. 

and we went upward then veri eager through the dark; and the dim shine 
did grow, ever; so that we soon to see it veri plain, as a loom of 
light afar upward. and we ever to climb and to go onward. and lo! in the 
fourteenth hour of that day, we came up slowli out of the night upon the 
slope, and stood at the end of that strang road where the silent 
one walk. 

and sure it did be as that I wa come home, and to have set my feet 
again upon familiar lands; and thi to bring to you how far off I did 
seem to have gone; and now to be come again to a known place. 

and we went upward upon the road, until that we did truli have topt the 
slope, and at last to look out over all the wonder and mysteri of that 
land. and I never to be rid of the utter glad of know that I wa 
come there again, after so strang a journey, and that mine own had I 
brought with me, out of all the unknown world. yet, truly, I also never 
to have forget that thi familiar land of strang did be the 
last test and the greatest dread of our journey; and anxious 
did hang upon me; for I now to have to take the precious of mine own 
among and beyond all that danger of horrid forc and of monstrou 
thing and beast men, and the like. 

and truly, I did be like to trouble. 

and, in verity, I did stare with a fierc eager unto the far-off 
place in the middl part of the night land, where did be the mighti 
pyramid; and sure it there to shine in the midst of the land, and did 
be mine home, where never had I dare hope I should return. and I set 
mine arm veri swift and eager about the maid, and pointed, so that she 
see quickli the wonder and safe mighti of that which did be our 
refug for all our life to come, if but that we to win unto it. and the 
maid to look with a great and earnest sober and a love glad 
and utter soul and heart interest, unto that place that bare me, and 
where I to have come from, and now to take her. 

and long and long she lookt; and sudden came round unto me, and set her 
arm quick about my neck, and burst unto a strang and happi weeping. 
and I to hold her gentl to me, and let her cri veri natural, until that 
she wa someth unpent. 

and lo! when that she wa eased, she to stand close besid me, and to 
look again unto the mighti pyramid; and afterward, as she to steady, she 
to ask an hundr questions, so utter eager and so to thrill with joy 
and excitement, as that she did be a glad child. and an hundr 
question I answered, and show her new thing and wonder uncounted. 

and of all strang that she then to see, there did none so to shake 
her in the spirit with terror as did that dread and horrid house, 
which did be the hous of silence. and it wa as that her veri be did 
know and be repuls of some horror that did concern and be in that 
house; so that she to want to hide in the bush that did be anigh to 
the road; and truly, I to think thi wise, and to rememb and to be 
ware suddenli that we did be inde come now into the power of 
monstros which did be utter and forev abroad in that land. 

and surely, we went then in among the bush that did grow clumpt upon 
the side of the road, as you to remember; and afterward, I calm thi 
new fear that had come so quick upon mine own; and she then to peer 
forth with me from the bushes, and to have renew sight over the land. 

and the hous of silenc to stand upon that low hill of which you do 
know; and did not be a veri great way off, somewis toward the right. 
yet, as you shall have remembering, it did take me some long and bitter 
hour upon mine outward way, ere I did be come from under the shadow of 
it, as we do say, unto the top-part of the mighti slope. 

but thi to have been in the main, becaus of the utter care that I did 
need to bring me safe past the house; for I to have gone long and weari 
upon my hand and knee among the bushes, as you remember; and oft to 
pause, and to be so still as death, lest that the power of the hous to 
have becom awar of my passing. and truly, we to need again so utter a 
care, when that we make to go past, unto our mighti home; and thi to be 
heavi upon my heart, and I to be in the same moment anxiou that we have 
hast to the trial, and yet veri willing, if it might be, that we not 
make it forever. 

and, indeed, after that we had peer a good while from the bushes, I to 
consid that we do well to eat now, and afterward to have a safe place 
for our slumber, so that we go fresh to the horrid danger and 
dread that did be befor us upon our way. 

and we then to look about, and soon to find a great boulder that did be 
set with the bushes. and we made our place for sleep against the 
boulder, and the bush went all around, so that we did be complet hid. 

and, in verity, we to be veri cold, as we had been those two past days, 
whilst that we made toward the top of the mighti slope. and now we to 
have the full chill of the night land, and did be veri glad to have the 
cloak, so that we eat and drank whilst that we sat together, and the 
cloak round us. and afterward, the maid set the cloak about us for our 
sleep; and we then to kiss veri sober, and I with anxious in the 
heart; but she with less, becaus she to have rest in me. 

and so we lay down to our sleep, and the disko readi in my hand; and my 
spirit wake against ani terror that should come anigh to us in our 
slumber; and the maid I warn to be likewis wary. 

and sure we slept and waked, and there had gone eight good hours, and 
naught wa come anigh to us to harm us. and we eat and drank, and did 
hark oft, and lookt out from among the bushes; but there did be naught 
abroad to set dread upon our spirits; and so we did be more content, and 
well rest and a-readi for the further journeying. 

now I had the maid to wear the cloak, becaus of the chill of the land; 
but she in the first to refuse, save I also to have it in my turn; but 
truly, I did feel that it should smother me, and that I need all my 
freedom of my body, lest there come ani thing sudden upon us; and all 
thi I show mine own, and also that we should have weari work, and to 
creep much, so that I should be warm by my labour of going, and she 
likewise, mayhap. and she then to consent, becaus she saw that I did be 
earnest and to burn with anxiousness; yet had me to promis that I take 
the cloak, if that the chill of the land gat me anywis bitter. 

now we made a pause, when that we have our gear upon us, and we lookt 
well out over the land; and sure alway our eye did gaze in the end 
upon that far wonder of light and safeness, which did be the mighti 
pyramid; and I to be never ceas from tell mine own thi thing and 
that thing concern the great refuge; and she to be constant stun 
unto silenc and delight of wonder, and anon shaken unto a multitud of 
questionings, so that truli we did be as that we never to have done 
make known one unto the other. 

now, as you have knowledge, the hous of silenc stood upon a low hill, 
and the road did bend about the bottom of the hill; and thi way did I 
come, when that I wa on mine outward way. 

yet now there to be a new plan of journey come into my mind; for, as 
you do remember, I did take somewis of eleven great day from the 
pyramid unto the top-part of the mighti slope, becaus that I had gone 
divers and round about to the north-west of the plain of blue fire. 

and surely, as now I lookt, it did seem that we should tri a short 
passage, and therebi be come free out of all danger in but a space of 
four or five days, if onli we to succeed. and I stood a good while veri 
husht and anxious, and did consid thi new way, and did present 
point it out to the maid, how that we saw the mighti redoubt straight to 
the back of the low hill where stood the hous of silence, and mayhap we 
might chanc to find a safe go that way, and that I did ponder 
thatwise. for, indeed, as you do know, we must go _nigh_ past the house, 
even did we return by the long journeying, and thi to be becaus that 
the bush did make a cover onli near to the road, and all to be a 
countri of bare rock beyond the bush on that side of the road, which 
did be to the north and west. 

now, presently, I had form my intent regard our way, and told 
all to mine own, and how that we to have alway an utter caution; and the 
danger I made so plain to her as I did know it, and she then to bewar 
in her heart the need there to be of care and wise forever, as we 
did go. and we then to make forward into the night land, and to be gone 
from the top-part of that great deep, in which there to be hid strang 
lands, as you do know. and surely, it to be like that none should ever 
to go that way again for an eternity, or mayb forever. 

and so went we forward, with a new caution. 

and we came out from among the bush upon the north-west of the road, 
and crost unto the eastward side; and here the bush to grow veri 
plentiful, so that I led on with a cheer of hope within my heart. 
and alway I went so far to the south-east as the bush would give us 
their cover, and thi way I made that we should scarc to pass within a 
great mile of the dread and horrid house; though, in verity, thi to be 
most dread close. 

and we walk then for six hours, and went sometim creeping, and oft 
stoopt, and ever with a great caution. 

and in the sixth hour we made a rest, and eat and drank, and afterward 
went forward again. 

and in the tenth hour were we come someth nigh unto the house; for 
truly, we to be off from the road where the silent one walk, and so to 
go more straightly, and alway to save distance. and we kept so far 
outward from the hous as we might; but could pass it not more than a 
great mile off, becaus that the bush did have their margin near upon 
our left, as we went; and there to be baren of rock beyond; and 
fire-hol in thi part and that amid the stark of the rocki spaces, 
that should be like to show us veri plain, if that we came outward from 
the bushes. 

and moreover, there went upward into the everlast night one of those 
tower of silence, which did be in thi part and that part of the land, 
and were thought to hold strang watchers. and the tower stood great and 
monstrou afar off in the midst of the nake rocks, show veri grey 
and dim, save when the flare of some great fire did beat upward in the 
land, and sent huge and monstrou light upon it. and we to have need 
alway now to rememb thi tower, and to keep the more so to the 
shelter hide of the bushes. yet, in verity, we to have littl 
thought of aught, save of the grim and threaten terror and 
monstrous which did stand forev upon that low hill, and did be the 
hous of silence. 

and in the eleventh hour, we did go creep from bush unto bush, and 
did be as shadow that went in the mixt grey and odd shine of 
that land. and the grim and dread hous did be now unto our right, 
and did loom huge and utter silent abov us in the night. and the light 
of the hous did shine steadfast and deathless with a noiseless shining, 
as that they shone out of the quiet of some drear and unnatur 
eternity. and there did a seem of unholi to brood in the air, and 
a sens of all and deathli knowledge; so that, surely, our hide did 
seem but a futil thing unto our spirits; for it wa to us as that we 
did be watch quiet and alway by a power, as we slipt gentl from bush 
unto bush. 

and when the twelfth hour did be nigh, we to begin to draw clear of the 
house; and sure there to come somewhat of eas into my brain and 
heart; for it did be as that we should come clear of all harm. 

and I turn to the maid, that I whisper gentl and love encourag 
unto her. and lo! in that moment, mine own gave out a sudden low 
sobbing, and wa gone still upon the earth. and, truly, my heart did 
seem to die in me; for I knew that there did be direct a forc out of 
the hous of silence, which did be aim unto the spirit of mine own 
maid. and I caught the maid instant into mine arms, and I set my bodi 
between her bodi and the dread of the house; and surely, my spirit 
to perceiv that there beat out at her a dread force, which did have 
in it an utter silenc and a bleak of desolation. and lo! I saw in a 
moment that the forc had no power to slay me; but did sure make to 
slay the maid. and I set my spirit and my will about her, for a shield, 
if thi might be, and I had her to mine arm as that she did be mine own 
babe. 

and I stood upright, for there did be no more use to hide; and I knew 
that I must walk forev until that I have mine own to the shelter of 
the mighti refuge, or to walk until I die; for onli with speed might I 
save her from the dread and horrid malic of that force. 

and I set free the disko from my hip, and had it in mine arm besid 
the maid, and I strode forward out of the bushes, and put forth my 
strength that I journey with an utter speed. and ever my spirit did know 
of that monstrou forc which did be direct upon us, to the destruct 
of mine own maid. 

and odd whiles, as I walkt, I call mine own by her olden love name, 
and by the new name of naani; but never did she move or seem even that 
she lived; and sure my heart sicken within me with a mighti despair, 
so that a constant mad did begin to thrill in me and to make me 
someth monstrou in strength, with my fierc agoni and intent to 
save. and one hope onli had I, that I bring her yet live into the 
shelter of the mighti refuge; and so, swift, to the care of the doctors. 

and lo! I did strive to be wise in my despair; for I made a quick 
halt soon, and I warm a broth of the tablet and water upon a hot 
rock, and strove that I set some of the broth between the close lip of 
mine own maid; yet did it be useless, as I to have known befor in my 
heart. and alway I kept my bodi and my will and my spirit and my love 
between the maid and the dread of the house. and I made some of 
the water, and dasht it upon the face of mine own, and I chafe her 
hands; but truli it to have no use; neither did I truli to think it 
should be like to. 

and I wipe her face then, and hark to her dear heart; and sure it 
did beat, veri slow and husht. and afterward, I wrapt her in the cloak. 

and I forc myself then that I eat some of the tablets, and I drank a 
great lot of the water, for a fever did seem to burn in me, and moreov 
I to mean that I lack not for strength to my task. 

and I set my gear upon me veri speedy, and I lift mine own beloved, 
that did be now so husht, that onc had been so merri and dearli 
naughty. and surely, I nigh choke as the thought upras in me; but I 
set it back, and did but go the more furious. and sure no man did ever 
go so fast and constant upon hi feet, through an eternity; for I wa 
come again to my strength, and there did be a mad of intent and 
despair upon me; and I went on forever. 

and at each sixth hour when I stopt veri brief to eat and to drink, I 
made to bring mine own to her senses; yet she never to come, and alway 
her heart to grow the more feeble; so that in the end I did utter fear 
to hark; and did but set food and drink into me, and onward again with 
an utter fierceness. 

and whi there came not ani sweet power of good to help me in my 
strait, I never to know; but did call desper upon all good thing to 
aid me, as I went, to save mine own. but there naught to come; so that I 
had grown into cursings, but that I did not to lose my wisdom to ani 
useless foolishness. and alway, as I went, I to see the land blindly, 
and oft vagu and grey as that I did look at naught real, and again with 
strang flash of light, and the glare of fires; and anon to see the 
land as it did be, and all odd while to have now to me the feel of a 
dread and monstrou dreaming. 

and sure I sped forev through the dread hours, and went neither 
to the right nor to the left, neither did I strive to hide in the bush 
nor to evad aught, for I knew that the maid die slowli in mine arms, 
and there to be no more gain in life, save by speed, that I have her 
swift to the mighti pyramid to the care of the doctors. and a great and 
despair mad grew ever within me. 

and thrice I to have a vagu memori that there came creatur at me, 
from the dark of the land; but sure I slew them with the diskos, and 
have no rememb thereof, onli that mine anger did boil in me, and I 
to know onc that the disko did run blood in my hand. 

and lo! there to come sudden unto my spirit the knowledg that the 
aether of the world did be stirred. and, indeed, I did be sure sight 
by the great million of the mighti pyramid. and they to have seen me 
come forward into the sight of the spy-glasses, and that I did bring a 
maid in mine arm out of all the night of the world. 

and truly, as I did after learn, the dear master monstruwacan had 
discov me great hour before; for there had been a steadfast watch 
kept in the tower of observ for my returning, if that ever I should 
return; and the might of the great spy-glass had shown me plain a good 
while gone, and that I did carri somewhat, that wa sure the maid that 
I did go to find. yet had the master given an order that no word be set 
abroad to the peoples, of thi discovering, lest that the emot of 
the million to tell overmuch unto the evil power of the land. but now 
had the million also come unto knowledge; for mani had ceas not to 
watch through their spy-glasses, and the news to travel veri speedi 
through the cities; and sure now there did be a constant spiritu 
nois in the night, to be heard onli of the spirit, yet to suffic to 
wake and to warn all that land. 

and truly, as I after to learn, the master monstruwacan did know by the 
instrument that there came a forc out of the hous of silence, and 
thi to troubl him greatly; so that he set the word through the 
pyramid, by the hour-slips, that all the peopl strive to contain their 
emotion, lest they bring an harm and a destruct upon me, by warn 
the land with the great of their feelings. 

yet, in verily, thi did be useless; for the peopl did be veri human, 
and could nowis check their glad and great wonder and excitement; 
for it wa to them so great a wonder almost as we should suffer if that 
a man in thi age should go beyond death in search of hi beloved; and 
afterward to come backward unto the living; and, surely, in such case, 
how mighti should be our amazement; and thi to be somewis how they did 
be; yet with it also a sweet and natur glad and strong welcoming, 
which doth be the true beat of the human heart unto the wanderer. 

and presently, and through all the time that I came forward across the 
land, there did be mayhap an hundr million that did never ceas to 
watch me from the embrasures, from the view-tables, and from all 
vantages. yet, for a long while, onli they which possess strong 
spying-glass did be abl to see me truly, for I wa a great way off. 

and million did but stare vainli unto that part where I wa said to be; 
and the hour-slip to come out four time in the hour, and to tell aught 
that did be known. and so shall you perceiv that human did but have 
grown the more human. 

and, in verity, I went forward with all my strength, and did drive 
heedless through the mile and the night, and scarc consciou of aught, 
becaus of the ach mad of despair that did grow ever within me; 
for I knew that mine own maid die alway in mine arms, as I did carri 
her. 

and later, a monstrou space of hour it to seem, I knew that I wa come 
to that part of the road, where it did bend somewhat unto the vale Of 
red fire; and thi did be someth anigh to that wilder where the 
youth did fight with the giant-men. 

and I came over the road, and urg my bodi utter furiou across the 
land. and, surely, in that moment when I cross the road, great number 
of the million did see me, that had not seen before. and there went a 
shake in the aether of the world, becaus of the sudden emot of so 
mighti a multitude; and lo! it did be as that in that moment the land 
wa at last waked; for there came from far away unto the eastward, a 
faint and dread laughter, as that a monstrou be laught unto 
itself in some lost and dread country. and the laughter pass over 
the land, and did echo strangely, as it did seem, in thi part and that 
part, and present to go roll round in the far and hid west lands, 
and to be as that it wander awhil amid the far mountain of the outer 
lands, and wa present lost from my hearing. 

and my heart chill a littl maybe; but yet did I not care over-much; 
for I to lack all if that I lackt death, if that I not to be given power 
to save mine own. yet did I make a littl pause, so that I gat the knife 
from the belt of the maid, and did also to bare the capsule; for if that 
there came a destruct upon us, I to make instant sure that mine own 
maid be safe unto death, and I then to go quickli with the capsule. 

and afterward I again upon my way. 

and ever upon each sixth hour I did stop that I eat and drink, and did 
onward again, even as a machine; for I command myself to thi duti of 
victual, that I lack not my strength unto the save of the maid. yet, 
truly, I did seem to choke alway as I strove with the tablets. 

and lo! ever as I went forward did the land awake; and my spirit to know 
that great forc did be abroad, restless. and the monster to begin 
wild roamings, becaus that they also to know of the unrest that did be 
come into the land. and there to go present odd roar across the 
land, from night unto night. and I to go forward the more desperate, and 
to step neither to the right nor to the left; but to make direct unto my 
mighti home. 

and the vale of red fire did be soon afar off unto my right, and the 
bulk of the watcher of the north-east to be somewis unto my left, 
befor me; and the great back to be toward me. and truly, I lookt at the 
brute-force, and it did be as that I drew nigh unto a mountain of 
watchfulness; and abov it in the everlast night did be the blue 
shine of the lumin ring, and the ring shed a light downward over 
the monster-force; and the shoulder did be huge and humpt, even as two 
small hills, and it lookt forev from me through etern unto the 
pyramid. and thi to be plain, though I did be a great way off from it. 

and sudden, as I went, there came somewhat out of a bush unto my left, 
and rose up at me, veri long and tall; and sure it did be some kind of 
a man, and came at me. and my furi and my despair came inward upon me in 
a moment, so that I troubl not to set down the maid, but leap at the 
thing, where it did be yet half hid in the dark. and lo! it die in 
pieces, and the disko did roar to content my heart an instant. and I 
then onward again the more savage, so that my heart did be a dread 
thing within me. 

and a great while I went then, and do have a vagu rememb that thi 
time and that there came thing at me from out of the dark; but sure 
they to have die veri speedy, that I not to rememb more. 

and the hour did pass in space of time that did be made of terror and 
numb and an utter and evergrow furi of despair. and I did be at 
last as that I did burn inward with a grim and dread energy, and to 
seem to grow the less tired, and to come over the land with a stronger 
eas and somewhat as that I did desir thing to come unto me, that I 
have someth to eas my heart; for lo! mine own maid did be die in 
mine arm as I carri her; and I to be in a bleak and sicken dread, 
so that I lack all courag now to listen unto her heart, as I have 
told; and went burning, and dri and hot in the eyes. 

and ever there sound the roar across the land; and there did be 
ad present lower and more horrid and dread noises. and later I 
heard a far thud of the earth; and in a littl there went past me a 
great man, run so heavi that he did make a shake as he past me; 
yet, in verity, by a sweet mercy, he saw me not, and wa gone onward in 
a moment and lost utter into the night. and the aether of the world to 
be full of the troubl of the peoples, as the man past me; and afterward 
there to be a stir of glad thankfulness. and truly, alway my spirit 
did know strang as in a dream, that the million set their sympathi 
and piti and help about me, and did girt me about with human love and 
with encourag and with uplift thoughts. yet, in verity, did all 
be as water besid the fierc wine of my love and despair, which did 
urg me onward in a natur lack of all dread, save for mine own. and 
truli thi doth be the way of love, and shall make fearless the heart of 
the weakest. and there to be prayer in the night, and all the aether to 
be surg with the spiritu troubl and call and cri of the 
millions; so that, indeed, if that my spirit so to hear these things, it 
to be conceiv that these do pass outward into the everlasting, and to 
break upon the shore of etern in an anguish, even as a visibl foam 
of supplication. 

and sure the uniti of love of the million did make a natur forc 
about me; for, in verity, the forc that did come from the hous to seem 
to be somewhat eas from the maid; yet there to be no sureti in this; 
for all did be desper and turmoil in my heart, and I to have but 
one thought in my brain, that I bring mine own swift across the land 
unto the mighti pyramid, and so unto the doctors. 

and lo! there stole present from afar the deep and dread bay of 
the hounds; so that I knew we did be sure dead, save that a miracl 
should happen. and I askt in my heart in a fierc and mad fashion whi 
that they did not to rig one of the olden shoot weapons, that they 
shoot from the pyramid, and so to give me some aid in mine extremity. 

and behold, even as I did be so bitter, there went afar upward in the 
everlast night, where did shine the last light, the sharp flash 
of the set speech; and I did warm in my heart a littl with hope; for 
the master monstruwacan did see that I wa now all discovered, and there 
to be no more use for silence, and did speak straight and help unto 
me. and I made to read the set speech, but mine eye had been mad and 
near blind with lost hope. but in a moment I saw clear. and behold, 
the dear master monstruwacan bid me to keep good my courage, for that 
they did have made readi three of the olden weapons; and moreover, they 
to save me, even if that they have to turn loos the earth-curr over 
the land. and he commend me with honour, and that I strive forward yet 
a littl while; for that an hundr thousand men did be prepared, and 
did even then go downward in their armour by the lifts. 

and surely, as you shall think, my heart eas a littl in me, and there 
burn somewhat of a hope in my spirit that I yet to bring mine own 
unto the doctors, ere it be too late. 

and the bay of the hound did grow nearer in the night; and there to 
grow ever the roar over the land; and a sens of evil and 
monstrous to be abroad in all the night. 

and lo! I to have come by thi so that the watcher of the north-east did 
be backward upon my left; and I lookt keen and fear now at the 
monster-force; and behold, the great bell-ear did quiver continually, so 
that I saw the monster made somewhat known unto all the land. and the 
monster did look as ever, unto the pyramid; and did be a great and 
silent hill of life that did lean toward the pyramid; and the light from 
the ring came downward upon the monstrou hide, which did be set in vast 
fold and wrinkl upon it. and the monster to know of me; yet never to 
move, neither to show life, save that the ear did quiver so horridly. 

and I knew that they made some great prepar in the pyramid for our 
defence; for all the night did begin now to shake and to quiver with the 
mighti beat of the earth-current. 




xvi 

IN the countri OF silenc 


and lo! I did be come someth nigh unto the mighti pyramid; and my 
great home went up vast into the everlast night, as a veri mountain 
of sweet life and safety, and had sure amaz me afresh with the utter 
big of it, onli that despair and weari did have too grim an hold 
upon my heart for me to care of aught, save to have mine own maid within 
the safe wonder of the huge refuge. and it did be still afar off from 
me. 

and I to go forward across the land with a strong going; and lo! as I 
past a hollow place where did burn a fire-hole, there came someth out 
of the hollow. and the thing gat upward from crawling, and did be a 
great and hair man. and the man lookt at me, and afterward came unto 
me, and did put hi hand forward, veri eager, as he came. and I did see 
the hand plain in the light from the fire-hole, and the hand were 
monstrous, and did be arm brutish with horrid claws, so that the man 
should have been abl to rip aught, even as a wild beast. 

and I put mine own veri swift to the earth; and surely, I care not for 
life or aught; for thi thing did make to delay me, and I to be fierc 
with despair that aught should halt me. and lo! I leap veri furiou 
and with cold anger at the giant; and I smote at the monstrou brute; 
but he unto the side in an instant of time, and so escap the blow. and 
he flung forth hi monstrou arm out of the half-dark of a shadow that 
did be cast by the danc of the fire-hole, and caught my head-piec and 
pluckt it from me so strong and brutish that he cast me nigh a dozen 
feet on to my back. yet I wa not harm in the life, but onli sore 
shake and bruised; and I to be up in a moment, and came in upon the 
giant, and the disko did roar and blaze in my hand as I swung the 
weapon. and I gat the giant abov the middl part, and the disko did 
glut itself, and went through the giant as that he did be naught, though 
so huge and monstrou and girt with strength. and he to have sure 
turn hi shoulder as he died; for the upper part of the giant-man 
went horrid to the earth, and the leg and the trunk stood plain in the 
light of the fire-hole, and the blood went upward as a fountain in the 
night. 

and I made no pause, but leap unto the maid, and had her in a moment 
to mine arms, and onward again past that dead thing, that did onli then 
to fall with an horrid sound. and sure the night did be full of an 
astonish and uplifted of the millions, so that their spiritu 
cri did go all about me, and did tell me that they had perceiv 
thi thing, and did cast their love and delight unto me, and a vast 
excit to be upon them. 

and lo! I scarc to have gone a great mile more, but there came two 
vagu thing out of a dark place, where certain rock did upstand; and I 
smote them with the diskos, and went onward; but what they did be, I 
never to know. 

and surely, after that, I did seem to go smite forever; for there to 
come, time and oft, strang thing out from the bush and the rocks, as 
that all the land did be a-crawl with foul and monstrou life, and I to 
go smiting, as in a dream, and to speed forward ever with a more fierc 
despair; for sure the end of our live did be come, and I not to be 
given power to save mine own maid. 

and all the land did be full of grim and monstrou roarings, and 
odd-wis lower sounds, veri deadly. and onc I did hear the nois of 
giant running. and all the night to be evil. and, in verity, how I did 
not be slain by some dread force, I not to know, unless that I did be 
burn free of all weak that an evil power should have chanc to 
harm me through; for, indeed, I had been dealt a bitter train a 
monstrou time. 

and lo! there to be again the deep and dread bay of the 
night-hound unto the south-east, and to be nearer; and I to know now 
that no strength of mine should serv to protect mine own. 

and lo! from the upward of the night, where did be the last light, 
there sudden to come downward a strang blue flash, that smote downward 
into the land unto the south-east. and again the flash to come, and 
mayhap a score time after; and there to come down out of the height a 
peculiar crackl sound, that did be less than the thunder of thi age, 
yet more loud than ani other sound that you ever to hear. and lo! I knew 
that the human did begin to fight for me, that I bring mine own safe 
unto home. 

and behold! it did be as that all the wake of the land that had 
been, did be but as sleep, besid the wake that now to come; for 
sure the night now to seem to rock with the roar of the monsters, 
and with the be-stir of great forces. and ever there to go over the 
land the yowl of that strang and dread laughter, which did come 
from that hid countri in the night of the lost east. 

and lo! there aros constant now the hoars and dread bay of the 
hounds, and made known that a mighti pack did be out. and they to seem 
to be no more, maybe, than a good mile unto the south-east; and I to be 
all alone, save for the die maid that I held in mine arms. and I lookt 
vainli and with despair for the hundr thousand that did be prepared, 
and had come downward, as you do know, unto mine aid. but truly, there 
did be naught to see anywheres, save the strang light and shadow of 
the land; and the movement of monstrou life in thi place and that 
place. and the hound to come nearer with everi moment of time; so that 
indeed, I knew that death did be veri nigh. 

and I ceas not from my stride; but went forward, and did begin to run; 
for the pyramid wa not a huge way off in the night; and the shine of 
the circl about it, to be plain seen, save here and there, where it did 
be hid strangely. and I to have a despair hope that I come yet with 
mine own into the safeti of the circle. 

and the bay of the hound to come ever the more near; and sure it 
did be a doubli hideou bitter thing that I lose My dear one, so nigh 
unto home; and the great mountain of my home to go upward befor me into 
the night, and to seem so near that sure I did be almost there; but 
yet, mayhap, two great mile off, even then. and, behold, I call out 
in vain despair and to no end, whi that none come to give me aid in thi 
extremity; for the hound did bay now but the half of a great mile, upon 
my left, and did sure have scent of me, by the way of their dread 
baying. 

and, truly, the million to have an anguish of sympathi for me; for the 
spiritu nois of their emot did be plain unto my spirit; and they 
sure to have seen and to have interpret the way that I did look 
about me and appear to call out in despair; for there came all about me 
in a moment the companion of a great and sweet spiritu force, which 
did be bred of their quick go with me in their understand and 
love; and they to have perceiv how that I did be unto the end of hope; 
and the hound to be almost upon me. 

and in thi moment, there came afresh to my hear the shake beat of 
the earth-current; so that I knew the human to take desper mean to 
save. and there came to my view a vast pack of the hound unto my left, 
and they came run at a great pace, and their head did be low, and 
they to be so great as horses; and seen plain, and again in shadow, all 
in the same moment, as they did come. 

and, in verity, I knew that we two to be dead inde ere a minut be 
gone, if that the human not to haste. and I stood where I did be; for 
there wa no more use to run; and I lookt from the hound unto the 
mighti pyramid, and again to the hounds. and again I lookt with my hope 
gone, unto the pyramid; for the hound did be scarc two hundr fathom 
off from me; and there did be hundr of the mighti beasts. and lo! 
even as I lookt that last time unto the pyramid, there brake out a 
monstrou burst flame, that did rush downward from the seal lower 
part of the mighti pyramid. and the flame smote downward upon the land 
where the hound did run, and all the night to be lost from my sight in 
the bright and strang of that mighti flame; so that I saw no 
more the pyramid, or aught; but onli the shine and dread glori of 
that flame. and the flame made a blast in the night, and a hot that 
did seem to wither me, even where I did be from it. and I perceiv that 
the human had truli turn loos the earth-curr upon the hounds, 
that I be saved. and there went a constant great thunder over the 
land, becaus that the earth-forc did rend and split the air, and did 
tear up the earth. and the roar of the monster did be husht and lost 
in that mighti sound; and I to see no place where the hound did be; but 
onli flame and broken land where the earth-forc did strike; and great 
rock did be hurl all whithers, with a vast noise; and truli it did be 
a merci that I wa not slain an hundr times, if thi might be, by the 
fail and burst of great rock and boulders. 

and lo! in a moment the human did cut off the earth-force, and had it 
again to their control. and there to seem now a great silenc upon the 
land, and an utter dark; save that flame and nois came from that part 
where the current did strike. and I veri speedi to come free of the 
dazed that had me, and made again to my running; for, in truth, it 
to seem now that I should yet be let to win unto safeti with mine own. 

and mine eye did grow present unto their accustom using; and I to 
look all way about me, lest there come somewhat upon me even then to 
work our deaths. and for a good time there to be naught that I did see 
anywheres, neither there to be the wake sound of the land, save onli 
the grim and horrid laughter from afar in the dead east. 

and oft as I did run, I to stare hungri heart upward at the mighti 
pyramid; and sure it alway now to seem to be less bright than before. 
and in the first, I to set thi to the count that mine eye did be yet 
daze by the great flame of the earth-force; but soon I to perceiv that 
it did be otherwise; and that there did be truli a less bright of 
the light that did shine throughout all the mighti redoubt. and thi 
lack I conceiv had owe to that great use of the forc and power of 
the earth-curr that had been loos to save us. and I to have thi 
new thing cold upon my heart; for, truly, if that the forc of the 
current to be made over low, there to be a danger for all the human 
that did live, even for all the great million of the mighti refuge. and 
this, did be sure known by the masters; and they to have no more power 
to aid me with the current, until it flow strong again, lest that they 
destroy all the peopl of the earth. and all thi to be plain to me in 
a moment, as I ran; and I to be but the more desper to come unto 
instant safeti with the maid. 

and surely, I to be yet in expect of the hundr thousand to come 
unto me; but they not to come. and all about me the land to begin again 
to give out the nois of the monsters; and to send forth new and 
peculiar noises, as that there did be more awak in the land than did 
be ever heard by me before. and presently, I saw that there went live 
things, creeping, between me and the light of the circle. and I to know 
that I yet to have to fight bitter, if that I would bring the maid safe. 
and I swung the disko free, and ran on. 

and sudden my spirit to know that I did be warn of some new peril; and 
I to look upward into the night, that the master monstruwacan should 
mayhap to tell me the danger, by the set speech. but, in truth, there 
came not the quick flash of the set speech; but onli an upward 
stillness, and a dim of the light of the mighti pyramid. and 
afterward, I to learn that the dear master monstruwacan made to warn me 
of danger; but that all the instrument of the tower of observ to 
fail to work, and likewis all the machineri of the pyramid to cease, 
even unto the move of the great lifts, and the moan of the air pumps; 
and all to have been thi way for nigh a great hour, until that the 
earth-curr did flow again more full. and surely, thi doth show that 
death did nigh to come unto all the millions, becaus of the great trial 
that did be made to save us. 

but, truly, my spirit did be warn by the troubl of the millions, and 
becaus the master monstruwacan call vagu with hi brain-elements; 
so that I went ever more warily, and did look all ways. and lo! sudden 
I to stare abov me into the night; and there to be a pale circle, veri 
quiet and steadfast that did go alway over the twain of us. and I saw 
that thi did be sure one of those sweet power of holiness, that did 
stand between our soul and some dread power that came anigh to work our 
destruction. and I to have no over-fear; but did put my trust in the 
forc of holiness, and went forward, run warily. 

and surely, I came mayhap so nigh as to within four hundr pace of the 
circle; and I to think that I yet to win mine own safe and undelay 
within the guard of the circle. and the light of the circl did burn 
dim; so that I had sudden fear whether that it be ani more use for a 
guard, until that the earth-curr to come more free. and all thi as I 
ran, swift and wari and utter anxious. 

and lo! in that moment in a dim place there rose up three beast-men from 
the earth, and came at me, growling. and the first did be so close that 
I had no room to the diskos; but beat in the head of the man with the 
haft-part. and I leap unto the side then, and swung the diskos, and 
did be utter mad, yet chill, with fury; so that the maid did be no more 
than a babe in the crook of mine arm. and I came in sudden to meet the 
two beast-men as they ran at me; and I cut quick and light with the 
great weapon, and did have that anger upon me which doth make the heart 
a place of cold and deadli intent; so that I had a wondrou and brutal 
judgement to the slaying. and, truly, I slew them as that they had been 
no more than mice; and I had no harm, neither so much as a touch from 
them. and, behold! in that moment there came a great shout of wonder and 
of welcom from within the circle. and I lookt swiftly, and began again 
to run; for there did be men in grey armour all within the circle; yet 
came they not to mine aid. 

and lo! in a moment I knew whi that the hundr thousand did have held 
off from me in mine extremity; for, behold! there did be monstrou black 
mound all along without of the circle, and did rock and sway with a 
forc of strang life that did set an horror into my soul as I ran; for 
truli they did be the visibl sign of monstrou forc of evil. and did 
ani human have ventur outward beyond the circle, then had that man 
been destroy in the spirit, and lost utterly; so that none had dare 
to come; neither had it been of use if ani had made themselv to be a 
sacrific to aid me; for, truly, they to have been of no use, when dead, 
as you shall say. 

and there came a constant shout from the hundr thousand to me, that 
I haste, and inde to haste. and truli I did hast with all my 
strength. and I lookt unto the dear circl of holi that did be abov 
us twain; and it to go steadfast over us; so that I saw we to be sure 
saved. 

and lo! I to be no more than an hundr pace now from the glow of 
the circle. and behold! even in that instant, there must come brutal 
thing to destroy us; for there came an herd of squat and brutish men 
all about me in a moment from the shadows, where they had been hid. and 
they caught at me, and caught at the maid to tear her from mine arm. and 
truly, it did be as that they sure to have success; for I could nowis 
in a moment free myself, and yet to guard the maid and to use the 
diskos. and lo! I kickt with my metal boots, and gave from them, and 
turn all way in a moment, and wrench free; and I leap back; and 
the herd of horrid brute after me. 

and now I to have space for the diskos, and a grim in my heart; and 
I came round veri sudden, and ran in among the men, smiting. and I hit 
veri swift both from the right and the left, and to and fro with a 
constant quick circling. and the disko did spin and roar, and made a 
strang light upon the face of the men, and they to have tusk like to 
the tusk of pigs. and sure I did rage through them, smiting. and they 
to strike me a thousand time with great stones, so that mine armour 
rang, and wa all fresh burst, and I near to sicken under the blow and 
new wounds; but they not to harm the maid, for I carri her abov their 
squat and brutish reach. 

and the brute-men to seem without end. but I made alway forward unto the 
glow of the circle; and the night to be full in that place of the 
fierc shout of the hundr thousand; and many--a I did learn--to 
have tri to come unto me, but that their comrad held them from so 
useless a dying. 

and, in verity, I to be now scarc fifti pace from the glow of the 
circle; and did be nigh to fall; for I did be so utter daze and wound 
with the fight, and ill with a vast weari and the despair and 
mad of my journey, and moreover, as you do know, I not to have 
slept, but to have carri the maid forev through day and nights, and 
to have fought oft. 

and lo! the hundr thousand stood just within the circle, and they that 
were to the front did swing each man the diskos; and they hurl each 
the disko in among the herd of the tuskt men that did make to slay me. 
and sure thi to save me; for the herd did thin to my front; and I to 
gather my strength, and to charg with despair, and to smite and never 
be ceas of smiting; so that there did be dead creatur all about. and 
behold! I brake through the herd, with mine own, and did be upon the 
circle. and lo! I stept over the circle, that did scarc now to give out 
a resistance; and a thousand hand did come forward to give me help; yet 
did none touch me, but gave back from me; for there did be that about me 
which held them off, as with a littl awe; for I to be strang unto 
them. 

and I stood there in a great silence, and the disko in my hand ran 
blood to the haft. and mayb I rockt as I stood; for mani again did put 
out their hands, as to hold me, and again drew back, and were silent. 

and I lookt unto them, and they lookt back at me; and I did gasp 
awhile, and wa strang dazed, and did tri to tell them that I had 
need of the doctor for the life of mine own maid, that did be die in 
mine arms. and behold, in that moment, there did be a sound of giant 
running, out in the night. and some then to cri out differ matters, 
to aid me, and to bewar of the giants, and to bring the doctor to 
attend me on the instant. 

and other voic did call that the holi light wa gone from above; and 
likewis the black mound from the outer part of the circle. and there 
did be a monstrou nois of roar in the land, and all to come 
bewild unto my brain, which did sure fail now with the grim and 
utter stress which had been mine so long. 

and there to be also a constant nois that came from near and from 
upward; and truli I to know, as in a dream, that it did be made of the 
shout of the great millions, that did make an etern and vagu 
roaring-sound upward in the night, that did come down from the upper 
heights, no more loud than a strang and continu murmur out of the 
lofti miles. 

and surely, I to find my voic in a littl minute, and did ask a near 
man whether there be ani doctor with the men. and in that moment there 
came forward a master of the diskos, which doth be as a command of 
thi age. and he made the salut of honour with the diskos, and would 
have eas the maid from me; but I to ask again, veri slow, whether that 
there wa a doctor a-near. and he on the instant to give an order; and 
the great thousand to begin to shape, and did make a mighti lane unto 
the great gateway of the mighti pyramid. 

and the master of the disko made a sign to certain that did be near; 
and they stood about me, as I to know dully, lest I fall; but they not 
to touch me; for I did be as that I must not be laid hand upon; for I 
did near to choke with despair lest I to have come home too late; and 
surely, also, the men to seem as that I did be strang unto them. 

and there went order swift and constant thi way and that; and lo! in a 
littl while, there came two big men of the upward cities, running; and 
they had a littl man between them upon a sling. and the littl man did 
be a master of the doctors; and he aid me gentl to lay mine own maid 
upon the earth. and the master of the disko made a sign, and the men 
that did be near, turn each hi back; and the doctor to make 
examin for the life of mine own. 

and there to come about that time a seem of silenc in the land. and 
truli the hundr thousand did be utter quiet; and a great quiet in the 
mighti pyramid; for, in truth, all to know, by this, that there to be a 
fear that the maid I did bring out of the night, did be slain by the 
evil forces. 

and sudden the littl man that did be the master doctor, lookt up quiet 
and piteou at me; so that I knew in a moment that mine own maid did be 
dead. and he to see that I knew; and he cover the face of mine own, 
and stood up veri speedy; and he call softli to the men that did be to 
my back, and he sign to them that some to support me, and some to lift 
mine own maid, and bear her unto the great gateway. and he lookt keen at 
me; and I to fight a littl that I breathe; and afterward did make with 
my hands, that the men not to come near me, neither to touch mine own. 
and the master doctor to understand that I did be truli strong until I 
die, and did beckon the men from me, and from the maid. 

and I stoopt, in a little, and I lift mine own maid into mine arm for 
that last journeying. 

and I came down the mighti lane of the hundr thousand, all in their 
grey armour. and they did make silent salut with the disko reversed, 
each man as I pass him, and did be utter silent. and I scarc to wot 
of aught, save that all the world did be quiet and emptied, and my task 
to have failed, and mine own to lie dead in mine arms. yet, truly, did 
it to have fail utter? for I had sure save mine own from the terror 
of the second night land, and she not to have come alon and with 
mad unto her death; but to have die in mine arms; and she sure to 
have been comfort within her spirit, becaus that my love did be so 
utter about her. and I to think vagu and terribl on an hundr sweet 
love action that she to have shown unto me; and sudden I did rememb 
with a dread pain how that I never to have wake to discov mine own 
maid kiss me in my sleep, as I to have meant. and a mad of 
anguish did flash sudden through the numb upon my brain; so that I 
did be blind a little, and sure went crook in my walk; for I to 
know, sudden, that the master doctor steadi mine elbow for a moment; 
but afterward did leav me be, as I to have again control of my spirit. 

and lo! as I drew nigh unto the great gateway, the light of the pyramid 
to begin to glow again more strong, and the machineri of the lift and 
the air pump to work, becaus that now the earth-curr did grow onc 
more to natur strength. and they to have power now to open the great 
gate, which did be done by great machines. 

and there to come forth to meet me a number of the master of the mighti 
pyramid; and the dear master monstruwacan did come befor them all, so 
eager as that he did be mine own father. and he to have heard somewhat, 
vaguely, that there to have been a fear for the life of the maid that I 
did bring. 

and surely, he did be told by one near to the gateway, that the maid did 
be dead in mine arms; for he and all the master did paus and stand 
silent for me to go by, and did revers each hi diskos; and thi to 
have been an honour shown, than which there did be scarc ani greater. 

and there went a constant murmur up in the night, which did be the 
speech of the millions, questioning. and the news that the maid did be 
dead, went upward through the miles. and my spirit to know, as in a 
dream, of the spiritu nois which did go outward through all space, 
and did be the grief of the multitudes, as they did hear thi thing. 
yet, truly, there did noth comfort me anywise; neither I proper yet 
to know the veriti of my loss; for I did go stunned. 

and I came in through the great gateway, and the full watch did stand 
there silent in their armour; and they made the salut of honour. and I 
went onward with the dead maid that I did bring out of eternity. 

and presently, they that were around, did guid me, with the maid in 
mine arms, unto the great lift. and I took mine own maid into the great 
lift; and the master came with me, and did be in their armour; and none 
did speak to me. and the master monstruwacan and the master of the 
doctor stood silent to the side of me. and there did be everywher 
great multitudes, that I did see vaguely; but my spirit not to wot of 
them. 

and lo! I stood veri quiet and dumb as we did go upward through the 
miles; and the million of the citi stood about the great lift, and 
there did be a great silenc upward and downward through the strang 
miles; save for the weep of women in dear sympathy, that did sound 
far and low and constant. 

and present I to know that the master monstruwacan and the master of 
the doctor did look one to the other; and I to be awar sudden that I 
stood in my blood; for I did be wound in an hundr parts, and the 
blood to go alway from me. yet did the master doctor be slow to do aught 
for me, becaus that he to perceiv that I did be slain in the heart; 
and there to be no pain so dread as that he should be like to wake me 
unto, if that he went hastily. 

yet, presently, there did come whirl into my head; and someon did 
sure make to eas mine own maid from mine arms. but I held her, 
dumbly; and the blood to go the more from me; and they not to know what 
should be done. and I to look at them. and the dear master monstruwacan 
did be say somewhat unto me, that I did have no power to hear; but 
onli to know that hi face did be veri human. and there went a strang 
nois all about me; and the master monstruwacan to seem to hold me up, 
and to beckon to some that did be to my back. and lo! there came a 
blackness, and the gentl of arm about mine armour.... 

and I to come present to quiet and to half-dreams; and did alway 
to seem that I carri mine own maid in mine arms. but truli there did 
pass three great days, whilst that I did be thus. and I all that while 
to be laid quiet, and to be tend by the master doctor, and aid by 
all knowledg that did be known of humans. 

and on the third day, as it might be called, I to come full unto my 
senses; and the pain to take me in the breast; and the master of the 
doctor did be with me, and they that nurst me; and the master doctor 
watch me veri keen and gentle. 

and I did be in a bed of the health room of mine own city. and I gat 
from the bed, and the doctor to say naught; but onli to watch me. and I 
walkt to and fro a little, and he alway to watch me; and present he 
gave me somewhat to drink; and I drank. and I wa gone soon from all 
knowledge. 

and I to come again unto a know that I yet to live; and there went a 
certain strength in my body. and lo! the first that I did see, wa the 
master of the doctors; and I to perceiv in a moment that he had waken 
me, and had nurst my strength for that moment, that I live through the 
burial. for he to be veri wise, and to have known from that first see 
of me, that I not to live after that mine own did die. 

and there wa brought to me a loos garment; but I to refus the 
garment, dumbly, and did look about me veri troubl and forgetting. and 
the master doctor lookt alway at me; and lo! in a moment he call one, 
and gave an order. and there wa brought in then my broken armour, and a 
garment to wear below. and I then to know that I did be content in thi 
matter; and the doctor alway to watch me. and they drest me in my broken 
armour. 

and surely, as they drest me, my spirit to hear the sorrow and sympathi 
of the multitudes, and did know that they went downward by millions, 
unto the countri of silence. 

and lo! in that moment when I near to be in mine armour, I to mind 
sudden again that I never to have wake to discov mine own maid 
kiss me in my sleep. and the pain gat me in the breast, so that I had 
sure end then, but that the master doctor set somewhat to my breath, 
that eas me, and gave someth of dull unto my sens for a 
while. 

and I did be carri then in a sling unto the great lift, and there did 
be a bed in the lift, and the doctor to have me to lie upon the bed; and 
I to know that he also to know that I never to need a bed ani more; 
neither should I ever to come upward again in the lift. 

and truli the mighti pyramid did be an emptyness; for there did seem to 
be left onli the stress master that did arrang the move of the 
millions. and the stress master did stand about the lift, as we dropt 
downward through the great mile unto the underground fields. and we 
came downward in the last unto the countri of silence, which did lie an 
hundr mile deep in the world, and did be an hundr mile everi way 
of silenc unto the dead. 

and they that were with me, gat me from the lift, and did mean to carri 
me in the sling unto the last road. but I stood upon my feet, and made 
that I should walk, and I held out my hand for the diskos, which one did 
carry. and the master doctor sign that they should obey me, as my 
spirit to know. and I walkt veri steadfast down the way that did lead 
unto the last road; and the master doctor walkt behind me, a littl 
space off. 

and surely, there did be all the peopl of the world in that great 
country; and the peopl did be spread out forever, so far as my see 
did go; and they to have sight of me; and all the aether did be stir 
with the human of their sorrow and their kind sympathy. and there 
grew a murmur, which did be like to a low roll thunder, and did be 
the voic of the peoples. and the roll of that great husht sound 
went to and fro across that mighti countri of quiet; and there to be 
afterward an utter silence. 

and I saw below me the place of the last rest, where did be the 
begin of the last road; and there did lie there a littl figure, 
cover with a white robe, that did glimmer with the beauteou work of 
women that had stitcht love and honour into that last garment. and 
surely, I to rock upon my feet, and to steadi myself with the diskos; 
and the master doctor to be unto my side in a moment, and gave me again 
someth that I breathe-in. but, indeed, I to refuse, after that I had 
taken one breath of the drug; for I to be abl to bear my pain the 
littl time that I now to have to live; and I to mean that I have no 
dim of my sens for those short minut that I should have yet near 
unto mine own. and truli the master doctor did not press me anywise, but 
had a perfect understanding, and went quiet again to the rearward. 

and I came soon to that place where mine own dead one did lie; and the 
master monstruwacan stood to her feet, and did be cloth in grey 
armour, and had the disko reversed; and thi to be for an honour unto 
My dead maid. 

and there kneel two maid in white, one to the right and one to the 
left of mine own, and they to be for faithfulness, and did be maids, 
becaus that they watch by a maid; and had likewis been matrons, if 
that the dead had been wife unto any. 

and the place at the head of the last rest did be empty, and did be for 
me; and he that stood to the head, did be for love; for it did be the 
chief, and did hold dominion over and did make to live both faith 
and honour. and thi to be the way of the burial alway. 

and lo! I took my courag into my heart; and I stood to the head of mine 
own maid; and I lookt down upon the wondrou white glori of the garment, 
which did be white becaus that mine own did be a maid; yet did be 
work with yellow flower of weeping, as we did call them, becaus that 
she had die in love. and I to know that no hand had toucht that 
wonder garment, save the hand of maidens. 

and behold! as I stood there, from far away over the land, there did 
come a far and faint sound; and the sound did come more nigh, so that I 
knew that afar off, beyond the hill of the babes, the million did 
begin to sing the call song, where million did call husht unto 
million, and the sound did come onward toward where we did be, and did 
go over us, and pass onward in a husht and wondrou breath of sound, 
as that all the love that did be ever in thi world, did call in a low 
anguish unto a lost beloved. and the sound to pass away and away over 
that mighti countri in the deep earth, and did hush and hush unto a 
great and utter silence, save for a faint murmur of countless women 
weeping, that did be in the air of that land of quiet. 

and there to be a space of silence, and again the silenc to be broken 
by a far sound; and there to come again from beyond the far hill of the 
babe a strang and low sound, and did be as of a wind wander through 
damp forests. and the sound grew, and came across the hill of the 
babes, and did be breath forth by million after million, so that in a 
littl I to hear the song of weep sung veri low and sorrow by the 
multitudes. and the song came onward over all that great country, and 
past over us, and went onward into the far land beyond the dome, and did 
be caught by the voic of million that did be hid in great distances, 
and so to go onward forever, and to die at last unto a mighti silence. 

and the master monstruwacan lookt at me from the feet of mine own maid, 
and I to know that the moment did be come when I to part from the maid 
naani forev and forever, even though I to live in some strang future, 
and to find her soul in some other sweet child. and I stoopt and laid 
the disko besid mine own maid there upon the last rest; and the two 
maid drew back the light wonder of the garment, and show me the face 
of mine own, and she to sleep there forev so sweet and husht as a 
child, and as oft I to have seen her to sleep. and I lookt a littl 
while, and the pain of my heart did be sufficient, so that I knew I die 
as I lookt. and onc more I lookt, and I set my soul about mine own. and 
I fought with myself, and stood upward, and the maid did cover the face 
of mine own maid. 

and the master monstruwacan commend naani unto eternity. and he rais 
the disko reversed; and lo! the road did begin to move upward unto the 
dome, and mine own maid did be upon the road; and I to fight that I keep 
breathing; so that I not to die befor she be lost utter to my sight. 

and there did rise now a sound from all that countri that had no order 
in it; and did be like to a low moan that did fill all the air of 
the land; and there to be also a constant sound, as of a littl 
whistl dree wind that did be in all that countri of quiet; and truli 
thi to be more than ani singing; for it to be the true weep of 
multitudes, that did sorrow from the heart, with the grief of thi thing 
that did be. 

and I stood utter still, and did draw my breath veri even, and lookt 
unto that small form that did be now afar off where it did lie upon the 
move roadway. and I gazed, as that my soul and all my be did have 
no power else, even as a man that dies, doth set all hi strength to a 
last movement. and I not to wot that the master monstruwacan and the two 
maid did hold me up, becaus they to perceiv that I did be dying; for 
I onli to see mine own littl one lie afar off upon the move of the 
last road. 

and the maid in that moment to come to the place where the road did pass 
into the strang and lumin vapour of the earth-current, which did lie 
all about the base of the dome; and the vapour to be onli as a faint 
shine smoke, scarc seen, yet to be enough to give someth of 
uncertainti to the dead, when that they did have past inward of it. 

and I stared, with all that did be left of my strength; for mine own to 
be gone utter and forev in but a littl minute. and the uncertainti of 
the lumin vapour did cling about her, and to make her to seem unreal 
to my gaze; for the vapour did be in constant movement, and to give a 
seem of shift to and fro of all that did be in it. 

and behold! as I did stare, with my dread pain, there did be sudden a 
strang hoars nois from the nearer millions. and lo! in an instant 
there came a mighti shout out of all that country; and the shout did be 
made again, and did grow into a mighti hoars roar from the millions, 
so that all that great countri did be fill with the monstrou sound. 
and, in verity, I to have seen the thing, likewise; but to have set it 
to the mad of long of my heart and to that desper and dread 
pain which did make me to be craze and lost from all sane thinking. 

and the thing that I did see, had been that the maid did seem to move, 
there upon the last road, where she did lie; but indeed, thi to have 
appear onli to be the stir of the lumin vapour of the 
earth-current, which did seem to make thing shift, as I have told. 

and lo! I now to see truli that the maid did move where she wa laid 
afar off upon the road; and I now to know, and to believ that she did 
inde live. and my life came into me with a bounding; yet did my heart 
seem to be a moment still in my breast. and the master monstruwacan to 
have sign alreadi that the roadway be stopt, and brought backward; but 
I to be now upon the last road, and did run as a madman, shout vainli 
upon the name of mine own. and I to learn afterward that there to have 
been a dread peril that all the near million to rush toward the last 
road, and so, mayhap, to have caus the death of many, and to have 
been like to have crusht mine own. but thi danger to have been eased, 
becaus that the watch master did act veri prompt, and set the great 
regiment of hi men to keep back the millions, and did send a signal 
abroad over all the country, that there to be calmness, for that the 
maid should be succoured. and alway, whilst thi to be, I did run 
stagger most strang upward of the last road; and sure that great 
roof did ring and boom with the constant and mighti shout of the 
millions. 

and there did run other also along the road, to my back; but I to have 
been the first, and to make a good speed, though I did stagger and rock 
so strang upon my feet; and the road alway to be move backward under 
me; and so I to be come wonder soon unto where the maid did be. and 
she to be upon her back, and to have pusht the garment from her face, 
and did be lie with her eye open, and a look of gentl wonder 
upon her dear face. and she then to see me, and her eye did smile at 
me, veri glad and quiet; for there to be yet an utter weak upon her. 

and lo! I came with a fall besid her, and I gat upon my knee and 
upon my hands, and my heart did shake my lip to dri whisperings. and 
she to look weak and steadfast unto me, and I to look forev at her; 
and I did alway tri to say thing unto her; but my mouth to refus me. 

and understand did come into her, as a light; and she to know in that 
instant that she to be truli come into the mighti pyramid, and I to have 
gat her there somewise; and she to wake sudden in her body, and set her 
hand forth all a-trembl from the garment, and in dread trouble. 
and I to see then that the blood did go from me, constant; and the maid 
to have perceiv thi thing, so that she wa wake the more proper in a 
moment from her death-swoon. 

and surely, I did bleed veri dreadful; for all my wound did be open 
with my running. and I to have sudden power with my lips, and did say 
unto her, veri simple, that I love her. and she to be all in an haze 
from me; and I to know that she to have come likewis unto her knees, 
and did have my head upon her breast; and there to be an utter shake 
of the air with some great sound, and a mighti spiritu stir of the 
aether of the world. 

and there to be then the voic of the master monstruwacan veri dull in 
mine ears; and the low voic of the master doctor; but I never to hear 
what they did be saying; and did know onli that mine own maid did live; 
and I not to mean to die, but to fight unto living. and even whilst that 
I made thi resolving, I wa gone into an utter blackness. 




xvii 

the love day 


now, when that I gat back unto life, I to know that I went upward in the 
lift, and did be upon that same bed, where I to think I never to need a 
bed ani more, neither to come upward again from out of the countri of 
silence. 

and I to know vagu and strange, that there rose up from out of the 
mighti depth of the world, the deep thunder of the underground organs, 
and did sound as that they made a strang and utter distant music beyond 
death; and there to go alway a roll chaunting, as that multitud did 
sing beyond far mountains, and the sound to be somewhil as a 
far-blow wind, low in the deep; and again to come clear, and to be 
that great olden melodi of the song of honour. and I knew, as in a 
dream, that the million in that deep countri made an honour and a 
rejoic over thi wonder of joy which did be come. but yet all to be 
faint and half hid from me, and mine eye to be as that they had no 
power to open, and I to seem to be lift alway upon strang water of 
unrealness. and there to be sweet and love odours, and these to be of 
reality, and to come from the great fields, where the flower did alway 
to grow about the passag way of the lifts; for the lift even then to 
be go upward through the great miles. 

and mayhap I move a little; for there came the voic of the master 
doctor low and gentl to me; and bid me rest; for that all did be well 
with the maid. and surely, afterward, I did be gone into an haze, and 
there to be then a seem of day in which I half to live and half to 
sleep, and to wonder without troubl whether I did be dead. 

and then there to come day when I lay veri quiet, and had no thought of 
aught; and the master doctor oft to bend over me in thi hour and that 
hour, and to look keen into my face. and in the end, after strang 
spaces, there bent over me another, and there lookt down upon me the 
dear and love face of mine own, and the eye did speak love into my 
soul; yet did she be calm and husht. and I to begin again to live in my 
body, and I made, mayhap, a littl fumbl with my hands; for she to 
take and to hold them; and life to come from her to me; and she to be 
ever wordless and gentle; and content to grow in me, and present a 
natur slumber. 

and there came a day when I did be let rise, and they that tend me, 
carri me to one of the quiet garden of the pyramid; and they set me 
there, and did seem to leav me alone. and there came one then around a 
bush, and lookt at me a moment, as with an half shyness; onli that the 
love that did shine in her eyes, made the shyness to be a littl thing. 
and, truly, I knew that it did be mine own maid; but I never befor to 
have seen naani drest pretti as a maid. and I lookt to her, and knew 
that she did be more dainti than even I to have known. and sudden I made 
that I rise to come unto her; but she to run quick to me, that she stop 
me of thi natur foolishness; and she then to sit besid me, and to 
take my head against her breast, and she not to deni me her lips; but to 
be both a maid and a mother to me in the same moment. 

and afterward, she had me to be veri still; and we to sit there in an 
utter dumb happiness, until they that did attend me, were come again. 
and the master of the doctor did be with them, and I to see that there 
went someth of satisfact in hi face. 

and after that day I saw mine own maid everi day; and I gat better unto 
health with a wondrou quickness; for love did mend me. and soon I did 
be let go downward unto the fields; but yet to go by privat ways, 
becaus that the multitud should be like to follow me alway; and I to 
need to be quiet. 

and the maid to be with me; for the master monstruwacan and the master 
of the doctor did agre upon thi matter, and had an offic of 
marriag to wed us; and we to be marri veri quiet and simple; for I 
yet to be over-weak for the public marriage, which we to have later; 
when, truly, the million made us a guard of honour eight mile high, 
from the top unto the bottom of the mighti pyramid. but thi to have 
been later, as I do tell, and did be a ceremoni of the peoples, 
becaus that they not to be deni that they give me an honour. 

and sure the maid to be with me alway, and did be now my wife, and my 
strength to come alway upon me, and mine own to grow again unto a 
perfect health. and, in verity, we did be now in the love day which do 
be the most beauteous, if that the love to be true. 

and we did wander through the mighti field at our will, and walkt in 
the love path of the fields, which did be alway anear to those place 
where did be the villages. and I to hide our name, lest we to be beset 
by any, out of natur curious and kindliness; for we to need to be 
utter togeth and quiet. 

and we to chose those place for our slumber where beauti of flower did 
be most wondrous; and we to carri somewhat of food with us; but also to 
eat when we came unto the villag which did be here and there in the 
fields, which were truli so huge as countries. and mine own did make 
good her promis an hundr times, as you shall say, and did prepar me 
a great and hearti meal; and did teas me utter that I did be a glutton, 
as I did eat, and kist me, lest that I have ever a chanc to say aught 
in mine own defence. and truly, she did be all that my heart and my 
spirit did desire; and she to have companion me with love, and to have 
enter my spirit into joy. 

and onc we to go downward unto the countri of silence; but not to stay 
veri long at that time; becaus that my memori did return upon me. yet 
in the after time, we to wander there oft with memory, and holi of 
great thinkings, and with love which doth hold all. 

and as we to leav that country, I to tell mine own how that when she 
had been suspend of her life by the horrid forc of the house, I to have 
mind me with a dread pain that I never to have wake to discov 
her kiss me when that I did sleep. and sure mine own dear one did 
blush most lovely, and had never known that I did be awar of her sweet 
naughtiness; and she then to have all thought for mine agony, when that 
she did be dead, ere the vapour of life of the earth-forc did set her 
spirit free of the silence. 

and she to come unto me in dear understanding. 

and she then to tell me that the doctor to say that she had been, as it 
were, stun and froze of the spirit, and all her be and life 
suspend; and the great life-forc of the earth-curr to have wake her 
spirit, and her bodi then to live and her blood to flow proper again. 
and the doctor had talkt much and search much of late in the olden 
record of their work; and they to have found somewhat of one such 
happen in the olden time; but truly, naught such to have been ever 
through a mighti age of years. 

and whilst that we to wander and to rest in the fields, I oft to tell 
mine own of thi matter and that matter; and I to know that she had 
learn somewhat of odd things, ere I did be come to health; but not 
overmuch; for she also to have been utter alack, as you shall think; and 
to have come from her bed, when that I did lie so still; for the master 
doctor to have ordain this, becaus he to fear that I to be go 
truli to die, if that he not to do somewhat to awaken my spirit. and in 
verity, you shall think upon the deep of my love as I to know that 
she did have held my hand so brave and gentle, whilst that she to have 
scarc power to her feet. and I to say a littl holi prais of mine own. 

and so do I come to mine ending; and have but one more thing that I 
tell. and thi to happen a while later; after that mine own and I had 
gone through the second marriag which did be the public marriage. for 
it did be, that one day My wife, that did be mine own, did take me with 
a sweet cun unto the hall of honour. and surely, when I wa come 
there, I to see that mani of the peopl did be in that great hall, and 
did stand about in a silence; yet as that they had no mean to do 
aught; but yet to be that they did wait upon somewhat. 

and My wife did go forward with me unto the centr place of the hall; 
and sudden I saw whi that she did bring me so cun sweet; for there 
did stand in the midst of the hall of honour, in the place of honour, a 
statu of a man in broken armour, that did carri a maid forever. 

and I did be dumb; and how of thi age shall you to know the honour that 
thi to mean in that; for it did be an honour that wa given onli to the 
great dead; and I to be but a young man, and did be so utter far off 
from greatness; save that I to love with all my heart and with all my 
spirit, and therefor death to be but a littl thing befor love. and 
you to know how love doth make sweet and brave the heart; and to have 
understand with me in my humbl and my wonder and my natur 
pride that there did ani so think to honour me. 

and mine own did be weep with joy and honest pride of her man, besid 
me. and there to be an utter silenc of dear sympathi in all the great 
hall of honour. and they that did be there, to let me go in quietness, 
with mine own, which did be a love thing of understanding. 

and I to go love and thought with mine own wife; and she to be veri 
nigh to me. 

and I to have gain honour; yet to have learn that honour doth be but 
as the ash of life, if that you not to have love. and I to have love. 
and to have love is to have all; for that which doth be _truly_ love 
doth mother honour and faithfulness; and they three to build the hous 
of joy. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the night land, by william hope hodgson 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the night land *** 

***** thi file should be name 10662.txt or 10662.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/6/6/10662/ 

produc by suzann shell, maria khomenko and PG distribut proofread 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is," with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectori of the same number as the ebook' 
ebook number, often in sever format includ plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edit of our ebook replac the old file and take over 
the old filenam and etext number. the replac older file is renamed. 
version base on separ sourc are treat as new ebook receiv 
new filenam and etext numbers. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to novemb 2003, with ebook number below #10000, 
are file in directori base on their releas date. If you want to 
download ani of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may util the follow address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post sinc novemb 2003, with etext number over #10000, are 
file in a differ way. the year of a releas date is no longer part 
of the directori path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
ident to the filename). the path to the file is made up of singl 
digit correspond to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
exampl an ebook of filenam 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filenam 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

An altern method of locat ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.al 

