the project gutenberg ebook of clarimonde, by théophil gautier 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: clarimond 

author: théophil gautier 

translator: lafcadio hearn 

releas date: septemb 18, 2007 [ebook #22661] 
last updated: octob 1, 2016 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook clarimond *** 




produc by david widger 





clarimond 

By théophil gautier 

translat By lafcadio hearn 

1908 

prefac 
brother, you ask me if I have ever loved. yes. My stori is a strang and 
terribl one; and though I am sixty-six year of age, I scarc dare 
even now to disturb the ash of that memory. To you I can refus 
nothing; but I should not relat such a tale to ani less experienc 
mind. So strang were the circumst of my story, that I can scarc 
believ myself to have ever actual been a parti to them. for more 
than three year I remain the victim of a most singular and diabol 
illusion. poor countri priest though I was, I led everi night in a 
dream--would to god it had been all a dream!--a most worldli life, a 
damn life, a life of sardanapalus. one singl look too freeli cast 
upon a woman well-nigh caus me to lose my soul; but final by the 
grace of god and the assist of my patron saint, I succeed in 
cast out the evil spirit that possess me. My daili life wa long 
interwoven with a nocturn life of a total differ character. By 
day I wa a priest of the lord, occupi with prayer and sacr things; 
by night, from the instant that I close my eye I becam a young 
nobleman, a fine connoisseur in women, dogs, and horses; gambling, 
drinking, and blaspheming; and when I awok at earli daybreak, it seem 
to me, on the other hand, that I had been sleeping, and had onli dream 
that I wa a priest. Of thi somnambulist life there now remain to me 
onli the recollect of certain scene and word which I cannot banish 
from my memory; but although I never actual left the wall of my 
presbytery, one would think to hear me speak that I were a man who, 
weari of all worldli pleasures, had becom a religious, seek to end a 
tempestu life in the servic of god, rather than a humbl seminarist 
who ha grown old in thi obscur curacy, situat in the depth of the 
wood and even isol from the life of the century. 

yes, I have love as none in the world ever loved--with an insens 
and furiou passion--so violent that I am astonish it did not caus my 
heart to burst asunder. ah, what nights--what nights! 

from my earliest childhood I had felt a vocat to the priesthood, so 
that all my studi were direct with that idea in view. Up to the 
age of twenty-four my life had been onli a prolong novitiate. have 
complet my cours of theolog I success receiv all the minor 
orders, and my superior judg me worthy, despit my youth, to pass the 
last aw degree. My ordin wa fix for easter week. 

I had never gone into the world. My world wa confin by the wall of 
the colleg and the seminary. I knew in a vagu sort of a way that there 
wa someth call woman, but I never permit my thought to dwell 
on such a subject, and I live in a state of perfect innocence. twice 
a year onli I saw my infirm and age mother, and in those visit were 
compris my sole relat with the outer world. 

I regret nothing; I felt not the least hesit at take the last 
irrevoc step; I wa fill with joy and impatience. never did a 
betroth lover count the slow hour with more feverish ardour; I slept 
onli to dream that I wa say mass; I believ there could be noth 
in the world more delight than to be a priest; I would have refus 
to be a king or a poet in preference. My ambit could conceiv of no 
loftier aim. 

I tell you thi in order to show you that what happen to me could 
not have happen in the natur order of things, and to enabl you to 
understand that I wa the victim of an inexplic fascination. 

At last the great day came. I walk to the church with a step so light 
that I fanci myself sustain in air, or that I had wing upon my 
shoulders. I believ myself an angel, and wonder at the sombr and 
thought face of my companions, for there were sever of us. I 
had pass all the night in prayer, and wa in a condit wellnigh 
border on ecstasy. the bishop, a vener old man, seem to me god 
the father lean over hi eternity, and I beheld heaven through the 
vault of the temple. 

you well know the detail of that ceremony--th benediction, the 
communion under both forms, the anoint of the palm of the hand with 
the oil of catechumens, and then the holi sacrific offer in concert 
with the bishop. 

ah, truli spake job when he declar that the imprud man is one who 
hath not made a coven with hi eyes! I accident lift my head, 
which until then I had kept down, and beheld befor me, so close that 
it seem that I could have touch her--although she wa actual a 
consider distanc from me and on the further side of the sanctuari 
railing--a young woman of extraordinari beauty, and attir with royal 
magnificence. It seem as though scale had suddenli fallen from my 
eyes. I felt like a blind man who unexpectedli recov hi sight. the 
bishop, so radiantli gloriou but an instant before, suddenli vanish 
away, the taper pale upon their golden candlestick like star in the 
dawn, and a vast dark seem to fill the whole church. the charm 
creatur appear in bright relief against the background of that 
darkness, like some angel revelation. she seem herself radiant, and 
radiat light rather than receiv it. 

I lower my eyelids, firmli resolv not to again open them, that 
I might not be influenc by extern objects, for distract had 
gradual taken possess of me until I hardli knew what I wa doing. 

In anoth minute, nevertheless, I reopen my eyes, for through my 
eyelash I still beheld her, all sparkl with prismat colours, and 
surround with such a penumbra as one behold in gaze at the sun. 

oh, how beauti she was! the greatest painters, who follow ideal 
beauti into heaven itself, and thenc brought back to earth the true 
portrait of the madonna, never in their delin even approach 
that wildli beauti realiti which I saw befor me. neither the vers 
of the poet nor the palett of the artist could convey ani concept 
of her. she wa rather tall, with a form and bear of a goddess. her 
hair, of a soft blond hue, wa part in the midst and flow back over 
her templ in two river of rippl gold; she seem a diadem 
queen. her forehead, bluish-whit in it transparency, extend it calm 
breadth abov the arch of her eyebrows, which by a strang singular 
were almost black, and admir reliev the effect of sea-green eye 
of unsustain vivac and brilliancy. what eyes! with a singl flash 
they could have decid a man’ destiny. they had a life, a limpidity, 
an ardour, a humid light which I have never seen in human eyes; they 
shot forth ray like arrows, which I could distinctli _see_ enter my 
heart. I know not if the fire which illumin them came from heaven or 
from hell, but assuredli it came from one or the other. that woman wa 
either an angel or a demon, perhap both. assuredli she never sprang 
from the flank of eve, our common mother. teeth of the most lustrou 
pearl gleam in her ruddi smile, and at everi inflect of her lip 
littl dimpl appear in the satini rose of her ador cheeks. there 
wa a delicaci and pride in the regal outlin of her nostril bespeak 
nobl blood. agat gleam play over the smooth lustrou skin of her 
half-bar shoulders, and string of great blond pearls--almost equal 
to her neck in beauti of colour--descend upon her bosom. from time 
to time she elev her head with the undul grace of a startl 
serpent or peacock, therebi impart a quiver motion to the high 
lace ruff which surround it like a silver trellis-work. 

she wore a robe of orange-r velvet, and from her wide ermine-lin 
sleev there peep forth patrician hand of infinit delicacy, and so 
ideal transpar that, like the finger of aurora, they permit the 
light to shine through them. 

all these detail I can recollect at thi moment as plainli as though 
they were of yesterday, for notwithstand I wa greatli troubl at 
the time, noth escap me; the faintest touch of shading, the littl 
dark speck at the point of the chin, the impercept down at the 
corner of the lips, the velveti floss upon the brow, the quiver 
shadow of the eyelash upon the cheeks--i could notic everyth with 
astonish lucid of perception. 

and gaze I felt open within me gate that had until then remain 
closed; vent long obstruct becam all clear, permit glimps of 
unfamiliar perspect within; life suddenli made itself visibl to me 
under a total novel aspect. I felt as though I had just been born into 
a new world and a new order of things. A fright anguish commenc to 
torture-mi heart as with red-hot pincers. everi success minut seem 
to me at onc but a second and yet a century. meanwhil the ceremoni wa 
proceeding, and I shortli found myself transport far from that world 
of which my newli born desir were furious besieg the entrance. 
nevertheless I answer ‘yes’ when I wish to say ‘no,’ though all 
within me protest against the violenc done to my soul by my tongue. 
some occult power seem to forc the word from my throat against my 
will. thu it is, perhaps, that so mani young girl walk to the altar 
firmli resolv to refus in a startl manner the husband impos 
upon them, and that yet not one ever fulfil her intention. thu it is, 
doubtless, that so mani poor novic take the veil, though they have 
resolv to tear it into shred at the moment when call upon to utter 
the vows. one dare not thu caus so great a scandal to all present, 
nor deceiv the expect of so mani people. all those eyes, all those 
will seem to weigh down upon you like a cope of lead, and, moreover, 
measur have been so well taken, everyth ha been so thoroughli 
arrang beforehand and after a fashion so evid irrevocable, that 
the will yield to the weight of circumst and utterli break down. 

As the ceremoni proceed the featur of the fair unknown chang their 
expression. her look had at first been one of caress tenderness; 
it chang to an air of disdain and of mortification, as though at not 
have been abl to make itself understood. 

with an effort of will suffici to have uproot a mountain, I strove 
to cri out that I would not be a priest, but I could not speak; my 
tongu seem nail to my palate, and I found it imposs to express 
my will by the least syllabl of negation. though fulli awake, I felt 
like one under the influenc of a nightmare, who vainli strive to 
shriek out the one word upon which life depends. 

she seem consciou of the martyrdom I wa undergoing, and, as though 
to encourag me, she gave me a look replet with divinest promise. her 
eye were a poem; their everi glanc wa a song. 

she said to me: 

‘if thou wilt be mine, I shall make thee happier than god himself in hi 
paradise. the angel themselv will be jealou of thee. tear off that 
funer shroud in which thou art about to wrap thyself. I am beauty, I 
am youth, I am life. come to me! togeth we shall be love. can jehovah 
offer thee aught in exchange? our live will flow on like a dream, in 
one etern kiss. 

‘fling forth the wine of that chalice, and thou art free. I will conduct 
thee to the unknown isles. thou shalt sleep in my bosom upon a bed of 
massi gold under a silver pavilion, for I love thee and would take thee 
away from thi god, befor whom so mani nobl heart pour forth flood of 
love which never reach even the step of hi throne!’ 

these word seem to float to my ear in a rhythm of infinit 
sweetness, for her look wa actual sonorous, and the utter of her 
eye were reecho in the depth of my heart as though live lip had 
breath them into my life. I felt myself will to renounc god, 
and yet my tongu mechan fulfil all the formal of 
the ceremony. the fair one gave me anoth look, so beseeching, so 
despair that keen blade seem to pierc my heart, and I felt my 
bosom transfix by more sword than those of our ladi of sorrows. 

all wa consummated; I had becom a priest. 

never wa deeper anguish paint on human face than upon hers. the 
maiden who behold her affianc lover suddenli fall dead at her side, 
the mother bend over the empti cradl of her child, eve seat at 
the threshold of the gate of paradise, the miser who find a stone 
substitut for hi stolen treasure, the poet who accident permit 
the onli manuscript of hi finest work to fall into the fire, could not 
wear a look so despairing, so inconsolable. all the blood had abandon 
her charm face, leav it whiter than marble; her beauti arm 
hung lifelessli on either side of her bodi as though their muscl 
had suddenli relaxed, and she sought the support of a pillar, for her 
yield limb almost betray her. As for myself, I stagger toward 
the door of the church, livid as death, my forehead bath with a sweat 
bloodier than that of calvary; I felt as though I were be strangled; 
the vault seem to have flatten down upon my shoulders, and it seem 
to me that my head alon sustain the whole weight of the dome. 

As I wa about to cross the threshold a hand suddenli caught mine--a 
woman’ hand! I had never till then touch the hand of ani woman. 
It wa cold as a serpent’ skin, and yet it impress remain upon my 
wrist, burnt there as though brand by a glow iron. It wa she. 
‘unhappi man! unhappi man! what hast thou done?’ she exclaim in a low 
voice, and immedi disappear in the crowd. 

the age bishop pass by. He cast a sever and scrutinis look upon 
me. My face present the wildest aspect imaginable: I blush and 
turn pale alternately; dazzl light flash befor my eyes. A 
companion took piti on me. He seiz my arm and led me out. I could 
not possibl have found my way back to the seminari unassisted. At the 
corner of a street, while the young priest’ attent wa momentarili 
turn in anoth direction, a negro page, fantast garbed, 
approach me, and without paus on hi way slip into my hand 
a littl pocket-book with gold-embroid corners, at the same time 
give me a sign to hide it. I conceal it in my sleeve, and there kept 
it until I found myself alon in my cell. then I open the clasp. there 
were onli two leav within, bear the words, ‘clarimonde. At the 
concini palace.’ So littl acquaint wa I at that time with the thing 
of thi world that I had never heard of clarimonde, celebr as she 
was, and I had no idea as to where the concini palac wa situated. I 
hazard a thousand conjectures, each more extravag than the last; 
but, in truth, I care littl whether she were a great ladi or a 
courtesan, so that I could but see her onc more. 

My love, although the growth of a singl hour, had taken imperish 
root. I did not even dream of attempt to tear it up, so fulli wa I 
convinc such a thing would be impossible. that woman had complet 
taken possess of me. one look from her had suffic to chang my veri 
nature. she had breath her will into my life, and I no longer live 
in myself, but in her and for her. I gave myself up to a thousand 
extravagancies. I kiss the place upon my hand which she had touched, 
and I repeat her name over and over again for hour in succession. I 
onli need to close my eye in order to see her distinctli as though 
she were actual present; and I reiter to myself the word she had 
utter in my ear at the church porch: ‘unhappi man! unhappi man! what 
hast thou done?’ I comprehend at last the full horror of my situation, 
and the funer and aw restraint of the state into which I had just 
enter becam clearli reveal to me. To be a priest!--that is, to be 
chaste, to never love, to observ no distinct of sex or age, to turn 
from the sight of all beauty, to put out one’ own eyes, to hide for 
ever crouch in the chill shadow of some church or cloister, to visit 
none but the dying, to watch by unknown corpses, and ever bear about 
with one the black soutan as a garb of mourn for oneself, so that 
your veri dress might serv as a pall for your coffin. 

and I felt life rise within me like a subterranean lake, expand 
and overflowing; my blood leap fierc through my arteries; my 
long-restrain youth suddenli burst into activ being, like the alo 
which bloom but onc in a hundr years, and then burst into blossom 
with a clap of thunder. 

what could I do in order to see clarimond onc more? I had no pretext 
to offer for desir to leav the seminary, not know ani person in 
the city. I would not even be abl to remain there but a short time, 
and wa onli wait my assign to the curaci which I must thereaft 
occupy. I tri to remov the bar of the window; but it wa at a 
fear height from the ground, and I found that as I had no ladder it 
would be useless to think of escap thus. and, furthermore, I could 
descend thenc onli by night in ani event, and afterward how should I be 
abl to find my way through the inextric labyrinth of streets? 
all these difficulties, which to mani would have appear altogeth 
insignificant, were gigant to me, a poor seminarist who had fallen in 
love onli the day befor for the first time, without experience, without 
money, without attire. 

‘ah!’ cri I to myself in my blindness, ‘were I not a priest I could 
have seen her everi day; I might have been her lover, her spouse. 
instead of be wrap in thi dismal shroud of mine I would have had 
garment of silk and velvet, golden chains, a sword, and fair plume 
like other handsom young cavaliers. My hair, instead of be 
dishonour by the tonsure, would flow down upon my neck in wave 
curls; I would have a fine wax moustache; I would be a gallant.’ but 
one hour pass befor an altar, a few hastili articul words, had 
for ever cut me off from the number of the living, and I had myself 
seal down the stone of my own tomb; I had with my own hand bolt the 
gate of my prison! I went to the window. the sky wa beauti blue; 
the tree had don their spring robes; natur seem to be make 
parad of an iron joy. the _place_ wa fill with people, some 
going, other coming; young beaux and young beauti were saunter in 
coupl toward the grove and gardens; merri youth pass by, cheerili 
troll refrain of drinking-songs--it wa all a pictur of vivacity, 
life, animation, gaiety, which form a bitter contrast with my mourn 
and my solitude. On the step of the gate sat a young mother play 
with her child. she kiss it littl rosi mouth still impearl with 
drop of milk, and performed, in order to amus it, a thousand divin 
littl pueril such as onli mother know how to invent. the father 
stand at a littl distanc smile gentli upon the charm group, and 
with fold arm seem to hug hi joy to hi heart. I could not endur 
that spectacle. I close the window with violence, and flung myself on 
my bed, my heart fill with fright hate and jealousy, and gnaw my 
finger and my bedcov like a tiger that ha pass ten day without 
food. 

I know not how long I remain in thi condition, but at last, while 
writh on the bed in a fit of spasmod fury, I suddenli perceiv 
the abbé sérapion, who wa stand erect in the centr of the room, 
watch me attentively. fill with shame of myself, I let my head fall 
upon my breast and cover my face with my hands. 

‘romuald, my friend, someth veri extraordinari is transpir within 
you,’ observ sérapion, after a few moments’ silence; ‘your conduct is 
altogeth inexplicable. you--alway so quiet, so pious, so gentle--y 
to rage in your cell like a wild beast! take heed, brother--do not 
listen to the suggest of the devil the evil spirit, furiou that you 
have consecr yourself for ever to the lord, is prowl around you 
like a raven wolf and make a last effort to obtain possess of 
you. instead of allow yourself to be conquered, my dear romuald, 
make to yourself a cuirass of prayers, a buckler of mortifications, and 
combat the enemi like a valiant man; you will then assuredli overcom 
him. virtu must be prove by temptation, and gold come forth purer 
from the hand of the assayer. fear not. never allow yourself to becom 
discouraged. the most watch and steadfast soul are at moment liabl 
to such temptation. pray, fast, meditate, and the evil spirit will 
depart from you.’ 

the word of the abbé sérapion restor me to myself, and I becam a 
littl more calm. ‘I came,’ he continued, ‘to tell you that you have 
been appoint to the curaci of c------. the priest who had charg of 
it ha just died, and monseigneur the bishop ha order me to have you 
instal there at once. Be ready, therefore, to start to-morrow.’ 
I respond with an inclin of the head, and the abbé retired. I 
open my missal and commenc read some prayers, but the letter 
becam confus and blur under my eyes, the thread of the idea 
entangl itself hopelessli in my brain, and the volum at last fell 
from my hand without my be awar of it. 

To leav to-morrow without have been abl to see her again, to add yet 
anoth barrier to the mani alreadi interpos between us, to lose 
for ever all hope of be abl to meet her, except, indeed, through a 
miracle! even to write to her, alas! would be impossible, for by whom 
could I dispatch my letter? with my sacr charact of priest, to whom 
could I dare unbosom myself, in whom could I confide? I becam a prey to 
the bitterest anxiety. 

then suddenli recur to me the word of the abbé sérapion regard 
the artific of the devil; and the strang charact of the adventure, 
the supernatur beauti of clarimonde, the phosphor light of her eyes, 
the burn imprint of her hand, the agoni into which she had thrown 
me, the sudden chang wrought within me when all my pieti vanish in a 
singl instant--thes and other thing clearli testifi to the work 
of the evil one, and perhap that satini hand wa but the glove which 
conceal hi claws. fill with terror at these fancies, I again pick 
up the missal which had slip from my knee and fallen upon the floor, 
and onc more gave myself up to prayer. 

next morn sérapion came to take me away. two mule freight with 
our miser valis await us at the gate. He mount one, and I the 
other as well as I knew how. 

As we pass along the street of the city, I gaze attent at all 
the window and balconi in the hope of see clarimonde, but it wa 
yet earli in the morning, and the citi had hardli open it eyes. mine 
sought to penetr the blind and window-curtain of all the palac 
befor which we were passing. sérapion doubtless attribut thi 
curios to my admir of the architecture, for he slacken the 
pace of hi anim in order to give me time to look around me. At last 
we pass the citi gate and commenc to mount the hill beyond. when 
we arriv at it summit I turn to take a last look at the place where 
clarimond dwelt. the shadow of a great cloud hung over all the city; 
the contrast colour of it blue and red roof were lost in the 
uniform half-tint, through which here and there float upward, like 
white flake of foam, the smoke of freshli kindl fires. By a 
singular optic effect one edifice, which surpass in height all the 
neighbour build that were still dimli veil by the vapours, 
tower up, fair and lustrou with the gild of a solitari beam of 
sunlight--although actual more than a leagu away it seem 
quit near. the smallest detail of it architectur were plainli 
distinguishable--th turrets, the platforms, the window-casements, and 
even the swallow-tail weather-vanes. 

‘what is that palac I see over there, all light up by the sun?’ I 
ask sérapion. He shade hi eye with hi hand, and have look in 
the direct indicated, replied: ‘it is the ancient palac which the 
princ concini ha given to the courtesan clarimonde. aw thing are 
done there!’ 

At that instant, I know not yet whether it wa a realiti or an illusion, 
I fanci I saw glide along the terrac a shape white figure, 
which gleam for a moment in pass and as quickli vanished. It wa 
clarimonde. 

oh, did she know that at that veri hour, all feverish and restless--from 
the height of the rug road which separ me from her, and which, 
alas! I could never more descend--i wa direct my eye upon the 
palac where she dwelt, and which a mock beam of sunlight seem to 
bring nigh to me, as though invit me to enter therein as it lord? 
undoubtedli she must have known it, for her soul wa too sympathet 
unit with mine not to have felt it least emot thrill, and that 
subtl sympathi it must have been which prompt her to climb--although 
clad onli in her nightdress--to the summit of the terrace, amid the ici 
dew of the morning. 

the shadow gain the palace, and the scene becam to the eye onli 
a motionless ocean of roof and gables, amid which one mountain 
undul wa distinctli visible. sérapion urg hi mule forward, my 
own at onc follow at the same gait, and a sharp angl in the road at 
last hid the citi of s------ for ever from my eyes, as I wa destin 
never to return thither. At the close of a weari three-days’ journey 
through dismal countri fields, we caught sight of the cock upon the 
steepl of the church which I wa to take charg of, peep abov 
the trees, and after have follow some wind road fring with 
thatch cottag and littl gardens, we found ourselv in front of the 
façade, which certainli possess few featur of magnificence. A porch 
ornament with some mouldings, and two or three pillar rude hewn 
from sandstone; a tile roof with counterfort of the same sandston as 
the pillars--that wa all. To the left lay the cemetery, overgrown with 
high weeds, and have a great iron cross rise up in it centre; to 
the right stood the presbyteri under the shadow of the church. It wa a 
hous of the most extrem simplic and frigid cleanliness. We enter 
the enclosure. A few chicken were pick up some oat scatter upon 
the ground; accustomed, seemingly, to the black habit of ecclesiastics, 
they show no fear of our presenc and scarc troubl themselv to 
get out of our way. A hoarse, wheezi bark fell upon our ears, and we 
saw an age dog run toward us. 

It wa my predecessor’ dog. He had dull blear eyes, grizzl hair, 
and everi mark of the greatest age to which a dog can possibl attain. 
I pat him gently, and he proceed at onc to march along besid me 
with an air of satisfact unspeakable. A veri old woman, who had been 
the housekeep of the former curé, also came to meet us, and after 
have invit me into a littl back parlour, ask whether I intend 
to retain her. I repli that I would take care of her, and the dog, and 
the chickens, and all the furnitur her master had bequeath her at 
hi death. At thi she becam fairli transport with joy, and the 
abbé sérapion at onc paid her the price which she ask for her littl 
property. 

As soon as my instal wa over, the abbé sérapion return to the 
seminary. I was, therefore, left alone, with no one but myself to look 
to for aid or counsel. the thought of clarimond again began to haunt 
me, and in spite of all my endeavour to banish it, I alway found it 
present in my meditations. one evening, while promenad in my littl 
garden along the walk border with box-plants, I fanci that I saw 
through the elm-tre the figur of a woman, who follow my everi 
movement, and that I beheld two sea-green eye gleam through the 
foliage; but it wa onli an illusion, and on go round to the other 
side of the garden, I could find noth except a footprint on the 
sand walk--a footprint so small that it seem to have been made 
by the foot of a child. the garden wa enclos by veri high walls. I 
search everi nook and corner of it, but could discov no one there. 
I have never succeed in fulli account for thi circumstance, which, 
after all, wa noth compar with the strang thing which happen 
to me afterward. 

for a whole year I live thus, fill all the duti of my call 
with the most scrupul exactitude, pray and fasting, exhort and 
lend ghostli aid to the sick, and bestow alm even to the extent 
of frequent depriv myself of the veri necessari of life. but I 
felt a great arid within me, and the sourc of grace seem close 
against me. I never found that happi which should spring from the 
fulfil of a holi mission; my thought were far away, and the word 
of clarimond were ever upon my lip like an involuntari refrain. oh, 
brother, medit well on this! through have but onc lift my eye 
to look upon a woman, through one fault appar so venial, I have for 
year remain a victim to the most miser agonies, and the happi 
of my life ha been destroy for ever. 

I will not longer dwell upon those defeats, or on those inward victori 
invari follow by yet more terribl falls, but will at onc proceed 
to the fact of my story. one night my door-bel wa long and violent 
rung. the age housekeep aros and open to the stranger, and the 
figur of a man, whose complexion wa deepli bronzed, and who wa richli 
clad in a foreign costume, with a poniard at hi girdle, appear under 
the ray of barbara’ lantern. her first impuls wa one of terror, but 
the stranger reassur her, and state that he desir to see me at onc 
on matter relat to my holi calling. barbara invit him upstairs, 
where I wa on the point of retiring. the stranger told me that hi 
mistress, a veri nobl lady, wa lie at the point of death, and 
desir to see a priest. I repli that I wa prepar to follow him, 
took with me the sacr articl necessari for extrem unction, and 
descend in all haste. two hors black as the night itself stood 
without the gate, paw the ground with impatience, and veil their 
chest with long stream of smoki vapour exhal from their nostrils. He 
held the stirrup and aid me to mount upon one; then, mere lay hi 
hand upon the pommel of the saddle, he vault on the other, press 
the animal’ side with hi knees, and loosen rein. the hors bound 
forward with the veloc of an arrow. mine, of which the stranger held 
the bridle, also start off at a swift gallop, keep up with hi 
companion. We devour the road. the ground flow backward beneath us 
in a long streak line of pale gray, and the black silhouett of 
the tree seem flee by us on either side like an armi in rout. We 
pass through a forest so profoundli gloomi that I felt my flesh creep 
in the chill dark with superstiti fear. the shower of bright 
spark which flew from the stoni road under the ironshod feet of our 
hors remain glow in our wake like a fieri trail; and had ani one 
at that hour of the night beheld us both--mi guid and myself--h must 
have taken us for two spectr ride upon nightmares. witch-fir ever 
and anon flit across the road befor us, and the night-bird 
shriek fearsom in the depth of the wood beyond, where we beheld 
at interv glow the phosphoresc eye of wild cats. the mane of the 
hors becam more and more dishevelled, the sweat stream over their 
flanks, and their breath came through their nostril hard and fast. but 
when he found them slack pace, the guid reanim them by utter 
a strange, gutteral, unearthli cry, and the gallop recommenc with 
fury. At last the whirlwind race ceased; a huge black mass pierc 
through with mani bright point of light suddenli rose befor us, the 
hoof of our hors echo louder upon a strong wooden drawbridge, and 
we rode under a great vault archway which darkli yawn between two 
enorm towers. some great excit evid reign in the castle. 
servant with torch were cross the courtyard in everi direction, 
and abov light were ascend and descend from land to landing. 
I obtain a confus glimps of vast mass of architecture--columns, 
arcades, flight of steps, stairways--a royal voluptu and elfin 
magnific of construct worthi of fairyland. A negro page--th 
same who had befor brought me the tablet from clarimonde, and whom 
I instantli recognised--approach to aid me in dismounting, and the 
major-domo, attir in black velvet with a gold chain about hi neck, 
advanc to meet me, support himself upon an ivori cane. larg tear 
were fall from hi eye and stream over hi cheek and white 
beard. ‘too late!’ he cried, sorrow shake hi vener head. 
‘too late, sir priest! but if you have not been abl to save the soul, 
come at least to watch by the poor body.’ 

He took my arm and conduct me to the death-chamber. I wept not less 
bitterli than he, for I had learn that the dead one wa none other 
than that clarimond whom I had so deepli and so wildli loved. A 
_prie-dieu_ stood at the foot of the bed; a bluish flame flicker in a 
bronz patern fill all the room with a wan, decept light, here 
and there bring out in the dark at interv some project 
of furnitur or cornice. In a chisel urn upon the tabl there wa a 
fade white rose, whose leaves--except one that still held--had all 
fallen, like odor tears, to the foot of the vase. A broken black 
mask, a fan, and disguis of everi variety, which were lie on the 
armchairs, bore wit that death had enter suddenli and unannounc 
into that sumptuou dwelling. without dare to cast my eye upon the 
bed, I knelt down and commenc to repeat the psalm for the dead, with 
exceed fervour, thank god that He had place the tomb between 
me and the memori of thi woman, so that I might thereaft be abl to 
utter her name in my prayer as a name for ever sanctifi by death. 
but my fervour gradual weakened, and I fell insens into a reverie. 
that chamber bore no semblanc to a chamber of death. In lieu of the 
fetid and cadaver odour which I had been accustom to breath 
dure such funer vigils, a languor vapour of orient perfume--i 
know not what amor odour of woman--softli float through the tepid 
air. that pale light seem rather a twilight gloom contriv for 
voluptu pleasure, than a substitut for the yellow-flick 
watch-tap which shine by the side of corpses. I thought upon the 
strang destini which enabl me to meet clarimond again at the veri 
moment when she wa lost to me for ever, and a sigh of regret anguish 
escap from my breast. then it seem to me that some one behind me 
had also sighed, and I turn round to look. It wa onli an echo. but in 
that moment my eye fell upon the bed of death which they had till then 
avoided. the red damask curtains, decor with larg flower work in 
embroideri and loop up with gold bullion, permit me to behold the 
fair dead, lie at full length, with hand join upon her bosom. she 
wa cover with a linen wrap of dazzl whiteness, which form 
a strong contrast with the gloomi purpl of the hangings, and wa of so 
fine a textur that it conceal noth of her body’ charm form, 
and allow the eye to follow those beauti outlines--undul like 
the neck of a swan--which even death had not rob of their suppl 
grace. she seem an alabast statu execut by some skil sculptor 
to place upon the tomb of a queen, or rather, perhaps, like a slumber 
maiden over whom the silent snow had woven a spotless veil. 

I could no longer maintain my constrain attitud of prayer. the air 
of the alcov intox me, that febril perfum of half-fad rose 
penetr my veri brain, and I commenc to pace restlessli up and down 
the chamber, paus at each turn befor the bier to contempl the 
grace corps lie beneath the transpar of it shroud. wild 
fanci came throng to my brain. I thought to myself that she might 
not, perhaps, be realli dead; that she might onli have feign death for 
the purpos of bring me to her castle, and then declar her love. 
At one time I even thought I saw her foot move under the white of 
the coverings, and slightli disarrang the long straight fold of the 
winding-sheet. 

and then I ask myself: ‘i thi inde clarimonde? what proof have I 
that it is she? might not that black page have pass into the servic 
of some other lady? surely, I must be go mad to tortur and afflict 
myself thus!’ but my heart answer with a fierc throbbing: ‘it is she; 
it is she indeed!’ I approach the bed again, and fix my eye with 
redoubl attent upon the object of my incertitude. ah, must I 
confess it? that exquisit perfect of bodili form, although purifi 
and made sacr by the shadow of death, affect me more voluptu 
than it should have done; and that repos so close resembl slumber 
that one might well have mistaken it for such. I forgot that I had come 
there to perform a funer ceremony; I fanci myself a young bridegroom 
enter the chamber of the bride, who all modestli hide her fair face, 
and through coy seek to keep herself wholli veiled. heartbroken 
with grief, yet wild with hope, shudder at onc with fear and 
pleasure, I bent over her and grasp the corner of the sheet. I lift 
it back, hold my breath all the while through fear of wake her. My 
arteri throb with such violenc that I felt them hiss through my 
temples, and the sweat pour from my forehead in streams, as though I 
had lift a mighti slab of marble. there, indeed, lay clarimonde, even 
as I had seen her at the church on the day of my ordination. she wa not 
less charm than then. with her, death seem but a last coquetry. the 
pallor of her cheeks, the less brilliant carnat of her lips, her long 
eyelash lower and reliev their dark fring against that white 
skin, lent her an unspeak seduct aspect of melancholi chastiti 
and mental suffering; her long loos hair, still intertwin with some 
littl blue flowers, made a shine pillow for her head, and veil the 
nuditi of her shoulder with it thick ringlets; her beauti hands, 
purer, more diaphanous, than the host, were cross on her bosom in an 
attitud of piou rest and silent prayer, which serv to counteract all 
that might have proven otherwis too alluring--even after death--in the 
exquisit round and ivori polish of her bare arm from which the 
pearl bracelet had not yet been removed. I remain long in mute 
contemplation, and the more I gazed, the less could I persuad myself 
that life had realli abandon that beauti bodi for ever. I do not 
know whether it wa an illus or a reflect of the lamplight, but it 
seem to me that the blood wa again commenc to circul under that 
lifeless pallor, although she remain all motionless. I laid my hand 
lightli on her arm; it wa cold, but not colder than her hand on the 
day when it touch mine at the portal of the church. I resum my 
position, bend my face abov her, and bath her cheek with the warm 
dew of my tears. ah, what bitter feel of despair and helplessness, 
what agoni unutter did I endur in that long watch! vainli did I 
wish that I could have gather all my life into one mass that I might 
give it all to her, and breath into her chill remain the flame which 
devour me. the night advanced, and feel the moment of etern 
separ approach, I could not deni myself the last sad sweet pleasur 
of imprint a kiss upon the dead lip of her who had been my onli 
love.... oh, miracle! A faint breath mingl itself with my breath, and 
the mouth of clarimond respond to the passion pressur of mine. 
her eye unclosed, and light up with someth of their former 
brilliancy; she utter a long sigh, and uncross her arms, pass 
them around my neck with a look of ineff delight. ‘ah, it is thou, 
romuald!’ she murmur in a voic languishingli sweet as the last 
vibrat of a harp. ‘what ail thee, dearest? I wait so long for 
thee that I am dead; but we are now betrothed: I can see thee and visit 
thee. adieu, romuald, adieu! I love thee. that is all I wish to 
tell thee, and I give thee back the life which thi kiss for a moment 
recalled. We shall soon meet again.’ 

her head fell back, but her arm yet encircl me, as though to retain 
me still. A furiou whirlwind suddenli burst in the window, and enter 
the chamber. the last remain leaf of the white rose for a moment 
palpit at the extrem of the stalk like a butterfly’ wing, then 
it detach itself and flew forth through the open casement, bear 
with it the soul of clarimonde. the lamp wa extinguished, and I fell 
insens upon the bosom of the beauti dead. 

when I came to myself again I wa lie on the bed in my littl room at 
the presbytery, and the old dog of the former curé wa lick my 
hand, which had been hang down outsid of the covers. barbara, all 
trembl with age and anxiety, wa busi herself about the room, 
open and shut drawers, and empti powder into glasses. On 
see me open my eyes, the old woman utter a cri of joy, the dog 
yelp and wag hi tail, but I wa still so weak that I could not 
speak a singl word or make the slightest motion. afterward I learn 
that I had lain thu for three days, give no evid of life beyond 
the faintest respiration. those three day do not reckon in my life, nor 
could I ever imagin whither my spirit had depart dure those three 
days; I have no recollect of aught relat to them. barbara told me 
that the same coppery-complexion man who came to seek me on the night 
of my departur from the presbyteri had brought me back the next morn 
in a close litter, and depart immedi afterward. when I becam 
abl to collect my scatter thoughts, I review within my mind all the 
circumst of that fate night. At first I thought I had been the 
victim of some magic illusion, but ere long the recollect of other 
circumstances, real and palpabl in themselves, came to forbid that 
supposition. I could not believ that I had been dreaming, sinc barbara 
as well as myself had seen the strang man with hi two black horses, 
and describ with exact everi detail of hi figur and apparel. 
nevertheless it appear that none knew of ani castl in the 
neighbourhood answer to the descript of that in which I had again 
found clarimonde. 

one morn I found the abbé sérapion in my room. barbara had advis 
him that I wa ill, and he had come with all speed to see me. although 
thi hast on hi part testifi to an affection interest in me, yet 
hi visit did not caus me the pleasur which it should have done. the 
abbé sérapion had someth penetr and inquisitori in hi 
gaze which made me feel veri ill at ease. hi presenc fill me with 
embarrass and a sens of guilt. At the first glanc he divin my 
interior trouble, and I hate him for hi clairvoyance. 

while he inquir after my health in hypocrit honey accents, 
he constantli kept hi two great yellow lion-ey fix upon me, and 
plung hi look into my soul like a sounding-lead. then he ask me 
how I direct my parish, if I wa happi in it, how I pass the leisur 
hour allow me in the interv of pastor duty, whether I had 
becom acquaint with mani of the inhabit of the place, what wa my 
favourit reading, and a thousand other such questions. I answer these 
inquiri as briefli as possible, and he, without ever wait for 
my answers, pass rapidli from one subject of queri to another. that 
convers had evid no connect with what he actual wish to 
say. At last, without ani premonition, but as though repeat a piec 
of news which he had recal on the instant, and fear might otherwis 
be forgotten subsequently, he suddenli said, in a clear vibrant voice, 
which rang in my ear like the trumpet of the last judgment: 

‘the great courtesan clarimond die a few day ago, at the close of 
an orgi which last eight day and eight nights. It wa someth 
infern splendid. the abomin of the banquet of belshazzar and 
cleopatra were re-enact there. good god, what age are we live in? 
the guest were serv by swarthi slave who spoke an unknown tongue, 
and who seem to me to be verit demons. the liveri of the veri 
least among them would have serv for the gala-dress of an emperor. 
there have alway been veri strang stori told of thi clarimonde, and 
all her lover came to a violent or miser end. they use to say that 
she wa a ghoul, a femal vampire; but I believ she wa none other than 
beelzebub himself.’ 

He ceas to speak, and commenc to regard me more attent than 
ever, as though to observ the effect of hi word on me. I could not 
refrain from start when I heard him utter the name of clarimonde, and 
thi news of her death, in addit to the pain it caus me by reason 
of it coincid with the nocturn scene I had witnessed, fill 
me with an agoni and terror which my face betrayed, despit my utmost 
endeavour to appear composed. sérapion fix an anxiou and sever 
look upon me, and then observed: ‘mi son, I must warn you that you are 
stand with foot rais upon the brink of an abyss; take heed lest you 
fall therein. satan’ claw are long, and tomb are not alway true to 
their trust. the tombston of clarimond should be seal down with a 
tripl seal, for, if report be true, it is not the first time she ha 
died. may god watch over you, romuald!’ 

and with these word the abbé walk slowli to the door. I did not see 
him again at that time, for he left for s------ almost immediately. 

I becam complet restor to health and resum my accustom duties. 
the memori of clarimond and the word of the old abbé were constantli 
in my mind; nevertheless no extraordinari event had occur to verifi 
the funer predict of sérapion, and I had commenc to believ 
that hi fear and my own terror were over-exaggerated, when one 
night I had a strang dream. I had hardli fallen asleep when I heard my 
bed-curtain drawn apart, as their ring slide back upon the curtain 
rod with a sharp sound. I rose up quickli upon my elbow, and beheld 
the shadow of a woman stand erect befor me. I recognis clarimond 
immediately. she bore in her hand a littl lamp, shape like those which 
are place in tombs, and it light lent her finger a rosi transparency, 
which extend itself by lessen degre even to the opaqu and milki 
white of her bare arm. her onli garment wa the linen winding-sheet 
which had shroud her when lie upon the bed of death. she sought to 
gather it fold over her bosom as though asham of be so scantili 
clad, but her littl hand wa not equal to the task. she wa so white 
that the colour of the draperi blend with that of her flesh under 
the pallid ray of the lamp. envelop with thi subtl tissu which 
betray all the contour of her body, she seem rather the marbl 
statu of some fair antiqu bather than a woman endow with life. but 
dead or living, statu or woman, shadow or body, her beauti wa still 
the same, onli that the green light of her eye wa less brilliant, and 
her mouth, onc so warmli crimson, wa onli tint with a faint tender 
rosiness, like that of her cheeks. the littl blue flower which I had 
notic entwin in her hair were wither and dry, and had lost nearli 
all their leaves, but thi did not prevent her from be charming--so 
charm that, notwithstand the strang charact of the adventure, 
and the unexplain manner in which she had enter my room, I felt 
not even for a moment the least fear. 

she place the lamp on the tabl and seat herself at the foot of my 
bed; then bend toward me, she said, in that voic at onc silveri 
clear and yet velveti in it sweet softness, such as I never heard from 
ani lip save hers: 

‘I have kept thee long in waiting, dear romuald, and it must have seem 
to thee that I had forgotten thee. but I come from afar off, veri far 
off, and from a land whenc no other ha ever yet returned. there is 
neither sun nor moon in that land whenc I come: all is but space and 
shadow; there is neither road nor pathway: no earth for the foot, no air 
for the wing; and nevertheless behold me here, for love is stronger than 
death and must conquer him in the end. Oh what sad face and fear 
thing I have seen on my way hither! what difficulti my soul, return 
to earth through the power of will alone, ha had in find it bodi 
and reinstat itself therein! what terribl effort I had to make ere 
I could lift the ponder slab with which they had cover me! see, the 
palm of my poor hand are all bruised! kiss them, sweet love, that they 
may be healed!’ she laid the cold palm of her hand upon ray mouth, one 
after the other. I kiss them, indeed, mani times, and she the while 
watch me with a smile of ineff affection. 

I confess to my shame that I had entir forgotten the advic of the 
abbé sérapion and the sacr offic wherewith I had been invested. I had 
fallen without resistance, and at the first assault. I had not even 
made the least effort to repel the tempter. the fresh cool of 
clarimonde’ skin penetr my own, and I felt voluptu tremor pass 
over my whole body. poor child! in spite of all I saw afterward, I can 
hardli yet believ she wa a demon; at least she had no appear 
of be such, and never did satan so skil conceal hi claw and 
horns. she had drawn her feet up beneath her, and squat down on the 
edg of the couch in an attitud full of neglig coquetry. from time 
to time she pass her littl hand through my hair and twist it into 
curls, as though tri how a new style of wear it would becom my 
face. I abandon myself to her hand with the most guilti pleasure, 
while she accompani her gentl play with the prettiest prattle. the 
most remark fact wa that I felt no astonish whatev at so 
extraordinari ah adventure, and as in dream one find no difficulti 
in accept the most fantast event as simpl facts, so all these 
circumst seem to me perfectli natur in themselves. 

‘I love thee long ere I saw thee, dear romuald, and sought thee 
everywhere. thou wast my dream, and I first saw thee in the church at 
the fatal moment. I said at once, “it is he!” I gave thee a look into 
which I threw all the love I ever had, all the love I now have, all 
the love I shall ever have for thee--a look that would have damn a 
cardin or brought a king to hi knee at my feet in view of all hi 
court. thou remainedst unmoved, prefer thi god to me! 

‘ah, how jealou I am of that god whom thou didst love and still lovest 
more than me! 

‘woe is me, unhappi one that I am! I can never have thi heart all to 
myself, I whom thou didst recal to life with a kiss--dead clarimonde, 
who for thi sake burst asund the gate of the tomb, and come to 
consecr to thee a life which she ha resum onli to make thee 
happy!’ 

all her word were accompani with the most impass caresses, which 
bewild my sens and my reason to such an extent, that I did not fear 
to utter a fright blasphemi for the sake of consol her, and to 
declar that I love her as much as god. 

her eye rekindl and shone like chrysoprases. ‘in truth?--in veri 
truth?--a much as god!’ she cried, fling her beauti arm around 
me. ‘sinc it is so, thou wilt come with me; thou wilt follow me 
whithersoev I desire. thou wilt cast away thi ugli black habit. thou 
shalt be the proudest and most envi of cavaliers; thou shalt be my 
lover! To be the acknowledg lover of clarimonde, who ha refus 
even a pope! that will be someth to feel proud of. ah, the fair, 
unspeak happi existence, the beauti golden life we shall live 
together! and when shall we depart, my fair sir?’ 

‘to-morrow! to-morrow!’ I cri in my delirium. 

‘to-morrow, then, so let it be!’ she answered. ‘in the meanwhil I shall 
have opportun to chang my toilet, for thi is a littl too light 
and in nowis suit for a voyage. I must also forthwith notifi all 
my friend who believ me dead, and mourn for me as deepli as they are 
capabl of doing. the money, the dresses, the carriages--al will be 
ready. I shall call for thee at thi same hour. adieu, dear heart!’ and 
she lightli touch my forehead with her lips. the lamp went out, the 
curtain close again, and all becam dark; a leaden, dreamless sleep 
fell on me and held me unconsci until the morn following. 

I awok later than usual, and the recollect of thi singular 
adventur troubl me dure the whole day. I final persuad myself 
that it wa a mere vapour of my heat imagination. nevertheless it 
sensat had been so vivid that it wa difficult to persuad myself 
that they were not real, and it wa not without some presenti of 
what wa go to happen that I got into bed at last, after have 
pray god to drive far from me all thought of evil, and to protect the 
chastiti of my slumber. 

I soon fell into a deep sleep, and my dream wa continued. the curtain 
again parted, and I beheld clarimonde, not as on the former occasion, 
pale in her pale winding-sheet, with the violet of death upon her 
cheeks, but gay, sprightly, jaunty, in a superb travelling-dress of 
green velvet, trim with gold lace, and loop up on either side to 
allow a glimps of satin petticoat. her blond hair escap in thick 
ringlet from beneath a broad black felt hat, decor with white 
feather whimsic twist into variou shapes. In one hand she held a 
littl riding-whip termin by a golden whistle. she tap me lightli 
with it, and exclaimed: ‘well, my fine sleeper, is thi the way you 
make your preparations? I thought I would find you up and dressed. aris 
quickly, we have no time to lose.’ 

I leap out of bed at once. 

‘come, dress yourself, and let us go,’ she continued, point to 
a littl packag she had brought with her. ‘the hors are becom 
impati of delay and champ their bit at the door. We ought to have 
been by thi time at least ten leagu distant from here.’ 

I dress myself hurriedly, and she hand me the articl of apparel 
herself one by one, burst into laughter from time to time at my 
awkwardness, as she explain to me the use of a garment when I had made 
a mistake. she hurriedli arrang my hair, and thi done, held up 
befor me a littl pocket-mirror of venetian crystal, rim with silver 
filigree-work, and play asked: ‘how dost find thyself now? wilt 
engag me for thi valet de chambre?’ 

I wa no longer the same person, and I could not even recognis myself. 
I resembl my former self no more than a finish statu resembl 
a block of stone. My old face seem but a coars daub of the one 
reflect in the mirror. I wa handsome, and my vaniti wa sensibl 
tickl by the metamorphosis. 

that eleg apparel, that richli embroid vest had made of me 
a total differ personage, and I marvel at the power of 
transform own by a few yard of cloth cut after a certain 
pattern. the spirit of my costum penetr my veri skin and within ten 
minut more I had becom someth of a coxcomb. 

In order to feel more at eas in my new attire, I took sever turn 
up and down the room. clari-mond watch me with an air of matern 
pleasure, and appear well satisfi with her work. ‘come, enough of 
thi child’ play! let us start, romuald, dear. We have far to go, and 
we may not get there in time.’ she took my hand and led me forth. all 
the door open befor her at a touch, and we pass by the dog without 
awak him. 

At the gate we found margheriton waiting, the same swarthi groom who 
had onc befor been my-escort. He held the bridl of three horses, all 
black like those which bore us to the castle--on for me, one for him, 
one for clarimonde. those hors must have been spanish genet born of 
mare fecund by a zephyr, for they were fleet as the wind itself, 
and the moon, which had just risen at our departur to light us on the 
way, roll over the sky like a wheel detach from her own chariot. We 
beheld her on the right leap from tree to tree, and put herself 
out of breath in the effort to keep up with us. soon we came upon 
a level plain where, hard by a clump of trees, a carriag with four 
vigor hors await us. We enter it, and the postillion urg 
their anim into a mad gallop. I had one arm around clarimonde’ 
waist, and one of her hand clasp in mine; her head lean upon my 
shoulder, and I felt her bosom, half bare, lightli press against 
my arm. I had never known such intens happiness. In that hour I had 
forgotten everything, and I no more rememb have ever been a priest 
than I rememb what I had been do in my mother’ womb, so great 
wa the fascin which the evil spirit exert upon me. from that 
night my natur seem in some sort to have becom halved, and there 
were two men within me, neither of whom knew the other. At one moment I 
believ myself a priest who dream nightli that he wa a gentleman, at 
anoth that I wa a gentleman who dream he wa a priest. I could 
no longer distinguish the dream from the reality, nor could I discov 
where the realiti began or where end the dream. the exquisit 
young lord and libertin rail at the priest, the priest loath the 
dissolut habit of the young lord. two spiral entangl and confound 
the one with the other, yet never touching, would afford a fair 
represent of thi bicephal life which I lived. despit the 
strang charact of my condition, I do not believ that I ever 
inclined, even for a moment, to madness. I alway retain with extrem 
vivid all the percept of my two lives. onli there wa one absurd 
fact which I could not explain to myself--namely, that the conscious 
of the same individu exist in two men so opposit in character. 
It wa an anomali for which I could not account--wheth I believ 
myself to be the curé of the littl villag of c------, or _il signor 
romualdo_, the titl lover of clarimonde. 

Be that as it may, I lived, at least I believ that I lived, in venice. 
I have never been abl to discov rightli how much of illus and how 
much of realiti there wa in thi fantast adventure. We dwelt in a 
great palac on the canaleio, fill with fresco and statues, and 
contain two titian in the noblest style of the great master, which 
were hung in clarimonde’ chamber. It wa a palac well worthi of a 
king. We had each our gondola, our _barcarolli_ in famili livery, 
our music hall, and our special poet. clarimond alway live upon a 
magnific scale; there wa someth of cleopatra in her nature. As 
for me, I had the retinu of a prince’ son, and I wa regard with as 
much reverenti respect as though I had been of the famili of one of 
the twelv apostl or the four evangelist of the most seren republic. 
I would not have turn asid to allow even the doge to pass, and I do 
not believ that sinc satan fell from heaven, ani creatur wa ever 
prouder or more insol than I. I went to the ridotto, and play with 
a luck which seem absolut infernal. I receiv the best of all 
society--th son of ruin families, women of the theatre, shrewd 
knaves, parasites, hector swashbucklers. but notwithstand the 
dissip of such a life, I alway remain faith to clarimonde. 
I love her wildly. she would have excit satieti itself, and chain 
inconstancy. To have clarimond wa to have twenti mistresses; ay, 
to possess all women: so mobile, so vari of aspect, so fresh in new 
charm wa she all in herself--a veri chameleon of a woman, in sooth. 
she made you commit with her the infidel you would have commit 
with another, by don to perfect the character, the attraction, 
the style of beauti of the woman who appear to pleas you. she 
return my love a hundred-fold, and it wa in vain that the young 
patrician and even the ancient of the council of ten made her the most 
magnific proposals. A foscari even went so far as to offer to espous 
her. she reject all hi overtures. Of gold she had enough. she wish 
no longer for anyth but love--a love youthful, pure, evok by 
herself, and which should be a first and last passion. I would have been 
perfectli happi but for a curs nightmar which recur everi night, 
and in which I believ myself to be a poor villag curé, practis 
mortif and penanc for my excess dure the day. reassur by 
my constant associ with her, I never thought further of the strang 
manner in which I had becom acquaint with clarimonde. but the word 
of the abbé sérapion concern her recur often to my memory, and 
never ceas to caus me uneasiness. 

for some time the health of clarimond had not been so good as usual; 
her complexion grew paler day by day. the physician who were summon 
could not comprehend the natur of her maladi and knew not how to treat 
it. they all prescrib some insignific remedies, and never call 
a second time. her paleness, nevertheless, visibl increased, and she 
becam colder and colder, until she seem almost as white and dead as 
upon that memor night in the unknown castle. I griev with anguish 
unspeak to behold her thu slowli perishing; and she, touch by my 
agony, smile upon me sweetli and sadli with the fate smile of those 
who feel that they must die. 

one morn I wa seat at her bedside, and breakfast from a littl 
tabl place close at hand, so that I might not be oblig to leav her 
for a singl instant. In the act of cut some fruit I accident 
inflict rather a deep gash on my finger. the blood immedi gush 
forth in a littl purpl jet, and a few drop spurt upon clarimonde. 
her eye flashed, her face suddenli assum an express of savag and 
feroci joy such as I had never befor observ in her. she leap out 
of her bed with anim agility--th agility, as it were, of an ape or a 
cat--and sprang upon my wound, which she commenc to suck with an air 
of unutter pleasure. she swallow the blood in littl mouthfuls, 
slowli and carefully, like a connoisseur tast a wine from xere or 
syracuse. gradual her eyelid half closed, and the pupil of her green 
eye becam oblong instead of round. from time to time she paus in 
order to kiss my hand, then she would recomm to press her lip to 
the lip of the wound in order to coax forth a few more ruddi drops. 
when she found that the blood would no longer come, she aros with eye 
liquid and brilliant, rosier than a may dawn; her face full and fresh, 
her hand warm and moist--in fine, more beauti than ever, and in the 
most perfect health. 

‘I shall not die! I shall not die!’ she cried, cling to my neck, half 
mad with joy. ‘I can love thee yet for a long time. My life is thine, 
and all that is of me come from thee. A few drop of thi rich and nobl 
blood, more preciou and more potent than all the elixir of the earth, 
have given me back life.’ 

thi scene long haunt my memory, and inspir me with strang 
doubt in regard to clarimonde; and the same evening, when slumber had 
transport me to my presbytery, I beheld the abbé sérapion, graver 
and more anxiou of aspect than ever. He gaze attent at me, and 
sorrow exclaimed: ‘not content with lose your soul, you now 
desir also to lose your body. wretch young man, into how terribl 
a plight have you fallen!’ the tone in which he utter these word 
power affect me, but in spite of it vivid even that 
impress wa soon dissipated, and a thousand other care eras it 
from my mind. At last one evening, while look into a mirror whose 
traitor posit she had not taken into account, I saw clarimond in 
the act of empti a powder into the cup of spice wine which she had 
long been in the habit of prepar after our repasts. I took the 
cup, feign to carri it to my lips, and then place it on the nearest 
articl of furnitur as though intend to finish it at my leisure. 
take advantag of a moment when the fair one’ back wa turned, I 
threw the content under the table, after which I retir to my chamber 
and went to bed, fulli resolv not to sleep, but to watch and discov 
what should come of all thi mystery. I did not have to wait long, 
clarimond enter in her nightdress, and have remov her apparel, 
crept into bed and lay down besid me. when she felt assur that I 
wa asleep, she bare my arm, and draw a gold pin from her hair, 
commenc to murmur in a low voice: 

‘one drop, onli one drop! one rubi at the end of my needle.... sinc 
thou lovest me yet, I must not die!... ah, poor love! hi beauti 
blood, so brightli purple, I must drink it. sleep, my onli treasure! 
sleep, my god, my child! I will do thee no harm; I will onli take of thi 
life what I must to keep my own from be for ever extinguished. but 
that I love thee so much, I could well resolv to have other lover 
whose vein I could drain; but sinc I have known thee all other men 
have becom hate to me.... ah, the beauti arm! how round it is! 
how white it is! how shall I ever dare to prick thi pretti blue vein!’ 
and while thu murmur to herself she wept, and I felt her tear 
rain on my arm as she clasp it with her hands. At last she took the 
resolve, slightli punctur me with her pin, and commenc to suck up 
the blood which ooz from the place. although she swallow onli a few 
drops, the fear of weaken me soon seiz her, and she care tie 
a littl band around my arm, afterward rub the wound with an unguent 
which immedi cicatris it. further doubt were impossible. the 
abbé sérapion wa right. notwithstand thi posit knowledge, 
however, I could not ceas to love clarimonde, and I would gladli of 
my own accord have given her all the blood she requir to sustain her 
factiti life. moreover, I felt but littl fear of her. the woman 
seem to plead with me for the vampire, and what I had alreadi heard 
and seen suffic to reassur me completely. In those day I had 
plenteou veins, which would not have been so easili exhaust as at 
present; and I would not have thought of bargain for my blood, drop 
by drop. I would rather have open myself the vein of my arm and said 
to her: ‘drink, and may my love infiltr itself throughout thi bodi 
togeth with my blood!’ I care avoid ever make the least 
refer to the narcot drink she had prepar for me, or to the 
incid of the pin, and we live in the most perfect harmony. 

yet my priestli scrupl commenc to torment me more than ever, and 
I wa at a loss to imagin what new penanc I could invent in order to 
mortifi and subdu my flesh. although these vision were involuntary, 
and though I did not actual particip in anyth relat to them, 
I could not dare to touch the bodi of christ with hand so impur and a 
mind defil by such debauch whether real or imaginary. In the effort 
to avoid fall under the influenc of these wearisom hallucinations, 
I strove to prevent myself from be overcom by sleep. I held my 
eyelid open with my fingers, and stood for hour togeth lean 
upright against the wall, fight sleep with all my might; but the dust 
of drowsi invari gather upon my eye at last, and find all 
resist useless, I would have to let my arm fall in the extrem 
of despair weariness, and the current of slumber would again bear 
me away to the perfidi shores. sérapion address me with the most 
vehement exhortations, sever reproach me for my soft and want 
of fervour. finally, one day when I wa more wretch than usual, he 
said to me: ‘there is but one way by which you can obtain relief from 
thi continu torment, and though it is an extrem measur it must be 
made use of; violent diseas requir violent remedies. I know where 
clarimond is buried. It is necessari that we shall disint her 
remains, and that you shall behold in how pitiabl a state the object of 
your love is. then you will no longer be tempt to lose your soul for 
the sake of an unclean corps devour by worms, and readi to crumbl 
into dust. that will assuredli restor you to yourself.’ for my part, I 
wa so tire of thi doubl life that I at onc consented, desir to 
ascertain beyond a doubt whether a priest or a gentleman had been the 
victim of delusion. I had becom fulli resolv either to kill one of 
the two men within me for the benefit of the other, or els to kill 
both, for so terribl an exist could not last long and be endured. 
the abbé sérapion provid himself with a mattock, a lever, and a 
lantern, and at midnight we wend our way to the cemeteri of ------, 
the locat and place of which were perfectli familiar to him. after 
have direct the ray of the dark lantern upon the inscript of 
sever tombs, we came at last upon a great slab, half conceal by 
huge weed and devour by moss and parasit plants, whereupon we 
deciph the open line of the epitaph: 

here lie clarimond 
who wa fame in her life-tim 
As the fairest of women.* 

* ici gît clarimond 
qui fut de son vivant 
La plu bell du monde. 

the broken beauti of the line is unavoid 
lost in the translation. 

‘it is here without a doubt,’ mutter sérapion, and place hi lantern 
on the ground, he forc the point of the lever under the edg of the 
stone and commenc to rais it. the stone yielded, and he proceed to 
work with the mattock. darker and more silent than the night itself, I 
stood by and watch him do it, while he, bend over hi dismal toil, 
stream with sweat, panted, and hi hard-com breath seem to have 
the harsh tone of a death rattle. It wa a weird scene, and had ani 
person from without beheld us, they would assuredli have taken us 
rather for profan wretch and shroud-steal than for priest of god. 
there wa someth grim and fierc in sérapion’ zeal which lent him 
the air of a demon rather than of an apostl or an angel, and hi great 
aquilin face, with all it stern features, brought out in strong relief 
by the lantern-light, had someth fearsom in it which enhanc the 
unpleas fancy. I felt an ici sweat come out upon my forehead in huge 
beads, and my hair stood up with a hideou fear. within the depth of my 
own heart I felt that the act of the auster sérapion wa an abomin 
sacrilege; and I could have pray that a triangl of fire would issu 
from the entrail of the dark clouds, heavili roll abov us, 
to reduc him to cinders. the owl which had been nestl in the 
cypress-trees, startl by the gleam of the lantern, flew against it 
from time to time, strike their dusti wing against it panes, and 
utter plaintiv cri of lamentation; wild fox yelp in the far 
darkness, and a thousand sinist nois detach themselv from the 
silence. At last séra-pion’ mattock struck the coffin itself, make 
it plank re-echo with a deep sonor sound, with that terribl sound 
nothing utter when stricken. He wrench apart and tore up the 
lid, and I beheld clarimonde, pallid as a figur of marble, with hand 
joined; her white winding-sheet made but one fold from her head to her 
feet. A littl crimson drop sparkl like a speck of dew at one corner 
of her colourless mouth. sérapion, at thi spectacle, burst into fury: 
‘ah, thou art here, demon! impur courtesan! drinker of blood and gold! 
‘and he flung holi water upon the corps and the coffin, over which he 
trace the sign of the cross with hi sprinkler. poor clarimond had 
no sooner been touch by the bless spray than her beauti bodi 
crumbl into dust, and becam onli a shapeless and fright mass of 
cinder and half-calcin bones. 

‘behold your mistress, my lord romuald!’ cri the inexor priest, as 
he point to these sad remains. ‘will you be easili tempt after thi 
to promenad on the lido or at fusina with your beauty?’ I cover my 
face with my hands, a vast ruin had taken place within me. I return 
to my presbytery, and the nobl lord romuald, the lover of clarimonde, 
separ himself from the poor priest with whom he had kept such 
strang compani so long. but onc only, the follow night, I saw 
clarimonde. she said to me, as she had said the first time at the 
portal of the church: ‘unhappi man! unhappi man! what hast thou done? 
wherefor have hearken to that imbecil priest? wert thou not happy? 
and what harm had I ever done thee that thou shouldst violat my poor 
tomb, and lay bare the miseri of my nothingness? all commun 
between our soul and our bodi is henceforth for ever broken. adieu! 
thou wilt yet regret me!’ she vanish in air as smoke, and I never saw 
her more. 

alas! she spoke truli indeed. I have regret her more than once, and I 
regret her still. My soul’ peac ha been veri dearli bought. the 
love of god wa not too much to replac such a love as hers. and this, 
brother, is the stori of my youth. never gaze upon a woman, and walk 
abroad onli with eye ever fix upon the ground; for howev chast and 
watch one may be, the error of a singl moment is enough to make one 
lose eternity. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of clarimonde, by théophil gautier 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook clarimond *** 

***** thi file should be name 22661-0.txt or 22661-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/6/6/22661/ 

produc by david widger 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase “project 
gutenberg”), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat (“the foundation” 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project 
gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase “project gutenberg” associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
“plain vanilla ascii” or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin “plain vanilla ascii” or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, “inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation.” 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
“defects,” such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the “right 
of replac or refund” describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you ‘as-is’ with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm’ 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation’ ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state’ laws. 

the foundation’ princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation’ web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
