  VII.
HER MOTHER LOVE  TOLD BY THE PHYSICIAN  By general although unspoken assent, the eyes of all the company were  now directed to the venerable hakeem, as if to invite from him the next  contribution to the night's entertainment.
Meditatively for a moment the  man of medicine stroked the broad white beard that descended almost to  his girdle, and then began:  "Familiar to us all is the thought that death is but a birth into  another state of existence, whether that state be the eternal paradise  which is the final goal of every man's hopes, or merely another stage  thitherward.
Death is a birth, the truth of which will more forcibly  appeal to our minds when we reflect also that birth is a death."
"How can that be, except for the still-born?"
queried the astrologer.
The hakeem raised a hand deprecating the interruption.
"Nay, follow me in my argument," he continued quietly.
"If death is a  birth, then is a birth truly death.
For the babe has been living through  a prior stage of existence.
To it the nine months passed in its mother's  womb may have meant a long span of life.
For time is but a relative  term, and, measured against eternity, the whole period of man's sojourn  on[Pg 147] earth, be it three score or four score years, is but as the puff of  a single breath.
So the child in the womb lives there a full span of  existence; it is nurtured and it grows, it sleeps and it wakes, it lies  passive and it disports itself, it is sensitive to cold and to heat, to  thirst and to hunger, and God alone knows what it thinks and what mental  impressions it forms of the existence through which it is passing.
And  the hour of its birth is truly the hour of its death, for in pain and  travail it is plucked from its warm and comfortable surroundings, and  with the shock of physical change and unseeing dread it cries aloud in  sharp anguish.
Thus precisely do we ourselves die when we pass from this  world to another existence, physically and mentally resenting the harsh  change, terrified because of our very ignorance of what is really  happening."
The physician paused, amid a deep hush that bore eloquent testimony to  the impressiveness of the thought to which he had given utterance.
"But the parallel does not end here," he resumed.
"When the infant is born, then for the first time does it see face to  face the divinity who through all the preceding stage of its existence  has protected it, warmed it, and nourished it.
In the presence of its  mother it is in the presence of the God who has hitherto enveloped it,  wholly and completely, in His own divine being.
So when we die will we  be face to face with the now unseen God who everywhere encompasses us,  beholding Him at first only with the dazzled vision and dim  half-consciousness of the new-[Pg 148]born babe, but growing to know Him and to  love Him as we have all known and loved the devoted mothers who bore us.
For mother love is man's first foretaste of God love, the full glory of  which we shall comprehend only when by death we are born into a higher  and more spacious sphere of existence."
There was another brief interval of silence, again unbroken by any  comment from the auditors.
Then the hakeem continued in lighter tone:  "Now let me point my moral by telling you a story of a mother's supreme  devotion for her son.
"At one time I practised my profession in the capital city of a state  ruled over by a maharajah, who, although he had been a brave and  honourable man in his prime, had degenerated into a mere voluptuary,  spending his days in the companionship of nautch girls and disreputable  men, indulging constantly in immoderate potations of strong wine, and  given at times to the use of bhang, which does more than anything else  to dull the faculties and deaden the conscience of the unfortunate who  surrenders himself to its seductive spells.
The inevitable results were  for him the premature loss of health and strength, and for his people  misrule, extortion and widespread unhappiness.
"It happened that, after several Hindu physicians had failed to restore  their royal master from a fainting spell, I, a Moslem, was summoned in  haste to the palace.
I carried with me a small jar containing a certain  pungent liquid, which I applied to the nos[Pg 149]trils of my patient, with the  result that he was straightway brought back from seeming death to  consciousness of his surroundings.
I take no special credit for  effecting this recovery, but the maharajah himself deemed me to be a  veritable worker of miracles, and, dismissing all his other doctors,  kept me thenceforth constantly by his side.
From the first I knew, by  his trembling limbs and enfeebled condition, that death had marked him  for its own; but I could, at least, prepare aromatic drinks to mitigate  his pains and saffron meats to drive out the evil spirits that possessed  him.
"Thus did it come about that I gained the confidence of the maharajah,  and when it happened that one of his favourite wives had fallen into a  decline, and had begged for the services of a physician, the honourable  trust of ministering to her needs was confided to me.
My examination of  the invalid was in accordance with the usual restrictions.
Accompanied  by the feeble old maharajah himself, I was conducted to an apartment  across which a heavy curtain was suspended.
After an interval of  waiting, the rustle of silken garments behind the purdah, followed by  the gentle sigh of a woman, told me that my patient had arrived.
It was  the husband himself who bade her thrust her tongue through an orifice in  the curtain.
My inspection of this member revealed no internal disorder,  and I requested from my master permission to touch the lady's hand so  that I might feel the pulsing of the blood in her veins.
Not too  willingly he ordered her to push her arm through the opening.
[Pg 150]  "It was a dainty white hand, with many jewelled rings upon the taper  fingers, and the nails, as with all ladies of quality, dyed the deep  orange red of henna.
Although I knew well that the jealously watchful  eyes of her lord were upon me, I made no hesitancy in encompassing the  wrist with my own fingers.
But the little hand within mine was clenched  tight, and, the better to conduct my examination, I freed my fingers  from her wrist so as to straighten out hers as I required them.
When I  attempted to do this, however, I was conscious of some resistance and  then of the presence of a small packet concealed in the palm of her  hand.
With a flash of comprehension I knew that the package must be  intended to be conveyed to me surreptitiously, and, with no thought at  that critical moment of what the ulterior object might be, I aided the  act by a deft movement of my shoulder, which for a moment intercepted  the maharajah's gaze.
"In another second he could see my finger-tips lightly pressed on her  wrist, and her empty hand extended; but the package was safe in my other  hand, and not the quiver of a muscle on my face betrayed that anything  unusual had happened.
Both to mask my feelings, and to give the lady  behind the curtain confidence that she could repose trust in my  discretion, I counted the pulse beats aloud.
"These indeed told me that the heart of my patient was beating at a mad  gallop, but this I divined was simply caused by the daring deed she had  essayed and successfully accomplished.
I deemed it wise and[Pg 151] prudent,  however, to announce that the lady was suffering from a fever, and that  I would send her a powder that would speedily restore her to good  health.
At this the maharajah was sufficiently overjoyed to permit of my  withdrawal without obvious embarrassment.
I had a smile upon my lips,  and the secret package secure in the folds of my girdle.
A chuprassi  accompanied me to my home to bring back the medicine.
"I knew, of course, that it was only a dry powder that this high-born  Hindu lady could take from my dispensary, for to have swallowed a liquid  drug would have been a violation of her caste.
I took pains to let the  chuprassi see that my hands did not touch the powder, which, after due  weighing, I bestowed in a paper carefully sealed, instructing him to  deliver it to no one but his highness the maharajah.
It was only finely  ground sugar that the man carried away.
But perhaps this is a harmless  little trick of my profession which even now I should not disclose."
But a general smile among the company showed the hakeem that his calling  was held in no undue reverence, at least by those without present need  of his ministrations.
"When I was alone with my mortars and my drugs," resumed the narrator,  "I lost no time in examining the mysterious packet.
I unwound the silk  threads that tightly tied it, both to restrict its bulk and to render it  secure.
Soon, to my amazement, I uncovered a string of ten pearls, of a  size and lustrous[Pg 152] purity that bespoke a high value even to my untutored  eyes.
Also there was a little seal of red chalcedony, with the antlered  head of a deer and some scroll of lettering engraved upon it; but there  was not one scrap of writing to explain to me the reason of these gifts.
"Had the lady, as often happens, imagined herself to be seriously sick,  and devised this plan of invoking my interest and most skilful services  on her behalf?
But why, then, the seal, the value of which was quite  insignificant?
"Even as I was pondering these questions, there came a clapping of hands  at the gateway of my home that announced the arrival of a visitor.
Hastily concealing the pearls and the seal in my girdle, I stepped forth  into the outer court and took my seat upon the divan.
"Straightway there was ushered into my presence a big man clothed in  rich garments.
His sable complexion and thick lips declared him to be a  moorman from across the seas, and his beardless chin further told at a  glance that he was an attendant at the seraglio of some rich noble.
"He salaamed me with the cool confidence of his kind, and, without  waiting for an invitation, seated himself on the carpet at my feet.
"'My name, O learned hakeem, is Malik Kafur,' he began in the shrill  treble voice I had anticipated, 'and you know why I come here.'
"As my knowledge had been taken for granted, I bowed in acquiescence.
"'But her highness said that you would first of all show me her signet[Pg 153]  so as to prove that you are acting with her authority.'
"With all due gravity I produced the chalcedony seal from my belt, and,  without quitting hold, extended it for my visitor's inspection.
There  was a swift gleam of recognition in his eyes.
"'That is right,' he murmured.
"'Then proceed,' I said, quietly.
'You can speak in the fullest  confidence.'
"'I have promised the maharanee that to-morrow, when the fourth of the  day is over, I shall conduct her into the bazaars.
She bade me explain  her plans precisely, so that you in turn should know how to act.
Well,  her highness will be, as usual, in her palankeen slung between two  mules.
When we turn from the coppersmiths' bazaar into the secluded  bazaar where the money changers dwell, the two grooms in charge of the  mules will be assailed by budmashes and beaten with sticks.
I, too, will  be knocked down and my clothes torn; but do not worry on my account.'
"I gave a cheerful nod to signify that his anxiety on this score might  be set at rest.
"'It will devolve on you to have two men ready to take advantage of the  confusion of the scuffle and lead away the mules with the palankeen,  conducting the maharanee to a place which she herself will indicate.
This you understand?'
"'I understand.'
"'At night, when I shall come to you again, under[Pg 154] cover of the  darkness, you will pay over to me the agreed-upon price—the ten pearls  which her highness has placed in your custody.'
"'They are here,' I assented, holding aloft the little string of pearls,  the purpose they were intended to serve at last made clear to my  understanding.
"The eyes of the negro flashed with cupidity, and he reached forth a  big, fat, black hand.
"'I can be trusted to do my share of the task,' he said, eagerly.
'To  save trouble, let me be paid now.'
"'Not so, thou slave,' I replied, curtly and with authority, as I  returned the pearls to their place of safe-keeping.
'The price will be  paid when the service is performed.
To-morrow night you will be  admitted, Malik Kafur, if you knock three times at my gate.'
"The fellow rose to his feet, with a servile and submissive smile, and,  by a wave of my hand, I dismissed him from my presence.
"Here, indeed, was an adventure thrust upon me, a man of peace and of  studious habits, who had ever shrunk from deeds of violence; but the  hand of fate was clearly beckoning me along the path of duty, and not  for a moment did I shrink from the dangers into which, perchance, I was  being hurried.
"For the maharajah, worthless, besotted, and on the verge of dishonoured  death, I could have no respect.
For the lady of his household, who was  confiding to me her very life, whose soft hand I had touched with due  reverence, there was an instinctive feeling of sympathy.
In her hour of  dire need,[Pg 155] most likely of extreme danger, she had turned to me, a man  of staid repute and old enough, no doubt, to be her father.
So this was  no affair of conjugal wrong, from which my religious scruples and my  abiding principles alike, would have repelled me.
Clearly was I the  instrument in God's directing hand for some great happening, and it was  not for me, through thought of self or cowardice, to interpose obstacles  to the carrying out of the divine will.
"And as I thus ruminated there came from a minaret close by the call to  evening prayer.
'The world is but an hour,' I murmured to myself as I  spread my carpet; 'spend it in devotion, the rest is unseen.'
"On the morrow I was astir even before the morning call to prayer.
'Prayer is better than sleep'—I listened to the familiar cry of the  muezzin.
But while again I prayed I felt that a good deed done may count  more for a man at the gates of Paradise than the record of many prayers.
"Full an hour before the appointed time I was at the corner of the  coppersmiths' and the money-changers' bazaars.
Here I posted two of my  retainers, in whom I could place complete confidence.
They had already  been instructed how to act when the proper moment arrived.
For myself, I  sauntered through the crowded and noisy bazaar of the makers and menders  of copper vessels, so as not to attract undue attention.
In my heart was  not one flutter of excitement or of uncertainty: I felt the quiet  confidence which in the crises[Pg 156] of life comes to a man whose trust in  God the Most High is implicit.
"After a period of waiting there came into sight the huge black moorman,  in his hand a white wand of office, and, following close behind him, a  brilliantly decorated palankeen suspended between a pair of mules and  attended by two grooms, leading the animals.
The throng had parted  before this little procession, averting their eyes from the covered  palankeen, as was beseeming.
"But suddenly, at the intersection of the two bazaars, a group of  loiterers sprang forward, and with cries assailed the moorman and the  grooms, turning the mules into the quieter thoroughfare.
There I had now  posted myself, and, while the shopkeepers ran up the street to see what  had befallen, the cavalcade under my directions, and with my attendants  at the animals' heads, hurried along, and as we threaded our way through  the maze of streets the tumult of voices soon died away behind us.
"After a little time I ventured to approach the curtained palankin.
"I spoke just loud enough to be heard by its occupant:  "'May your day, O queen, be peaceful!
Your servant, most humble and  devoted, awaits your orders.'
"'Peace be to thee, O thou trustful and brave hakeem.
Take me to the  protection of thy wife and home.'
"It was a soft, melodious woman's voice that had[Pg 157] spoken, tremblingly,  imploringly, and yet withal in a tone of authority.
"'As thou hast commanded, so shall it be done,' was my brief reply.
"After a little time the cavalcade, without any undue attention being  attracted, had passed through the gateway of my home, and the doors had  been barred behind us.
"To my surprise a gallant youth, some twelve years of age, sprang  through the momentarily parted curtains of the palankeen.
"'I salute thee, O hakeem, our deliverer,' he exclaimed, kissing the hem  of my robe.
'My royal mother is in the palankeen, and craves for  sanctuary in your zenana.'
"'Let her pass,' I replied, and I urged the docile mules toward the  second archway that led to the women's courtyard.
"At my bidding the inner gates opened, and they closed again when the  palankeen had entered.
"'Within is sanctuary for your royal mother, and here is sanctuary for  yourself, O prince,' I continued, with a profound obeisance, for,  despite the modest garments he wore, I had recognized the eldest royal  son of the maharajah, whom I had seen several times in his father's  presence, and on one occasion at an affair of state clad in a robe of  honour of silk and gold brocade, festoons of jewels around his neck, and  a tiny sword with scabbard of gold girt at his side.
"Having once more impressed secrecy on my attendants, and bidding them  give admission to no one,[Pg 158] I led my young guest into an inner reception  room.
There, in a few concise sentences, he told me his story.
"A plot had been hatched in the royal zenana that, just so soon as the  maharajah died, this youth, and seven or eight younger brothers, sons of  other wives, should be slain, so that the undisputed succession might  descend on one particular son, elder by several years, but not in the  regular line of succession because born of a slave mother.
It was this  slave woman's brother who commanded the maharajah's bodyguard, and, in  collusion with his sister, had conceived the damnable conspiracy.
Only  by the whisper of a woman who was close to the officer, but whose heart  was tender, had the mother of the young heir to the throne been warned.
With my aid, and that of the eunuch who had visited me the day before,  they had made their escape, the youth having been hidden in the  palankeen of his mother before the latter left the seraglio on one of  her occasional visits to the bazaars.
"Such was the story.
Now the future had to be planned, for up to this  point the maharanee had acted blindly and impulsively—just swiftly—the  moment she had realized the supreme danger for her son.
In the boy I  found high courage and a clear brain, and together we devised the  measures to be followed that would best allay suspicion as to the  whereabouts of the fugitives.
"As a first step I sallied forth as usual to pay my professional visit  on the maharajah a little before[Pg 159] the noontide hour.
Perhaps I felt  that, if by any chance suspicion had already alighted upon me, I was  taking my life in my hands by entering the palace; but, trusting to the  protection of Allah, I gave no second thought to any fear of this kind.
"I had not yet reached the palace gates when I encountered a messenger  running in hot haste to summon me.
His highness the maharajah had been  seized with a fit, and the whole palace was in a turmoil.
"When I gained the royal apartment I saw at a glance that the sufferer  was beyond human aid.
I could but watch the deep laboured breathing,  growing ever fainter and fainter, until the death-rattle in the throat  proclaimed the end.
"During that hour of watching my soul had been gravely perturbed, not  because of the dying debauchee, but in dread of sinister happenings in  the royal zenana when the news of the maharajah's demise should come to  be announced.
But how was I to give warning without betraying to certain  death the youth and his mother who had sought sanctuary in my  defenceless home?
For there, at the door of the sick room, stood the  captain of the king's bodyguard, Todar Rao, the very man who, I knew,  held his corrupt soldiery in leash for any villainy.
"Another high officer of the court, the diwan, had shared my vigil in  the death chamber, and just before the end came had informed me that it  was news of an attack by budmashes on one of the royal palankeens that  morning in the bazaars that had[Pg 160] inflicted the fatal stroke upon his  master.
But this treasurer was an aged man, who would have quailed under  the eye of the stern and relentless soldier keeping watch and ward at  the doorway, and, for all I knew, he, too, might be in the  conspiracy—indeed, his furtive glances and the nervous twitching of his  hands forewarned me of this danger.
"Surrounded by uncertainties, and utterly helpless in my isolation, I  could but drift whither the stream of destiny carried me.
"'The king is dead,' I announced, when the last flutter of the heart had  ceased.
'May God in His compassion give him peace.'
"The diwan summoned the captain of the bodyguard, and the latter, to  make certainty doubly sure, brutally shook the dead man by the shoulder.
I could see the savage gleam of satisfaction on his face when he threw  from him the already stiffening arm.
The two men, in close conclave,  hastened from the chamber, and when the attendants set up the accustomed  cries of wailing I profited by the clamour and confusion to slip  discreetly from the palace and gain my own home.
"The terrible events of the next few days were, alas!
just the same as  have befallen a hundred times on the passing of a king.
The outside  world knew few details, but the news from the palace current in the  bazaars was that all the sons of the late maharajah had perished  excepting only the eldest.
And this youth, although the whisper passed  freely[Pg 161] that he was merely the son of a slave woman, duly ascended the  throne.
"Revolt by some of the nobles over such an indignity might come later  on.
But meanwhile, at all events, the show of military power quelled all  opposition, while a judicious remission of taxes pleased the general  populace, and indeed caused them joyfully to acclaim the new maharajah  as he made a triumphal procession through the city, mounted on an  elephant caparisoned with cloth of gold and bedecked with silver chains  and bells, preceded by priests and the dancing girls of the temples, and  surrounded by troops, both horsemen and foot soldiers.
"Only I and the members of my household knew that the rightful heir to  the throne was alive and in safe hiding.
For the moorman had never come  to claim his string of pearls, and it was not until some days later that  I had learned of his having been summarily dispatched by order of the  dead maharajah, in the latter's first paroxysm of anger over the  abduction of his favourite wife when visiting the bazaars.
In this  opportune removal of a greedy hireling and possible traitor I once more  recognized the hand of Providence working for the noble woman whose  quick wit had aided mother love to save her son.
"A noble woman I have called her, and such indeed she was.
For me the  maharanee had discarded the purdah, and in the sanctity of my harem,  with my wife as her devoted attendant, I was privileged to converse with  her hour after hour, gazing freely[Pg 162] upon the most beautiful countenance  I had ever beheld—beautiful not only by reason of soft and rounded  features and the peach bloom of the skin, but also because of the  soul-lit eyes that illumined it with joyous radiance.
For this queen  lived in her son, forgot every other sorrow in his safety, and now  experienced all the glowing pride of a leader on the field of battle in  planning the campaign for the vindication of his rightful claims to the  royal inheritance.
"Her first step had been to send secret word to her father—she was the  daughter of a mountain chieftain—bidding him to dispatch one of her  brothers to me as a trusted messenger.
The distance was far, and three  months elapsed before the hillman arrived, a sturdy young fellow, serene  of eye, slow of speech, and muscled like a panther.
He departed back  home again, carrying our tale by simple word of mouth for greater  security, and having concealed on his person some of the gems which the  maharanee had saved and which would be readily convertible into money.
Then, after a second interval of time, other tribesmen came sifting into  the city by twos and threes, until we had full fifty of the finest  material for a bodyguard a young prince could desire.
These men were  quartered at different places in the vicinity of my home, armed and  ready for a general muster when the moment should be ripe for action.
"Meanwhile a widespread spirit of dissatisfaction with the new raj was  daily growing, and on every hand in the bazaars mutterings of trouble  began to[Pg 163] be heard.
The young ruler had proved to be a mere puppet in  the hands of his mother and uncle, who had not hesitated to advance  their base-born relatives and associates to places of highest honour and  emolument, thereby giving grievous offence among the families of proud  and ancient lineage, both Hindu and Moslem, which had hitherto supplied  the principal officers of state and had been the real buttresses of the  throne.
Then, to fill full the measure of discontent, came ominous  rumours that the prince, although still a mere youth, had, like his  father, become addicted to the use of bhang and strong wines, and,  encouraged by a worthless following, was abandoning himself to all  manner of expensive debauchery.
And when at last the screw of heavily  increased taxation gave proof to these stories the first timid whispers  of displeasure among the populace swelled to sullen and continuous  murmuring.
"For the true queen mother and her son the hour of destiny was  approaching!
"But, although the embers of revolt were ready to burst into flame at  the first fanning of a breeze, Todar Rao, now sirdar in command of the  whole army, still dominated the situation.
At his slightest word the  mercenary soldiery under his control would have rushed into the bazaars  with sword and torch, like ravening wolves among sheep helpless to  defend themselves.
As for the nobles, each surrounded by his own  bodyguard, they were torn into rival factions, the one jealously  watching the other lest open revolt should be made the excuse for[Pg 164]  usurpation of the throne by the strongest and best prepared among them.
"In these circumstances it would have been fatal to let word go forth  prematurely that the rightful heir was alive, for disappointed ambitions  among the feudal lords might have become an added danger to the fury of  the sirdar.
But any prolonged delay would also be disastrous, for it was  only now that the boy prince would be recognized and received as the  undoubted heir to his father's throne; a few years later he would, to a  certainty, be looked at askance as a mere pretender—a pawn in the game  of some unscrupulous king-maker playing for his own aggrandizement.
"It was the maharanee who devised the bold stroke which involved  undoubted danger yet promised the best chance of success.
Her idea was  to take the whole court unawares at one and the same moment, so that the  nobles might have presented to them, not only a common rallying-point  for loyalty, but the chance by united action to break for all time the  hated military power of the slave-born sirdar.
"It was the appointed day when the recently installed maharajah,  according to custom immemorial, was to be publicly weighed, and the gold  he counterbalanced distributed in charity.
In the great courtyard of the  palace all the people were assembled, nobles and officers of state,  soldiers and traders, rich and poor, among the latter the halt, the  blind and the maimed, the deformed and the leprous, in pitiful evidence  as fitting objects for a share of the pro[Pg 165]mised bounty.
On a raised  dais, seated upon a throne covered with cloth of gold, and sheltered by  a canopy and awnings of crimson brocade, sat the reigning maharajah, a  puny and sickly-looking stripling.
"Before the main ceremony of the day, heralds had announced that the  sovereign was prepared to listen to any grievances or complaints from  his people.
For a few minutes no one came forward, but at last a pair of  sleek mules, handsomely caparisoned, with a richly adorned palankeen  slung between them, the identical equipage of the maharanee which had  been harboured in my home, emerged from the crowd, and advanced at a  grave pace toward the royal dais.
That some high-born lady was within  the silken coverings of the palankeen every one surmised, and at this  extraordinary spectacle a hush of tense expectancy fell upon the  assemblage.
"But the silence changed to murmurs of amazement and admiration when a  queenly woman stepped upon the edge of the dais, and faced, not the  maharajah on his throne, but the nobles and courtiers and officers  clustered around.
"With a proud gesture she flung even the sari from her face, which the  play of the sunbeams among the jewels in her hair and around her neck  invested with a shimmering halo of radiance.
On such a woman's face the  multitude had never looked before.
But stately and unabashed, serene in  the purity of her womanhood, the dignity of her motherhood, and the  majesty of her rank, she raised aloft a hand, and[Pg 166] spake aloud in tones  clear as the notes of a silver trumpet.
"'O nobles and O people, the royal son and heir of my husband, the late  maharajah, is alive, spared by divine Providence from the massacre of  his brothers and playmates in the seraglio of the palace.
Many of you  know him well, and behold now he comes to claim his heritage.'
"As these words were spoken, the crowd again parted, and there stepped  forth the young prince, my protégé.
At the edge of the throng he  discarded a loose mantle of cotton that had concealed the rich garments  befitting his rank.
Then he advanced, looking proudly and gaily about  him, while close behind, and pressing eagerly around his person, came  full fifty stalwart tribesmen, treading with the bold swinging gait of  the mountaineer, their drawn tulwars flashing in the sun, their voices  shouting 'Jai, jai,—Hail, hail!'
in deafening chorus.
"The effect was instantaneous and tremendous, and from all the assembled  multitude went up the loud acclaim—'Jai, jai, jai!'
There seemed to be  not a dissentient in the throng.
And a moment later the young prince was  standing on the dais by his mother's side, one hand resting proudly on  her shoulder.
"Among the nobles there had hitherto been the silence of stupefaction.
But at last, one of their number, an elderly man, advanced, and  prostrated himself on the rich carpet spread in front of the dais, thus  rendering public homage to his rightful king.
'Jai, jai, jai!'
shouted  the mob, and soon a[Pg 167] dozen others among the nobles had given the pledge  of fealty.
"Meanwhile the kinglet on the throne of gold had been forgotten.
He had  made no move, but had contented himself with staring around in confused  and helpless surprise.
But now Todar Rao, the sirdar, had sprung to his  side and dragged the youth to his feet.
"'O princes and people, this is your rightful king,' cried the soldier  in stentorian tones, 'crowned and proclaimed and accepted by your  pledges of loyalty.
My orders to the troops are death to those who now  betray him.'
"But the words had hardly passed his lips, when two score of the  mountaineers, shouting 'Deen, deen,—Kill, kill,' had swarmed over the  silver railings surrounding the throne.
There was the momentary clash of  steel on steel, the impotent curse of an angry man, a shrill pitiful cry  of anguish from the youth who in his terror had crouched behind the  awnings descending from the canopy.
And when the tribesmen again faced  the multitude, the soldierly figure of Todar Rao had disappeared, and  the throne was vacant for the reception of its rightful occupant.
"Amidst a wild tumult of joy the young prince ascended from the dais and  took the royal seat, showing in his every movement the natural grace and  dignity that might almost in themselves have proved his right of  heritage, and that certainly won to his cause the last waverers among  the onlooking[Pg 168] multitude.
Even the bodyguard of the slain sirdar were  now joining in the universal acclaim.
"The first to bend a knee to the rightful king enthroned was the royal  queen, his mother.
And then the lady stepped back, a little to the rear  and to the side of the throne, drawing her silken sari over the lovely  countenance that would never again be beholden by the people.
"'Never again!'
The thought had scarce passed through my mind, as I  watched the scene from the fringe of the crowd, when a more grim and  terrible reality was given to the unspoken words than I had ever  intended.
Close to the spot where the maharanee had halted were some  hangings of brocade arranged, as we understood later, so that the seated  and veiled figure of a woman might observe the brilliant pageantry of  the day from the privacy of this purdah.
"And from out these hangings there now stretched, stealthily but  swiftly, a bejewelled hand, which plunged a long dagger between the  shoulders of the queen mother.
"Without a cry she fell.
I was quickly by her side, and the young  maharajah and myself, as we bent over her, caught her dying words.
"'All is well, my beloved son,' she murmured.
'I have accomplished that  which I was sent into the world to perform.
In peace I yield my soul to  God.'
"With the last word she breathed her last breath.
And such is mother  love."
There was a suppressed sob in more than one breast at the close of the[Pg 169]  venerable hakeem's tale.
Down his own furrowed face the tears were  streaming.
"And the woman who struck the foul blow?"
inquired the Afghan in an  eager whisper.
"The slave mother of the dead pretender.
Well, she too had given her all  for mother love.
The tribesmen tore her limb from limb."
And the hakeem pressed a hand to his eyes to shut out the memory of a  dreadful scene.
[Pg 170]The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tales of Destiny, by Edmund Mitchell  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with  almost no restrictions whatsoever.
You may copy it, give it away or  re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included  with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org  Title: Tales of Destiny  Author: Edmund Mitchell  Release Date: August 10, 2006 [EBook #19017]  Language: English  Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1  *** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES OF DESTINY ***  Produced by R. Cedron, Joseph R. Hauser and the Online  Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net  TALES OF  DESTINY  By  EDMUND MITCHELL  LONDON  CONSTABLE AND COMPANY LTD  1913  COPYRIGHT, 1912,  UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,  BY  EDMUND MITCHELL  CONTENTS  Introduction     1  Chap.
I.
The Maid of Jhalnagor.
Told by the Rajput Chief     5  II.
The Hollow Column.
Told by the Tax-Collector     19  III.
What the Stars ordained.
Told by the Astrologer     35  IV.
The Spirit Wail.
Told by the Merchant     60  V.     The Blue Diamonds.
Told by the Fakir     101  VI.
The Tiger of the Pathans.
Told by the Afghan General     128  VII.
Her Mother Love.
Told by the Physician     146  VIII.
The Sacred Pickaxe.
Told by the Magistrate.
170  TALES OF DESTINY  [Pg 1]  INTRODUCTION  Just without one of the massive bastioned gates of the city of  Fathpur-Sikri there stood in the year 1580 a caravanserai that afforded  accommodation for man and beast.
Here would alight travellers drawn by  the calls of homage, by business, or by curiosity to the famous Town of  Victory, built, as the inscription over the gateway told, by "His  Majesty, King of Kings, Heaven of the Court, Shadow of God, Jalal-ad-din  Mohammed Akbar Padishah."
At the time of our story Akbar was at the zenith of his glory.
He had  moved his court from Agra, the capital of his predecessors on the throne  of the Moguls, after having raised for himself, on the spot where the  birth of a son had been promised him by a hermit saint, this superb new  city of Fathpur-Sikri, seven miles in circumference, walled and guarded  by strong forts at its seven gateways.
Emperor and nobles had vied with  each other in erecting palaces of stately design and exquisite finish of  adornment.
A beautiful mosque commemorated the good deeds of the saint,  and provided a place of prayer for those of the Moslem faith.
In the  palace of the Emperor was a magnificent audience hall, with marble  columns and stone-carved galleries, in the centre of which stood the  throne of gold sprinkled with rubies, emeralds, and diamonds, surrounded  by a silver rail[Pg 2]ing, and covered by a canopy of rich crimson brocade.
In this audience hall the great and good Akbar was wont to receive not  only his subjects, rich and poor, the former assembled to pay their  court, the latter to lay their grievances before the Imperial judge; but  he also extended welcome to strangers from afar.
On the question of  religion his mind was at this period in a state of change, for he had  broken from the strict faith of the Moslem, had publicly announced that  there was good in all beliefs, had overthrown ceremonial rules, whether  of Islam or of Hinduism, and had proclaimed all things lawful except  excess.
His thoughts thus drifting toward a new religion, a divine faith  that would bring into one fold the votaries of all religions, he was  glad at his court to give audience to learned doctors from distant lands  as well as from every part of India.
All were welcome—Brahmins and  Buddhists, Moslem schoolmen, Hindu fanatics, pantheists, the worshippers  of fire, the Jews whose prophets are Abraham and Moses, even Christian  padres from far-off Europe.
It was Akbar's delight to listen to their  expositions and discussions, and to the defence of their varied dogmas.
Thus did the fame of the king for tolerance, benevolence and wisdom  become noised abroad far and wide, so that visitors flocked in  ever-increasing numbers to the beautiful city.
At our caravanserai  without the gate there would often, in the cool of an evening, be  gathered together on the shaded veranda a group of travellers  representing diverse races[Pg 3] and classes.
Some of the town-dwellers, too,  would be there, resting and refreshing themselves after their walk to  the city walls, while from the near-by camp of the Rajputs, who formed a  portion of the royal bodyguard, there would oftentimes stroll over a few  men-at-arms.
On such occasions it would generally happen that the debates recently  listened to in the Imperial Hall of Assembly would be subjected to  comment.
And from discussion of this kind the conversation would quite  frequently change to story-telling, dear to the hearts of all natives of  Hindustan, and by no means to be despised, for in a good story there may  be implanted the kernel of a sound philosophy.
On a summer night in the year named eight men were assembled on the  veranda of the caravanserai.
The full moon had just risen above a tope  of tamarind trees, and its silvern radiance revealed every detail of the  scene.
A Rajput chief occupied the place of central prominence, cushions  arranged for his convenience, on one of which rested his scimitar, the  emblem of his soldierly profession.
Not far from him, in a  half-reclining posture, was a general of the Afghans, also of the  bodyguard of the Emperor.
A hakeem, or physician, and an astrologer,  both in the Moslem style of dress, were seated close together, legs  crossed beneath them; while a little apart were two Hindus, as the caste  marks on their foreheads showed, a tax-collector from the country and a  kotwal, or city magistrate.
Just above the steps leading on to the  veranda, surrounded by his[Pg 4] bales of merchandise, sat a merchant from  Bombay, a big and stalwart man, attired in spotless white raiment, on  his head a voluminous muslin turban.
In striking contrast, squatting on  the ground below the steps, at his feet a wooden begging bowl, was a  fakir, or religious ascetic, a loin cloth his sole covering, his face  bedaubed with ashes, his lean chin resting on his upraised knees while  he listened to the dialogue and watched each speaker's face with eyes of  keen alertness.
There had been some desultory conversation, which finally resulted in  the Rajput chief being begged to relate in detail an experience at which  he had previously hinted.
The first story led to another story, and the  third to yet another, and so on, until each member of the company had  contributed to the general entertainment.
And these are the tales that  were told by the travellers on the veranda of the caravanserai outside  the walls of Fathpur-Sikri that moonlight night in the days of the  mighty Akbar:  [Pg 5]  I.
THE MAID OF JHALNAGOR  TOLD BY THE RAJPUT CHIEF  Well, since you would have it so, listen to the story of Rukpur Singh,  hereditary chief of Jhalnagor, mansabdar of five hundred men, captain of  the bodyguard of Akbar the Great, King of Kings, Lord of the Earth.
"This day in the Hall of Assembly, in the presence of the great Padishah  himself, we have listened to the arguments of men of diverse faiths.
It  is well.
As Akbar, the Most High, himself has said, all religions are  good; each man has the god or gods of his fathers; let there be no  obstacle placed against worshipping the divine power in any manner that  seemeth fit.
That is both wisdom and justice.
That is why I, a Hindu, a  Rajput, one of the twice born, can serve my lord, the Moslem Emperor  Akbar, with loyalty of heart and of sword that no man may question."
At these words the captain of the bodyguard touched the jewelled hilt of  his scimitar lying on the cushion by his side.
He glanced around, as if  to see whether anyone present dared to question the fidelity he had  professed.
But there was neither movement nor remark among his  listeners, and with a disdainful little smile of self-complacency he  resumed.
"During to-day's discussion, in the spirit of tolerance that Akbar[Pg 6]  teaches to all of us, we Rajputs have had to harken to severe  upbraiding.
We are accused of inhumanity because in our homes a female  child may be done away with at birth, lawfully and without dishonour.
Be  it so; the fact itself I shall not dispute.
Nor shall I defend the  practice except to point out that a woman more or less in the world does  not matter, that the babe suffers no pain and knows no ill, that had she  lived it might have been to a life of widowhood—if courage were wanting  to choose the suttee—and therefore to long days of shame and sorrow.
"Furthermore, has it to be remembered that the marriage of one of our  daughters costs much money.
According to the rules of our caste and the  customs of our race, the ceremony must be worthy of the parents and of  the position they occupy; all of the district must be feasted, and let  the expense be grievous as it may it must be borne.
To some who are rich  the money thus spent is of no account.
But to others who are poor yet  proud—and all Rajputs are proud—a wedding that is seemly for a  daughter of the house may mean poverty and ruin for the father and  brothers during twenty years to follow.
In certain circumstances this  misfortune cannot be thought of.
The honour of the race, the very safety  of a whole clan, may depend on rigid economy as a provision against  danger.
So it may be both right and wise for an infant daughter to be  put painlessly to her death.
Such was the doctrine my father taught me,  and his name is blessed."
The speaker dropped his eyes, folded his hands across his breast, and[Pg 7]  for a full minute remained in silent meditation.
When at last he looked  up again, there had come over the usually stern and haughty face a  wonderful glow of kindliness, and his voice took a softer modulation.
"However, know this, my friends, that in my zenana at Jhalnagor there  are little girls—three, and more will be welcome should the divine  Krishna send them.
Three little daughters have I, all born of my wife  Lakmibai, the jewel of Jhalnagor.
With sons also am I blessed—two brave  little boys, of whom I may well be proud.
But I love them not more than  my daughters, nor would I change any one daughter for a son.
This do I  say out of the truth of my heart, and in no wise because fortune has  been kind to me and mine, and has given us such prosperity that there is  a fit dower for each daughter without my treasury knowing the loss.
"So when the learned mullah from Stamboul denounced infanticide, I was  one with him in sympathy, for my inclination is to cherish with love and  care every female child the gods send.
"Now would you hear how a Rajput came to this manner of thinking?
My  story is that of a little maid.
Listen.
It happened just five years gone  by.
"Under the firm and just rule of our master Akbar there has been peace  for many years in our part of the world.
Except when, as now, I come to  Fathpur-Sikri for my yearly month of service in providing[Pg 8] part of the  Emperor's bodyguard, I live quietly among my own people.
The soil around  our villages is tilled, our shopkeepers buy and sell, we worship in our  temples, and we are happy, for no enemy comes to disturb the peace of  our beautiful little valley of Jhalnagor embosomed among the hills.
"One day it befell that I had gone on a hunting trip with a party of my  friends.
In the early dawn we had descended from the fort on the hill  top which is my home and the rallying-place for my clan—a small clan,  numbering but a few thousands, but nobly born as any tribe in Rajputana,  brave and of honour unsullied, men who have never yet given a daughter  to the harem of a Moslem."
The features of the Rajput flashed with pride.
His brother-at-arms, the  Afghan, met the defiant look, and said, with a quiet smile:  "There are many Rajput women wed to Moslem lords."
"Yes, but not Rajput women of Jhalnagor.
They would have died  first—many of them did so prefer to die when the Moslem host first  swept over our land.
In the hour of defeat, against overwhelming  numbers, within the citadel of Jhalnagor the women of my race, refusing  to accept dishonour, bared their bosoms to the spears of those they  loved, husbands, brothers, and fathers, and so they died."
With hands outstretched and eyes upraised in rapt pride and reverence  for the deeds of his ancestors, again the Rajput fell into momentary  silence.
"The story of the little maid."
It was the voice of[Pg 9] the physician  recalling the narrator to his task.
"Yes, the story of the little maid," resumed the Rajput.
"As I have  said, we had gone to the hunt one morning—a party of twelve, riding on  three elephants.
For we were in pursuit of a tiger, a destroyer of men,  which the villagers had marked down in a patch of jungle by the river  side.
Of the hunt I need say nothing; we killed the tiger, and, with the  huge, striped body slung across the neck of my elephant, we were  returning home.
It was toward evening, for we had rested in the forest  during the heat of the day.
"We were just entering the narrow gorge that leads to the fort on the  hill, when, right on the pathway before me, I saw the prone figure of a  child.
Almost my elephant's feet were upon it before the sage brute  himself stopped and trumpeted a warning to us in the howdah, for, the  tiger's body occupying the place where the mahout was wont to ride, the  latter was walking, and he, too, had not noticed the tiny bundle of  bright yellow clothing lying on the road.
"Glancing down, I beheld a little girl with her forehead touching the  dust.
At my calling she arose, and spread her hands across her breast.
"'Listen, O chief, to my warning, listen, O my lord,' she called out in  a shrill tone of supplication.
Already had I observed that her face was  one of great beauty, although that of just a little child, but six or  seven years old.
"The other two elephants had halted behind mine,[Pg 10] and some of the party  had descended.
But at the approach of these men the maid shrank away,  and, keeping her eyes fixed in my direction, she continued to address  me:  "'Listen to my words, O chief, and be saved from death.'
"In another moment I had sprung to the ground.
As I advanced the child  ran toward me, absolutely fearless.
Taking her in my arms, I sat me down  by the roadside.
Close to my breast she nestled, and, with sobs and  tears now, told me her story.
"A robber band was in the nullah—less than a mile further along—full a  hundred strong, fierce men and murderers.
For they had already slain the  father and the mother of the little maid, humble woodcutters.
I had  known them well; they were poor, but of mine own people, and instantly  in my heart I vowed that I would be avenged.
"The little girl, Brenda her name, as she told me in her childish way of  confidence, had hidden in the brushwood all day, trembling and afraid.
But at last she divined that the men had come to slay me, for as the  afternoon advanced they disposed themselves among bushes and behind  trees, also in the hut of her dead parents.
And even now were the  assassins in waiting for me, for the girl had seen our party ride forth  in the early morning, and she knew that I had not yet returned.
"When, with wonderful intuition for a child so tender in years, the  thought came to her mind that I was to be assailed, she stole down the  gorge, moving[Pg 11] cautiously through the undergrowth, and awaited at the  spot we found her to give me warning.
"The child had described to me the leader of the gang, and I had  immediately recognized Gunesh Tanti, accursed son of a pig, a robber  from across the desert of Sindh, who had more than once ravaged peaceful  villages of Rajputana.
He would know that I had treasure in the fort,  and of an instant I could read his wily plan.
Moving through the  country, he had doubtless heard a day or two before of this projected  expedition of mine for the killing of the man-eating tiger.
So he had  designed to slay me on my homeward way, and, the deed accomplished,  would rely on gaining access to the citadel by loading his ruffians into  the howdahs of my elephants.
Once over the drawbridge and within the  portcullised gateway, his murderous scheme might have been easy, for my  score of men-at-arms on duty would have been taken by surprise and so at  a disadvantage.
"But knowing now the danger, I laughed in my beard, for Gunesh Tanti,  this human tiger and slayer of innocent men, just as had been the tiger  now slung across the back of my elephant, was fairly delivered into my  hand.
He who had come to trap me was himself entrapped.
And thanks all  to this little maid of the glen!
At the thought, I patted her soft cheek  with my hand, and in response she smiled up into my eyes with wondrous  trust and winsomeness.
"Our party, as I have said, numbered twelve, this[Pg 12] without counting the  three mahouts, lithe and active men, and brave as any one of us.
The  neck of the gorge was narrow, and for a hundred yards on either side  there were steep precipices down which rocks could be tumbled on fleeing  men.
By a goat path over the hillside the fort could be reached by one  sure of foot and knowing the way.
Such a lad was of our party, a cousin  of my own, who could race with the deer.
"In a few minutes he had girded his loins and was on his mission,  disappearing over the crest of the almost perpendicular crag up which he  had clambered.
He was to warn the garrison, turn out every man and boy  fully armed, and bid them to sweep down on the ambushed robbers.
The  mothers and the maidens would hold the fort.
No other garrison, when  once on the alert, was needed for such an enemy."
Again the Rajput smiled proudly, but the silence of intent listening was  unbroken, and he continued:  "The firing of a matchlock was to be our signal that my men held the  upper end of the pass, and were descending on our enemies.
Meanwhile, my  immediate followers prepared the rocks above the narrow neck of the  defile and got them ready for instant rolling down.
To this last task  four of our number were deputed.
The others abided with me.
Our plan was  to block the narrow passage by ranging the elephants abreast of each  other, and, so that the animals themselves might not be stampeded by the  unexpected din of battle, we chained their forelegs,[Pg 13] first each animal  separately, and then the middle one to his comrades on either side.
"At last all our preparations were completed, the huge beasts in line,  my companions mounted into the howdahs.
I alone remained on foot, I and  the little woodcutters' daughter, standing by my side, holding  trustfully to my hand, and no longer weeping.
"'You must come with me, my almond-sweet,' I said, as I raised the child  in my arms, and passed her up into the howdah of my own elephant, the  central one.
Then I myself clambered aloft.
The tiger's corpse had been  flung to the ground, and our three mahouts sat in their proper places,  iron goads in hand, ready to perform their task of keeping the elephants  under control.
"At last, after a tense period of waiting, the welcome report of the  matchlock reverberated from among the hills.
"The fight does not really concern my story," said the Rajput, grimly.
"It is sufficient to say that Gunesh Tanti and all his band perished to  a man—some slain by the swords of my horsemen charging down the pass,  some crushed by the falling rocks, some of the last survivors, who flung  themselves desperately against our living barrier, dying on our  handpikes or being trampled under foot by the elephants.
Not one of more  than five score men lived to carry back the tale of death to the robber  haunts whence they had come.
"On our side some lives were lost, seven in all; but this is the penalty  that brave men have to pay in the[Pg 14] doing of righteous deeds.
Their  memory is honoured.
"As for the little maid, I had nested her in the best-protected corner  of the howdah, and in the thick of the fray, when a shower of arrows had  fallen upon us, I had covered her tiny form with my shield.
But during  the final hand-to-hand fight, when all was din and turmoil with the  shouting of the men and the angry trumpeting of the elephants, I had not  paid her any special heed.
From her lips came no sound to attract my  attention—no cry of fear, nor wailing murmur.
"But at the end I looked for the little child, lifting the shield that  had partly guarded her.
She met my gaze with a smile.
But straightway I  noticed that an arrow, descending almost perpendicularly, had pierced  her soft little arm, and transfixed it to her side.
Yet had she not  cried out, nor even now, when I was tending her, did she whimper.
"I drew forth the arrow, breaking it in twain, so as to let the shaft  pass through the arm.
Although blood flowed freely, I saw at a glance  that the wound in the body was a mere puncture, and also that on the  limb only a piercing of the flesh.
Therefore was her hurt not serious,  although of a certainty painful, and terrifying too for a child so  young.
But even now not one word of complaining did she utter.
She kept  her sweet smile on me.
Brave little maid!
"Tearing a length of cambric from my turban, I had bound both arm and  tender breast, and readjusted the sari of yellow-dyed cotton that formed  her[Pg 15] simple garment.
And now she reposed, happy and contented, in my  arms.
I remained in the howdah, while my companions cut off the heads of  the robbers, and loaded these trophies of victory on one of the other  elephants, so that a triumphal pile might be made in the courtyard of  the citadel.
Then, with the tiger replaced on the neck of my own  elephant, we moved for home, a group of fifty horsemen now forming our  escort.
The headless bodies of our enemies were left as fitting spoil  for the jackals and the vultures, the latter of whom, scenting the  carrion, were already beginning to drop down, it might seem, from the  blue vault of heaven.
"By the time we gained the fortress the dusk was gathering.
Across the  drawbridge, promptly lowered at the sound of our joyful shouting, I saw  my wife standing beside the big carronade that commanded the roadway up  the hill.
The smoking match was in her hand, but at sight of me she  stooped and smothered in the dust the spark that would have dealt out  death to the robbers had they ever gained a near approach.
Descending  from my elephant, I greeted her and thanked her for the courage of  herself and all the other women, our loved ones.
"Then my friends above handed down gently into my arms the form of the  little maid.
At sight of my wife's sweet and kindly countenance the eyes  of the child were lighted with joyousness.
But with a quick motion wife  drew her veil completely over her features.
Ere this was done, however,  I had caught a strange look in her face—a look of mingled sur[Pg 16]prise and  terror.
At the same moment her old attendant and confidant, Rakaya,  flung herself at my feet, and began to babble for my forgiveness.
"'What means this?'
I asked, glancing in profound amazement from the  woman's prostrate form up into my wife's eyes.
There again I read the  strangely troubled expression.
Puzzled, yet restraining my curiosity  before the others gathered around, I placed the wounded child in my  wife's arms, and, with a gesture to signify that she and Rakaya were to  follow, I led the way to the women's quarters.
"Once within the zenana, I told my story briefly: how the little damsel  of the glen had saved me from certain death, and then, through danger  and through pain, had been brave as the noblest-born Rajput maid could  be.
After this recital, I commended the child to my wife's affections,  bidding her love the orphan as she would a daughter.
"Then was the lovely countenance of my wife, the jewel of Jhalnagor,  suffused with great joy.
Hugging the child to her motherly bosom, she  exclaimed:   II.
THE HOLLOW COLUMN  TOLD BY THE TAX-COLLECTOR  "Every man's fate is fore-ordained," said the tax-collector,  reflectively stroking his beard.
"Although we may not understand it at  the moment each particular event that happens is simply a means prepared  for some destined end that may be many years remote in time.
Vishnu the  Preserver saved the life of the little maid of Jhalnagor so that her  father's life might later on be saved.
But none can read the future, so  that we are all blindly doing the things of to-day without knowing their  real bearing on the things of a far-away to-morrow.
And one man can make  or mar the happiness of another man, even though their lives be  separated by hundreds of leagues in space or hundreds of years in time."
"In your mind doubtless is some tale to illustrate the truth of what you  teach," remarked the astrologer, with a shrewd uplifting of his  eyebrows.
"The stars can help us to read the future, as I can prove to  you by a story of actual experience.
But before I proceed to my  narrative, pray, friend, let us hear from you."
"Gladly," assented the tax-collector.
"The story of this noble Rajput  has brought to memory an incident in my own life many years ago,  likewise serving[Pg 20] to show that the gods prepare long years ahead for the  working out of each particular man's destiny.
Listen:  "As a youth I was a keeper of accounts in the service of a rich  zemindar, whose estate lay in the Country of the Five Rivers.
He was a  usurer as well as a landowner, as had been his fathers before him for  many generations.
So in his castle was an accumulation of great stores  of wealth—gold and silver and precious stones, cloth of gold, silks,  brocades, and muslins, ivory and amber, camphor, spices, dye stuffs, and  other merchandise of divers kinds."
The Afghan general stirred, and the scabbard of his sword rattled on the  floor as, raising himself from his elbow that rested on a cushion, he  sat up and assumed an attitude of keen attention.
"Where is this place?"
he asked, a wolfish gleam in his eyes, and his  lips curved to a smile that revealed, under the black, curled moustache,  the white gleam of sharp-pointed teeth.
The story-teller also smiled, knowingly, and raised a deprecatory hand.
"Nay, friend, this zemindar, my first master, was not fated to be  relieved of his treasure, as my story will tell, even though a skilful  plot had been laid for his spoliation.
Which is the very point of my  tale, although I may seem to come to it by a roundabout way of telling."
The Afghan sank back on his cushion, but his gaze remained riveted on  his narrator's face.
"One day I was seated in my home, casting up my books of account, for I[Pg 21]  had only that morning completed the taking of taxes from the crops of  the rayats, the tenants of my lord.
All of a sudden a white-robed figure  entered the doorway and threw himself prostrate before me.
When at last  the face was raised I recognized the dhobi of the village that nestled  under the hill on which was perched the castle of the zemindar.
"'O thou washer of clothes,' I asked, 'what is thy plaint?'
"'Protector of the poor,' replied my visitor, 'behold my bandaged feet,  beaten with rods until they are swollen and torn.'
"I looked, as requested, and saw the blood-stains soaked through the  wrappings of linen.
"'Thou art an honest and a peaceful man, Bhagwan.
Why this cruel  punishment?'
"'I know not, indeed.
But I have come to thee, because I have endured  the wrong at the hands of thy master.'
"'Tell me thy story.'
"'As you have said, O my protector,' began the dhobi, assuming a sitting  posture and spreading the folds of his loose-flowing cotton garment over  his bandaged feet, 'I am an honest man.
And it is for that very reason I  have suffered.
Yesterday, among the apparel I received from the home of  the zemindar to be made clean and white was the bodice of a woman, and  tied in one corner of this piece of raiment was a ring set with bright  red stones that[Pg 22] gleamed as if they were aflame.
Straightway I returned  to the palace of the zemindar, and, entering the audience chamber where,  as is his wont at that particular hour each day, he was seated receiving  the complaints of the oppressed, did my humble obeisance, and then  placed in his hand the jewel I had discovered.
He asked me where I had  found it, and when I replied truthfully, his eyes flashed with anger,  and his voice thundered at me in rebuke.
Although I had done no wrong,  but rather a virtuous deed, I implored for pardon.
But in vain.
My mind  grew confused, and the next thing I remember was the sharp cut of bamboo  rods upon the soles of my feet.
I was in a small vaulted chamber, bound  to a wooden bench, surrounded by the zemindar's soldiers, and powerless  except to scream out in the agony of each blow.
Thirty strokes were  counted, and then I was flung out of the gates of the castle, to limp my  way home.'
"Tears of self-pity were in the dhobi's eyes as he recounted his tale of  woe.
Even then I was reflecting on the real cause of the zemindar's  wrath.
The jewel had been discovered in the folds of a garment worn by  one of the women in his zenana, and his quick access of anger showed  that the gift had come from some other hand than his.
Savage jealousy,  therefore, had prompted the act of injustice inflicted upon the  unfortunate washerman.
I knew my master so well his sullen moods, his  outbursts of passion, that already I could arrive at this conclusion  with certainty.
"'Proceed,' I said, indifferently, for it is well that a[Pg 23] man should  keep his own counsel in such delicate affairs.
'What is my concern with  your misfortune?'
"'Harken, O dispenser of bounties!
Last night when I lay nursing my  wounds, I remembered that the ring which had proved the cause of my  misery had been wrapped in a fragment of paper whereon were some strange  marks and lines as in the books of learned men.
This I had flung away,  at that time deeming only the ring to be of any consequence.
But the  thought came to me in the night that perhaps the paper might tell  something about the ring.
So all this day have I searched among the  bushes by the stream where I beat the clothes on stones and wash them.
And behold, I have found that for which I have been seeking.'
"Hereupon the dhobi loosened the loin cloth beneath his upper garment,  and extracted from its folds a tiny roll of paper.
This he presented to  me, with a bow of deference to my superior understanding of such things.
"'This time I have come to you,' he said, 'a man of learning and of  justice, not like unto the cruel zemindar.
Does the paper tell why I  should have suffered such shame and pain at his hands?'
"I had unrolled the scroll, the folds of which showed that it had served  as a wrapping for the ring.
The writing was in neat Persian characters,  and I had no difficulty in deciphering it, for the four lines that met  my eyes had been recited to me only a few days before by the very man  who claimed to be their author.
"Now did my very heart tremble with agitation.
[Pg 24] But to the dhobi I  appeared cold as the waters of the snows that melt on the mountains.
"'This writing would only add to your troubles,' I said.
'Here, let me  destroy it.'
And, turning to the red ashes burning in a brazier near at  hand, I dexterously substituted a fragment of paper, on which I had been  figuring my accounts, for the paper received, from the dhobi, placing  the former on the glowing charcoal embers and bestowing the latter in  the security of my girdle.
A curl of white smoke, a puff of flame, and  the work of destruction was, to all appearance, completed.
"'In view of your misfortune, my friend,' I resumed, 'I bestow upon you  in the name of my master ten maunds of dal, which will be sent to your  home on the morrow.'
"The recipient of this unexpected bounty prostrated himself before me.
"'O prince of justice, no longer do my wounds pain me.
The bellies of my  children will be filled for many long days to come.'
"'Then go thy way, rejoicing in thy heart even though limping on thy  feet.
And remember that silence is golden.
Say not one word more to  anyone about the ring or the paper, your punishment or the reward that  has now redressed the wrong.
Go in peace.'
"And the dhobi, after profuse expressions of gratitude, hobbled from my  presence.
"Alone with my thoughts, I felt sorely troubled.
The writer of the  verses of ardent poetry written on[Pg 25] the paper brought to me by the  washerman was my cherished friend, a youth from far-away Bokhara, Abdul  by name.
This young man had come to our country only a year or so  before, bringing several beautiful Arab horses for sale.
These the  zemindar had purchased, and had retained Abdul in his service, for the  youth was skilled in the management of horses, and in the rearing of  young stock.
"Abdul and myself were much of an age, and my regulation of expenditures  in the stables had brought us constantly together.
So a close friendship  had resulted, valued greatly on my side, for I had soon come to know  that Abdul was a man of refinement and learning such as I had never  before encountered in any man of so humble a calling.
And despite the  fact that he was a Moslem and I a Hindu, he had chosen me as his  intimate friend, his only confidant.
Thus had it come about that at  times he had read to me of an evening songs of his own composing, and  even on occasion had sung them to the accompaniment of a small harp, the  strings of which he touched with wondrous skill and sensibility.
"Now did I know that this dear friend of mine had endangered not only      III.
WHAT THE STARS ORDAINED  TOLD BY THE ASTROLOGER  "And now, master star-gazer, your proffered story," said the  tax-collector, bestirring the company from its meditative mood.
"As I have promised," responded the astrologer, "I shall recount an  experience that shows how the stars, if read aright, can tell us the  influences for good or for evil that weigh upon a man and inevitably  determine his destiny at the critical moments of his life.
What is  written is written, and it is impossible to strive against fate."
"Nay," objected the Rajput, "that is a teaching of helplessness to which  I cannot subscribe—the pitiful excuse of the coward who folds his hands  in the hour of danger, or of the self-indulgent weakling who yields to  seductive temptation because his heart inclines to seize the pleasure of  the moment even when his conscience counsels otherwise.
I hold that man  is the master of his own fate.
Most assuredly have I been the master of  mine," he added with a proud smile, his fingers closing significantly on  the handle of a dagger at his belt.
"Be it so," answered the astrologer.
"But as Allah knows everything that  is to happen, so must it happen."
"Which does not forbid the exercise of my own free will," argued the[Pg 36]  Rajput.
"The Supreme Being, the presiding power of creation, call him  Allah if you will, understanding my heart as he understands all things,  knows beforehand what choice of action I shall make at the moment of an  emergency.
But that still leaves me responsible for the deed which I  elect to do.
Such is my understanding of destiny.
It gives  fore-knowledge to God, but leaves free will to man."
"From all of which I do not dissent," rejoined the astrologer.
"It is  only the ignorant or the base that makes kismet the excuse for  helplessness or for wrongdoing.
But as the stars under which a man is  born influence that man's acts, then does the reading of the stars guide  us as to what the future has in store."
"I know little about your stars," replied the Rajput.
"But let us have  the story," he added, crossing his hands on his knees in an attitude of  expectancy.
The astrologer, saluting his audience generally with a bow  of acquiescence, thus began:  "By your courtesy let me first explain, as necessary to the  understanding of the tale which is to follow, that I am from Persia,  from the city of Teheran, where for many generations my ancestors were  profound students of astrology, some of them famous men because of their  skilful divinations, with reputations that reached even to Stamboul.
For  thither in my early boyhood to the court of the Sultan of the Osmanlis  was my father summoned, and him I never[Pg 37] beheld again.
It was from my  aged grandfather that I learned my first lessons in astrology—about the  twelve houses, the ruling star of each day, the coming and the going of  the planets, their conjunctions and oppositions, and the influences they  exercise on men's lives.
I learned with avidity, and was an apt pupil,  for at fifteen I had begun the practice of my profession, casting  horoscopes and reading the nocturnal heavens with constant care,  understanding also the flight of birds and the cries of wild beasts of  the jungle.
"Yet at that time was my mind assailed with grievous doubts.
I often  caught myself wondering whether the stars did really rule the fates of  men.
And with this inward questioning a restless spirit grew upon me.
I  longed to see more of the world—to enlarge the sphere of my  observations.
Just then I chanced to hear some gossip in the bazaars  about a great expedition that was getting ready at Kabul to descend upon  Hindustan.
The hunger of adventure seized me, and was not to be denied.
Despite the tears and implorings of my family, I set forth on foot for  Afghanistan, a stripling; in my hand the staff I used in my divinations,  in the bag slung at my side a single change of raiment.
Money I had  none, but my ability to read the stars I knew well would earn me a  livelihood wherever I might wander.
"With my adventures during the next two years this story has no concern.
It is enough to say that, after many vicissitudes of fortune, I found  myself installed as astrologer in the court of a Moslem[Pg 38] prince,  sovereign over an extensive region in Kashmir.
"My lord was a man of noble heart and of high mental gifts.
He ruled  over his people not by fear of the sword, but by absolute justice, which  he himself personally administered, every day holding audience so that  grievances, even those of the most poor, might be heard and wrongs  redressed.
And his royal duties were shared by his wife, who, although  she might sit behind the screen of the women's quarters, none the less  shared in the counsels of state, and contributed words of wisdom in the  direction of affairs.
"Never in my experience have I encountered such mutual love, trust, and  devotion as subsisted between this pair.
For no other woman in the world  had Mirza Shah thought or regard or desire—I call him Mirza Shah, but  that was not his real name.
For reasons that will presently appear, I  refrain from disclosing the identity of places and persons connected  with my story.
"Well, it was my privilege from the outset to be on relations of close  intimacy with my master.
He used to come through the palace gardens to  the shrub-embowered tower which I occupied, and from the roof of which I  nightly contemplated the heavens.
For long hours he would abide with me,  learning something of the stars while enjoying the cool of the night air  after the heat and fatigues of the day.
And many times of an afternoon  the sultana, veiled, would come with her lord, and together they would[Pg 39]  seek to gain from me knowledge of the heavenly bodies and of divination.
Some things I told to them, but others I withheld, which is just and  right, for skill in astrology is hereditary, descending from father to  son, and new minds are unprepared for such teachings, so that too much  knowledge conveyed to outsiders may become a source of disturbance to  themselves and perchance of danger and hurt to their fellow men.
Thus,  following the rules laid down for me by my grandfather, always, even  when closely pressed with questions, did I exercise a discreet reserve.
"Gradually the friendship accorded to me by my lord and his lady waxed  stronger, and I found myself being admitted to some of their innermost  thoughts.
Thus did I come to learn the passionate longing of the wife to  become a mother: for six years had she waited, but no child had blessed  her love for her husband.
As for Mirza Shah, just so soon as the subject  was mentioned I could see the cloud of melancholy rest on his brow.
And  when, as time went on, sadness seemed to settle upon him continuously, I  knew full well that this disappointment in his wedded life had at last  taken complete possession of his mind, to the exclusion of all other  matters.
"And from the sultana's manner I could see the trepidation that filled  her heart—the dread that her childlessness might in the end rob her of  her husband's love.
It was not given to me to look upon her face—to get  more than a glimpse of her eyes as they shot an occasional glance at me  through the parted folds[Pg 40] of her veil.
But in these glances I had read  the prayers of entreaty that I should use all the spells of my art in  her favour, so as to obtain for her from God the gift of a son.
"Well, after a time an unexpected thing happened.
Mirza Shah was absent  from his home—gone on a full week's journey, engaged in the settling of  some dispute on the confines of his territory.
To me there came one  afternoon the sultana, attended by one of her women—the most trusted  one, I knew, for both were from the same country, near to Amritsar,  where the famous rugs are woven.
So much I had learned, and this further  I also knew, that by birth the sultana was a Hindu, although on being  wed to her lord as a little girl, she had of course embraced the true  faith of Islam, in so far as it matters for a woman to have any religion  at all.
"It was the female attendant who spoke to me, her mistress listening in  silence.
But the questions came so readily that it was clear the lesson  had been well rehearsed by the twain.
"'Astrologer,' she began, 'can you swear on the Koran that the stars  speak truth?'
"'That I can swear,' I replied, with due dignity and respect for myself  and my profession.
"'Can the stars bring about the wishes of man or of woman?'
"'Nay, that I do not declare.
They rule the lives of men and women only  in so far as their movements forecast the future.
If we can read the  stars aright, we may gain foreknowledge of events destined to[Pg 41] happen.
For what is written in the scroll of fate cannot be changed.
From kismet  there is no escape."
"'Then tell me this, O astrologer, from your stars: is my noble lady  here ever going to have a child, a son?'
"'That question I cannot answer.
Unless I have the horoscope of her  highness, cast by skilled hands at the time of her birth, I cannot tell  which planet rules her destiny.'
"'Alas, we knew not these things among my people down in Amritsar,' I  heard my lady murmur.
"'Bah!'
exclaimed the serving woman contemptuously.
She had flung open  her veil, unashamed as are women of her station that I, not her brother  or her husband, should gaze upon her face.
It was a pleasant enough face  of a woman of five-and-twenty years of age; yet, methought, as I looked  into it now, that there was unseemly boldness in her eye and even  something of wanton abandonment in her manner.
"'Bah!
If your stars cannot get us what we wish, what good are they?
Better pray at a Hindu shrine to Krishna, god of love revels, than waste  time in consulting a Moslem astrologer.
That is what I have said all  along, dear lady'; and with undoubtedly great affection the woman folded  to her breast her now sobbing mistress.
"I turned away, as was proper, and busied myself with a chart of the  heavens over which I had been poring when my visitors had arrived.
On  again raising my eyes, I found that I was alone.
"This incident I had well nigh forgotten, and near a year had elapsed.
For some months I had not seen[Pg 42] the sultana; she remained in the strict  seclusion of the harem.
Her highness was unwell, most people said.
But I  knew the truth; Mirza Shah himself had told it to me, his face beaming  with pride and pleasure.
At last his dearest hopes were to be realized;  the sultana was about to become a mother.
IV.
THE SPIRIT WAIL  TOLD BY THE MERCHANT  "Allah alone can search the hearts of men," said the hakeem, slowly and  reflectively repeating the words with which the astrologer had closed  his tale.
He was a man of venerable appearance, with flowing, white  beard that descended to his waist.
And yet, although his face was  furrowed with the lines of old age, his eyes were wonderfully youthful  in their contemplative calm.
"No truer words have been spoken to-night," he continued.
"Yet must we  further reflect that, while a man cannot sit in judgment upon his  fellows, he can assuredly judge himself, which goes to show that within  the breast of every man there dwells the very spirit of God, the power  to search his own heart, whether in condemnation or for approval.
Life  is a problem, and it requires a full lifetime to solve it.
Only as we  grow older do we come to know our own souls—our strength and our  weakness, the measure of our true nobility of character and likewise the  measure of our inherent meanness, the temptations not merely from  without but from within that assail us, our power to conquer these or  our miserable yielding at times, with no one, perhaps, even guessing at  our degradation except the divine spark of[Pg 61] conscience that inexorably  turns a searching ray on every thought and on every motive for action."
"So you would argue that man is God?"
queried the Rajput.
"Not so, but that the soul of man is of the essence of God, the proof of  which is this very power of searching out our own hearts and sitting in  judgment on our own failings: for the judgment seat belongs to Allah  alone."
"A subtle philosophy which I do not presume fully to understand,"  interposed the merchant from Bombay.
During the night's entertainment he had shown himself to be a man of few  words, yet an attentive listener.
He was of middle age, of a mild  dignity of mien, and of robust physique, as befitted one accustomed to  long journeys through regions infested with robbers or with beasts of  prey.
"But in my practical experience of life," he proceeded, "I have come to  realize that, while I may know myself, no other man can I know.
Therefore, if it be right to be sparing of condemnation for another, it  is also wise to be chary of undue commendation.
The world too often  acclaims a deed as noble when the real motive prompting it is utterly  ignoble."
"A true philosopher, despite your bales of merchandise," murmured the  hakeem, with a smiling nod of approval for the sentiments expressed.
"Well, I suppose that every one who travels becomes a philosopher, more  or less," assented the[Pg 62] trader.
"Change of scene and of companionship  stimulates new ideas.
Now will I relate an actual experience which aptly  illustrates that, in our dealings with those around us, we never really  penetrate their minds.
Man knows himself; he knows no one else—friend  or intimate, the child of his heart or the very wife of his bosom."
"It is more easy to discover a white crow," muttered the fakir, "than  know what a woman has in her heart."
The merchant paid no heed to the interruption.
He went on:  "Each of us is an inscrutable mystery to the other.
Each soul is veiled  to every other soul, and is naked to itself alone."
"O prince of philosophers in pedlar's disguise!"
murmured the hakeem.
"If our souls sat naked for the common gaze," commented the Rajput, "if  we could all read each other's hearts, then indeed would life be an  abomination—an utter misery, with the twin devils of shame and disgust  seated at our elbows all the time."
"Most true," concurred the trader.
"For too much knowledge of another's  inmost thoughts brings only disillusionment and regret, as my tale will  show.
The story takes us among humble people, but human nature is the  same everywhere—the same in the hut of the rayat as in the palace of  the rajah.
"Once in every two years it is my custom to travel from Bombay to  Benares, and invariably I break[Pg 63] the journey at a certain village some  six or seven days from my final destination.
Here dwells an old friend  and caste brother, formerly, like myself, a merchant in the Bombay  bazaar where silken stuffs are sold, but retired now to his own country  with modest savings sufficient for the rest of his days.
Baji Lal, as he  is named, is all the closer to me because his wife Devaka is a sister of  my own wife, and the two are always eager to have news of each other's  welfare.
"At the house of this friend I rest for a day or two, enjoying his  companionship, the reminiscences of old times, and the gossip of the  hour.
So, on my long and fatiguing journeyings, I have always looked  forward to these meetings with pleasurable anticipation and remembered  them with tranquil satisfaction.
"But on the occasion of one of my periodical visits judge of my surprise  when I was received in silence and with apathy that made no pretence at  disguise.
Devaka did not rise from her cushions on the floor to bid me  welcome, and her husband, similarly irresponsive, returned my customary  cordial greeting with nothing better than a look of wearied dejection.
"Disturbed, I made inquiry:  "'Baji Lal, my friend, what is the matter?
Are you ailing?'
"But he only shook his head, and turned away.
"To Devaka I then appealed.
"'What is the meaning of this?'
I asked.
'Sadness and silence where  everything used to be joy.'
"She drew aside the sari that had concealed her face, and I was shocked[Pg 64]  at its grief-stricken aspect.
Her trembling lips parted to answer me,  but her husband checked her with a sharp word, such as I had never heard  him use to her before.
Her eyes filled with tears, and I could see the  big drops rolling down her cheeks as she silently replaced the sari over  her head, and, bending low, rocked herself to and fro.
"For the moment I imagined that I had intruded on some scene of domestic  unhappiness which would be dissipated in an hour.
So, hiding my  embarrassment, I turned to the door, intimating that I would seek some  other lodging for the night, and return on the morrow, when I hoped my  friends would be in fitter mood to receive me.
"At last Baji Lal spoke, raising his face but still remaining seated on  the divan we were wont in former times to share.
"'Go thy way, Chunda Das,' he said.
'The sword of fate has descended  upon this house.
Come not again to a place accursed.'
"Then did I realize that the trouble was serious.
"'But, my friend and brother,' I protested, 'I cannot depart and leave  you thus.
Let me at least understand what calamity has befallen you, so  that I may help toward its repair.'
"'Nothing can be done, so nothing need be said,' he answered, in a tone  and with a look of dignified resignation to the will of God.
'If you  must have the story of our misfortune, you have only to ask the first of  our neighbours you encounter.'
"And he, too, covered his face with his garment, leaving me no choice[Pg 65]  but to withdraw without further attempt at this manifestly inopportune  time to probe the mystery.
"If I was to be of service to my friends, however, knowledge of what had  befallen was the first essential.
So I took the road that would lead me  to the great pipul tree in the village square, close to the tank and to  the temple, where all day long there was coming and going, and where  therefore I would be most likely to glean the information I desired.
By  a happy chance I found reclining under the pipul tree the village  barber, a loquacious fellow, who counted it as part of his business to  know the last detail about other people's affairs.
"After greetings, and a few remarks about the weather and the crops and  the season's epidemics, I carefully broached the real purpose of my  interview, for a prudent man will never divulge his thoughts to another  until he knows that other's thoughts.
"'I have just come from the house of Baji Lal,' I said, in a seemingly  casual way.
"The barber's face instantly lost the smile it had worn.
"'How did you find him?'
he asked.
"'Strangely altered,' I replied.
"'And so does every one,' he concurred.
"'Why so?'
I ventured.
"The barber looked at me squarely, and then said:  "'You and he were very good friends, Chunda Das.'
"'Yes, and are still, so far as I am concerned,' I answered.
[Pg 66]  "'I thought so.
Well, I am his friend likewise.
Many years I have known  him and his wife, Devaka.
Both are good, kind people, always willing to  help their neighbours, and ready to give their last bowl of rice to a  vagrant beggar.
Perhaps you can assist me to clear away the shadows that  have fallen around them and obscured the sunshine of their home.
Let me  tell you the story.
A few months ago a stranger came to this village.
He  was on his way to Fathpur-Sikri, to witness the glories of the court of  the mighty Akbar.
But on the road he had fallen ill, and, arriving here,  was too sick to proceed.
I am ashamed to say that none of us were  willing to take him in, for sickness goes from one person to another.
So  we have to be careful, especially in my calling, where I come into such  close contact with so many.
"'There was quite a little crowd just here by the tank, discussing the  situation, the sick man in their midst resting upon the ground, when  Baji Lal and his wife, who happened to be passing, came forward to see  what the commotion was all about.
They listened to the story, and then  told the stranger he might come with them.
He gratefully accepted, and,  after whispering some instructions to a servant by whom he was  accompanied, he motioned to Baji Lal to lead the way.
The little group  moved off, the servant in the rear, leading the horses, which included a  pack animal laden with the traveller's bedding, cooking pots, and other  belongings.
V. THE BLUE DIAMONDS  TOLD BY THE FAKIR  "You have certainly improved on the moral of my story," said the  astrologer, addressing the merchant, silent now after the telling of his  tale.
"If it is for God alone to pronounce the censure on mankind, then  assuredly it is for God also to award the praise.
As the story of Sheikh  Ahmed and his jewelled harp well shows, deeds may be done openly by the  hand, but the motives for their doing lie secretly in the heart.
And the  heart is the innermost temple where none but the high priest, the  individual soul, holds communion with his God, the supreme Deity of the  universe."
"So that a man's life is an unsolvable riddle to all but himself,"  concurred the hakeem.
"And not to be solved even by himself," remarked the Afghan with a  laugh, half of bitterness, half of bravado.
"We may know in our secret  heart the motive that prompts to a deed, but we cannot tell the  consequences of that deed as affecting even ourselves who wrought it.
Take this very story of the Sheikh; when recovering his precious harp he  was but digging his own grave.
So with all of us; we imagine we are  marching bravely to accomplish some preconceived plan, when all the time  we are merely[Pg 102] groping with blinded eyes along the path of destiny,  avoiding the mud holes, it may be, but failing to see the tiger,  crouched for his spring, a few paces further along."
"Shabash!"
cried the fakir, in a shrill tone of approval that drew all  eyes to the lean and naked and ash-besprinkled figure seated at the foot  of the veranda steps.
"Shabash!
shabash!"
he cried, again and yet again.
"And your story?"
asked the Rajput, with a nod of inquiry and  encouragement.
"Is one that shows how a man may keep on running all his life yet never  reach the goal he has in sight," replied the ascetic.
And with the  sturdy independence of his calling he beat a peremptory tattoo with  finger-tips on wooden begging-bowl to command attention to his tale.
"Behold in me a man who possesses nothing in this world excepting a  begging-bowl and a loin cloth.
Yet was I at one time the owner of lands  and of cattle, of a home bountifully stored for comfort and for  sustenance, of wives who wore rich jewels, necklets of pearls, armlets  of gold, and bangles of silver, with maid-servants to minister to their  needs and children to play around them.
All gone!
by my own doing, or  undoing, call it which you will.
"And know, too, that in those days I also was a soldier"—this with a  defiant glance first at the Rajput chief and then at the Afghan general.
"At my side rattled the steel scabbard, and in my belt[Pg 103] was the sharp  poinard, swift messenger of death when it came to hand-to-hand fighting,  and the horse I rode had its rich trappings of gold and silver.
It may  all seem strange, to hear me tell those things of the long ago and to  look upon me now"—and the speaker stretched forth his skinny, twisted  fingers and attenuated arms, and for a moment ruefully contemplated  them.
"But I speak the truth," he went on, "for to-night, prompted by the  stories to which I have listened and the thoughts they have engendered,  will I unseal my lips after fifty long years of wandering alone, giving  no man my confidence, seeking no man's confidence, intent only on the  attainment of the one desire deeply seated in my heart, and which, in my  eager striving to achieve, seems to be ever more remote from  accomplishment.
To-night will I reveal the story of my life, so that,  perchance, the lesson it teaches will show still more clearly the  impotence of man to constitute himself the avenger of wrongs.
For if  judgment belongs to Allah, so does vengeance.
And the choice of  instrument, of time and place, of the very manner of the deed—all this  belongs to God alone, as this night, listening to the stories that have  gone before, have I for the first time come fully to comprehend."
The fakir paused to gaze around his audience.
The look of interest and  expectancy on each face showed the impression his impulsive flow of  language had made.
No interrupting word was spoken, but every eye  remained fastened on the lean, keen face peering[Pg 104] over long slender  shanks and hand-clasped knees.
The narrator continued:  "In those days I had twenty retainers at my call, and these men I  commanded when I rode forth to service with a certain Nawab, from whom I  held my lands for the feudal service I thus performed.
It was my fate to  take part in many a fight and in many a foray, and to send many a man to  his doom.
But God had ordained it so; the fault was not mine.
"Well, it befell that a certain city was given over to sack and carnage,  for the word had gone forth that the only way to break the power of its  Hindu occupants was to demolish their temples, destroy their idols, and  thereby show the impotence of their false gods to protect them."
The Rajput drew himself up proudly, and a flush of resentment stole over  his face.
But the Moslem fanatic, unconscious now of anything but his  reminiscences of the past, went on unheeding and unabashed:  "It was toward the hour of sunset when a body of our soldiery broke into  a temple devoted to the worship of Siva the Destroyer.
We had battered  in the heavy wooden doors that protected the inner court, and within the  threshold a score or more of priests fell to our swords, and a dozen  dancing girls as well, attendants on the idols—self-slain these women,  for when they saw that there was no quarter for the men they rushed on  us like female panthers and flung themselves on our dripping blades."
The Hindu listeners were visibly disturbed and af[Pg 105]fected by this cold  recital of bloody deeds.
The hands of the Rajput clenched and unclenched  themselves nervously, and the merchant gave a deep, guttural groan of  horror as he flung the end of his robe over his face as if to shut out a  vision of sacrilege and shame.
"It was written in the beginning, nay before creation it was written,"  murmured the Moslem astrologer, quoting, in courteous sympathy, the  familiar formula of his faith.
"And as your priests themselves say," he  added, addressing himself more particularly to the Rajput, "'The destiny  of each man is irrevocably inscribed on his forehead by the hand of  Brahma himself.'"
The Rajput bowed his head in acquiescent silence, and as the fakir  proceeded with his story the trader also regained his composure and  withdrew the covering from his face.
"When the shadows of night fell, the temple made a bonfire that  illuminated the scenes of pillage going on all around.
The big idols of  loathly aspect had been thrown down, broken to pieces, and despoiled of  their jewels and the heavy plates of gold that encumbered them.
Our  soldiers had swarmed out of the building, past a tank to the houses of  some priests beyond.
Not one single custodian of the temple survived,  and I stood alone in the outer courtyard, watching in idle fashion the  tongues of flame licking the beams and rafters and paint-bedaubed walls  of the wrecked edifice.
"Then did my eyes chance to light on a small idol[Pg 106] in the passage-way  between the two courtyards of the temple, set in a deep niche, on which  account it had escaped the notice of the despoilers.
It was the familiar  elephant-headed idol of the Hindus, Ganapati, as I knew they called him,  their god of wisdom and the remover of obstacles according to their  creed.
"Even as I looked, methought that the eyes of the idol twinkled  knowingly and entreatingly at me.
After a moment I saw that this fancy  was but due to the play of the flames on jewels, comprehending which, I  said to myself that the little fat man might perchance be of some  considerable value.
So I plucked him from his resting-place, not without  difficulty, for the base of the idol was fastened by iron clamps to the  altar, and only just in time before a surge of fire and smoke swept  through the vestibule.
Then, without more ado, I carried forth this  Ganapati, wrapped in a cotton cloth I had gathered from one of the slain  priests, and tied it to the saddle-bow of my horse, which had been  standing tethered under a tree close at hand.
"Thus did it come about that, a full month later, I was seated in my  home, in a secret inner chamber that served me as a treasury, and to  which the only access was through the women's quarters.
And before me on  a stool rested the cross-legged figure of the four-armed and  elephant-headed god, fat, complacent, smiling, to all appearance  recovered from the fatigues of a journey of near a hundred leagues and  thoroughly contented amidst his new surround[Pg 107]ings.
The idol was of  bronze, and the eyes, which at times gave it such life-like semblance,  were clusters of rubies set around with white sapphires.
"And it followed that, day after day, after the siesta hour, I found  myself in the company of this accursed idol—for accursed it came to be,  bringing me misfortunes and ruin, as my story will unfold.
No doubt it  was by my own doing that the wrath of Allah was brought down upon my  head.
For had not I, a follower of the Prophet, and therefore a despiser  of graven images in every shape or form, come to treat this monstrous  and misshapen creature, half man, half beast, as a sort of familiar,  even greeting him on my entry with the words with which I might have  saluted a living unbeliever, 'May your days be peaceful,' spoken in  goodnatured jest, of course, and without one thought at the time of the  sacrilege of which I was guilty?
Yea, I would pat the fat little fellow  on the head, and, when the humour seized me, would show him my hoard of  gold mohurs, even jingle before him a bag of silver rupees, or ask his  opinion on the colour and quality of some gem, speaking words of  foolishness the while, like a child playing with a toy.
And when I lay  back on my cushions, sometimes I fancied that the little jewelled eyes  in the elephant head of bronze twinkled at me in merry and friendly  understanding.
All which things I have since remembered with bitter  shame.
VI.
THE TIGER OF THE PATHANS  TOLD BY THE AFGHAN GENERAL  "In my case the philosophy of life is of the simplest," remarked the  Afghan general.
"I neither crave the wealth of the prince, nor do I  inflict upon myself the mortifications of the ascetic.
For the one rich  robes and the sceptre, for the other a loin cloth and a begging-bowl;  but for me the good sword that commands respect from my enemies,  confidence from my friends, and my due share of the good things of  existence.
In this frame of mind I find the full measure of joy in each  day that passes."
He smiled the smile of the man contented with the world and with  himself, but there was the light of proud determination in his eyes that  belied the mere sybarite.
"Then for you the greatest good consists in the happiness you can snatch  from the passing hour," suggested the magistrate.
"That is so," concurred the soldier, "if to the word happiness you give  the right interpretation.
To me the performance of one's present duty is  the only real thing that brings contentment.
And duty need not always be  stern and forbidding; to laugh and play and be merry may, at the proper  time and in the proper circumstances, be a duty both to ourselves[Pg 129] and  to others.
When one lives philosophically for the present, he takes men  in all their moods and life in all its phases.
The past is counted as  dead and to be forgotten, except for the experience gained to guide the  doing of the things that lie now to one's hand.
The future is unseen,  but is none the less determined by our deeds, words, and thoughts of the  passing moment, each one of which, be it remembered, whether deed or  rash word, or unspoken thought, has consequences that are eternal."
"So for the man whose mind is thus attuned," again interposed the  magistrate, "the present becomes all supreme, shaped by the past,  shaping the future."
"Which means that destiny never degenerates into mere blind and helpless  fatalism," responded the Afghan.
"To do the right now suffices to give  absolute trust in God for the hereafter.
That is the key of destiny, and  each man holds it in his own keeping."
"A simple religion," smiled the Rajput.
"And therefore the best.
It is the religion of Islam freed from all the  controversies of rival sects and over-learned mullahs.
It is the  religion of my fathers and the religion of my youth, and in it I abide.
Let me tell you a story of the rough school in which I received my early  training and where such thoughts as these first began to sink deep into  my mind.
"Have you ever heard of Shir Jumla Khan?
No?
Well, that is doubtless  because he has been dead for a full score of years, and because he held  his sway in a land remote from these plains of Hindustan, up[Pg 130] in the  rugged mountains, where brave tribesmen guard the valleys which their  ancestors tilled, and yield allegiance to no one but their own  hereditary chieftains.
Such was my country and my people, for I am proud  that in my veins runs the blood of the man who for a hundred miles  around my boyhood home was known as The Tiger of the Pathans.
Behold in  me a grandson of Shir Jumla Khan."
The narrator folded his arms across his breast, in an attitude of quiet  dignity.
After just a moment's pause he continued:  "We were all born fighters, the members of my clan, for during hundreds  of years many a swarming host had swept past the gateways of our  territory, Persians, Arabs, Afghans, Moguls, Turkmans, hordes of  fighting men of every race and tongue, sometimes marching south bent on  conquest, at other times returning to their homes laden with rich  spoils, and yet at other times defeated and broken, with enemies  pressing at their heels.
And it was the patrimonial right of our tribe  to take toll from all alike, from victors and vanquished, from pursuers  and pursued.
"Sometimes an army would pass through our mountains under safe conduct  from all the tribes, and the price paid in money, horses, camels, and  cattle, cloths and other goods, would be divided among the several  clans.
But in this practice there had grown to be more danger for  ourselves than from forays or assaults on passing enemies, because over  the division of the spoils there would be[Pg 131] quarrelling, followed by  fighting, among the tribes.
Thus had originated many a blood feud  enduring through many generations.
"In the early days of Shir Jumla Khan it had come about that several  rich caravans had fallen exclusively into his hands.
With the money thus  provided by the bountifulness of Allah, he had been enabled to build for  himself a citadel that for vastness and security surpassed those of all  his rivals among the tribal chiefs.
Within its wide walls were wells and  water tanks, gardens for the growing of fruits and vegetables,  warehouses for goods, granaries stored with barley, wheat, and dal,  stables for a hundred horses, sheds for the housing of cattle, sheep,  and camels, and dwelling places for a goodly multitude of armed men,  their wives and their children.
And all of these things endure until  this day, for the fortress town amid the mountains built by my  grandsire, The Tiger of the Pathans, has ever remained unconquered and  unconquerable.
"But as Shir Jumla Khan grew rich in possessions and in power—for  scores of fighting men from afar were attracted to his service—at the  same time did his position among the tribesmen become one of increasing  isolation.
All feared him and envied him, and fear and envy have ever  been breeders of hate.
Yet was he a just and a benevolent man, honoured  and beloved by every one within his domain, where his slightest word was  gladly accepted law, not because of the might he wielded but because of  his fairness to all men.
"I was yet a young man when a widely spread plot among the rival[Pg 132]  tribesmen to destroy Shir Jumla Khan's power had come to a head, and had  resulted in a determined and prolonged attack upon his citadel.
Numbers  had told, our outlying fields had been devastated, our flocks and herds  driven away, and crowded within the walls of the fortress were refugees  from all the surrounding countryside.
We had been cooped up through the  summer, we had lost our annual crops, and without the usual  replenishment granaries and warehouses were beginning to wear an empty  look, with but sorry promise for the winter.
But, calm and undismayed,  his proud look and serene smile ever the same, Shir Jumla Khan continued  to feed the hungry host within his gates and now absolutely dependent  upon his protection.
"The coming of winter would mean for us some relief, for the first snows  would scatter the beleaguering hosts, sending them back to their own  valleys, and giving us the chance, in the intervals of the season's  storms, to make a few forays on our own account on neighbouring  communities, which, taken one at a time, would be pretty well at our  mercy.
But if we reasoned in this wise so did our enemies; for it was  now toward the close of the month of August and redoubled efforts were  being put forth to accomplish the breaching of our walls, so that The  Tiger of the Pathans might be slain before there was the chance of his  fangs and claws again becoming dangerous.
"The tribesmen, no doubt by capture and enforced service, had secured[Pg 133]  the help of some engineers versed in the methods of sieges and assaults  on fortified places as practised in Hindustan.
At that time I had never  before seen a sabat, but now from our fortifications I beheld the  gradual extension, day by day, of a broad covered way, with bull-hide  roof stretched across the trench being dug, and effectually protecting  the labourers below from our guns and muskets and catapults.
We had made  several sallies with a view to try and stop this work, but these had  only resulted in losses on our side out of all proportion to the  harassment and delay inflicted on the besiegers.
So we could but  impotently watch the subtle and inexorable approach of the skilled men  who would eventually reach our walls, drive mines beneath them, and blow  us to perdition.
"Our one chance lay in the question of time.
If the winter began early  we should be saved, but if the snows held off till late in the year it  looked as if our doom must be sealed.
"But quite unexpectedly a ray of hope came from another quarter.
Dissension had broken out in the ranks of our foes!
"The first word was brought to us by a deserter from the besiegers'  camp, who one night had crept up to the gateway of the fort and whined  for admittance, declaring that he had important news to tell and hoped  for a reward.
"I was with my grandfather when, awakened from his sleep, he listened to  the man's story.
It told of a[Pg 134] fierce quarrel the preceding evening  between two of the leading chieftains.
They had been conversing alone in  one of their tents, when suddenly those without had heard angry words.
Then it would seem that the owner of the tent had sent for one of the  slippers which his visitor had left at the doorway, and with this had  administered five or six strokes over the head, driving his guest forth  insulted and disgraced.
Every one in the camp was on the alert for  fighting in the morning.
"With a grim smile Shir Jumla Khan listened to this narrative.
But he  made no comment; he merely issued instructions for the informer to be  fed and for the present closely guarded.
"But if there had been any lingering doubt as to the truth of the story,  confirmation came ere the breaking of the dawn.
For we were once again  disturbed from our rest, this time by the noise of a great tumult in the  camp of the besiegers, loud shouting followed by the discharge of  muskets, the sounds gradually dying away in the distance as if a fight  and a pursuit had taken place.
When day broke such indeed proved to be  the case; we could descry in the camp a row of tents thrown down and  dismantled, also dead or wounded men being brought in from the country  beyond, while away on a distant ridge was a considerable body of  tribesmen retreating toward their homes.
"At this sight joyful huzzas resounded through the fortress, and we did  indeed all feel that Allah, by disrupting the forces of the enemy, was  fighting on[Pg 135] our side.
And as I spread my prayer carpet, and prostrated  myself toward Mecca, the pious thought in my heart was one that had many  times been inculcated by my noble grandsire himself: 'Let the wise man  reflect that he can in no way succeed without the help of God Most  High.'
"During the day we took counsel as to the advisability of an attack on  the somewhat attenuated host without the walls.
But from our posts of  observation we could see that every one in the camp was under arms and  on the alert, no doubt foreseeing that such an attempt was likely on our  part.
So we concluded to let events develop, and contented ourselves  with watching the progress of the sabat.
Here there was no relaxation of  endeavour, for the protected trench made a considerable advance ere the  sun once again sank over the western hills.
"Darkness had not long fallen when another bleating voice of a suppliant  for admittance was heard by the sentry at the gateway.
Introduced to our  presence, the newcomer, a goatherd by his appearance, and with the signs  of travel on his garments, removed his head dress, untwisted the long  locks of hair bound according to custom around his head, and, producing  a small packet from the midst of his tresses, flung it on the floor.
I  picked up the missive, and handed it to our chieftain.
"Shir Jumla Khan untied the packet, and produced therefrom a heavy gold  signet ring.
While he was examining this, the seeming goatherd raised  his voice: The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astral Worship, by J. H. Hill  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with  almost no restrictions whatsoever.
You may copy it, give it away or  re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included  with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org  Title: Astral Worship  Author: J. H. Hill  Posting Date: April 6, 2014 [EBook #8855]  Release Date: September, 2005  First Posted: August 14, 2003  Language: English  Character set encoding: UTF-8  *** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRAL WORSHIP ***  Produced by David Deley  Astral Worship  BY  J. H. Hill, M. D.  “Now, what I want is—facts.—Boz.
CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION  5  THE GEOCENTRIC SYSTEM OF NATURE  13        The Earth  13        The Firmament  13        The Planets  14        The Constellations  15        The Zodiac  15  THE SACRED NUMBERS 7 AND 12  17  THE TWELVE THOUSAND YEAR CYCLE  18  THE ANCIENT TRIAD  19  GOD SOL  22  THE ANCIENT COSMOGONY  30  FALL AND REDEMPTION OF MAN  31  INCARNATIONS OF GOD SOL  33  FABLE OF THE TWELVE LABORS  36  ANNIVERSARIES OF SOLAR WORSHIP  40        The Nativity  40        Epiphany or Twelfth Day  41        Lent or Lenten Season  42        Passion Week  44        Passion Plays  45        Resurrection and Easter Festival  46        Annunciation  48        Ascension  49        Assumption  49        The Lord's Supper  50        Transubstantiation  50        Autumnal Crucifixion  51        Michaelmas  56  PERSONIFICATIONS OF THE DIVISIONS OF TIME  57        The Hours  57        The Days  57        The Months  58        The Seasons  60        Half Year of Increasing Days  63        Half Year of Decreasing Days  63        Last Quarter of the Year  64  ZODIACAL SYMBOLS OF SOLAR WORSHIP  64        The Sphinx  65        The Dragon  66        The Bull  67        The Ram  68        The Lamb  68        The Fish  71  SIGNS OF THE CROSS  72  FUTURE REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS  74        The Oriental System  75        The Occidental System  75        The Second or General Judgment  77  JEWISH, OR ANCIENT CHRISTIANITY  79  THE PROPHECIES  83  ROMAN OR MODERN CHRISTIANITY  88  FREEMASONRY AND DRUIDISM  109  THE SABBATH  117  PIOUS FRAUDS  121  CONCLUSION  125  INTRODUCTION.
In an article, entitled "Then and Now," published in  the December number, 1890, of "The Arena," its author,  a distinguished Unitarian D.D.
of Boston, Mass., says.
"Astronomy has shattered the fallacies of Astrology;"  and people have found out that the stars are minding their  own business instead of meddling with theirs."
Now,  while it is true that modern Astronomy has superseded  the ancient system, and people have ceased to believe that  the stars are intervening in mundane affairs, nothing  could be further from the truth than the assertion that  "Astronomy has shattered the fallacies of Astrology;  and those of our readers who will accord to this work an  unprejudiced perusal can hardly fail to be convinced that  a large majority of the people of Christendom are dominated  as much by these fallacies as were our Pagan ancestry—the  only difference being a change of name.
The  dogmatic element of religion, which was anciently designated  as Astrology, is now known as Theology.
All the evidences bearing upon the subject indicate  that the founders of the primary form of religion were a  sect of philosophers, known as Magi, or wise men, of the  Aryan race of Central Asia, who, having lived ages before  any conceptions of the supernatural had obtained in the  world, and speculating relative to the "beginnings of  things," were necessarily confined to the contemplation  and study of nature, the elements of which they believed  to be self-existent and endless in duration; but, being  wholly without knowledge of her inherent forces, they  explained her manifold processes by conceiving the idea  that she was animated by a great and inherent soul or  spirit, emanations from which impressed all her parts  with life and motion.
Thus, endowing man, and other  animals, with souls emanating alike from the imaginary  great soul of nature, they believed, and taught, that immediately  after death all souls were absorbed into their  source, where, as "the dewdrop slips into the shining  sea," all personal identity was forever lost.
Hence we see  that although recognizing the soul as immortal, considering  it, not as an entity existing independent of matter, but  as the spirit of matter itself, the primary religion was the  exponent of the purest form of Materialism.
Being the Astronomers of their day, and mistaking  the apparent for the real, the ancient Magi constructed  that erroneous system of nature known as the Geocentric,  and, in conformity thereto, composed a collection of Astronomical  Allegories, in which the emanations from the  imaginary great soul of nature, by which they believed  all materialities we're impressed with life and motion, were  personified and made to play their respective parts.
Basing  the religion they instituted upon their system of Allegorical  Astronomy, and making its personifications the  objects of worship, they thus originated the anthropomorphic  or man-like Gods, and, claiming to have composed  them under the inspiration of these self same divinities,  they designated them as sacred records, or Scriptures,  and taught the ignorant masses that they were literal histories,  and their personifications real personages, who,  having once lived upon earth, and; for the good of mankind,  performed the wondrous works imputed to them,  were then in heaven whence they came.
Thus we see that the primary religion, which is popularly  known as Paganism, was founded in the worship  of personified nature; that, according special homage to  the imaginary genii of the stars, and inculcating supreme  adoration to the divinity supposed to reside in the sun, it  was anciently known by the general name of Astrolatry,  and by the more specific one of solar worship; and that its  founders, arrogating to themselves the title of Astrologers,  gave to its dogmatic element the name of Astrology.
In studying the primitive forms of religion it will be  found that none of them taught anything relative to a  future life, for the simple reason that their founders had  no conceptions of such a state.
Hence it follows that the  laws they enacted were intended solely for the regulation  of their social relations, and, to secure their observance,  they were embodied into their sacred records and made  part of their religion.
One form of that most ancient  worship was known as Sabaism, or Sabism.
Another  form of the same religion was the Ancient Judaism, as  portrayed in the Old Testament, and more especially in  the Pentateuch, or first five books; in the Decalogue of  which the only promise made for the observance of one of  the Commandments is length of days on earth; and, in a  general summing up of the blessings and curses to be  enjoyed or suffered, for the observance or violation of the  laws, as recorded in the 28th chapter of Deuteronomy, it  will be seen they are all of a temporal character only.
At  the beginning of the Christian era there were still in existence  a sect of Jews known as Sadducees, who were strict  adherents to the primitive form of worship, and their belief  relative to the state of the dead we find recorded in  Ecclesiastes xii., 7, which reads: "Then shall the dust return  to earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to God  who gave it."
For ages the doctrine of soul absorption, immediately  after death, constituted the belief of mankind; but ultimately  recognizing the fact that the temporal punishments  of the existing laws were wholly inadequate to the  prevention of crime, and conceiving the idea that the  ignorant and vicious masses could be governed with a  surer hand by appealing to the sentiments of hope and  fear in relation to the rewards and punishments of an  imaginary future life, the ancient Astrologers resolved to  remodel the dogmatic elements of religion so as to include  that doctrine.
But realizing the necessity, of suppressing  the belief in the absorption of all souls, immediately  after death, they ceased to teach it, and ultimately it  was embodied in that secret and unwritten system known  as the Esoteric philosophy, in which the Astrologers  formulated their own private belief, and which for many  centuries was kept from the knowledge of the uninitiated  by their successors in the priestly office.
As they were  the sole custodians of the Scriptures, they made do change  in their verbiage, but, adding the doctrine of future rewards  and punishments to that written and openly taught  system of faith known as the Exoteric creed, they made it  the more impressive by instituting a system of imposing  rites and ceremonies, which they designated as Mysteries,  into which they initiated the neophytes, and in which were  portrayed, in the most vivid manner, the rewards and  punishments of the imaginary future life, which they  taught were the awards of the Gods for the observance or  violation of the laws.
These teachings were inculcated in  the lesser degrees only, but those who were found worthy  of so great a distinction were also inducted into the higher  degrees, in which was imparted the knowledge of the  Esoteric philosophy.
In both the lesser and higher degrees  the initiates received instruction in an oral manner  only; and all were bound by the most fearful oaths not to  reveal the secrets imparted to them.
Thus were the votaries of the ancient Astral worship  divided into two distinct classes, the Esoterics, or Gnostics;  and the Exoterics, or Agnostics; the former comprising  those who knew that the Gods were mythical and  the scriptures allegorical; and the latter, those who were  taught that the Gods were real, and the scriptures historical;  or, in other words, it was philosophy for the cultured  few, and religion for the ignorant multitude.
The initiates  into the secrets of these two systems recognized  them as the two Gospels; and Paul must have had reference  to them in his Epistle to the Galatians ii., 2, where he  distinguishes the Gospel which he preached on ordinary  occasions from that Gospel which he preached "privately  to them which were of reputation."
Such was the system of Astrolatry, which, originating  in the Orient, and becoming, after being remodelled  in Egypt, the prototype of all Occidental forms of worship,  was recognized, successively, as the state religion of  the Grecian and Roman Empires; and we propose to describe  the erroneous system of nature upon which it was  based, and to develop the origins of its cycles, dogmas,  ordinances, anniversaries, personifications and symbols,  with the view to proving that it was the very same system  which was ultimately perpetuated under the name of  Christianity.
We also propose to present the origins and  abridged histories of its two forms, the Jewish, or ancient,  and the Roman, or modern; and to give an account of the  conflict between the votaries of the latter, and the adherents  to the established form of worship, which culminated  in the fourth century in the substitution of Christianity  as the state religion of the Roman Empire.
We furthermore  propose to show the changes to which the creed and  scriptures were subjected during the Middle Ages, and at  the Reformation in the sixteenth century, through which  they assumed the phases as now taught in the theologies,  respectively of Catholicism and Orthodox Protestantism.
We also present an article relative to Freemasonry and  Druidism, for the purpose of showing that, primarily, they  were but different forms of the ancient Astrolatry.
We  also devote a few pages to the subjects of the Sabbath, and  to that of "Pious Frauds."
Note.—For the matter published in this work, we are  principally indebted to the writings of Robert Taylor, an erudite  but recusant minister of the church of England, who flourished  about seventy years ago, and who, being too honest to  continue to preach what, after thorough investigation, he did  not believe, began to give expression to his doubts by writing  and lecturing.
Not being able to cope with his arguments, the  clergy, under the charge of the impossible crime of blasphemy,  had him imprisoned for more than two years, during which  time he wrote his great work entitled "The Diegesis," which  should be read by all persons who are investigating the claim  of the Christian religion to Divine authenticity.
ROMAN OR MODERN CHRISTIANITY.
Having presented the evidences that the Jewish, or  ancient Christianity, originated at the University of Alexandria,  under Greek rule, we now propose to show that its  modern form emanated from the same source, under Roman  rule; but, before entering upon this investigation, it  is important to become conversant with the sentiments  manifested towards religion by the cultured element of  Roman society in that enlightened era, which, designated  as the golden age of literature, was adorned by such distinguished  orators, philosophers, historians, poets and  naturalists as Cicero, Tacitus, Pliny, Horace and Virgil.
THE GEOCENTRIC SYSTEM OF NATURE.
In constructing their system of nature, the ancient  Astronomers constituted it of the Earth, the Firmament,  the Planets, the Constellations and the Zodiac, and we  will refer to them in the order named.
The Earth.
Believing that the earth was the only world, that it  was a vast circular plane, and that it was the fixed and  immovable center around which revolved the celestial  luminaries, the ancient Astronomers, in conformity to the  requirement of the doctrine of future rewards and punishments,  as inculcated in the Egyptian Version of the  Exoteric Creed, divided it into an upper and an under,  or nether world, which they connected by a sinuous and  tenebrious passage.
The Firmament.
The azure dome, called the firmament in the book of  Genesis, was believed to be a solid transparency, which  we find described, in the fourth chapter and sixth verse,  of that collection of Astronomical Allegories, called the  Apocalypse, or Book of Revelation, "as a sea of glass like  unto crystal."
It was represented as being supported by  four pillars, resting upon the earth, one at each of the cardinal  points, which were designated as "the pillars of  heaven."
Conceiving the idea that there were windows  in the firmament, the ancient Astronomers called them  "the windows of heaven" and taught that they were  opened when it rained, and closed when it ceased to rain.
Hence it is evident that the ancient Astronomers did not  refer to these pillars and windows in a figurative sense,  but as real appurtenances to a solid firmament, as will be  seen by reference to Gen. vii.
11, and viii.
2, Job xxvi.
11,  and Malachi iii.
10.
The Planets.
Believing that the stars were but mere flambeaux,  suspended beneath the firmament, and revolving round  the earth, for the sole purpose of giving it light and heat;  and observing that seven of these, answering to the Sun,  Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, had  perceptible movements, in relation to the other luminaries,  the ancient astronomers designated them as planets  or wandering stars.
The Constellations.
Perceiving that the other celestial luminaries maintained  the same relation to each other, and designating  them as fixed stars, the ancient astronomers grouped  those visible to them into forty-eight Constellations; and  giving names to these, they also attached names to the  stars of larger magnitude, which was done for the purpose  of locating and distinguishing them with greater  ease.
The Zodiac.
Through twelve of these Constellations, mostly contained  within a belt of 16 degrees in width, and within  which the planets appeared to revolve, the ancient astronomers  inscribed a central line representing the Ecliptic, or  apparent orbit of the sun, which they divided into 360  degrees; and quartering these to denote the seasons, they  named the cardinal points the Summer and Winter Solstices,  and the Vernal and Autumnal Equinoxes; the  former referring to the longest and shortest days of the  year; and the latter to the two periods when the days and  nights are equal.
An abbreviatory sign having been attached  to each of these constellations, the great celestial  belt containing them was called "the wheel of the signs,"  or "a wheel in the middle of a wheel," as designated by  that old Astrologer, Ezekiel the Prophet, in chap.
i. and  16th verse.
But for the reason that, with only one exception,  the forms of living things, either real or mythical,  were given to them, this belt, ultimately, wad designated  as the Zodiac; or Circle of living Creatures, see Ezekiel,  chap.
i.
Constituting the essential feature of the ancient  Astronomy, we present, in our frontispiece, a diagram of  the Zodiac, as anciently represented, to which, as well as  to Burritts' Celestial Atlas, our readers will be necessitated  to make frequent reference.
Recent researches among the ruins of ancient cities  have developed the fact that several centuries before the  beginning of our era the astronomers had invented the  telescope, and discovered the true or heliocentric system  of nature; but for the reason that religion had been based  upon the false, or geocentric system, it was deemed prudent  not to teach it to the masses.
Hence, hiding it away  among the other secrets of the Esoteric philosophy, the  knowledge of it was lost during the Middle Ages; and  when rediscovered, the hierarchy of the Church of Rome,  upon the plea that it was contrary to the teachings of  Scripture, resorted to inquisitorial tortures to suppress  its promulgation; but, in spite of all their efforts, it has  been universally accepted; and, in this otherwise enlightened  age, we have presented to us the anomaly of a religion  based upon a false system of Astronomy, while its  votaries believe in the true system.
SIGNS OP THE CROSS.
Among the numerous symbols of solar worship, besides  those we have already referred to, there are three  to which we will direct attention.
Two of these were of  astronomical signification: the one adopted when the  Spring Equinox was in the sign of Taurus and shaped like  the letter T, was the model after which the ancient temples  were built; and the other, shaped like the letter X, in reference  to the angle of 23½ degrees made by the crossing  of the Ecliptic and the Celestial equator, is known as St.  Andrew's Cross.
The third, and most important of all the  symbols of solar worship, in its relation to the Christian  religion, which, having no astronomical signification,  originated in Egypt, in reference to the annual inundation  of the river Nile.
To mark the height to which the water  should rise to secure an abundant harvest, posts were  planted upon its banks to which cross beams were attached  thus ┼.
If the water should rise to the designated  height, it was called "the waters of life," or "river  of life;" and, ultimately, this form of the cross was adopted  as the symbol of the life to come, or eternal life; and the  ancient astrologers had it engraved upon stone, encircled  with a hieroglyphical inscription to that effect, one of  which was discovered in the ruins of the temple erected  at Alexandria, and dedicated to "our Lord and Saviour  Serapis."
But, if the water failed to rise to the required height,  and the horrors of starvation becoming the inevitable result,  it was the custom of the people to nail to these crosses  symbolical personifications of the Demon of Famine.
To  indicate the sterility of the domain over which he reigned,  he was represented by the figure of a lean and haggard  man, with a crown of thorns upon his head; a reed cut  from the river's bank was placed in his hands, as his unreal  sceptre; and, considering the inhabitants of Judea as the  most slavish and mean-spirited race in their knowledge,  they placarded this figure with the inscription: "This is  the King of the Jews."
Thus, to the ancient Egyptians,  this sign of the cross was blessed or accursed as it was  represented with, or without, this figure suspended  upon it.
When the Roman, or modern, form of Christianity  was instituted, the hieroglyphical inscription signifying  the life to come or eternal life was substituted by a placard  nailed to the cross with the letters I. N. R. I. inscribed  upon it, which are the initials of the Latin words conveying  the same meaning.
But if we would learn how the  figure of a man came to be suspended upon this form of  the cross, we must refer to Mediaeval History, which  teaches that in the year 680, under the Pontificate of Agathon,  and during the reign of Constantine Pogonat, at the  sixth council of the church, and third at Constantinople, it  was ordered in Canon 82 that "Instead of a lamb, the figure  of a man nailed to a cross should be the distinguishing  symbol of the Christian religion."
Now, as this figure  is represented by that of a lean and haggard man, with a  crown of thorns upon his head, does it not look as if the  old Egyptian Demon of Famine was the model after  which it was constructed?
FUTURE REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS.
In the ancient Astrolatry, two different systems of  future rewards and punishments were inculcated; the  Oriental or East Indian, and the Occidental or Egyptian;  the former, ignoring the resurrection of the body, taught  but one judgment immediately after death, and the latter  inculcated an individual judgment immediately after  death, the resurrection of the body, and a general judgment  at the end of the world, or conclusion of the 12,000  year cycle.
The Oriental System.
Considering perfect happiness to consist in absolute  rest, the Oriental astrologers conceived a state of eternal  and unconscious repose, equivalent to soul absorption,  to which they gave the name of Nirvana, into which they  taught that, by the awards of the gods, the souls of the  righteous, or those who had lived what they called "the  contemplative life," would be permitted to enter immediately  after death.
But, for the souls of sinners, they invented  a system of expiatory punishments which, known  as the Metempsychosis, or transmigration of souls, taught  that they would be compelled to successively animate the  bodies of beasts, birds, fishes, etc., for a thousand years  before being permitted to enter the Nirvana.
The Occidental System.
In concocting the doctrine of the first judgment the  Egyptian astrologers, ignoring the Nirvana, inculcated  the future sentient existence of the soul; and, while retaining  the Metempsychotial expiations of the Oriental system,  taught that its rewards, and principal punishments,  would be enjoyed or suffered in the under or nether  world, the existence of which they had conceived in constructing  their system of nature.
This imaginary region,  known to the Egyptians as the Amenti, to the Greeks as  Hades, and to the Hebrews as Sheol, was divided by an  impassable gulf into the two states of happiness and  misery which were designated in the Grecian mythology  as the Elysium, or Elysian Fields, and the Tartarus.
In  the lower part of the latter was located the Phlegethon,  or lake of fire and brimstone, the smoke from which ascended  into an upper apartment.
In this system it was taught that the souls of the  two extremes of society, constituted of the righteous  and the great sinners, would be consigned immediately  after the first judgment, the one to the Elysium, and the  other to the Phlegethon, where they were to remain until  the second or general judgment; while the souls of less  venial sinners, constituting the greater mass of mankind,  before being permitted to enter the Elysium would be  compelled to suffer the expiatory punishments of the  Metempsychosis, or in the upper region, or "smoky row"  of the Tartarus.
Such was the Egyptian purgatory, and  its denizens constituted "the spirits in prison" referred to  in I. Peter iii.
19, from which the astrologers claimed to  have the power to release, provided their surviving friends  paid liberally for their propitiatory offices; and, from this  assumption, the clergy of the Catholic church derived the  idea of saying masses for the repose of the soul.
These  doctrines were carried by Pythagoras from Egypt to  Greece about 550 years before the beginning of our era;  and passing from thence to Rome, the Greek and Latin  poets vied with each other in portraying Hades and the  joys and terrors of its two states.
The Second or General Judgment.
The Egyptian Astrologers, recognizing the soul as  a material entity, and conceiving the idea that in the  future life it would require a material organization for its  perfect action, taught that at the general judgment it  would be re-united to its resurrected body.
In conformity  to this belief, Job is made to say in chapter xix.
25, 26,  "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand  at the latter day upon the earth; and though worms destroy  this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God."
The  higher class Egyptians, however, fearing that their existence  would continue to be of the same shadowy and intangible  character after the second judgment, as they believed  it would be in the Amenti, if worms were allowed to  destroy their bodies, hoped to preserve them until that  time by the process of embalming.
The imaginary events to occur in connection with  the second judgment, which, constituting the finale of the  plan of redemption, and inculcated in what are known as  the doctrines of Second Adventism, were to be inaugurated  by an archangel sounding a trumpet summoning  the quick and the dead to appear before the bar of the  gods to receive their final awards.
At the second judgment,  designated in the allegories as "the last day," "day  of judgment," "great and terrible day of the Lord," etc.,  it was taught that the tenth and last saviour would make  his second advent by descending upon the clouds, and  after the final awards, the elect being caught up "to meet  the Lord in the air" (I. Thes.
iv.
17), the heaven and the  earth would be reduced to chaos through the agency of  fire.
In reference to that grand catastrophe we find it  recorded in II.
Peter iii.
10, that "the heavens shall pass  away with a great noise and the elements shall melt with  fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein  shall be burned up."
After the organization of a new heaven and a new earth  it was taught that upon the latter would descend a beautiful  city, with pearly gates and golden streets, called the  City of God, the Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of Heaven  or New Jerusalem, in which the host of the redeemed  would, with their Lord and Saviour, enjoy the Millennium,  or thousand years of happiness unalloyed with evil;  and such was the Kingdom for the speedy coming of  which the votaries of Astral worship were taught to pray  in what is known as the Lord's Prayer.
According to the teachings of the Allegories, there were  to be no sun, moon or stars during the Millennium, their  authors having arranged it so that the light of those luminaries  would not be needed, as we find recorded in Rev.
xxi.
23, and xxii.
5: "The city had no need of the  sun, neither of the moon to shine in it; for the glory of  God did lighten it," and "there shall be no night there;  and they need no candle, neither the light of the sun; for  the Lord God giveth them light."
It must be remembered,  when reading the fanciful ideas relative to the City  of God, that they were composed by men who, living in  a very ignorant age, gave free rein to fervid imaginations.
JEWISH OR ANCIENT CHRISTIANITY.
It is our purpose to present the evidences showing  that a system of Astral worship, which we designate as  Jewish Christianity, was in existence more than two  centuries and a half before the institution of its  modern form.
In verification of this assertion we must  find the initial point of our inquiry in ancient history,  which teaches that in the division of the Grecian Empire  among his generals, after the death of Alexander the  Great, who died 332 years before the beginning of our era,  the governorship of Egypt and adjacent provinces was secured  by Ptolemy Lagus, or Soter, who, having subsequently  suppressed a revolt in Judea, removed from that  country a large body of its inhabitants to people the new  city of Alexandria, which had been laid out by order of  and named after the great Conqueror.
The Egyptian version of the Gospel story, being  more appropriate to the Nile Valley than to the region  from whence they came, the Greek colonists of Alexandria  adopted it, but preferring to pay homage to Serapis,  one of the ninth incarnations of God Sol, which they  imported from Pontus, a Greek province of Asia Minor,  they erected to his worship that celebrated temple known  as the Grand Serapium; and, transferring the culture and  refinement of Greece to the new city, it became, under the  Ptolemian dynasty, a great seat of learning; the arts and  sciences flourished, an immense library was collected, the  various forms of Astral worship were represented and  schools for the dissemination of the several phases of Grecian  philosophy and Oriental Gnosticism were founded.
Such being the environment of the Jewish residents  of Alexandria, they soon acquired the vernacular and  adopted the religion of the Greeks, who, having ever attached  to their incarnate saviours the title signifying the  Christ, or the anointed, were known as Christians.
Encouraged  by the liberal policy of Philadelphus, the second  Ptolemy, a body of their learned men, who had been educated  in the Greek schools, founded a college for the education  of their own people, which institution was ultimately  known as the University of Alexandria.
Under  the auspices of Philadelphus the professors of that institution  rendered their Hebrew sacred records into the Greek  language, which translation is known as the Septuagint, or  Alexandrian version of the Old Testament.
Having acquired from the Egyptian astrologers the  arts of healing, thaumaturgy and necromancy, and teaching  them in their school, the professors of the Jewish  college of Alexandria assumed the title of Essenes, or  Therapeutae, the Egyptian and Greek words signifying  Doctors, Healers or Wonder Workers.
Possessed of the  sad and gloomy characteristics of their race, they adopted  the "Contemplative Life," or asceticism of the Oriental  Gnosticism, from which they derived the name of Ascetics.
Founding a church for the propagation of their  peculiar tenets, those who were set apart for the ministry  assumed the title of Ecclesiastics.
Inculcating rigid temperance  and self-denial among their people, they were  known as Enchratites, Nazarites or Abstainers; and the  more devout among them retiring to monasteries, or to  the solitude of caves and other secluded places, were also  designated as Monks, Cenobites, Friars, Eremites, Hermits  or Solitaries.
The time having arrived, according to the cyclic  teachings of Astral worship, for the manifestation of the  tenth and last incarnation of God Sol, or, in other words,  to, give a new name to the mythical genius of the sun, the  professors of the Jewish school of Alexandria is resolved to  inaugurate their own form of worship.
While retaining the  same title under which they had paid homage to Serapis  and known as Christians, Essenes or Therapeutae, they  substituted for their Christ the name of the Grecian Bacchus,  which, composed of the letters ΙΗΣ, signifies Yes,  Ies or Jes.
In composing their version of the Gospel  story, having, like their race, no inventive genius, they appropriated  that of Serapis as its basis and laid its scene in  the land of their ancestry, but inconsistently retained the  sign of the cross and the phraseology connected there  with, which, having special reference to the Nile River and  its annual inundation, had no application whatever to the  sterile land of Judea.
Selecting what they conceived to  be the best from other versions of the Gospel story, and assuming  the title of Eclectics, they designated their system  as the Eclectic Philosophy.
In proof of the eclectic character  of the Gospel and Epistles of ancient Christianity, we  refer to the Asceticism inculcated therein, which, derived  from the Oriental Gnosticism, we find perpetuated in the  scriptures of modern Christianity; we also refer to the miracle  of converting water into wine, taken from the Gospel  story of Bacchus, and to the statements that the Saviour  was the son of a carpenter and was hung between two  thieves, copied from the story of Christna, the Eighth,  Avatar of the East Indian astrolatry.
Thus we see that,  although the scene of the Gospel story of ancient Christianity  was laid in the land of Judea, its authors having  adopted a Greek version of that story as its basis, given a  Greek title and name to their Messiah, perpetuated a  Greek name for their sect and quoted exclusively from the  Septuagint, or Greek version of the Old Testament, the  facts show conclusively that it was not Jews of Judea, but  Hellenized Jews of Alexandria, who were the real authors  of the ancient Christianity.
THE PROPHECIES.
The clergy having ever claimed that the prophecies  are Divine revelations of events yet to occur, and having  incessantly agitated society by preaching their speedy fulfillment,  we propose to expose the fallacy of their teachings  by showing that these scriptures are not the records  of future events, Divinely reavealed, but that they originated  with the founders of Astral worship, who predicated  them upon predetermined events of their own concoction,  relative to the general judgment, and setting up of the  kingdom of heaven, which were to occur as the finale of  the plan of redemption and from which were derived the  doctrines of second adventism; and, in determining the  exact time when then were to occur, we have but to prove  that it was coincident with the conclusion of the last half  of the grand cycle of 12,000 years, which, as we have  shown, was dedicated to man as the duration of his race  on earth.
As evidence that the founders of the Jewish or ancient  Christianity believed, like the votaries of other forms  of Astral worship, that the prophecies were soon to be fulfilled,  we find that the New Testament, of the original version  of which they were the authors, is replete with such  texts as "Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand,"  Matt.
iv.
17; "There be some standing here which shall  not taste death till they see the Son of Man coming in His  kingdom," Matt.
xxi.
28; "The time is fulfilled, and the  Kingdom of God is at hand," Mark i.
15.
That the original  version of the New Testament was composed when the  Vernal Equinox was in the sign of Aries we are assured by  reason of the fact that it inculcates homage to the Lord  under the symbol of the Lamb; and that it was during the  last, or 30th degree of that sign, can readily be proven by  appealing to history and to astronomy, the former of which  teaches that the Jews were removed from Judea to Alexandria  twenty-five years before the accession to the throne  of Philadelphus, the Second Ptolemy, to whom we have  referred in our preceding article, and who, after reigning  thirty-nine years, died 246 years before the beginning of  our era.
By reference to the Celestial atlas we will find  that the Vernal Equinox will pass out of the sign of Pisces  into that of Aquarius, or in the year 1900, and we  have but to deduct that period of time from 2150, the  number of years required for the cardinal points to pass  through one whole sign, to determine that the Spring  Equinox passed out of the sign of Aries into that of Pisces  250 years before the beginning of our era, or about 2,100  years ago.
Now, from the projections of the astrological  science, we are assured that the last half of the grand cycle  of 12,000 years, which was allotted to man as the duration  of his race on earth, was made to begin at a time corresponding  to the Autumnal Equinox, when that cardinal  point was passing out of the sign of Virgo, and that of necessity  it had to come to an end at a time corresponding  to the Vernal Equinox, when that cardinal point was passing  out of the sign of Aries; from which we know why, at  the last judgment, the office of trumpeter was assigned to  the Archangel Gabriel, the genius of Spring, and why it  was a ram's horn with which he was to "toot the crack o'  doom."
When the time arrived for the fulfillment of the prophecies  we can well imagine that, fearing the wrath of the  Lamb, there were weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth  among the terror-stricken sinners, while those who believed  they had made their calling and election sure were  looking with feverish expectancy for the second advent of  their Lord and Saviour; and, doubtless, clothed with their  ascension robes, they watched and waited, with ears alert,  to hear the sound of Gabriel's trumpet, summoning the  quick, and the dead to the general judgment.
But not a  blast from the archangel's ram's horn was heard reverberating  along the skies, no Lord appeared descending  upon the clouds to meet the elect in the air, and, in the last  act of the fearful drama of "judgment day," the curtain refused  to be rung down upon a burning world.
With the non-fulfillment of the prophecies, the more  enlightened elements of society began to scoff at the  priests, who were temporarily demoralized, but true to  their deceptive instincts, soon rallying with the plea of a  mistake having been made in the calculations based upon  the prophecies, they undoubtedly concocted scripture to  meet that very emergency, for, to the taunts of the scoffers  who, in reference to the second advent of the Lord, enquired  "Where is the sign of His coming?
for, since the  fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from  the beginning of creation," they answered that "The Lord  is not slack concerning His promise," but "as a thief in the  night" he would soon come and all things be fulfilled.
See  II.
Peter, chapter iii.
Following up the history of this interesting subject,  we find that the founders of modern Christianity, to which  we will refer in our next article, in composing their version  of the New Testament from that of the Jewish, or ancient  Christians, made no change in its verbiage relative to the  prophecies; but when Constantine I., Emperor of Rome,  became the patron of the church, her hierarchy, tired of  figuring upon them, secured a long respite from that troublesome  subject by claiming to have made other calculations,  which put off the time of fulfillment to the year 1000;  and from history we learn when the time arrived the whole  of Christendom was fearfully agitated upon the subject:  Since then every generation has been vexed with the fallacies  of second adventism; and the facts of the case justify  the charge that the clergy, by teaching that the prophecies  refer to events yet to occur, are perpetuating a  most stupendous fraud upon Christendom, and an earnest  and efficient protest should be inaugurated against the  further agitation of the monstrous delusion of second adventism,  which is frightening thousands of weak-minded  people into insanity and causing a vast amount of social  distress.GOD SOL.
In determining the characteristics of the supreme  divinity of astral worship, it must be borne in mind that  its founders taught that he was evolved or engendered by  the Father, or first person in the sacred Triad, from his  pure substance, which as we have shown was constituted  of chaos or the primeval fire into which they supposed all  things were reduced through the agency of that element  at the conclusion of 12,000 year cycles.
Hence, designating  that mythical being as the only begotten of the  Father, they personified him as God the Son, or second  person in the sacred Triad; and recognizing the Sun as the  ruling star, very appropriately made him the presiding  genius of that luminary, under the title of God Sol.
According  homage to light as his chief attribute, he is referred  to in the allegories as "The true Light, which lighteth  every man that cometh into the world," John i., 9; and,  although designated as the only begotten of the Father,  his co-existence with him, under the title of the Logos or  Word, is shown in the text which reads, "In the beginning  was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the  Word was God," John i., 1.
Personifying the principles of Good and Evil in God  Sol, the ancient Astrologers consecrated the six divisions  of the 12,000 year cycle, corresponding to the reproductive  months of Spring and Summer, to him as Lord of  Good, and symbolizing him by the constellation of the  Zodiac in which the Vernal Equinox successively occurred,  as explained hereafter, they dedicated the six divisions  of that cycle, corresponding to the destructive  months of Autumn and Winter, to him as Lord of Evil,  and as such, symbolizing him by the serpent, marked the  beginning of his reign by the constellation "Serpens,"  placed in conjunction with the Autumnal Equinox.
Personifying in him the opposing principles of Good and  Evil, he was to the ancients both God and Devil, or the  varied God, who, in relation to the seasons, was described  as beautiful in Spring, powerful in Summer, beneficent in  Autumn and terrible in Winter.
Thus under various  names, intended to represent God Sol in relation to the  diversified seasons, we find recorded in the Scriptures, or  solar fables, numerous portrayals of imaginary conflicts,  in which the Evil principle, triumphing during Autumn  and Winter, is conquered at the Vernal Equinox by the  Good principle, who, bringing back equal days and nights,  restores the harmony of nature.
The eternal enmity between the principles of Good  and Evil, as manifested in the diversity of the seasons,  we find portrayed in the Constellations Hercules and  Draco, placed in the northern heavens, in which the heel  of the former, representing one of the most ancient of the  imaginary incarnations of God Sol, to which we will refer  hereafter, is resting upon the head of the latter, as referred  to in Genesis iii., 15, which makes God Sol, or the  Lord God, say to the serpent, "I will put enmity between  thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed;  it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel."
The woman alluded to in this text is the Virgo of the  Zodiac, as will be made apparent hereafter.
Of all the divinities of the ancient mythology God  Sol was the only one distinguished by the exalted title of  Lord or Lord God, for the reason that he was made the  organizer of chaos and governor of heaven and earth.
Hence, having constituted him the lord of light and darkness,  as well as good and evil, the ancient astrologers in  composing the solar fables made him say of himself, "I  form the light and create darkness; I make peace and  create evil, I the Lord do all these things," Isaiah xlv., 7.
"Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hath not  done it?"
Amos iii., 6.
Besides the title of Lord or  Lord God, the solar divinity is also designated in the  allegories as the Lord of Lords and the King of Kings,  the Invincible, the Mighty God, etc.
Subjecting the mythical genius of the sun, in his apparent  annual revolution round the earth, to the four  stages of human life from infancy to old age, the ancient  Magi fixed the natal day of the young God Sol at the winter  solstice, the Virgo of the Zodiac was made his mother,  and the constellation in conjunction with her, which is  now known as Bootes, but anciently called Arcturus, his  foster father.
He is represented as holding in leash two  hunting dogs and driving Ursa Major, or the Great Bear,  around the north pole, thus showing that the original  occupation of the celestial foster father of the young God  Sol was that of a bear driver, and that his sons, referred to  in job xxxviii., 32, are the dogs Asterion and Chara.
It  will be observed that Virgo is represented in our illustration  with a child in her arms, for the reason that she is so  represented in the ancient Zodiacs, and the fact will be  readily conceded that she is the only Virgin who could  give birth to a child and be a virgin still.
THE ANCIENT COSMOGONY.
Speculating relative to the order in which chaos had  been organized, the ancient Astrologers constructed a  Cosmogony, which divided the labors of God the Son, or  second person in the Trinity, into six periods of a thousand  years each; and which, answering to the six divisions  of the 12,000 year cycle corresponding to the reproductive  months of Spring and Summer, taught that in the first  period he made the earth; in the second, the firmament;  in the third, vegetation; in the fourth, the Sun and  Moon and "the stars also;" in the fifth, the animals, fishes,  birds, etc., and in the sixth, Man.
That vegetation was made before the Sun was not an  inconsistent idea to the originators of the ancient Cosmogony.
They imagined that the heat and light, emanating  from the elementary fire, were sufficient to stimulate its  growth, after which God the Son gathered it together and  made the Celestial luminaries.
In the solar fables this  imaginary element is called the fire-ether, or sacred fire of  the stars.
FALL AND REDEMPTION OF MAN.
Religion having been based upon the worship of personified  nature, it is evident that its founders fabricated  its dogmatic element from their conceptions of her destructive  and reproductive processes as manifested in the  rotation and diversity of the seasons.
The apparent retreat  of the sun from the earth, in winter, and his return in  the spring, suggesting the idea of a figurative death and  resurrection of the genius of that luminary, they applied  these phenomena of the year to man, and composed the  allegories relative to his fall and redemption, as inculcated  in the Exoteric Creed.
In the allegory relating to the fall,  it was taught that, after making the first human pair, the  Lord of Good or the Lord God placed them in a beautiful  garden—corresponding to the seasons of fruits and flowers  or months of Spring and Summer, with the injunction,  under a penalty, not to eat of the fruit of a certain tree.
When the Lord of Evil, or Devil, symbolized by the serpent  and represented by the constellation "Serpens"  placed in conjunction with the Autumnal Equinox, meeting  them on the confines of his dominion, and tempting  the woman, and she the man, they ate of the forbidden  fruit; thus, falling from their first estate, and committing  the original sin, they involved the whole human race in the  consequences of their disobedience.
Then the Lord God,  pronouncing a curse against the serpent, clothed the man  and woman with skins to protect them against the inclemency  of his, dominion as Lord of Evil, and drove them  from the garden; after which they were necessitated to  earn their bread by tilling the ground.
In, reference to the plan of redemption, the ancient  Astrologers divided the 6,000 years appropriated to man,  as the duration of his race on earth, into ten equal cycles,  and taught that at the conclusion of each God Sol, as  Lord of Good, would manifest himself in the flesh, to destroy  his works as Lord of Evil, and through suffering  and death make an atonement for sin.
Thus having originated  the doctrines of original sin, incarnation and vicarious  atonement, as parts of the plan of redemption, and  making its finale correspond, in point of time, to the conclusion  of the 12,000 year cycle, their successors in the  priestly office ultimately inculcated the additional dogmas  of the general judgment and future rewards and punishments,  as we have shown in our introduction.
Having based the fables of the fall and redemption of  man upon the idea that he was impelled, without his  volition, to pass from the dominion of God to that of the  Devil, or in other words, upon his subjection to the inexorable  necessity which makes the inclement seasons  of Autumn and Winter succeed the beneficent ones of  Spring and Summer, its authors composed the original  of the text which, found in Romans viii., 20, reads that  "The creature was made subject to vanity (Evil), not willingly,  but by reason of him who hath subjected the same  in hope."
But for the popular teaching in favor of its being  literal history, no one could read the account of the fall of  man, as recorded in the third chapter of Genesis, without  recognizing it as simply an allegory; or fail to realize, the  force of the argument of no fall, no redemption, and if no  redemption, no God to reward or Devil to punish; no hell  to suffer, or heaven to enjoy.
The fact is that these are  but antithetical ideas which came in together, and must  survive or perish together.
They cannot be separated  without destroying the whole theological fabric.
INCARNATIONS OF GOD SOL.
Believing that God Sol was necessitated to remain at  his post to direct the course of the sun, the ancient astrologers  conceived the idea of teaching that, attended by a  retinue of subordinate genii, he descended to earth  through the medium of incarnations at the end of 600 year  cycles, to perform the work of man's redemption and,  having made Virgo of the Zodiac the mother of the Solar  divinity, they taught in their allegorical Astronomy, or  scriptures, that his incarnations were born of a Virgin.
Hence we find that God Sol, usually designated by the  title of the Word, "was made flesh, and dwelt among us."
John i., 14.
In a discourse upon this text delivered by Tillotson,  Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1680, published in  the fourth volume of Woodhouse's edition of his Grace's  sermons, in the year 1744, concerning the Incarnation of  our blessed Saviour, he explains the necessity of incarnation  by saying that "There was likewise a great inclination  in mankind to the worship of a visible Deity, so God was  pleased to appear in our nature, that they, who were so  fond of a visible Deity, might have one, even a true and  natural image of God the Father, the express image of  his person."
It only requires a little reflection to appreciate  the Prelate's covert irony and want of faith.
Having ascribed to the imaginary incarnations of  God Sol the characteristics of heaven-descending, virgin-born,  earth-walking, wonder-working, dying, resuscitated  and ascending sons of God, the ancient Astrologers  attached to them the several titles of Saviour, Redeemer,  Avatar, Divine-Helper, Shiloh, Messiah, Christ; and, in  reference to their foster-father, that of Son of Man.
Teaching that they continued to make intercession for sin,  after their ascension to the right hand of the Father, they  were also called Intercessors, Mediators or Advocates  with the Father.
From teaching their appearance every  600 years originated the Egyptian legend of the Phoenix,  a bird said to descend from the sun at these intervals, and,  after being consumed upon the altar in the temple of On,  or city of the sun—called Heliopolis by the Greeks—would  rise from its ashes and ascend to its source.
According  to the civil laws of Egypt, manhood was not  attained until the age of thirty years.
Hence the earthly  mission of incarnate Saviours was made to begin at that  age; and for the reason that, relating to the apparent transit  of the sun through the twelve signs of the Zodiac, it  was completed during the period of one year.
To impress the ignorant masses with the belief that  the scriptures were literal histories, and the incarnate  Saviours real personages, the ancient Astrologers caused  tombs to be erected in which it was claimed they were  buried.
Such sepulchres were erected to Hercules at  Cadiz, to Apollo at Delphi, and to other Saviours at many  other places, to which their respective votaries were induced  to perform pilgrimages.
In Egypt the pyramids  were built, partly for astronomical purposes, and partly  as tombs for Saviours, claimed to have been kings, who  had once ruled over the country; and why should we not  recognize that magnificent structure known as the Church  of the Holy Sepulchre, at Jerusalem, as but another of  those tombs of Saviours in which no Saviour was ever entombed?
Thus we have shown that it was God Sol, the only  begotten of the Father, or second person in the sacred  Triad, to whom supreme adoration was inculcated in all  forms of the ancient Astrolatry; and that its cultured  votaries, understanding that the doctrines pertaining to  the fall and redemption of man were evolved from the  figurative death and resurrection of the solar divinity,  recognized the doctrine of incarnation as a priestly invention  intended only for the ignorant masses.
FABLE OF THE TWELVE LABORS.
The authors of the original solar fables, having lived  in that remote age in which physical prowess was recognized  as the highest attribute of humanity, conceived the  idea that God Sol, while passing through his apparent  orbit, had to fight his way with the animals of the Zodiac,  and with others in conjunction with them.
Hence, designating  him as the Mighty Hunter, and calling his exploits  the twelve labors, they made the incarnate Saviours  the heroes of similar ones on earth, which they taught  were performed for the good of mankind; and that, after  fulfilling their earthly mission, they were exhaled to  heaven through the agency of fire.
When these fables  were composed the Summer Solstice was in the sign of  Leo, and making the twelve labors begin in it, the first  consisted in the killing of a lion, and the second, in rescuing  a virgin (Virgo) by the destruction of a Hydra, the  constellation in conjunction with her.
Upon one of the  Assyrian marbles on exhibition in the British Museum  these two labors are represented as having been performed  by a saviour by the name of Nimroud.
In the constellations  of Taurus, the bull of the Zodiac, and of Orion, originally  known as Horns, in conjunction therewith, we  have groupings of stars representing the latter as one of  the mighty hunters of the ancient Astrolatry, supporting  on his left arm the shield of the lion's skin, the trophy of  the first labor, and holding a club in his uplifted right  hand, is engaged in performing the tenth labor by a conflict  with the former.
The fable of the twelve labors constituted the sacred  records or scriptures of the older forms of Astrolatry, one  version of which, written with the cuneiform character  upon twelve tablets of burnt clay, exhumed from the ruins  of an Assyrian city, and now on exhibition in the British  Museum, is ascribed to Nimroud, the prototype of the  Grecian Hercules, and of Nimrod, the Mighty Hunter of  the Old Testament.
ANNIVERSARIES OF SOLAR WORSHIP.
The Nativity.
Applying the anniversaries inculcated in the worship  of God Sol to his imaginary incarnations, the founders of  the ancient Astrolatry made them refer to the several  stages of human existence from infancy to mature age.
Hence, comparing the first day of infantile life to the  shortest day of the year, it would naturally be expected  that they would have placed the anniversary of the Nativity  exactly at the Winter solstice; but, having conceived  the idea that the sun stood still for the space of three days  at each of the cardinal points, and making it represent the  figurative death of the genius of that luminary, they fixed  the date for its observance three days later, or on the 25th  of December.
The Gnostic adherents to the ancient  solar worship, or those who were conversant with the  teachings of the Esoteric philosophy, knowing that the  dramatis personæ of the fable of incarnation were pictured  with stars upon the azure vault, recognized the  woman "clothed with the sun, and the moon under her  feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars," referred  to in Revelations xii.
1, as the Virgo of the Zodiac; they  also knew that she was the true queen of heaven and  mother of God; and that the infant, anciently represented  in her arms, and with whom, in their day, she arose on the  Eastern horizon at midnight on the 24th of December,  was the same of whom the people were taught to sing at  Christmas "Unto us a child is born this day."
With the knowledge of these facts we can readily see  that this is the Virgin and child which constituted the  originals of those exquisite paintings, by the old masters,  known as the Madonna and Child.
Epiphany or Twelfth Day.
In reference to the twelve signs through which the  sun makes his apparent annual revolution, the twelfth  day after Christmas, answering to the 6th of January, was  observed by the votaries of the ancient Astrolatry as the  anniversary of the Epiphany or Twelfth Day.
In the  solar fables, it was taught that a star appeared in the  heavens on that day to manifest the birthplace of the  infant Saviour to the Magi or Wise Men of the East, who  came to pay him homage, and to present him with the  gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh, as related in Matthew ii.
11.
The reason for presenting these gifts is explained by  the facts that of the seven metals dedicated to the genii of  the planets, gold was the one consecrated to God Sol; and  frankincense and myrrh were the gums burned in censers  in his worship.
In reading the account of the Magi's visit to the infant  Saviour, we have but to exercise our thinking faculties to  realize that it is allegory instead of literal history.
Lent or Lenten Season.
In the ancient solar fables it was taught that the persecutions  to which the incarnate Saviours were subjected  while passing through the dominion of God Sol as Lord of  Evil, raged with greatest fury during the forty days  preceding the festival of Easter, which period, beginning  when the days were perceptibly lengthening, was called  Lent, or the Lenten season.
It was during this season  that the votaries of the ancient religion were taught to  manifest their sympathy for the Saviour in his imaginary  conflict with the Devil by abstaining from all festivities,  and by fasting and prayer; and, as that was the season  in which the flocks and herds were poor in flesh, while the  seas and rivers abounded with fish in good condition, the  ancient priests, making a virtue of necessity, enjoined a  diet principally of fish, and for that reason placed the constellation  Pisces at the point in the Zodiac in which the  Lenten season anciently began; which, without regard to  the day of the week, was always observed on the 15th day  of February, the name of that month having been derived  from the Februa, or feast of purification and expiation of  the old Roman calendar.
At the council of Nice the Lenten season was made  to begin on the fourth day of the week, and in reference to  the ancient custom of the more devout sprinkling ashes  upon their heads at the feast of the Februa, it is called Ash  Wednesday.
Hence we see that all years in which Ash Wednesday  does not come on the 15th of February, the Lenten  season must necessarily contain a greater or lesser number  than the original assignment of forty days.
Passion Week.
The last seven days of Lent is called Passion Week, in  reference to the apparent passage of the sun across the  Celestial equator at the Vernal Equinox or 21st of  March; the ancient astrologers having conceived the idea  that the sun stood still for the space of three days at each  of the cardinal points, and making it represent the figurative  death of the genius of that luminary, it was observed  as the anniversary of the Vernal crucifixion or passion of  the incarnate Saviours; and in commemoration of their  imaginary sufferings and death it was the custom to expose  in the temples during the last three days of Passion  Week figures representing their dead bodies, over which  the votaries of solar worship, especially the women, made  great lamentation.
It was in reference to one of these  images, laid out in the temple at Jerusalem, to which the  jealous Jehovah, considering it a great abomination in his  own house, is made to direct the attention of Ezekiel, the  prophet, who, looking, beheld "Women weeping for Tammuz"  as recorded in the eighth chapter.
This divinity  was the Phoenician prototype of the Grecian Adonis, to  whom the women of Judea preferred to pay homage.
It was during the last three days of Passion Week  that the votaries of solar worship performed their severest  penance.
Besides fasting and prayer, the more devout  flagellated and slashed themselves and others with knives  and thongs, and carried heavy crosses up steep acclivities.
In all ultra-Catholic countries the priests, in imitation of  the ancient custom, expose in the churches figures representing  the dead Saviour, over which the laity, especially  the women, weep and mourn; and the more devout  men cut and slash themselves, and each other, with  knives and thongs; and, in imitation of the imaginary  tramp of Jesus with his cross up Calvary's rugged side,  bear heavy crosses up steep acclivities.
Passion Plays.
Anciently dramas representing the passion of incarnate  saviours, called Passion plays, were enacted upon the  stage.
The most celebrated of these divine tragedies,  known as Prometheus Bound, and composed by the  Greek poet Æschylus, was played at Athens 500 years  before the beginning of the Christian era.
To show that  this sin-atoning saviour was not chained to a rock, while  vultures preyed upon his vitals, as popularly taught, but  was nailed to a tree; we quote front Potter's translation of  the play, that passage which, readily recognized as the  original of a Christian song, reads as follows:              "Lo, streaming from the fatal tree,                 His all atoning blood:              Is this the infinite?
'Tis he—                 Prometheus and a God.
Well might the sun in darkness hide,                 And veil his glories in,              When God the great Prometheus died                 For man, the creature's sin."
The veiling of the sun, as represented in these plays,  having reference to the imaginary sympathy expressed by  God Sol for the sufferings of his incarnate son, was shown  upon the stage by shading the lights.
The monks of the  Middle Ages enacted plays representing the passion of the  Christian Saviour, and the Bavarian peasantry, perpetuating  this custom, perform the play every tenth year.
Resurrection and Easter Festival.
In conformity to the ancient teachings, the incarnate  saviours, considered as figuratively dead for the space of  three days at the Vernal Equinox, or 21st of March, were  raised to newness of life after the expiration of that time.
Hence, the 25th of March, without regard to the day of  the week, was celebrated as the anniversary of the Vernal  resurrection.
On the morning of this day it was the  custom of the astrologers to say to the mourners assembled  in the temples, "Be of good cheer, sacred band of initiates;  your God has risen from the dead, his pains and his  sufferings shall be your salvation."
Another form of  this admonition, quoted from an ancient poem in reference  to the Phoenician Tammuz, reads as follows:              "Trust ye saints, your God restored,              Trust ye in your risen Lord,              For the pains which he endured,              Your salvation hath procured."
Then would begin the festivities of Easter, which  corrupted from Eostre, and derived from the Teutonic  mythology, was one of the many names given to the goddess  of Spring.
In the observance of this festival the  temples were adorned with floral offerings; the Hilaries  sang their joyful lays; the fires upon the pyres, or the fire-altars,  were extinguished and rekindled with new fire, or  sacred fire of the stars, which the Astrologers taught was  brought down from heaven by the winged genius Perseus,  the constellation which, anciently, was in conjunction  with the Vernal Equinox; Paschal candles, lit from  the new fire, were distributed to the faithful and the Paschal  feast, Easter feast, or the feast of the passover, was  eaten in commemoration of the passion of the incarnate  saviours, or, in other words, of the passage of the sun  across the celestial equator.
In ultra-Catholic countries the descent of the sacred  fire is represented by some secretly arranged pyrotechny,  and the credulous laity, believing they have witnessed a  miraculous display, eagerly solicit Paschal candles lit  from it; and in imitation of the ancient festivities in honor  of the return of spring, all Catholic churches, and most of  Protestant ones, are adorned with flowers, the bells ring  out their merriest peals, and "Gloria in Excelsis" and  other jubilant songs, similar to the lays of the ancient Hilaries,  are sung.
Annunciation.
The anniversary of the Nativity having been placed  on the 25th of December, according to the course of nature,  the 25th of March was anciently celebrated as the  anniversary of the annunciation, and is still observed on  that day, and the duty of saluting the Virgin (Virgo) and  announcing her conception by the Holy Ghost or third  person in the Trinity was assigned to the genius of Spring.
In the Chaldean version of the Gospel story the name of  Gabriel was given to this personification, and in the Christian  version of that story he is made to perform the same  office; see Luke i.
26-35.
Ascension.
Celebrating the anniversary of the ascension forty  days after Easter, it was anciently observed on the 4th of  May, and it was taught that the incarnate saviours ascended  bodily into heaven, in a golden chariot drawn by  four horses caparisoned with gilded trappings, all glittering  like fire in the fervid sunlight.
Hence when we read  in II.
Kings ii.
11, that "There appeared a chariot of fire  and horses of fire, .
.
.
and Elijah went up by a  whirlwind into heaven," we must accept this text as descriptive  of the imaginary ascension of one of the incarnate  saviours of ancient Judaism.
Assumption.
When the Summer solstice was in the sign of Cancer,  the sun was in that of Virgo in the month of August, and  the anniversary of the Assumption was observed on the  15th of that month, and is so observed at the present  time.
The fact that the anniversary of the Ascension precedes  that of the Assumption explains why Jesus is made  to say to his mother (Virgo) soon after his resurrection,  "Touch me not: for I am not yet ascended to my Father."
John xx.
17.
The Lord's Supper.
In the ancient solar worship the so-called ordinance  of the Lord's Supper was observed just before the anniversary  of the autumnal crucifixion; and consisting of bread  and wine, in reference to the maturing of the crops and  completion of the vintage, was, like the modern festival of  the hardest home, a season of thankfulness to the Lord  (God Sol) as the giver of all good gifts.
Hence being  observed but once a year, it was in reality not an ordinance  but an anniversary; and the fact that Christians  partake of these emblems so frequently during the year  indicates that the original signification of the Lord's Supper  has been lost.
Transubstantiation,  or the conversion of the bread and wine into the veritable  blood and body of Christ, is a doctrine of the Catholic  church which was derived from the ritual of the ancient  solar worship.
In the 26th chapter of Matthew we have an account  of the Lord administering the last supper to his Disciples  on the eve of the autumnal crucifixion, and in verse 27  it reads that "he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave  it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it."
The compilers of  the modern version of the Gospel story must surely have  inadvertently copied this text as it read in the ancient  versions of that old, old story, which, when observed in  remembrance of "Our Lord and Saviour Bacchus," was  called the Bacchanalia, or feast, of Bacchus.
At these  orgies the participants give thanks for the wine by not  only drinking all of one cup, but many more; in fact they  kept on drinking until they fell under the table.
Autumnal Crucifixion.
The beneficent seasons of Spring and Summer coming  to an end at the Autumnal Equinox, the 22d of September  was made the anniversary of the Autumnal Crucifixion.
The vernal resurrection and Autumnal Crucifixion,  representing the alternate triumph of the personified  principles of Good and Evil, as manifested in the diversity  of the seasons; we find appropriately expressed in  two religious pictures.
In the one, the Saviour, appealing  as a vigorous young man, surrounded by a brilliant halo,  representing the rays of the all-conquering Sun of Spring,  is rising triumphantly from the tomb, before whom the  demon of Winter, or Devil, is seen retreating in the background.
In the other, the vanquished Saviour, represented  by the figure of a lean and haggard man, with a crown of  thorns upon his head, around which appears a faint halo  of the Sun's declining rays, and above which is placarded  the letters I. N. R. I., the initial letters of Latin words,  signifying the life to come, or the eternal life, is suspended  upon the cross, at the foot of which his mother Mary  (Virgo) is represented as kneeling in a mourning attitude,  and by her side is seen a serpent and a skull, the emblems  of Evil and of Death.
Michaelmas.
In the calendar of the ancient Astral Worship, the  fourth day after the Autumnal Equinox was dedicated to  the genius of Autumn.
In the Chaldean allegories the  name of Michael was given to this personification, and  called Michaelmas, or feast of Michael.
In the Catholic  calendar this anniversary is placed an the 29th of September,  instead of the 26th of that month, while that  of St. Matthew, the Christian genius of Autumn, which  should be placed on the 26th of that month, is observed  on the 21st.
Thus we have shown that the anniversaries of the  ancient Astral Worship were all fixed, and from church  history we learn that they were so observed by the Christians  until the Council of Nice in the year 325, when the  Bishops assembled at that celebrated convocation, desiring  to have the festival of Easter celebrated on Sunday,  which had been made the Sabbath by the edict of Constantine,  in the year 321, ordered that it should be observed  on the Sunday of the full moon, which comes on or next  after the Vernal Equinox.
Hence, converting it into a  movable festival, its allied feasts and fast days were also  made movable.
PERSONIFICATIONS OF THE DIVISIONS OF TIME.
In the ancient solar fables the several divisions of  time were personified and made to pay homage to the  Triune Deity, supposed to be enthroned above the firmament.
The Hours.
The genii of the hours were designated as Elders, and  we find them described in the 4th chapter of Revelation  as sitting round about the throne upon four and twenty  seats, clothed in white raiment, and crowns of gold upon  their heads.
The Days.
Each day of the year was appropriately personified,  and these genii of the days constitute the saints of the  Christian calendar.
Of these we will refer to but one.
According to the ancient belief that the sun stood still  for the space of three days at each of the cardinal points,  the 24th of June was made the first of the decreasing days;  and dedicating it to St. John the Baptist, he is made to say  in reference to his opposite, (the genius of the 25th of  December, and first of the increasing days,) "He must increase,  but I must decrease."
This text, found in John  iii.
30, simply means that the days of the one must increase  in length, while the days of the other must decrease.
The Months.
The fable of the twelve labors having been superseded  by others, in which the genii of the twelve signs of the  Zodiac, corresponding to the months, were designated  as angels, and made to minister to God Sol while making  his apparent annual revolution; but, when constituted the  attendants of the incarnate saviours during their imaginary  earth life, they were personified as men and called  Disciples.
Of these genii of the months we will refer only  to the first and the last.
The first month, dedicated to the  genius known in the mythology as Janus, and from which  was derived the name January, was portrayed with two  faces, the one of an old man looking mournfully backward  over the old year, and the other of a young man looking  joyfully forward to the new year.
This personification,  made the opener of the year, and represented as holding  a pair of cross-keys, was called "The carrier of the keys  of the kingdom of heaven."
Hence, the Popes of Rome,  claiming apostolic succession from Peter, the Janus of the  Christian twelve, wear cross-keys as the insignia of their  office.
Sometimes a crosier, or shepherd's crook, is substituted  for one of the keys, in reference to his arrogated  office of the leader of the sheep!
The authority for the  assumption that the Popes are Peter's successors is found  in Matthew xvi.
18, 19; but its fallacy becomes apparent  when we bear in mind that the scriptures are but collections  of astronomical allegories, and that the Peter  referred to in the text was not a man, but the mythical  genius of the month of January.
In reference to the last month, we find that the  authors of the ancient solar fables, ever doubting whether  God Sol, after inaugurating Winter by his supposed retreat  from the earth, would return to revivify nature with  his life-giving rays, gave to the genius of the twelfth  month the title of the Doubter.
In the Christian calendar  this personification is known as Thomas, and a more  specific dedication of the shortest day of the year having  been made to him, the 21st day of December is called St.  Thomas day.
The Seasons.
When the cardinal points were in the constellations  Leo, Taurus, Aquarius and Scorpio, the astrologers, objecting  to the signification of the latter, substituted the  constellation in conjunction therewith, which is known  as Aquila (Ak-we-la) or Flying Eagle.
In the allegorical  astronomy of that remote period these genii of the seasons  were designated as beasts, and as such we find them  referred to in Revelation iv.
7, which reads as follows:  "And the first beast was like a lion (Leo), and the second  beast like a calf (Taurus, the bull calf), and the third  beast had a face as a man, (Aquarius, the waterman) and  the fourth beast was like a flying eagle (Aquila)."
In the  first chapter of Ezekiel, the prophet, the genii of the seasons  are referred to in the same manner.
These genii of the seasons, standing, imaginarily, at  the four corners of the heavens, were called corner-keepers,  and making them witnesses to God Sol in his apparent  annual revolution, the founders of the Astral Worship  designated them as Archangels, Evangelists, God-Spellers  or Gospel-Bearers, and claiming inspiration from  them, composed four different histories of the birth and  earth-life of the incarnate saviour, to each of which they  attached a name, and called these records the Gospel  story.
In its Chaldean version, the names of Gabriel,  Michael, Raphael and Uriel were given them; but while  the first two of these are mentioned in the Christian Gospel  story, its authors gave to the Evangelists the names  of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.
Thus knowing the  true signification of the Disciples and Evangelists, the  very pertinent question presents itself: If they are not  the genii of the months and the seasons, why are there  just twelve of the one and four of the other?
Half Year of Increasing Days.
In the ancient astrolatry, the half year of increasing  days, extending from the Winter to the Summer Solstice,  was personified by the composite figure representing the  constellations of Taurus and Aquarius, which, constituted  of the winged body of a bull and the head and beard  of a man, was called the Cherubim.
This personification  we find portrayed upon the Assyrian marbles on exhibition  in the British Museum.
Half Year of Decreasing Days.
The half year of decreasing days, extending from the  Summer to the Winter Solstice, was personified by the  figure, which, representing the constellations of Leo and  Aquila, and composed of the winged body and limbs of a  lion, with the head of an eagle, was called the Seraphim.
These last two personifications constituted the Archangels  of the ancient Astral Worship.
Last Quarter of the Year.
The last quarter of the year was personified in the  ancient allegories as a decrepit old man, who, stung by  a Scorpion (Scorpio), and fatally wounded by an arrow  from the quiver of an archer (Saggitarius) dies at the  Winter Solstice; and, after lying in the grave for the space  of three days, is brought to life again.
Such was the personification  referred to in the Christian Gospel-story as  having been raised from the grave by the mandate, "Come  forth, Lazarus."
Thus have we shown that the elders  and the saints; the angels, and the Archangels; the Cherubim  and Seraphim; and also poor old Lazarus, are but  personifications of the several divisions of time.
ZODIACAL SYMBOLS OF SOLAR WORSHIP.
Having shown that the founders of the ancient astrolatry  accorded homage to God Sol as Lord of Evil, under  the symbol of the serpent, and marked the beginning of  his reign, as such, by the constellation "Serpens" placed in  conjunction with the Autumnal Equinox; we will now  direct attention to the symbols under which he was worshipped  as Lord of Good, which, corresponding to the  form of the constellation in which occurred the Vernal  Equinox, and which was changed to correspond to the  form of the succeeding constellation as that Cardinal  point passed into it, by that process, known in Astronomy,  as the precession of the Equinoxes, its explanation becomes  essential to a correct understanding of our subject.
After long observation, aided by the telescope, of  which they were undoubtedly the original inventors, the  ancient Astrologers discovered that the Sun, in making  his apparent annual revolution, did not return to the same  point in the heavens, but fell behind that of the preceding  year, at the rate of 50¼ seconds of a degree annually.
At  this rate of precession, which modern, calculation has confirmed,  it requires 71 2-3 years for the Cardinal points to  pass through one degree on the Ecliptic, and 2150 years  through thirty degrees, or one sign of the Zodiac.
The  knowledge of this process affording an exact chronology,  we are enabled, not only to determine the origin of these  symbols, but to approximate, very nearly, to the respective  dates of their adoption.
The Sphinx.
From the teachings of Astronomy we learn that the  Summer Solstice is now occupying the point between the  signs of Taurus and Gemini, from which we know that  that Cardinal point has passed through three whole signs  since it was between the signs of Leo and Virgo, and we  have but to multiply 2,150 by 3 to determine that it has  been about 6,450 years ago.
Hence, the tourist to the  Nile valley, when viewing, near the base of old Cheops,  the great Egyptian pyramid, a colossal head and bust of  a woman, carved in stone, and learns that it is attached  to a body, in the form of a lion in a crouching attitude 146  feet long, hidden beneath the shifting sands of the Libyan  desert; if possessed of the knowledge of the precession  of the Equinoxes, he will be enabled to solve the  riddle of the Sphinx by recognizing in that grotesque  monument the mid-summer symbol of solar worship,  when the Summer Solstice was between the signs of Leo  and Virgo.
The Dragon.
When the Summer Solstice was between the signs  of Leo and Virgo, the Winter Solstice was between those  of Aquarius and Pisces, and the figure composed of the  body of a man with the tail of a fish became the mid-winter  symbol of solar worship.
Such was the form of this  symbol to which the ancient Phoenicians paid homage  to the Lord under the name of Dagon.
The Bull.
At the same time the Summer Solstice entered the  sign of Leo, the Vernal Equinox entered that of Taurus,  and the bull becoming the spring symbol of solar worship—the  Lord was designated in the ancient allegories as the  bull of God which taketh away the sin of the world; which,  shorn of its allegorical sense, signifies the sun in Taurus,  or sun of spring, which taketh away the evil of Winter.
Such is the purport of hieroglyphical inscriptions upon  papyrus rolls found in Egypt, and engraved upon obelisks  erected in the Nile valley, one of which has been recently  brought to the City of New York and set up in Central  Park.
In the East Indies this symbol was represented by  the figure of a bull with the solar disk between his horns;  and the Egyptians, who were of Hindoo origin, perpetuating  it in their "Apis," it was reproduced in the golden calf  of the ancient Israelites.
The Assyrians represented this  symbol by the figure of a winged bull with the face and  beard of a man; the Phoenicians, in their "Baal," by the  figure of a man with a bull's head and horns; and the  small silver bull's heads with golden horns, recently discovered  by Dr. Schliemann in the ruins of Mycenae, were  jewels worn by the women of that ancient city, when the  Vernal Equinox was in the sign of Taurus.
The Ram.
By deducting 2,150 years from 6,450, we determine  that about 4,300 years; ago the Vernal Equinox entered the  sign of Aries, and the spring symbol of solar worship,  changing from the bull to the ram, was represented by  ram-headed figures, two of which, found in Egypt, are on  exhibition in the British Museum.
Then the text which  read the bull of God, was changed to the Ram of God  which taketh away the sins of the world.
The Lamb.
Ultimately attaching a meek and lowly disposition  to the imaginary incarnations of the mythical genius of  the sun, the symbol of the ram was changed to that of the  lamb, and the text in the allegories, which read the Ram of  God, was changed to read "The Lamb of God which  taketh away the sin of the World," John i, 29.
The explanation  we have given relative to the Zodiacal Symbols  of solar worship makes the assurance doubly sure that the  originals of the New Testament were composed when the  Vernal Equinox was in the sign of Aries, as will be  shown hereafter.
Having adopted the symbol of the  lamb, it was represented by several forms of what is  known as Agnus Dei, or Lamb of God, one of which was  in the form of a bleeding lamb with a vase attached into  which blood is flowing, which originated in reference to  the shedding of blood as a vicarious atonement for sin.
But the most comprehensive form of this symbol in its  astronomical signification, was represented by the  figure of a lamb in a standing attitude, supporting the  circle of the Zodiac, divided into quarters to denote the  seasons.
At each of the cardinal points there was a small  cross, and the lamb held in its uplifted fore-foot a larger  cross, the long arm of which was made to cut the celestial  equator at the angle of 23½ degrees, the true angle of  obliquity of the Ecliptic.
This symbol is still retained in  the Catholic Church.
The Fish.
By deducting 2,150 years from 4,300 we determine  that about 2,150 years ago the Vernal Equinox entered  the sign of Pisces; and although the original version of the  New Testament was founded upon the symbol of the lamb,  it is a historical fact that for centuries after the beginning  of our era, the Christians paid homage to the Lord under  the symbol of the fish; but ultimately going into desuetude,  the lamb was retained as the distinguishing symbol  of the Christian religion until the year 680, at which date  another was substituted, as will be shown under our next  heading.
THE SACRED NUMBERS 7 AND 12.
In reference to the planets, and the signs of the  Zodiac, the numbers seven and twelve were recognized  as sacred by the ancient Astrologers, and dedications  were made to them in all kinds and sorts of forms.
In  the allegories, the genii of the planets were designated  as spirits or messengers to the Supreme Deity, imaginarily  enthroned above the firmament, which we find described  in Revelations iv.
5, as "Seven lamps of fire burning  before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God;"  and which were represented by lights burning in seven  branched candlesticks set before the altars in the temples;  the central light for the Sun; the Moon, Mercury and  Venus on one side; and Mars, Jupiter and Saturn on the  other.
The seven branched candlesticks seen in all  Catholic churches, and in some Protestant ones, are intended  to represent the same planetary system.
Among the numerous dedications to the genii of the  planets we mention the seven days of the week, the seven  stories of the tower of Babylon, the seven gates of Thebes,  the seven piped flute of Pan, the seven stringed lyre of  Apollo, the seven books of fate, the book of seven seals,  the seven castes into which the Egyptians and East Indians  were divided, and the jubilee of seven times seven  years.
Among the dedications to the twelve signs we  mention the twelve months of the year, the grand cycle  of 12,000 years, the twelve altars of James, the twelve  labors of Hercules, the twelve divisions of the Egyptian  Labyrinth, the twelve shields of Mars, the twelve precious  stones, ranged in threes to denote the seasons, in the  breastplate of High Priest, the twelve foundations of the  Sacred City, referred to in the Book of Revelation, the  twelve sons of Jacob, the twelve tribes of Israel, and the  twelve Disciples.
In the Book of Revelation alone the  number 7 is repeated twenty-four times, and the number  12 fourteen times.
THE TWELVE THOUSAND YEAR CYCLE.
In determining the duration of the period within  which were to occur the events taught in the doctrines of  the Exoteric Creed, the ancient Astrologers dedicated  a thousand years to each of the signs of the Zodiac, and  thus inaugurating the cycle of twelve thousand years,  taught that, at its conclusion, the heaven and the earth,  which they believed to be composed of the indestructible  elements of fire, air, earth and water, would, through the  agency of the first of these, be reduced to chaos, as a  preliminary to the reorganization of a new heaven and a  new earth at the beginning of the succeeding cycle.
Such  was the origin of the grand cycle of the ancient Astrolatry,  and it must be borne in mind that its authors made its  conclusion to correspond in time and circumstance to the  doctrines relating to the finale of the plan of redemption.
THE ANCIENT TRIAD.
After conceiving the idea of a primeval chaos, constituted  of four indestructible elements of which fire was  the leading one, the Oriental astrologers began to indulge  in speculations relative to the agencies which were engaged  in its organization.
Having no knowledge of the  forces inherent in nature, they imputed this work to three  intelligences, which, embodying the All in All, they personified  by the figure of a man with three heads, and to  this trinity gave the names of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva.
Such a figure, carved in stone, may be seen in the island  Cave of Elephanta, near Bombay, India, and is popularly  believed to represent the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer;  but, in determining their true signification, we  must be governed by the ancient teachings that "All  things were made by one god-head with three names, and  this God is all things."
Hence the conclusion is irresistible  that the first person represents neither the creator  nor organizer of chaos, but chaos itself; the second person,  its organizer and governor; and the third person, the  agent in nature which impresses all her parts with life and  motion; the latter being the imaginary great soul or  spirit inculcated in the Esoteric philosophy.
In support  of this opinion it will be found that the Egyptian Triad of  Father, Son and Spirit is virtually the same we have assigned  to its Oriental prototype.
Thus we see that to  the ancient Astrolatry Christendom is indebted for the  Trinity of              "God the Father, God the Son,              God the Spirit—three in one."
But, having ascribed supreme intelligence or reason  to its second person, under the name of the Logos, or  Word, and designating its third person as the Holy Ghost,  the ancient Triad was usually formulated as the Father,  the Word and the Holy Ghost, as may be seen by reference  to the text in the allegories which we find recorded  in I John v. 7, which reads that "There are three that  bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word and the  Holy Ghost, and these three are one."
Considered in some forms of Astrolatry as too  sacred to attach a name to the triune Deity, he was called  "the One," and we find him thus designated in the 4th  chapter of Revelation, where, like Zeus and Jupiter, of the  Grecian and Roman mythologies, he is represented as  seated above the firmament, upon a throne from which  "proceeded lightnings and thunderings," and to whom  all, the subordinate divinities were made to pay homage.
As the hurler of thunderbolts he was called "the Thunderer,"  and as the opener of the windows of heaven,  when it rained, he was designated "Jupiter Pluvius."
Such was the ancient Triad made to say of himself, in an  inscription found in the ruins of the temple at Sais in  Egypt, "I am all that has been, all that is, and all that  shall be, and no mortal has lifted yet the veil that covers  me;" and such was the Triunity referred to as the God  Universe by Pliny, the Roman philosopher and naturalist,  who, flourishing in the first century of the Christian era,  wrote that he is "An infinite God which has never been  created, and which shall never come to an end.
To look  for something else beyond it is useless labor for man and  out of his reach.
Behold that truly sacred Being, eternal  and immense, which includes within itself everything; it  is All in All, or rather itself is All.
It is the work of  nature, and itself is nature."
Thus we see that, although inculcating homage to a  multitude of subordinate divinities, the ancient Astrolatry  was only an apparent Polytheism; its enlightened votaries,  recognizing the dogma of the unity of God, were in  reality Monotheists, paying supreme adoration to the  mythical genius of the Sun, to whom we will now direct  attention.
ANDREW LANG.
GUY MANNERING  OR  THE ASTROLOGER  CHAPTER I  He could not deny that, looking round upon the dreary region,  and seeing nothing but bleak fields and naked trees, hills  obscured by fogs, and flats covered with inundations, he did  for some time suffer melancholy to prevail upon him, and  wished himself again safe at home.
--’Travels of Will.
Marvel,’ IDLER, No.
49.
It was in the beginning of the month of November 17--when a young English  gentleman, who had just left the university of Oxford, made use of the  liberty afforded him to visit some parts of the north of England; and  curiosity extended his tour into the adjacent frontier of the sister  country.
He had visited, on the day that opens our history, some monastic  ruins in the county of Dumfries, and spent much of the day in making  drawings of them from different points, so that, on mounting his horse to  resume his journey, the brief and gloomy twilight of the season had  already commenced.
His way lay through a wide tract of black moss,  extending for miles on each side and before him.
Little eminences arose  like islands on its surface, bearing here and there patches of corn, which  even at this season was green, and sometimes a hut or farm-house, shaded  by a willow or two and surrounded by large elder-bushes.
These insulated  dwellings communicated with each other by winding passages through the  moss, impassable by any but the natives themselves.
The public road,  however, was tolerably well made and safe, so that the prospect of being  benighted brought with it no real danger.
Still it is uncomfortable to  travel alone and in the dark through an unknown country; and there are few  ordinary occasions upon which Fancy frets herself so much as in a  situation like that of Mannering.
As the light grew faint and more faint, and the morass appeared blacker  and blacker, our traveller questioned more closely each chance passenger  on his distance from the village of Kippletringan, where he proposed to  quarter for the night.
His queries were usually answered by a  counter-challenge respecting the place from whence he came.
While  sufficient daylight remained to show the dress and appearance of a  gentleman, these cross interrogatories were usually put in the form of a  case supposed, as, ‘Ye’ll hae been at the auld abbey o’ Halycross, sir?
there’s mony English gentlemen gang to see that.’--Or, ‘Your honour will  become frae the house o’ Pouderloupat?’ But when the voice of the querist  alone was distinguishable, the response usually was, ‘Where are ye coming  frae at sic a time o’ night as the like o’ this?’--or, ‘Ye’ll no be o’  this country, freend?’ The answers, when obtained, were neither very  reconcilable to each other nor accurate in the information which they  afforded.
Kippletringan was distant at first ‘a gey bit’; then the ‘gey  bit’ was more accurately described as ‘ablins three mile’; then the ‘three  mile’ diminished into ‘like a mile and a bittock’; then extended  themselves into ‘four mile or thereawa’; and, lastly, a female voice,  having hushed a wailing infant which the spokeswoman carried in her arms,  assured Guy Mannering, ‘It was a weary lang gate yet to Kippletringan, and  unco heavy road for foot passengers.’ The poor hack upon which Mannering  was mounted was probably of opinion that it suited him as ill as the  female respondent; for he began to flag very much, answered each  application of the spur with a groan, and stumbled at every stone (and  they were not few) which lay in his road.
Mannering now grew impatient.
He was occasionally betrayed into a  deceitful hope that the end of his journey was near by the apparition of a  twinkling light or two; but, as he came up, he was disappointed to find  that the gleams proceeded from some of those farm-houses which  occasionally ornamented the surface of the extensive bog.
At length, to  complete his perplexity, he arrived at a place where the road divided into  two.
If there had been light to consult the relics of a finger-post which  stood there, it would have been of little avail, as, according to the good  custom of North Britain, the inscription had been defaced shortly after  its erection.
Our adventurer was therefore compelled, like a knight-errant  of old, to trust to the sagacity of his horse, which, without any demur,  chose the left-hand path, and seemed to proceed at a somewhat livelier  pace than before, affording thereby a hope that he knew he was drawing  near to his quarters for the evening.
This hope, however, was not speedily  accomplished, and Mannering, whose impatience made every furlong seem  three, began to think that Kippletringan was actually retreating before  him in proportion to his advance.
It was now very cloudy, although the stars from time to time shed a  twinkling and uncertain light.
Hitherto nothing had broken the silence  around him but the deep cry of the bog-blitter, or bull-of-the-bog, a  large species of bittern, and the sighs of the wind as it passed along the  dreary morass.
To these was now joined the distant roar of the ocean,  towards which the traveller seemed to be fast approaching.
This was no  circumstance to make his mind easy.
Many of the roads in that country lay  along the sea-beach, and were liable to be flooded by the tides, which  rise with great height, and advance with extreme rapidity.
Others were  intersected with creeks and small inlets, which it was only safe to pass  at particular times of the tide.
Neither circumstance would have suited a  dark night, a fatigued horse, and a traveller ignorant of his road.
Mannering resolved, therefore, definitively to halt for the night at the  first inhabited place, however poor, he might chance to reach, unless he  could procure a guide to this unlucky village of Kippletringan.
A miserable hut gave him an opportunity to execute his purpose.
He found  out the door with no small difficulty, and for some time knocked without  producing any other answer than a duet between a female and a cur-dog, the  latter yelping as if he would have barked his heart out, the other  screaming in chorus.
By degrees the human tones predominated; but the  angry bark of the cur being at the instant changed into a howl, it is  probable something more than fair strength of lungs had contributed to the  ascendency.
‘Sorrow be in your thrapple then!’ these were the first articulate words,  ‘will ye no let me hear what the man wants, wi’ your yaffing?’  ‘Am I far from Kippletringan, good dame?’  ‘Frae Kippletringan!!
!’ in an exalted tone of wonder, which we can but  faintly express by three points of admiration.
‘Ow, man!
ye should hae  hadden eassel to Kippletringan; ye maun gae back as far as the whaap, and  baud the whaap till ye come to Ballenloan, and then--’  ‘This will never do, good dame!
my horse is almost quite knocked up; can  you not give me a night’s lodgings?’  ‘Troth can I no; I am a lone woman, for James he’s awa to Drumshourloch  Fair with the year-aulds, and I daurna for my life open the door to ony o’  your gang-there-out sort o’ bodies.’  ‘But what must I do then, good dame?
for I can’t sleep here upon the road  all night.’  ‘Troth, I kenna, unless ye like to gae down and speer for quarters at the  Place.
I’se warrant they’ll tak ye in, whether ye be gentle or semple.’  ‘Simple enough, to be wandering here at such a time of night,’ thought  Mannering, who was ignorant of the meaning of the phrase; ‘but how shall I  get to the PLACE, as you call it?’  ‘Ye maun baud wessel by the end o’ the loan, and take tent o’ the  jaw-hole.’  ‘O, if ye get to eassel and wessel again, I am undone!
Is there nobody  that could guide me to this Place?
I will pay him handsomely.’  The word pay operated like magic.
‘Jock, ye villain,’ exclaimed the voice  from the interior, ‘are ye lying routing there, and a young gentleman  seeking the way to the Place?
Get up, ye fause loon, and show him the way  down the muckle loaning.
He’ll show you the way, sir, and I’se warrant  ye’ll be weel put up; for they never turn awa naebody frae the door; and  ye ‘ll be come in the canny moment, I’m thinking, for the laird’s  servant--that’s no to say his body-servant, but the helper like--rade  express by this e’en to fetch the houdie, and he just staid the drinking  o’ twa pints o’ tippenny to tell us how my leddy was ta’en wi’ her pains.’  ‘Perhaps,’ said Mannering, ‘at such a time a stranger’s arrival might be  inconvenient?’  ‘Hout, na, ye needna be blate about that; their house is muckle eneugh,  and decking time’s aye canty time.’  By this time Jock had found his way into all the intricacies of a tattered  doublet and more tattered pair of breeches, and sallied forth, a great  white-headed, bare-legged, lubberly boy of twelve years old, so exhibited  by the glimpse of a rush-light which his half-naked mother held in such a  manner as to get a peep at the stranger without greatly exposing herself  to view in return.
Jock moved on westward by the end of the house, leading  Mannering’s horse by the bridle, and piloting with some dexterity along  the little path which bordered the formidable jaw-hole, whose vicinity the  stranger was made sensible of by means of more organs than one.
His guide  then dragged the weary hack along a broken and stony cart-track, next over  a ploughed field, then broke down a slap, as he called it, in a drystone  fence, and lugged the unresisting animal through the breach, about a rood  of the simple masonry giving way in the splutter with which he passed.
Finally, he led the way through a wicket into something which had still  the air of an avenue, though many of the trees were felled.
The roar of  the ocean was now near and full, and the moon, which began to make her  appearance, gleamed on a turreted and apparently a ruined mansion of  considerable extent.
Mannering fixed his eyes upon it with a disconsolate  sensation.
CHAPTER II  Comes me cranking in,  And cuts me from the best of all my land  A huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle, out  Henry IV, Part 1.
The company in the parlour at Ellangowan consisted of the Laird and a sort  of person who might be the village schoolmaster, or perhaps the minister’s  assistant; his appearance was too shabby to indicate the minister,  considering he was on a visit to the Laird.
The Laird himself was one of those second-rate sort of persons that are to  be found frequently in rural situations.
Fielding has described one class  as feras consumere nati; but the love of field-sports indicates a certain  activity of mind, which had forsaken Mr. Bertram, if ever he possessed it.
A good-humoured listlessness of countenance formed the only remarkable  expression of his features, although they were rather handsome than  otherwise.
In fact, his physiognomy indicated the inanity of character  which pervaded his life.
I will give the reader some insight into his  state and conversation before he has finished a long lecture to Mannering  upon the propriety and comfort of wrapping his stirrup-irons round with a  wisp of straw when he had occasion to ride in a chill evening.
Godfrey Bertram of Ellangowan succeeded to a long pedigree and a short  rent-roll, like many lairds of that period.
His list of forefathers  ascended so high that they were lost in the barbarous ages of Galwegian  independence, so that his genealogical tree, besides the Christian and  crusading names of Godfreys, and Gilberts, and Dennises, and Rolands  without end, bore heathen fruit of yet darker ages--Arths, and Knarths,  and Donagilds, and Hanlons.
In truth, they had been formerly the stormy  chiefs of a desert but extensive domain, and the heads of a numerous tribe  called Mac-Dingawaie, though they afterwards adopted the Norman surname of  Bertram.
They had made war, raised rebellions, been defeated, beheaded,  and hanged, as became a family of importance, for many centuries.
But they  had gradually lost ground in the world, and, from being themselves the  heads of treason and traitorous conspiracies, the Bertrams, or  Mac-Dingawaies, of Ellangowan had sunk into subordinate accomplices.
Their  most fatal exhibitions in this capacity took place in the seventeenth  century, when the foul fiend possessed them with a spirit of  contradiction, which uniformly involved them in controversy with the  ruling powers.
They reversed the conduct of the celebrated Vicar of Bray,  and adhered as tenaciously to the weaker side as that worthy divine to the  stronger.
And truly, like him, they had their reward.
ENLARGE   Allan Bertram of Ellangowan, who flourished tempore Caroli primi, was,  says my authority, Sir Robert Douglas, in his Scottish Baronage (see the  title ‘Ellangowan’), ‘a steady loyalist, and full of zeal for the cause of  His Sacred Majesty, in which he united with the great Marquis of Montrose  and other truly zealous and honourable patriots, and sustained great  losses in that behalf.
He had the honour of knighthood conferred upon him  by His Most Sacred Majesty, and was sequestrated as a malignant by the  parliament, 1642, and afterwards as a resolutioner in the year 1648.’  These two cross-grained epithets of malignant and resolutioner cost poor  Sir Allan one half of the family estate.
His son Dennis Bertram married a  daughter of an eminent fanatic who had a seat in the council of state, and  saved by that union the remainder of the family property.
But, as ill  chance would have it, he became enamoured of the lady’s principles as well  as of her charms, and my author gives him this character: ‘He was a man of  eminent parts and resolution, for which reason he was chosen by the  western counties one of the committee of noblemen and gentlemen to report  their griefs to the privy council of Charles II.
anent the coming in of  the Highland host in 1678.’ For undertaking this patriotic task he  underwent a fine, to pay which he was obliged to mortgage half of the  remaining moiety of his paternal property.
This loss he might have  recovered by dint of severe economy, but on the breaking out of Argyle’s  rebellion Dennis Bertram was again suspected by government, apprehended,  sent to Dunnotar Castle on the coast of the Mearns, and there broke his  neck in an attempt to escape from a subterranean habitation called the  Whigs’ Vault, in which he was confined with some eighty of the same  persuasion.
The apprizer therefore (as the holder of a mortgage was then  called) entered upon possession, and, in the language of Hotspur, ‘came me  cranking in,’ and cut the family out of another monstrous cantle of their  remaining property.
Donohoe Bertram, with somewhat of an Irish name and somewhat of an Irish  temper, succeeded to the diminished property of Ellangowan.
He turned out  of doors the Reverend Aaron Macbriar, his mother’s chaplain (it is said  they quarrelled about the good graces of a milkmaid); drank himself daily  drunk with brimming healths to the king, council, and bishops; held orgies  with the Laird of Lagg, Theophilus Oglethorpe, and Sir James Turner; and  lastly, took his grey gelding and joined Clavers at Killiecrankie.
At the  skirmish of Dunkeld, 1689, he was shot dead by a Cameronian with a silver  button (being supposed to have proof from the Evil One against lead and  steel), and his grave is still called the Wicked Laird’s Lair.
His son Lewis had more prudence than seems usually to have belonged to the  family.
He nursed what property was yet left to him; for Donohoe’s  excesses, as well as fines and forfeitures, had made another inroad upon  the estate.
And although even he did not escape the fatality which induced  the Lairds of Ellangowan to interfere with politics, he had yet the  prudence, ere he went out with Lord Kenmore in 1715, to convey his estate  to trustees, in order to parry pains and penalties in case the Earl of Mar  could not put down the Protestant succession.
But Scylla and Charybdis--a  word to the wise--he only saved his estate at expense of a lawsuit, which  again subdivided the family property.
He was, however, a man of  resolution.
He sold part of the lands, evacuated the old cattle, where the  family lived in their decadence as a mouse (said an old farmer) lives  under a firlot.
Pulling down part of these venerable ruins, he built with  the stones a narrow house of three stories high, with a front like a  grenadier’s cap, having in the very centre a round window like the single  eye of a Cyclops, two windows on each side, and a door in the middle,  leading to a parlour and withdrawing-room full of all manner of cross  lights.
This was the New Place of Ellangowan, in which we left our hero, better  amused perhaps than our readers, and to this Lewis Bertram retreated, full  of projects for re-establishing the prosperity of his family.
He took some  land into his own hand, rented some from neighbouring proprietors, bought  and sold Highland cattle and Cheviot sheep, rode to fairs and trysts,  fought hard bargains, and held necessity at the staff’s end as well as he  might.
But what he gained in purse he lost in honour, for such  agricultural and commercial negotiations were very ill looked upon by his  brother lairds, who minded nothing but cock-fighting, hunting, coursing,  and horse-racing, with now and then the alternative of a desperate duel.
The occupations which he followed encroached, in their opinion, upon the  article of Ellangowan’s gentry, and he found it necessary gradually to  estrange himself from their society, and sink into what was then a very  ambiguous character, a gentleman farmer.
In the midst of his schemes death  claimed his tribute, and the scanty remains of a large property descended  upon Godfrey Bertram, the present possessor, his only son.
The danger of the father’s speculations was soon seen.
Deprived of Laird  Lewis’s personal and active superintendence, all his undertakings  miscarried, and became either abortive or perilous.
Without a single spark  of energy to meet or repel these misfortunes, Godfrey put his faith in the  activity of another.
He kept neither hunters nor hounds, nor any other  southern preliminaries to ruin; but, as has been observed of his  countrymen, he kept a man of business, who answered the purpose equally  well.
Under this gentleman’s supervision small debts grew into large,  interests were accumulated upon capitals, movable bonds became heritable,  and law charges were heaped upon all; though Ellangowan possessed so  little the spirit of a litigant that he was on two occasions charged to  make payment of the expenses of a long lawsuit, although he had never  before heard that he had such cases in court.
Meanwhile his neighbours  predicted his final ruin.
Those of the higher rank, with some malignity,  accounted him already a degraded brother.
The lower classes, seeing  nothing enviable in his situation, marked his embarrassments with more  compassion.
He was even a kind of favourite with them, and upon the  division of a common, or the holding of a black-fishing or poaching court,  or any similar occasion when they conceived themselves oppressed by the  gentry, they were in the habit of saying to each other, ‘Ah, if  Ellangowan, honest man, had his ain that his forbears had afore him, he  wadna see the puir folk trodden down this gait.’ Meanwhile, this general  good opinion never prevented their taking advantage of him on all possible  occasions, turning their cattle into his parks, stealing his wood,  shooting his game, and so forth, ‘for the Laird, honest man, he’ll never  find it; he never minds what a puir body does.’ Pedlars, gipsies, tinkers,  vagrants of all descriptions, roosted about his outhouses, or harboured in  his kitchen; and the Laird, who was ‘nae nice body,’ but a thorough  gossip, like most weak men, found recompense for his hospitality in the  pleasure of questioning them on the news of the country side.
A circumstance arrested Ellangowan’s progress on the highroad to ruin.
This was his marriage with a lady who had a portion of about four thousand  pounds.
Nobody in the neighbourhood could conceive why she married him and  endowed him with her wealth, unless because he had a tall, handsome  figure, a good set of features, a genteel address, and the most perfect  good-humour.
It might be some additional consideration, that she was  herself at the reflecting age of twenty-eight, and had no near relations  to control her actions or choice.
It was in this lady’s behalf (confined for the first time after her  marriage) that the speedy and active express, mentioned by the old dame of  the cottage, had been despatched to Kippletringan on the night of  Mannering’s arrival.
Though we have said so much of the Laird himself, it still remains that we  make the reader in some degree acquainted with his companion.
This was  Abel Sampson, commonly called, from his occupation as a pedagogue, Dominie  Sampson.
He was of low birth, but having evinced, even from his cradle, an  uncommon seriousness of disposition, the poor parents were encouraged to  hope that their bairn, as they expressed it, ‘might wag his pow in a  pulpit yet.’ With an ambitious view to such a consummation, they pinched  and pared, rose early and lay down late, ate dry bread and drank cold  water, to secure to Abel the means of learning.
Meantime, his tall,  ungainly figure, his taciturn and grave manners, and some grotesque habits  of swinging his limbs and screwing his visage while reciting his task,  made poor Sampson the ridicule of all his school-companions.
The same  qualities secured him at Glasgow College a plentiful share of the same  sort of notice.
Half the youthful mob of ‘the yards’ used to assemble  regularly to see Dominie Sampson (for he had already attained that  honourable title) descend the stairs from the Greek class, with his  lexicon under his arm, his long misshapen legs sprawling abroad, and  keeping awkward time to the play of his immense shoulder-blades, as they  raised and depressed the loose and threadbare black coat which was his  constant and only wear.
When he spoke, the efforts of the professor  (professor of divinity though he was) were totally inadequate to restrain  the inextinguishable laughter of the students, and sometimes even to  repress his own.
The long, sallow visage, the goggle eyes, the huge  under-jaw, which appeared not to open and shut by an act of volition, but  to be dropped and hoisted up again by some complicated machinery within  the inner man, the harsh and dissonant voice, and the screech-owl notes to  which it was exalted when he was exhorted to pronounce more  distinctly,--all added fresh subject for mirth to the torn cloak and  shattered shoe, which have afforded legitimate subjects of raillery  against the poor scholar from Juvenal’s time downward.
It was never known  that Sampson either exhibited irritability at this ill usage, or made the  least attempt to retort upon his tormentors.
He slunk from college by the  most secret paths he could discover, and plunged himself into his  miserable lodging, where, for eighteenpence a week, he was allowed the  benefit of a straw mattress, and, if his landlady was in good humour,  permission to study his task by her fire.
Under all these disadvantages,  he obtained a competent knowledge of Greek and Latin, and some  acquaintance with the sciences.
CHAPTER III  Do not the hist’ries of all ages  Relate miraculous presages  Of strange turns in the world’s affairs,  Foreseen by astrologers, soothsayers,  Chaldeans, learned genethliacs,  And some that have writ almanacks?
Hudibras.
The circumstances of the landlady were pleaded to Mannering, first, as an  apology for her not appearing to welcome her guest, and for those  deficiencies in his entertainment which her attention might have supplied,  and then as an excuse for pressing an extra bottle of good wine.
‘I cannot  weel sleep,’ said the Laird, with the anxious feelings of a father in such  a predicament, ‘till I hear she’s gotten ower with it; and if you, sir,  are not very sleepery, and would do me and the Dominie the honour to sit  up wi’ us, I am sure we shall not detain you very late.
Luckie Howatson is  very expeditious.
There was ance a lass that was in that way; she did not  live far from hereabouts--ye needna shake your head and groan, Dominie; I  am sure the kirk dues were a’ weel paid, and what can man do mair?--it was  laid till her ere she had a sark ower her head; and the man that she since  wadded does not think her a pin the waur for the misfortune.
They live,  Mr. Mannering, by the shoreside at Annan, and a mair decent, orderly  couple, with six as fine bairns as ye would wish to see plash in a  saltwater dub; and little curlie Godfrey--that’s the eldest, the come o’  will, as I may say--he’s on board an excise yacht.
I hae a cousin at the  board of excise; that’s Commissioner Bertram; he got his commissionership  in the great contest for the county, that ye must have heard of, for it  was appealed to the House of Commons.
Now I should have voted there for  the Laird of Balruddery; but ye see my father was a Jacobite, and out with  Kenmore, so he never took the oaths; and I ken not weel how it was, but  all that I could do and say, they keepit me off the roll, though my agent,  that had a vote upon my estate, ranked as a good vote for auld Sir Thomas  Kittlecourt.
But, to return to what I was saying, Luckie Howatson is very  expeditious, for this lass--’  Here the desultory and long-winded narrative of the Laird was interrupted  by the voice of some one ascending the stairs from the kitchen story, and  singing at full pitch of voice.
The high notes were too shrill for a man,  the low seemed too deep for a woman.
The words, as far as Mannering could  distinguish them, seemed to run thus:--  Canny moment, lucky fit!
Is the lady lighter yet?
Be it lad, or be it lass,  Sign wi’ cross and sain wi’ mass.
‘It’s Meg Merrilies, the gipsy, as sure as I am a sinner,’ said Mr.  Bertram.
The Dominie groaned deeply, uncrossed his legs, drew in the huge  splay foot which his former posture had extended, placed it  perpendicularly, and stretched the other limb over it instead, puffing out  between whiles huge volumes of tobacco smoke.
‘What needs ye groan,  Dominie?
I am sure Meg’s sangs do nae ill.’  ‘Nor good neither,’ answered Dominie Sampson, in a voice whose untuneable  harshness corresponded with the awkwardness of his figure.
They were the  first words which Mannering had heard him speak; and as he had been  watching with some curiosity when this eating, drinking, moving, and  smoking automaton would perform the part of speaking, he was a good deal  diverted with the harsh timber tones which issued from him.
But at this  moment the door opened, and Meg Merrilies entered.
Her appearance made Mannering start.
She was full six feet high, wore a  man’s great-coat over the rest of her dress, had in her hand a goodly  sloethorn cudgel, and in all points of equipment, except her petticoats,  seemed rather masculine than feminine.
Her dark elf-locks shot out like  the snakes of the gorgon between an old-fashioned bonnet called a  bongrace, heightening the singular effect of her strong and weather-beaten  features, which they partly shadowed, while her eye had a wild roll that  indicated something like real or affected insanity.
‘Aweel, Ellangowan,’ she said, ‘wad it no hae been a bonnie thing, an the  leddy had been brought to bed, and me at the fair o’ Drumshourloch, no  kenning, nor dreaming a word about it?
Wha was to hae keepit awa the  worriecows, I trow?
Ay, and the elves and gyre-carlings frae the bonnie  bairn, grace be wi’ it?
Ay, or said Saint Colme’s charm for its sake, the  dear?’ And without waiting an answer she began to sing--  Trefoil, vervain, John’s-wort, dill,  Hinders witches of their  will, Weel is them, that weel may  Fast upon Saint Andrew’s day.
Saint Bride and her brat,  Saint Colme and his cat,  Saint Michael and his spear,  Keep the house frae reif and wear.
This charm she sung to a wild tune, in a high and shrill voice, and,  cutting three capers with such strength and agility as almost to touch the  roof of the room, concluded, ‘And now, Laird, will ye no order me a tass  o’ brandy?’  ‘That you shall have, Meg.
Sit down yont there at the door and tell us  what news ye have heard at the fair o’ Drumshourloch.’  ‘Troth, Laird, and there was muckle want o’ you, and the like o’ you; for  there was a whin bonnie lasses there, forbye mysell, and deil ane to gie  them hansels.’  ‘Weel, Meg, and how mony gipsies were sent to the tolbooth?’  ‘Troth, but three, Laird, for there were nae mair in the fair, bye mysell,  as I said before, and I e’en gae them leg-bail, for there’s nae ease in  dealing wi’ quarrelsome fowk.
And there’s Dunbog has warned the Red Rotten  and John Young aff his grunds--black be his cast!
he’s nae gentleman, nor  drap’s bluid o’ gentleman, wad grudge twa gangrel puir bodies the shelter  o’ a waste house, and the thristles by the roadside for a bit cuddy, and  the bits o’ rotten birk to boil their drap parritch wi’.
Weel, there’s Ane  abune a’; but we’ll see if the red cock craw not in his bonnie barn-yard  ae morning before day-dawing.’  ‘Hush!
Meg, hush!
hush!
that’s not safe talk.’  ‘What does she mean?’ said Mannering to Sampson, in an undertone.
‘Fire-raising,’ answered the laconic Dominie.
‘Who, or what is she, in the name of wonder?’  ‘Harlot, thief, witch, and gipsy,’ answered Sampson again.
‘O troth, Laird,’ continued Meg, during this by-talk, ‘it’s but to the  like o’ you ane can open their heart; ye see, they say Dunbog is nae mair  a gentleman than the blunker that’s biggit the bonnie house down in the  howm.
But the like o’ you, Laird, that’s a real gentleman for sae mony  hundred years, and never hunds puir fowk aff your grund as if they were  mad tykes, nane o’ our fowk wad stir your gear if ye had as mony capons as  there’s leaves on the trysting-tree.
And now some o’ ye maun lay down your  watch, and tell me the very minute o’ the hour the wean’s born, an I’ll  spae its fortune.’  ‘Ay, but, Meg, we shall not want your assistance, for here’s a student  from Oxford that kens much better than you how to spae its fortune; he  does it by the stars.’  ‘Certainly, sir,’ said Mannering, entering into the simple humour of his  landlord, ‘I will calculate his nativity according to the rule of the  “triplicities, as recommended by Pythagoras, Hippocrates, Diocles, and  Avicenna.
Or I will begin ab hora questionis, as Haly, Messahala,  Ganwehis, and Guido Bonatus have recommended.’  One of Sampson’s great recommendations to the favour of Mr. Bertram was,  that he never detected the most gross attempt at imposition, so that the  Laird, whose humble efforts at jocularity were chiefly confined to what  were then called bites and bams, since denominated hoaxes and quizzes, had  the fairest possible subject of wit in the unsuspecting Dominie.
It is  true, he never laughed, or joined in the laugh which his own simplicity  afforded--nay, it is said, he never laughed but once in his life, and on  that memorable occasion his landlady miscarried, partly through surprise  at the event itself, and partly from terror at the hideous grimaces which  attended this unusual cachinnation.
The only effect which the discovery of  such impositions produced upon this saturnine personage was, to extort an  ejaculation of ‘Prodigious!’ or ‘Very facetious!’ pronounced syllabically,  but without moving a muscle of his own countenance.
On the present occasion, he turned a gaunt and ghastly stare upon the  youthful astrologer, and seemed to doubt if he had rightly understood his  answer to his patron.
‘I am afraid, sir,’ said Mannering, turning towards him, ‘you may be one  of those unhappy persons who, their dim eyes being unable to penetrate the  starry spheres, and to discern therein the decrees of heaven at a  distance, have their hearts barred against conviction by prejudice and  misprision.’  ‘Truly,’ said Sampson, ‘I opine with Sir Isaac Newton, Knight, and umwhile  master of his Majesty’s mint, that the (pretended) science of astrology is  altogether vain, frivolous, and unsatisfactory.’ And here he reposed his  oracular jaws.
‘Really,’ resumed the traveller, ‘I am sorry to see a gentleman of your  learning and gravity labouring under such strange blindness and delusion.
Will you place the brief, the modern, and, as I may say, the vernacular  name of Isaac Newton in opposition to the grave and sonorous authorities  of Dariot, Bonatus, Ptolemy, Haly, Eztler, Dieterick, Naibob, Harfurt,  Zael, Taustettor, Agrippa, Duretus, Maginus, Origen, and Argol?
Do not  Christians and Heathens, and Jews and Gentiles, and poets and  philosophers, unite in allowing the starry influences?’  ‘Communis error--it is a general mistake,’ answered the inflexible Dominie  Sampson.
‘Not so,’ replied the young Englishman; ‘it is a general and well-grounded  belief.’  ‘It is the resource of cheaters, knaves, and cozeners,’ said Sampson.
‘Abusus non tollit usum.--The abuse of anything doth not abrogate the  lawful use thereof.’    CHAPTER IV  Come and see’ trust thine own eyes  A fearful sign stands in the house of life,  An enemy a fiend lurks close behind  The radiance of thy planet O be warned!
COLERIDGE, from SCHILLER  The belief in astrology was almost universal in the middle of the  seventeenth century; it began to waver and become doubtful towards the  close of that period, and in the beginning of the eighteenth the art fell  into general disrepute, and even under general ridicule.
Yet it still  retained many partizans even in the seats of learning.
Grave and studious  men were loath to relinquish the calculations which had early become the  principal objects of their studies, and felt reluctant to descend from the  predominating height to which a supposed insight into futurity, by the  power of consulting abstract influences and conjunctions, had exalted them  over the rest of mankind.
Among those who cherished this imaginary privilege with undoubting faith  was an old clergyman with whom Mannering was placed during his youth.
He  wasted his eyes in observing the stars, and his brains in calculations  upon their various combinations.
His pupil, in early youth, naturally  caught some portion of his enthusiasm, and laboured for a time to make  himself master of the technical process of astrological research; so that,  before he became convinced of its absurdity, William Lilly himself would  have allowed him ‘a curious fancy and piercing judgment in resolving a  question of nativity.’  On the present occasion he arose as early in the morning as the shortness  of the day permitted, and proceeded to calculate the nativity of the young  heir of Ellangowan.
He undertook the task secundum artem, as well to keep  up appearances as from a sort of curiosity to know whether he yet  remembered, and could practise, the imaginary science.
He accordingly  erected his scheme, or figure of heaven, divided into its twelve houses,  placed the planets therein according to the ephemeris, and rectified their  position to the hour and moment of the nativity.
Without troubling our  readers with the general prognostications which judicial astrology would  have inferred from these circumstances, in this diagram there was one  significator which pressed remarkably upon our astrologer’s attention.
Mars, having dignity in the cusp of the twelfth house, threatened  captivity or sudden and violent death to the native; and Mannering, having  recourse to those further rules by which diviners pretend to ascertain the  vehemency of this evil direction, observed from the result that three  periods would be particularly hazardous--his fifth, his tenth, his  twenty-first year.
It was somewhat remarkable that Mannering had once before tried a similar  piece of foolery at the instance of Sophia Wellwood, the young lady to  whom he was attached, and that a similar conjunction of planetary  influence threatened her with death or imprisonment in her thirty-ninth  year.
She was at this time eighteen; so that, according to the result of  the scheme in both cases, the same year threatened her with the same  misfortune that was presaged to the native or infant whom that night had  introduced into the world.
Struck with this coincidence, Mannering  repeated his calculations; and the result approximated the events  predicted, until at length the same month, and day of the month, seemed  assigned as the period of peril to both.
It will be readily believed that, in mentioning this circumstance, we lay  no weight whatever upon the pretended information thus conveyed.
But it  often happens, such is our natural love for the marvellous, that we  willingly contribute our own efforts to beguile our better judgments.
Whether the coincidence which I have mentioned was really one of those  singular chances which sometimes happen against all ordinary calculations;  or whether Mannering, bewildered amid the arithmetical labyrinth and  technical jargon of astrology, had insensibly twice followed the same clue  to guide him out of the maze; or whether his imagination, seduced by some  point of apparent resemblance, lent its aid to make the similitude between  the two operations more exactly accurate than it might otherwise have  been, it is impossible to guess; but the impression upon his mind that the  results exactly corresponded was vividly and indelibly strong.
He could not help feeling surprise at a coincidence so singular and  unexpected.
‘Does the devil mingle in the dance, to avenge himself for our  trifling with an art said to be of magical origin?
Or is it possible, as  Bacon and Sir Thomas Browne admit, that there is some truth in a sober and  regulated astrology, and that the influence of the stars is not to be  denied, though the due application of it by the knaves who pretend to  practise the art is greatly to be suspected?’ A moment’s consideration of  the subject induced him to dismiss this opinion as fantastical, and only  sanctioned by those learned men either because they durst not at once  shock the universal prejudices of their age, or because they themselves  were not altogether freed from the contagious influence of a prevailing  superstition.
Yet the result of his calculations in these two instances  left so unpleasing an impression on his mind that, like Prospero, he  mentally relinquished his art, and resolved, neither in jest nor earnest,  ever again to practise judicial astrology.
He hesitated a good deal what he should say to the Laird of Ellangowan  concerning the horoscope of his first-born; and at length resolved plainly  to tell him the judgment which he had formed, at the same time acquainting  him with the futility of the rules of art on which he had proceeded.
With  this resolution he walked out upon the terrace.
If the view of the scene around Ellangowan had been pleasing by moonlight,  it lost none of its beauty by the light of the morning sun.
The land, even  in the month of November, smiled under its influence.
A steep but regular  ascent led from the terrace to the neighbouring eminence, and conducted  Mannering to the front of the old castle.
It consisted of two massive  round towers projecting deeply and darkly at the extreme angles of a  curtain, or flat wall, which united them, and thus protecting the main  entrance, that opened through a lofty arch in the centre of the curtain  into the inner court of the castle.
The arms of the family, carved in  freestone, frowned over the gateway, and the portal showed the spaces  arranged by the architect for lowering the portcullis and raising the  drawbridge.
A rude farm-gate, made of young fir-trees nailed together, now  formed the only safeguard of this once formidable entrance.
The esplanade  in front of the castle commanded a noble prospect.
The dreary scene of desolation through which Mannering’s road had lain on  the preceding evening was excluded from the view by some rising ground,  and the landscape showed a pleasing alternation of hill and dale,  intersected by a river, which was in some places visible, and hidden in  others, where it rolled betwixt deep and wooded banks.
The spire of a  church and the appearance of some houses indicated the situation of a  village at the place where the stream had its junction with the ocean.
The  vales seemed well cultivated, the little inclosures into which they were  divided skirting the bottom of the hills, and sometimes carrying their  lines of straggling hedgerows a little way up the ascent.
Above these were  green pastures, tenanted chiefly by herds of black cattle, then the staple  commodity of the country, whose distant low gave no unpleasing animation  to the landscape.
The remoter hills were of a sterner character, and, at  still greater distance, swelled into mountains of dark heath, bordering  the horizon with a screen which gave a defined and limited boundary to the  cultivated country, and added at the same time the pleasing idea that it  was sequestered and solitary.
The sea-coast, which Mannering now saw in  its extent, corresponded in variety and beauty with the inland view.
In  some places it rose into tall rocks, frequently crowned with the ruins of  old buildings, towers, or beacons, which, according to tradition, were  placed within sight of each other, that, in times of invasion or civil  war, they might communicate by signal for mutual defence and protection.
Ellangowan Castle was by far the most extensive and important of these  ruins, and asserted from size and situation the superiority which its  founders were said once to have possessed among the chiefs and nobles of  the district.
In other places the shore was of a more gentle description,  indented with small bays, where the land sloped smoothly down, or sent  into the sea promontories covered with wood.
ENLARGE   A scene so different from what last night’s journey had presaged produced  a proportional effect upon Mannering.
Beneath his eye lay the modern  house--an awkward mansion, indeed, in point of architecture, but well  situated, and with a warm, pleasant exposure.
‘How happily,’ thought our  hero, ‘would life glide on in such a retirement!
On the one hand, the  striking remnants of ancient grandeur, with the secret consciousness of  family pride which they inspire; on the other, enough of modern elegance  and comfort to satisfy every moderate wish.
Here then, and with thee,  Sophia!’  We shall not pursue a lover’s day-dream any farther.
Mannering stood a  minute with his arms folded, and then turned to the ruined castle.
On entering the gateway, he found that the rude magnificence of the inner  court amply corresponded with the grandeur of the exterior.
On the one  side ran a range of windows lofty and large, divided by carved mullions of  stone, which had once lighted the great hall of the castle; on the other  were various buildings of different heights and dates, yet so united as to  present to the eye a certain general effect of uniformity of front.
The  doors and windows were ornamented with projections exhibiting rude  specimens of sculpture and tracery, partly entire and partly broken down,  partly covered by ivy and trailing plants, which grew luxuriantly among  the ruins.
That end of the court which faced the entrance had also been  formerly closed by a range of buildings; but owing, it was said, to its  having been battered by the ships of the Parliament under Deane, during  the long civil war, this part of the castle was much more ruinous than the  rest, and exhibited a great chasm, through which Mannering could observe  the sea, and the little vessel (an armed lugger), which retained her  station in the centre of the bay.
[Footnote: The outline of the above  description, as far as the supposed ruins are concerned, will be found  somewhat to resemble the noble remains of Carlaverock Castle, six or seven  miles from Dumfries, and near to Lochar Moss.]
While Mannering was gazing  round the ruins, he heard from the interior of an apartment on the left  hand the voice of the gipsy he had seen on the preceding evening.
He soon  found an aperture through which he could observe her without being himself  visible; and could not help feeling that her figure, her employment, and  her situation conveyed the exact impression of an ancient sibyl.
She sate upon a broken corner-stone in the angle of a paved apartment,  part of which she had swept clean to afford a smooth space for the  evolutions of her spindle.
A strong sunbeam through a lofty and narrow  window fell upon her wild dress and features, and afforded her light for  her occupation; the rest of the apartment was very gloomy.
Equipt in a  habit which mingled the national dress of the Scottish common people with  something of an Eastern costume, she spun a thread drawn from wool of  three different colours, black, white, and grey, by assistance of those  ancient implements of housewifery now almost banished from the land, the  distaff and spindle.
As she spun, she sung what seemed to be a charm.
Mannering, after in vain attempting to make himself master of the exact  words of her song, afterwards attempted the following paraphrase of what,  from a few intelligible phrases, he concluded to be its purport:--  Twist ye, twine ye!
even so  Mingle shades of joy and woe,  Hope, and fear, and peace, and strife,  In the thread of human life.
While the mystic twist is spinning,  And the infant’s life beginning,  Dimly seen through twilight bending,  Lo, what varied shapes attending!
Passions wild, and Follies vain,  Pleasures soon exchanged for pain,  Doubt, and Jealousy, and Fear  In the magic dance appear.
Now they wax, and now they dwindle,  Whirling with the whirling spindle.
Twist ye, twine ye!
even so  Mingle human bliss and woe.
Ere our translator, or rather our free imitator, had arranged these  stanzas in his head, and while he was yet hammering out a rhyme for  DWINDLE, the task of the sibyl was accomplished, or her wool was expended.
She took the spindle, now charged with her labours, and, undoing the  thread gradually, measured it by casting it over her elbow and bringing  each loop round between her forefinger and thumb.
When she had measured it  out, she muttered to herself--’A hank, but not a haill ane--the full years  o’ three score and ten, but thrice broken, and thrice to OOP (i.e.
to  unite); he’ll be a lucky lad an he win through wi’t.’  Our hero was about to speak to the prophetess, when a voice, hoarse as the  waves with which it mingled, hallooed twice, and with increasing  impatience--’Meg, Meg Merrilies!
Gipsy--hag--tausend deyvils!’  ‘I am coming, I am coming, Captain,’ answered Meg; and in a moment or two  the impatient commander whom she addressed made his appearance from the  broken part of the ruins.
CHAPTER IV  You have fed upon my seignories,  Dispark’d my parks, and fell’d my forest woods,  From mine own windows torn my household coat,  Razed out my impress, leaving me no sign,  Save men’s opinions and my living blood,  To show the world I am a gentleman.
Richard II.
When the boat which carried the worthy captain on board his vessel had  accomplished that task, the sails began to ascend, and the ship was got  under way.
She fired three guns as a salute to the house of Ellangowan,  and then shot away rapidly before the wind, which blew off shore, under  all the sail she could crowd.
‘Ay, ay,’ said the Laird, who had sought Mannering for some time, and now  joined him, ‘there they go--there go the free-traders--there go Captain  Dirk Hatteraick and the Yungfrauw Hagenslaapen, half Manks, half Dutchman,  half devil!
run out the boltsprit, up mainsail, top and top-gallant sails,  royals, and skyscrapers, and away--follow who can!
That fellow, Mr.  Mannering, is the terror of all the excise and custom-house cruisers; they  can make nothing of him; he drubs them, or he distances them;--and,  speaking of excise, I come to bring you to breakfast; and you shall have  some tea, that--’  Mannering by this time was aware that one thought linked strangely on to  another in the concatenation of worthy Mr. Bertram’s ideas,  Like orient pearls at random strung;  and therefore, before the current of his associations had drifted farther  from the point he had left, he brought him back by some inquiry about Dirk  Hatteraick.
‘O he’s a--a--gude sort of blackguard fellow eneugh; naebody cares to  trouble him--smuggler, when his guns are in ballast--privateer, or pirate,  faith, when he gets them mounted.
He has done more mischief to the revenue  folk than ony rogue that ever came out of Ramsay.’  ‘But, my good sir, such being his character, I wonder he has any  protection and encouragement on this coast.’  ‘Why, Mr. Mannering, people must have brandy and tea, and there’s none in  the country but what comes this way; and then there’s short accounts, and  maybe a keg or two, or a dozen pounds, left at your stable-door, instead  of a d--d lang account at Christmas from Duncan Robb, the grocer at  Kippletringan, who has aye a sum to make up, and either wants ready money  or a short-dated bill.
Now, Hatteraick will take wood, or he’ll take bark,  or he’ll take barley, or he’ll take just what’s convenient at the time.
I’ll tell you a gude story about that.
There was ance a laird--that’s  Macfie of Gudgeonford,--he had a great number of kain hens--that’s hens  that the tenant pays to the landlord, like a sort of rent in kind.
They  aye feed mine very ill; Luckie Finniston sent up three that were a shame  to be seen only last week, and yet she has twelve bows sowing of victual;  indeed her goodman, Duncan Finniston--that’s him that’s gone--(we must all  die, Mr. Mannering, that’s ower true)--and, speaking of that, let us live  in the meanwhile, for here’s breakfast on the table, and the Dominie ready  to say the grace.’  The Dominie did accordingly pronounce a benediction, that exceeded in  length any speech which Mannering had yet heard him utter.
The tea, which  of course belonged to the noble Captain Hatteraick’s trade, was pronounced  excellent.
Still Mannering hinted, though with due delicacy, at the risk  of encouraging such desperate characters.
‘Were it but in justice to the  revenue, I should have supposed--’  ‘Ah, the revenue lads’--for Mr. Bertram never embraced a general or  abstract idea, and his notion of the revenue was personified in the  commissioners, surveyors, comptrollers, and riding officers whom he  happened to know--’the revenue lads can look sharp eneugh out for  themselves, no ane needs to help them; and they have a’ the soldiers to  assist them besides; and as to justice--you ‘ll be surprised to hear it,  Mr. Mannering, but I am not a justice of peace!’  Mannering assumed the expected look of surprise, but thought within  himself that the worshipful bench suffered no great deprivation from  wanting the assistance of his good-humoured landlord.
Mr. Bertram had now  hit upon one of the few subjects on which he felt sore, and went on with  some energy.
‘No, sir, the name of Godfrey Bertram of Ellangowan is not in the last  commission, though there’s scarce a carle in the country that has a  plough-gate of land, but what he must ride to quarter-sessions and write  J.P. after his name.
I ken fu’ weel whom I am obliged to--Sir Thomas  Kittlecourt as good as tell’d me he would sit in my skirts if he had not  my interest at the last election; and because I chose to go with my own  blood and third cousin, the Laird of Balruddery, they keepit me off the  roll of freeholders; and now there comes a new nomination of justices, and  I am left out!
And whereas they pretend it was because I let David  Mac-Guffog, the constable, draw the warrants, and manage the business his  ain gate, as if I had been a nose o’ wax, it’s a main untruth; for I  granted but seven warrants in my life, and the Dominie wrote every one of  them--and if it had not been that unlucky business of Sandy Mac-Gruthar’s,  that the constables should have keepit twa or three days up yonder at the  auld castle, just till they could get conveniency to send him to the  county jail--and that cost me eneugh o’ siller.
But I ken what Sir Thomas  wants very weel--it was just sic and siclike about the seat in the kirk o’  Kilmagirdle--was I not entitled to have the front gallery facing the  minister, rather than Mac-Crosskie of Creochstone, the son of Deacon  Mac-Crosskie, the Dumfries weaver?’  Mannering expressed his acquiescence in the justice of these various  complaints.
‘And then, Mr. Mannering, there was the story about the road and the  fauld-dike.
I ken Sir Thomas was behind there, and I said plainly to the  clerk to the trustees that I saw the cloven foot, let them take that as  they like.
Would any gentleman, or set of gentlemen, go and drive a road  right through the corner of a fauld-dike and take away, as my agent  observed to them, like twa roods of gude moorland pasture?
And there was  the story about choosing the collector of the cess--’  ‘Certainly, sir, it is hard you should meet with any neglect in a country  where, to judge from the extent of their residence, your ancestors must  have made a very important figure.’  ‘Very true, Mr. Mannering; I am a plain man and do not dwell on these  things, and I must needs say I have little memory for them; but I wish ye  could have heard my father’s stories about the auld fights of the  Mac-Dingawaies--that’s the Bertrams that now is--wi’ the Irish and wi’ the  Highlanders that came here in their berlings from Ilay and Cantire; and  how they went to the Holy Land--that is, to Jerusalem and Jericho, wi’ a’  their clan at their heels--they had better have gaen to Jamaica, like Sir  Thomas Kittlecourt’s uncle--and how they brought hame relics like those  that Catholics have, and a flag that’s up yonder in the garret.
If they  had been casks of muscavado and puncheons of rum it would have been better  for the estate at this day; but there’s little comparison between the auld  keep at Kittlecourt and the castle o’ Ellangowan; I doubt if the keep’s  forty feet of front.
But ye make no breakfast, Mr. Mannering; ye’re no  eating your meat; allow me to recommend some of the kipper.
It was John  Hay that catcht it, Saturday was three weeks, down at the stream below  Hempseed ford,’ etc.
etc.
etc.
The Laird, whose indignation had for some time kept him pretty steady to  one topic, now launched forth into his usual roving style of conversation,  which gave Mannering ample time to reflect upon the disadvantages  attending the situation which an hour before he had thought worthy of so  much envy.
Here was a country gentleman, whose most estimable quality  seemed his perfect good-nature, secretly fretting himself and murmuring  against others for causes which, compared with any real evil in life, must  weigh like dust in the balance.
But such is the equal distribution of  Providence.
To those who lie out of the road of great afflictions are  assigned petty vexations which answer all the purpose of disturbing their  serenity; and every reader must have observed that neither natural apathy  nor acquired philosophy can render country gentlemen insensible to the  grievances which occur at elections, quarter-sessions, and meetings of  trustees.
Curious to investigate the manners of the country, Mannering took the  advantage of a pause in good Mr. Bertram’s string of stories to inquire  what Captain Hatteraick so earnestly wanted with the gipsy woman.
‘O, to bless his ship, I suppose.
You must know, Mr. Mannering, that these  free-traders, whom the law calls smugglers, having no religion, make it  all up in superstition; and they have as many spells and charms and  nonsense--’  ‘Vanity and waur!’ said the Dominie;’ it is a trafficking with the Evil  One.
Spells, periapts, and charms are of his device--choice arrows out of  Apollyon’s quiver.’  ‘Hold your peace, Dominie; ye’re speaking for ever’--by the way, they were  the first words the poor man had uttered that morning, excepting that he  said grace and returned thanks--’Mr.
Mannering cannot get in a word for  ye!
And so, Mr. Mannering, talking of astronomy and spells and these  matters, have ye been so kind as to consider what we were speaking about  last night?’  ‘I begin to think, Mr. Bertram, with your worthy friend here, that I have  been rather jesting with edge-tools; and although neither you nor I, nor  any sensible man, can put faith in the predictions of astrology, yet, as  it has sometimes happened that inquiries into futurity, undertaken in  jest, have in their results produced serious and unpleasant effects both  upon actions and characters, I really wish you would dispense with my  replying to your question.’  It was easy to see that this evasive answer only rendered the Laird’s  curiosity more uncontrollable.
Mannering, however, was determined in his  own mind not to expose the infant to the inconveniences which might have  arisen from his being supposed the object of evil prediction.
He therefore  delivered the paper into Mr. Bertram’s hand, and requested him to keep it  for five years with the seal unbroken, until the month of November was  expired.
After that date had intervened he left him at liberty to examine  the writing, trusting that, the first fatal period being then safely  overpassed, no credit would be paid to its farther contents.
This Mr.  Bertram was content to promise, and Mannering, to ensure his fidelity,  hinted at misfortunes which would certainly take place if his injunctions  were neglected.
The rest of the day, which Mannering, by Mr. Bertram’s  invitation, spent at Ellangowan, passed over without anything remarkable;  and on the morning of that which followed the traveller mounted his  palfrey, bade a courteous adieu to his hospitable landlord and to his  clerical attendant, repeated his good wishes for the prosperity of the  family, and then, turning his horse’s head towards England, disappeared  from the sight of the inmates of Ellangowan.
He must also disappear from  that of our readers, for it is to another and later period of his life  that the present narrative relates.
CHAPTER VI  Next, the Justice,  In fair round belly with good capon lined,  With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,  Full of wise saws and modern instances--  And so he plays his part  --As You Like It  When Mrs. Bertram of Ellangowan was able to hear the news of what had  passed during her confinement, her apartment rung with all manner of  gossiping respecting the handsome young student from Oxford who had told  such a fortune by the stars to the young Laird, ‘blessings on his dainty  face.’ The form, accent, and manners of the stranger were expatiated upon.
His horse, bridle, saddle, and stirrups did not remain unnoticed.
All this  made a great impression upon the mind of Mrs. Bertram, for the good lady  had no small store of superstition.
Her first employment, when she became capable of a little work, was to  make a small velvet bag for the scheme of nativity which she had obtained  from her husband.
Her fingers itched to break the seal, but credulity  proved stronger than curiosity; and she had the firmness to inclose it, in  all its integrity, within two slips of parchment, which she sewed round it  to prevent its being chafed.
The whole was then put into the velvet bag  aforesaid, and hung as a charm round the neck of the infant, where his  mother resolved it should remain until the period for the legitimate  satisfaction of her curiosity should arrive.
The father also resolved to do his part by the child in securing him a  good education; and, with the view that it should commence with the first  dawnings of reason, Dominie Sampson was easily induced to renounce his  public profession of parish schoolmaster, make his constant residence at  the Place, and, in consideration of a sum not quite equal to the wages of  a footman even at that time, to undertake to communicate to the future  Laird of Ellangowan all the erudition which he had, and all the graces and  accomplishments which--he had not indeed, but which he had never  discovered that he wanted.
In this arrangement the Laird found also his  private advantage, securing the constant benefit of a patient auditor, to  whom he told his stories when they were alone, and at whose expense he  could break a sly jest when he had company.
About four years after this time a great commotion took place in the  county where Ellangowan is situated.
Those who watched the signs of the times had long been of opinion that a  change of ministry was about to take place; and at length, after a due  proportion of hopes, fears, and delays, rumours from good authority and  bad authority, and no authority at all; after some clubs had drank Up with  this statesman and others Down with him; after riding, and running, and  posting, and addressing, and counter-addressing, and proffers of lives and  fortunes, the blow was at length struck, the administration of the day was  dissolved, and parliament, as a natural consequence, was dissolved also.
Sir Thomas Kittlecourt, like other members in the same situation, posted  down to his county, and met but an indifferent reception.
He was a  partizan of the old administration; and the friends of the new had already  set about an active canvass in behalf of John Featherhead, Esq., who kept  the best hounds and hunters in the shire.
Among others who joined the  standard of revolt was Gilbert Glossin, writer in--, agent for the Laird  of Ellangowan.
This honest gentleman had either been refused some favour  by the old member, or, what is as probable, he had got all that he had the  most distant pretension to ask, and could only look to the other side for  fresh advancement.
Mr. Glossin had a vote upon Ellangowan’s property; and  he was now determined that his patron should have one also, there being no  doubt which side Mr. Bertram would embrace in the contest.
He easily  persuaded Ellangowan that it would be creditable to him to take the field  at the head of as strong a party as possible; and immediately went to  work, making votes, as every Scotch lawyer knows how, by splitting and  subdividing the superiorities upon this ancient and once powerful barony.
These were so extensive that, by dint of clipping and paring here, adding  and eking there, and creating over-lords upon all the estate which Bertram  held of the crown, they advanced at the day of contest at the head of ten  as good men of parchment as ever took the oath of trust and possession.
This strong reinforcement turned the dubious day of battle.
The principal  and his agent divided the honour; the reward fell to the latter  exclusively.
Mr. Gilbert Glossin was made clerk of the peace, and Godfrey  Bertram had his name inserted in a new commission of justices, issued  immediately upon the sitting of the parliament.
This had been the summit of Mr. Bertram’s ambition; not that he liked  either the trouble or the responsibility of the office, but he thought it  was a dignity to which he was well entitled, and that it had been withheld  from him by malice prepense.
But there is an old and true Scotch proverb,  ‘Fools should not have chapping sticks’; that is, weapons of offence.
Mr.  Bertram was no sooner possessed of the judicial authority which he had so  much longed for than he began to exercise it with more severity than  mercy, and totally belied all the opinions which had hitherto been formed  of his inert good-nature.
We have read somewhere of a justice of peace  who, on being nominated in the commission, wrote a letter to a bookseller  for the statutes respecting his official duty in the following  orthography--’Please send the ax relating to a gustus pease.’ No doubt,  when this learned gentleman had possessed himself of the axe, he hewed the  laws with it to some purpose.
Mr. Bertram was not quite so ignorant of  English grammar as his worshipful predecessor; but Augustus Pease himself  could not have used more indiscriminately the weapon unwarily put into his  hand.
In good earnest, he considered the commission with which he had been  entrusted as a personal mark of favour from his sovereign; forgetting that  he had formerly thought his being deprived of a privilege, or honour,  common to those of his rank was the result of mere party cabal.
He  commanded his trusty aid-de-camp, Dominie Sampson, to read aloud the  commission; and at the first words, ‘The King has been pleased to  appoint’--’Pleased!’ he exclaimed in a transport of gratitude; ‘honest  gentleman!
I’m sure he cannot be better pleased than I am.’  Accordingly, unwilling to confine his gratitude to mere feelings or verbal  expressions, he gave full current to the new-born zeal of office, and  endeavoured to express his sense of the honour conferred upon him by an  unmitigated activity in the discharge of his duty.
New brooms, it is said,  sweep clean; and I myself can bear witness that, on the arrival of a new  housemaid, the ancient, hereditary, and domestic spiders who have spun  their webs over the lower division of my bookshelves (consisting chiefly  of law and divinity) during the peaceful reign of her predecessor, fly at  full speed before the probationary inroads of the new mercenary.
Even so  the Laird of Ellangowan ruthlessly commenced his magisterial reform, at  the expense of various established and superannuated pickers and stealers  who had been his neighbours for half a century.
He wrought his miracles  like a second Duke Humphrey; and by the influence of the beadle’s rod  caused the lame to walk, the blind to see, and the palsied to labour.
He  detected poachers, black-fishers, orchard-breakers, and pigeon-shooters;  had the applause of the bench for his reward, and the public credit of an  active magistrate.
All this good had its rateable proportion of evil.
Even an admitted  nuisance of ancient standing should not be abated without some caution.
The zeal of our worthy friend now involved in great distress sundry  personages whose idle and mendicant habits his own lachesse had  contributed to foster, until these habits had become irreclaimable, or  whose real incapacity for exertion rendered them fit objects, in their own  phrase, for the charity of all well-disposed Christians.
The  ‘long-remembered beggar,’ who for twenty years had made his regular rounds  within the neighbourhood, received rather as an humble friend than as an  object of charity, was sent to the neighbouring workhouse.
The decrepit  dame, who travelled round the parish upon a hand-barrow, circulating from  house to house like a bad shilling, which every one is in haste to pass to  his neighbour,--she, who used to call for her bearers as loud, or louder,  than a traveller demands post-horses,--even she shared the same disastrous  fate.
The ‘daft Jock,’ who, half knave, half idiot, had been the sport of  each succeeding race of village children for a good part of a century, was  remitted to the county bridewell, where, secluded from free air and  sunshine, the only advantages he was capable of enjoying, he pined and  died in the course of six months.
The old sailor, who had so long rejoiced  the smoky rafters of every kitchen in the country by singing ‘Captain  Ward’ and ‘Bold Admiral Benbow,’ was banished from the county for no  better reason than that he was supposed to speak with a strong Irish  accent.
Even the annual rounds of the pedlar were abolished by the  Justice, in his hasty zeal for the administration of rural police.
These things did not pass without notice and censure.
We are not made of  wood or stone, and the things which connect themselves with our hearts and  habits cannot, like bark or lichen, be rent away without our missing them.
The farmer’s dame lacked her usual share of intelligence, perhaps also the  self-applause which she had felt while distributing the awmous (alms), in  shape of a gowpen (handful) of oatmeal, to the mendicant who brought the  news.
The cottage felt inconvenience from interruption of the petty trade  carried on by the itinerant dealers.
The children lacked their supply of  sugarplums and toys; the young women wanted pins, ribbons, combs, and  ballads; and the old could no longer barter their eggs for salt, snuff,  and tobacco.
All these circumstances brought the busy Laird of Ellangowan  into discredit, which was the more general on account of his former  popularity.
Even his lineage was brought up in judgment against him.
They  thought ‘naething of what the like of Greenside, or Burnville, or  Viewforth might do, that were strangers in the country; but Ellangowan!
that had been a name amang them since the Mirk Monanday, and lang  before--HIM to be grinding the puir at that rate!
They ca’d his  grandfather the Wicked Laird; but, though he was whiles fractious aneuch,  when he got into roving company and had ta’en the drap drink, he would  have scorned to gang on at this gate.
Na, na, the muckle chumlay in the  Auld Place reeked like a killogie in his time, and there were as mony puir  folk riving at the banes in the court, and about the door, as there were  gentles in the ha’.
And the leddy, on ilka Christmas night as it came  round, gae twelve siller pennies to ilka puir body about, in honour of the  twelve apostles like.
They were fond to ca’ it papistrie; but I think our  great folk might take a lesson frae the papists whiles.
They gie another  sort o’ help to puir folk than just dinging down a saxpence in the brod on  the Sabbath, and kilting, and scourging, and drumming them a’ the sax days  o’ the week besides.’  Such was the gossip over the good twopenny in every ale-house within three  or four miles of Ellangowan, that being about the diameter of the orbit in  which our friend Godfrey Bertram, Esq., J. P., must be considered as the  principal luminary.
Still greater scope was given to evil tongues by the  removal of a colony of gipsies, with one of whom our reader is somewhat  acquainted, and who had for a great many years enjoyed their chief  settlement upon the estate of Ellangowan.
CHAPTER VII  Come, princes of the ragged regiment,  You of the blood!
PRIGS, my most upright lord,  And these, what name or title e’er they bear,  JARKMAN, or PATRICO, CRANKE or CLAPPER-DUDGEON,  PRATER or ABRAM-MAN--I speak of all.
Beggar’s Bush.
Although the character of those gipsy tribes which formerly inundated most  of the nations of Europe, and which in some degree still subsist among  them as a distinct people, is generally understood, the reader will pardon  my saying a few words respecting their situation in Scotland.
It is well known that the gipsies were at an early period acknowledged as  a separate and independent race by one of the Scottish monarchs, and that  they were less favourably distinguished by a subsequent law, which  rendered the character of gipsy equal in the judicial balance to that of  common and habitual thief, and prescribed his punishment accordingly.
Notwithstanding the severity of this and other statutes, the fraternity  prospered amid the distresses of the country, and received large  accessions from among those whom famine, oppression, or the sword of war  had deprived of the ordinary means of subsistence.
They lost in a great  measure by this intermixture the national character of Egyptians, and  became a mingled race, having all the idleness and predatory habits of  their Eastern ancestors, with a ferocity which they probably borrowed from  the men of the north who joined their society.
They travelled in different  bands, and had rules among themselves, by which each tribe was confined to  its own district.
The slightest invasion of the precincts which had been  assigned to another tribe produced desperate skirmishes, in which there  was often much blood shed.
The patriotic Fletcher of Saltoun drew a picture of these banditti about a  century ago, which my readers will peruse with astonishment:--  ‘There are at this day in Scotland (besides a great many poor families  very meanly provided for by the church boxes, with others who, by living  on bad food, fall into various diseases) two hundred thousand people  begging from door to door.
These are not only no way advantageous, but a  very grievous burden to so poor a country.
And though the number of them  be perhaps double to what it was formerly, by reason of this present great  distress, yet in all times there have been about one hundred thousand of  those vagabonds, who have lived without any regard or subjection either to  the laws of the land or even those of God and nature .
.
.
No magistrate  could ever discover, or be informed, which way one in a hundred of these  wretches died, or that ever they were baptized.
Many murders have been  discovered among them; and they are not only a most unspeakable oppression  to poor tenants (who, if they give not bread or some kind of provision to  perhaps forty such villains in one day, are sure to be insulted by them),  but they rob many poor people who live in houses distant from any  neighbourhood.
In years of plenty, many thousands of them meet together in  the mountains, where they feast and riot for many days; and at country  weddings, markets, burials, and other the like public occasions, they are  to be seen, both man and woman, perpetually drunk, cursing, blaspheming,  and fighting together.’  Notwithstanding the deplorable picture presented in this extract, and  which Fletcher himself, though the energetic and eloquent friend of  freedom, saw no better mode of correcting than by introducing a system of  domestic slavery, the progress of time, and increase both of the means of  life and of the power of the laws, gradually reduced this dreadful evil  within more narrow bounds.
The tribes of gipsies, jockies, or cairds--for  by all these denominations such banditti were known--became few in number,  and many were entirely rooted out.
Still, however, a sufficient number  remained to give, occasional alarm and constant vexation.
Some rude  handicrafts were entirely resigned to these itinerants, particularly the  art of trencher-making, of manufacturing horn-spoons, and the whole  mystery of the tinker.
To these they added a petty trade in the coarse  sorts of earthenware.
Such were their ostensible means of livelihood.
Each  tribe had usually some fixed place of rendezvous, which they occasionally  occupied and considered as their standing camp, and in the vicinity of  which they generally abstained from depredation.
They had even talents and  accomplishments, which made them occasionally useful and entertaining.
Many cultivated music with success; and the favourite fiddler or piper of  a district was often to be found in a gipsy town.
They understood all  out-of-door sports, especially otter-hunting, fishing, or finding game.
They bred the best and boldest terriers, and sometimes had good pointers  for sale.
In winter the women told fortunes, the men showed tricks of  legerdemain; and these accomplishments often helped to while away a weary  or stormy evening in the circle of the ‘farmer’s ha’.’ The wildness of  their character, and the indomitable pride with which they despised all  regular labour, commanded a certain awe, which was not diminished by the  consideration that these strollers were a vindictive race, and were  restrained by no check, either of fear or conscience, from taking  desperate vengeance upon those who had offended them.
These tribes were,  in short, the pariahs of Scotland, living like wild Indians among European  settlers, and, like them, judged of rather by their own customs, habits,  and opinions, than as if they had been members of the civilised part of  the community.
Some hordes of them yet remain, chiefly in such situations  as afford a ready escape either into a waste country or into another  Jurisdiction.
Nor are the features of their character much softened.
Their  numbers, however, are so greatly diminished that, instead of one hundred  thousand, as calculated by Fletcher, it would now perhaps be impossible to  collect above five hundred throughout all Scotland.
A tribe of these itinerants, to whom Meg Merrilies appertained, had long  been as stationary as their habits permitted in a glen upon the estate of  Ellangowan.
They had there erected a few huts, which they denominated  their ‘city of refuge,’ and where, when not absent on excursions, they  harboured unmolested, as the crows that roosted in the old ash-trees  around them.
They had been such long occupants that they were considered  in some degree as proprietors of the wretched shealings which they  inhabited.
This protection they were said anciently to have repaid by  service to the Laird in war, or more frequently, by infesting or  plundering the lands of those neighbouring barons with whom he chanced to  be at feud.
Latterly their services were of a more pacific nature.
The  women spun mittens for the lady, and knitted boot-hose for the Laird,  which were annually presented at Christmas with great form.
The aged  sibyls blessed the bridal bed of the Laird when he married, and the cradle  of the heir when born.
The men repaired her ladyship’s cracked china, and  assisted the Laird in his sporting parties, wormed his dogs, and cut the  ears of his terrier puppies.
The children gathered nuts in the woods, and  cranberries in the moss, and mushrooms on the pastures, for tribute to the  Place.
These acts of voluntary service, and acknowledgments of dependence,  were rewarded by protection on some occasions, connivance on others, and  broken victuals, ale, and brandy when circumstances called for a display  of generosity; and this mutual intercourse of good offices, which had been  carried on for at least two centuries, rendered the inhabitants of  Derncleugh a kind of privileged retainers upon the estate of Ellangowan.
‘The knaves’ were the Laird’s ‘exceeding good friends’; and he would have  deemed himself very ill used if his countenance could not now and then  have borne them out against the law of the country and the local  magistrate.
But this friendly union was soon to be dissolved.
The community of Derncleugh, who cared for no rogues but their own, were  wholly without alarm at the severity of the Justice’s proceedings towards  other itinerants.
They had no doubt that he determined to suffer no  mendicants or strollers in the country but what resided on his own  property, and practised their trade by his immediate permission, implied  or expressed.
Nor was Mr. Bertram in a hurry to exert his newly-acquired  authority at the expense of these old settlers.
But he was driven on by  circumstances.
At the quarter-sessions our new Justice was publicly upbraided by a  gentleman of the opposite party in county politics, that, while he  affected a great zeal for the public police, and seemed ambitious of the  fame of an active magistrate, he fostered a tribe of the greatest rogues  in the country, and permitted them to harbour within a mile of the house  of Ellangowan.
To this there was no reply, for the fact was too evident  and well known.
The Laird digested the taunt as he best could, and in his  way home amused himself with speculations on the easiest method of ridding  himself of these vagrants, who brought a stain upon his fair fame as a  magistrate.
Just as he had resolved to take the first opportunity of  quarrelling with the pariahs of Derncleugh, a cause of provocation  presented itself.
Since our friend’s advancement to be a conservator of the peace, he had  caused the gate at the head of his avenue, which formerly, having only one  hinge, remained at all times hospitably open--he had caused this gate, I  say, to be newly hung and handsomely painted.
He had also shut up with  paling, curiously twisted with furze, certain holes in the fences  adjoining, through which the gipsy boys used to scramble into the  plantations to gather birds’ nests, the seniors of the village to make a  short cut from one point to another, and the lads and lasses for evening  rendezvous--all without offence taken or leave asked.
But these halcyon  days were now to have an end, and a minatory inscription on one side of  the gate intimated ‘prosecution according to law’ (the painter had spelt  it ‘persecution’--l’un vaut bien l’autre) to all who should be found  trespassing on these inclosures.
On the other side, for uniformity’s sake,  was a precautionary annunciation of spring-guns and man-traps of such  formidable powers that, said the rubrick, with an emphatic nota bene--’if  a man goes in they will break a horse’s leg.’  In defiance of these threats, six well-grown gipsy boys and girls were  riding cock-horse upon the new gate, and plaiting may-flowers, which it  was but too evident had been gathered within the forbidden precincts.
With  as much anger as he was capable of feeling, or perhaps of assuming, the  Laird commanded them to descend;--they paid no attention to his mandate:  he then began to pull them down one after another;--they resisted,  passively at least, each sturdy bronzed varlet making himself as heavy as  he could, or climbing up as fast as he was dismounted.
The Laird then called in the assistance of his servant, a surly fellow,  who had immediate recourse to his horsewhip.
A few lashes sent the party  a-scampering; and thus commenced the first breach of the peace between the  house of Ellangowan and the gipsies of Derncleugh.
The latter could not for some time imagine that the war was real; until  they found that their children were horsewhipped by the grieve when found  trespassing; that their asses were poinded by the ground-officer when left  in the plantations, or even when turned to graze by the roadside, against  the provision of the turnpike acts; that the constable began to make  curious inquiries into their mode of gaining a livelihood, and expressed  his surprise that the men should sleep in the hovels all day, and be  abroad the greater part of the night.
When matters came to this point, the gipsies, without scruple, entered  upon measures of retaliation.
Ellangowan’s hen-roosts were plundered, his  linen stolen from the lines or bleaching-ground, his fishings poached, his  dogs kidnapped, his growing trees cut or barked.
Much petty mischief was  done, and some evidently for the mischief’s sake.
On the other hand,  warrants went forth, without mercy, to pursue, search for, take, and  apprehend; and, notwithstanding their dexterity, one or two of the  depredators were unable to avoid conviction.
One, a stout young fellow,  who sometimes had gone to sea a-fishing, was handed over to the captain of  the impress service at D--; two children were soundly flogged, and one  Egyptian matron sent to the house of correction.
Still, however, the gipsies made no motion to leave the spot which they  had so long inhabited, and Mr. Bertram felt an unwillingness to deprive  them of their ancient ‘city of refuge’; so that the petty warfare we have  noticed continued for several months, without increase or abatement of  hostilities on either side.
CHAPTER VIII  So the red Indian, by Ontario’s side,  Nursed hardy on the brindled panther’s hide,  As fades his swarthy race, with anguish sees  The white man’s cottage rise beneath the trees;  He leaves the shelter of his native wood,  He leaves the murmur of Ohio’s flood,  And forward rushing in indignant grief,  Where never foot has trod the fallen leaf,  He bends his course where twilight reigns sublime.
O’er forests silent since the birth of time.
SCENES OF INFANCY.
In tracing the rise and progress of the Scottish Maroon war, we must not  omit to mention that years had rolled on, and that little Harry Bertram,  one of the hardiest and most lively children that ever made a sword and  grenadier’s cap of rushes, now approached his fifth revolving birthday.
A  hardihood of disposition, which early developed itself, made him already a  little wanderer; he was well acquainted with every patch of lea ground and  dingle around Ellangowan, and could tell in his broken language upon what  baulks grew the bonniest flowers, and what copse had the ripest nuts.
He  repeatedly terrified his attendants by clambering about the ruins of the  old castle, and had more than once made a stolen excursion as far as the  gipsy hamlet.
On these occasions he was generally brought back by Meg Merrilies, who,  though she could not be prevailed upon to enter the Place of Ellangowan  after her nephew had been given up to the press-gang, did not apparently  extend her resentment to the child.
On the contrary, she often contrived  to waylay him in his walks, sing him a gipsy song, give him a ride upon  her jackass, and thrust into his pocket a piece of gingerbread or a  red-cheeked apple.
This woman’s ancient attachment to the family, repelled  and checked in every other direction, seemed to rejoice in having some  object on which it could yet repose and expand itself.
She prophesied a  hundred times, ‘that young Mr. Harry would be the pride o’ the family, and  there hadna been sic a sprout frae the auld aik since the death of Arthur  Mac-Dingawaie, that was killed in the battle o’ the Bloody Bay; as for the  present stick, it was good for nothing but fire-wood.’ On one occasion,  when the child was ill, she lay all night below the window, chanting a  rhyme which she believed sovereign as a febrifuge, and could neither be  prevailed upon to enter the house nor to leave the station she had chosen  till she was informed that the crisis was over.
The affection of this woman became matter of suspicion, not indeed to the  Laird, who was never hasty in suspecting evil, but to his wife, who had  indifferent health and poor spirits.
She was now far advanced in a second  pregnancy, and, as she could not walk abroad herself, and the woman who  attended upon Harry was young and thoughtless, she prayed Dominie Sampson  to undertake the task of watching the boy in his rambles, when he should  not be otherwise accompanied.
The Dominie loved his young charge, and was  enraptured with his own success in having already brought him so far in  his learning as to spell words of three syllables.
The idea of this early  prodigy of erudition being carried off by the gipsies, like a second Adam  Smith,[Footnote: The father of Economical Philosophy was, when a child,  actually carried off by gipsies, and remained some hours in their  possession.]
was not to be tolerated; and accordingly, though the charge  was contrary to all his habits of life, he readily undertook it, and might  be seen stalking about with a mathematical problem in his head, and his  eye upon a child of five years old, whose rambles led him into a hundred  awkward situations.
Twice was the Dominie chased by a cross-grained cow,  once he fell into the brook crossing at the stepping-stones, and another  time was bogged up to the middle in the slough of Lochend, in attempting  to gather a water-lily for the young Laird.
It was the opinion of the  village matrons who relieved Sampson on the latter occasion, ‘that the  Laird might as weel trust the care o’ his bairn to a potatoe bogle’; but  the good Dominie bore all his disasters with gravity and serenity equally  imperturbable.
‘Pro-di-gi-ous!’ was the only ejaculation they ever  extorted from the much-enduring man.
ENLARGE   The Laird had by this time determined to make root-and-branch work with  the Maroons of Derncleugh.
The old servants shook their heads at his  proposal, and even Dominie Sampson ventured upon an indirect remonstrance.
As, however, it was couched in the oracular phrase, ‘Ne moveas Camerinam,’  neither the allusion, nor the language in which it was expressed, were  calculated for Mr. Bertram’s edification, and matters proceeded against  the gipsies in form of law.
Every door in the hamlet was chalked by the  ground-officer, in token of a formal warning to remove at next term.
Still, however, they showed no symptoms either of submission or of  compliance.
At length the term-day, the fatal Martinmas, arrived, and  violent measures of ejection were resorted to.
A strong posse of  peace-officers, sufficient to render all resistance vain, charged the  inhabitants to depart by noon; and, as they did not obey, the officers, in  terms of their warrant, proceeded to unroof the cottages, and pull down  the wretched doors and windows--a summary and effectual mode of ejection  still practised in some remote parts of Scotland when a tenant proves  refractory.
The gipsies for a time beheld the work of destruction in  sullen silence and inactivity; then set about saddling and loading their  asses, and making preparations for their departure.
These were soon  accomplished, where all had the habits of wandering Tartars; and they set  forth on their journey to seek new settlements, where their patrons should  neither be of the quorum nor custos rotulorum.
Certain qualms of feeling had deterred Ellangowan from attending in person  to see his tenants expelled.
He left the executive part of the business to  the officers of the law, under the immediate direction of Frank Kennedy, a  supervisor, or riding-officer, belonging to the excise, who had of late  become intimate at the Place, and of whom we shall have more to say in the  next chapter.
Mr. Bertram himself chose that day to make a visit to a  friend at some distance.
But it so happened, notwithstanding his  precautions, that he could not avoid meeting his late tenants during their  retreat from his property.
It was in a hollow way, near the top of a steep ascent, upon the verge of  the Ellangowan estate, that Mr. Bertram met the gipsy procession.
Four or  five men formed the advanced guard, wrapped in long loose great-coats that  hid their tall slender figures, as the large slouched hats, drawn over  their brows, concealed their wild features, dark eyes, and swarthy faces.
Two of them carried long fowling-pieces, one wore a broadsword without a  sheath, and all had the Highland dirk, though they did not wear that  weapon openly or ostentatiously.
Behind them followed the train of laden  asses, and small carts or TUMBLERS, as they were called in that country,  on which were laid the decrepit and the helpless, the aged and infant part  of the exiled community.
The women in their red cloaks and straw hats, the  elder children with bare heads and bare feet, and almost naked bodies, had  the immediate care of the little caravan.
The road was narrow, running  between two broken banks of sand, and Mr. Bertram’s servant rode forward,  smacking his whip with an air of authority, and motioning to the drivers  to allow free passage to their betters.
His signal was unattended to.
He  then called to the men who lounged idly on before, ‘Stand to your beasts’  heads, and make room for the Laird to pass.’  ‘He shall have his share of the road,’ answered a male gipsy from under  his slouched and large-brimmed hat, and without raising his face, ‘and he  shall have nae mair; the highway is as free to our cuddies as to his  gelding.’  The tone of the man being sulky, and even menacing, Mr. Bertram thought it  best to put his dignity in his pocket, and pass by the procession quietly,  on such space as they chose to leave for his accommodation, which was  narrow enough.
To cover with an appearance of indifference his feeling of  the want of respect with which he was treated, he addressed one of the  men, as he passed him without any show of greeting, salute, or  recognition--’Giles Baillie,’ he said, ‘have you heard that your son  Gabriel is well?’ (The question respected the young man who had been  pressed.)
‘If I had heard otherwise,’ said the old man, looking up with a stern and  menacing countenance, ‘you should have heard of it too.’ And he plodded on  his way, tarrying no further question.
[Footnote: This anecdote is a  literal fact.]
When the Laird had pressed on with difficulty among a crowd  of familiar faces, which had on all former occasions marked his approach  with the reverence due to that of a superior being, but in which he now  only read hatred and contempt, and had got clear of the throng, he could  not help turning his horse, and looking back to mark the progress of their  march.
The group would have been an excellent subject for the pencil of  Calotte.
The van had already reached a small and stunted thicket, which  was at the bottom of the hill, and which gradually hid the line of march  until the last stragglers disappeared.
His sensations were bitter enough.
The race, it is true, which he had thus  summarily dismissed from their ancient place of refuge, was idle and  vicious; but had he endeavoured to render them otherwise?
They were not  more irregular characters now than they had been while they were admitted  to consider themselves as a sort of subordinate dependents of his family;  and ought the mere circumstance of his becoming a magistrate to have made  at once such a change in his conduct towards them?
Some means of  reformation ought at least to have been tried before sending seven  families at once upon the wide world, and depriving them of a degree of  countenance which withheld them at least from atrocious guilt.
There was  also a natural yearning of heart on parting with so many known and  familiar faces; and to this feeling Godfrey Bertram was peculiarly  accessible, from the limited qualities of his mind, which sought its  principal amusements among the petty objects around him.
As he was about  to turn his horse’s head to pursue his journey, Meg Merrilies, who had  lagged behind the troop, unexpectedly presented herself.
She was standing upon one of those high precipitous banks which, as we  before noticed, overhung the road, so that she was placed considerably  higher than Ellangowan, even though he was on horseback; and her tall  figure, relieved against the clear blue sky, seemed almost of supernatural  stature.
We have noticed that there was in her general attire, or rather  in her mode of adjusting it, somewhat of a foreign costume, artfully  adopted perhaps for the purpose of adding to the effect of her spells and  predictions, or perhaps from some traditional notions respecting the dress  of her ancestors.
On this occasion she had a large piece of red cotton  cloth rolled about her head in the form of a turban, from beneath which  her dark eyes flashed with uncommon lustre.
Her long and tangled black  hair fell in elf-locks from the folds of this singular head-gear.
Her  attitude was that of a sibyl in frenzy, and she stretched out in her right  hand a sapling bough which seemed just pulled.
‘I’ll be d--d,’ said the groom, ‘if she has not been cutting the young  ashes in the dukit park!’ The Laird made no answer, but continued to look  at the figure which was thus perched above his path.
‘Ride your ways,’ said the gipsy, ‘ride your ways, Laird of Ellangowan;  ride your ways, Godfrey Bertram!
This day have ye quenched seven smoking  hearths; see if the fire in your ain parlour burn the blyther for that.
Ye  have riven the thack off seven cottar houses; look if your ain roof-tree  stand the faster.
Ye may stable your stirks in the shealings at  Derncleugh; see that the hare does not couch on the hearthstane at  Ellangowan.
Ride your ways, Godfrey Bertram; what do ye glower after our  folk for?
There’s thirty hearts there that wad hae wanted bread ere ye had  wanted sunkets, and spent their life-blood ere ye had scratched your  finger.
Yes; there’s thirty yonder, from the auld wife of an hundred to  the babe that was born last week, that ye have turned out o’ their bits o’  bields, to sleep with the tod and the blackcock in the muirs!
Ride your  ways, Ellangowan.
Our bairns are hinging at our weary backs; look that  your braw cradle at hame be the fairer spread up; not that I am wishing  ill to little Harry, or to the babe that’s yet to be born--God forbid--and  make them kind to the poor, and better folk than their father!
And now,  ride e’en your ways; for these are the last words ye’ll ever hear Meg  Merrilies speak, and this is the last reise that I’ll ever cut in the  bonny woods of Ellangowan.’  So saying, she broke the sapling she held in her hand, and flung it into  the road.
Margaret of Anjou, bestowing on her triumphant foes her  keen-edged malediction, could not have turned from them with a gesture  more proudly contemptuous.
The Laird was clearing his voice to speak, and  thrusting his hand in his pocket to find a half-crown; the gipsy waited  neither for his reply nor his donation, but strode down the hill to  overtake the caravan.
Ellangowan rode pensively home; and it was remarkable that he did not  mention this interview to any of his family.
The groom was not so  reserved; he told the story at great length to a full audience in the  kitchen, and concluded by swearing, that ‘if ever the devil spoke by the  mouth of a woman, he had spoken by that of Meg Merrilies that blessed  day.’  CHAPTER IX  Paint Scotland greeting ower her thrissle,  Her mutchkin stoup as toom’s a whistle,  And d--n’d excisemen in a bustle,  Seizing a stell,  Triumphant crushin’t like a mussel,  Or lampit shell  BURNS.
During the period of Mr. Bertram’s active magistracy, he did not forget  the affairs of the revenue.
Smuggling, for which the Isle of Man then  afforded peculiar facilities, was general, or rather universal, all along  the southwestern coast of Scotland.
Almost all the common people were  engaged in these practices; the gentry connived at them, and the officers  of the revenue were frequently discountenanced in the exercise of their  duty by those who should have protected them.
There was at this period, employed as a riding-officer or supervisor, in  that part of the country a certain Francis Kennedy, already named in our  narrative--a stout, resolute, and active man, who had made seizures to a  great amount, and was proportionally hated by those who had an interest in  the fair trade, as they called the pursuit of these contraband  adventurers.
This person was natural son to a gentleman of good family,  owing to which circumstance, and to his being of a jolly, convivial  disposition, and singing a good song, he was admitted to the occasional  society of the gentlemen of the country, and was a member of several of  their clubs for practising athletic games, at which he was particularly  expert.
At Ellangowan Kennedy was a frequent and always an acceptable guest.
His  vivacity relieved Mr. Bertram of the trouble of thought, and the labour  which it cost him to support a detailed communication of ideas; while the  daring and dangerous exploits which he had undertaken in the discharge of  his office formed excellent conversation.
To all these revenue adventures  did the Laird of Ellangowan seriously incline, and the amusement which he  derived from Kennedy’s society formed an excellent reason for  countenancing and assisting the narrator in the execution of his invidious  and hazardous duty.
‘Frank Kennedy,’ he said, ‘was a gentleman, though on the wrang side of  the blanket; he was connected with the family of Ellangowan through the  house of Glengubble.
The last Laird of Glengubble would have brought the  estate into the Ellangowan line; but, happening to go to Harrigate, he  there met with Miss Jean Hadaway--by the by, the Green Dragon at Harrigate  is the best house of the twa--but for Frank Kennedy, he’s in one sense a  gentleman born, and it’s a shame not to support him against these  blackguard smugglers.’  After this league had taken place between judgment and execution, it  chanced that Captain Dirk Hatteraick had landed a cargo of spirits and  other contraband goods upon the beach not far from Ellangowan, and,  confiding in the indifference with which the Laird had formerly regarded  similar infractions of the law, he was neither very anxious to conceal nor  to expedite the transaction.
The consequence was that Mr. Frank Kennedy,  armed with a warrant from Ellangowan, and supported by some of the Laird’s  people who knew the country, and by a party of military, poured down upon  the kegs, bales, and bags, and after a desperate affray, in which severe  wounds were given and received, succeeded in clapping the broad arrow upon  the articles, and bearing them off in triumph to the next custom-house.
Dirk Hatteraick vowed, in Dutch, German, and English, a deep and full  revenge, both against the gauger and his abettors; and all who knew him  thought it likely he would keep his word.
A few days after the departure of the gipsy tribe, Mr. Bertram asked his  lady one morning at breakfast whether this was not little Harry’s  birthday.
‘Five years auld exactly, this blessed day,’ answered the lady; ‘so we may  look into the English gentleman’s paper.’  Mr. Bertram liked to show his authority in trifles.
‘No, my dear, not till  to-morrow.
The last time I was at quarter-sessions the sheriff told us  that DIES--that dies inceptus--in short, you don’t understand Latin, but  it means that a term-day is not begun till it’s ended.’  ‘That sounds like nonsense, my dear.’  ‘May be so, my dear; but it may be very good law for all that.
I am sure,  speaking of term-days, I wish, as Frank Kennedy says, that Whitsunday  would kill Martinmas and be hanged for the murder; for there I have got a  letter about that interest of Jenny Cairns’s, and deil a tenant’s been at  the Place yet wi’ a boddle of rent, nor will not till Candlemas.
But,  speaking of Frank Kennedy, I daresay he’ll be here the day, for he was  away round to Wigton to warn a king’s ship that’s lying in the bay about  Dirk Hatteraick’s lugger being on the coast again, and he’ll be back this  day; so we’ll have a bottle of claret and drink little Harry’s health.’  ‘I wish,’ replied the lady, ‘Frank Kennedy would let Dirk Hatteraick  alane.
What needs he make himself mair busy than other folk?
Cannot he  sing his sang, and take his drink, and draw his salary, like Collector  Snail, honest man, that never fashes ony body?
And I wonder at you, Laird,  for meddling and making.
Did we ever want to send for tea or brandy frae  the borough-town when Dirk Hatteraick used to come quietly into the bay?’  ‘Mrs.
Bertram, you know nothing of these matters.
Do you think it becomes  a magistrate to let his own house be made a receptacle for smuggled goods?
Frank Kennedy will show you the penalties in the act, and ye ken yoursell  they used to put their run goods into the Auld Place of Ellangowan up by  there.’  ‘Oh dear, Mr. Bertram, and what the waur were the wa’s and the vault o’  the auld castle for having a whin kegs o’ brandy in them at an orra time?
I am sure ye were not obliged to ken ony thing about it; and what the waur  was the King that the lairds here got a soup o’ drink and the ladies their  drap o’ tea at a reasonable rate?--it’s a shame to them to pit such taxes  on them!--and was na I much the better of these Flanders head and pinners  that Dirk Hatteraick sent me a’ the way from Antwerp?
It will be lang or  the King sends me ony thing, or Frank Kennedy either.
And then ye would  quarrel with these gipsies too!
I expect every day to hear the barnyard’s  in a low.’  ‘I tell you once more, my dear, you don’t understand these things--and  there’s Frank Kennedy coming galloping up the avenue.’  ‘Aweel!
aweel!
Ellangowan,’ said the lady, raising her voice as the Laird  left the room, ‘I wish ye may understand them yoursell, that’s a’!’  From this nuptial dialogue the Laird joyfully escaped to meet his faithful  friend, Mr. Kennedy, who arrived in high spirits.
‘For the love of life,  Ellangowan,’ he said, ‘get up to the castle!
you’ll see that old fox Dirk  Hatteraick, and his Majesty’s hounds in full cry after him.’ So saying, he  flung his horse’s bridle to a boy, and ran up the ascent to the old  castle, followed by the Laird, and indeed by several others of the family,  alarmed by the sound of guns from the sea, now distinctly heard.
On gaining that part of the ruins which commanded the most extensive  outlook, they saw a lugger, with all her canvass crowded, standing across  the bay, closely pursued by a sloop of war, that kept firing upon the  chase from her bows, which the lugger returned with her stern-chasers.
‘They’re but at long bowls yet,’ cried Kennedy, in great exultation, ‘but  they will be closer by and by.
D--n him, he’s starting his cargo!
I see  the good Nantz pitching overboard, keg after keg!
That’s a d--d ungenteel  thing of Mr. Hatteraick, as I shall let him know by and by.
Now, now!
they’ve got the wind of him!
that’s it, that’s it!
Hark to him!
hark to  him!
Now, my dogs!
now, my dogs!
Hark to Ranger, hark!’  ‘I think,’ said the old gardener to one of the maids, ‘the ganger’s fie,’  by which word the common people express those violent spirits which they  think a presage of death.
Meantime the chase continued.
The lugger, being piloted with great  ability, and using every nautical shift to make her escape, had now  reached, and was about to double, the headland which formed the extreme  point of land on the left side of the bay, when a ball having hit the yard  in the slings, the mainsail fell upon the deck.
The consequence of this  accident appeared inevitable, but could not be seen by the spectators; for  the vessel, which had just doubled the headland, lost steerage, and fell  out of their sight behind the promontory.
The sloop of war crowded all  sail to pursue, but she had stood too close upon the cape, so that they  were obliged to wear the vessel for fear of going ashore, and to make a  large tack back into the bay, in order to recover sea-room enough to  double the headland.
‘They ‘ll lose her, by--, cargo and lugger, one or both,’ said Kennedy; ‘I  must gallop away to the Point of Warroch (this was the headland so often  mentioned), and make them a signal where she has drifted to on the other  side.
Good-bye for an hour, Ellangowan; get out the gallon punch-bowl and  plenty of lemons.
I’ll stand for the French article by the time I come  back, and we’ll drink the young Laird’s health in a bowl that would swim  the collector’s yawl.’ So saying, he mounted his horse and galloped off.
About a mile from the house, and upon the verge of the woods, which, as we  have said, covered a promontory terminating in the cape called the Point  of Warroch, Kennedy met young Harry Bertram, attended by his tutor,  Dominie Sampson.
He had often promised the child a ride upon his galloway;  and, from singing, dancing, and playing Punch for his amusement, was a  particular favourite.
He no sooner came scampering up the path, than the  boy loudly claimed his promise; and Kennedy, who saw no risk, in indulging  him, and wished to tease the Dominie, in whose visage he read a  remonstrance, caught up Harry from the ground, placed him before him, and  continued his route; Sampson’s ‘Peradventure, Master Kennedy-’ being lost  in the clatter of his horse’s feet.
The pedagogue hesitated a moment  whether he should go after them; but Kennedy being a person in full  confidence of the family, and with whom he himself had no delight in  associating, ‘being that he was addicted unto profane and scurrilous  jests,’ he continued his own walk at his own pace, till he reached the  Place of Ellangowan.
The spectators from the ruined walls of the castle were still watching the  sloop of war, which at length, but not without the loss of considerable  time, recovered sea-room enough to weather the Point of Warroch, and was  lost to their sight behind that wooded promontory.
Some time afterwards  the discharges of several cannon were heard at a distance, and, after an  interval, a still louder explosion, as of a vessel blown up, and a cloud  of smoke rose above the trees and mingled with the blue sky.
All then  separated on their different occasions, auguring variously upon the fate  of the smuggler, but the majority insisting that her capture was  inevitable, if she had not already gone to the bottom.
‘It is near our dinner-time, my dear,’ said Mrs. Bertram to her husband;  ‘will it be lang before Mr. Kennedy comes back?’  ‘I expect him every moment, my dear,’ said the Laird; ‘perhaps he is  bringing some of the officers of the sloop with him.’  ‘My stars, Mr. Bertram!
why did not ye tell me this before, that we might  have had the large round table?
And then, they’re a’ tired o’ saut meat,  and, to tell you the plain truth, a rump o’ beef is the best part of your  dinner.
And then I wad have put on another gown, and ye wadna have been  the waur o’ a clean neck-cloth yoursell.
But ye delight in surprising and  hurrying one.
I am sure I am no to baud out for ever against this sort of  going on; but when folk’s missed, then they are moaned.’  ‘Pshaw, pshaw!
deuce take the beef, and the gown, and table, and the  neck-cloth!
we shall do all very well.
Where’s the Dominie, John?
(to a  servant who was busy about the table) where’s the Dominie and little  Harry?’  ‘Mr.
Sampson’s been at hame these twa hours and mair, but I dinna think  Mr. Harry cam hame wi’ him.’  ‘Not come hame wi’ him?’ said the lady; ‘desire Mr. Sampson to step this  way directly.’  ‘Mr.
Sampson,’ said she, upon his entrance, ‘is it not the most  extraordinary thing in this world wide, that you, that have free  up-putting--bed, board, and washing--and twelve pounds sterling a year,  just to look after that boy, should let him out of your sight for twa or  three hours?’  Sampson made a bow of humble acknowledgment at each pause which the angry  lady made in her enumeration of the advantages of his situation, in order  to give more weight to her remonstrance, and then, in words which we will  not do him the injustice to imitate, told how Mr. Francis Kennedy ‘had  assumed spontaneously the charge of Master Harry, in despite of his  remonstrances in the contrary.’  ‘I am very little obliged to Mr. Francis Kennedy for his pains,’ said the  lady, peevishly; ‘suppose he lets the boy drop from his horse, and lames  him?
or suppose one of the cannons comes ashore and kills him?
or  suppose--’  ‘Or suppose, my dear,’ said Ellangowan, ‘what is much more likely than  anything else, that they have gone aboard the sloop or the prize, and are  to come round the Point with the tide?’  ‘And then they may be drowned,’ said the lady.
‘Verily,’ said Sampson, ‘I thought Mr. Kennedy had returned an hour since.
Of a surety I deemed I heard his horse’s feet.’  ‘That,’ said John, with a broad grin, ‘was Grizzel chasing the humble-cow  out of the close.’  Sampson coloured up to the eyes, not at the implied taunt, which he would  never have discovered, or resented if he had, but at some idea which  crossed his own mind.
‘I have been in an error,’ he said; ‘of a surety I  should have tarried for the babe.’ So saying, he snatched his bone-headed  cane and hat, and hurried away towards Warroch wood faster than he was  ever known to walk before or after.
The Laird lingered some time, debating the point with the lady.
At length  he saw the sloop of war again make her appearance; but, without  approaching the shore, she stood away to the westward with all her sails  set, and was soon out of sight.
The lady’s state of timorous and fretful  apprehension was so habitual that her fears went for nothing with her lord  and master; but an appearance of disturbance and anxiety among the  servants now excited his alarm, especially when he was called out of the  room, and told in private that Mr. Kennedy’s horse had come to the stable  door alone, with the saddle turned round below its belly and the reins of  the bridle broken; and that a farmer had informed them in passing that  there was a smuggling lugger burning like a furnace on the other side of  the Point of Warroch, and that, though he had come through the wood, he  had seen or heard nothing of Kennedy or the young Laird, ‘only there was  Dominie Sampson gaun rampauging about like mad, seeking for them.’  All was now bustle at Ellangowan.
The Laird and his servants, male and  female, hastened to the wood of Warroch.
The tenants and cottagers in the  neighbourhood lent their assistance, partly out of zeal, partly from  curiosity.
Boats were manned to search the sea-shore, which, on the other  side of the Point, rose into high and indented rocks.
A vague suspicion  was entertained, though too horrible to be expressed, that the child might  have fallen from one of these cliffs.
The evening had begun to close when the parties entered the wood, and  dispersed different ways in quest of the boy and his companion.
The  darkening of the atmosphere, and the hoarse sighs of the November wind  through the naked trees, the rustling of the withered leaves which strewed  the glades, the repeated halloos of the different parties, which often  drew them together in expectation of meeting the objects of their search,  gave a cast of dismal sublimity to the scene.
At length, after a minute and fruitless investigation through the wood,  the searchers began to draw together into one body, and to compare notes.
The agony of the father grew beyond concealment, yet it scarcely equalled  the anguish of the tutor.
‘Would to God I had died for him!’ the  affectionate creature repeated, in notes of the deepest distress.
Those  who were less interested rushed into a tumultuary discussion of chances  and possibilities.
Each gave his opinion, and each was alternately swayed  by that of the others.
Some thought the objects of their search had gone  aboard the sloop; some that they had gone to a village at three miles’  distance; some whispered they might have been on board the lugger, a few  planks and beams of which the tide now drifted ashore.
At this instant a shout was heard from the beach, so loud, so shrill, so  piercing, so different from every sound which the woods that day had rung  to, that nobody hesitated a moment to believe that it conveyed tidings,  and tidings of dreadful import.
All hurried to the place, and, venturing  without scruple upon paths which at another time they would have shuddered  to look at, descended towards a cleft of the rock, where one boat’s crew  was already landed.
‘Here, sirs, here!
this way, for God’s sake!
this way!
this way!’ was the reiterated cry.
Ellangowan broke through the throng  which had already assembled at the fatal spot, and beheld the object of  their terror.
It was the dead body of Kennedy.
At first sight he seemed to  have perished by a fall from the rocks, which rose above the spot on which  he lay in a perpendicular precipice of a hundred feet above the beach.
The  corpse was lying half in, half out of the water; the advancing tide,  raising the arm and stirring the clothes, had given it at some distance  the appearance of motion, so that those who first discovered the body  thought that life remained.
But every spark had been long extinguished.
‘My bairn!
my bairn!’ cried the distracted father, ‘where can he be?’ A  dozen mouths were opened to communicate hopes which no one felt.
Some one  at length mentioned--the gipsies!
In a moment Ellangowan had reascended  the cliffs, flung himself upon the first horse he met, and rode furiously  to the huts at Derncleugh.
All was there dark and desolate; and, as he  dismounted to make more minute search, he stumbled over fragments of  furniture which had been thrown out of the cottages, and the broken wood  and thatch which had been pulled down by his orders.
At that moment the  prophecy, or anathema, of Meg Merrilies fell heavy on his mind.
‘You have  stripped the thatch from seven cottages; see that the roof-tree of your  own house stand the surer!’          CHAPTER X  But see, his face is black and full of blood;  His eye-balls farther out than when he lived,  Staring full ghastly like a strangled man,  His hair uprear’d, his nostrils stretch d with struggling,  His hands abroad display’d, as one that grasp’d  And tugg’d for life, and was by strength subdued  Henry VI, Part II  The Sheriff-depute of the county arrived at Ellangowan next morning by  daybreak.
To this provincial magistrate the law of Scotland assigns  judicial powers of considerable extent, and the task of inquiring into all  crimes committed within his jurisdiction, the apprehension and commitment  of suspected persons, and so forth.
[Footnote: The Scottish sheriff  discharges, on such occasions as that now mentioned, pretty much the same  duty as a coroner.]
The gentleman who held the office in the shire of---at the time of this  catastrophe was well born and well educated; and, though somewhat pedantic  and professional in his habits, he enjoyed general respect as an active  and intelligent magistrate.
His first employment was to examine all  witnesses whose evidence could throw light upon this mysterious event, and  make up the written report, proces verbal, or precognition, as it is  technically called, which the practice of Scotland has substituted for a  coroner’s inquest.
Under the Sheriff’s minute and skilful inquiry, many  circumstances appeared which seemed incompatible with the original opinion  that Kennedy had accidentally fallen from the cliffs.
We shall briefly  detail some of these.
The body had been deposited in a neighbouring fisher-hut, but without  altering the condition in which it was found.
This was the first object of  the Sheriff’s examination.
Though fearfully crushed and mangled by the  fall from such a height, the corpse was found to exhibit a deep cut in the  head, which, in the opinion of a skilful surgeon, must have been inflicted  by a broadsword or cutlass.
The experience of this gentleman discovered  other suspicious indications.
The face was much blackened, the eyes  distorted, and the veins of the neck swelled.
A coloured handkerchief,  which the unfortunate man had worn round his neck, did not present the  usual appearance, but was much loosened, and the knot displaced and  dragged extremely tight; the folds were also compressed, as if it had been  used as a means of grappling the deceased, and dragging him perhaps to the  precipice.
On the other hand, poor Kennedy’s purse was found untouched; and, what  seemed yet more extraordinary, the pistols which he usually carried when  about to encounter any hazardous adventure were found in his pockets  loaded.
This appeared particularly strange, for he was known and dreaded  by the contraband traders as a man equally fearless and dexterous in the  use of his weapons, of which he had given many signal proofs.
The Sheriff  inquired whether Kennedy was not in the practice of carrying any other  arms?
Most of Mr. Bertram’s servants recollected that he generally had a  couteau de chasse, or short hanger, but none such was found upon the dead  body; nor could those who had seen him on the morning of the fatal day  take it upon them to assert whether he then carried that weapon or not.
The corpse afforded no other indicia respecting the fate of Kennedy; for,  though the clothes were much displaced and the limbs dreadfully fractured,  the one seemed the probable, the other the certain, consequences of such a  fall.
The hands of the deceased were clenched fast, and full of turf and  earth; but this also seemed equivocal.
The magistrate then proceeded to the place where the corpse was first  discovered, and made those who had found it give, upon the spot, a  particular and detailed account of the manner in which it was lying.
A  large fragment of the rock appeared to have accompanied, or followed, the  fall of the victim from the cliff above.
It was of so solid and compact a  substance that it had fallen without any great diminution by splintering;  so that the Sheriff was enabled, first, to estimate the weight by  measurement, and then to calculate, from the appearance of the fragment,  what portion of it had been bedded into the cliff from which it had  descended.
This was easily detected by the raw appearance of the stone  where it had not been exposed to the atmosphere.
They then ascended the  cliff, and surveyed the place from whence the stony fragment had fallen.
It seemed plain, from the appearance of the bed, that the mere weight of  one man standing upon the projecting part of the fragment, supposing it in  its original situation, could not have destroyed its balance and  precipitated it, with himself, from the cliff.
At the same time, it  appeared to have lain so loose that the use of a lever, or the combined  strength of three or four men, might easily have hurled it from its  position.
The short turf about the brink of the precipice was much  trampled, as if stamped by the heels of men in a mortal struggle, or in  the act of some violent exertion.
Traces of the same kind, less visibly  marked, guided the sagacious investigator to the verge of the copsewood,  which in that place crept high up the bank towards the top of the  precipice.
With patience and perseverance they traced these marks into the thickest  part of the copse, a route which no person would have voluntarily adopted,  unless for the purpose of concealment.
Here they found plain vestiges of  violence and struggling, from space to space.
Small boughs were torn down,  as if grasped by some resisting wretch who was dragged forcibly along; the  ground, where in the least degree soft or marshy, showed the print of many  feet; there were vestiges also which might be those of human blood.
At any  rate it was certain that several persons must have forced their passage  among the oaks, hazels, and underwood with which they were mingled; and in  some places appeared traces as if a sack full of grain, a dead body, or  something of that heavy and solid description, had been dragged along the  ground.
In one part of the thicket there was a small swamp, the clay of  which was whitish, being probably mixed with marl.
The back of Kennedy’s  coat appeared besmeared with stains of the same colour.
At length, about a quarter of a mile from the brink of the fatal  precipice, the traces conducted them to a small open space of ground, very  much trampled, and plainly stained with blood, although withered leaves  had been strewed upon the spot, and other means hastily taken to efface  the marks, which seemed obviously to have been derived from a desperate  affray.
On one side of this patch of open ground was found the sufferer’s  naked hanger, which seemed to have been thrown into the thicket; on the  other, the belt and sheath, which appeared to have been hidden with more  leisurely care and precaution.
The magistrate caused the footprints which marked this spot to be  carefully measured and examined.
Some corresponded to the foot of the  unhappy victim; some were larger, some less; indicating that at least four  or five men had been busy around him.
Above all, here, and here only, were  observed the vestiges of a child’s foot; and as it could be seen nowhere  else, and the hard horse-track which traversed the wood of Warroch was  contiguous to the spot, it was natural to think that the boy might have  escaped in that direction during the confusion.
But, as he was never heard  of, the Sheriff, who made a careful entry of all these memoranda, did not  suppress his opinion, that the deceased had met with foul play, and that  the murderers, whoever they were, had possessed themselves of the person  of the child Harry Bertram.
Every exertion was now made to discover the criminals.
Suspicion hesitated  between the smugglers and the gipsies.
The fate of Dirk Hatteraick’s  vessel was certain.
Two men from the opposite side of Warroch Bay (so the  inlet on the southern side of the Point of Warroch is called) had seen,  though at a great distance, the lugger drive eastward, after doubling the  headland, and, as they judged from her manoeuvres, in a disabled state.
Shortly after, they perceived that she grounded, smoked, and finally took  fire.
She was, as one of them expressed himself, ‘in a light low’ (bright  flame) when they observed a king’s ship, with her colours up, heave in  sight from behind the cape.
The guns of the burning vessel discharged  themselves as the fire reached them; and they saw her at length blow up  with a great explosion.
The sloop of war kept aloof for her own safety;  and, after hovering till the other exploded, stood away southward under a  press of sail.
The Sheriff anxiously interrogated these men whether any  boats had left the vessel.
They could not say, they had seen none; but  they might have put off in such a direction as placed the burning vessel,  and the thick smoke which floated landward from it, between their course  and the witnesses’ observation.
That the ship destroyed was Dirk Hatteraick’s no one doubted.
His lugger  was well known on the coast, and had been expected just at this time.
A  letter from the commander of the king’s sloop, to whom the Sheriff made  application, put the matter beyond doubt; he sent also an extract from his  log-book of the transactions of the day, which intimated their being on  the outlook for a smuggling lugger, Dirk Hatteraick master, upon the  information and requisition of Francis Kennedy, of his Majesty’s excise  service; and that Kennedy was to be upon the outlook on the shore, in case  Hatteraick, who was known to be a desperate fellow, and had been  repeatedly outlawed, should attempt to run his sloop aground.
About nine  o’clock A.M. they discovered a sail which answered the description of  Hatteraick’s vessel, chased her, and, after repeated signals to her to  show colours and bring-to, fired upon her.
The chase then showed Hamburgh  colours and returned the fire; and a running fight was maintained for  three hours, when, just as the lugger was doubling the Point of Warroch,  they observed that the main-yard was shot in the slings, and that the  vessel was disabled.
It was not in the power of the man-of-war’s men for  some time to profit by this circumstance, owing to their having kept too  much in shore for doubling the headland.
After two tacks, they  accomplished this, and observed the chase on fire and apparently deserted.
The fire having reached some casks of spirits, which were placed on the  deck, with other combustibles, probably on purpose, burnt with such fury  that no boats durst approach the vessel, especially as her shotted guns  were discharging one after another by the heat.
The captain had no doubt  whatever that the crew had set the vessel on fire and escaped in their  boats.
After watching the conflagration till the ship blew up, his  Majesty’s sloop, the Shark, stood towards the Isle of Man, with the  purpose of intercepting the retreat of the smugglers, who, though they  might conceal themselves in the woods for a day or two, would probably  take the first opportunity of endeavouring to make for this asylum.
But  they never saw more of them than is above narrated.
Such was the account given by William Pritchard, master and commander of  his Majesty’s sloop of war, Shark, who concluded by regretting deeply that  he had not had the happiness to fall in with the scoundrels who had had  the impudence to fire on his Majesty’s flag, and with an assurance that,  should he meet Mr. Dirk Hatteraick in any future cruise, he would not fail  to bring him into port under his stern, to answer whatever might be  alleged against him.
CHAPTER XI  ENTER TIME, AS CHORUS  I, that please some, try all, both joy and terror  Of good and bad; that make and unfold error,  Now take upon me, in the name of Time,  To use my wings Impute it not a crime  To me, or my swift passage, that I slide  O’er sixteen years, and leave the growth untried  Of that wide gap.
Winter’s Tale.
Our narration is now about to make a large stride, and omit a space of  nearly seventeen years; during which nothing occurred of any particular  consequence with respect to the story we have undertaken to tell.
The gap  is a wide one; yet if the reader’s experience in life enables him to look  back on so many years, the space will scarce appear longer in his  recollection than the time consumed in turning these pages.
It was, then, in the month of November, about seventeen years after the  catastrophe related in the last chapter, that, during a cold and stormy  night, a social group had closed around the kitchen-fire of the Gordon  Arms at Kippletringan, a small but comfortable inn kept by Mrs.  Mac-Candlish in that village.
The conversation which passed among them  will save me the trouble of telling the few events occurring during this  chasm in our history, with which it is necessary that the reader should be  acquainted.
Mrs. Mac-Candlish, throned in a comfortable easychair lined with black  leather, was regaling herself and a neighbouring gossip or two with a cup  of genuine tea, and at the same time keeping a sharp eye upon her  domestics, as they went and came in prosecution of their various duties  and commissions.
The clerk and precentor of the parish enjoyed at a little  distance his Saturday night’s pipe, and aided its bland fumigation by an  occasional sip of brandy and water.
Deacon Bearcliff, a man of great  importance in the village, combined the indulgence of both parties: he had  his pipe and his tea-cup, the latter being laced with a little spirits.
One or two clowns sat at some distance, drinking their twopenny ale.
‘Are ye sure the parlour’s ready for them, and the fire burning clear, and  the chimney no smoking?’ said the hostess to a chambermaid.
She was answered in the affirmative.
‘Ane wadna be uncivil to them,  especially in their distress,’ said she, turning to the Deacon.
‘Assuredly not, Mrs. Mac-Candlish; assuredly not.
I am sure ony sma’ thing  they might want frae my shop, under seven, or eight, or ten pounds, I  would book them as readily for it as the first in the country.
Do they  come in the auld chaise?’  ‘I daresay no,’ said the precentor; ‘for Miss Bertram comes on the white  powny ilka day to the kirk--and a constant kirk-keeper she is--and it’s a  pleasure to hear her singing the psalms, winsome young thing.’  ‘Ay, and the young Laird of Hazlewood rides hame half the road wi’ her  after sermon,’ said one of the gossips in company.
‘I wonder how auld  Hazlewood likes that.’  ‘I kenna how he may like it now,’ answered another of the tea-drinkers;  ‘but the day has been when Ellangowan wad hae liked as little to see his  daughter taking up with their son.’  ‘Ay, has been,’ answered the first, with somewhat of emphasis.
‘I am sure, neighbour Ovens,’ said the hostess, ‘the Hazlewoods of  Hazlewood, though they are a very gude auld family in the county, never  thought, till within these twa score o’ years, of evening themselves till  the Ellangowans.
Wow, woman, the Bertrams of Ellangowan are the auld  Dingawaies lang syne.
There is a sang about ane o’ them marrying a  daughter of the King of Man; it begins--  Blythe Bertram’s ta’en him ower the faem,  To wed a wife, and bring her hame--  I daur say Mr. Skreigh can sing us the ballant.’  ‘Gudewife,’ said Skreigh, gathering up his mouth, and sipping his tiff of  brandy punch with great solemnity, ‘our talents were gien us to other use  than to sing daft auld sangs sae near the Sabbath day.’  ‘Hout fie, Mr. Skreigh; I’se warrant I hae heard you sing a blythe sang on  Saturday at e’en before now.
But as for the chaise, Deacon, it hasna been  out of the coach-house since Mrs. Bertram died, that’s sixteen or  seventeen years sin syne.
Jock Jabos is away wi’ a chaise of mine for  them; I wonder he’s no come back.
It’s pit mirk; but there’s no an ill  turn on the road but twa, and the brigg ower Warroch burn is safe eneugh,  if he haud to the right side.
But then there’s Heavieside Brae, that’s  just a murder for post-cattle; but Jock kens the road brawly.’  A loud rapping was heard at the door.
‘That’s no them.
I dinna hear the wheels.
Grizzel, ye limmer, gang to the  door.’  ‘It’s a single gentleman,’ whined out Grizzel; ‘maun I take him into the  parlour?’  ‘Foul be in your feet, then; it’ll be some English rider.
Coming without a  servant at this time o’ night!
Has the hostler ta’en the horse?
Ye may  light a spunk o’ fire in the red room.’  ‘I wish, ma’am,’ said the traveller, entering the kitchen, ‘you would give  me leave to warm myself here, for the night is very cold.’  His appearance, voice, and manner produced an instantaneous effect in his  favour.
He was a handsome, tall, thin figure, dressed in black, as  appeared when he laid aside his riding-coat; his age might be between  forty and fifty; his cast of features grave and interesting, and his air  somewhat military.
Every point of his appearance and address bespoke the  gentleman.
Long habit had given Mrs. Mac-Candlish an acute tact in  ascertaining the quality of her visitors, and proportioning her reception  accordingly:--  To every guest the appropriate speech was made,  And every duty with distinction paid;  Respectful, easy, pleasant, or polite--  ‘Your honour’s servant!’ ‘Mister Smith, good-night.‘  On the present occasion she was low in her courtesy and profuse in her  apologies.
The stranger begged his horse might be attended to: she went  out herself to school the hostler.
‘There was never a prettier bit o’ horse-flesh in the stable o’ the Gordon  Arms,’ said the man, which information increased the landlady’s respect  for the rider.
Finding, on her return, that the stranger declined to go  into another apartment (which, indeed, she allowed, would be but cold and  smoky till the fire bleezed up), she installed her guest hospitably by the  fireside, and offered what refreshment her house afforded.
‘A cup of your tea, ma’am, if you will favour me.’  Mrs. Mac-Candlish bustled about, reinforced her teapot with hyson, and  proceeded in her duties with her best grace.
‘We have a very nice parlour,  sir, and everything very agreeable for gentlefolks; but it’s bespoke the  night for a gentleman and his daughter that are going to leave this part  of the country; ane of my chaises is gane for them, and will be back  forthwith.
They’re no sae weel in the warld as they have been; but we’re  a’ subject to ups and downs in this life, as your honour must needs  ken,--but is not the tobacco-reek disagreeable to your honour?’  ‘By no means, ma’am; I am an old campaigner, and perfectly used to it.
Will you permit me to make some inquiries about a family in this  neighbourhood?’  The sound of wheels was now heard, and the landlady hurried to the door to  receive her expected guests; but returned in an instant, followed by the  postilion.
‘No, they canna come at no rate, the Laird’s sae ill.’  ‘But God help them,’ said the landlady, ‘the morn’s the term, the very  last day they can bide in the house; a’ thing’s to be roupit.’  ‘Weel, but they can come at no rate, I tell ye; Mr. Bertram canna be  moved.’  ‘What Mr. Bertram?’ said the stranger; ‘not Mr. Bertram of Ellangowan, I  hope?’  ‘Just e’en that same, sir; and if ye be a friend o’ his, ye have come at a  time when he’s sair bested.’  ‘I have been abroad for many years,--is his health so much deranged?’  ‘Ay, and his affairs an’ a’,’ said the Deacon; ‘the creditors have entered  into possession o’ the estate, and it’s for sale; and some that made the  maist by him--I name nae names, but Mrs. Mac-Candlish kens wha I mean (the  landlady shook her head significantly)--they’re sairest on him e’en now.
I  have a sma’ matter due myself, but I would rather have lost it than gane  to turn the auld man out of his house, and him just dying.’  ‘Ay, but,’ said the parish clerk, ‘Factor Glossin wants to get rid of the  auld Laird, and drive on the sale, for fear the heir-male should cast up  upon them; for I have heard say, if there was an heir-male they couldna  sell the estate for auld Ellangowan’s debt.’  ‘He had a son born a good many years ago,’ said the stranger; ‘he is dead,  I suppose?’  ‘Nae man can say for that,’ answered the clerk mysteriously.
‘Dead!’ said the Deacon, ‘I’se warrant him dead lang syne; he hasna been  heard o’ these twenty years or thereby.’  ‘I wot weel it’s no twenty years,’ said the landlady; ‘it’s no abune  seventeen at the outside in this very month.
It made an unco noise ower a’  this country; the bairn disappeared the very day that Supervisor Kennedy  cam by his end.
If ye kenn’d this country lang syne, your honour wad maybe  ken Frank Kennedy the Supervisor.
He was a heartsome pleasant man, and  company for the best gentlemen in the county, and muckle mirth he’s made  in this house.
I was young then, sir, and newly married to Bailie  Mac-Candlish, that’s dead and gone (a sigh); and muckle fun I’ve had wi’  the Supervisor.
He was a daft dog.
O, an he could hae hauden aff the  smugglers a bit!
but he was aye venturesome.
And so ye see, sir, there was  a king’s sloop down in Wigton Bay, and Frank Kennedy, he behoved to have  her up to chase Dirk Hatteraick’s lugger--ye’ll mind Dirk Hatteraick,  Deacon?
I daresay ye may have dealt wi’ him--(the Deacon gave a sort of  acquiescent nod and humph).
He was a daring chield, and he fought his ship  till she blew up like peelings of ingans; and Frank Kennedy, he had been  the first man to board, and he was flung like a quarter of a mile off, and  fell into the water below the rock at Warroch Point, that they ca’ the  Gauger’s Loup to this day.’  ‘And Mr. Bertram’s child,’ said the stranger, ‘what is all this to him?’  ‘Ou, sir, the bairn aye held an unco wark wi’ the Supervisor; and it was  generally thought he went on board the vessel alang wi’ him, as bairns are  aye forward to be in mischief.’    CHAPTER XII  Reputation!
that’s man’s idol  Set up against God, the Maker of all laws,  Who hath commanded us we should not kill,  And yet we say we must, for Reputation!
What honest man can either fear his own,  Or else will hurt another’s reputation?
Fear to do base unworthy things is valour;  If they be done to us, to suffer them  Is valour too.
BEN JONSON.
The Colonel was walking pensively up and down the parlour when the  officious landlady reentered to take his commands.
Having given them in  the manner he thought would be most acceptable ‘for the good of the  house,’ he begged to detain her a moment.
‘I think,’ he said, ‘madam, if I understood the good people right, Mr.  Bertram lost his son in his fifth year?’  ‘O ay, sir, there’s nae doubt o’ that, though there are mony idle clashes  about the way and manner, for it’s an auld story now, and everybody tells  it, as we were doing, their ain way by the ingleside.
But lost the bairn  was in his fifth year, as your honour says, Colonel; and the news being  rashly tell’d to the leddy, then great with child, cost her her life that  samyn night; and the Laird never throve after that day, but was just  careless of everything, though, when his daughter Miss Lucy grew up, she  tried to keep order within doors; but what could she do, poor thing?
So  now they’re out of house and hauld.’  ‘Can you recollect, madam, about what time of the year the child was  lost?’ The landlady, after a pause and some recollection, answered, ‘she  was positive it was about this season’; and added some local recollections  that fixed the date in her memory as occurring about the beginning of  November 17--.
The stranger took two or three turns round the room in silence, but signed  to Mrs. Mac-Candlish not to leave it.
‘Did I rightly apprehend,’ he said, ‘that the estate of Ellangowan is in  the market?’  ‘In the market?
It will be sell’d the morn to the highest bidder--that’s  no the morn, Lord help me!
which is the Sabbath, but on Monday, the first  free day; and the furniture and stocking is to be roupit at the same time  on the ground.
It’s the opinion of the haill country that the sale has  been shamefully forced on at this time, when there’s sae little money  stirring in Scotland wi’ this weary American war, that somebody may get  the land a bargain.
Deil be in them, that I should say sae!’--the good  lady’s wrath rising at the supposed injustice.
‘And where will the sale take place?’  ‘On the premises, as the advertisement says; that’s at the house of  Ellangowan, your honour, as I understand it.’  ‘And who exhibits the title-deeds, rent-roll, and plan?’  ‘A very decent man, sir; the sheriff-substitute of the county, who has  authority from the Court of Session.
He’s in the town just now, if your  honour would like to see him; and he can tell you mair about the loss of  the bairn than ony body, for the sheriff-depute (that’s his principal,  like) took much pains to come at the truth o’ that matter, as I have  heard.’  ‘And this gentleman’s name is--’  ‘Mac-Morlan, sir; he’s a man o’ character, and weel spoken o’.’  ‘Send my compliments--Colonel Mannering’s compliments to him, and I would  be glad he would do me the pleasure of supping with me, and bring these  papers with him; and I beg, good madam, you will say nothing of this to  any one else.’  ‘Me, sir?
ne’er a word shall I say.
I wish your honour (a courtesy), or  ony honourable gentleman that’s fought for his country (another courtesy),  had the land, since the auld family maun quit (a sigh), rather than that  wily scoundrel Glossin, that’s risen on the ruin of the best friend he  ever had.
And now I think on’t, I’ll slip on my hood and pattens, and gang  to Mr. Mac-Morlan mysell, he’s at hame e’en now; it’s hardly a step.’  ‘Do so, my good landlady, and many thanks; and bid my servant step here  with my portfolio in the meantime.’  In a minute or two Colonel Mannering was quietly seated with his writing  materials before him.
We have the privilege of looking over his shoulder  as he writes, and we willingly communicate its substance to our readers.
The letter was addressed to Arthur Mervyn, Esq., of Mervyn Hall,  Llanbraithwaite, Westmoreland.
It contained some account of the writer’s  previous journey since parting with him, and then proceeded as follows:--  ‘And now, why will you still upbraid me with my melancholy, Mervyn?
Do you  think, after the lapse of twenty-five years, battles, wounds,  imprisonment, misfortunes of every description, I can be still the same  lively, unbroken Guy Mannering who climbed Skiddaw with you, or shot  grouse upon Crossfell?
That you, who have remained in the bosom of  domestic happiness, experience little change, that your step is as light  and your fancy as full of sunshine, is a blessed effect of health and  temperament, cooperating with content and a smooth current down the course  of life.
But MY career has been one of difficulties and doubts and errors.
From my infancy I have been the sport of accident, and, though the wind  has often borne me into harbour, it has seldom been into that which the  pilot destined.
Let me recall to you--but the task must be brief--the odd  and wayward fates of my youth, and the misfortunes of my manhood.
‘The former, you will say, had nothing very appalling.
All was not for the  best; but all was tolerable.
My father, the eldest son of an ancient but  reduced family, left me with little, save the name of the head of the  house, to the protection of his more fortunate brothers.
They were so fond  of me that they almost quarrelled about me.
My uncle, the bishop, would  have had me in orders, and offered me a living; my uncle, the merchant,  would have put me into a counting-house, and proposed to give me a share  in the thriving concern of Mannering and Marshall, in Lombard Street.
So,  between these two stools, or rather these two soft, easy, well-stuffed  chairs of divinity and commerce, my unfortunate person slipped down, and  pitched upon a dragoon saddle.
Again, the bishop wished me to marry the  niece and heiress of the Dean of Lincoln; and my uncle, the alderman,  proposed to me the only daughter of old Sloethorn, the great  wine-merchant, rich enough to play at span-counter with moidores and make  thread-papers of bank-notes; and somehow I slipped my neck out of both  nooses, and married--poor, poor Sophia Wellwood.
‘You will say, my military career in India, when I followed my regiment  there, should have given me some satisfaction; and so it assuredly has.
You will remind me also, that if I disappointed the hopes of my guardians,  I did not incur their displeasure; that the bishop, at his death,  bequeathed me his blessing, his manuscript sermons, and a curious  portfolio containing the heads of eminent divines of the church of  England; and that my uncle, Sir Paul Mannering, left me sole heir and  executor to his large fortune.
Yet this availeth me nothing; I told you I  had that upon my mind which I should carry to my grave with me, a  perpetual aloes in the draught of existence.
I will tell you the cause  more in detail than I had the heart to do while under your hospitable  roof.
You will often hear it mentioned, and perhaps with different and  unfounded circumstances.
I will therefore speak it out; and then let the  event itself, and the sentiments of melancholy with which it has impressed  me, never again be subject of discussion between us.
‘Sophia, as you well know, followed me to India.
She was as innocent as  gay; but, unfortunately for us both, as gay as innocent.
My own manners  were partly formed by studies I had forsaken, and habits of seclusion not  quite consistent with my situation as commandant of a regiment in a  country where universal hospitality is offered and expected by every  settler claiming the rank of a gentleman.
In a moment of peculiar pressure  (you know how hard we were sometimes run to obtain white faces to  countenance our line-of-battle), a young man named Brown joined our  regiment as a volunteer, and, finding the military duty more to his fancy  than commerce, in which he had been engaged, remained with us as a cadet.
Let me do my unhappy victim justice: he behaved with such gallantry on  every occasion that offered that the first vacant commission was  considered as his due.
I was absent for some weeks upon a distant  expedition; when I returned I found this young fellow established quite as  the friend of the house, and habitual attendant of my wife and daughter.
It was an arrangement which displeased me in many particulars, though no  objection could be made to his manners or character.
Yet I might have been  reconciled to his familiarity in my family, but for the suggestions of  another.
If you read over--what I never dare open--the play of “Othello,  you will have some idea of what followed--I mean of my motives; my  actions, thank God!
were less reprehensible.
There was another cadet  ambitious of the vacant situation.
He called my attention to what he led  me to term coquetry between my wife and this young man.
Sophia was  virtuous, but proud of her virtue; and, irritated by my jealousy, she was  so imprudent as to press and encourage an intimacy which she saw I  disapproved and regarded with suspicion.
Between Brown and me there  existed a sort of internal dislike.
He made an effort or two to overcome  my prejudice; but, prepossessed as I was, I placed them to a wrong motive.
Feeling himself repulsed, and with scorn, he desisted; and as he was  without family and friends, he was naturally more watchful of the  deportment of one who had both.
‘It is odd with what torture I write this letter.
I feel inclined,  nevertheless, to protract the operation, just as if my doing so could put  off the catastrophe which has so long embittered my life.
But--it must be  told, and it shall be told briefly.
CHAPTER XIII  They told me, by the sentence of the law,  They had commission to seize all thy fortune.
Here stood a ruffian with a horrid face,  Lording it o’er a pile of massy plate,  Tumbled into a heap for public sale;  There was another, making villainous jests  At thy undoing; he had ta’en possession  Of all thy ancient most domestic ornaments.
OTWAY.
Early next morning Mannering mounted his horse and, accompanied by his  servant, took the road to Ellangowan.
He had no need to inquire the way.
A  sale in the country is a place of public resort and amusement, and people  of various descriptions streamed to it from all quarters.
After a pleasant ride of about an hour, the old towers of the ruin  presented themselves in the landscape.
The thoughts, with what different  feelings he had lost sight of them so many years before, thronged upon the  mind of the traveller.
The landscape was the same; but how changed the  feelings, hopes, and views of the spectator!
Then life and love were new,  and all the prospect was gilded by their rays.
And now, disappointed in  affection, sated with fame and what the world calls success, his mind,  goaded by bitter and repentant recollection, his best hope was to find a  retirement in which he might nurse the melancholy that was to accompany  him to his grave.
‘Yet why should an individual mourn over the instability  of his hopes and the vanity of his prospects?
The ancient chiefs who  erected these enormous and massive towers to be the fortress of their race  and the seat of their power,--could they have dreamed the day was to come  when the last of their descendants should be expelled, a ruined wanderer,  from his possessions!
But Nature’s bounties are unaltered.
The sun will  shine as fair on these ruins, whether the property of a stranger or of a  sordid and obscure trickster of the abused law, as when the banners of the  founder first waved upon their battlements.’  These reflections brought Mannering to the door of the house, which was  that day open to all.
He entered among others, who traversed the  apartments, some to select articles for purchase, others to gratify their  curiosity.
There is something melancholy in such a scene, even under the  most favourable circumstances.
The confused state of the furniture,  displaced for the convenience of being easily viewed and carried off by  the purchasers, is disagreeable to the eye.
Those articles which, properly  and decently arranged, look creditable and handsome, have then a paltry  and wretched appearance; and the apartments, stripped of all that render  them commodious and comfortable, have an aspect of ruin and dilapidation.
It is disgusting also to see the scenes of domestic society and seclusion  thrown open to the gaze of the curious and the vulgar, to hear their  coarse speculations and brutal jests upon the fashions and furniture to  which they are unaccustomed,--a frolicsome humour much cherished by the  whisky which in Scotland is always put in circulation on such occasions.
All these are ordinary effects of such a scene as Ellangowan now  presented; but the moral feeling, that in this case they indicated the  total ruin of an ancient and honourable family, gave them treble weight  and poignancy.
It was some time before Colonel Mannering could find any one disposed to  answer his reiterated questions concerning Ellangowan himself.
At length  an old maidservant, who held her apron to her eyes as she spoke, told him  ‘the Laird was something better, and they hoped he would be able to leave  the house that day.
Miss Lucy expected the chaise every moment, and, as  the day was fine for the time o’year, they had carried him in his  easychair up to the green before the auld castle, to be out of the way of  this unco spectacle.’ Thither Colonel Mannering went in quest of him, and  soon came in sight of the little group, which consisted of four persons.
The ascent was steep, so that he had time to reconnoitre them as he  advanced, and to consider in what mode he should make his address.
Mr. Bertram, paralytic and almost incapable of moving, occupied his  easy-chair, attired in his nightcap and a loose camlet coat, his feet  wrapped in blankets.
Behind him, with his hands crossed on the cane upon  which he rested, stood Dominie Sampson, whom Mannering recognised at once.
Time had made no change upon him, unless that his black coat seemed more  brown, and his gaunt cheeks more lank, than when Mannering last saw him.
On one side of the old man was a sylph-like form--a young woman of about  seventeen, whom the Colonel accounted to be his daughter.
She was looking  from time to time anxiously towards the avenue, as if expecting the  post-chaise; and between whiles busied herself in adjusting the blankets  so as to protect her father from the cold, and in answering inquiries,  which he seemed to make with a captious and querulous manner.
She did not  trust herself to look towards the Place, although the hum of the assembled  crowd must have drawn her attention in that direction.
The fourth person  of the group was a handsome and genteel young man, who seemed to share  Miss Bertram’s anxiety, and her solicitude to soothe and accommodate her  parent.
This young man was the first who observed Colonel Mannering, and  immediately stepped forward to meet him, as if politely to prevent his  drawing nearer to the distressed group.
Mannering instantly paused and  explained.
‘He was,’ he said, ‘a stranger to whom Mr. Bertram had formerly  shown kindness and hospitality; he would not have intruded himself upon  him at a period of distress, did it not seem to be in some degree a moment  also of desertion; he wished merely to offer such services as might be in  his power to Mr. Bertram and the young lady.’  He then paused at a little distance from the chair.
His old acquaintance  gazed at him with lack-lustre eye, that intimated no tokens of  recognition; the Dominie seemed too deeply sunk in distress even to  observe his presence.
The young man spoke aside with Miss Bertram, who  advanced timidly, and thanked Colonel Mannering for his goodness; ‘but,’  she said, the tears gushing fast into her eyes, ‘her father, she feared,  was not so much himself as to be able to remember him.’  She then retreated towards the chair, accompanied by the Colonel.
‘Father,’ she said, ‘this is Mr. Mannering, an old friend, come to inquire  after you.’  ‘He’s very heartily welcome,’ said the old man, raising himself in his  chair, and attempting a gesture of courtesy, while a gleam of hospitable  satisfaction seemed to pass over his faded features; ‘but, Lucy, my dear,  let us go down to the house; you should not keep the gentleman here in the  cold.
Dominie, take the key of the wine-cooler.
Mr. a--a--the gentleman  will surely take something after his ride.’  Mannering was unspeakably affected by the contrast which his recollection  made between this reception and that with which he had been greeted by the  same individual when they last met.
He could not restrain his tears, and  his evident emotion at once attained him the confidence of the friendless  young lady.
‘Alas!’ she said, ‘this is distressing even to a stranger; but it may be  better for my poor father to be in this way than if he knew and could feel  all.’  A servant in livery now came up the path, and spoke in an undertone to the  young gentleman--’Mr.
Charles, my lady’s wanting you yonder sadly, to bid  for her for the black ebony cabinet; and Lady Jean Devorgoil is wi’ her  an’ a’; ye maun come away directly.’  ‘Tell them you could not find me, Tom, or, stay,--say I am looking at the  horses.’  ‘No, no, no,’ said Lucy Bertram, earnestly; ‘if you would not add to the  misery of this miserable moment, go to the company directly.
This  gentleman, I am sure, will see us to the carriage.’  ‘Unquestionably, madam,’ said Mannering, ‘your young friend may rely on my  attention.’  ‘Farewell, then,’ said young Hazlewood, and whispered a word in her ear;  then ran down the steep hastily, as if not trusting his resolution at a  slower pace.
‘Where’s Charles Hazlewood running?’ said the invalid, who apparently was  accustomed to his presence and attentions; ‘where’s Charles Hazlewood  running?
what takes him away now?’  ‘He’ll return in a little while,’ said Lucy, gently.
The sound of voices was now heard from the ruins.
The reader may remember  there was a communication between the castle and the beach, up which the  speakers had ascended.
‘Yes, there’s a plenty of shells and seaware for manure, as you observe;  and if one inclined to build a new house, which might indeed be necessary,  there’s a great deal of good hewn stone about this old dungeon, for the  devil here--’  ‘Good God!’ said Miss Bertram hastily to Sampson, ‘‘t is that wretch  Glossin’s voice!
If my father sees him, it will kill him outright!’  Sampson wheeled perpendicularly round, and moved with long strides to  confront the attorney as he issued from beneath the portal arch of the  ruin.
‘Avoid ye!’ he said, ‘avoid ye!
wouldst thou kill and take  possession?’  ‘Come, come, Master Dominie Sampson,’ answered Glossin insolently, ‘if ye  cannot preach in the pulpit, we’ll have no preaching here.
We go by the  law, my good friend; we leave the gospel to you.’  The very mention of this man’s name had been of late a subject of the most  violent irritation to the unfortunate patient.
The sound of his voice now  produced an instantaneous effect.
Mr. Bertram started up without  assistance and turned round towards him; the ghastliness of his features  forming a strange contrast with the violence of his exclamations.--’Out of  my sight, ye viper!
ye frozen viper, that I warmed, till ye stung me!
Art  thou not afraid that the walls of my father’s dwelling should fall and  crush thee limb and bone?
Are ye not afraid the very lintels of the door  of Ellangowan Castle should break open and swallow you up?
Were ye not  friendless, houseless, penniless, when I took ye by the hand; and are ye  not expelling me--me and that innocent girl--friendless, houseless, and  penniless, from the house that has sheltered us and ours for a thousand  years?’  Had Glossin been alone, he would probably have slunk off; but the  consciousness that a stranger was present, besides the person who came  with him (a sort of land-surveyor), determined him to resort to impudence.
The task, however, was almost too hard even for his  effrontery--’Sir--sir--Mr. Bertram, sir, you should not blame me, but your  own imprudence, sir--’     CHAPTER XIV  The bell strikes one.
We take no note of time  But from its loss.
To give it then a tongue  Is wise in man.
As if an angel spoke,  I feel the solemn sound.
YOUNG.
The moral which the poet has rather quaintly deduced from the necessary  mode of measuring time may be well applied to our feelings respecting that  portion of it which constitutes human life.
We observe the aged, the  infirm, and those engaged in occupations of immediate hazard, trembling as  it were upon the very brink of non-existence, but we derive no lesson from  the precariousness of their tenure until it has altogether failed.
Then,  for a moment at least--  Our hopes and fears Start up alarm’d, and o’er life’s narrow verge  Look down--on what?
a fathomless abyss, A dark eternity, how surely  ours!
The crowd of assembled gazers and idlers at Ellangowan had followed the  views of amusement, or what they called business, which brought them  there, with little regard to the feelings of those who were suffering upon  that occasion.
Few, indeed, knew anything of the family.
The father,  betwixt seclusion, misfortune, and imbecility, had drifted, as it were,  for many years out of the notice of his contemporaries; the daughter had  never been known to them.
But when the general murmur announced that the  unfortunate Mr. Bertram had broken his heart in the effort to leave the  mansion of his forefathers, there poured forth a torrent of sympathy like  the waters from the rock when stricken by the wand of the prophet.
The  ancient descent and unblemished integrity of the family were respectfully  remembered; above all, the sacred veneration due to misfortune, which in  Scotland seldom demands its tribute in vain, then claimed and received it.
Mr. Mac-Morlan hastily announced that he would suspend all farther  proceedings in the sale of the estate and other property, and relinquish  the possession of the premises to the young lady, until she could consult  with her friends and provide for the burial of her father.
Glossin had cowered for a few minutes under the general expression of  sympathy, till, hardened by observing that no appearance of popular  indignation was directed his way, he had the audacity to require that the  sale should proceed.
‘I will take it upon my own authority to adjourn it,’ said the  Sheriff-substitute, ‘and will be responsible for the consequences.
I will  also give due notice when it is again to go forward.
It is for the benefit  of all concerned that the lands should bring the highest price the state  of the market will admit, and this is surely no time to expect it.
I will  take the responsibility upon myself.’  Glossin left the room and the house too with secrecy and despatch; and it  was probably well for him that he did so, since our friend Jock Jabos was  already haranguing a numerous tribe of bare-legged boys on the propriety  of pelting him off the estate.
Some of the rooms were hastily put in order for the reception of the young  lady, and of her father’s dead body.
Mannering now found his farther  interference would be unnecessary, and might be misconstrued.
He observed,  too, that several families connected with that of Ellangowan, and who  indeed derived their principal claim of gentility from the alliance, were  now disposed to pay to their trees of genealogy a tribute which the  adversity of their supposed relatives had been inadequate to call forth;  and that the honour of superintending the funeral rites of the dead  Godfrey Bertram (as in the memorable case of Homer’s birthplace) was  likely to be debated by seven gentlemen of rank and fortune, none of whom  had offered him an asylum while living.
He therefore resolved, as his  presence was altogether useless, to make a short tour of a fortnight, at  the end of which period the adjourned sale of the estate of Ellangowan was  to proceed.
But before he departed he solicited an interview with the Dominie.
The  poor man appeared, on being informed a gentleman wanted to speak to him,  with some expression of surprise in his gaunt features, to which recent  sorrow had given an expression yet more grisly.
He made two or three  profound reverences to Mannering, and then, standing erect, patiently  waited an explanation of his commands.
‘You are probably at a loss to guess, Mr. Sampson,’ said Mannering, ‘what  a stranger may have to say to you?’  ‘Unless it were to request that I would undertake to train up some youth  in polite letters and humane learning; but I cannot--I cannot; I have yet  a task to perform.’  ‘No, Mr. Sampson, my wishes are not so ambitious.
I have no son, and my  only daughter, I presume, you would not consider as a fit pupil.’  ‘Of a surety no,’ replied the simple-minded Sampson.
‘Nathless, it was I  who did educate Miss Lucy in all useful learning, albeit it was the  housekeeper who did teach her those unprofitable exercises of hemming and  shaping.’  ‘Well, sir,’ replied Mannering, ‘it is of Miss Lucy I meant to speak.
You  have, I presume, no recollection of me?’  Sampson, always sufficiently absent in mind, neither remembered the  astrologer of past years, nor even the stranger who had taken his patron’s  part against Glossin, so much had his friend’s sudden death embroiled his  ideas.
‘Well, that does not signify,’ pursued the Colonel; ‘I am an old  acquaintance of the late Mr. Bertram, able and willing to assist his  daughter in her present circumstances.
Besides, I have thoughts of making  this purchase, and I should wish things kept in order about the place;  will you have the goodness to apply this small sum in the usual family  expenses?’ He put into the Dominie’s hand a purse containing some gold.
‘Pro-di-gi-ous!’ exclaimed Dominie Sampson.
‘But if your honour would  tarry--’  ‘Impossible, sir, impossible,’ said Mannering, making his escape from him.
‘Pro-di-gi-ous!’ again exclaimed Sampson, following to the head of the  stairs, still holding out the purse.
‘But as touching this coined money--’  Mannering escaped downstairs as fast as possible.
‘Pro-di-gi-ous!’ exclaimed Dominie Sampson, yet the third time, now  standing at the front door.
‘But as touching this specie--’  But Mannering was now on horseback, and out of hearing.
The Dominie, who  had never, either in his own right or as trustee for another, been  possessed of a quarter part of this sum, though it was not above twenty  guineas, ‘took counsel,’ as he expressed himself, ‘how he should demean  himself with respect unto the fine gold’ thus left in his charge.
Fortunately he found a disinterested adviser in Mac-Morlan, who pointed  out the most proper means of disposing of it for contributing to Miss  Bertram’s convenience, being no doubt the purpose to which it was destined  by the bestower.
Many of the neighbouring gentry were now sincerely eager in pressing  offers of hospitality and kindness upon Miss Bertram.
But she felt a  natural reluctance to enter any family for the first time as an object  rather of benevolence than hospitality, and determined to wait the opinion  and advice of her father’s nearest female relation, Mrs. Margaret Bertram  of Singleside, an old unmarried lady, to whom she wrote an account of her  present distressful situation.
The funeral of the late Mr. Bertram was performed with decent privacy, and  the unfortunate young lady was now to consider herself as but the  temporary tenant of the house in which she had been born, and where her  patience and soothing attentions had so long ‘rocked the cradle of  declining age.’ Her communication with Mr. Mac-Morlan encouraged her to  hope that she would not be suddenly or unkindly deprived of this asylum;  but fortune had ordered otherwise.
For two days before the appointed day for the sale of the lands and estate  of Ellangowan, Mac-Morlan daily expected the appearance of Colonel  Mannering, or at least a letter containing powers to act for him.
But none  such arrived.
Mr. Mac-Morlan waked early in the morning, walked over to  the Post-office,--there were no letters for him.
He endeavoured to  persuade himself that he should see Colonel Mannering to breakfast, and  ordered his wife to place her best china and prepare herself accordingly.
But the preparations were in vain.
‘Could I have foreseen this,’ he said,  ‘I would have travelled Scotland over, but I would have found some one to  bid against Glossin.’ Alas!
such reflections were all too late.
The  appointed hour arrived; and the parties met in the Masons’ Lodge at  Kippletringan, being the place fixed for the adjourned sale.
Mac-Morlan  spent as much time in preliminaries as decency would permit, and read over  the articles of sale as slowly as if he had been reading his own  death-warrant.
He turned his eye every time the door of the room opened,  with hopes which grew fainter and fainter.
He listened to every noise in  the street of the village, and endeavoured to distinguish in it the sound  of hoofs or wheels.
It was all in vain.
A bright idea then occurred, that  Colonel Mannering might have employed some other person in the  transaction; he would not have wasted a moment’s thought upon the want of  confidence in himself which such a manoeuvre would have evinced.
But this  hope also was groundless.
After a solemn pause, Mr. Glossin offered the  upset price for the lands and barony of Ellangowan.
No reply was made, and  no competitor appeared; so, after a lapse of the usual interval by the  running of a sand-glass, upon the intended purchaser entering the proper  sureties, Mr. Mac-Morlan was obliged, in technical terms, to ‘find and  declare the sale lawfully completed, and to prefer the said Gilbert  Glossin as the purchaser of the said lands and estate.’ The honest writer  refused to partake of a splendid entertainment with which Gilbert Glossin,  Esquire, now of Ellangowan, treated the rest of the company, and returned  home in huge bitterness of spirit, which he vented in complaints against  the fickleness and caprice of these Indian nabobs, who never knew what  they would be at for ten days together.
Fortune generously determined to  take the blame upon herself, and cut off even this vent of Mac-Morlan’s  resentment.
An express arrived about six o’clock at night, ‘very particularly drunk,’  the maid-servant said, with a packet from Colonel Mannering, dated four  days back, at a town about a hundred miles’ distance from Kippletringan,  containing full powers to Mr. Mac-Morlan, or any one whom he might employ,  to make the intended purchase, and stating that some family business of  consequence called the Colonel himself to Westmoreland, where a letter  would find him, addressed to the care of Arthur Mervyn, Esq., of Mervyn  Hall.
Mac-Morlan, in the transports of his wrath, flung the power of attorney at  the head of the innocent maidservant, and was only forcibly withheld from  horse-whipping the rascally messenger by whose sloth and drunkenness the  disappointment had taken place.
CHAPTER XV  My gold is gone, my money is spent,  My land now take it unto thee.
Give me thy gold, good John o’ the Scales,  And thine for aye my land shall be.
Then John he did him to record draw.
And John he caste him a gods-pennie;  But for every pounde that John agreed,  The land, I wis, was well worth three.
HEIR OF LINNE.
The Galwegian John o’ the Scales was a more clever fellow than his  prototype.
He contrived to make himself heir of Linne without the  disagreeable ceremony of ‘telling down the good red gold.’ Miss Bertram no  sooner heard this painful, and of late unexpected, intelligence than she  proceeded in the preparations she had already made for leaving the  mansion-house immediately.
Mr. Mac-Morlan assisted her in these  arrangements, and pressed upon her so kindly the hospitality and  protection of his roof, until she should receive an answer from her  cousin, or be enabled to adopt some settled plan of life, that she felt  there would be unkindness in refusing an invitation urged with such  earnestness.
Mrs. Mac-Morlan was a ladylike person, and well qualified by  birth and manners to receive the visit, and to make her house agreeable to  Miss Bertram.
A home, therefore, and an hospitable reception were secured  to her, and she went on with better heart to pay the wages and receive the  adieus of the few domestics of her father’s family.
Where there are estimable qualities on either side, this task is always  affecting; the present circumstances rendered it doubly so.
All received  their due, and even a trifle more, and with thanks and good wishes, to  which some added tears, took farewell of their young mistress.
There  remained in the parlour only Mr. Mac-Morlan, who came to attend his guest  to his house, Dominie Sampson, and Miss Bertram.
‘And now,’ said the poor  girl, ‘I must bid farewell to one of my oldest and kindest friends.
God  bless you, Mr. Sampson, and requite to you all the kindness of your  instructions to your poor pupil, and your friendship to him that is gone.
I hope I shall often hear from you.’ She slid into his hand a paper  containing some pieces of gold, and rose, as if to leave the room.
Dominie Sampson also rose; but it was to stand aghast with utter  astonishment.
The idea of parting from Miss Lucy, go where she might, had  never once occurred to the simplicity of his understanding.
He laid the  money on the table.
‘It is certainly inadequate,’ said Mac-Morlan,  mistaking his meaning, ‘but the circumstances--’  Mr. Sampson waved his hand impatiently.--’It is not the lucre, it is not  the lucre; but that I, that have ate of her father’s loaf, and drank of  his cup, for twenty years and more--to think that I am going to leave her,  and to leave her in distress and dolour!
No, Miss Lucy, you need never  think it!
You would not consent to put forth your father’s poor dog, and  would you use me waur than a messan?
No, Miss Lucy Bertram, while I live I  will not separate from you.
I’ll be no burden; I have thought how to  prevent that.
But, as Ruth said unto Naomi, “Entreat me not to leave thee,  nor to depart from thee; for whither thou goest I will go, and where thou  dwellest I will dwell; thy people shall be my people, and thy God shall be  my God.
Where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried.
The Lord  do so to me, and more also, if aught but death do part thee and me.’  During this speech, the longest ever Dominie Sampson was known to utter,  the affectionate creature’s eyes streamed with tears, and neither Lucy nor  Mac-Morlan could refrain from sympathising with this unexpected burst of  feeling and attachment.
‘Mr.
Sampson,’ said Mac-Morlan, after having had  recourse to his snuff-box and handkerchief alternately, ‘my house is large  enough, and if you will accept of a bed there while Miss Bertram honours  us with her residence, I shall think myself very happy, and my roof much  favoured, by receiving a man of your worth and fidelity.’ And then, with a  delicacy which was meant to remove any objection on Miss Bertram’s part to  bringing with her this unexpected satellite, he added, ‘My business  requires my frequently having occasion for a better accountant than any of  my present clerks, and I should be glad to have recourse to your  assistance in that way now and then.’  ‘Of a surety, of a surety,’ said Sampson eagerly; ‘I understand  book-keeping by double entry and the Italian method.’  Our postilion had thrust himself into the room to announce his chaise and  horses; he tarried, unobserved, during this extraordinary scene, and  assured Mrs. Mac-Candlish it was the most moving thing he ever saw; ‘the  death of the grey mare, puir hizzie, was naething till’t.’ This trifling  circumstance afterwards had consequences of greater moment to the Dominie.
The visitors were hospitably welcomed by Mrs. Mac-Morlan, to whom, as well  as to others, her husband intimated that he had engaged Dominie Sampson’s  assistance to disentangle some perplexed accounts, during which occupation  he would, for convenience sake, reside with the family.
Mr. Mac-Morlan’s  knowledge of the world induced him to put this colour upon the matter,  aware that, however honourable the fidelity of the Dominie’s attachment  might be both to his own heart and to the family of Ellangowan, his  exterior ill qualified him to be a’squire of dames,’ and rendered him,  upon the whole, rather a ridiculous appendage to a beautiful young woman  of seventeen.
Dominie Sampson achieved with great zeal such tasks as Mr. Mac-Morlan  chose to entrust him with; but it was speedily observed that at a certain  hour after breakfast he regularly disappeared, and returned again about  dinner-time.
The evening he occupied in the labour of the office.
On  Saturday he appeared before Mac-Morlan with a look of great triumph, and  laid on the table two pieces of gold.
‘What is this for, Dominie?’ said  Mac-Morlan.
‘First to indemnify you of your charges in my behalf, worthy sir; and the  balance for the use of Miss Lucy Bertram.’  ‘But, Mr. Sampson, your labour in the office much more than recompenses  me; I am your debtor, my good friend.’  ‘Then be it all,’ said the Dominie, waving his hand, ‘for Miss Lucy  Bertram’s behoof.’  ‘Well, but, Dominie, this money-’  ‘It is honestly come by, Mr. Mac-Morlan; it is the bountiful reward of a  young gentleman to whom I am teaching the tongues; reading with him three  hours daily.’  A few more questions extracted from the Dominie that this liberal pupil  was young Hazlewood, and that he met his preceptor daily at the house of  Mrs. Mac-Candlish, whose proclamation of Sampson’s disinterested  attachment to the young lady had procured him this indefatigable and  bounteous scholar.
Mac-Morlan was much struck with what he heard.
Dominie Sampson was  doubtless a very good scholar, and an excellent man, and the classics were  unquestionably very well worth reading; yet that a young man of twenty  should ride seven miles and back again each day in the week, to hold this  sort of TETE-A-TETE of three hours, was a zeal for literature to which he  was not prepared to give entire credit.
Little art was necessary to sift  the Dominie, for the honest man’s head never admitted any but the most  direct and simple ideas.
‘Does Miss Bertram know how your time is engaged,  my good friend?’  ‘Surely not as yet.
Mr. Charles recommended it should be concealed from  her, lest she should scruple to accept of the small assistance arising  from it; but,’ he added, ‘it would not be possible to conceal it long,  since Mr. Charles proposed taking his lessons occasionally in this house.’  ‘O, he does!’ said Mac-Morlan.’ Yes, yes, I can understand that better.
And pray, Mr. Sampson, are these three hours entirely spent inconstruing  and translating?’  ‘Doubtless, no; we have also colloquial intercourse to sweeten study:  neque semper arcum tendit apollo.’  The querist proceeded to elicit from this Galloway Phoebus what their  discourse chiefly turned upon.
‘Upon our past meetings at Ellangowan; and, truly, I think very often we  discourse concerning Miss Lucy, for Mr. Charles Hazlewood in that  particular resembleth me, Mr. Mac-Morlan.
When I begin to speak of her I  never know when to stop; and, as I say (jocularly), she cheats us out of  half our lessons.’  ‘O ho!’ thought Mac-Morlan, ‘sits the wind in that quarter?
I’ve heard  something like this before.’  He then began to consider what conduct was safest for his protegee, and  even for himself; for the senior Mr. Hazlewood was powerful, wealthy,  ambitious, and vindictive, and looked for both fortune and title in any  connexion which his son might form.
At length, having the highest opinion  of his guest’s good sense and penetration, he determined to take an  opportunity, when they should happen to be alone, to communicate the  matter to her as a simple piece of intelligence.
He did so in as natural a  manner as he could.
‘I wish you joy of your friend Mr. Sampson’s good  fortune, Miss Bertram; he has got a pupil who pays him two guineas for  twelve lessons of Greek and Latin.’  ‘Indeed!
I am equally happy and surprised.
Who can be so liberal?
is  Colonel Mannering returned?’  ‘No, no, not Colonel Mannering; but what do you think of your  acquaintance, Mr. Charles Hazlewood?
He talks of taking his lessons here;  I wish we may have accommodation for him.’  Lucy blushed deeply.
‘For Heaven’s sake, no, Mr. Mac-Morlan, do not let  that be; Charles Hazlewood has had enough of mischief about that already.’  ‘About the classics, my dear young lady?’ wilfully seeming to  misunderstand her; ‘most young gentlemen have so at one period or another,  sure enough; but his present studies are voluntary.’  Miss Bertram let the conversation drop, and her host made no effort to  renew it, as she seemed to pause upon the intelligence in order to form  some internal resolution.
The next day Miss Bertram took an opportunity of conversing with Mr.  Sampson.
Expressing in the kindest manner her grateful thanks for his  disinterested attachment, and her joy that he had got such a provision,  she hinted to him that his present mode of superintending Charles  Hazlewood’s studies must be so inconvenient to his pupil that, while that  engagement lasted, he had better consent to a temporary separation, and  reside either with his scholar or as near him as might be.
Sampson  refused, as indeed she had expected, to listen a moment to this  proposition; he would not quit her to be made preceptor to the Prince of  Wales.
‘But I see,’ he added, ‘you are too proud to share my pittance; and  peradventure I grow wearisome unto you.’  ‘No indeed; you were my father’s ancient, almost his only, friend.
I am  not proud; God knows, I have no reason to be so.
You shall do what you  judge best in other matters; but oblige me by telling Mr. Charles  Hazlewood that you had some conversation with me concerning his studies,  and that I was of opinion that his carrying them on in this house was  altogether impracticable, and not to be thought of.’  Dominie Sampson left her presence altogether crest-fallen, and, as he shut  the door, could not help muttering the ‘varium et mutabile’ of Virgil.
Next day he appeared with a very rueful visage, and tendered Miss Bertram  a letter.
‘Mr.
Hazlewood,’ he said, ‘was to discontinue his lessons,  though he had generously made up the pecuniary loss.
But how will he make  up the loss to himself of the knowledge he might have acquired under my  instruction?
Even in that one article of writing,--he was an hour before  he could write that brief note, and destroyed many scrolls, four quills,  and some good white paper.
I would have taught him in three weeks a firm,  current, clear, and legible hand; he should have been a calligrapher,--but  God’s will be done.’  The letter contained but a few lines, deeply regretting and murmuring  against Miss Bertram’s cruelty, who not only refused to see him, but to  permit him in the most indirect manner to hear of her health and  contribute to her service.
But it concluded with assurances that her  severity was vain, and that nothing could shake the attachment of Charles  Hazlewood.
Under the active patronage of Mrs. Mac-Candlish, Sampson picked up some  other scholars--very different indeed from Charles Hazlewood in rank, and  whose lessons were proportionally unproductive.
Still, however, he gained  something, and it was the glory of his heart to carry it to Mr. Mac-Morlan  weekly, a slight peculium only subtracted to supply his snuff-box and  tobacco-pouch.
And here we must leave Kippletringan to look after our hero, lest our  readers should fear they are to lose sight of him for another quarter of a  century.
CHAPTER XVI  Our Polly is a sad slut, nor heeds what we have taught her,  I wonder any man alive will ever rear a daughter,  For when she’s drest with care and cost, all tempting, fine,  and gay,  As men should serve a cucumber, she flings herself away.
Beggar’s Opera.
After the death of Mr. Bertram, Mannering had set out upon a short tour,  proposing to return to the neighbourhood of Ellangowan before the sale of  that property should take place.
He went, accordingly, to Edinburgh and  elsewhere, and it was in his return towards the south-western district of  Scotland, in which our scene lies, that, at a post-town about a hundred  miles from Kippletringan, to which he had requested his friend, Mr.  Mervyn, to address his letters, he received one from that gentleman which  contained rather unpleasing intelligence.
We have assumed already the  privilege of acting a secretis to this gentleman, and therefore shall  present the reader with an extract from this epistle.
‘I beg your pardon, my dearest friend, for the pain I have given you in  forcing you to open wounds so festering as those your letter referred to.
I have always heard, though erroneously perhaps, that the attentions of  Mr. Brown were intended for Miss Mannering.
But, however that were, it  could not be supposed that in your situation his boldness should escape  notice and chastisement.
Wise men say that we resign to civil society our  natural rights of self-defence only on condition that the ordinances of  law should protect us.
Where the price cannot be paid, the resignation  becomes void.
For instance, no one supposes that I am not entitled to  defend my purse and person against a highwayman, as much as if I were a  wild Indian, who owns neither law nor magistracy.
The question of  resistance or submission must be determined by my means and situation.
But  if, armed and equal in force, I submit to injustice and violence from any  man, high or low, I presume it will hardly be attributed to religious or  moral feeling in me, or in any one but a Quaker.
An aggression on my  honour seems to me much the same.
The insult, however trifling in itself,  is one of much deeper consequence to all views in life than any wrong  which can be inflicted by a depredator on the highway, and to redress the  injured party is much less in the power of public jurisprudence, or rather  it is entirely beyond its reach.
If any man chooses to rob Arthur Mervyn  of the contents of his purse, supposing the said Arthur has not means of  defence, or the skill and courage to use them, the assizes at Lancaster or  Carlisle will do him justice by tucking up the robber; yet who will say I  am bound to wait for this justice, and submit to being plundered in the  first instance, if I have myself the means and spirit to protect my own  property?
But if an affront is offered to me, submission under which is to  tarnish my character for ever with men of honour, and for which the twelve  judges of England, with the chancellor to boot, can afford me no redress,  by what rule of law or reason am I to be deterred from protecting what  ought to be, and is, so infinitely dearer to every man of honour than his  whole fortune?
Of the religious views of the matter I shall say nothing,  until I find a reverend divine who shall condemn self-defence in the  article of life and property.
If its propriety in that case be generally  admitted, I suppose little distinction can be drawn between defence of  person and goods and protection of reputation.
That the latter is liable  to be assailed by persons of a different rank in life, untainted perhaps  in morals, and fair in character, cannot affect my legal right of  self-defence.
I may be sorry that circumstances have engaged me in  personal strife with such an individual; but I should feel the same sorrow  for a generous enemy who fell under my sword in a national quarrel.
I  shall leave the question with the casuists, however; only observing, that  what I have written will not avail either the professed duellist or him  who is the aggressor in a dispute of honour.
I only presume to exculpate  him who is dragged into the field by such an offence as, submitted to in  patience, would forfeit for ever his rank and estimation in society.
‘I am sorry you have thoughts of settling in Scotland, and yet glad that  you will still be at no immeasurable distance, and that the latitude is  all in our favour.
To move to Westmoreland from Devonshire might make an  East-Indian shudder; but to come to us from Galloway or Dumfries-shire is  a step, though a short one, nearer the sun.
Besides, if, as I suspect, the  estate in view be connected with the old haunted castle in which you  played the astrologer in your northern tour some twenty years since, I  have heard you too often describe the scene with comic unction to hope you  will be deterred from making the purchase.
I trust, however, the  hospitable gossiping Laird has not run himself upon the shallows, and that  his chaplain, whom you so often made us laugh at, is still in rerum  natura.
‘And here, dear Mannering, I wish I could stop, for I have incredible pain  in telling the rest of my story; although I am sure I can warn you against  any intentional impropriety on the part of my temporary ward, Julia  Mannering.
But I must still earn my college nickname of Downright  Dunstable.
In one word, then, here is the matter.
‘Your daughter has much of the romantic turn of your disposition, with a  little of that love of admiration which all pretty women share less or  more.
She will besides, apparently, be your heiress; a trifling  circumstance to those who view Julia with my eyes, but a prevailing bait  to the specious, artful, and worthless.
You know how I have jested with  her about her soft melancholy, and lonely walks at morning before any one  is up, and in the moonlight when all should be gone to bed, or set down to  cards, which is the same thing.
The incident which follows may not be  beyond the bounds of a joke, but I had rather the jest upon it came from  you than me.
‘Two or three times during the last fortnight I heard, at a late hour in  the night or very early in the morning, a flageolet play the little Hindu  tune to which your daughter is so partial.
I thought for some time that  some tuneful domestic, whose taste for music was laid under constraint  during the day, chose that silent hour to imitate the strains which he had  caught up by the ear during his attendance in the drawing-room.
But last  night I sat late in my study, which is immediately under Miss Mannering’s  apartment, and to my surprise I not only heard the flageolet distinctly,  but satisfied myself that it came from the lake under the window.
Curious  to know who serenaded us at that unusual hour, I stole softly to the  window of my apartment.
But there were other watchers than me.
You may  remember, Miss Mannering preferred that apartment on account of a balcony  which opened from her window upon the lake.
Well, sir, I heard the sash of  her window thrown up, the shutters opened, and her own voice in  conversation with some person who answered from below.
This is not “Much  ado about nothing; I could not be mistaken in her voice, and such tones,  so soft, so insinuating; and, to say the truth, the accents from below  were in passion’s tenderest cadence too,--but of the sense I can say  nothing.
I raised the sash of my own window that I might hear something  more than the mere murmur of this Spanish rendezvous; but, though I used  every precaution, the noise alarmed the speakers; down slid the young  lady’s casement, and the shutters were barred in an instant.
The dash of a  pair of oars in the water announced the retreat of the male person of the  dialogue.
Indeed, I saw his boat, which he rowed with great swiftness and  dexterity, fly across the lake like a twelve-oared barge.
Next morning I  examined some of my domestics, as if by accident, and I found the  gamekeeper, when making his rounds, had twice seen that boat beneath the  house, with a single person, and had heard the flageolet.
I did not care  to press any farther questions, for fear of implicating Julia in the  opinions of those of whom they might be asked.
Next morning, at breakfast,  I dropped a casual hint about the serenade of the evening before, and I  promise you Miss Mannering looked red and pale alternately.
I immediately  gave the circumstance such a turn as might lead her to suppose that my  observation was merely casual.
I have since caused a watch-light to be  burnt in my library, and have left the shutters open, to deter the  approach of our nocturnal guest; and I have stated the severity of  approaching winter, and the rawness of the fogs, as an objection to  solitary walks.
Miss Mannering acquiesced with a passiveness which is no  part of her character, and which, to tell you the plain truth, is a  feature about the business which I like least of all.
Julia has too much  of her own dear papa’s disposition to be curbed in any of her humours,  were there not some little lurking consciousness that it may be as prudent  to avoid debate.
‘Now my story is told, and you will judge what you ought to do.
I have not  mentioned the matter to my good woman, who, a faithful secretary to her  sex’s foibles, would certainly remonstrate against your being made  acquainted with these particulars, and might, instead, take it into her  head to exercise her own eloquence on Miss Mannering; a faculty which,  however powerful when directed against me, its legitimate object, might, I  fear, do more harm than good in the case supposed.
Perhaps even you  yourself will find it most prudent to act without remonstrating, or  appearing to be aware of this little anecdote.
Julia is very like a  certain friend of mine; she has a quick and lively imagination, and keen  feelings, which are apt to exaggerate both the good and evil they find in  life.
She is a charming girl, however, as generous and spirited as she is  lovely.
I paid her the kiss you sent her with all my heart, and she rapped  my ringers for my reward with all hers.
Pray return as soon as you can.
Meantime rely upon the care of, yours faithfully, ‘ARTHUR MERVYN.
‘P.S.--You will naturally wish to know if I have the least guess  concerning the person of the serenader.
In truth, I have none.
There is no  young gentleman of these parts, who might be in rank or fortune a match  for Miss Julia, that I think at all likely to play such a character.
But  on the other side of the lake, nearly opposite to Mervyn Hall, is a d--d  cake-house, the resort of walking gentlemen of all descriptions--poets,  players, painters, musicians--who come to rave, and recite, and madden  about this picturesque land of ours.
It is paying some penalty for its  beauties, that they are the means of drawing this swarm of coxcombs  together.
But were Julia my daughter, it is one of those sort of fellows  that I should fear on her account.
She is generous and romantic, and  writes six sheets a week to a female correspondent; and it’s a sad thing  to lack a subject in such a case, either for exercise of the feelings or  of the pen.
Adieu, once more.
Were I to treat this matter more seriously  than I have done, I should do injustice to your feelings; were I  altogether to overlook it, I should discredit my own.’  The consequence of this letter was, that, having first despatched the  faithless messenger with the necessary powers to Mr. Mac-Morlan for  purchasing the estate of Ellangowan, Colonel Mannering turned his horse’s  head in a more southerly direction, and neither ‘stinted nor staid’ until  he arrived at the mansion of his friend Mr. Mervyn, upon the banks of one  of the lakes of Westmoreland.
CHAPTER XVII  Heaven first, in its mercy, taught mortals their letters,  For ladies in limbo, and lovers in fetters,  Or some author, who, placing his persons before ye,  Ungallantly leaves them to write their own story.
POPE, imitated.
When Mannering returned to England, his first object had been to place his  daughter in a seminary for female education, of established character.
Not, however, finding her progress in the accomplishments which he wished  her to acquire so rapid as his impatience expected, he had withdrawn Miss  Mannering from the school at the end of the first quarter.
So she had only  time to form an eternal friendship with Miss Matilda Marchmont, a young  lady about her own age, which was nearly eighteen.
To her faithful eye  were addressed those formidable quires which issued forth from Mervyn Hall  on the wings of the post while Miss Mannering was a guest there.
The  perusal of a few short extracts from these may be necessary to render our  story intelligible.
FIRST EXTRACT  ‘Alas!
my dearest Matilda, what a tale is mine to tell!
Misfortune from  the cradle has set her seal upon your unhappy friend.
That we should be  severed for so slight a cause--an ungrammatical phrase in my Italian  exercise, and three false notes in one of Paisiello’s sonatas!
But it is a  part of my father’s character, of whom it is impossible to say whether I  love, admire, or fear him the most.
His success in life and in war, his  habit of making every obstacle yield before the energy of his exertions,  even where they seemed insurmountable--all these have given a hasty and  peremptory cast to his character, which can neither endure contradiction  nor make allowance for deficiencies.
Then he is himself so very  accomplished.
Do you know, there was a murmur, half confirmed too by some  mysterious words which dropped from my poor mother, that he possesses  other sciences, now lost to the world, which enable the possessor to  summon up before him the dark and shadowy forms of future events!
Does not  the very idea of such a power, or even of the high talent and commanding  intellect which the world may mistake for it,--does it not, dear Matilda,  throw a mysterious grandeur about its possessor?
You will call this  romantic; but consider I was born in the land of talisman and spell, and  my childhood lulled by tales which you can only enjoy through the gauzy  frippery of a French translation.
O, Matilda, I wish you could have seen  the dusky visages of my Indian attendants, bending in earnest devotion  round the magic narrative, that flowed, half poetry, half prose, from the  lips of the tale-teller!
No wonder that European fiction sounds cold and  meagre, after the wonderful effects which I have seen the romances of the  East produce upon their hearers.’  SECOND EXTRACT  ‘You are possessed, my dear Matilda, of my bosom-secret, in those  sentiments with which I regard Brown.
I will not say his memory; I am  convinced he lives, and is faithful.
His addresses to me were countenanced  by my deceased parent, imprudently countenanced perhaps, considering the  prejudices of my father in favour of birth and rank.
But I, then almost a  girl, could not be expected surely to be wiser than her under whose charge  nature had placed me.
My father, constantly engaged in military duty, I  saw but at rare intervals, and was taught to look up to him with more awe  than confidence.
Would to Heaven it had been otherwise!
It might have been  better for us all at this day!’  THIRD EXTRACT  ‘You ask me why I do not make known to my father that Brown yet lives, at  least that he survived the wound he received in that unhappy duel, and had  written to my mother expressing his entire convalescence, and his hope of  speedily escaping from captivity.
A soldier, that “in the trade of war has  oft slain men, feels probably no uneasiness at reflecting upon the  supposed catastrophe which almost turned me into stone.
And should I show  him that letter, does it not follow that Brown, alive and maintaining with  pertinacity the pretensions to the affections of your poor friend for  which my father formerly sought his life, would be a more formidable  disturber of Colonel Mannering’s peace of mind than in his supposed grave?
If he escapes from the hands of these marauders, I am convinced he will  soon be in England, and it will be then time to consider how his existence  is to be disclosed to my father.
But if, alas!
my earnest and confident  hope should betray me, what would it avail to tear open a mystery fraught  with so many painful recollections?
My dear mother had such dread of its  being known, that I think she even suffered my father to suspect that  Brown’s attentions were directed towards herself, rather than permit him  to discover their real object; and O, Matilda, whatever respect I owe to  the memory of a deceased parent, let me do justice to a living one.
I  cannot but condemn the dubious policy which she adopted, as unjust to my  father, and highly perilous to herself and me.
But peace be with her  ashes!
her actions were guided by the heart rather than the head; and  shall her daughter, who inherits all her weakness, be the first to  withdraw the veil from her defects?’  FOURTH EXTRACT ‘MERVYN HALL.
‘If India be the land of magic, this, my dearest Matilda, is the country  of romance.
The scenery is such as nature brings together in her sublimest  moods-sounding cataracts--hills which rear their scathed heads to the  sky--lakes that, winding up the shadowy valleys, lead at every turn to yet  more romantic recesses--rocks which catch the clouds of heaven.
All the  wildness of Salvator here, and there the fairy scenes of Claude.
I am  happy too in finding at least one object upon which my father can share my  enthusiasm.
An admirer of nature, both as an artist and a poet, I have  experienced the utmost pleasure from the observations by which he explains  the character and the effect of these brilliant specimens of her power.
I  wish he would settle in this enchanting land.
But his views lie still  farther north, and he is at present absent on a tour in Scotland, looking,  I believe, for some purchase of land which may suit him as a residence.
He  is partial, from early recollections, to that country.
So, my dearest  Matilda, I must be yet farther removed from you before I am established in  a home.
And O how delighted shall I be when I can say, Come, Matilda, and  be the guest of your faithful Julia!
‘I am at present the inmate of Mr. and Mrs. Mervyn, old friends of my  father.
The latter is precisely a good sort of woman, ladylike and  housewifely; but for accomplishments or fancy--good lack, my dearest  Matilda, your friend might as well seek sympathy from Mrs. Teach’em;--you  see I have not forgot school nicknames.
Mervyn is a different--quite a  different being from my father, yet he amuses and endures me.
He is fat  and good-natured, gifted with strong shrewd sense and some powers of  humour; but having been handsome, I suppose, in his youth, has still some  pretension to be a beau garcon, as well as an enthusiastic agriculturist.
I delight to make him scramble to the tops of eminences and to the foot of  waterfalls, and am obliged in turn to admire his turnips, his lucerne, and  his timothy grass.
He thinks me, I fancy, a simple romantic Miss, with  some--the word will be out--beauty and some good-nature; and I hold that  the gentleman has good taste for the female outside, and do not expect he  should comprehend my sentiments farther.
So he rallies, hands, and hobbles  (for the dear creature has got the gout too), and tells old stories of  high life, of which he has seen a great deal; and I listen, and smile, and  look as pretty, as pleasant, and as simple as I can, and we do very well.
‘But, alas!
my dearest Matilda, how would time pass away, even in this  paradise of romance, tenanted as it is by a pair assorting so ill with the  scenes around them, were it not for your fidelity in replying to my  uninteresting details?
Pray do not fail to write three times a week at  least; you can be at no loss what to say.’  FIFTH EXTRACT  ‘How shall I communicate what I have now to tell!
My hand and heart still  flutter so much, that the task of writing is almost impossible!
Did I not  say that he lived?
did I not say I would not despair?
How could you  suggest, my dear Matilda, that my feelings, considering I had parted from  him so young, rather arose from the warmth of my imagination than of my  heart?
O I was sure that they were genuine, deceitful as the dictates of  our bosom so frequently are.
But to my tale--let it be, my friend, the  most sacred, as it is the most sincere, pledge of our friendship.
‘Our hours here are early--earlier than my heart, with its load of care,  can compose itself to rest.
I therefore usually take a book for an hour or  two after retiring to my own room, which I think I have told you opens to  a small balcony, looking down upon that beautiful lake of which I  attempted to give you a slight sketch.
Mervyn Hall, being partly an  ancient building, and constructed with a view to defence, is situated on  the verge of the lake.
A stone dropped from the projecting balcony plunges  into water deep enough to float a skiff.
I had left my window partly  unbarred, that, before I went to bed, I might, according to my custom,  look out and see the moonlight shining upon the lake.
I was deeply engaged  with that beautiful scene in the “Merchant of Venice where two lovers,  describing the stillness of a summer night, enhance on each other its  charms, and was lost in the associations of story and of feeling which it  awakens, when I heard upon the lake the sound of a flageolet.
I have told  you it was Brown’s favourite instrument.
Who could touch it in a night  which, though still and serene, was too cold, and too late in the year, to  invite forth any wanderer for mere pleasure?
I drew yet nearer the window,  and hearkened with breathless attention; the sounds paused a space, were  then resumed, paused again, and again reached my ear, ever coming nearer  and nearer.
At length I distinguished plainly that little Hindu air which  you called my favourite.
I have told you by whom it was taught me; the  instrument, the tones, were his own!
Was it earthly music, or notes  passing on the wind, to warn me of his death?
‘It was some time ere I could summon courage to step on the balcony;  nothing could have emboldened me to do so but the strong conviction of my  mind that he was still alive, and that we should again meet; but that  conviction did embolden me, and I ventured, though with a throbbing heart.
There was a small skiff with a single person.
O, Matilda, it was himself!
I knew his appearance after so long an absence, and through the shadow of  the night, as perfectly as if we had parted yesterday, and met again in  the broad sunshine!
He guided his boat under the balcony, and spoke to me;  I hardly knew what he said, or what I replied.
Indeed, I could scarcely  speak for weeping, but they were joyful tears.
We were disturbed by the  barking of a dog at some distance, and parted, but not before he had  conjured me to prepare to meet him at the same place and hour this  evening.
‘But where and to what is all this tending?
Can I answer this question?
I  cannot.
Heaven, that saved him from death and delivered him from  captivity, that saved my father, too, from shedding the blood of one who  would not have blemished a hair of his head, that Heaven must guide me out  of this labyrinth.
Enough for me the firm resolution that Matilda shall  not blush for her friend, my father for his daughter, nor my lover for her  on whom he has fixed his affection.’  CHAPTER XVIII  Talk with a man out of a window!--a proper saying.
Much Ado about Nothing.
We must proceed with our extracts from Miss Mannering’s letters, which  throw light upon natural good sense, principle, and feelings, blemished by  an imperfect education and the folly of a misjudging mother, who called  her husband in her heart a tyrant until she feared him as such, and read  romances until she became so enamoured of the complicated intrigues which  they contain as to assume the management of a little family novel of her  own, and constitute her daughter, a girl of sixteen, the principal  heroine.
She delighted in petty mystery and intrigue and secrets, and yet  trembled at the indignation which these paltry manoeuvres excited in her  husband’s mind.
Thus she frequently entered upon a scheme merely for  pleasure, or perhaps for the love of contradiction, plunged deeper into it  than she was aware, endeavoured to extricate herself by new arts, or to  cover her error by dissimulation, became involved in meshes of her own  weaving, and was forced to carry on, for fear of discovery, machinations  which she had at first resorted to in mere wantonness.
Fortunately the young man whom she so imprudently introduced into her  intimate society, and encouraged to look up to her daughter, had a fund of  principle and honest pride which rendered him a safer intimate than Mrs.  Mannering ought to have dared to hope or expect.
The obscurity of his  birth could alone be objected to him; in every other respect,  With prospects bright upon the world he came, Pure love of virtue, strong  desire of fame, Men watched the way his lofty mind would take, And all  foretold the progress he would make.
But it could not be expected that he should resist the snare which Mrs.  Mannering’s imprudence threw in his way, or avoid becoming attached to a  young lady whose beauty and manners might have justified his passion, even  in scenes where these are more generally met with than in a remote  fortress in our Indian settlements.
The scenes which followed have been  partly detailed in Mannering’s letter to Mr. Mervyn; and to expand what is  there stated into farther explanation would be to abuse the patience of  our readers.
We shall therefore proceed with our promised extracts from Miss  Mannering’s letters to her friend.
SIXTH EXTRACT  ‘I have seen him again, Matilda--seen him twice.
I have used every  argument to convince him that this secret intercourse is dangerous to us  both; I even pressed him to pursue his views of fortune without farther  regard to me, and to consider my peace of mind as sufficiently secured by  the knowledge that he had not fallen under my father’s sword.
He  answers--but how can I detail all he has to answer?
He claims those hopes  as his due which my mother permitted him to entertain, and would persuade  me to the madness of a union without my father’s sanction.
But to this,  Matilda, I will not be persuaded.
I have resisted, I have subdued, the  rebellious feelings which arose to aid his plea; yet how to extricate  myself from this unhappy labyrinth in which fate and folly have entangled  us both!
‘I have thought upon it, Matilda, till my head is almost giddy; nor can I  conceive a better plan than to make a full confession to my father.
He  deserves it, for his kindness is unceasing; and I think I have observed in  his character, since I have studied it more nearly, that his harsher  feelings are chiefly excited where he suspects deceit or imposition; and  in that respect, perhaps, his character was formerly misunderstood by one  who was dear to him.
He has, too, a tinge of romance in his disposition;  and I have seen the narrative of a generous action, a trait of heroism, or  virtuous self-denial, extract tears from him which refused to flow at a  tale of mere distress.
But then Brown urges that he is personally hostile  to him.
And the obscurity of his birth, that would be indeed a  stumbling-block.
O, Matilda, I hope none of your ancestors ever fought at  Poictiers or Agincourt!
If it were not for the veneration which my father  attaches to the memory of old Sir Miles Mannering, I should make out my  explanation with half the tremor which must now attend it.’  SEVENTH EXTRACT  ‘I have this instant received your letter--your most welcome letter!
Thanks, my dearest friend, for your sympathy and your counsels; I can only  repay them with unbounded confidence.
‘You ask me what Brown is by origin, that his descent should be so  unpleasing to my father.
His story is shortly told.
He is of Scottish  extraction, but, being left an orphan, his education was undertaken by a  family of relations settled in Holland.
He was bred to commerce, and sent  very early to one of our settlements in the East, where his guardian had a  correspondent.
But this correspondent was dead when he arrived in India,  and he had no other resource than to offer himself as a clerk to a  counting-house.
The breaking out of the war, and the straits to which we  were at first reduced, threw the army open to all young men who were  disposed to embrace that mode of life; and Brown, whose genius had a  strong military tendency, was the first to leave what might have been the  road to wealth, and to choose that of fame.
The rest of his history is  well known to you; but conceive the irritation of my father, who despises  commerce (though, by the way, the best part of his property was made in  that honourable profession by my great-uncle), and has a particular  antipathy to the Dutch--think with what ear he would be likely to receive  proposals for his only child from Vanbeest Brown, educated for charity by  the house of Vanbeest and Vanbruggen!
O, Matilda, it will never do; nay,  so childish am I, I hardly can help sympathising with his aristocratic  feelings.
Mrs. Vanbeest Brown!
The name has little to recommend it, to be  sure.
What children we are!’  EIGHTH EXTRACT  ‘It is all over now, Matilda!
I shall never have courage to tell my  father; nay, most deeply do I fear he has already learned my secret from  another quarter, which will entirely remove the grace of my communication,  and ruin whatever gleam of hope I had ventured to connect with it.
Yesternight Brown came as usual, and his flageolet on the lake announced  his approach.
We had agreed that he should continue to use this signal.
These romantic lakes attract numerous visitors, who indulge their  enthusiasm in visiting the scenery at all hours, and we hoped that, if  Brown were noticed from the house, he might pass for one of those admirers  of nature, who was giving vent to his feelings through the medium of  music.
The sounds might also be my apology, should I be observed on the  balcony.
But last night, while I was eagerly enforcing my plan of a full  confession to my father, which he as earnestly deprecated, we heard the  window of Mr. Mervyn’s library, which is under my room, open softly.
I  signed to Brown to make his retreat, and immediately reentered, with some  faint hopes that our interview had not been observed.
‘But, alas!
Matilda, these hopes vanished the instant I beheld Mr.  Mervyn’s countenance at breakfast the next morning.
He looked so  provokingly intelligent and confidential, that, had I dared, I could have  been more angry than ever I was in my life; but I must be on good  behaviour, and my walks are now limited within his farm precincts, where  the good gentleman can amble along by my side without inconvenience.
I  have detected him once or twice attempting to sound my thoughts, and watch  the expression of my countenance.
He has talked of the flageolet more than  once, and has, at different times, made eulogiums upon the watchfulness  and ferocity of his dogs, and the regularity with which the keeper makes  his rounds with a loaded fowling-piece.
He mentioned even man-traps and  springguns.
I should be loth to affront my father’s old friend in his own  house; but I do long to show him that I am my father’s daughter, a fact of  which Mr. Mervyn will certainly be convinced if ever I trust my voice and  temper with a reply to these indirect hints.
Of one thing I am certain--I  am grateful to him on that account--he has not told Mrs. Mervyn.
Lord help  me, I should have had such lectures about the dangers of love and the  night air on the lake, the risk arising from colds and fortune-hunters,  the comfort and convenience of sack-whey and closed windows!
I cannot help  trifling, Matilda, though my heart is sad enough.
What Brown will do I  cannot guess.
I presume, however, the fear of detection prevents his  resuming his nocturnal visits.
He lodges at an inn on the opposite shore  of the lake, under the name, he tells me, of Dawson; he has a bad choice  in names, that must be allowed.
He has not left the army, I believe, but  he says nothing of his present views,  ‘To complete my anxiety, my father is returned suddenly, and in high  displeasure.
Our good hostess, as I learned from a bustling conversation  between her housekeeper and her, had no expectation of seeing him for a  week; but I rather suspect his arrival was no surprise to his friend Mr.  Mervyn.
His manner to me was singularly cold and constrained, sufficiently  so to have damped all the courage with which I once resolved to throw  myself on his generosity.
He lays the blame of his being discomposed and  out of humour to the loss of a purchase in the south-west of Scotland on  which he had set his heart; but I do not suspect his equanimity of being  so easily thrown off its balance.
His first excursion was with Mr.  Mervyn’s barge across the lake to the inn I have mentioned.
You may  imagine the agony with which I waited his return!
Had he recognized Brown,  who can guess the consequence!
He returned, however, apparently without  having made any discovery.
I understand that, in consequence of his late  disappointment, he means now to hire a house in the neighbourhood of this  same Ellangowan, of which I am doomed to hear so much; he seems to think  it probable that the estate for which he wishes may soon be again in the  market.
I will not send away this letter until I hear more distinctly what  are his intentions.’  ‘I have now had an interview with my father, as confidential as, I  presume, he means to allow me.
He requested me to-day, after breakfast, to  walk with him into the library; my knees, Matilda, shook under me, and it  is no exaggeration to say I could scarce follow him into the room.
I  feared I knew not what.
From my childhood I had seen all around him  tremble at his frown.
He motioned me to seat myself, and I never obeyed a  command so readily, for, in truth, I could hardly stand.
He himself  continued to walk up and down the room.
You have seen my father, and  noticed, I recollect, the remarkably expressive cast of his features.
His  eyes are naturally rather light in colour, but agitation or anger gives  them a darker and more fiery glance; he has a custom also of drawing in  his lips when much moved, which implies a combat between native ardour of  temper and the habitual power of self-command.
This was the first time we  had been alone since his return from Scotland, and, as he betrayed these  tokens of agitation, I had little doubt that he was about to enter upon  the subject I most dreaded.
CHAPTER XIX  Which sloping hills around inclose,  Where many a beech and brown oak grows  Beneath whose dark and branching bowers  Its tides a far-fam’d river pours,  By natures beauties taught to please,  Sweet Tusculan of rural easel  WARTON.
Woodbourne, the habitation which Mannering, by Mr. Mac-Morlan’s mediation,  had hired for a season, was a large comfortable mansion, snugly situated  beneath a hill covered with wood, which shrouded the house upon the north  and east; the front looked upon a little lawn bordered by a grove of old  trees; beyond were some arable fields, extending down to the river, which  was seen from the windows of the house.
A tolerable, though old-fashioned  garden, a well-stocked dove-cot, and the possession of any quantity of  ground which the convenience of the family might require, rendered the  place in every respect suitable, as the advertisements have it, ‘for the  accommodation of a genteel family.’  Here, then, Mannering resolved, for some time at least, to set up the  staff of his rest.
Though an East-Indian, he was not partial to an  ostentatious display of wealth.
In fact, he was too proud a man to be a  vain one.
He resolved, therefore, to place himself upon the footing of a  country gentleman of easy fortune, without assuming, or permitting his  household to assume, any of the faste which then was considered as  characteristic of a nabob.
He had still his eye upon the purchase of Ellangowan, which Mac-Morlan  conceived Mr. Glossin would be compelled to part with, as some of the  creditors disputed his title to retain so large a part of the  purchase-money in his own hands, and his power to pay it was much  questioned.
In that case Mac-Morlan was assured he would readily give up  his bargain, if tempted with something above the price which he had  stipulated to pay.
It may seem strange that Mannering was so much attached  to a spot which he had only seen once, and that for a short time, in early  life.
But the circumstances which passed there had laid a strong hold on  his imagination.
There seemed to be a fate which conjoined the remarkable  passages of his own family history with those of the inhabitants of  Ellangowan, and he felt a mysterious desire to call the terrace his own  from which he had read in the book of heaven a fortune strangely  accomplished in the person of the infant heir of that family, and  corresponding so closely with one which had been strikingly fulfilled in  his own.
Besides, when once this thought had got possession of his  imagination, he could not, without great reluctance, brook the idea of his  plan being defeated, and by a fellow like Glossin.
So pride came to the  aid of fancy, and both combined to fortify his resolution to buy the  estate if possible.
Let us do Mannering justice.
A desire to serve the distressed had also its  share in determining him.
He had considered the advantage which Julia  might receive from the company of Lucy Bertram, whose genuine prudence and  good sense could so surely be relied upon.
This idea had become much  stronger since Mac-Morlan had confided to him, under the solemn seal of  secrecy, the whole of her conduct towards young Hazlewood.
To propose to  her to become an inmate in his family, if distant from the scenes of her  youth and the few whom she called friends, would have been less delicate;  but at Woodbourne she might without difficulty be induced to become the  visitor of a season, without being depressed into the situation of an  humble companion.
Lucy Bertram, with some hesitation, accepted the  invitation to reside a few weeks with Miss Mannering.
She felt too well  that, however the Colonel’s delicacy might disguise the truth, his  principal motive was a generous desire to afford her his countenance and  protection, which his high connexions, and higher character, were likely  to render influential in the neighbourhood.
About the same time the orphan girl received a letter from Mrs. Bertram,  the relation to whom she had written, as cold and comfortless as could  well be imagined.
It inclosed, indeed, a small sum of money, but strongly  recommended economy, and that Miss Bertram should board herself in some  quiet family, either at Kippletringan or in the neighbourhood, assuring  her that, though her own income was very scanty, she would not see her  kinswoman want.
Miss Bertram shed some natural tears over this  cold-hearted epistle; for in her mother’s time this good lady had been a  guest at Ellangowan for nearly three years, and it was only upon  succeeding to a property of about L400 a year that she had taken farewell  of that hospitable mansion, which otherwise might have had the honour of  sheltering her until the death of its owner.
Lucy was strongly inclined to  return the paltry donation, which, after some struggles with avarice,  pride had extorted from the old lady.
But on consideration she contented  herself with writing that she accepted it as a loan, which, she hoped in a  short time to repay, and consulted her relative upon the invitation she  had received from Colonel and Miss Mannering.
This time the answer came in  course of post, so fearful was Mrs. Bertram that some frivolous delicacy,  or nonsense, as she termed it, might induce her cousin to reject such a  promising offer, and thereby at the same time to leave herself still a  burden upon her relations.
Lucy, therefore, had no alternative, unless she  preferred continuing a burden upon the worthy Mac-Morlans, who were too  liberal to be rich.
Those kinsfolk who formerly requested the favour of  her company had of late either silently, or with expressions of resentment  that she should have preferred Mac-Morlan’s invitation to theirs,  gradually withdrawn their notice.
The fate of Dominie Sampson would have been deplorable had it depended  upon any one except Mannering, who was an admirer of originality, for a  separation from Lucy Bertram would have certainly broken his heart.
Mac-Morlan had given a full account of his proceedings towards the  daughter of his patron.
The answer was a request from Mannering to know  whether the Dominie still possessed that admirable virtue of taciturnity  by which he was so notably distinguished at Ellangowan.
Mac-Morlan replied  in the affirmative.
‘Let Mr. Sampson know,’ said the Colonel’s next  letter, ‘that I shall want his assistance to catalogue and put in order  the library of my uncle, the bishop, which I have ordered to be sent down  by sea.
I shall also want him to copy and arrange some papers.
Fix his  salary at what you think befitting.
Let the poor man be properly dressed,  and accompany his young lady to Woodbourne.’  Honest Mac-Morlan received this mandate with great joy, but pondered much  upon executing that part of it which related to newly attiring the worthy  Dominie.
He looked at him with a scrutinising eye, and it was but too  plain that his present garments were daily waxing more deplorable.
To give  him money, and bid him go and furnish himself, would be only giving him  the means of making himself ridiculous; for when such a rare event arrived  to Mr. Sampson as the purchase of new garments, the additions which he  made to his wardrobe by the guidance of his own taste usually brought all  the boys of the village after him for many days.
On the other hand, to  bring a tailor to measure him, and send home his clothes, as for a  school-boy, would probably give offence.
At length Mac-Morlan resolved to  consult Miss Bertram, and request her interference.
She assured him that,  though she could not pretend to superintend a gentleman’s wardrobe,  nothing was more easy than to arrange the Dominie’s.
‘At Ellangowan,’ she said, ‘whenever my poor father thought any part of  the Dominie’s dress wanted renewal, a servant was directed to enter his  room by night, for he sleeps as fast as a dormouse, carry off the old  vestment, and leave the new one; nor could any one observe that the  Dominie exhibited the least consciousness of the change put upon him on  such occasions.’  Mac-Morlan, in conformity with Miss Bertram’s advice, procured a skilful  artist, who, on looking at the Dominie attentively, undertook to make for  him two suits of clothes, one black and one raven-grey, and even engaged  that they should fit him--as well at least (so the tailor qualified his  enterprise) as a man of such an out-of-the-way build could be fitted by  merely human needles and shears.
When this fashioner had accomplished his  task, and the dresses were brought home, Mac-Morlan, judiciously resolving  to accomplish his purpose by degrees, withdrew that evening an important  part of his dress, and substituted the new article of raiment in its  stead.
Perceiving that this passed totally without notice, he next  ventured on the waistcoat, and lastly on the coat.
When fully  metamorphosed, and arrayed for the first time in his life in a decent  dress, they did observe that the Dominie seemed to have some indistinct  and embarrassing consciousness that a change had taken place on his  outward man.
Whenever they observed this dubious expression gather upon  his countenance, accompanied with a glance that fixed now upon the sleeve  of his coat, now upon the knees of his breeches, where he probably missed  some antique patching and darning, which, being executed with blue thread  upon a black ground, had somewhat the effect of embroidery, they always  took care to turn his attention into some other channel, until his  garments, ‘by the aid of use, cleaved to their mould.’ The only remark he  was ever known to make on the subject was, that ‘the air of a town like  Kippletringan seemed favourable unto wearing apparel, for he thought his  coat looked almost as new as the first day he put it on, which was when he  went to stand trial for his license as a preacher.’  When the Dominie first heard the liberal proposal of Colonel Mannering, he  turned a jealous and doubtful glance towards Miss Bertram, as if he  suspected that the project involved their separation; but when Mr.  Mac-Morlan hastened to explain that she would be a guest at Woodbourne for  some time, he rubbed his huge hands together, and burst into a portentous  sort of chuckle, like that of the Afrite in the tale of ‘The Caliph  Vathek.’ After this unusual explosion of satisfaction, he remained quite  passive in all the rest of the transaction.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Everybody's Book of Luck, by Anonymous  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most  other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions  whatsoever.
You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of  the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at  www.gutenberg.org.
If you are not located in the United States, you'll have  to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
Title: Everybody's Book of Luck  Author: Anonymous  Release Date: July 10, 2017 [EBook #55082]  Language: English  Character set encoding: ASCII  *** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERYBODY'S BOOK OF LUCK ***  Produced by Chris Curnow, Christopher Wright, and the  Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net  (This file was produced from images generously made  available by The Internet Archive)  Everybody's  BOOKOF  LUCK  WHITMAN PUBLISHING COMPANY  RACINE, WIS.         POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y.
PRINTED IN U.S.A.
CONTENTS  CHAP.
PAGE.
I.
THINGS THAT BRING YOU GOOD LUCK AND BAD LUCK  3  II.
HAVE YOU A TALISMAN?
6  III.
HINTS ON FORTUNETELLING  12  IV.
PALMISTRY—WHAT MAY BE LEARNED FROM HANDS  13  V.  YOUR HANDWRITING REVEALS YOUR CHARACTER  32  VI.
YOUR FACE IS YOUR FORTUNE  40  VII.
WHAT DO YOUR BUMPS MEAN?
46  VIII.
HOW ASTROLOGY DECIDES YOUR DESTINY  49  IX.
YOUR CHILD'S OCCUPATION DECIDED BY THE STARS  55  X.
WHAT ARE YOUR HOBBIES?
59  XI.
WHAT IS YOUR LUCKY NUMBER?
60  XII.
YOUR LUCKY COLOR  65  XIII.
WHICH IS YOUR LUCKY STONE?
67  XIV.
DREAMS—WHAT THEY MEAN  72  XV.
TEACUP FORTUNETELLING  83  XVI.
LUCKY AND UNLUCKY DAYS  91  XVII.
THE LUCK OF FLOWERS  99  XVIII.
SUPERSTITIONS REGARDING ANIMALS  104  XIX.
CRYSTAL GAZING  107  XX.
THE MOON AND THE LUCK IT BRINGS  111  XXI.
FORTUNETELLING BY MEANS OF PLAYING CARDS  113  XXII.
FORTUNETELLING GAMES  137  XXIII.
THE LUCK OF WEDDINGS AND MARRIAGES  151  XXIV.
FOLKLORE AND SUPERSTITIONS OF THE MONTHS  159  XXV.
A CALENDAR FOR LOVERS  173  XXVI.
MAKING USEFUL MASCOTS  191  [3]  THINGS THAT BRING YOU GOOD LUCK  AND BAD LUCK  Ask a dozen people whether they have any superstitions, and the majority  will tell you, without hesitation, that they have not the slightest  belief in such things.
If the truth is told there are very few of us who do not  cherish some little weaknesses in this direction.
One person may believe in  a number of superstitions; another has, perhaps, only a few that are observed;  but he or she that has none at all is a remarkably rare individual.
As a matter of fact, most superstitions are based on reason and sound  common sense, and the man or woman who pays heed to them is acting  intelligently, whether he or she knows it or not.
Take, for instance, the  belief that it is unlucky to walk under a ladder.
True, the old assertion is  that it is unlucky to do so because Jesus Christ was taken down from the  Cross by means of a ladder.
But the more practical reason is that painters  and other men on ladders are very likely to drop things and, if you happen  to be passing at the time, the paintpot or the tools will fall on you.
Of course, the reasons for all superstitions are not so evident as this one  about walking under a ladder: nevertheless, there is a germ of reason in them  all, whether or not we know the reason.
Thus, the man or woman who  observes the common superstitions of everyday life is acting wisely.
Not  only will he or she avoid a good deal of trouble, but his actions will  provide him with a sense of well-being, and the effect it will have on his  mind, the psychological effect as it is called, is all to the good.
It is not proposed to explain why this or that superstition is worthy of  being observed; in many cases, the reason is obscure; but here we will give  some of the beliefs which are current at the present time.
First of all, you should never pass anybody on the stairs of a private house,  and, while talking of stairs, it may be said that many people believe that,  for someone to fall up a step, is a sign of an approaching wedding.
Never light three cigarettes with the same match unless you are prepared  for a spell of ill-fortune.
This superstition gained currency during the War,  probably because a match held long enough to light three cigarettes would  give the enemy a clue to your position, especially at night-time.
If the cord of a picture frame snaps and the picture falls to the ground,  it is an omen that somebody is going to die.
If the picture is a portrait  of a living person, then that person's life is the one likely to be terminated.
This omen may be considered a remarkably silly one, with not a shred of  sense to recommend it.
Yet how many people can point to instances when  the prophecy has come true!
Of salt, there are several omens.
The chief one tells you not to help anybody  to salt; in other words, it is unwise to put some on a person's plate.
Helping them to salt is helping them to sorrow.
Another superstition says[4]  that if you spill salt you will be unlucky unless you throw a pinch of it  over your left shoulder.
To break a mirror is known by all as a serious matter.
The reason why  it is unlucky, we are told, doubtless finds its origin in a mere association  of ideas.
The mirror being broken, the image of the person looking into  it is destroyed: therefore, bad luck in some form must be the fate of the  careless one.
What exactly is the penalty one must pay for breaking a  mirror is not definite.
Some people speak of seven years of misfortune,  while others claim that it means seven years of celibacy.
To take certain things into the house is the height of folly, if you believe  in superstitions.
May or hawthorn blossom is one, though the berries of  this flower seem to have no ill-potency.
Peacock's feathers are another.
Somewhat similar is the contention that it is very unlucky to open an  umbrella indoors.
While sitting at the meal-table, there are several things that must not be  done.
Helping a friend to salt has been already mentioned, but you must not  allow the knives or forks to become crossed.
Quarrels with your friends will  result if you do.
Of course, you must not sit down, thirteen of you, around  the table.
As is well known, this belief has its origin in the Last Supper,  when our Lord sat at meat with his twelve apostles.
On the other hand,  should you taste a fruit for the first time in that season, you have only to  frame a wish and it will be granted.
Much the same applies to mince-pies.
You will be awarded with a whole happy month for each pie that you eat at  Christmas-time which is made in a different house.
Of course, it is highly  unwise for two people to pour tea out of the same pot at the same meal.
To give a friend an edged tool is sure to cut the friendship, whether it be  a knife, a pair of scissors, a razor or a chisel.
When such a gift is to be  made, the usual plan is to sell it to your friend for a penny.
You should never put a shoe on a table, and, to see a pin lying on the  floor and leave it there, is an omen that you will want before you die.
As  the jingle runs:  See a pin and let it lie, you're sure to want before you die.
See a pin and pick it up, then you're sure to have good luck.
Elsewhere, a good deal is said about dreams.
Here it will be sufficient  to mention one or two items of interest.
It is decidedly unlucky to dream  of a baby, yet to dream of a funeral is lucky.
The following is worth bearing  in mind:  Friday dream and Saturday told;  Sure to come true, if ever so old.
And here it will be appropriate to recall the fact that it is an unwise  thing to get out of bed on the wrong side.
The devil will be with you all the  day, if you do.
You should avoid looking at the new moon through glass; but if you have  a wish that you want fulfilled, you have only to count seven stars on seven  nights in succession.
Let it be said, however, that to count seven stars for  this space of time is not as simple as it appears.
[5]  It is unlucky to treasure locks of people's hair, and, should you drop a  glove, it is to your advantage if someone else picks it up for you.
If the  fire refuses to light properly in the morning, anticipate a whole day with  the devil.
Everybody knows that one of the luckiest things that can be done is to  pick up a horse-shoe.
But it is not generally known that the more nails left  in it, the better.
Nor is it sufficiently well recognized that a shoe, hung up,  should have the tips pointing upwards.
If they are turned down, the luck  will run out of them.
Naturally, you will never start anything fresh on a Friday, and you  will not cut your fingernails on a Sunday.
Regarding fingernails, a poet,  of sorts, has said:  Cut them on Monday, you cut them for news.
Cut them on Tuesday, a new pair of shoes.
Cut them on Wednesday, you cut them for health.
Cut them on Thursday, you cut them for wealth.
Cut them on Friday, a sweetheart you'll know.
Cut them on Saturday, a journey you'll go.
Cut them on Sunday, you cut them for evil:  For all the next week, you'll be ruled by the devil.
Of course, bad luck has not a monopoly on your superstitions, for good  luck has something to say also.
To see a piebald horse is fortunate; to find  white heather, four-leaved clover or four-leaved shamrock is even more fortunate.
To open a pea-pod and find ten peas in it is particularly lucky.
For a black cat to come into your house is worth much.
To come across a  nickel with a hole in it is not without its merits, but the best thing of  all is to put on some article of clothing inside out, and to wear it all day  long, without being aware of it until bed-time.
[6]  HAVE YOU A TALISMAN?
"A person who finds a four-leaved clover, and believes it is a harbinger  of something good, has adopted the right attitude, for he keeps a keen  look-out for that particular good and holds out both hands for it.
Seldom  is he disappointed, for he has unconsciously set going the mental machinery  which brings his wishes within reach.
Had he not found the clover and  had gone along life's highway unexpectant of anything good, he would never  have discovered this pleasant happening.
And therein lies the true psychology  of luck, which seems too simple to be true, but then its simplicity  is really the sign-manual of its verity."
This quotation from the writings of a well-known author goes direct to  the point about talismans.
If you adopt a talisman and put your faith in  it, you immediately prepare your mind for receiving an abundance of good  fortune.
Reject all talismans and argue that there is no such thing as luck,  and you straightway set going the mental machinery which looks on the  dark side of things and which misses every slice of luck that comes along.
Therefore, we say, with emphasis, take to yourself a talisman, a mascot, a  charm—call it what you will—and you will never regret it.
Of talismans, there are countless varieties; some are known the world  over, others are the particular choice of individuals.
They range from the[7]  amulets and scarabs of the ancients to the golliwogs and crudities of the  ultra-moderns.
Your choice may roam between these two extremes, but  whatever your choice, it must be set with the seal of your faith.
In order to assist you in picking out a talisman for yourself, we append  the following accounts of those examples which are favored most:—  THE HORSE-SHOE.—No symbol is a greater favorite than the horse-shoe.
There are many legends regarding its origin, but the most commonly  accepted concerns the well-known visit of his Satanic Majesty to the shoe-smith.
As a consequence, the Devil evinced a wholesome dread of horseshoes,  and would not go near a house or person possessing one.
It is more  likely, however, that the horse-shoe was accepted as a symbol of luck because  it was a commonplace object very nearly the same shape as the metal crescents  worn by the Romans when they wanted to be fortunate.
These crescents  were always carried with the horns turned up, and, if a horse-shoe is to bring  good luck, it, too, must be placed with the prongs uppermost.
The reason  for the prongs being so turned depends on a belief that misfortune always  travels in circles, but when it reaches the tips of a horse-shoe, it is baffled,  unless all the luck has already run out of the tips through them being turned  downwards.
Of course, an old, worn shoe is more lucky than a new one, and it is  a recognized fact that the more nails found in it the luckier will be the  finder.
THE SCARAB.—This device is accounted very lucky or very unlucky,  according to the disposition of the wearer.
The symbol represents the[8]  scarab beetle with its wings outspread or with them closed.
Such charms  are made to-day in large numbers for sale in Egypt, but those who trade in  them usually claim that each particular specimen has been in the family  since Biblical times.
As a rule, the device is made in a rough kind of bluish  porcelain and is carved, in intaglio, with divine figures.
The Egyptians used  to make up the scarab as a neck pendant or as a little ornament for  placing in the coffins of the dead.
Its mission was to scare away the evil one.
No.
2.—An Egyptian Scarab, such as were used as talismen.
Two forms are shown,  one with the pectoral wings outspread; the other, with wings closed.
THE TET.—This symbol was shaped somewhat like a mallet, and was  always worn with the head uppermost and the handle hanging down.
It  was made in porcelain or stone, and was often colored gaudily.
The Egyptians  were the first to find efficacy in this charm, and they wore it suspended  around the neck to ward off attacks from visible and invisible enemies.
Thus, it was a protection against evil in any form; it was also supposed to  provide the wearer with strength and endurance.
The tet has been much  forgotten of late years, but there are adherents who value it above the horseshoe  and almost any other charm.
No.
3.—The Talisman on the left is the Tet; on the right, the Arrow-Head.
THE ARROW-HEAD.—The early Britons spent a great deal of their  time in taking suitable flints and shaping them into the form of triangles.
These were called arrow-heads, and when the two side edges had been  sharpened they were fixed into sticks and used as weapons or tools.
Out  of this use grew the idea that arrow-heads were potent charms in providing  bodily protection against enemy force or the usual illnesses.
Accordingly,  people began to wear them as neck ornaments and, for this purpose, decorative  arrow-heads were made.
Ever since then, they have been cherished  for their powers in warding off attacks, and a superstition still exists which  claims that if one of these arrow-heads is dipped in water, the water will be  more potent than any doctor's medicine.
THE CADUCEUS.—This device, which figures as part of the design of[9]  some postage stamps, has been considered a bringer of good fortune ever since  the time of the ancient Greeks.
It consists of two snakes entwining a rod,  surmounted by a pine cone.
By the side of the cone is a pair of wings.
It  was the symbol of Mercury.
The rod had the supernatural powers of  quelling disputes and letting people dwell in harmony.
The snakes possessed  the property of healing; the pine cone preserved good health; and the wings  stood for speed and progress.
Thus people wear the caduceus today in order  to ensure a life free from quarrels and illness, and to enable them to be  healthy and "go ahead."
No.
4.—The Caduceus or Staff of Mercury.
THE EYE AGATE.—As is generally appreciated, the "evil eye" is the  source of all trouble and misfortunes, and the early Eastern races thought  that, if the "evil eye" could be avoided or frightened away, all would be well.
Searching for a charm to effect their purpose, they alighted upon the eye agate,  and this they believed would give no quarter to the "evil eye."
Accordingly,  agates were cut to resemble an eye which would be powerful enough to  neutralize the effects of the evil one, and these were worn as brooches, rings  and necklaces.
The agate chosen for the purpose consisted of thin layers  of stone of various colors.
Thus, by cutting the stones oval and removing[10]  parts of the top layers, it was possible to produce a charm closely resembling  a human eye, both in shape and color.
Such eyes are still sold today, and many people treasure them in the hope  that they will ward off evil in any form.
THE JADE AXE-HEAD.—Many jewelers still sell little axe-heads carved  out of jade, for wearing around the neck.
The axe-head has been considered  a symbol of strength and vigor ever since primitive times, and jade has a  world-wide reputation as a charm against disease and accidents.
THE SEAL OF SOLOMON.—This device is now regarded as a symbol  of the Jewish religion, but it can be traced to several other religions, and,  no doubt, it dates even farther back than the commencement of the Jewish  era.
The triangle with the upward point stood for goodness; the triangle  with the downward point for wickedness; while the two intertwined symbolized  the triumph of good over bad.
Those who wear the device contend  that it preserves them from all that is ill, and, at the same time, it gives  them a share of the world's blessings.
No.
5.—The Seal of Solomon, one of the oldest lucky charms in existence.
THE ABRACADABRA.—This charm dates from the second century,  and was a symbol of the Gnostic worship.
It often took the form of a little  piece of parchment, folded into the shape of a cross, but it can, also, be seen  as a tablet, made of stone or metal, shaped like an inverted triangle.
On  the charm, of whatever shape, was inscribed the following:  A B R A C A D A B R A  B R A C A D A B R  R A C A D A B  A C A D A  C A D  A  [11]  It will be seen that the word "Abracadabra" can be read along the upper  line and also down and up the two sides.
This word is said to conceal the  name of God and the charm has the powers of warding off dangers and  sickness.
THE FOUR-LEAF CLOVER OR SHAMROCK.—Everyone knows that  a four-leaf clover or shamrock is supposed to be a bringer of luck and good  fortune.
As these are not readily found and, moreover, they soon perish, the  opportunity has been seized by jewelers to produce artificial ones in various  precious and semi-precious metals.
To wear either is supposed to avoid  misfortune.
It may be mentioned that the four-leaf Shamrock as a charm  has proved immensely popular by those who are interested in the Irish sweepstakes.
BLACK CATS.—Of course, it is lucky for a black cat to walk into your  house, but failing an actual cat, a counterfeit one serves the same purpose.
Thus, people who pin their faith to black cats often make stuffed ones, or  draw pictures of them, and look to the creature of their own handiwork to  serve the role of mascot.
YOUR OWN TALISMAN.—So far, the talismans that have received universal  acceptance have alone been mentioned, but the tendency today is for  enthusiasts to originate a mascot of their very own.
It may take any or  every form, according to the whim or fancy of the individual.
Maybe you will  prefer to find your own mascot or talisman in this direction.
If you have no  preferences, why not constitute a device which embraces your lucky number,  your lucky flower, your lucky color, and so on?
It is a suggestion bristling  with opportunities.
Just to show that people are tending towards the idea of choosing a talisman  of their very own, we will conclude with a story that was recently  published.
"There is a precious stone to which the board of directors of a firm of  diamond dealers annually pass a vote of thanks.
The stone is a sapphire  and it has been named Shani, meaning 'bringer of luck.'
"Shani was bought by the firm about seventy years ago, and it only  leaves the safe on New Year's Day.
A special meeting, attended by every  member of the firm, is then held in the board room.
Shani is placed in  the middle of the table and, with hands clasped in prayer, the members  offer thanks for the good luck the sapphire has brought the firm during the  preceding year.
"One of the directors said, 'My grandfather once received a tempting offer  for Shani and yielded, but a few hours after the sapphire had been sent  away he was taken violently ill with fever.
The sapphire was brought back  from a distant part of India, and my grandfather became well at once.'"
Should not we all have a Shani?
[12]  HINTS ON FORTUNETELLING  Hundreds of dollars are paid each week to professional fortunetellers  by people in all walks of life, in order that they may gain a peep into  the future.
These people belong to every class of society; they are of all ages  and they consult the mediums on almost every matter connected with human  existence.
There is the industrial magnate, the society girl, and the hard-working  shop assistant, all anxious to peer into the coming months.
Accordingly, the teller of fortunes and the writer of horoscopes is doing  an excellent business.
The dollars and the cents are pouring in at a remarkable  rate, and those who read the future, as a profession, are having the  time of their lives.
This state of things is one calculated to make you stop and think for a  moment.
Why should not you learn the rudiments of fortunetelling yourself?
Why should not you find out how to read the signs of your own  future and the future of your friends?
The subject is interesting; it is not  a difficult one and all you need to know is set out in this book.
Your course of study may well begin with the chapter on Palmistry.
Having mastered that, turn to the one on Handwriting, and follow with  "What do your Bumps Mean?"
These three sections will give you a very  useful start and then you might continue with "How Astrology Decides Your  Destiny" and "Your Face is Your Fortune."
The five chapters named will enable you to read people with a great  deal of success, and it should not be long before your friends compliment you  on your accuracy.
Probably this will spur you to further efforts, and you  will study the passages on lucky numbers, dreams, tea-cup readings, lucky  colors, etc.
These will add a polish to your preliminary knowledge.
Very soon you will gain a reputation as a seer and it will add not a little to  your vanity when people come to you and ask you to read their futures.
In doing so, you will be advised to follow a few rules.
Never jump to hasty  conclusions.
Weigh all the facts and strike a balance.
If the hand says  "yes" and the face says "no," the conclusion is that "it may be."
When  disappointing things are noted, be charitable and let the applicant off lightly.
In cases where dire illnesses are portended, suppress the facts or state them  in such a way that the applicant has a chance of avoiding the trouble, if he  or she takes suitable measures.
But, whatever happens, never make a statement  for which you have not "chapter and verse."
And this brings me to my last point.
Hands, faces, heads and other  characteristics give their readings, but none of these readings should be taken  as absolutely final.
The power is within us to fight against our failings and  to better our good qualities.
We may even allow our best ones to deteriorate.
That is why two people born at the same time and in the same town need  not grow up exactly alike.
And it is also why a small percentage of horoscopes  and fortunes are bound to miss the mark.
[13]  PALMISTRY—WHAT MAY BE LEARNED  FROM HANDS  "There are more things in Heaven and Earth...."  People who can see as far as the ends of their noses and then only  through a fog, declare (with a superior sniff) that Palmistry is nothing but  a trap to catch fools; they call it quackery, or declare perhaps that it is  merely a fake or blind guesswork.
Now, while we would be the first to deny that Palmistry is an exact and  infallible science, yet we just as strongly affirm that it is undoubtedly a most  fascinating and interesting recreation; as to its truth, each one must decide  that question for himself.
For the few who have a wish to take up this study seriously, there are  many now who will naturally wish to know just sufficient to be able to  "tell fortunes."
Fortunetellers are always popular at some jolly party or  quiet friendly gathering of an evening.
In this book they will find all the simple information required; on the  other hand the student will find a sincere delight in reading and sifting  thoroughly the numerous books that probe the depths of the subject.
Quite apart from any markings which may be upon the hand, a general  indication of the habits and temperament of the individual in question can  readily be gained by a careful examination of the texture or quality of  the skin.
It were as well to note here that the impressions gained must never be  taken by themselves, but only in conjunction with other confirming signs.
Especially is this so when judging the character of a friend or acquaintance.
TEXTURE OF SKIN.—The skin may, of course, be smooth or rough.
To judge this you should turn the hand in question back upwards; now get  the feel of the skin by actual touch; a smooth, fine-textured skin denotes  a refined nature, and vice versa.
This is a very strong indication indeed,  insomuch that should there be other tendencies pointing to coarseness of  nature, this texture of the hand would have a refining effect upon the whole.
ELASTICITY OF THE HAND.—This is best tested by actual grip (as  in shaking hands).
All hands naturally present some feeling of elasticity;  this is a matter of comparison, but it is very easy to tell the quick, virile  grip of an elastic hand to the dead fish feeling which a flabby hand gives  us when we grasp it.
A FLEXIBLE HAND denotes an active and energetic person, one who  will be readily adaptable to new conditions.
He will always rise to the  occasion, and manfully withstands the buffets of ill-fortune.
This type is  always trustworthy and a good friend.
[14]  No.
6.—Beware of these Hands.—A shows a weak, flattened thumb; B a curved little  finger and C a coarse, short thumb.
Each has other defects as well.
[15]  A FLABBY HAND—one that does not respond to your grip or responds  but sluggishly—is the hand of an idle man, untrustworthy and inconsistent,  a man of weak and negative character; but be sure to search well for other  confirming signs of this weakness.
THE SHAPE OF THE HAND  A fairly accurate guide to character is certainly contained in the shape  of the hand.
Hands may be roughly divided into two classes—broad and  long.
A person having a long hand you may judge to have great capacity  for mental effort and matters of detail.
The broad-handed person you may expect to be a strong man physically;  his culture will be bodily rather than mental.
He could with advantage  improve his culture by reading, and by enjoying the best music.
THE SHAPE OF THE FINGERS  When an individual is found with square finger-tips, he should make  a good marriage partner; he will be practical—a man of method and  reason.
He is punctual, but should cultivate imagination.
POINTED FINGER tips will be found on the hand of the musician,  the painter, and, in fact, anyone who is of artistic temperament.
Persons with these fingers should curb their imagination with reason,  and cultivate the power of doing things, not only dreaming them, though  dreaming is well enough in its way.
TAPERING fingers indicate people of extremes.
"Ice and fire" are these  people—impulsive and generous to a fault.
They should guard against  undue and morbid sensitiveness, and should cultivate a sane philosophical  outlook upon life.
They are capable of the highest, but are frequently their  own worst enemies.
SPATULATE FINGERS.—These are the sportsmen of the world.
They  are not worried much by the opinions of others, while they love a busy,  healthy life; a sound mind in a sound body.
GENERAL SHAPE AND FORMATION OF THE HAND  If the hands are knotted with the joints swollen, powers of analysis,  calculation and reflection are shown; philosophers have this type of hand.
SMOOTH fingers and hands indicate the artistic temperament.
These  people are frequently inspired, and have curious intuitions concerning coming  events.
Musicians, spiritualists, and martyrs are of this type, together  with many folk who are square pegs in round holes; maybe doing work  which is uncongenial to them.
[16]  THE THUMB has also in it certain very marked indications of character.
The three bones (or Phalanges) in the thumb each have their interpretation.
Beginning at the top these should be judged by length as follows:—  1.
Will.
(The pushing type of man.)
2.
Reasoning power.
(The thinker or philosopher.)
3.
Love.
Thus a long first or top phalange indicates great will power; or if it is  not a certain indication, it points to a definite likelihood of the will being  strong.
THE MOUNTS  Take your subject's hand and examine it closely; a strong magnifying  glass should form part of the equipment of every wise palmist.
It will be  seen that there are certain portions of the hands which are raised above  the surface.
These are known as "mounts."
As will be noticed in the  accompanying picture, we call these mounts by astrological names, a method  adopted from the very earliest times.
They are eight in number, named:  Jupiter, Mercury, Venus, Saturn, Apollo, Luna and Mars (of which there  are two).
YOUR HANDWRITING REVEALS  YOUR CHARACTER  Your handwriting is you; disguise it as you will, it still reveals your character.
As a matter of fact, it is a sheer impossibility for an ordinary person  to alter his or her writing completely.
The natural hand and the purposely-changed  hand will bear several resemblances, however hard the individual  may try to make them dissimilar.
This is due to the fact that the same  character lies behind both efforts.
Not only is your handwriting you, but  the handwriting of your friend is "him or her."
This being so, you will  find it a simple matter to arrive at his or her qualities by analyzing a few  lines of the person's handwriting.
To become sufficiently expert for this,  you will not need more than half-an-hour's study.
FIRST of all we must attend to the direction of the lines of writing, as,  should these be level, a normal and calm state of mind is shown, generally  reliable, and not subject to change.
When the lines slope toward the right, much energy is indicated; when  the lines slope downward, a lack of energy is shown, usually from depression  which may result from ill health.
If the writing slopes upward with excess, it shows recklessness; if downwards,  with a very sloping inclination, it shows mental depression verging  almost on loss of reason.
If the signature slopes upwards, then we may expect to find personal  ambition, but if downwards, some physical weakness.
If instead of the  whole line ascending only words here and there will ascend, this indicates  "hope," but if scattered words ascend and descend in the same line, we may  read a lack of tenacity in emotions.
SECONDLY.—The lines forming the letters may appear:—  (A) Practically upright; or  (B) Sloping slightly to the right.
(C) Sloping very much to the right as if each letter were falling  over the rest.
(D) Sloping to the left, and lastly,  (E) "Back-hand writing."
Between A and B might be called normal.
A Shows pluck and self-possession, and, if pointed, mathematics.
B Tenderness, but should the writing be pointed, a quick, acute mind,  with no sympathy with sentiment.
C Shows indolence; if with pointed letters, mental power, but should  the letters be rounded, mental and physical indolence.
[33]  D Shows a love of ease, while  E Looks peculiar and indicates self-consciousness, and, as a rule, hidden  sentimentality.
THIRDLY.—The writing small and pointed, we get curiosity; if medium  in size, and gradually increasing towards the end of the line, it shows an  outspoken nature; should the writing diminish towards the end of the line  we read tact.
If it is fine and threadlike in appearance, it shows a sensitive mind, diplomacy.
Large writing shows promptness, but if the strokes are very fine, we see  appreciation of other people's work—a connoisseur.
Small, clear writing shows love of the abstruse, and if the lines are very  delicate, a feeling for the mystic.
If the writing is extremely small, it shows  pettiness of nature, fussiness over unimportant details.
Letters of different sizes show unreliability of nature, exaggerating trifles  and ignoring more important things.
Light and fine writing means delicacy of feeling, but if carried to excess  it shows fastidiousness.
FOURTHLY.—The connections of the letters with each other must be  judged.
If the connecting stroke is long, it shows some facility in talking  and expression, the power of using words well, not talkativeness.
Letters ingeniously connected show constructiveness, but should they be  separate, we get perception and intuition.
Any eccentricity indicates that the person's career has not been ordinary.
Marked originality, especially of capitals, shows unusual taste.
Tremulous  tendency resulting neither from illness nor old age—Irritability.
Highly  restrained, small—Refractory disposition, difficult to live with.
Regular and  well-placed lines, followed by those careless and irregular—A mind quick  to embark on an enterprise, but lacking perseverance.
Back-handed less  susceptible than inclined—The head ruling the heart.
Generally the body of the letter or specimen gives the present character,  the signature the past.
CROTCHETS.—Egotism, self-satisfaction (a return upon self.)
HARPOONS (HOOKS).—Tenacity, united perhaps with weak will.
DASHES.—Perfectly straight—Persistence.
Undulating.—Art, levity.
Undulating, beginning or finishing with a crotchet or ungraceful flourish.—Lack  of taste, slight vulgarity.
Light.—Writer attaches little idea to things expressed.
Ending Thickly.—Resolution, desires ideas to carry weight.
Curved Ascendingly.—Versatility; slight inconsistency; speaks without  thought.
[34]  Tremulous.—Timidity, hesitation.
Placed at end of line or paragraph.—Lack of self-assertion.
Ending abruptly, thick and hard.—Distrust, reserve.
Sharply elongated.—Impulsive nature; prudence taught by experience.
Used instead of "full stops.
"—Cultivated caution.
CAPITAL LETTERS.—Large and well-formed.—Pride.
Print-like in shape.—Dignity.
Thin strokes.—Boasting.
Exaggerated in height.—Love of ceremonial.
The angle very pointed.—Acuteness, penetrative, leadership.
Large and badly-formed.—Egomania.
Large upper hall.—Self-assertion.
Large bases.—Self-confidence.
The capital letter of Christian names larger than that of surname.—Love  of home.
The capital letter of surname larger.—Love of position.
Small capitals.—Lack of self-assertion.
Capital letters made like small ones.—Said to show poetic feeling, love of  Nature.
Print-like in form.—Originality.
Eccentric in any way.—Pose or whim.
Widely spaced.—Love of open air.
Curving far below the line, and almost encircling the word.—Protective  love of animals.
Letters incorrectly used.—Small detail made over-important.
Tendency to replace by print.—Sense of form, artistic and poetic.
SPECIAL LETTERS.—A.M.N.H., G.O., R.U.W.—Normal width.—Well-poised  mind.
Too wide.—Self-contentment, satisfaction.
Nearly touching.—Timidity, want of knowledge of the world.
First leg slightly raised.—Aristocratic tastes.
Second leg exaggerated.—Pose, affectation.
Unconnected, ending with crotchet rentrant.—Egotistical, selfish.
The letters begun and ended with a small crotchet rentrant.—Avarice,  meanness.
Letters and words connected.—Power of assimilating ideas, but lack of  originality; logic.
Letters disconnected even with their parts.—Creative power, want of logic.
Equally connected or disconnected.—Balanced intuition and deduction.
[35]  Last letter increasing in size.—Lack of power of concealment.
Decreasing.—Finesse.
Handwriting does not invariably show sex, as the qualities indicated are  common to both men and women.
The writing develops as the soul develops, and imitation comes before  originality.
QUALITIES SHOWN IN HANDWRITING ALPHABETICALLY  ARRANGED  ABILITY.—Small writing, angular, clear, decided capitals.
ACCURACY.—Neat, well-placed lines and words, punctuation correct.
AFFECTION.—Softly sloping writing, rounded, fairly thick.
AMIABILITY.—Rounded letters, often unfinished, medium capitals.
AMBITION.—Large first stroke of capital "M's" ascending lines of writing.
Imposing signature.
ANALYTICAL.—Small-pointed, clear writing, letters divided, decided  capitals.
ARGUMENT.—Words connected, giving logic, and occasional extra long  connecting strokes, small writing.
(See A.2.)
AUTHORITY.—Large capitals, especially the letter "I" and first letter of  surname, level crossing to t's.
BOASTFUL.—Large writing, exaggerated capital, flying cross bar to t's.
(See A.1.)
BOLD.—Large well-formed capitals, clear rounded, but not pointed writing.
BROAD-MINDED.—Well-spaced words, clear capitals, O's and A's wide  and rounded.
CANDOUR.—O's and A's open at the top.
CAPRICE.—Eccentric letters, irregular writing, no punctuation.
CARE.—See Accuracy.
CARELESSNESS.—Ill-formed letters, open O's, no punctuation.
CAUTION.—Dashes used instead of full stops.
CEREMONIOUS.—Capitals important, all large above the line, some added  flourishes.
CHANGEABLE.—Letters differently formed, eccentric capitals, variability  of line.
YOUR FACE IS YOUR FORTUNE  Everybody sums up the faces of his friends and of the people he meets.
It is a habit we all have.
But most of us are apt to classify these faces into  groups according to whether the possessors are good-looking, ordinary or  supremely ugly.
We say to ourselves, "Isn't So-and-so charming," or alternatively,  "How positively plain is So-and-so."
As a matter of fact, the degree of beauty expressed in an individual's face  ought to count for very little.
What ought to count is the character which  his or her features reveal.
Let it be said quite definitely that faces indicate  character more accurately than any other physical property of an individual.
A person can change his voice and he can check his actions, but he cannot  alter his features for more than a second at a time, and then only superficially.
Thus it comes about that faces are definite indications of character, and  these indications are fairly easy to read, once the rules are learned.
Of  course, all such things as accidental blemishes, such as scars and broken  noses, must be ignored at the outset.
First, let us take the general shape of the face.
No.
12.
THE SHAPE OF THE FACE.—There can be thousands of different  shapes, but the normal is shown by Fig.
1, where the width across  the forehead is more than across the chin.
The forehead, the nose and the  rest of the face should be about equal in length.
Add to the width across the forehead and you have a brainy person, a  clear thinker, a person whose opinions are worth considering.
Of course,  an excess of width in this place suggests some mental instability.
Fig.
2 shows an entirely different type.
It may belong to a jolly person[41]  who is excellent company; but do not go to him for sound advice.
There  is not enough length of forehead, nor width of forehead, to house a superabundance  of brains.
Fig.
3 introduces us to a ponderous type, slow-thinking, fond of food, and  with animal instincts lurking in the background of his make-up.
Fig.
4 reveals a long face, narrow for its width.
This belongs to a person  who is limited in vision, and who can be very awkward at times.
Such an  individual will find it very hard to agree with others, especially in business  matters.
He may be deep and more often than not, he is a rather sad  companion.
No.
13.
THE NOSE.—Fig.
1 shows the normal nose, betokening an average  character.
Fig.
2 is too rounded at the tip.
Force of character is lacking.
Fig.
3 reveals a drooping line between the tip of the nose and the upper  lip.
This stands for a character that loves amusements and is apt to neglect  the real things of life.
Fig.
4 gives a pronounced, fleshy curl where the nose joins the face.
This  is a sign that the possessor is a clear thinker, a leader of others, an intelligent  person.
Fig.
5 shows a thin, pointed nose.
The possessor is, probably, of a refined  nature, but he or she is apt to be lacking in sympathy, even cruel.
Fig.
6 depicts a curved ridge.
This is the nose of a person who lacks a  refined nature.
He may be jolly and humorous, but certainly not actuated  by the highest ideals.
Many noses of this shape are the result of an accident,  which, of course, does not count.
A long nose indicates cautiousness, watchfulness, and often timidity.
A prominent nose that stands well out from the face shows a desire to  observe and examine things, without the interference of others.
A fleshy tip to the nose displays a kindly nature, and a love of ease.
A short, small nose tells of conceit and a lack of sympathy for others.
[42]  A turned-up nose means that the possessor is a busybody, one who cannot  keep a secret, but may be kind and generous.
THE EYES.—Large eyes denote love of talking and the ability to learn  languages.
Small eyes denote secrecy and close-mindedness.
Full, dark eyes denote love of the opposite sex.
Truthful eyes are set straight in the head.
Untruthful eyes slope towards the nose.
Eyes that slope downwards from the nose are cruel and deceitful.
Eyes set widely apart denote breadth of mind.
Eyes set close together denote narrow-mindedness.
THE CHEEKS.—Full, rounded cheeks denote sociability and a love of  friends.
Thin cheeks denote those who prefer their own company.
Fullness in lower part of cheek denotes love of eating and drinking.
A moderate fullness denotes hospitality.
High cheekbones show that the possessor is very methodical.
He or she  is likely to interfere in other people's business.
THE FOREHEAD.—Prominent brows denote a practical disposition.
Fullness in center of forehead denotes a good memory for dates and events.
A broad forehead denotes a humorous disposition.
A rounded forehead denotes musical ability; this is usually accompanied  by curved eyebrows and wavy hair.
THE MOUTH AND LIPS.—When upper lip is deeply grooved down  the center, it denotes modesty and refinement.
A plain upper lip, boldness and forwardness.
A long upper lip denotes self-esteem and self-control.
Redness and fullness in center of lip, love and passion for opposite sex.
Fullness at either side shows love of children and animals.
A mouth that displays the teeth when smiling denotes love of approbation  and attention.
A full, red, well-developed lower lip denotes a kindly, sympathetic disposition.
Thin lips denote a hard, selfish, and unsympathetic nature.
The same  with straight lips.
No.
14.
THE CHIN.—A receding chin, as shown in Fig.
1, p. 43, denotes a lack  of firmness.
It belongs to a person who has insufficient will of his own.
A chin shaped as Fig.
2 or 3, or midway between these, provides a very  acceptable character.
There is determination and grit, without an excess of  these qualities.
Fig.
2 may be taken as the normal type.
[43]  Broad, bony structures of the chin denotes conscientiousness and straightforwardness.
Length and projection of chin denotes firmness, stability, and perseverance.
An extremely long and projecting chin denotes stubbornness and obstinacy.
(Fig.
4.)
A full ridge of fat under the chin denotes economy.
WRINKLES.—A wrinkle commencing in the lower cheek and extending  right under the chin, from side to side, is caused from constant talking.
A wrinkle running from the side of the nose, downwards upon the lower  cheek, to the outer corners of the mouth, is a sign of love of approbation.
Whenever in laughter three parallel circular lines are formed in the cheeks  there is a fund of folly in the character.
Wrinkles lying horizontally across the root of the nose denote ability to  command.
Several perpendicular wrinkles between the eyebrows denote a plodding,  persevering disposition.
DIMPLES.—A round dimple in the chin denotes love of the beautiful in  the opposite sex.
Dimples at the outer corners of the mouth are another sign of mirthfulness.
Dimples in the center of cheeks are another sign of approbation.
When a little cleft is seen at the tip of the nose it denotes the natural  critic.
Close attention should always be given to texture and quality of the hair,  eyes, and skin; this is most important, as the coarseness or refinement of  character is shown very plainly to those who take the trouble to notice these  things.
Color of hair, eyes, and skin is also very important; the depth of the feelings  and passions is shown here; poorly colored people are much less passionate  than their deeper colored fellow-creatures.
Thus from dark individuals of coarse quality we expect coarse passions,  and from dark fine-quality individuals deep, refined emotions.
No.
15.
THE EYEBROWS.—Fig.
2 is intended for the eyebrows of a normal  individual.
Such a person goes about his duties in an ordinary, intelligent  manner and does his best to make the world a little better place for having  him in it.
[44]  In Fig.
1, the eyebrows have insufficient shape.
They belong to an  individual of extremes; he or she is either too determined or devoid of  kindness.
In Fig.
3, the eyebrows are too curved, forming a full semi-circle.
This is  a sign of shallowness; they belong to a person who is not going to put himself  out for somebody else.
In Fig.
4, the eyebrows are higher at the outer than at the inner ends.
Such are difficult to diagnose.
They may belong to a very jolly, funny person;  but they may also belong to someone absolutely untrustworthy, a foxy  individual, in fact.
They should be read in company with other facial signs.
In Fig.
5, the eyebrows meet on the nose.
Hesitate before trusting a  person so provided.
He may be perfectly reliable, but make sure first.
Nos.
1 to 5 show eyebrows of fine or medium thickness, but Figs.
6 and  7 are coarser and heavier.
Those that are neither too fine or too thick are  best, since they are more likely to belong to a well-balanced person.
Fine  pencil streaks show a finniky, perhaps unkind nature.
Heavy, bushy eyebrows  point to an austere, querulous nature.
In Fig.
7, the upstanding hairs suggest a nature that may derive pleasure  from posing.
A FINAL HINT.—In checking the "points" of a face, it is often found  that one feature may contradict another.
This does not prove that the explanations  given above are incorrect.
It goes to show that the character of  the individual is not definitely set in one direction.
He may vary at times or  he may have the aptitude for fighting against one characteristic in favor  of another.
The only sound plan is to assess the character by striking a  balance of all the "points" at issue.
[45]  HAVE YOU A MOLE?
Many people do not like these little marks, but let them be comforted,  for in olden times, according to the wise men of the day,  great reliance was placed on them.
Just what a mole means depends  on where it is to be found.
The following may describe a  mole of your own:—  RIGHT EYE (above).—Wealth and a happy marriage.
LEFT EYE (above).—You have a great liking for the opposite  sex and you will, thereby, gain much happiness.
TEMPLE.—As above.
NOSE.—You will succeed in business.
CHEEK.—You will be happy, but not be blessed with fame and  fortune.
CHIN.—Fortunate in your choice of friends.
EAR (either).—A contented nature.
ARMS.—A happy nature, but with something of the "don't care"  spirit.
SHOULDERS.—Will face difficulties with fortitude.
HANDS.—A practical nature.
Able to take care of yourself.
LEGS.—Strong willed.
NECK.—You have a great deal of patience.
[46]  WHAT DO YOUR BUMPS MEAN?
Just feel the shape of your own head, and then ask a friend to let you do  the same thing to him or her.
Most likely you will be very surprised at the  difference between the two.
You may have bumps in certain places while  your friend has them in totally different parts.
The science of phrenology, which is the reading of bumps, has discovered  that bumps in certain places point to certain characteristics; if you have them,  you must have the characteristics, and, if you have not them, you cannot have  those qualities.
In fact, the reading of character through the medium of  bumps is a very definite science, and it is a science that can be easily learned  and applied by almost anyone.
Of course, there is much to learn, but there  is no need to know a great deal if you merely want to assess a person's  character in general terms.
A chart is supplied on p. 47, and on it is marked out just enough to  enable you to read a head with ease.
Only certain areas are mapped out; the  rest of the head may be the location of bumps, but it does not present the  bumps which are likely to interest us just now.
The areas are as follows:—  1.—Lying at the top of the head, in the center and coming a little way  towards the forehead.
If this area is well developed, it shows that the individual  has a benevolent nature.
He is generous and kind; he will work  for the good of others and not think only of himself.
If the area is over-developed, the individual will be inclined to favor others  at the expense of his own safety; if it is under-developed, he will be cruel  and selfish.
2.—Situated above but a little behind the eye; usually the place is just  covered by hair.
When this area is well developed, it shows that the individual  possesses plenty of happiness and a store of wit and mirth.
He is a  pleasant person, smiles on adversity and is excellent company.
If the area is over-developed, the individual is one who can never be  taken seriously, who pokes fun at everything; if it is under-developed, he is the  type of person who is never known to smile.
3.—In the middle of the head, where it curves down towards the back of  the neck.
In cases where this area is well developed, the person is one who  has strength of mind; he is firm in his actions; he cannot be persuaded against  his own judgment; and he likes his own way.
If this area is over-developed, the person is obstinate and stubborn; if it  is under-developed, he is easily led, apt to waver and has not a mind of his  own.
[47]  No.
16.—Chart of Phrenology.
1—Benevolence, generosity, kindness.
2—Happiness, Wit, Mirth.
3—Firmness, Strength of Mind.
4—Self-Esteem, Dignity, Pride.
5—Conscientiousness, Sense of Duty.
6—Love.
7—Courage.
8—Desire for Marriage.
9—Love of Children.
[48]  4.—In the middle of the head, lower down at the back than No.
3.
When  this area is found in a well-developed condition, the possessor is a person  who has dignity, self-esteem and proper pride.
He is one who lives an  upright life because he puts a high price on these qualities.
If this area is over-developed, the individual is over-confident, he thinks  too much of himself and is haughty; if it lacks development, he is too humble  and suffers from an inferiority complex.
5.—Lying beside Nos.
3 and 4.
To find this area well developed is a sure  sign that the possessor is a conscientious individual; it shows that he has a  high sense of duty, and his life will center around actions that are based on  what he thinks is right.
If this area is over-developed, the possessor will never progress far because  he will be always stopping and wondering whether what he proposes to  do is right; if under-developed, the possessor is one who does not care  whether what he does is wrong or right, so long as it brings him pleasure  and gain.
6.—At the base of the skull, at the back, where it joins the backbone.
If  this area is well developed, it shows that the individual has the power of loving  somebody of the opposite sex in a proper manner.
He or she will fall  in love when a suitable occasion arises and will make an excellent partner.
If this area is over-developed, the individual will be too passionate, will fall  in love with little or slight provocation, and will give himself or herself a  great deal of unhappiness; if under-developed, he or she will be too cold to  be moved by the thoughts of love.
7.—A slight distance away from the back of the ear.
When this area is  well developed, the individual may be counted on to be courageously inclined.
He will not know the meaning of fear, and will not hold back because  troubles may be brewing.
If this area is over-developed, we have a quarrelsome person and if under-developed,  one who is afraid of his skin.
8.—Beside No.
7, but more in the center of the back of the head.
Whenever  this area is properly developed, it shows that the possessor would make  an admirable husband or wife.
He or she would be devoted, loyal and  attentive.
If the area is over-developed, the possessor has a jealous disposition; if  under-developed, he or she is fickle and apt to flirt with others.
9.—Beside No.
8, in the center of the back of the head, low down.
Should  this area be well developed, it shows that the possessor has a proper love and  regard for children and that he thinks no person has experienced the fullest  joys of life who has not become a parent.
If this area is over-developed, the possessor thinks so much of children  that he spoils them; if it is under-developed, he is of the type that "cannot  stand them at any price."
[49]  HOW ASTROLOGY DECIDES YOUR DESTINY  Astrology is one of the oldest sciences in the world.
It is said to have  originated with the Egyptians, almost at the very beginning of time.
Indeed,  it is almost impossible to trace a period when this science was not practiced.
There is nothing new under the sun, and its close followers will scarcely  allow any errors in its deductions.
They go so far as to declare it to be an  exact science, a term which means that everything can be reasoned out and  proved; nothing is left to guesswork.
Such sciences are Mathematics, Algebra, and Geometry.
We need not  believe that Astrology is all this, but certainly some very startling and accurate  predictions have been made by astrologers.
However, as in all other methods of fortunetelling attempted by us mortals,  it is far from infallible.
So long as we do not take it to be exact and sure,  we shall get plenty of amusement and interest from its study, with the exciting  feeling all the time at the back of our minds that "it might come true."
Here is a list giving you the names and meanings given to planets by  astrologers.
Name.
Approximate meaning given by Astrologers.
Mars.
Strength.
Venus.
Beauty.
Mercury.
Capacity for adapting oneself.
Uranus.
Improvement.
Sun.
Life.
Jupiter.
Freedom and growth.
Saturn.
Diminished—shrinking—lack of growth.
Neptune.
Able to receive—receptive.
Earth.
Physical—not spiritual.
The Moon.
Feeling.
The main idea at the back of astrology is that the planets (or starry  bodies which revolve round the sun) each have a strong and varying influence  upon the minds of human beings.
THE ZODIAC.—Of course when the planets revolve round the sun they  travel through a course or path.
The Zodiac is the name given by astronomers  to the boundary which encloses this course or path in the sky.
The signs of the Zodiac are the spaces into which the Zodiac is divided.
[50]  Here are the signs of the Zodiac arranged in order to show which signs are  opposite to each other.
Aries.
facing  Libra.
Taurus.
Scorpio.
Gemini.
Sagittarius.
Cancer.
Capricorn.
Leo.
Aquarius.
Virgo.
Pisces.
Now each sign has a planet which is said to rule it; this is called the ruling  planet.
It is from the nature of this planet that the probable character  and fate of the individual are told.
It is not necessary to know the whys and  wherefores of this, if you have not studied astronomy it will only serve to  muddle you, and if, on the other hand, you do understand astronomy you will  not need any explanation.
We will just say what does happen, and that  will tell you all you need in these first steps.
Well, we all know that the earth revolves upon its axis once in every 24  hours.
Now, according to astronomers, this causes one of the Zodiac signs  to appear in the eastern sky, where it remains for two hours.
We have said  that each sign has a planet ruling it, so the sign that appears on the sky at  the time of birth decides what planet that person is born under or is influenced  by.
Let us suppose for a moment that you were born when the sign Libra  was rising, as the saying is.
The planet which rules Libra is Venus, so the  person born at that time would be a Venus type, i.e., a person having the  influence of Venus upon him.
In addition to the main ruling planet, astrologers will tell you that there  are other "neighboring" planets—we will call them neighboring because it is  a simple term—which also have their effect upon us.
Astrologers call this one  planet being "in aspect" with another.
For instance, you might have the  planet Mars in aspect with (or influenced by) the planet Saturn; you would  then be dealing with a very strong character.
The qualities of Mars which give the fighter and the pushing type, or in  excess the bully, will be well steadied by the qualities of Saturn, which by  themselves give coldness and, in excess, lack of feeling.
The two together  result in a character remarkable for its steadiness combined with its never-wearying  energy and good balance.
So you see, we seldom find pure types (i.e., qualities of Mars, or other  planets by themselves), and it is very fortunate that this is so; we should get  a very one-sided world if we did.
Now we come to that part of Astrology which really interests most people;  here will be shown the birth-dates for each month in the year and the  probable characters of persons born at that special time.
You may ask why  the characters are given and why not the fate or future of the person concerned.
The reason is this: you can be pretty sure that what you read of an  individual's character will give you a sound idea of what in all probability  his future will be.
[51]  After all, the carving out of our lives is in our own hands.
We are the  masters of our fate, or as the song has it, "Captain of our Soul."
However, if we believe astrologers, there is a way to tell the times of our  lives when matters should go smoothly or the reverse.
The most favorable  times for speculating with money, starting in business, in fact, the most  and least favorable periods of our lives can, according to astrology, be  worked out by what is known as the Horoscope.
Now this Horoscope is in reality a chart of your life.
The rocky waters  are shown, and the barrier reefs which each of us must avoid through our  life, so you will see a use in the study of astrology.
It would seem to be  Nature's warning to us all of the necessity for effort, effort and again effort.
Here are the birth dates and characteristics of persons born between the  dates mentioned.
Since astrology is not infallible, do not take all these  characteristics too seriously.
You will notice that each date is taken from about the 20th of one month  to the 20th of the next month.
WHEN WERE YOU BORN?
Dec. 22nd to Jan. 20th.
People born during this period have considerable mental ability and a keen  business instinct.
They are fond of the imaginative arts.
They are proud;  they like their own way and they see that they get it.
Generally speaking,  they are better fitted to lead than to follow others.
However, they do not take kindly to changes of any kind, and are  annoyed by newfangled ideas.
They do not want the advice of other  people and often resent it.
They do not strike out in new directions and  they avoid taking risks.
They lack "push."
To these people, we say:  Don't wait for opportunities—make them.
Don't let your pride persuade you to keep on the wrong road rather than  turn back.
Don't be afraid of admitting and correcting a mistake.
Don't run away from trouble; meet it with a bold front.
Jan. 21st to Feb. 19th.
People born during this period have a strong sense of duty.
They have a  kindly disposition and are inclined to be affectionate.
They refuse to think  ill of anyone until the bad qualities are proved.
Being straightforward themselves,  they imagine everyone else is the same and, on this account, they  are likely to suffer some bitter experiences.
However, they lack a proper regard for their own welfare.
They are a  little too confiding and they are not adaptable.
Once they make up their  minds on a matter, it is almost impossible to persuade them to change it.
To these people we say:  Don't brood over troubles.
Face the facts, fight them out, and then, forget  all about them.
[52]   YOUR CHILD'S OCCUPATION DECIDED  BY THE STARS  It is a well-known fact that every human being is considerably influenced,  as far as character and capabilities are concerned, by the time of the year in  which he or she was born.
That being so, it follows that the occupation best  suited to any particular individual is, in a measure, related to his or her  birth-date.
Parents who are anxious to do the best for their children should take note  of these conditions; they may be helpful in keeping round pegs out of square  holes.
Below, we offer suggestions which have proved of use in thousands  of cases, where doubt had previously existed.
The information may be used  in this way: Suppose a child is about to leave school and is ready to make his  or her entry into the world of work.
In a number of cases, the child has  a very definite idea of what he or she wants to do.
If the work is reasonably  suited to the child's temperament, station in life, and so on, it is much the  best plan to allow him or her to follow the particular bent.
It is just as  well to note whether the chosen occupation fits in with the work which we  list below for his or her individual birth-date.
If it approximates to some  occupation which we mention, well and good.
Let the child go ahead,  there is every chance of success.
But, if it is quite alien to anything which  is given in the list, caution is needed.
We do not say that the child's ambition  should be checked and that he or she should be put to a job of our selection,  but we do say that caution ought to be exercised.
We are perfectly ready to  admit that the stars and the birth-date are not the only factors which count.
Environment, upbringing, the father's occupation, and other things must influence  the child.
All these influences should be weighed and carefully  considered.
But where astrology and the stars can give most help is in the case of a  boy or girl who has no formulated idea as to what he or she wants to  become.
Thousands of children reach the school-leaving age without showing  the slightest inkling for any particular job.
To the parents of such children,  we say, consult the lists set out below, seeing that they are based on astrological  teachings.
Go over the selected occupations carefully, discuss them with the  child, explain what they offer in terms of money, work, hours, etc., and watch  the effect they have on the child.
In this way, it will soon be possible to  gain an idea as to what occupation should be eventually decided on.
Here are the occupations suitable for each person:  CAPRICORN BORN (Dec. 22nd to Jan. 20th).—Since people born in  this period have considerable mental ability, it follows that they do well in  most of the professions, since they can pass the necessary examinations and  become well qualified.
Thus, they ought to do satisfactorily in medicine,[56]  the law, dentistry, the scholastic profession and similar occupations.
The  fact that they do not care to take risks unfits them for many business openings,  but where aspirations are not high, they do well as clerks and in filling  posts which consist of routine work.
Girls, especially, should seek work which  is connected with the imaginative arts.
AQUARIAN BORN (Jan. 21st to Feb. 19th).—Boys display a good deal  of interest in occupations which require the use of their hands.
This makes  them capable in many engineering posts, in wireless, in cabinet-making and  similar jobs.
They are not good at creating or inventing in connection with  these industries, however.
There is the roving disposition implanted in  these boys and many of them think that the pilot's job on an air liner could  not be equalled.
Girls are, also, interested in working with their hands: thus they are fitted  for dressmaking, the millinery trade, for dealing with arts and crafts supplies,  etc.
A certain number are eminently suited to secretarial work.
PISCEAN BORN (Feb. 20th to March 20th).—Children born in this  period have a love for the sea and, therefore, the boys find congenial work as  ship's mates, stewards, marine engineers, etc., while girls are suitable for  stewardesses and other jobs filled by women on ocean-going vessels.
In addition boys and girls are both fitted to all kinds of work in shops,  chain stores, etc., but they are not at their best when managing their  own businesses.
They require authority behind them.
A few Pisceans have artistic ability which should lead them to do splendidly  as authors, painters, musicians, etc.
ARIES BORN (March 21st to April 19th).—The Aries child is often a  problem, for certain of them have a rooted objection to anything in the  nature of routine work.
They chafe at going and coming at the same hour  each day, and of doing the same work year after year.
It is not that they  are lazy, but that their nature refuses to be driven by set rules.
With such  children, it is wisest to interest them in whatever they fancy, until the time  comes when they launch out on some brilliant scheme of their own.
Aries  men are the ones that fill unusual, out-of-the-way posts.
Where this rooted objection does not exist, the children are good in almost  any position which permits of movement, as travellers, for instance.
TAURIAN BORN (April 20th to May 20th).—As a rule, children who  are Taurians are very successful.
They do not mind hard work and they  have a "flair" for doing the right thing, without knowing why.
They have  a head for figures and money, and thus do well in banks and stockbroker's  offices.
They take kindly to long training, which enables them to succeed  in law and medicine.
Both boys and girls are good with their hands.
This makes them successful  in a large number of occupations, as widely diverse as engineering and  tailoring, or hairdressing and piano playing.
[57]  GEMINI BORN (May 21st to June 21st).—Gemini children show a  good deal of ambition, and their chief fault is that they object to beginning  at the bottom of the ladder.
Perhaps this is useful, in a way, as it goads  them on to climbing upwards.
They have a good deal of vision.
Thus  they make excellent newspaper men and women.
They do well in new  trades, notably in radio and the motor world.
Also, they ought to make a  success in certain branches of aviation.
Their eloquence fits them admirably  for travellers, and they would make their mark in any business which,  eventually, gave them work of an imaginative nature.
In a general way,  they find interest in theatrical work, in literary activities and in architecture.
All Gemini people have a streak in their natures which causes them to  seek unnecessary changes.
CANCER BORN (June 22nd to July 22nd).—Children born during this  period are usually "workers."
They will plod, they do not mind long hours,  and they will set themselves to difficult jobs, if told to get on with them.
As a rule, they should be set to something which enables them to work  "on their own."
They much prefer this to being a small peg in a large  machine.
They are suited to small businesses and agencies.
A mail-order  business might fit in with their requirements.
Girls would do well as private  teachers, running small schools of their own.
They are, also, suited to the  drapery trade.
LEO BORN (July 23rd to August 21st).—Those who are born during  this period succeed best in what might be called "clean" occupations.
The  boys do not want to put on overalls and become grimy, and the girls prefer  work that enables them to be always neat and tidy.
Both of them show  aptitude in marketing such things as jewelry, drugs, books and clothes,  but they do not want to be concerned with making them.
They are not so  much interested in vending the necessaries of life as the luxuries.
Thus,  motor cars, victrolas, cameras, sports requisites, etc., attract them.
They are not much suited to clerical work, but a good number find an  outlet for their ambitions in the theatrical and literary world, while a few  make good dentists, radiologists and medical practitioners.
VIRGO BORN (Aug. 22nd to Sept. 22nd).—These children are capable,  but their great failing is that, once they find a fairly suitable post, they will  not look for anything better.
They prefer to hold on to a moderate certainty  than to risk a little for a great success.
Consequently, Virgo-born are found  living on salaries just sufficient to keep them from want.
They are eminently suited to clerical work of the higher types, such as  in banks, insurance companies, stockbrokers' offices, etc.
They make good  company secretaries, excellent journalists, fairly good actors and actresses,  and the girls do well as teachers.
LIBRA BORN (Sept. 23rd to October 23rd).—Children of this period  do not mind hard work, but they hate monotony, especially if it is at all  sordid.
They have good judgment, a quality which fits them for such[58]  diverse occupations as medicine and the drama, the law and dressmaking.
No special trades or professions can be singled out for them; but, as long as  they are set to work in a direction which provides them with an outlet for  a nicely balanced judgment and a capacity for what might be termed the  detective instinct, they should succeed admirably.
SCORPIO BORN (Oct. 24th to Nov. 22nd).—There is an abundance of  ambition in these children, and they seek position rather than money.
Thus,  the boys do well in the Navy and the Army, and, in a less degree, in the  Air Force.
The Church holds out good openings for many of them, and  the Mercantile Marine interest not a few.
Medicine attracts both boys and  girls, and so does the stage.
Anything to do with chemicals seems to influence  many of the boys.
Scorpio-born children are often heard to say that they  want to make a name for themselves.
SAGITTARIAN BORN (Nov. 23rd to Dec. 21st).—Children of this  period are fond of animals; thus they are suited to become veterinary surgeons,  horse-dealers, farmers and even jockeys.
One section of them, having excessive  will power and plenty of self-reliance, makes a type of individual who  seeks publicity in the political world.
All are capable in business, especially  in the executive branches.
Not a few men become company promoters,  chairmen and directors.
The girls make excellent teachers and welfare  workers.
[59]  WHAT ARE YOUR HOBBIES?
According to your Zodiac sign you have a disposition for certain hobbies.
You may not necessarily have these hobbies but your inclinations lie towards  them.
CAPRICORN BORN.—Gardening.
Nature Study.
Rambles in the  countryside.
Making things of almost any kind.
Chemistry.
Physics.
AQUARIAN BORN.—Aviation, ranging from actual flying to making  aeroplane models.
Gliding.
Constructing all kinds of articles.
Painting  pictures.
Drawing.
Needlework.
PISCES BORN.—Traveling, especially by sea.
Photography.
Constructing  and using wireless apparatus.
Making electrical apparatus.
Theater-going  and amateur theatricals.
Arts and crafts (girls).
ARIES BORN.—Traveling, touring.
Anything connected with motor  cars.
Sight-seeing.
Making things.
Reading.
Arts and crafts (girls).
TAURUS BORN.—Constructive hobbies, from wireless to the building  of houses.
Walking.
Golf.
Swimming.
Collecting antiques.
GEMINI BORN.—Likely to be interested in inventions.
Good at solving  puzzles.
Football.
Tennis.
Nature rambling.
Girls have a bent for  household duties, such as cooking, needlework, etc.
CANCER BORN.—Interested in the wonders of the world.
Anxious to  see things and people.
Music.
Reading.
Collecting antiques.
Almost any  outdoor game.
Girls are fond of needlework of the finer kinds.
LEO BORN.—Hobbies allied to the daily work.
Intellectual reading,  especially anything bearing on historical matters.
Going about.
Golf.
Swimming.
Making things of an artistic nature.
VIRGO BORN.—Indoor games.
Making and repairing household articles.
Good at manual activities, from playing the piano to constructing toys.
Prefers  to be amused indoors than out in the open.
LIBRA BORN.—Doing things to keep the home ship-shape.
Football.
Cricket.
Photography.
Reading.
Wireless.
Needlework and knitting (girls).
SCORPIO BORN.—Scientific recreations of all kinds.
Keeping pets.
Nature rambling.
Girls take a keen interest in household duties.
Card  playing.
Seeing people.
Dabbling in mysterious matters, such as thought-reading,  table-rapping, seances, etc.
SAGITTARIAN BORN.—Hobbies of an intellectual character.
Walking.
Outdoor sports.
Boxing.
Nature study.
Keeping pets.
Reading.
[60]  WHAT IS YOUR LUCKY NUMBER?
Once more from the rising sun of the East further marvelous theories  have reached us through the paths of the ages.
To many of our prosaic  Western minds, maybe not unnaturally, these ideas will at first sight appear  almost ridiculous.
However, do not condemn numerical mysteries unheard,  for no Manual of Fortunetelling would be complete should it not include  a talk on this most arresting subject.
Students of numbers, as do astrologers and students of palmistry, declare  that there is no such thing as luck or chance in the world.
They also state  that we are strongly but not inevitably influenced by certain powerful laws  of Nature.
Number science is certainly unknown to the great majority of us, but  there are some superstitions which are based on evil numbers; these superstitions  we treat with great respect.
Very few of us really care to sit down  thirteen at table, while I have known a man go sad and smokeless rather  than be the third to light his cigarette off one match!
Fortunetelling by numbers is allied to astrology very closely indeed.
Let  us now take each day of the week individually and see what information  we can get from it.
You will find that very useful as a check upon your  other forms of fortunetelling.
ON WHAT DAY WERE YOU BORN?
If, as I suggested, we take the days of the week we shall find that they  in turn are influenced by the order in which they are found, or by the  number which is theirs.
For instance, Sunday being the first day, is  influenced by No.
1, and Friday, being the sixth day takes No.
6 as its ruling  number.
According to the ancients each number has its corresponding planet; here is  a little table showing the planet representing and ruling over each number.
No.
0.
Represented by Space.
No.
1.
Represented by The Sun.
No.
2.
Represented by The Moon  No.
3.
Represented by Mars.
No.
4.
Represented by Mercury.
No.
5.
Represented by Jupiter.
No.
6.
Represented by Venus.
No.
7.
Represented by Saturn.
No.
8.
Represented by Uranus.
No.
9.
Represented by Neptune.
Taking each day of the week in order, we find the following characteristics.
TABLE OF DAYS IN WEEK  No.
1 (Sunday).—You will see by your table that this day takes the Sun  for its ruler—Sun-day.
It is a fortunate day; persons born on a Sunday have  a brave and honest influence on them.
They will be optimistic, but not[61]  foolishly so, while at the same time they have great pride in the reputation  of themselves and their families.
If they have any fault it is, maybe, that this  pride is felt, a little too strongly; they may be inclined to take themselves  rather too seriously.
However, I repeat, this is an excellent day.
No.
2 (Monday).—This day is the Moon-day.
The lesson for Monday  men to learn is steadiness.
They are too easily influenced and are blown  hither and thither upon life's winds.
They adapt themselves well to change  of place, circumstances, scene, and frequently follow the sea.
They have  plenty of imagination in their natures, and should cultivate common sense.
No.
3 (Tuesday).—The day of Mars (French—Mardi).
Frequently the  engineers of the world.
An ambitious go-ahead day is Tuesday.
These  Tuesday folk are the explorers, the men who emigrate, and the earnest  patriots of life.
Soldiers, workers at the furnace among other workers, are  found among those born on Tuesday.
Their womenfolk are inclined to be  rather shrewish and domineering.
They are not naturally good managers,  and should cultivate this quality because they are always rare workers.
No.
4 (Wednesday).—The table tells us that these are the Mercurians.
The men are quick at calculating figures, and always capable and thoughtful  workers.
Mercury, as its name implies, gives quickness, with business trading  capacity.
The women appear not to be so favorably influenced, they  must guard against grumbling and gossip; then they may do well enough.
No.
5 (Thursday).—Under the planet of Jupiter, these Thursday people  have many good qualities.
They are liberal and good natured, but have one  vice—the outcome of their virtue.
They are inclined to be too liberal with  themselves, which is extravagance.
Given an idea they can turn it to good  account, but do not, as a rule, originate ideas.
Statesmen are here found;  let these Jupiterians beware of a love of display and what is commonly  known as side.
Then they are very excellent people indeed.
No.
6 (Friday).—Look at the table—see Venus is the planet of Friday.
This accounts for many things.
Here we see the typical Venus type.
Gay,  light-hearted, with no thought of the morrow, they flit happily through life  like a gilded butterfly upon the wing.
If they lack taste they over-dress.
Their good qualities are their charming personalities, pleasing manners, and  a quick command of music and art.
They should beware of being only  butterflies, and should cultivate strength of character.
They should also  obtain by hook or by crook a liking for hard work; it will serve them in  good stead.
No.
7 (Saturday).—Saturday, as its name tells us, has sad Saturn for its  planet.
Here we have the exact opposite to the persons mentioned who were  born on a Friday.
Saturday people miss half the joy of living by their cold  and calculating natures.
Careful with money, they are patient workers,  they must beware of being miserly, and should certainly cultivate their  missing sense of humor.
The good qualities in these people are their  sincerely earnest outlook and their capacity for an almost endless grind of[62]  hard work.
Their womenfolk frequently make old maids and should practice  sweet temper and a kindly feeling towards the rest of the household.
YOUR OWN NUMBER  But there is much more in the science of numbers than that which can  be gleaned from the days of the week.
There is your own personal number,  the number which influences you and your actions more than any other.
If you know your number, think how you can use it for good and avoid  others for ill!
The finding of your number is a simple matter when you  have mastered the elements of numerology, which is the science of numbers.
Let us explain how your own number is found.
First, write down your  birth-date, the day of the month, the month itself and the year.
Thus, three  items are required.
Take first the day of the month.
If it consists of one  figure, leave it.
If it consists of two, add them together, and, if the answer  comes to two figures, add them together.
All this may appear a little involved,  but it is not, as one or two examples will show.
Suppose you were born on the 9th of the month, then 9 is the number  you want.
But, suppose it was the 16th, then six and one make seven.
Therefore  7 is the required number.
Again, if you were born on the 29th, then nine and two make eleven, but  as eleven consists of two figures, you must add them together, and they  make 2.
So much for the day of the month, now for the month itself.
January  stands for one, February for 2, and so on, to December for 12.
The numbers  of the months from January to September can stand as they are, but October  November and December, being 10, 11 and 12, must be added up, as already  described.
Thus October is one, November is two and December three.
Thirdly, the number of the year must be considered.
Say you were born  in 1910.
These figures add up to eleven, and eleven, being double figures,  adds up to 2.
Therefore 1910 is equivalent to 2.
Work out your figures here.
You have now obtained three separate figures, add them together and if  they come to a one-figure number, that is the number which you require.
On the other hand, if it is a double-figured amount, add the two figures  as before, until you arrive at a single-figured amount.
Then that is the  number you require.
So as to make the whole thing perfectly clear, we will take a complete  example and work it out, exactly as you must work out your own birth-date.
Example.—12th September, 1913.
12 = 1 + 2 = 3  September is the 9th month = 9  1913 = 1 + 9 + 1 + 3 = 14 = 1 + 4 = 5  3 + 9 + 5 = 17 = 1 + 7 = 8  [63]  Therefore, the personal number of anyone born on 12th September, 1913,  is 8.
Eight should guide and influence all his or her actions.
We are not  going to pretend that benefits will accrue on every occasion that the personal  number is observed, but we are going to say that we have noted some  marvelous pieces of good fortune when it has.
When you have found your personal number, there are several ways in  which you can use it.
Suppose your number is the one just found, eight;  then you can conclude that the eighth day of any month will be a propitious  one for you.
But that is not the only one.
The 17th is equally good,  because one plus seven gives eight.
Moreover, the 26th is in a similar  position.
Two and six make eight.
Yet another way to use your personal number arises when you want to  know whether some important step should be taken on a definite day.
What  is the particular day?
Add up its numerological values, exactly as you did  with your birthday, and if it resolves itself into the same number as your  personal number, you may go ahead with cheerfulness.
Put forth your  best effort, and, on the day, you will have ample chances of success.
THE NUMBER OF YOUR NAME  Numerology permits of still another step.
Take your own name and see  what number it is equal to.
You will be able to do this in the following  way: A stands for one, B for two, C for three, and so on.
When you reach  I, which is 9, commence again and give J the value of one, then continue.
To make all this clear, we will set out the values of the complete alphabet:  1 = A J S  2 = B K T  3 = C L U  4 = D M V  5 = E N W  6 = F O X  7 = G P Y  8 = H Q Z  9 = I R —  Thus, suppose your name is Joan Shirley, the letters resolve themselves  into the following numbers:—  J O A N S H I R L E Y  1 + 6 + 1 + 5 + 1 + 8 + 9 + 9 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 55  55 = 5 + 5 = 10 = 1 + 0 = 1  From all that we have said, it will be clear that the birthdate may be used  for finding the personal number, or the letters of the name may be used.
On  rare occasions, the two ways will provide the same number.
When this is  the case, great faith should be placed in that number.
But, when the two  ways give different numbers, what?
Does one disprove the other?
No.
You[64]  simply have two numbers favorable to you.
The birthdate number is the  more definite and reliable because your very existence is based on it.
A word at the end.
Married ladies must use their maiden name for  finding the name number.
YOUR LUCKY COLOR  The old saying, "green for grief," is a well-known one, and the writer  would rather wear any color on earth than green, not even a green scarf or  belt.
Moreover, she sees to it that the other members of the family do not  indulge in the unlucky color.
But mind you, green only brings her ill-fortune  when used for wearing apparel.
There is no objection, of course, to a green  front-door nor to wallpaper of the same color.
For such uses, green plays  its part harmlessly enough.
Though green dresses are more distressing to the writer than a red rag  to a bull, she is quite prepared to admit that many people find it a very  lucky color.
This brings us to the point.
There is no color that is universally  unlucky; it is only so in the hands of certain individuals.
With  others, it may be an absolute harbinger of all that is lucky.
Even green may  do this.
Now the question is, "Which is your lucky color?"
If you know it, well  and good.
Make use of it in every possible way.
When wearing dresses  made of it, you will feel more confident of yourself than when arrayed in  something else.
You will get more work done, and it will be better work.
The only thing is that you must be sure that it is your lucky color.
If you  are not quite sure, the tonic effect is absolutely lost.
Not only should you wear your fortunate color, but it is a good plan  to surround yourself with it.
We know a woman who pins her faith to  purple.
Her dresses are mostly purple; the wallpaper in her bedroom is  purple; purple casement curtains adorn the windows; there are purple rugs  in various parts of the house; even the back of the hair-brush on her dressing  table is purple.
And, since she decided that purple was her lucky color and  used it in every reasonable way, she has had several strokes of marvelous  good fortune.
But, of course, you may say in reply to all this that you do not know  your lucky color.
What then?
This is where we can give you a little help.
Most people's lucky color depends on the time of their birth and the following  list sets out the birth colors.
We know full well that everybody does not  derive good fortune from his birth color, but that they find it in some other  hue.
Therefore, the proper course is to make trials with the appropriate  color listed below and, if that does not answer satisfactorily, to choose another  of your own liking and try that.
Only by personal experiment can you  finally decide the point.
These are the birth-colors.
The first given for any period is the one almost  universally accepted.
Those following after the first are, however, favored  by a certain number of people.
[66]  Birth Date  Colors  Dec. 22nd to Jan. 20th  Emerald Green  Sapphire Blue  Black  Jan. 21st to Feb. 19th  Various Blues  Dark Green  Feb. 20th to March 20th  Purple  White  Silver  March 21st to April 19th  Rose Red  April 20th to May 20th  Turquoise Blue  Other shades of Blue  May 21st to June 21st  Light shades of Yellow  Orange  Gold  June 22nd to July 22nd  Mauve  White  Silver  July 23rd to August 21st  Gold  Brown  Yellow  Aug. 22nd to Sept. 22nd  Yellow  Orange  Light Blue  Sept. 23rd to Oct. 23rd  Rose Pink  Yellow  Oct. 24th to Nov. 22nd  Dark Green  Red  Brown  Nov. 23rd to Dec. 21st  Purple  Blue  COLORS, of course, have certain values attached to them:  White is a symbol of purity.
Red is typical of fire, blood and anger.
Orange stands for marriage.
Green recalls spring and suggests youth and hope.
Purple means royalty and everything regal.
Yellow is associated with great success.
Black is a symbol of sadness and mourning.
[67]  WHICH IS YOUR LUCKY STONE?
Ever since time began, it has been a common belief that people derived  luck and good fortune by wearing precious stones.
A stone, however, that  brought luck to one person might be ineffective when worn by someone else.
Thus everybody is required to find out which stone he or she must wear in  order to enjoy the utmost good fortune.
As a rule, the stone which any particular person must choose is decided  by the month in which that individual was born.
But this it not invariably  the case.
Many people have noticed that luck has come to them when they  have been wearing some other stone than that decreed by their birth-month.
And, of course, the opposite has often happened.
History records a well-known  case in point.
The Hope diamond, for instance, wrecked the lives  of several royal personages, even including some that were born in April;  while an opal, possessed by members of the Spanish royal family, brought  disaster to many people, one after the other, although certain of them were  born in October.
Clearly, then, the proper thing is for all of us to choose our lucky stone  according to our own preferences; but failing any definite preference to  select it according to the month of our birth.
STONES OF THE MONTHS  Twelve verses of poetry have been written which set down in rhyme  the stones for all the months of the year.
Here they are:—  JANUARY  By her, who in this month was born,  No gem save Garnets should be worn.
They will ensure her constancy,  True friendship and fidelity.
FEBRUARY  The February born shall find  Sincerity and peace of mind,  Freedom from passion and from care,  If they the Amethyst will wear.
MARCH  Who in this world of ours, their eyes  In March first open, shall be wise,  In days of peril, strong and brave,  And wear a Bloodstone to their grave.
[68]  APRIL  Those who from April date their years,  Should Diamonds wear lest bitter tears  For vain repentance flow: this stone,  Emblem of innocence is known.
MAY  Who first beholds the light of day,  In spring's sweet, flowery month of May,  And wears an Emerald all her life,  Shall be a loved and loving wife.
JUNE  Who comes in summer to this earth  And owes to June her time of birth,  With ring of Agate on her hand  Can health, wealth and lengthy life command.
JULY   DREAMS—WHAT THEY MEAN  A  ABROAD.—(Dreamer going or gone) An early journey.
ACCIDENT.—(being the victim of one) Business deal impending requires  great caution.
ACCIDENT.—(to a friend or relative) A letter from him or her conveying  good news.
ANCHOR.—A voyage across the sea: (in water) a disappointment: (if a  girl dreams) a sailor will fall in love with her.
ANGER.—To dream of being angry with anyone means that that person  is a true friend.
ANIMALS.—As a rule, luck; (domestic animals) speedy return of absent  friends, family reconciliation: (wild animals) secret enemies.
APPLES.—Long life: (to a woman) many years and many children.
ARROW.—A letter has been written which will cause regret.
AXE.—A way will present itself soon to attain a much desired end.
B  BALL.—(Game) Money coming soon.
(Rolling ball) an unexpected gift  of money which will be soon spent.
BALLROOM.—(Dancing with a dear friend) Marriage to him or her.
BANANAS.—A piece of good luck coming.
BAND.—(Musical) A lucky speculation or business deal.
BAREFOOT.—A successful speculation or bargain.
BARREL.—(Full) Money coming quickly.
BATH.—Health and long life: (if dreamer is a young girl) early marriage  to present lover.
BATTLE.—(By girl) Will shortly fall in love; (by a soldier) promotion.
BEAR.—(Chasing the dreamer) Victory of an enemy: (bear running from  dreamer) victory over an enemy.
BEES.—Steady pursuit of object in view will bring success.
BEGGARS.—To dream of beggars is a fortunate sign to lovers and business  people.
BLIND.—To dream of being blind is a very lucky sign; to see a blind  person is a warning of danger.
[73]  BLOOD.—To see blood means great riches, an inheritance.
BOAT.—The arrival of a dear friend.
BOUQUET.—To receive one means much pleasure; to give one, constancy  of a lover or friend.
BRACELET.—Good luck and fortune coming.
BROTHER.—Seeing dead brothers or sisters in a dream is a sign of long  life.
BULLDOG.—A good omen in love or business.
BURIAL.—To dream of being buried means that wealth is coming—"as  much wealth as earth laid over you."
BURNING.—(Houses, etc.)
Riches and prosperity.
BUYING.—Happiness and contentment, a legacy.
C  CAGE.—(Birds in) Early fortunate marriage; (empty) friends or lovers  will go away.
CAKES.—To dream of any kind of cakes is a good omen.
CANARY.—(Singing) Marriage and a charming house.
CARDS.—(Playing at) Speedy marriage.
CATHEDRAL.—Prosperity and fortune.
CEMETERY.—An omen of prosperity.
CHAIR.—An increase in the family.
CHERRIES.—Good news, pleasure and enjoyment.
CHILDREN.—Lucky omen: increase in wealth.
CHIMNEY.—Good luck, the higher the better.
CHRISTENING.—Good fortune approaching.
COCK CROWING.—Great prosperity.
COINS.—(Copper) Good fortune; (silver) worry; (gold) commercial  troubles.
COLD.—Friends will be kind to you.
CORNFIELD.—Health, wealth and pleasant times.
COWS.—Prosperity, the more the better.
D  DAFFODILS.—Pleasure and amusement in abundance.
DAGGER.—A friend will confer a favor.
[74]  DEAD.—To dream of oneself as dead is a good and auspicious sign of  long life and success.
DEATH OF A FRIEND.—Arrival of good news.
DIGGING.—Good luck with perseverance.
DOCKS.—Good news from abroad.
DOG.—As a rule, a favorable sign; (Dog barking) somebody is trying to  do you an ill turn; (Dogs fighting) serious quarrel between two friends of  the dreamer.
DONKEY.—Lucky omen, usually a legacy.
DOVES.—Success, especially to lovers.
To the married, they denote a  pleasure in store.
DROWNING.—(Either the dreamer or another person.)
Success, joy,  prosperity.
DUCKS.—Increased prosperity and happiness.
E  EAGLE.—Success in a new place.
EARS.—A pleasant letter from a friend.
EATING.—(Dreamer eating) ill luck; (seeing others eat) good luck.
ECHO.—Sickness either of dreamer or relations.
EGGS.—Good luck, money, success; (eggs broken) failure and loss.
ELM TREE.—A good turn offered by a male relative.
ELOPEMENT.—Sign of a speedy marriage.
EMERALD.—A sign of good luck and happiness.
EMPTINESS.—Always a bad sign in a dream.
ENGAGEMENT.—(To dream of being engaged to a handsome person)  Great pleasure in store; (to a plain person) worry and trouble.
EYES.—In general a sign of good luck, and the prettier the eyes the better.
To dream of someone with a defect of the eyes signifies minor misfortunes.
F  FACES.—(Smiling) Happy times with friends; (pale and gloomy) trouble  and poverty; (changing faces) a removal; (washing own face) repentance  for sin; (own face in glass) long-cherished secret plan will fail.
FAIRY.—All dreams of fairies are good omens—success and riches.
FALLING.—Indicates some misfortune.
FAN.—Quarrels, a rival in love.
[75]  FARMYARD.—Good fortune coming; comfort and happiness.
FEATHERS.—(White) Success and riches; (black) loss and failure.
FENCE.—(Climbing) A sudden rise in life.
FIELDS.—(Green) Prosperity, a happy marriage, handsome children;  (clover, barley, wheat, etc.)
great prosperity and happiness.
FIGS.—A good dream, joy and pleasure; (if a woman dreams) happy  marriage and many children.
FLEET.—(At sea) Realization of cherished hopes.
FLOATING.—To dream of floating on water is a good and lucky sign.
FLOODS.—Success after triumphing over difficulties.
FLOUR.—Death of a relative bringing a legacy.
FLOWERS.—Prosperity.
FLY.—(Swarm of flies) Rivals and jealous persons are spreading scandal.
FLYING.—(Without wings) Success in love and business; (if ended by  a fall) failure in attaining object; (with wings) bad omen—frustrated ambition.
FOG.—Bad dream—business losses.
FOREIGN.—(Country) Success and prosperity at home.
FOREST.—Trouble and losses through rivals.
FORK.—A warning of imminent danger.
FOUNTAIN.—(Playing) Good luck, happy times and laughter.
FOX.—Trouble through secret enemy; (killing one) good luck.
FRIENDS.—(Absence of) Speedy return; (death of) good news; (illness)  bad news; (in good health) their prosperity.
FROGS.—Beware of flatterers and pessimists.
FROST.—Success through aid of friends.
FRUIT.—Usually a good dream, according to kind of fruit; (dreamer  eating or throwing away fruit) bad sign.
FUNERAL.—A legacy or a rich marriage.
G  GAS.—Minor discomforts and annoyances.
GATE.—An obstacle to success will suddenly disappear.
GEESE.—Happiness, success; (to hear geese cackling) a profitable business  deal will be quickly concluded.
GEMS.—Usually an unfortunate omen.
[76]  GHOSTS.—To dream of ghosts is invariably the presage of misfortune.
GIANT.—Good fortune, success in business or love.
GIFTS.—(Receiving) Good fortune coming.
GYPSIES.—A profitless voyage to many strange countries.
GLASS.—To dream of anything made of glass refers to women; (receiving  glass of water) birth in the family.
GLOVES.—Usually bad luck; (gloves on hands) honor and safety; (losing  gloves) loss in business.
GOAT.—Bad luck, some misfortune, especially unlucky to sailors; (white  goat) a profitable venture; (many goats) an inheritance.
GOD.—A good dream—health and happiness.
GOLD.—Omen of loss and bad luck: (dreamer finding gold) a sign that  he will be robbed; (dreamer paying out gold) a sign that he will increase  the number of his friends.
GOOSEBERRIES.—Time and trouble spent only for the benefit of others.
H  HAIR.—Riches and fine clothes; (hair falling over face) a coming event  will cause displeasure; (having hair cut) losses in business; (becoming bald)  great danger.
HAMMER.—Triumph over difficulties.
HAMMOCK.—Loss of something that is prized.
HAPPINESS.—A presage of doubt and difficulty.
HARE.—(Alive) Friendship: (dead) good luck: (hare running) a lengthy  journey.
HARVEST.—Hopes will not come to fruition.
HAT.—(New) A small success: (blown off or damaged) losses.
HATCHET.—A solution near to existing difficulties.
HAWK.—A happy omen—success in life.
HAY.—Good luck: (dreamer cutting hay) troubles and sorrow.
HAZEL NUT.—(Eating) Troubles and discord.
HEAD.—Good omen—health and money.
HORSESHOE.—(Seeing one) A journey: (finding one) great good lock.
HOSPITAL.—Misery, poverty, wounds.
HOUSE.—Good luck: (dreamer building house) unlucky dream, signifying  loss and sickness.
HUNCHBACK.—A troubled life, with many ups and downs.
[83]  TEACUP FORTUNETELLING  (In the following pages, you may learn something of the meanings attached  to the tea leaves which remain among the dregs in the bottom of your teacup.)
HOW TO TEST YOUR FORTUNES  Leave a slight amount of tea in the cup, not so much as a spoonful.
Place  the saucer on the cup, swill the cup round, males do this so that the liquid  moves round in a clockwise direction, females in an anti-clockwise direction.
The tea is then run out of the cup, the saucer lifted off and the shapes or formations  are ready to be examined.
No.
17.—Birds seen in tea leaves generally denote an end of your troubles.
WHAT THE FORMATIONS MEAN  ANCHOR.—Denotes a voyage full of hope.
It is considered a splendid  omen for a sailor's bride.
ARCH.—You are to undertake a journey in the near future.
It is some[84]times  a happy omen for a woman, signifying that she will marry a tall, handsome  man and be blessed with healthy children.
AXE.—Denotes that your difficulties have now been overcome by your  own splendid endeavors.
You have severed the old bad habits and made a  clean cut at your past blunders.
BALLOON.—Although it denotes a certain rise in the consultant's fortunes,  it carries the warning to beware of a sudden fall.
BANANA.—Signifies to the sick, quick restoration to health.
BASKET.—Implies that a person, by changing his or her mind within the  last twenty-four hours, has reason for congratulation.
BELLS.—If they are connected to a rope, you can look forward to splendid  news.
BIRDS.—Generally, they denote an end of your troubles.
BOAT.—If you cannot discover an occupant of the boat, the symbol means  a voyage.
BOOK.—You should ask advice from some friend for whom you care.
Good advice is precious.
BUGLE.—You will be the recipient of good news shortly.
BUTTERFLY.—A warning to a young lady that her lover, whom she  trusts implicitly, is rather fond of flitting from one "peach" to another.
CAP.—If you see a man's cap, you may have minor worries: if a widow's  cap, married joy will be yours.
CARDS.—If you gamble, you will certainly lose.
CHAIN.—This bids you put forth every ounce of energy in one big endeavor:  then, success will be yours.
CIGAR.—Some of your schemes may "end in smoke."
CLOCK.—This signifies that you are to have an important appointment  with someone very soon.
COMET.—A symbol to warn you against playing with fire.
Beware.
CROSS.—You may have anxiety: but it will soon pass away.
CROWN.—Denotes great honors coming to you.
DART.—You will shortly have a proposal of marriage.
Cupid is about.
DICE.—You will lose money if you gamble.
DOVES.—Your trials will end when you see this welcome "messenger of  peace."
ENVELOPE.—Good tidings are heralded.
EYE.—Look to some other power than your own.
FINGERPRINT.—A reminder to you to ask and you will find out a secret.
[85]  FISH.—This signifies good news from abroad.
If the fish is surrounded by  dots you will emigrate.
FLAG.—A splendid omen—the best of news is coming from abroad, and  you are about to experience good fortune at home.
No.
18.—Cross.
You may have anxiety, but it will soon pass away.
FOOT.—This leaf-picture denotes good news which, however, is still far off.
FORK.—Your life would be all the happier were you not so easily flattered.
GALLOWS.—Contrary to expectation, to see this picture denotes nothing  of evil significance, but is merely a warning to you to be cautious—in fact, a  kindly symbol.
GARDEN.—Prosperous, joyful days.
GATE.—A reminder that patience is a virtue, and that the gate to fortune  will open for you in due course.
GIANT.—This denotes you are attempting something which is far too big  for you.
Better be a successful dwarf than a gigantic failure.
GYPSY.—An invitation to you to wish for something you dearly desire, and  your wish will be granted.
GLOBE.—Denotes you are to take a roundabout journey leading finally to  your home.
GLOVE.—A sign of good luck.
[86]  GOOSE.—You will be the recipient of foolish remarks from stupid persons,  but these need cause you no concern.
GRAPES.—From time immemorial the symbol of perfect love between  couples.
HAIR.—A lock of hair signifies great devotion on the part of your lover.
HALTER.—A warning that you are too easily led, and that you must  cultivate the art of self-reliance.
HAM.—This is a sign you will undergo a brief illness, but will make a  quick recovery.
HAMMER.—Triumph over adversity.
After enduring many knocks you  will hit the nail of success.
HAMMOCK.—Points to the knowledge that your sailor-lover is true and  dreams of you every night.
HAMPER.—Suggests useful and serviceable, but inexpensive, presents are  coming.
HANDCUFFS.—This is a cogent warning to you to get rid of an evil  habit before it is too late.
Little sins lead to great crimes, and no one desires  to receive the attentions of the law.
HARP.—Count yourself very fortunate.
HAT.—This picture, if it is a lady's hat, signifies luck, but if a man's, it  means that you may experience a slight misfortune.
HATCHET.—This leaf-picture is a warning to take great care or you may  experience danger.
INITIAL.—In this important leaf-picture the initials should be carefully  studied.
If the initial is formed near the rim, the significance is one of good  fortune.
Initials most commonly found are those without curves.
Such  straight initials are—A, I, L, N, T, V, W.  INTERROGATION MARK.—Signifies doubt.
Be careful.
KEY.—An important picture suggesting that you look deeper and more  carefully in the cup for an initial, which, when you have found it, will unlock  something that has been up till now a mystery.
A closed book will be opened  for you and past enigmas unravelled.
LABEL.—This ticket-like picture, which must not be mistaken for an  envelope, is the sign that you possess a dear friend who will one day be "tied"  to you for life.
LACE.—Denotes you will err on a very minor and fragile matter and make  a false move on very flimsy grounds.
LADDER.—If on the side of the cup a rise in your fortunes is indicated.
LADY.—Points to the fact that you will shortly make a friend of one who  will prove of great service.
[87]  No.
19.—A Mark of Interrogation signifies doubt: be careful.
LINES.—These indicate journeys.
LOCK.—This denotes that you can safely confide in your nearest friend.
He or she will lock your secrets in his or her bosom.
LOCKET.—A picture denoting steadfast loyalty on the part of a friend  whom you have not seen for long months.
LOOKING GLASS.—You are warned by this picture that the world sees  you for what you really are.
Your character is mirrored for your friends to  gaze upon.
MAN.—Denotes a visitor who will bring a gift if his arm is outstretched.
If the symbol is clear he is a dark man; if vague he is very fair.
MAP.—A symbol bidding you travel, for you will be sure of success wherever  you go.
MAZE.—A regular "maze of difficulty" confronts you, but with care you  will find a way out of the labyrinth.
MILESTONES.—You are about to win success after traveling a long and  difficult road.
MOON.—If shown as a crescent prosperity and fortune are indicated.
MOTORCAR.—Denotes that you will achieve a rapid success.
MOUNTAINS.—This majestic picture signifies an arduous, lengthy, and  uphill fight against bad fortune.
Set your heart to it, and toil on to the goal.
[88]  MOUSE.—A reminder that the little irritation you are nursing is really a  very trivial affair.
NAVVY.—A token that you are very bookish, and fond of digging into  abstruse treatises.
You are reminded that "all work and no play makes  Jack a dull boy."
NECKLACE.—Grace and beauty of body and mind are here indicated.
NEEDLE.—A single needle signifies you are able to withstand all the  sharp pricks of circumstances.
Several needles together mean quarrels.
PENDULUM.—Great indecision and lack of character are here indicated.
PENNON.—To decipher this small-pointed flag is a sign that someone  on board a ship is thinking much of you.
PENNIES.—They denote great carefulness in small details, which leads  to ultimate prosperity.
RING.—A very important symbol.
Generally speaking, it always denotes  marriage, especially if seen at the bottom of the cup, in which case search  for an initial which will reveal to a man or woman his or her future life-partner.
RIVERS.—These denote much peace of mind.
ROADS.—If the roads appear in the clear they predict a speedy change  of circumstances, usually for the better.
ROBIN.—This bird always denotes hope.
If you see it you can cheer up,  as the trouble you now experience is about to pass away.
ROCK.—A massive rock denotes great burdens.
If there are a number of  small rocks easy fortune and much happiness are indicated.
ROCKET.—Another warning against high ambition.
ROD.—If it is long and slender you will be very fortunate.
ROOF.—If what appears to be the roof only of a house is seen the signification  is domestic bliss.
ROOK.—Great happiness is indicated.
SAILOR.—Foretells that very shortly you will receive a letter from over  the sea.
SCALES.—This picture is the token that the friend you have weighed in  the balance and found wanting is really true and just.
SCEPTRE.—A sign of honor from royalty.
SERPENT.—If on the side of the cup and appearing to be rising to near  the brim you may take comfort in the fact that you will shortly receive some  information which will be of use.
SHEAVES.—A good omen of a bounteous harvest of prosperity.
SHIELD.—A reminder that you have just escaped from a great calamity.
[89]  SHIP.—A large ship with funnels and masts is a token of a long journey,  usually on business.
THIMBLE.—This homely picture denotes that industry and devotion to  duty bring their own reward.
THIN PERSON.—The figure of a very slender person is usually the sign  of very prosperous days ahead.
THISTLE.—This striking leaf-picture is a sign that you will only achieve  success by plain living and high thinking.
THORN.—This is always an excellent omen.
Good luck and many  friends are indicated.
TONGS.—Suggests you are of a fiery nature, and will quarrel with your  best friend.
TONGUE.—Someone you are fond of who is far away is speaking about  you.
TOOL.—Any instrument of manual operation denotes that hard knocks  may be coming.
TRIANGLE.—This is a token of all-round prosperity in love.
TRIDENT.—This is a token of success and honors in the Navy.
WAGON.—A reminder that you are soon to undertake a long journey.
WAITER.—This picture denotes that riches and married happiness will  come to you.
WALKING STICK.—A warning not to lean too much on your own  efforts.
WATERFALL.—Indicates the removal of many obstructions in your path  to happiness.
WEATHERCOCK.—This picture points to a friend who is unreliable.
WEB.—Signifies you will one day be caught in the toils as the result of  ignoring friendly warnings.
WELL.—This denotes you are not dipping deep enough into knowledge.
[90]  WHEN WILL YOU MARRY?
It has long been held that an unmarried person can tell  how many years it will be before he or she is married, in the  following manner.
Balance a small spoon on the edge of a teacup.
The spoon  should be perfectly dry.
Then, with the assistance of a second  spoon, tilt drops of tea into the balancing spoon and count  them, one by one.
The number of drops it takes to upset  the spoon reveals the number of years that will elapse before  the wedding takes place.
[91]  LUCKY AND UNLUCKY DAYS  Most of us have discovered that certain days of the week, or even the year,  are more favorable to us than others.
But there are some people who have  not made this discovery.
To them, the indications given in this chapter will  be of considerable interest.
Friday—an Unlucky Day.—Fortunately, six of the seven days of the week  are charitably disposed towards the majority of us.
Here and there, a person  may be found who affirms that Monday, Thursday or some other day never  did him or her a kindness; but such a remark is not general.
Friday, however,  can be put on the black list, as it is a notoriously unlucky day.
Most  men and women cherish a superstitious fear of it, and this opinion has  existed since the first Good Friday.
Many will never embark upon any  enterprise of importance; there are fewer marriages on this day than any  other, and sailors are averse to sailing on Friday.
Many are the tales they  tell of vessels which put to sea on a Friday, and were never heard of again.
If all the bank or financial crashes of the last century were counted up, it  would be found that Friday supplied the greatest number.
A lengthy list  could be added to prove that Friday is a day of bad luck.
One good thing can be said for it, however—it favors its own: for people  born on a Friday are not affected by its evil disposition.
Unlucky Dates.—In an old calendar, astrologers indicated the following  dates as unlucky.
If any of them fell on a Friday, they were doubly unlucky:  January 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 17, 29—very unlucky.
February 26, 27, 28—unlucky; 8, 10, 17—very unlucky.
March 16, 17, 20—very unlucky.
April 7, 8, 10, 20—unlucky; 16 and 21—very unlucky.
June 10 and 22—unlucky; 4 and 8—very unlucky.
July 15 and 21—very unlucky.
August 1, 29 and 30—unlucky; 19 and 20—very unlucky.
September 2, 4, 21, 23—unlucky; 6 and 7—very unlucky.
October 4, 16, 24—unlucky; 6, very unlucky.
November 5, 6, 29, 30—unlucky; 15 and 20—very unlucky.
December 15, 22—unlucky; 6, 7, and 9—very unlucky.
These were regarded as perilous days to fall ill upon, to have an accident,  to be married, to start on a journey, or commence any work.
What is most striking about this list is that the "thirteenth" does not appear  on it at all, although most people will tell you that the thirteenth is the date  they avoid more than all others.
Lucky and Unlucky Dates depending on Birth-dates.—Much the most  accurate way of determining which dates are lucky and unlucky is by using  the portents displayed by the Signs of the Zodiac.
To do this, it is necessary  to know when the individual affected was born.
The following is a list  worked out on these lines:  [92]  Born—Dec.
22nd to Jan. 20th.
Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 2, 7, 8, 18, 26 and 31  Jan. 11, 14, 15 and 28  Feb. 3, 7, 9, 12, 13 and 27  Feb. 11, 18, 24 and 25  Mar.
1, 5, 7, 10, 24 and 28  Mar.
8, 16, 17 and 23  April 2, 3, 7, 16, 25 and 26  April 12, 13, 19 and 20  May 5, 6, 14, 15, 27 and 31  May 10, 16, 29 and 30  June 1, 14, 15, 18, 24 and 29  June 5, 13, 22 and 26  July 9, 12, 13, 17, 20 and 27  July 2, 11, 16 and 24  Aug. 3, 8, 9, 16, 21 and 31  Aug. 6, 18, 19 and 29  Sept. 5, 9, 14, 18, 19 and 27  Sept. 1, 3, 17 and 23  Oct. 10, 11, 16, 17, 25 and 30  Oct. 8, 12, 21 and 27  Nov. 6, 7, 8, 12, 13 and 26  Nov. 10, 17, 18 and 25  Dec. 3, 8, 9, 19, 24 and 31  Dec. 2, 6, 11 and 30  Born—Jan.
21st to Feb. 19th  Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 1, 5, 9, 10, 15 and 20  Jan. 2, 19, 24 and 31  Feb. 2, 5, 6, 11, 16 and 29  Feb. 13, 20, 26 and 27  Mar.
3, 6, 7, 10, 17 and 30  Mar.
11, 19, 24 and 25  April 4, 5, 10, 20, 23 and 29  April 7, 14, 15 and 24  May 7, 8, 16, 17, 25 and 31  May 4, 12, 18 and 19  June 5, 12, 17, 18, 25 and 26  June 1, 2, 28 and 29  July 10, 11, 19, 22, 23 and 28  July 5, 12, 13 and 26  Aug. 10, 14, 19, 20, 24 and 25  Aug. 2, 22, 23 and 27  Sept. 10, 11, 12, 22, 29 and 30  Sept. 4, 5, 19 and 25  Oct. 1, 3, 9, 13, 27 and 28  Oct. 2, 8, 11 and 26  Nov. 4, 5, 10, 15, 23 and 28  Nov. 11, 18, 26 and 27  Dec. 7, 8, 13, 21, 25 and 27  Dec. 9, 16, 17 and 24  [93]  Born—Feb.
20th to March 20th  Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 5, 7, 9, 21, 22 and 27  Jan. 8, 16, 23 and 28  Feb. 4, 7, 9, 20, 21 and 26  Feb. 5, 10, 22 and 25  Mar.
5, 6, 12, 13, 17 and 29  Mar.
11, 15, 18 and 26  April 6, 8, 11, 15, 22 and 30  April 9, 12, 20 and 23  May 8, 14, 15, 19, 24 and 29  May 4, 17, 20 and 28  June 10, 11, 19, 21, 23 and 27  June 6, 18, 24 and 28  July 11, 15, 20, 22, 24 and 31  July 8, 21, 25 and 26  Aug. 13, 16, 17, 20, 28 and 30  Aug. 4, 5, 19 and 25  Sept. 15, 17, 19, 24, 27 and 28  Sept. 3, 8, 18 and 26  Oct. 17, 19, 20, 21, 29 and 30  Oct. 4, 6, 8 and 28  Nov. 8, 9, 10, 14, 19 and 21  Nov. 1, 12, 18 and 24  Dec. 3, 7, 9, 13, 22 and 28  Dec. 11, 16, 20 and 29  Born—March 21st to April 19th  Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 1, 5, 9, 23, 27 and 28  Jan. 6, 16, 26 and 29  Feb. 2, 5, 10, 19, 25 and 29  Feb. 8, 15, 16 and 23  Mar.
4, 9, 10, 19, 20 and 31  Mar.
3, 6, 15 and 21  April 1, 5, 14, 15, 19 and 28  April 2, 3, 17 and 30  May 3, 12, 13, 18, 21 and 31  May 8, 14, 27 and 28  June 3, 7, 17, 18, 25 and 27  June 4, 5, 23 and 26  July 1, 6, 14, 23, 28 and 29  July 2, 4, 30 and 31  Aug. 2, 10, 11, 24, 25 and 26  Aug. 6, 12, 22 and 23  Sept. 7, 10, 11, 12, 21 and 25  Sept. 2, 23, 24 and 26  Oct. 3, 9, 13, 17, 19 and 31  Oct. 6, 14, 26 and 27  Nov. 1, 5, 8, 14, 20 and 30  Nov. 6, 18, 22 and 29  Dec. 1, 13, 25, 26, 27 and 31  Dec. 6, 12, 22 and 28  [94]  Born—Feb.
20th to March 20th  Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 5, 7, 9, 21, 22 and 27  Jan. 8, 16, 23 and 28  Feb. 4, 7, 9, 20, 21 and 26  Feb. 5, 10, 22 and 25  Mar.
5, 6, 12, 13, 17 and 29  Mar.
11, 15, 18 and 26  April 6, 8, 11, 15, 22 and 30  April 9, 12, 20 and 23  May 8, 14, 15, 19, 24 and 29  May 4, 17, 20 and 28  June 10, 11, 19, 21, 23 and 27  June 6, 18, 24 and 28  July 11, 15, 20, 22, 24 and 31  July 8, 21, 25 and 26  Aug. 13, 16, 17, 20, 28 and 30  Aug. 4, 5, 19 and 25  Sept. 15, 17, 19, 24, 27 and 28  Sept. 3, 8, 18 and 26  Oct. 17, 19, 20, 21, 29 and 30  Oct. 4, 6, 8 and 28  Nov. 8, 9, 10, 14, 19 and 21  Nov. 1, 12, 18 and 24  Dec. 3, 7, 9, 13, 22 and 28  Dec. 11, 16, 20 and 29  Born—March 21st to April 19th  Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 1, 5, 9, 23, 27 and 28  Jan. 6, 16, 26 and 29  Feb. 2, 5, 10, 19, 25 and 29  Feb. 8, 15, 16 and 23  Mar.
4, 9, 10, 19, 20 and 31  Mar.
3, 6, 15 and 21  April 1, 5, 14, 15, 19 and 28  April 2, 3, 17 and 30  May 3, 12, 13, 18, 21 and 31  May 8, 14, 27 and 28  June 3, 7, 17, 18, 25 and 27  June 4, 5, 23 and 26  July 1, 6, 14, 23, 28 and 29  July 2, 4, 30 and 31  Aug. 2, 10, 11, 24, 25 and 26  Aug. 6, 12, 22 and 23  Sept. 7, 10, 11, 12, 21 and 25  Sept. 2, 23, 24 and 26  Oct. 3, 9, 13, 17, 19 and 31  Oct. 6, 14, 26 and 27  Nov. 1, 5, 8, 14, 20 and 30  Nov. 6, 18, 22 and 29  Dec. 1, 13, 25, 26, 27 and 31  Dec. 6, 12, 22 and 28  [95]  Born—June 22nd to July 22nd  Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 3, 9, 11, 13, 16 and 29  Jan. 6, 8, 27 and 28  Feb. 7, 8, 13, 14, 22 and 27  Feb. 3, 11, 24 and 25  Mar.
5, 7, 12, 20, 21 and 25  Mar.
1, 4, 22 and 26  April 2, 7, 8, 12, 13 and 29  April 5, 19, 20 and 25  May 1, 5, 10, 11, 18 and 19  May 3, 17, 23 and 30  June 2, 7, 10, 15, 24 and 28  June 13, 19, 20 and 22  July 3, 4, 7, 20, 22 and 25  July 10, 13, 23 and 28  Aug. 5, 8, 9, 21, 22 and 30  Aug. 7, 12, 19 and 20  Sept. 5, 12, 13, 19, 27 and 28  Sept. 3, 10, 16 and 17  Oct. 1, 3, 11, 15, 16 and 30  Oct. 7, 14, 27 and 28  Nov. 6, 7, 16, 17, 27 and 30  Nov. 8, 9, 18 and 19  Dec. 4, 9, 13, 24, 30 and 31  Dec. 6, 7, 18 and 21  Born—July 23rd to August 21st  Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 1, 4, 13, 15, 18 and 27  Jan. 3, 8, 12 and 30  Feb. 1, 15, 20, 24, 25 and 29  Feb. 8, 12, 21 and 28  Mar.
9, 18, 19, 20, 21 and 28  Mar.
12, 22, 24 and 25  April 1, 5, 10, 11, 18 and 23  April 7, 8, 16 and 22  May 2, 3, 6, 12, 13 and 31  May 5, 18, 19 and 24  June 3, 4, 13, 17, 26 and 30  June 2, 14, 21 and 22  July 2, 6, 9, 14, 23 and 29  July 12, 13, 24 and 25  Aug. 3, 7, 10, 23, 25 and 30  Aug. 9, 14, 21 and 22  Sept. 3, 15, 16, 22, 26 and 29  Sept. 5, 17, 18 and 19  Oct. 1, 13, 17, 27, 28 and 31  Oct. 9, 14, 15 and 29  Nov. 9, 10, 15, 20, 23 and 27  Nov. 5, 12, 13 and 17  Dec. 7, 11, 16, 18, 22 and 26  Dec. 3, 9, 23 and 28  [96]  Born—August 22nd to September 22nd  Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 1, 3, 9, 15, 20 and 31  Jan. 4, 11, 18 and 19  Feb. 3, 12, 13, 18, 23 and 27  Feb. 8, 15, 16 and 29  Mar.
1, 11, 20, 21, 28 and 29  Mar.
6, 7, 26 and 27  April 7, 8, 15, 17, 24 and 25  April 2, 3, 9 and 29  May 4, 7, 10, 18, 22 and 31  May 8, 21, 27 and 28  June 1, 6, 7, 11, 15 and 29  June 3, 9, 16 and 24  July 4, 9, 10, 17, 25 and 30  July 2, 14, 20 and 22  Aug. 3, 5, 12, 22, 28 and 29  Aug. 10, 17, 18 and 23  Sept. 4, 9, 10, 22, 23 and 28  Sept. 7, 8, 17 and 21  Oct. 1, 2, 11, 12, 25 and 30  Oct. 4, 8, 14 and 20  Nov. 17, 18, 22, 23, 25 and 30  Nov. 5, 7, 12 and 21  Dec. 9, 10, 18, 23, 26 and 28  Dec. 4, 5, 6 and 14  Born—September 23rd to October 23rd  Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 1, 5, 9, 19, 20 and 27  Jan. 6, 7, 21 and 23  Feb. 2, 6, 15, 20, 24 and 29  Feb. 11, 17, 19 and 22  Mar.
4, 14, 18, 23, 27 and 31  Mar.
2, 9, 10 and 28  April 1, 15, 19, 23, 24 and 28  April 4, 5, 14 and 26  May 7, 8, 12, 17, 21 and 24  May 3, 9, 23 and 29  June 8, 12, 13, 16, 22 and 30  June 7, 19, 20 and 27  July 4, 14, 19, 20, 23 and 28  July 10, 17, 27 and 29  Aug. 1, 7, 10, 11, 15 and 30  Aug. 12, 13, 22 and 27  Sept. 3, 6, 11, 20, 22 and 29  Sept. 8, 16, 17 and 24  Oct. 4, 5, 17, 22, 24 and 27  Oct. 8, 12, 20 and 21  Nov. 1, 4, 6, 14, 19 and 26  Nov. 9, 17, 28 and 29  Dec. 3, 12, 13, 21, 25 and 29  Dec. 4, 7, 15 and 19  [97]  Born—October 24th to November 22nd  Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 2, 3, 7, 8, 22 and 30  Jan. 10, 16, 18 and 24  Feb. 3, 9, 17, 18, 24 and 27  Feb. 1, 12, 14 and 20  Mar.
1, 6, 15, 20, 25 and 29  Mar.
3, 11, 19 and 30  April 2, 3, 12, 17, 21 and 29  April 7, 8, 26 and 28  May 5, 10, 11, 15, 19 and 27  May 4, 6, 24 and 26  June 6, 11, 15, 19, 23 and 25  June 2, 8, 26 and 28  July 4, 7, 9, 17, 21 and 30  July 3, 8, 19 and 31  Aug. 5, 9, 13, 17, 18 and 27  Aug. 2, 12, 22 and 28  Sept. 9, 10, 12, 23, 27 and 28  Sept. 11, 14, 18 and 29  Oct. 2, 3, 11, 20, 25 and 29  Oct. 8, 9, 22 and 24  Nov. 2, 6, 16, 17, 23 and 30  Nov. 5, 12, 18 and 29  Dec. 2, 5, 18, 19, 24 and 27  Dec. 3, 6, 16 and 18  Born—November 23rd to December 21st  Lucky Dates:  Unlucky Dates:  Jan. 1, 9, 14, 15, 23 and 24  Jan. 6, 12, 18 and 22  Feb. 3, 5, 7, 19, 21 and 28  Feb. 8, 15, 16 and 23  Mar.
5, 8, 10, 19, 23 and 31  Mar.
6, 7, 15 and 21  April 4, 14, 15, 19, 20 and 28  April 3, 18, 22 and 26  May 1, 12, 16, 20, 26 and 31  May 7, 14, 15 and 27  June 7, 8, 13, 17, 21 and 25  June 3, 11, 23 and 24  July 6, 11, 15, 21, 22 and 25  July 7, 20, 23 and 29  Aug. 3, 6, 7, 14, 15 and 29  Aug. 4, 12, 18 and 28  Sept. 1, 10, 12, 15, 26 and 29  Sept. 13, 17, 20 and 22  Oct. 4, 5, 22, 23, 27 and 31  Oct. 11, 12, 18 and 26  Nov. 9, 19, 20, 23, 24 and 28  Nov. 6, 14, 15 and 22  Dec. 3, 7, 8, 17, 22 and 25  Dec. 6, 11, 18 and 28                                               SECTION I THE ALPHABET OF THE HEAVENS                                              CHAPTER I                        THE PLANETS, THEIR NATURES AND TYPES   The luminaries and planets are known to astronomers under the following names and symbols:— The Sun ☉, Moon ☽, Neptune ♆, Uranus ♅, Saturn ♄, Jupiter ♃, Mars ♂, Venus ♀, and Mercury ☿.
Neptune revolves around the Sun in its distant orbit once in about 165 years.
Uranus completes its orbital revolution in 84 years, Jupiter in 12 years, Mars in about 15 months, Venus in 11 months, and Mercury in 18 weeks.
If you imagine these bodies to be revolving in a plane around the Sun and yourself to be standing within the Sun, the motions of these bodies will appear almost uniform and always in one direction.
Were the orbits of the planets circular and the Sun holding the centre of the circle, their motions would be constant, that is to say, always in the same direction and at the same rate.
But the orbits are elliptical, and the Sun holds a position in one of the foci of each ellipse.
Consequently the planets are at times further from the Sun than at others, and        [Pg 18]  they are then said to be in their aphelion, the opposite point of the orbit where they are nearest to the Sun being called the perihelion.
When at aphelion the planets move slower, and when at perihelion they move quicker than at the mean distance.
Astronomers employ an imaginary circular orbit for the planets, in which they move at an uniform rate of velocity, which is called the mean motion.
This is subject to an equation depending on the position of the planet in its orbit, and it determines the diﬀerence between the imaginary planet and the true planet.
The equation itself depends on the eccentricity of the orbit, that is to say, its relation to a circle drawn around the same focal centre.
The Earth follows the same laws as all other bodies of the same system.
But if we imagine the Earth to be stationary in space and the centre around which the planets revolve, their motions present several irregularities.
Mercury and Venus will then appear to revolve around the Sun while the Sun revolves around the Earth, sometimes being between the Earth and the Sun, which is called an Inferior conjunction, sometimes on the further side of the Sun away from the Earth, as at their Superior conjunction; and again, at other times to the right or left of the Sun, in East or West elongation.
The other planets, having orbits greater than that of the Earth, will appear to revolve around it at constantly varying distances and velocities.
At certain points in their orbits they will appear to remain stationary in the same part of the Zodiac.
The annexed illustration will assist the lay reader perhaps.
The body M is Mercury when at Inferior conjunction with the Sun,      [Pg 19]  as seen from the Earth.
The letter V is the planet Venus at Superior conjunction with the Sun.
The points W and E are the points of greatest elongation West and East, and the letter S shows the points in the orbit at which those bodies appear to be stationary when viewed from the Earth, at G. As seen from the Earth, Venus would appear to be direct and Mercury retrograde.
Astrologically we regard the Earth as the passive subject of planetary inﬂuence, and we have therefore to regard it as the centre of the eld of activity.
If we were making a horoscope for an inhabitant of the planet Mars, we should make Mars the centre of the system.
The planets’ positions are therefore taken as from the centre of the Earth (Geocentric), and not as from the centre of the Sun (Heliocentric).
An astrological Ephemeris of the         [Pg 20]  planets’ motions is employed for this purpose (see Sect.
II., chap, i.
), and there are 480,000 of these sold to astrologers or students of astrology every year, from which fact it is possible to draw one’s own conclusions as to the state of Astrology in the West.
These gures, of course, do not include the millions of almanac readers nor the Oriental students, who prepare their own ephemerides.
Knowing the simple natures of the several planets we are able to arrive at an estimate of their eﬀects when acting in combination.
Neptune acts upon the mind of man to produce a highly-strung nervous temperament, often allied to either insanity or genius; neurosis, aphasia, &c. It produces complications in business and an involved state of aﬀairs generally.
Disposes to fraud, double-dealing, and irresponsible actions.
In the body it produces waste of tissue and a consumptive habit.
Uranus gives an eccentric mind, waywardness, originality, inventiveness.
Acting on the aﬀairs of business, it produces sudden and unexpected developments, irregularities, rapid rise and fall, instability, unexpected turns of good and bad fortune.
In the body it has relation to the nervous system, and its diseases are those of paralysis, lesion, and nervous derangement.
Saturn produces a thoughtful, sober, ponderable mind; steadfastness, patience, and endurance; disposition to routine and habit, method.
In nancial aﬀairs it gives steady results commensurate with labour, success that is slow but sure, durance, hardships, privations.
In the body it is related to the osseous system, and its eﬀects are          [Pg 21]  brought about by obstructions, chills, and inhibition of function.
Jupiter gives joviality, optimism, bountifulness, generosity, a rich and fruitful mind.
It renders the subject fortunate in his aﬀairs, giving success and frequently opulence.
With this planet strong in the horoscope a person never “goes under. In the body it has relation to the arterial process, and its diseases are those which arise from surfeit, congestion, and plethora.
Mars confers a sense of freedom, much ambition and executive ability, frankness, truthfulness, and scorn of consequence.
It renders the mind forceful and militant, stimulates to new projects and enterprises, and in the body of man has relation to the muscular system.
Its diseases are those which arise from inﬂammatory action in the tissues.
Venus confers poesy, good taste, ne feeling, artistic powers, gentleness, docility, dalliance, and love of pleasure.
It renders the aﬀairs pleasant and prosperous, giving prot from both artistic and rustic pursuits.
Next to Jupiter it is the most benec of the planets in its action on mankind.
In the body it has relation to the venous system, and its diseases are those which arise from impurities of the blood, scorbutic and zymotic diseases, eczema, smallpox, measles, &c. Mercury renders its subjects active, versatile, apt and business-like, disposed to much commerce, whether of the mind or the market, and eager in the pursuit of knowledge; alert, and well-informed.
Its inﬂuence on aﬀairs of life is variable, for it always translates the nature of that planet to which at birth it is in nearest aspect (Sect.
I., chap.
iv.).
In the body it is related to the sensorium, the centres of sensation, and reﬂexly controls the nerves of        [Pg 22]  action.
The Moon gives gracefulness of manner and suavity of speech, softness and adaptability of nature, variableness, love of change, romance, and adventure; disposed to exploration and voyaging.
In the body it corresponds to the glandular system, and its diseases are those incidental to the lymphatic glands and vascular tissue.
The Sun renders its subjects magnanimous, noble, proud, despising all mean and sordid actions; loyal, truthful, and fearless.
It produces honours and the favour of dignitaries, and renders the subject fortunate in the control of his affairs.
In the body it controls the vital principle.
The types of persons produced by the various planets are very distinct, the chief features of each being as follows:— Neptune—Thin, nervous-looking people, blue eyes, soft, silky hair, thin and usually long faces, frequently wearing a strained or startled look.
Uranus—Tall, wiry, and energetic gures, alert, muscular, spasmodic, and with some touch of eccentricity.
Saturn—Dark and lean people, small, deep-set eyes, heavy brows, long noses, thin lips, and sallow complexions.
Jupiter—Full bodied, robust men, large and expressive blue or brown eyes, arched brows, high foreheads, oval faces, and rich brown hair.
Mars—Strong, muscular, and athletic bodies, ruddy complexion, grey eyes, prominent brows, sloping forehead, and usually some mark or scar in the face.
Sun—Fresh, clear complexion, blue or grey eyes, round head, broad shoulders, strong jaws, upright and dignied carriage.
Venus—Elegant, well-groomed, and often dainty-looking people, with blue or soft brown                    [Pg 23]  eyes, brown hair, ne teeth and nger-nails, small feet and short ﬂeshy hands.
Mercury—Thin, tall, and active bodies, alert appearance, small and usually dark eyes; wide, thin lips, long arms and slender hands.
Frequently great talkers and quick walkers.
Moon—Rather short and ﬂeshy people, with pale face, soft limpid eyes, sad brown or medium coloured hair, ne teeth, broad chest, and a tendency to a squat fulness of body.
The forehead is usually high and broad.
Look at the people as they pass you in the street.
Bring them if possible under one or other of these types.
Consider what has been said of the planets’ natures, and you have a ready key to something of their character and destiny.
[Pg 24]                                              CHAPTER II                                     THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC   The Zodiac is an imaginary belt of the Heavens through which the Sun and planets move in their apparent revolutions round the Earth.
It extends from 23° 27′ above the plane of the Equator to the same distance below it, being bounded by the Tropic of Cancer on the North and by that of Capricorn on the South.
The Ecliptic is a circle transecting this belt at an angle of 23° 27′ to the plane of the Equator.
The points where it cuts the Equator are called the Equinoxes.
The Ecliptic is divided into twelve equal sections, counting from the Vernal Equinox.
These are called the Signs of the Zodiac.
Each sign occupies 30 degrees of the circle.
Their names and symbols are as follows:—                             1.
Aries, the Ram ♈          7.
Libra, the Balance ♎                             2.
Taurus, the Bull ♉        8.
Scorpio, the Scorpion                              3.
Gemini, the Twins                                                          9.
Sagittarius, the Hunter                              ♊                             4.
Cancer, the Crab ♋        10.
Capricornus, the Goat ♑                                                          11.
Aquarius, the Waterman                             5.
Leo, the Lion ♌                                                          ♒                             6.
Virgo, the Virgin        12.
Pisces, the Fishes ♓   For Astrological purposes they are grouped according to the element and the constitution which they represent,          [Pg 25]  thus:—                                                    ELEMENTS.
Fire—Aries, Leo, Sagittarius.
Earth—Taurus, Virgo, Capricornus.
Air—Gemini, Libra, Aquarius.
Water—Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces.
C ONSTITUTIONS.
Movable—Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricornus.
Fixed—Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius.
Flexed—Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces.
Every alternate sign, beginning with Aries, is male and the rest are female.
Aries, male; Taurus, female; Gemini, male; Cancer, female, &c. The signs Aries, Leo, Capricornus are called barren, while Taurus, Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces are fruitful.
Aries governs the East, Cancer the North, Libra the West, and Capricornus the South.
The Double-bodied signs are Gemini, Sagittarius, and Pisces.
It is important that all these classications should be learned, as they form an essential part of the doctrine of Astrology, and are frequently employed in the reading of a Horoscope.
The types of people under the various signs should also be known as intimately as possible.
A person is said to be “under a sign—that is to say, under its inﬂuence, when that sign is rising in the East at the moment of birth.
[Pg 26]  You will recognise these types among your friends and associates:— Aries produces a person of lean body, long neck, high cheek-bones, grey eyes, sandy or sad brown hair, which is either wiry and straight or crisp and curling.
The front teeth are usually large and prominent.
Taurus gives a full, thick-set body, strong neck and shoulders, full brown eyes, dark curling hair, full lips, rather wide mouth, and round, bullet-shaped head.
The hands and feet are short and fleshy.
Gemini produces a tall, active, and upright body, long arms and legs, wide, thin lips, straight and oftenretroussé nose, lank, straight black hair, rather wide shoulders, and thin body.
Cancer denotes a rather short, squat gure, full lymphatic body, pale complexion, round face, broad forehead, sad brown hair, large aqueous eyes, full chest, short, fleshy hands and feet.
Leo renders its subjects tall, broad shouldered, ne and manly gures, small round head, fair complexion, blue or grey eyes, flaxen or fair brown hair, upright and fearless carriage.
Virgo renders the body thin and active, the head well developed, the forehead broad, hair light brown and waving off the forehead, eyes blue, shoulders broad, the type being of an intellectual or artistic form.
Libra gives an elegant body, well-developed limbs, ne oval face, straight nose, ne blue eyes (sometimes deep brown), ﬂaxen or chestnut hair, beautiful complexion.
The highest types of beauty are to be found under this sign.
Scorpio gives a short, thick-set, and powerful gure, broad, deep chest, dusky or sallow complexion, dark               [Pg 27]  curling or crisp hair, strong and rather bowed legs.
This is a very virile and robust type.
Sagittarius gives a tall person, well-made gure, elegant limbs, oval and rather long face, brown or chestnut hair growing oﬀ the forehead, ne expressive eyes, rather prominent and of a dark brown or blue colour, long nose, slightly aquiline.
Capricornus produces a slight and rather ill-formed person, long and scraggy neck, prominent features, narrow chin, weak and frequently decrepit limbs, weak chest and sloping shoulders.
Frequently the gure is wiry and suggestive of considerable powers of endurance.
The brows are prominent, the nose long, and the face thin and hard-set.
Aquarius contributes the nest types of beauty next to Libra.
The Saxon type is dominant.
A tall gure, well formed and rounded, fair complexion and blue eyes, ﬂaxen hair, straight features, well-developed chin, and ne, clear forehead.
Pisces produces one of rather short stature, short limbs, lymphatic body, pale complexion, limpid blue eyes, black or brown eyes, short nose, full lips, round face, small hands and feet.
The short signs are Taurus, Cancer, Capricornus, and Pisces.
The tall signs are Gemini, Leo, Sagittarius, and Aquarius.
The others are of medium height.
The planets rising in each sign will always alter the type by impressing their own characteristics on the subject.
Each sign has a Ruler, and the position of the ruler of the rising sign has much to do with the physical conformation, as if Taurus be rising and Venus, its ruler, be in Leo, the person will be taller and fairer than      [Pg 28]  indicated by Taurus alone.
Pure types are very uncommon.
The rulership of the planets in the signs is as follows:—      Saturn governs Aquarius and Capricornus.
Jupiter governs Pisces and Sagittarius.
Mars governs Aries and Scorpio.
Venus governs Taurus and Libra.
Mercury governs Gemini and Virgo.
The Moon governs Cancer, and Leo is governed by the Sun.
When a planet is found in a sign over which it is said to govern it acts more strongly than usual, and when in the opposite signs to those it governs it is said to be in its “fall, when it is weaker than usual.
Planets governing opposite signs to one another are said to be “enemies. Such do not produce harmonious and favourable results when acting in conjunction.
[Pg 29]                                            CHAPTER III                                       THE CELESTIAL HOUSES   The imaginary circle which passes immediately over your head as you face the South is called the Prime Vertical.
This is divided for astrological purposes into twelve equal divisions called Houses, six of which are above the horizon and six below it.
They are counted from the East Horizon under the Earth to the West, and thence through the zenith to the East again.
The gure in Section IV., chapter v., will make the idea easy of comprehension.
Each such division or House carries its own signication, and it has been ascertained beyond all doubt or cavil that the ruling of the Ancients in this matter is altogether reliable, however empirical it may appear.
The First House governs the personal appearance, but chieﬂy the face and head.
The Second House rules over nance, movable eﬀects, commerce.
In the body it governs the neck and throat.
The Third House governs short journeys, letters, and other means of communication, near relations or neighbours.
In the body it governs the arms and lungs.
The Fourth House governs real estate, the residence, the produce of the earth, the mother of          [Pg 30]  the subject, and the end of life.
In the body, the breasts and thorax.
The Fifth House governs progeny, the sex instincts, domestic relations, and social pleasures.
In the body, the back and heart.
The Sixth House governs the health, servants, and personal comforts of the subject, clothes, food, and other physical requisites, sanitation, hygiene.
In the body it rules over the abdomen and lower viscera.
The Seventh House has dominion over marriage, contracts, agreements, partners, and matters of exchange.
In the body it has relation to the loins and kidneys.
The Eighth House rules death, loss, legacies and dowries, and matters appertaining to the deceased.
In the body it is related to the excretory system.
The Ninth House is said to govern long journeys, publications, religious beliefs, foreign lands, and legal aﬀairs.
In the body it rules the thighs.
The Tenth House rules over position, honour and fame of the subject, the father, superiors of all orders.
In the body it rules over the knees.
The Eleventh House governs friends, social relations, societies and companies with which the subject is concerned.
In the body it has relation to the legs from calf to ankle.
The Twelfth House rules ambushes, restraints, privations, imprisonments, connements, and all limitations of the personal freedom.
In the body it rules the ankles and feet.
Applying these signications to the interpretation of a horoscope it will be seen that if Mars should be rising at the moment of birth there will be a scar or mark on the face.
Observations of this sort will frequently assist to determine the time of birth when it is not known.
Similarly with other planets in the same or other Houses; but of this more anon.
[Pg 31]                                             CHAPTER IV                                  THE ASTRONOMICAL ASPECTS   Aspects are certain angular distances measured on the Ecliptic, and they form a fundamental part of astrological science.
Any planet may be good or bad in its eﬀects on the character and destiny, according to the aspect that it throws to the chief points of the Horoscope.
The aspects are: The semisquare aspect of 45 degrees, sextile of 60 degrees, square of 90 degrees, trine of 120 degrees, sesquiquadrate of 135 degrees, and the opposition of 180 degrees.
There is also the conjunction, when bodies are in the same degree or part of a Sign.
The good aspects are the trine and sextile; the evil being the semisquare, square, sesquiquadrate, and opposition.
The aspect of a planet determines its eﬀects, whether for good or evil.
The conjunction is good with good planets, such as Jupiter and Venus, and evil with malefic planets such as Mars and Saturn.
When planets are the same distance North or South of the Equator they are in parallel declination (p.d.
), and they then act as if in conjunction.
Also when planets are in mutual disposition, that is to say, occupying one another’s signs, they act as if they were in conjunction.
Planets in conjunction act according to their simple natures, but when in aspect, according to the nature of that       [Pg 32]  aspect.
The benec planets Jupiter, Venus, Sun, Moon, and also Mercury when in good disposition with another planet or in a congenial Sign, produce good eﬀects by their conjunctions and by their trine and sextile aspects; but when in square, semisquare, or sesquisquare aspect they are uniformly evil in eﬀect.
On the other hand, the malec planets Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, and Mars, together with Mercury when ill-disposed or in uncongenial Signs, are evil in their eﬀects when in conjunction with the signicant points of the horoscope; also when in evil aspect; but they nevertheless produce good effects when in good aspect.
The Significators.
The more important points of the Horoscope to which aspect can be thrown are called “Signicators. The general signicators in any horoscope are the Sun, the Moon, the Midheaven (the degree which holds the meridian of the horoscope), and the Ascendant (the degree which is rising).
But every planet can be a particular significator in its own province, namely, in the Sign which it rules, and the House in which it is found at birth.
In a general sense the Moon is signicant of the mother, female relations, the personal health and fortunes and the changes incident to these.
The Sun in the same way indicates the father, male relations, the vital principle, and position.
Mercury is the signicator of the mind and intellect, the faculties generally.
Venus is signicatrix of love aﬀairs, domestic relations, pleasures, and of young female relations, sisters, &c. Mars is signicator of          [Pg 33]  enterprises, strifes, and young male relations.
Jupiter is signicator of increase and emoluments; Saturn of legacies, inheritance, and aged persons; Uranus of civic and governmental bodies; Neptune of voyages and psychic experiences.
The chief points to be regarded, however, are the Midheaven, the Ascendant, and the places of the Sun and Moon.
[Pg 34]                                            SECTION II                  THE CONSTRUCTION OF A HOROSCOPE                                              CHAPTER I                                  THE EPHEMERIS AND ITS USES   An Ephemeris is an almanac of the planetary positions day by day throughout any given year.
They are to be obtained at a cost of one shilling per year, in a convenient form specially adapted to the use of astrologers.
In the rst column will be found the Sidereal Time for the day, which is the Sun’s Right Ascension or distance from the Vernal Equinox, expressed in Hours, Minutes, and Seconds, and equated to Mean Time at Greenwich.
By merely adding the time after noon, or subtracting the hours and minutes before noon, at which the birth took place, you will obtain the Right Ascension of the Midheaven at the moment of birth.
The use to which this is put will appear in the next chapter.
It corresponds to a particular degree of the Zodiac which is in the Midheaven at the given time of birth.
The next column contains the Sun’s longitude at Noon for each day.
By taking the position on one day fromthat          [Pg 35]  on the next day, the motion of the Sun for 24 hours is obtained, and a proportion of this for the hour of birth can easily be made.
The mean motion of the Sun per day is 2½′, or 1 degree per day.
In another column will be found the Moon’s longitude, and in adjacent columns its declination and latitude.
Declination is distance North or South of the Equator, and celestial latitude is distance North or South of the Ecliptic.
The longitudes of the other bodies are also given for each day at noon.
The mean longitudinal progress of the several bodies is as follows: Sun,2½′ per hour, or 1 degree per day; Moon, 32′ per hour, or 13 degrees per day; Neptune, 2′ per day; Uranus, 3′ per day; Saturn, about 5′ per day; Jupiter, about 12′ per day; Mars, 45′ per day, or about 2′ per hour; Venus, 72′ per day, or 3′ per hour; Mercury, 84′ per day, or 3½′ per hour.
These increments are for direct motion only; the planets are, as already explained, sometimes retrograde and sometimes stationary.
The Horoscope of birth is only concerned with the longitudes of the planets, but when one or more planets have the same declination North or South, they should be noted as being in Parallel, for they then act as if they were in conjunction.
Take in hand, then, the Ephemeris for the year of your birth and read this chapter with it in view.
After understanding its construction, extract the Sidereal Time at Noon for the day of your birth and refer to the next chapter.
[Pg 36]                                               CHAPTER II                            TO ERECT A FIGURE OF THE HEAVENS   Take the Sidereal time at noon on the day of birth, and add to it the hours and minutes after noon at which you were born, or if before noon, subtract from it the interval between the birth and noon.
This will give the approximate Right Ascension of the Midheaven at birth.
Thus, suppose a person to be born on May 1, 1890, at 3h.
30m.
p.m. in London—                               The Sidereal time, noon, May 1, 1890, is 2h.
36m.
28s.
To which add time p.m.       …… …         3 30 0                              Acceleration at 10″ per hour    … …       0     0 34                              Right Ascension of Midheaven at Birth     6h.
7m.
2s.
With this Right Ascension of the Midheaven you then refer to Tables of Houses for London (seeChapter III.
), and against this quantity of Sidereal Time you will nd, under the column marked 10, the sign and degree which corresponds to it, namely, the 2nd of Cancer.
This is put at the head of the gure, and the rest of the signs are placed around the gure in their order as shown in the Table.
Only six of the Houses are given in the Tables,         [Pg 37]  because the opposite Houses will have the same degrees of the opposite signs on them.
Thus we read against the Right Ascension 6h.
7m.
28s.
the following:—                                 10        11     12     Ascen.
2         3                              Cancer     Leo    Virgo                Libra     Scorp.
Libra 1.33,                                2,        8,     8,                   26,       26.
This means that the 2nd degree of Cancer was on the cusp of the Tenth House (the Midheaven) at the moment of the birth, Leo 8th on the cusp of the Eleventh House, Virgo 8th on the cusp of the Twelfth, Libra 1.33 on the Ascendant or Eastern Horizon, and so of the rest.
On the cusp of the Fourth House we place Capricornus 2, because the Fourth House is opposite the 10th and the sign Capricornus is opposite to Cancer.
On the cusp of the Fifth House we place Aquarius 8, because the Fifth House is opposite to the Eleventh, and Aquarius is opposite to Leo.
When completed we find the cusps of the Houses as follows, opposite to those in the Tables:—                                4         5          6        7           8         9                             Capric.
Aquar.
Pisces                Aries     Taur.
Aries 1.33,                               2,        8,        8,                   26,       26.
It is then only necessary to place the planets in the gure, as explained in thepreceding chapter, and the gure of the Heavens is complete.
To Draw a Figure of the Heavens.
Take a pair of compasses, and with a radius, of about 2½ inches, describe a circle.
Within this, and with a radius of about 2 inches, describe another.
With the radius of this latter mark oﬀ six equal divisions, and then equally     [Pg 38]  divide these so as to make twelve.
Within the gure draw a small circle, concentric with the others, to represent the Earth.
From the points of division already obtained draw straight lines to the centre of the gure until they touch the circle of the Earth.
You then have a gure which represents the Houses of the Heavens, being a twelvefold division of the Prime Vertical.
The lines extending from the outer circles to the Earth are the cusps of the Houses (see fig.
Section IV., chap.
5).
The degrees of the Zodiac which are upon the cusps of the Houses, as found in the Tables opposite a given Sidereal Time, are written over the several cusps in their order between the two outer circles.
Reference to the Ephemeris for May 1, 1890, shows the Sun at noon in Taurus 11 degrees 2 minutes.
Three and a half hours later it will have advanced about 8 minutes in longitude, so that its position will be in Taurus 11 degrees 10 minutes.
This longitude falls in the Eighth House, and we therefore place the symbol of the Sun in that division of the Heavens and place against it the gures 11.10, so that as Aries 26 is on the cusp of the Eighth and Taurus 26 on the cusp of the Ninth House, the Sun’s position in Taurus 11.10 will fall between these cusps, i.e., in the Eighth House.
The rest of the planets are placed in the figure according to their respective longitudes.
[Pg 39]                                              CHAPTER III                                       THE TABLES OF HOUSES   The Tables of the Houses on pp.
40, 41, are calculated for the latitude of 51° 32′ North.
This will serve for London and environs, and approximately for the South of England and the Midlands.
Tables of Houses for other latitudes may be obtained through the booksellers, a useful set of half a dozen diﬀerent latitudes being sold for one shilling.
In order to illustrate the uses to which these Tables may be put in the solution of astronomical problems, let us take the Sun’s position in the horoscope for the 1st of May, 1890, and nd when the Sun sets on that day on the horizon of London.
The Sun is in Taurus, 11 degrees, and it will set when the opposite point of the Heavens is rising.
Find under the column marked “Ascen. the 11th degree of Scorpio, and against it in the column marked “Sidereal Time you will nd 9h.
49m.
9s.
This will be the Right Ascension of the Midheaven when the Sun sets on London.
We have already seen that the Sidereal Time at noon on the 1st of May was 2h.
37m.
28s., and this, taken from the former Sidereal Time, gives about 7.12 p.m. as the time of sunset.
Now in the example horoscope the birth took place at 3.30 p.m., and this time, taken from 7.12 p.m., gives 3h.
42m.
from birth to sunset.
If you multiply this by 15 to turn it into degrees and minutes of the Equator, you will obtain 55° 30′, which are the number of degrees which pass over the Midheaven from birth until sunset.
At the rate of 1 degree for every year of life, this corresponds to 55½ years of age, when the subject of this horoscope would come under the adverse inﬂuence of the Sun opposition Ascendant, and would suﬀer some serious ill health of a feverish nature, incident to the throat (the part ruled by Taurus, the sign in which the Sun is situate).
This is how predictions are made, but of this more anon.
[Pg 40]                    Sidereal 10 11     12   Ascen.
2    3    Sidereal 10 11   12   Ascen.
2    3                      Time.
♈ ♉        ♊      ♋      ♌          Time.
♉ ♊      ♋      ♌                              H. M. S. °  °      °    °   ′    °    °    H. M. S. °  °    °    °   ′    °    °                    0 0 0 0 9          22   26 36    12   3    1 51 37 0 9      17   16 28    4    28                    0 3 40 1 10        23   27 17    13   3    1 55 27 1 10     18   17 8     5    29                    0 7 20 2 11        24   27 56    14   4    1 59 17 2 11     19   17 48    6    ♎                    0 11 0 3 12        25   28 42    15   5    2 3 8 3 12       19   18 28    7    1                    0 14 41 4 13       25   29 17    15   6    2 6 59 4 13      20   19 9     8    2                    0 18 21 5 14       26   29 55    16   7    2 10 51 5 14     21   19 49    9    2                    0 22 2 6 15        27   0 ♌ 34   17   8    2 14 44 6 15     22   20 29    9    3                    0 25 42 7 16       28   1   14   18   8    2 18 37 7 16     22   21 10    10   4                    0 29 23 8 17       29   1   55   18   9    2 22 31 8 17     23   21 51    11   5                    0 33 4 9 18        ♋    2   33   19   10   2 26 25 9 18     24   22 32    11   6                    0 36 45 10 19      1    3   14   20   11   2 30 20 10 19    25   23 14    12   7                    0 40 26 11 20      1    3   54   20   12   2 34 16 11 20    25   23 55    13   8                    0 44 8 12 21       2    4   33   21   13   2 38 13 12 21    26   24 36    14   9                    0 47 50 13 22      3    5   12   22   14   2 42 10 13 22    27   25 17    15   10                    0 51 32 14 23      4    5   52   23   15   2 46 8 14 23     28   25 58    15   11                    0 55 14 15 24      5    6   30   23   15   2 50 7 15 24     29   26 40    16   12                    0 58 5 16 25       6    7   9    24   16   2 54 7 16 25     29   27 22    17   12                    1 2 40 17 26       6    7   50   25   17   2 58 7 17 26     ♌    28 4     18   13                    1 6 23 18 27       7    8   30   26   18   3 2 8 18 27      1    28 46    18   14                    1 10 7 19 28       8    9   9    26   19   3 6 9 19 27      2    29 28    19   15                    1 13 51 20 29      9    9   48   27   19   3 10 12 20 28    3    0  12   20   16                    1 17 35 21 ♊       10   10 28    28   20   3 14 15 21 29    3    0   54   21   17                    1 21 20 22 1       10   11 8     28   21   3 18 19 22 ♋     4    1   36   22   18                    1 25 6 23 2        11   11 48    29   22   3 22 23 23 1     5    2   20   22   19                    1 28 52 24 3       12   12 28        23   3 26 29 24 2     6    3   2    23   20                    1 32 38 25 4       13   13 8     1    24   3 30 35 25 3     7    3   45   24   21                    1 36 25 26 5       14   13 48    1    25   3 34 41 26 4     7    4   28   25   22                    1 40 12 27 6       14   14 28    2    25   3 38 49 27 5     8    5   11   26   23                    1 44 0 28 7        15   15 8     3    26   3 42 57 28 6     9    5   54   27   24                    1 47 48 29 8       16   15 48    4    27   3 47 6 29 7      10   6   28   27   25                    1 51 37 30 9       17   16 28    4    28   3 51 15 30 8     11   7   21   28   25                      Sidereal 10 11    12    Ascen.
2    3    Sidereal 10 11   12   Ascen.
2    3                      Time.
♊ ♋       ♌                 ♎      Time.
♋ ♌            ♎      ♎                        H. M. S. °  °     °     °   ′    °    °    H. M. S. °  °    °    °   ′    °    °                    3 51 15 0 8       11    7   21   28   25   6 0 0 0 6        6    0   0    24   24                    3 55 25 1 19      12    8   5    29   26   6 4 22 1 7       7    0   47   25   25                    3 59 36 2 10      12    8   49   ♎    27   6 8 43 2 8       8    1   33   26   26                    4 3 48 3 10       13    9   33   1    28   6 13 5 3 9       9    2   19   27   27 4 8      0    4    11 14 10       17 2      29 6 17 26 4            10 10 3        5    27 28 4   12   13   5    12   15   11   2    2        6   21   48   5    11   10   3    51   28   29 4   16   26   6    13   16   11   46   3    1    6   26   9    6    12   11   4    37   29    4   20   40   7    14   17   12   30   4    2    6   30   30   7    13   12   5    23       1 4   24   55   8    15   17   13   15   5    3    6   34   51   8    14   13   6    9    1    2 4   29   10   9    16   18   14   0    6    4    6   39   11   9    15   14   6    55   2    3 4   33   26   10   17   19   14   45   7    5    6   43   31   10   16   15   7    40   2    4 4   37   42   11   18   20   15   30   8    6    6   47   51   11   16   16   8    26   3    4 4   41   59   12   19   21   16   15   8    7    6   52   11   12   17   16   9    12   4    5 4   46   16   13   20   21   17   0    9    8    6   56   31   13   18   17   9    58   5    6 4   50   34   14   21   22   17   45   10   9    7   0    50   14   19   18   10   43   6    7 4   54   52   15   22   23   18   30   11   10   7   5    8    15   20   19   11   28   7    8 4   59   10   16   23   24   19   16   12   11   7   9    26   16   21   20   12   14   8    9 5   3    29   17   24   25   20   3    13   12   7   13   44   17   22   21   12   59   8    10 5   7    49   18   25   26   20   49   14   13   7   18   1    18   23   22   13   45   9    11 5   12   9    19   25   27   21   35   14   14   7   22   18   19   24   23   14   30   10   12 5   16   29   20   26   28   22   20   15   14   7   26   34   20   25   24   15   15   11   13 5   20   49   21   27   28   23   6    16   15   7   30   50   21   26   25   16   0    12   14 5   25   9    22   28   29   23   51   17   16   7   35   5    22   27   25   16   45   13   15 5   29   30   23   29       24   37   18   17   7   39   20   23   28   26   17   30   13   16 5   33   51   24   ♌    1    25   23   19   18   7   43   34   24   29   27   18   15   14   17 5   38   12   25   1    2    26   9    20   19   7   47   47   25       28   18   59   15   18 5   42   34   26   2    3    26   55   21   20   7   52   0    26   1    29   19   43   16   19 5   46   55   27   3    4    27   41   21   21   7   56   12   27   2    29   20   27   17   20 5   51   17   28   4    4    28   27   22   22   8   0    24   28   3    ♎    21   11   18   20 5   55   38   29   5    5    29   13   23   23   8   4    35   29   4    1    21   56   18   21 6   0    0    30   6    6    30   0    24   24   8   8    45   30   5    2    22   40   19   22   Sidereal 10 11          12   Ascen.
2    3    Sidereal 10 11          12   Ascen.
2    3   Time.
♌              ♎      ♎                 Time.
 ♎             ♎                 ♑ H. M. S. °  °           °    °   ′     °    °    H. M. S. °  °           °    °   ′     °    ° 8 8 45 0 5              2    23 40     19   22   10 8 23 0 2             26   13 33     13   20 8 12 54 1 5             3    23 24     20   23   10 12 12 1 3            26   14 13     14   21 8 17 3 2 6              3    24 7      21   24   10 16 0 2 4             27   14 53     15   22 8 21 11 3 7             4    24 50     22   25   10 19 48 3 5            28   15 38     15   23 8 25 19 4 8             5    25 34     23   26   10 23 35 4 5            29   16 13     16   24 8 29 26 5 9             6    26 18     23   27   10 27 22 5 6            29   16 52     17   25 8 33 31 6 10            7    27 1      24   28   10 31 8 6 7                 17 32     18   26 8 37 37 7 11            8    27 44     25   29   10 34 54 7 8            1    18 13     19   27 8 41 41 8 12            8    28 26     26   ♑    10 38 40 8 9            2    18 52     20   28 8 45 45 9 13            9    29 8      27   1    10 42 25 9 10           2    19 31     20   29 8 49 48 10 14           10   29 50     27   2    10 46 9 10 11           3    20 11     21   ♒ 8 53 51 11 15           11   0  32    28   3    10 49 53 11 11          4    20 50     22   1 8 57 52 12 16           12   1   15    29   4    10 53 37 12 12          4    21 30     23   2 9 1 53 13 17            12   1   58        4    10 57 20 13 13          5    22 9      24   3 9 5 53 14 18            13   2   39    1    5    11 1 3 14 14            6    22 49     24   4 9 9 53 15 18            14   3   21    1    6    11 4 46 15 15           7    23 23     25   5 9 13 52 16 19           15   4   3     2    7    11 8 28 16 16           7    24 8      26   6 9 17 50 17 20           16   4   44    3    8    11 12 10 17 17          8    24 47     27   8 9 21 47 18 21           16   5   26    3    9    11 15 22 18 17          9    25 27     28   9 9 25 44 19 22           17   6   7     4    10   11 19 34 19 18          10   26 5      29   10 9 29 40 20 23           18   6   48    5    11   11 23 15 20 19          10   26 45     ♑    11 9 33 35 21 24           18   7   29    5    12   11 26 56 21 20          11   27 25     0    12 9 37 29 22 25           19   8   9     6    13   11 30 37 22 21          12   28 5      1    13 9 41 23 23 26           20   8   50    7    14   11 34 18 23 22          13   28 44     2    14 9 45 16 24 27           21   9   31    8    15   11 37 58 24 23          13   29 24     3    15 9 49 9 25 28            22   10 11     9    16   11 41 39 25 23          14   0 3      4    16 9 53 1 26 28            23   10 51     9    17   11 45 19 26 24          15   0   43    5    17 9 56 52 27 29           23   11 32     10   18   11 49 0 27 25           15   1   23    6    18 10 0 43 28 ♎            24   12 12     11   19   11 52 40 28 26          16   2   3     6    19 10 4 33 29 1            25   12 53     12   20   11 56 20 29 27          17   2   43    7    20 10 8 23 30 2            26   13 33     13   20   12 0 0 30 27            17   3   23    8    20    Sidereal 10 11 12 Ascen.
2                  3    Sidereal 10 11 12 Ascen.
2 3                     [Pg 41]  Time.
♎    ♎                     ♑    ♒     Time.
                    ♒    ♓ H. M. S.     °    °    °    °        ′    °    °    H. M. S.     °    °    °    °   ′    °    ° 12 0    0    0    27   17   3        23   8    21   13 51   37   0    22   10   25 20    10   27 12 3    40   1    28   18   4        4    9    23   13 55   27   1    23   11   26 10    11   28 12 7    20   2    29   19   4        45   10   24   13 59   17   2    24   11   27 2     12   ♈ 12 11   0    3        20   5        26   11   25   14 3    8    3    25   12   27 53    14   1 12 14   41   4    1    20   6        7    12   26   14 6    59   4    26   13   28 45    15   2 12 18   21   5    1    21   6        48   13   27   14 10   51   5    26   14   29 36    16   4 12 22   2    6    2    22   7        29   14   28   14 14   44   6    27   15   0 ♑ 29   18   5 12 25   42   7    3    23   8        10   15   29   14 18   37   7    28   15   1   23   19   6 12 29   23   8    4    23   8        51   16   ♓    14 22   31   8    29   16   2   18   20   8 12 33   4    9    5    24   9        33   17   2    14 26   25   9        17   3   14   22   9 12 36   45   10   6    25   10       15   18   3    14 30   20   10   1    18   4   11   23   10 12 40   26   11   6    25   10       57   19   4    14 34   16   11   2    19   5   9    25   11 12 44   8    12   7    26   11       40   20   5    14 38   13   12   2    20   6   7    26   13 12 47   50   13   8    27   12       22   21   6    14 42   10   13   3    20   7   6    28   14 12 51   32   14   9    28   13       4    22   7    14 46   8    14   4    21   8   6    29   15 12 55   14   15   10   28   13       47   23   9    14 50   7    15   5    22   9   8    ♓    17 12 58   5    16   11   29   14       30   24   10   14 54   7    16   6    23   10 11    2    18 13 2    40   17   11       15       14   25   11   14 58   7    17   7    24   11 15    4    19 13 6    23   18   12   1    15       59   26   12   15 2    8    18   8    25   12 20    6    21 13 10   7    19   13   1    16       44   27   13   15 6    9    19   9    26   13 27    8    22 13 13   51   20   14   2    17       29   28   15   15 10   12   20   9    27   14 35    9    23 13 17   35   21   15   3    18       14   29   16   15 14   15   21   10   27   15 43    11   24 13 21   20   22   16   4    19       0    ♒    17   15 18   19   22   11   28   16 52    13   26 13 25   6    23   16   4    19       45   1    18   15 22   23   23   12   29   18 3     14   27 13 28   52   24   17   5    20       31   2    20   15 26   29   24   13   ♑    19 16    16   28 13 32   38   25   18   6    21       18   4    21   15 30   35   25   14   1    20 32    17   29 13 36   25   26   19   7    22       6    5    22   15 34   41   26   15   2    21 48    19   ♉ 13 40   12   27   20   7    22       54   6    23   15 38   49   27   16   3    23 8     21   2 13 44   0    28   21   8    23       42   7    25   15 42   57   28   17   4    24 29    22   3 13 47   48   29   21   9    24       31   8    26   15 47   6    29   18   5    25 51    24   5 13 51   37   30   22   10   25       20   10   27   15 51   15   30   18   6    27 15    26   6   Sidereal 10 11         12   Ascen.
2    3    Sidereal 10 11         12   Ascen.
2    3   Time.
             ♑      ♑           ♓    ♉      Time.
♑ ♑            ♒      ♈      ♉    ♊ H. M. S. °  °          °    °   ′         °    °    H. M. S. °  °          °    °   ′    °    ° 15 51 15 0 18          6    27 15         26   6    18 0 0 0 18            13   0   0    17   11 15 55 25 1 19          7    28 42         28   7    18 4 22 1 20           14   2   39   19   13 15 59 36 2 20          8    0 ♒ 11        ♈    9    18 8 43 2 21           16   5   19   20   14 16 3 48 3 21           9    1   42        1    10   18 13 5 3 22           17   7   55   22   15 16 8 0 4 22            10   3   16        3    11   18 17 26 4 23          19   10 29    23   16 16 12 13 5 23          11   4   53        5    12   18 21 48 5 24          20   13 2     25   17 16 16 26 6 24          12   6   22        7    14   18 26 9 6 25           22   15 36    26   18 16 20 40 7 25          13   8   13        9    15   18 30 30 7 26          23   18 6     28   19 16 24 55 8 26          14   9   57        11   16   18 34 51 8 27          25   20 34    29   20 16 29 10 9 27          16   11 44         12   17   18 39 11 9 29          27   22 59    ♊    21 16 33 26 10 28         17   13 34         14   18   18 43 31 10 ♒          28   25 22    1    22 16 37 42 11 29         18   15 26         16   20   18 47 51 11 1          ♓    27 42    2    23 16 41 59 12 ♑          19   17 20         18   21   18 52 11 12 2          2    29 58    4    24 16 46 16 13 1          20   19 18         20   22   18 56 31 13 3          3    2 ♉ 13   5    25 16 50 34 14 2          21   21 22         21   23   19 0 50 14 4           5    4   24   6    26 16 54 52 15 3          22   23 29         23   25   19 5 8 15 6            7    6   30   8    27 16 59 10 16 4          24   25 36         25   26   19 9 26 16 7           9    8   36   9    28 17 3 29 17 5           25   27 46         27   27   19 13 44 17 8          10   10 40    10   29 17 7 49 18 6           26   30 0          28   28   19 18 1 18 9           12   12 39    11   ♋ 17 12 9 19 7           27   2 ♓ 19        ♉    29   19 22 18 19 10         14   14 35    12   1 17 16 29 20 8          29   4   40        2    ♊    19 26 34 20 12         16   16 28    13   2 17 20 49 21 9          ♒    7   2         3    1    19 30 50 21 13         18   18 17    14   3 17 25 9 22 10          1    9   26        5    2    19 35 5 22 14          19   20 3     16   4 17 29 30 23 11         3    11 54         7    3    19 39 20 23 15         21   21 48    17   5 17 33 51 24 12         4    14 24         8    5    19 43 34 24 16         23   23 29    18   6 17 38 12 25 13         5    17 0          10   6    19 47 47 25 18         25   25 9     19   7 17 42 34 26 14         7    19 33         11   7    19 52 0 26 19          27   26 45    20   8 17 46 55 27 15         8    22 6          13   8    19 56 12 27 20         28   28 18    21   9                   17 51 17 28 16 10 24       40 14 9        20 0 24 28 21 ♈ 29        49 22 10                   17 55 38 29 17 11 27       23 16 10 20 4 35 29 23 2 1 ♊ 19 23 11                   18 0 0 30 18 13 30         0 17 11 20 8 45 30 24 4 2    45 24 12                     Sidereal 10 11    12   Ascen.
2    3    Sidereal 10 11   12   Ascen.
2    3                     Time.
♒ ♒       ♈      ♊      ♊    ♋      Time.
♓ ♈      ♉      ♋      ♋    ♌                   H. M. S. °  °     °    °   ′    °    °    H. M. S. °  °    °    °   ′    °    °                   20 8 45 0 24      4    2   45   24   12   22 8 23 0 3      20   4   38   20   8                   20 12 54 1 25     6    4   9    25   12   22 12 12 1 4     21   5   28   21   8                   20 17 3 2 27      7    5   32   26   13   22 16 0 2 6      23   6   17   22   9                   20 21 11 3 28     9    6   53   27   14   22 19 48 3 7     24   7   5    23   10                   20 25 19 4 29     11   8   12   28   15   22 23 35 4 8     25   7   53   23   11                   20 29 26 5 ♓      13   9   27   29   16   22 27 22 5 9     26   8   42   24   12                   20 33 31 6 2      14   10 43    ♋    17   22 31 8 6 10     28   9   29   25   13                   20 37 37 7 3      16   11 58    1    18   22 34 54 7 12    29   10 16    26   14                   20 41 41 8 4      18   13 9     2    19   22 38 40 8 13    ♊    11 2     26   14                   20 45 45 9 6      19   14 18    3    20   22 42 25 9 14    1    11 47    27   15                   20 49 48 10 7     21   15 25    3    21   22 46 9 10 15    2    12 31    28   16                   20 53 51 11 8     23   16 32    4    21   22 49 53 11 17   3    13 16    29   17                   20 57 52 12 9     24   17 39    5    22   22 53 37 12 18   4    14 1     29   18                   21 1 53 13 11     26   18 44    6    23   22 57 20 13 19   5    14 45    ♌    19                   21 5 53 14 12     28   19 48    7    24   23 1 3 14 20     6    15 28    1    19                   21 9 53 15 13     29   20 51    8    25   23 4 46 15 21    7    16 11    2    20                   21 13 52 16 15    ♉    21 53    9    26   23 8 28 16 23    8    16 54    2    21                   21 17 50 17 16    2    22 53    10   27   23 12 10 17 24   9    17 57    3    22                   21 21 47 18 17    4    23 52    10   28   23 15 22 18 25   10   18 20    4    23                   21 25 44 19 19    5    24 51    11   28   23 19 34 19 26   11   19 3     5    24                   21 29 40 20 20    7    25 48    12   29   23 23 15 20 27   12   19 45    5    24                   21 33 35 21 22    8    26 44    13   ♌    23 26 56 21 29   13   20 26    6    25                   21 37 29 22 23    10   27 40    14   1    23 30 37 22 ♉    14   21 8     7    26                   21 41 23 23 24    11   28 34    15   2    23 34 18 23 1    15   21 50    7    27                   21 45 16 24 25    13   29 29    15   3    23 37 58 24 2    16   22 31    8    28                   21 49 9 25 26     14   0 ♋ 22   16   4    23 41 39 25 3    17   23 12    9    28                   21 53 1 26 28     15   1   15   17   4    23 45 19 26 4    18   23 53    9    29                   21 56 52 27 29    16   2   7    18   5    23 49 0 27 5     19   24 33    10                      22 0 43 28 ♈      18   2   57   19   6    23 52 40 22 6    20   25 15    11   1                   22 4 33 29 2      19   3   48   19   7    23 56 20 29 8    21   25 56    12   2                   22 8 23 30 3      20   4   38   20   8    24 0 0 30 9      22   26 36    12   3   If I wished to know what particular part of the Zodiac one is subject to in any particular year of life—that is to   [Pg 42]  say, what part of the Zodiac is rising—I add 1 degree for every year to the Midheaven at birth and thus obtain a new Midheaven, under which, in the Tables of Houses, I nd the Ascendant which rules the year.
Thus in the case of one born on the 1st of May at 3.30 p.m. the 30th year comes under the Midheaven of Leo 2, which is 30 degrees further advanced than Cancer 2, and under Leo 2 in the 10th House I nd the Ascendant to be in Libra 24.7, which is the Ascendant governing that year of life.
The meaning and importance of these calculations will appear at a later stage of this exposition.
When a degree is on the Midheaven or the 10th House it is said to “culminate, and when on the horizon Eastward it is said to “ascend. The Midheaven is often called the “M.C. (Medium Coeli), and the opposite point is called the “I.C. (Imaum Coeli).
They are the points of the Ecliptic which cut through the meridian of a place at any given time.
SECTION III                         HOW TO READ THE HOROSCOPE                                             CHAPTER I                                  THE PLANETS IN THE HOUSES   It is impossible to categorically state the eﬀects which are due to the positions of the planets in the several Houses, because very much depends upon the signs they are in and the aspects they have from other planets.
The means of judging the eﬀects is very simple, when once the natures of the planets and the dominion of the several Houses have been thoroughly digested.
Thus, it is rst necessary to see in what House a planet is situated.
Then consider the nature of the planet in the following concrete manner:       Neptune means chaos, confusion, deception.
Uranus, eccentricity, originality, estrangement.
Saturn, privation, hindrance, denial.
Jupiter, affluence, fruitfulness, increase.
Sun, dignities, honours.
Mars, excess, impulse, quarrels.
Venus, peace, happiness, agreement Mercury, commerce, versatility, adaptability.
[Pg 52]        Moon, changes, publicity.
Now look to the things that are governed by the House in which any particular planet is situated at the moment of birth (Sect.
I., chap.
iii.).
Suppose Saturn to be found in the 11th House.
Saturn is “privation and the 11th House is the domain of “Friends. Hence a paucity of friends, or such as there may be are evil or unfortunate to the subject.
Jupiter in the 2nd House, in the same manner, would signify “increase of “money and possessions. Mars in the 7th would indicate “quarrels with “partners; and so on.
Each planet reﬂects its own nature upon the aﬀairs governed by the House in which it is found at the moment of birth.
It will not infrequently happen, however, that there are more than one planet in the same House.
Suppose two planets to occupy the same House.
In such case one may be good (Jupiter), and the other evil (Mars).
It is then necessary to take rst that which rst comes to the horizon or Midheaven, that is to say, the one which is in the earlier part of the House, and next that which follows.
Thus Saturn followed by Jupiter in the 11th House, would signify misfortune by means of advisers and friends, followed at a later period in the life by some great good through the same source.
The degrees which separate the planets will indicate the years which elapse between these changes of fortune.
Similarly if there be more than two planets in the same House; in such cases you may safely predict many changes in that department of life which the House is said to rule.
But the fact of a planet being in a House is not of itself suﬃcient evidence from which to make a judgment.
The     [Pg 53]  aspects which that planet has must also be considered, for in this matter Saturn when throwing a good aspect to any of the Signicators—the Sun, Moon, Ascendant or Midheaven, and well aspected by other planets, is to be preferred to Jupiter when the latter is badly placed and aspected; for Jupiter has his own ill eﬀects, and Saturn has his good inﬂuences.
Jupiter is only a benec when acting by conjunction or good aspect with another planet, and Saturn is only a malefic when acting by conjunction or evil aspect.
These things being duly considered, it is possible to arrive, with even brief experience, at the results that are signified by the planets in the several Houses.
[Pg 54]                                               CHAPTER II                                            THE CONSTITUTION   The Sun is the chief signicator of the constitution, and the aspects he holds to the other planets are to be considered.
Thus if he be found in good aspect, or at least not in evil aspect, to the other planets, the constitution may be judged as sound.
When, however, the Sun is aﬄicted by some planets and assisted by others, there will be only a moderate constitution, and judgment has to be made as to which inﬂuence predominates, the good or evil.
When the aﬄicting planets are angular—that is to say, in the 1st, 4th, 7th, or 10th Houses—the congenital or hereditary tendency to organic disease is by that circumstance so much the stronger.
But when the assisting planets are angular, the predisposition to disease is considerably mitigated, and in most cases entirely overcome.
The predisposition of the body to aﬀections of a constitutional nature is to be judged from the prevalence of evil aspects to the Sun, and the parts of the body liable to be aﬀected are judged from the Signs which are occupied by the afflicting bodies.
The various aﬀections due to the several planets have already been cited (Sect.
I., chap.
i.).
The Signs are grouped for purposes of pathological study as follows:— The Movable Signs—Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricornus—have relation to the head, stomach, skin, kidneys,                 [Pg 55]  liver, and spine.
The Fixed Signs—Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius—are related to the throat, heart, blood, and excretory system.
The Common Signs—Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces—are related to the lungs, bowels, and nervous system.
It will also be advisable to read Sect.
I., chap.
ii., in order to determine the special points liable to aﬀections, the nature of the affection being judged solely by the planet which casts the malefic aspect to the Sun.
When the Sun is found to be aﬄicted by several planets, and at the same time there is no assistance from the good aspects or conjunctions of other bodies, then the constitution is deemed faulty and liable to early disruption.
But when there are several planets aﬄicting and at the same time some benec inﬂuences from others, it is probable that there will be prolonged disease and physical weakness, though life will continue.
Death in infancy occurs when the malec planets are immediately rising or culminating at the birth in evil aspect to the luminary which at the time may be above the horizon.
Also when there are malec planets immediately setting or passing the nadir, in evil aspect to the luminary below the horizon.
But when there are mitigating inﬂuences from the good aspects of the benec planets, or the luminaries, the malec planets will not induce death, but there will be great difficulty in rearing.
[Pg 56]                                            CHAPTER III                                       HEALTH AND SICKNESS   The aspects of the moon are the chief consideration in the matter of sickness.
If the Moon be found to be aﬄicted by the evil aspects of several planets, and no assistance be given by the good aspects of others, then the health will be precarious and frequent spells of illness will result.
The Moon being well aspected and not in any way aﬄicted, shows that the health will be well established, and that there will be immunity from sickness of all sorts.
The considerations necessary to be made in this matter are similar to those which have been cited in regard to the Sun and the constitution, except that we substitute the Moon for the Sun.
For, whereas the Sun governs the vital power in man, the Moon governs the functional powers, and whereas the Sun denotes those aﬀections which are congenital or hereditary, the Moon denotes such as are brought about by causes after birth.
Similarly, the Sun denotes aﬀections which are incidental to the body, while the Moon denotes such as are accidental thereto.
These points being borne in mind, they may be memorised at sight:—                                                   [Pg 57]                                                 SUN.
MOON.
Organic.
Functional.
Hereditary.
Acquired.
Incidental.
Accidental.
But it should be observed that the constitution may be strong and the health may be at the same time very bad, or, on the other hand, the health may be good and the constitution may be weak.
In the rst case, there would be a long life of considerable suﬀering from ill-health; and in the second case, there would be little or no ill- health for some considerable time, but the constitution would give way and the vital powers become depleted by the first serious illness that occurred.
Only when the Sun and Moon are both unaﬄicted by evil aspects or conjunctions, the health and constitution are both good, and there is every indication of a robust and vigorous life reaching to a ripe old age.
When the Sun and Moon are both heavily aﬄicted, and there is no assistance given by good aspects, there is every probability of death in infancy, or before reaching maturity.
For reasons which are allied to the connection existing between the constitution and the health, the good aspect of the Moon to the Sun at birth is an excellent augury, for it indicates co-ordination between the organic and functional.
Where this co-ordination exists there is always considerable power of recuperation, so that illness is easily overcome and the balance of power restored in the system.
Malec planets rising and aﬄicting either the Sun or Moon indicate prolonged ill-health, and most frequently         [Pg 58]  some permanent hurt to the body.
When predisposition to illness is shown in the horoscope, the particular aﬀection can be determined by the Sign which the aﬄicting planets hold.
Thus if Saturn aﬄict the Moon from Aries, you will judge some hurts and obstructions in the head, chills and colds, inﬂuenza, coryza, &c. Similarly Mars in Leo would indicate functional defects of the heart due to accelerated action and overstrain, such as result from fevers.
A good aspect of the planets Jupiter and Venus is of material help in counteracting the inﬂuence of malec aspects or evil positions.
Thus it will be seen that the health may be judged entirely apart from the constitution, the planets which are in aspect to the Moon being of first consideration, and next those which may be rising at the time of birth.
[Pg 59]                                              CHAPTER IV                       HOW TO READ CHARACTER AND DISPOSITION   Ptolemy says: “Mercury is the ruler of the rational soul, the Moon of the animal soul. By this he would mean, no doubt, that Mercury has relation to the faculty of the mind, while the Moon is related to brain function.
There are certain attributes of the mind which are distinctive of the human being, and certain other qualities which are common to man and the lower animals.
These latter are under the dominion of the Moon, while Mercury has chief signification of the rational faculties.
The position and aspects of the Moon and Mercury are therefore to be considered in making judgment of the mental endowments and disposition of the subject.
Planets that are in conjunction or aspect to either the Moon or Mercury will impress their nature strongly on the character and disposition.
The natures of the planets have already been recited (Sect.
I., chap.
i.
), and it is therefore only necessary to consider further, in this connection, the nature of the aspect that is thrown to the Mental Signicators by the other bodies.
Thus the Sun being in trine to the Moon will give a proper degree of              [Pg 60]  independence and dignity, while the square aspect or opposition of the Sun would indicate an excess of pride, harmful to the subject in his ordinary relationships.
In the same manner, the good aspect of Jupiter would show benevolence and regulated philanthropy, while the opposition or other evil aspect of the same body would indicate extravagance and ostentatious display of charity.
The good and bad aspects of the planets may be summed up in a few lines as follows:—               IN GOOD ASPECT.
IN EVIL ASPECT.
Neptune—Genius, inspiration.
Insanity, obsession.
Uranus—Originality, invention.
Obstinacy, eccentricity.
Saturn—Steadfastness, fidelity.
Deceitfulness, suspicion.
Jupiter—Benevolence, joviality.
Ostentation, profligacy.
Mars—Energy, executiveness.
Impulse, destructiveness.
Sun—Dignity, independence.
Vanity, egotism.
Venus—Affability, art.
Self-indulgence, disorderliness.
Mercury—Alertness, ingenuity.
Inquisitiveness, meddling.
Moon—Grace, idealism.
Inconstancy, awkwardness.
The general trend of the disposition and habit of mind is judged by the position of the majority of the planets, according to the “Constitution of the Signs they occupy.
Thus, the majority of the planets being in— Cardinal or Movable Signs indicates executive ability, business aptitude, pioneer spirit, ambition, capability to cut out a line in life for oneself, and to make headway against diﬃculties.
Such persons are usually the foremost in their particular sphere of life, and are always found in the most progressive movements, reforms, &c. Fixed Signs—Stability, patience, endurance, method, caution, and diplomacy.
Such persons are apt to become                 [Pg 61]  the originators of schools of thought, policies, and schemes.
They have xity of purpose, determination, independence, and pivotal stability.
They sit still and the world revolves around them.
Flexed or Common Signs—Versatility, flexibility, suavity, adaptability, and lack of originality.
Such people usually have too many irons in the re, and take in hand more than they can bring to satisfactory conclusion.
This is due to their versatility.
They have a supercial knowledge of many things, but lack the persistence to bring that knowledge to practical eﬀect.
At the same time their adaptability is the occasion of many successes in life, and their agreeableness, sympathy, and suavity create many friends for them.
In the Wheel of Life the cardinal signs denote the rim or tyre which is ever on the move, having the greatest acceleration.
The Common Signs represent the spokes of the wheel, uniting the tyre to the nave, and in that sense representing the power of adaptability.
The Fixed Signs represent the nave, which remains quiescent and still, being useful by that pivotal stability and apparent non-entity.
Thus, while the Sign-groupings of the planets are useful in giving the keynote of the nature and disposition, the particular faculties and characteristics are to be judged only from the aspects of the planets to the Moon and Mercury.
Further, it will be noted that those planets which occupy the 3rd and 9th Houses, and those also which are just rising at the moment of birth, will strongly impress themselves on the nature, apart from any aspects they may hold to the Mental Rulers.
This is on account of the natural relationship of those Houses to the mind and its means of expression.
Due attention must be paid to the position and aspects of those planets which are in aspect to the Mental                  [Pg 62]  Rulers, for if they be badly placed, in uncongenial signs, and themselves badly aspected by other planets, they will not act with the same directness and force as they otherwise would do.
It is of course admitted, in all astrological inquiries, that the eﬀects of heredity, training and association count for something.
A man who is generated from a vitiated parentage, badly nourished and imperfectly trained, cannot be expected, even with the best aspects, to manifest the highest faculties in their fullest or most perfect expressions.
I have not the slightest doubt that many a clodpole was born under similar aspects to those which obtained at the birth of Shakespeare, Raphael, Newton, or Cæsar.
I am not dismayed.
Non gli astri muovono solamente per Roma!
Who shall tell the tale of the world’s starved, neglected, and submerged genius?
We are doing the right thing, at all events, in keeping the school-door wide open.
But to continue.
The inspirational and ardent temperament is indicated by the majority of planets being in Fiery signs.
The mental or intellectual temperament is shown by the majority in Aerial signs.
The psychic or emotional temperament by the majority in Watery signs, and the practical or sordid temperament by the majority being in Earthy signs.
The rising sign at birth often impresses itself strongly on the mind of the Subject, and its characteristics are those which belong to the planet which governs it, and the “elemental nature of the sign itself.
Thus you have the chief keys to the estimate of character in the individual, and when once the student is           [Pg 63]  convinced by experience of the paramount reliability of this method of character-delineation, its uses will need no special pointing.
Mental and Brain Disorders.
When either the Moon or Mercury is aﬄicted by the malec planets, that is to say, when Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, or Mars are in conjunction or evil aspect with the mental Signicators, and there be no relieving aspect from the benec planets, Jupiter, Venus, or the Sun, then there is every predisposition to aﬀections of the brain and nervous system.
This is the more to be feared when the Moon or Mercury is aﬄicted in the ﬂexed or common signs.
This observation has been scientically established by Mr. A. G. Trent, in his little work entitled “The Soul and the Stars, to which the student is referred for a mass of statistical evidence.
[Pg 64]                                              CHAPTER V                                        FINANCIAL PROSPECTS   Look to the planets which are in the 2nd House, and the aspects to them.
If any planet be therein, and well aspected by others, the nancial condition will be competent.
If a benec (Jupiter or Venus) be therein, and free from evil aspects, the same eﬀect will accrue.
But if the benec in the 2nd should have good aspects from other planets, then there will be considerable wealth.
Any planet in the 2nd House, badly aspected, will produce diﬃculty in acquiring money, and if it be a malec planet which occupies the 2nd House under these conditions, there will be times of stress and even poverty.
Continual hardship and poverty is shown by malec planets in the 2nd House, in evil aspect to the Moon or Sun; while at the same time the planets in the 2nd House will be severely afflicted by others.
Saturn in the Midheaven aﬄicting the Sun or Moon is an indication of reversal of fortune, and such persons usually attain considerable position in the world and are then depleted of everything.
Jupiter or Venus in the 10th House, and near the meridian, are signs of good fortune and success in life, and           [Pg 65]  the same results are due to their rising at birth.
In a general manner the aspects to the Moon in a male horoscope or the Sun in a female horoscope should be consulted, and the planets in good aspect thereto will show the means of good fortune, while those in evil aspect will indicate the sources of loss and hurt, according to the Houses the aﬄicting or assisting planets occupy.
Thus Jupiter in good aspect to the Moon from the 11th House shows gain by friends, advisers, and co- operative measures, because the 11th House rules these relationships and Jupiter is the index of increase.
Similarly, Uranus in the 7th House would show gain by the marriage partner if in good aspect to the Moon, or loss thereby if in evil aspect.
Mars in the 2nd House shows good earning capacity, because Mars is an ambitious and industrious planet i(.e., it produces such eﬀects in the person), and the 2nd House is the domain of nance.
But at the same time it shows extravagance and inability to save money, for Mars is impulsive and lacking thrift.
The 6th House well occupied shows faithful and advantageous servants and employés, such as will augment the fortunes and do good work for the Subject.
Neptune in the 2nd shows complications and an involved state of nance, and frequently it shows loss by fraud and imposition; though in good aspect to other planets it shows gain by such nefarious means.
Uranus indicates many ups and downs of fortune, sudden and unexpected rises and falls.
Thus each planet is judged according to its nature and the aspect it throws to the Moon or Sun, while the               [Pg 66]  planets in the 2nd House are judged by their own natures and the aspects which they receive.
Inheritance is shown by a benec planet in the 5th or 11th House in good aspect to Saturn; but indirect inheritance can be the result of Saturn in good aspect to Jupiter from any part of the figure.
Legacies are shown by good planets, or planets well aspected, in the 8th House; or by Jupiter in good aspect to Uranus from any part of the heavens.
Gain by marriage is shown by benec planets in the 8th House, because the 8th is 2nd from the 7th, and the 7th House rules over the partner.
The potential of each horoscope is capable of being increased by due attention to the sources of gain, as shown by the position and aspects of the planets in various parts of the heavens; but chieﬂy by associating oneself with persons whose horoscopes are in harmony with one’s own.
Thus it happens that individuals are lifted to position and aﬄuence through their association with persons whose horoscopes are in sympathy with theirs.
(See Chap.
XI.
of this Section.)
The Sun and Moon being in good aspect to one another will prevent disaster, or will always provide a means of restoration of fortunes, because it is an index of general good fortune and continual support.
Such persons as have this aspect in their horoscopes need never fear misfortune, for if they should fall into disasters in one place, they will always turn up in another with a complete adjustment of their position.
But when the Sun and Moon are in evil aspect, and particularly when the malec planets are in elevation in the heavens, continual misfortune dogs the footsteps, and though there be spells of good fortune, they are brief and attended with             [Pg 67]  troubles.
The benec planets, Jupiter, Venus, and Sun, being well elevated in the heavens, that is to say, in the 10th or 11th Houses, it is a sign of preponderating good fortune.
But when the malecs are in elevation the reverse results happen.
The Line of Least Resistance.
It is a law in Nature that the line of least resistance is that of greatest progress.
The lightning ﬂash does not come straight to earth, but zigzag by the line of least resistance.
The great rivers do not come by a direct course to the ocean, but by many turns and backward reaches, because they follow the path of least resistance.
When one comes to take account of the years of human life that are spent in the vain endeavour to achieve the impossible, the lessons of Nature are worth reciting.
But what is impossible to one man is facile to another, and the greatest economy of eﬀort is therefore to be secured by proper regard to suitability of occupation and direction of effort.
The principles of Astrology enable us to determine the line of action which at all times will be the most fruitful of results, and in the matter of money-making the matter is decided in the following manner: That planet which has a trine or sextile aspect of the Moon, and is at the same time elevated above the malec planets, especially if it be itself assisted by the good aspects of other planets, receives rst consideration.
The House it is in will indicate the source of benet, but the Sign it is in will show the means through which it will come.
Thus if Uranus      [Pg 68]  should be in the Midheaven, in trine aspect to the Moon, and itself receiving a good aspect from either the Sun, Jupiter, or Venus, it will indicate gain through governmental bodies, authorities, and persons of high rank.
If Uranus should be in the sign Cancer, it would point to matters associated with the ocean, marine aﬀairs, or those in which water is the element in chief employ; as in marine engineering, shipping, dock building, &c. But if Uranus had been in the 11th House, and in the sign Scorpio, then the source of gain would be by means of companies, syndicates, and associations of a collective nature, and the sign Scorpio would show it to be connected with naval defence (because Scorpio is a martial and watery sign) or the utilisation of waste materials, inﬂammable oils, &c., or by systems of drainage, which represent the excretory system of a town.
By looking chieﬂy to the nature of the planet concerned, and that of the sign it occupies, a good artist will readily describe the particular line which is to be pursued.
But here, as in every other matter upon which judgment is made, attention must be paid to the character and disposition of the Subject, his aptitudes and qualications, for it is obviously of little use recommending literature or the law to one whose sole capabilities lie in unintellectual directions.
Natural aptitude, supplemented by the necessary training, are the first considerations, for without these success in any direction is but ill assured.
[Pg 69]                                            CHAPTER VI                                         THE POSITION IN LIFE   This is to be judged from the position of the majority of the planets, but principally from the Midheaven, the planets therein and its aspects.
Thus, if you nd the majority of the planets rising, that is to say, in the 10th, 11th, 12th, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Houses the Subject will be a candidate for responsibility, ambitious of honours and position, and generally independent.
If these or the majority of them be well aspected he will become a man of position, employing others; or, if a woman, will hold an important position in her sphere of life, and be esteemed in the social world.
If the degree on the Midheaven receives good aspects from the major planets, the position will be honourable and secure.
Venus or Jupiter, or the Sun well aspected, in the Midheaven, denotes a superior position, honours, and distinction.
The same will result if these be rising.
When the majority of the planets are above the horizon, even though they be not rising, the Subject will have responsibilities thrust upon him, even though he should not desire them.
If the majority of these planets be well      [Pg 70]  aspected, he will acquit himself creditably and attain to honours.
It is always fortunate for the position that there should be planets exactly on the cusps of either the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 8th, or 12th Houses, for then there will be every opportunity of securing fame and advancement in life.
But when any of the malec planets are found exactly on or nearest to the meridian, whether above or below the horizon, there will be loss of position, reversal, a sinister fame, or disgrace.
The 10th House represents the fame and honour of a person, and the 4th House represents the end of life and that which militates against the fame and honour.
Therefore when there are good planets in these places, the Subject will meet with rewards and honours commensurate with his eﬀorts; but when evil planets occupy the meridian, he will at best sustain his position in life with great difficulty.
It is futile for any one to suppose that the position of a benec planet in the meridian of the horoscope will bring him to fame and elevate him in the world irrespective of his own endeavours.
The planets operate on human aﬀairs in terms of human thought and action, and that by xed laws; never adventitiously.
That “the Gods help those who help themselves to the extent that natural laws permit, is a truth which astrology fully provides for.
Fitness and fortune are as cause and effect to one another in respect of planetary action in human life.
Many planets in cardinal signs will dispose a man to seek fame, and when the Midheaven of the horoscope is well aspected or there be fortunate planets therein, he will attain it.
Cardinal signs on the angles of the            [Pg 71]  horoscope (the meridian and horizon), produce fame outlasting death.
The same if either of the luminaries be exactly on the equinoxes.
Venus in the Midheaven gives social elevation and lifts a person above the sphere of birth.
Good planets in the 11th show patronage.
But when the luminaries are heavily aﬄicted there will be an inconstant fortune and many reverses, so that position gained will be lost again.
Most of the planets under the horizon shows success and position in the latter part of life, while if they be between the 4th and 7th cusps, there will be advantages after marriage, or by means of partnerships.
In judging of the means by which the position will be sustained, respect must be had to the positions of those planets which are in good aspect to the Midheaven, or to benec planets in the Midheaven, and if none be so situated, then those which hold benec aspect to either the Sun or Moon at birth must be taken, and judgment made according to the nature of the planet and the sign it occupies.
Preference should always be given to that planet which has the strongest aspect for good.
Thus if two planets were in trine, that which is in elevation should be preferred, especially if it be strengthened by the good aspects of other planets.
[Pg 72]                                            CHAPTER VII                                   THE CHOICE OF OCCUPATION   The enormous waste of force and time entailed by the experimental trip upon which most young men embark at the outset of their career in life, might be greatly reduced by a proper knowledge of individual aptitude in relation to circumstances.
The average boy cannot readily make up his mind as to what occupation he will follow, because he does not know either enough of his own powers or of the world in which he is called upon to use them.
Parents are in the same diﬃculty.
They must needs wait to see how a boy will shape out.
They study his inclinations to the best of their ability, but without coming to a denite conclusion any sooner than the boy himself.
Given a fair education, such as may t him for almost anything, but which specialises him for nothing in particular, he is put to some desk or bench and there left to his own resources.
By a fortunate chance, he may nd himself suited to his post.
More frequently he is several years in nding out that he has missed his vocation, that his inclinations and his work are not in accord, that he has misapplied his energies for some time, and that he has made a false start.
Fortunately circumstanced at birth he may have been equipped by higher education             [Pg 73]  for some distinctive profession, to which he gains access after the payment of large fees or premiums.
The man has a strong dramatic faculty and the stage claims him after all.
Here is both waste of time and money.
Astrology, as a reliable key to character and inclination, deserves some recognition on the grounds of social economy.
The inclinations of the Subject are judged from the position of the majority of the planets, for if they should be found in the aerial signs, Gemini, Libra, or Aquarius, the inclination will be towards mental occupations, especially science and literature.
In ery signs there is a predisposition to a more robust and active life, such as is aﬀorded by military service, travelling, prospecting, exploring, &c. In earthy signs the aptitude lies in the direction of agriculture, experimental science, surveying, dealing in real estate, broking, &c. In watery signs there is special inclination to pursuits connected with the water, such as sailors, watermen, and others; but frequently to other occupation in which ﬂuids are predominant, such as publicans, wine and spirit merchants, chemists, and oil merchants.
Each sign has its special tendency, and the exact occupation can often be decided thereby, when regard is had to the planet in closest aspect to the Sun or Moon and the sign it occupies.
Thus Aries denotes soldiers and pioneers of movements; Taurus shows dealers in real estate, house agents and brokers; Gemini, literary men and writers of all sorts; Cancer, sailors and publicans; Leo, actors and artists; Virgo, clothes dealers and sellers of confectionery and bread; Libra, valuers, assayers, money-changers, and pawnbrokers; Scorpio, naval sailors,          [Pg 74]  chemists, dealers in oils and spirits; Sagittarius, explorers, divines, lawyers; Capricornus, political agents and ministers of the State; Aquarius, electricians, company promoters, syndics, and scientic researchers; Pisces, dealers in sh and sea produce, warders, and those connected with places of connement, such as prisons and hospitals.
Taking, therefore, the dominant planet and the signs that hold the majority of the planets, the line along which the Subject will make the most progress in the world and acquit himself most successfully, may be readily determined.
No person will make a good soldier who has not Mars as a dominant planet, nor will he succeed with the public if the Moon be not elevated and well aspected, nor become a successful artist, musician, or poet if Venus be not conspicuous in the horoscope.
Generally the inclination is derived from a consideration of the dominant planet, and the degree of success attendant upon the occupation is judged from the aspect which that planet throws to the Sun or Moon, and there can be no great advantage from following an inclination which does not promise some measure of success, as is the case when the dominant planet is in evil aspect to the luminaries.
Thus it happens that some men follow unprotable callings, their judgment being dominated by an inclination adverse to their natural welfare.
Yet never was good work done in the world without a strong inclination and considerable enthusiasm, and Heaven makes its own slaves, its martyrs, and its scapegoats.
And always, the following of an inclination means the            [Pg 75]  sacrice of some of the benets of life.
“Take what thou wilt, but pay the price! is the Divine mandate, according to Emerson.
But unquestionably, the science which enables a man to choose the line of least resistance, which prevents a youth of intellectual tendencies from wasting the best years of his life in drudgery at the desk or bench, is worth a little study.
“Hitch your waggon to a star, is good advice if only we hitch it to the right one.
[Pg 76]                                            CHAPTER VIII                                    MARRIAGE CIRCUMSTANCES   The question as to how, when, and where marriage will take place is an all-absorbing one to the majority of men and women, and no less important than interesting.
Astrology has made it possible to answer these questions categorically and with particular precision and verity.
The conditions of connubial life are judged (in a male horoscope) from the condition of the Moon and Venus, and (in a female horoscope) from that of the Sun and Mars.
The planet to which the luminary rst forms an aspect after birth (that which it “applies to) denotes the marriage partner.
If the aspect be good there will be agreement and the choice of a partner will be fortunate.
But if the aspect be evil, there will be trouble after marriage.
The nature of the planet to which the luminary forms its aspect after birth ought also to be considered, for if it be that the luminary applies by a good aspect to a benec planet, or to one that is well-placed and aspected, then there will be considerable happiness and fortune in marriage.
On the other hand, if both the aspect and the planet be evil—as if the Moon were applying to the opposition of Saturn or Uranus or Mars—               [Pg 77]  then the fate in marriage will be extremely unhappy and disagreements will be frequent and even permanent.
When the aspect and the nature of the planet are at variance, as when the Moon has a good aspect to Saturn, or a bad aspect to Jupiter, there will be a mingled fortune of good and ill in marriage.
There is no better sign of happiness and harmony in marriage than a good aspect between the Sun and Moon.
Moreover, it may happen that the Moon applies by good aspect to a planet after birth, and that there is at the same time a malec body in the 7th House.
This indicates that there will be agreement in the connubial life, but that bereavement will soon follow.
When the Moon applies to Neptune there will be some peculiarity or touch of genius in the partner, according as Neptune may be aspected.
Uranus shows eccentricity and sometimes wilfulness.
Saturn shows steadiness, industry; or jealousy and coldness.
Jupiter indicates a good nature, bountiful and honest, but may be given to excess and extravagance.
Mars induces industry and practicality, but it gives a strong temper and considerable independence.
The Sun shows dignity and loyalty, but may indicate ostentation and foolish pride.
Venus denotes peacefulness and a genial, rened nature, but its perversion brings indiﬀerence, neglect and disorderliness.
Mercury denotes an active and energetic nature, but may produce a busybody and meddler.
Everything depends on the aspect which the signicant luminary throws to the planet it applies to, for if the aspect be good it will indicate the better qualities of that planet; but if evil, then there is frequently the unfortunate consequence of choosing a partner in whom the perverted qualities of the planet are predominant.
[Pg 78]  Good planets in the 7th House indicate a good partner, but when at the same time the aspect of the luminary is evil, it will denote a good marriage, followed by bereavement.
Marriage to a widow (or widower) occurs when Mars and Saturn are the planets concerned in the indications, as if Mars be in the 7th House and in aspect to Saturn, or if the Moon apply to Mars when aspected by Saturn, or when one of them is in the 5th House and the other in the 7th.
Love aﬀairs before marriage are indicated by the 5th House, the planets therein and their aspects, and in a general sense by Venus in a male horoscope and Mars in a female horoscope.
Thus if Venus (or Mars) be aﬄicted by Saturn or Uranus there will be disappointment in the early aﬀections.
Uranus in aspect to Venus gives romantic attachments and much inﬂuence over the other sex.
Neptune in aspect shows idealism, and when aﬄicting Venus it produces chaos and entanglement, danger of seduction.
Mars afflicting Venus gives ardour and impulse.
More than one Marriage is indicated when the luminary is in aspect to more than one planet in a double-bodied sign,e.g., Gemini, Sagittarius, or Pisces.
Or, if the luminary itself be in a double sign and in aspect to any planet other than one which may be in the 7th House.
Also a double sign being on the cusp of the 7th House, and the luminary in a fruitful sign, Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces, or in aspect to planets in those signs.
All these are signs of more than     [Pg 79]  one marriage during life.
Signs of separation or divorce are as follows: The luminary applying to the ill aspect of a malec planet, Venus aﬄicted, and Uranus in the 7th House or aﬄicting the Moon or Venus.
In female horoscopes change the Significators, taking the Sun and Mars instead of the Moon and Venus, and judge the same.
Where more than one marriage is shown, the ruler of the 7th House denotes the rst partner, and the planet ruling the sign it occupies is called its “dispositor or “displacer. This dispositor represents the second partner.
The planet to which the signicant luminary applies is that which is taken to describe the partner, according to the sign it is in.
But if this planet be retrograde, i.e., going backwards in the zodiac by apparent motion, then it only represents an attachment which will be broken oﬀ.
Its dispositor then becomes the signicator of the partner.
But the ruler of the 7th House is taken for the condition and fortunes of the partner, and if it be aﬄicted or badly placed and weak in the horoscope, then the marriage will be ill-assorted, unfortunate, and full of dissatisfaction.
The contrary is the case when the significant planet is well placed and aspected.
The place or circumstances under which the partner will be met may be known from the sign and house occupied by the planet to which the luminary rst applies after birth.
Thus if it be in the 11th House, the partner will be met among friends, at the house of a friend, or introduced by a friend.
If in the 3rd House, then on a short    [Pg 80]  journey or in correspondence; in the 5th, at a place of amusement; in the 10th, in the course of business; and so on, judgment being made according to the places and circumstances ruled by the House occupied by the planet.
[Pg 81]                                            CHAPTER IX                                     INDICATIONS OF PROGENY   The 5th House, the planets therein and the position and aspects of the Moon, have to be considered in this matter.
If the 5th House be occupied by benec planets, or planets well aspected by others, then the progeny will be a source of satisfaction and credit to the Subject, and will be reared to maturity.
But the contrary is the case when the 5th House is occupied by malefic planets and such as may be heavily afflicted.
The Moon represents the tendency in the male and the capacity in the female, and when well aspected, or free from evil aspects and well placed, then there will be good fortune in connection with the progeny.
When Uranus aﬄicts a planet in the 5th House, there will be some premature births, and generally it will be observed that when planets are opposed from the 11th and 5th Houses, or malec planets occupy those houses, there is trouble through the progeny, and usually the loss of one or more during infancy is to be feared.
As to the number of children, no empirical rules exist for the judgment of this matter, which necessarily is a         [Pg 82]  diﬃcult one owing to the fact that we have no means of comparing the horoscopes of man and wife, but the nature of the sign on the cusp of the 5th House is usually to be depended upon for an approximation.
Thus Aries, Leo, and Capricornus give small families.
Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, and Pisces give large families, and the other signs yield a moderate family.
When the Moon is strong, angular, and not aﬄicted, the number is increased.
Twins are born from double-bodied signs occupying the cusp of the 5th House, or planets in the 5th in a double-bodied sign.
The condition of each child is known in a general manner from the alternate Houses, commencing with the 5th.
Thus the rst child is (in a male horoscope) ruled by the 5th House, and planets therein; the second child by the 7th House; the third by the 9th House, and so on.
In a female horoscope the rst child is ruled by the 4th House; the second by the 6th House, and so on.
Thus if it be found that there is probability of loss of some of the progeny, the children most liable to aﬄiction may be known by this method; for the Houses which contain the malec planets, or the aﬄicted planets, correspond to the afflicted progeny.
Illustrious children are born to the Subject when the ruler of the 5th House is in elevation and well aspected, and in a congenial sign.
But if the ruler of the 5th House be badly placed and aspected and in a sign of debility, i.e., opposite to one over which it rules, then the progeny are ill-equipped for the battle of life, either mentally or morally.
The particular qualities and fortunes of the progeny can only be known from their individual horoscopes.
[Pg 83]  When malec planets hold the 12th House in a female horoscope, there will be danger in connement; and the same happens if either of the luminaries, but particularly the Moon, be afflicted in the 5th House.
[Pg 84]                                             CHAPTER X                                      VOYAGES AND JOURNEYS   The indications of short journeys, inland and around the coast, are to be judged from the 3rd House and the planets therein.
If a movable sign be on the cusp of the 3rd House, or planets in a movable sign occupy the 3rd House, then there will be much travelling and many short journeys to and fro.
The aspects to these planets in the 3rd will indicate whether such journeys will be mainly successful or not.
When there are no aspects to the planet or planets in the 3rd House the fortune of short journeys is to be judged from the nature of the planet in the 3rd, as if Jupiter, they will be fortunate and lucrative; but if Saturn, unfortunate and subject to many hindrances and delays.
When malec planets are aﬄicted in the 3rd House, or malec planets in the 3rd throw evil aspects to the Sun or Moon, then there will be dangers and accidents.
Watery signs on the cusp of the 3rd House, or planets in watery signs in the 3rd, indicate cruising and yachting, short journeys by water around the coast.
If the Moon be in good aspect to these planets, then there will be safety in passage; but if aﬄicted by the planets in the 3rd there will be danger of collision, capsizing, &c.,         [Pg 85]  according to the nature of the planet in the 3rd House.
Long voyages are to be judged in exactly similar manner from the 9th House, the planets therein and their aspects.
The 4th House indicates the place of birth, and if this House hold a benec planet, or either the Sun or Moon, well aspected, then there is fortune in the place of birth, and journeys should only be undertaken when they are without doubt fortunate in their issues and admit of a return to the native place.
When, however, the 4th House is occupied by evil planets or planets heavily aﬄicted, it will be advisable to remove from the place of birth and seek fortune in more propitious localities.
In this matter the choice is made by reference to that planet which holds the greatest power for good in the horoscope of birth, and the quarter of the Heavens which it occupies will indicate the direction, as from the place of birth, to which the Subject should repair.
Thus, if between the East horizon and the meridian, South-east; between the meridian and the West horizon, South-west; and so of the rest.
The points of the compass follow the cardinal points of the Heavens, the Midheaven being South; the Nadir, North; the Ascendant, East; and the Descendant, West.
If a malec planet is rising or setting at birth it is advisable to x the place of residence so much to the Eastward of the birthplace as will suﬃce to bring the malec planets out of the angles of the horoscope.
The same if malec planets occupy the 10th or 4th Houses.
On the contrary, if benec planets are in the 3rd and 9th Houses the Subject should            [Pg 86]  move Westward so as to bring the benefic influences into the 10th and 4th Houses.
When benec planets or planets well aspected occupy the angles of the gure at birth the Subject should not travel far, nor reside long away from the place of birth.
Indications of many voyages are as follows: Many planets in watery signs, Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, and also in the sign Virgo.
When the majority of the planets are in cardinal and ﬂexed signs, Aries, Gemini, Cancer, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius, Capricornus, and Pisces, there will be many changes and journeys.
Also if the Sun, Moon, Mars, and Mercury are in either the 3rd, 9th, 12th, or 6th Houses, there will be many journeys and long explorations in foreign countries.
When planets are aﬄicted in watery signs there will be danger in voyages, and if the Moon or Sun be aﬄicted in Virgo there will be submersion due to wreck.
Also, when there are planets, especially malecs, in Scorpio, Leo, Taurus, and Aquarius, aﬄicted by the aspects of other planets, or themselves afflicting the Sun or Moon, then there is danger of drowning.
When the signs of voyaging are propitious, and especially when the indications in the 4th House are not so, then removal from the place of birth to some other permanent centre of activity will be advisable.
But when good planets or planets well aspected are either rising or in the 4th House, the Subject should remain in his native place, and in the end his patience will be justified.
[Pg 87]                                            CHAPTER XI                                     OF FRIENDS AND ENEMIES   The general harmony of the horoscope consists in the positions and aspects of the planets and their relations with the luminaries.
When this is conspicuous there will be many friends and supporters, and the associations of the Subject will be pleasant and protable.
But when the horoscope is fraught with evil aspects and angular positions of the malefics there will be much strife and many enmities.
In a particular sense the friends and associations of the Subject are to be known from the 11th House and the planets therein.
For if there be a benec planet in the 11th, especially if in good aspect to either of the luminaries, there will be many friends and adherents.
Similarly, the enemies of the Subject are known from the 7th House, and secret enemies from the 12th.
Malec planets therein, especially in evil aspect to the Sun or Moon, shows many opponents.
Neptune in any malec aspect to the Sun or Moon shows danger of deceit and treachery being practisedupon              [Pg 88]  the Subject, and if violent testimonies concur from the ill aspects of Mars or Uranus he will be in danger of an ambush.
Saturn in the 7th or 12th shows long feuds and implacable enmities.
Uranus therein shows litigation and heckling of creditors.
Mars therein is an index of violence and passionate hatred.
Mercury therein shows much scandal and many petty annoyances.
Now observe the places of the malec planets and the Houses wherein they are situated.
Take the date when the Sun is in the same longitude as any of these malec planets, which will be the same in any year, and this will be the birthday of persons who are to be avoided as likely to bring mischief into the life.
Supposing, for instance, that Saturn is found at birth in the 10th House, in the 13th degree of the sign Aquarius.
Reference to the Ephemeris (Sect.
II., chap.
i.)
will show that the Sun is in Aquarius 13 on the 1st and 2nd February.
Hence it would be unfortunate for the Subject to serve any man who was born between the 28th January and the 3rd February in any year.
Also, if Uranus were in Leo 23 in the 7th House he should not go into partnership or marriage with anybody born on or near the 15th August in any year.
Take now the places of the benec planets, and also the place of the Moon, and nd the corresponding Solar dates, for these will be the birth dates of such persons as should be cultivated and drawn into close association for mutual benefit.
Observe also the trines and sextiles of the benec planets and of the Moon, and the squares and opposi                                                                                                     tions of          [Pg 89]  the malefics, for these will operate in a minor degree in a similar manner as already indicated.
A comparison of the horoscopes of persons, whether kings or plebeians, with those of others who have wrought great good or evil in their lives, will immediately establish this observation.
Indeed there is nothing more dependable in the whole range of scientic observation than this sympathy and antipathy of horoscopes and their corresponding results.
It is an argument for the claim of its advocates that Astrology should be regarded in the light of a science, for if the planets act not at all upon the dispositions and tendencies of men their squares and oppositions in two separate horoscopes would have no signication.
Let those who are unhappily mated compare their horoscopes and they will nd the signs of discord to which reference has been made above.
On the other hand, let any man who has been lifted to wealth, fame, or position by the patronage of another compare his horoscope with that of his benefactor, and it will be found that the benec planets in the latter hold the places of the Sun, Moon, Midheaven, or Ascendant in his own.
This frequently accounts for the fact that men with comparatively unfortunate horoscopes are sometimes found in positions of inﬂuence and in the enjoyment of considerable fortune.
The complex fabric of life has its warp and woof wherein many coloured threads are woven together for the completing of the grand design, and the great loom of life has its wheels within wheels which only the Great Articer can understand and regulate.
We here below, subjects all of interplanetary action, must content ourselves with the design as revealed to us in the history of mankind, or we      [Pg 90]  must seek to understand the purpose of life, its motif, the complex laws which operate to bring about the unfoldment of the great plan, and thence to prognosticate that which hereafter shall be revealed to the commonplace observer.
[Pg 91]                                             CHAPTER XII                                              THE END OF LIFE   The end of life is judged from the planets occupying the 8th and 4th Houses, for the 8th denotes Death, and the 4th denotes the nal resting-place of man.
When benec planets, or the Luminaries well aspected, occupy these Houses, you may judge that the end will be peaceful, normal, and that death will take place in the midst of congenial and even exceptionally agreeable surroundings.
When, however, the malec planets hold these Houses, or aﬄict the luminaries therein, you may judge greater stress and privation.
Uranus in the 8th House denotes a sudden death, and the same result is observed when the Luminaries therein are aﬄicted by Uranus.
Neptune in the 8th denotes danger of trance, coma, and simulated death, and when this position is observed it is necessary that all the signs of mortication should be present before interment is eﬀected.
Saturn produces death by privation and obstructions, by chills and colds.
Mars induces death by fevers and inflammatory action, and frequently by hæmorrhage.
Planets in Fixed signs in the 8th House show death from heart or throat aﬀections, aﬀections of the excretory            [Pg 92]                                                                                                                              [Pg 94]                                            SECTION IV                           THE STARS IN THEIR COURSES                                              CHAPTER I                                           THE TIME-MEASURE   The planets, in their motions after birth, come into certain relations with the planets in the horoscope of birth, and also form aspects among themselves owing to the diversities of their motions in the Zodiac.
In Astrological science there are two separate means of calculating the time of events, but both methods consist of bringing the body of one planet to the body or aspect of another, which process is called “Directing, and the arc described by the moving body is called an “Arc of Direction. The rst of these methods is the discovery of Claudius Ptolemy, the famous mathematician and geographer, the author of the Syntaxis, as set forth in his work the Tetrabiblos, or Four Books on the inﬂuence of the Stars.
This method had the support and conrmation of the great Kepler.
It has respect to the rising, setting, and             [Pg 95]  meridian passage of the planets after birth, whereby they are brought to the places or aspects of the planets in the Radix (the Root), which is the horoscope of birth.
The limits and nature of this work do not permit of a thorough exposition of this method, which entails some little knowledge of spherical trigonometry, but the reader who desires to perfect himself therein is referred to the author’s work, entitled “Prognostic Astronomy. A facile application of the method is here given, by which any one may, by the aid of the Tables of Houses, make certain of the more important calculations by rule of thumb, and predict thence the times of remarkable events.
The principle involved is this: The number of degrees which pass over the meridian between the moment of birth and the rising or culminating of a planet, will equal the number of years which must elapse from birth until the influence of that planet becomes dominant.
Thus, if Jupiter at birth is coming to the meridian, that is to say, if it be in the 10th, 11th, or 12th House, count the number of degrees between the meridian and Jupiter, and in so many years from the time of birth there will be an access of good fortune.
Similarly, if Saturn or other of the malec planets be coming to the meridian, the number of degrees between it and the Midheaven will indicate the age at which troubles will abound.
Also, when the planets have passed the meridian, the measure is made in the same way, by bringing the Midheaven to the place of the planet, counting the degrees between the planet and Midheaven for the number of years at which it will operate.
But the same and other planets may be directed to the horizon, by taking the Table of Houses for the latitude of        [Pg 96]  the birthplace (Sect.
I., chap.
iii.)
and nding therein under the column marked “Ascen. (Ascendant) the longitude held by any of the planets.
Observe then what degree is on the Midheaven in the column marked 10 (10th House), and count the number of degrees between this Midheaven and the Midheaven at birth.
The result will give the age at which the effects of such planets will be experienced.
Thus, for a person born in or near Liverpool or in the same latitude, suppose the Midheaven at birth to be in Scorpio 0, and Saturn to be in the 2nd House in Aquarius 8 degrees.
I wish to bring Saturn to the horizon.
In the Table of Houses I nd that Aquarius 8 is on the Ascendant when Sagittarius 9 is on the Midheaven, and I therefore count from Scorpio 0 to Sagittarius 9.
This gives the age of 39 years, and as Saturn is in the 2nd House at birth, I say that at 39 years of age the Subject would experience nancial disaster, and because Saturn comes then to the Ascendant, I also say there would be serious illness and depression of spirits.
When planets are setting at birth they are brought to the opposition of the Ascendant in a similar manner, only the opposite point of the zodiac must be found in the Tables under the Ascendant.
Thus, if Mars were in the 7th House at birth in the 11th degree of Cancer, I nd the opposite point (Capricornus 11) under the column of the Ascendant, and I note that Scorpio 19 is then on the Midheaven, so that from Scorpio 0 to Scorpio 19 gives 19 years, at which age the Subject would have a serious illness due to inﬂammatory action in the stomach and               [Pg 97]  probably produced by overwork and worry, as indicated by the sign Cancer and the planet Mars, or if there be indications of an accident, then an accident by scalding with hot water or acids would be predicted.
Planets are brought to the opposition of the Midheaven by counting the degrees which intervene between the longitude on the lower meridian at birth and that held by the planet.
In all such directions the conjunctions of benec planets are advantageous when directed to the Midheaven or Ascendant, and the conjunctions of the malecs are indicated of periods of bad fortune.
The oppositions are uniformly evil, whether the planet involved in the direction be a benefic or malefic.
(Sect.
I., chap.
iv.)
These are the directions of the planets to the two Signicators, the Midheaven and Ascendant.
The Midheaven appertains to honours and credit, while the Ascendant has relation to the personal and bodily welfare and the general fortunes.
To direct the Midheaven or Ascendant to the other aspects of the planets, such as the sextile, trine, semisquare or square, it is only necessary to note the degrees in which these aspects fall and bring them to the Midheaven or Ascendant as if the body of the planet were itself there, and in the manner already indicated.
The Sun is directed after birth by its motion in the zodiac, which can be found in the Ephemeris for the year of birth, and the aspects it forms to the planets in the horoscope and in the daily progress should be tabulated.
In most Ephemerides they are already calculated, so that the labour is considerably lightened.
Each day after birth        [Pg 98]  will represent one year of life, the mean motion of the Sun being about 1 degree per day.
All that is necessary, therefore, is to count the number of days from birth to the date when the Sun forms an aspect, and that will give the age at which the planet aspected will produce its effects.
As the Sun goes through the zodiac the other bodies make progress along with it, in which course they form aspects to the Midheaven, Ascendant, the Sun and Moon in the horoscope of birth.
These are called “Secondary directions, and in connection with the Sun’s aspects after birth, constituted the system in use among the Arabian astrologers.
Minor periods of good and bad fortune, subsidiary to the above periodic inﬂuences, are taken from the Moon’s progress after birth, in which one day equals one year of life, and two hours equal one month.
These directions of the Moon aﬀord a monthly prognosis of the course of events, and are useful in the conduct of minor aﬀairs in life.
When they are contrary to the general trend and import of the periodic directions made to the Midheaven, Ascendant and Sun, they act indiﬀerently, and frequently produce only passing benets or annoyances; but when they are in agreement with the Primary Directions cited above, then they accentuate and dene the nature and time of events.
As if the Primaries be good and the Lunar directions evil, then there will be a predominance of good fortune with some current disturbances; but both being good there will be abundant success and satisfaction; while if the Primaries be evil and the Lunar directions good, the latter will serve only to   [Pg 99]  moderate the effects for the time being of the Primary evil indications.
An intelligent apercu of the principles of directing will greatly enhance the value of any prognostications made from the horoscope of birth, as it will enable the student to select those periods in the life when the eﬀects due to any planet are most likely to eventuate.
Thus, if Saturn be in the 2nd House at birth, it may be said that there would follow some periods of great nancial stress, and the rising of Saturn by direction after birth would show the time when one, at all events, of such periods would be experienced.
And here is the great fact upon which astrologers the world over are prepared to stand or fall.
If the planets have no eﬀect in the lives of men, their directions to the angles of the horoscope can have no eﬀect; but never was it found that a man had evil fortunes at the period when the planet Jupiter was directed to the Midheaven or Ascendant, or anything but bad fortune when Saturn was similarly directed.
The fact is there, and we cannot get away from it.
The only question is as to how far we can intelligently carry our investigations beyond that point, and intelligibly convey our discoveries to the world by their application to the aﬀairs of daily life.
The reader may judge for himself from a perusal of these pages.
The directions being calculated and tabulated in order of their occurrence, the time and general nature of the inﬂuences operating in successive periods of the life will stand revealed.
The particular nature of the events indicated by the several directions may be known from (a) the House in which the directed planet is situated; (b)       [Pg 100]  the Sign it occupies; and (c) the aspect it forms, considered in relation to the nature of the planet.
For example: If Uranus at birth were in the 9th House and the sign Gemini, its direction to the Midheaven would be the index of litigation in connection with writings, publications, or means of transit; because the 9th House, among other things, has relation to litigation and legal aﬀairs, and Gemini (the 3rd House sign) to communications, writings, &c., while Uranus denotes sudden and unexpected events, ruptures, alienations, and complexities.
So if Saturn were in the 6th House in the sign Aquarius, its direction to the opposition of the Ascendant would indicate chills to the blood, anemia, &c., constituting a serious illness with probability of low fever; because the 6th House rules sickness, and Aquarius rules the blood, while Saturn is the cause of chills, paucity, and impediments.
Thus the time and nature of events may be known with great certainty.
[Pg 101]                                              CHAPTER II                                     THE EFFECTS OF TRANSITS   Among the number of important indicators to which Astrologers refer in making a forecast of concurrent events, there are the transits of the planets over the places of the Signicators at birth, the positions of Eclipses, and those of the lunations.
The rst of these chronocrators depends upon the revolutions of the planets in their orbits.
Each planet has a period in which it completes its revolution in the heavens, in the course of which it passes the places of the Sun, Moon, Midheaven, and Ascendant of the horoscope.
This passage over the radical Signicators is technically termed its “transit, and it will be found that such transits aﬀord a very precise and reliable source of prognostication, for the time of a planet’s transit is known in advance of its occurrence (see Sect.
II., chap.
iv.
), and the eﬀects of such transit are in exact terms of the nature of the planet concerned.
It is only necessary to add that the Midheaven and the Sun have relation to the position and honour of the Subject, while the Moon and Ascendant have relation to the personal health and general fortunes.
The Sun and Midheaven also signify              [Pg 102]  the father, and the Moon has general signication of the mother.
Venus signies domestic and love aﬀairs, the aﬀections and sentiments; while Mercury signies the mental disposition.
So Uranus in transit over the place of Venus will give a love aﬀair, a romantic attachment.
Mars over the place of Venus will engender passionate love.
Saturn over Venus will give disappointment or bereavement; and Neptune thereover will bring entanglements and complications, with danger of being led astray.
Saturn over Mercury will produce melancholy and many errors of judgment.
Mars over the same planet will excite the mind and dispose to impulse and unreasoning anger, quarrels and disputation.
Uranus over Mercury will render the mind wayward and headstrong, disposed to erratic courses and egotistic methods.
Neptune passing the place of Mercury produces deceits, treacheries, and apprehension of impending evil, a sense of espionage and ambush.
It involves the mind in tortuous and complicated schemes, and disposes to secrecy and wariness.
The transits of the major planets are of chief signicance, and their eﬀects are rendered more weighty and lasting when at the time of transit they are retrograde in the zodiac; while their stationary positions on the places of the Significators have almost the same power as Primary Directions.
Of Eclipses.
An Eclipse of the Sun or Moon falling on the place of any Signicator in the horoscope of birth is of a sinister import, and cannot be too seriously considered.
Falling on the Ascendant or the Moon they aﬀect the health and           [Pg 103]  general fortunes very seriously, and only a series of subsequent good directions can avail to restore the Subject to his normal condition.
On the Midheaven or the Sun, the honour and fortunes may both be aﬀected, and in the same serious degree.
The Eclipses falling on the places of the other planets will produce eﬀects in accord with the nature of those planets and the Houses they occupy.
To have any appreciable eﬀect, the Eclipses must be within two degrees of any of the radical positions, or of their opposition aspects.
Of Lunations.
The Lunations recur in the same part of the Ecliptic every nineteen years.
Considered in relation to the current indications they aﬀord the means of a monthly forecast of events.
Thus, if the lunation for the month falls on the place of Jupiter in the horoscope of birth, it will produce good eﬀects in that department of life which is governed by the House in which Jupiter is situated; as if in the 11th, through friends; in the 4th, through property or rental; in the 6th, through servants and health; in the 8th, through a financial colleague, &c. The eﬀects of Lunations are subsidiary to the current Lunar directions, and these in turn are subsidiary to the transits, and the transits to the Primary Directions.
By this it is not meant that they are inoperative, nor that they fail to indicate the events of the month, but their power and degree of inﬂuence is subject to the greater inﬂuence of superior causes.
And as a general observation it may be aﬃrmed that the less frequently any celestial position occurs in a horoscope, the greater is its inﬂuence.
This fact gives to primary directions their       [Pg 104]  great inﬂuence in the life, for they can only occur once in a lifetime; and for the same reason Eclipses have a major signicance, for the same Eclipse only recurs after an interval of 649 years.
The transits of Neptune, of Uranus, of Saturn and Jupiter and Mars follow in their order of frequency.
Neptune has a revolution of about 165 years, Uranus 84 years, Saturn 30 years, Jupiter 12 years, and Mars 1¼ years.
Major eﬀects must not therefore be referred to inferior causes, and minor eﬀects must not be referred to superior causes.
In universal or even national cataclysms, individual fortunes are submerged.
[Pg 105]                                               CHAPTER III                              HOW TO SUMMARISE A HOROSCOPE   Before leaving the exposition of this subject, it may be of advantage to the reader if I give some idea of the method to be pursued in the complete handling of a horoscope.
First, then, erect the gure of birth, taking care to use the Ephemeris of the year of birth, and also the correct Table of Houses for the latitude of the place of birth.
Next proceed to attempt a description of the chief personal traits of the Subject, following in succession with a well-considered judgment on the constitution, hereditary tendencies, the health and pathological predispositions, the mental traits and disposition, considering these latter in relation to the state of health indicated.
Then pass to a consideration of the environing conditions of life; the nancial condition and outlook; the position in life; the occupation; prospects and conditions of marriage; of progeny.
Judge next concerning voyages and journeys.
Finish with a statement regarding the predominance of friends or enemies, and select dates by Solar positions, as already instructed.
In cases where it is not objected to, an approximation may be              [Pg 106]  made to the time and nature of death.
Throughout the whole of this judgment, the periods when these predicted eﬀects will come into force should be made by reference to the rising, setting, and meridian passage of the planets, the solar aspects, and transits.
Care should be taken to weigh justly and impartially the evidence set before you in the gure of the heavens for birth.
Major importance should be given to those planets which are in angles, and those which are in elevation, for the nearer a planet may be to the Midheaven, the greater is its inﬂuence for good or ill, according to its nature and aspect.
Read what you see, not what you imagine should be the destiny of an individual.
If you are in complete ignorance of his person, position, and environment, so much the better.
If you follow carefully the various rules which are contained in this book, you may at rst make some errors of judgment, but as you become familiar with the task, even these errors will become few and far between, and in the end the language of the horoscope will become so intelligible and clear that it will interpret itself, and the whole trend and potentiality for good or ill of any birth-gure will force itself upon you in just the same way as when a man walks into your presence with his character clearly stamped upon his face, so that you have only to look and know.
Having become procient in the judgment of birth-gures, you will do well to proceed to a closer study of the mathematics of astrology, making yourself procient in the various methods of directing, so that you may at any             [Pg 107]  time refine upon your general prognostics, and make predictions which are clear, sharp, and to the point.
Undoubtedly there is a modicum of intuitive perception at work in the judgment of any horoscope, which will enable you to seize upon the small details and exact pointing of any matter, and this perhaps constitutes the whole diﬀerence between the rule of thumb worker and the inspirational reasoning of the intuitive worker.
The one exhausts the books and the other embellishes them.
It is so with science in every department.
The books will take you up to a certain point of prociency, and a strict regard for the formulæ will keep you within the bounds of safety.
But if you are ever to make a discovery or become a recognised exponent of any science, you must be naturally gifted with what is called the “scientic imagination, another name for intuition.
But at no point does true intuition part company with exact reasoning.
There is no lesion.
The one is an extension of the other.
It is the higher reason, which argues from the known to the unknown.
And the Astrologer is in this respect as the poet, “born, not made. But a moment’s reﬂection will suﬃce to convince you that the more facile you may become with the book-learning and technique of Astrology, the more you will leave the intuition free to act.
When a lad is struggling with his multiplication tables, his appreciation of the binomial theorem or the diﬀerential calculus cannot be said to amount to much.
And, in the same way, a person who is stuﬃng down the Alphabet of Astrology cannot be expected to intuit anything concerning the potential of the Sun’s direction to the quadrature of Saturn.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astrology, by Sepharial  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.
You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org.
If you are not located in the United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
Title: Astrology      How to Make and Read Your Own Horoscope  Author: Sepharial  Release Date: September 25, 2014 [EBook #46963]  Language: English  Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1  *** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTROLOGY ***     Produced by Charlene Taylor, Peter Vachuska, donovan, Reiner Ruf, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net                                ASTROLOGY:                                       HOW TO MAKE AND READ                                       YOUR OWN HOROSCOPE                                                            By                                                 SEPHARIAL                   EDITOR OF “MOORE’S AND “OLD MOORE’S ALMANACS AUTHOR OF “THE                   MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY, “PROGNOSTIC ASTRONOMY, “THE BIRTHDAY                          BOOK OF DESTINY, “THE CRYSTAL AND THE SEER, ETC.
ILLUSTRATED                                 ADVANCED THOUGHT PUB.
CO.                                            216 WEST AUSTIN AVE.                                              CHICAGO, ILL.
Copyright, 1920                                                  Chicago, Ill.                                                                                                                             [Pg 5]  Preface to the Revised and Enlarged Edition  Since the publication of this small manual of practical Astrology, two editions of which have been exhausted, the attention given to the subject has so far extended as to create an increased demand for a concise work of this nature, designed for the initial use of students and oﬀered at a price that is within the means of all.
It is believed that the revision and enlargement of the present work will render it even more popular than hitherto with beginners.
The practical uses of Astrology are daily more and more recognized and appreciated, and although some of the higher and later developments of Astrology in its relation to every-day problems have necessarily been withheld from these pages, yet it is to be hoped that so much as is here presented of an abstruse and recondite science will enable the student to pursue the subject with increasing assurance and satisfaction, in which case doubtless he will readily discover for himself, and without any special pointing on my part, that Astrology is primarily and finally a practical and useful study.
There are, of course, many aspects of this fascinating subject which nd no place in this small work, which deals solely with Genethliacal Astrology, or the doctrine of Nativities.
Yet if it be true, as I think to be the case, that “the proper study for mankind is man, then undoubtedly we are right in selecting this phase of Astrological Science as that to which the student should first devote himself.
When we have thoroughly arrived at an understanding of the complex nature of human character and the primary causes of variety in expression, when we have seen for ourselves how the many-coloured dome of Life              [Pg 6]  overarches us of this sublunary world with its kaleidoscopic interplay of forces, we shall be to some extent better equipped not only to deal with character as we nd it, but also to direct the forces of the human mind along channels which lead to the preservation of our social economy, and that not by any restrictive measures or harmful suppression of natural passions and powers, but by conversion of them into forms that are conservative and useful.
To apply oneself to the specialization of inherent faculty, to nd the line of least resistance, and to discover the measure of one’s own soul in the universe and the limit to which ambition can safely aspire, these are things necessary to be known and things that Astrology makes clear to the mind in the very earliest stages of our study.
And apart from the scientic verities to which the science of planetary inﬂuence directs us, there are other not less important and fascinating truths of a purely philosophic nature to which it inevitably impels the mind and which cannot fail to exercise a tremendous inﬂuence in the shaping of our thought in regard to the purpose of life.
It places the thoughtful student in an entirely new position with regard to many of the deeper problems of existence, and it is certainly the fact that to those who newly come to its study, Astrology is a revelation, an enlightenment, and a conviction from which there is no possible or desirable escape.
SEPHARIAL.
[Pg 7]                                              Astrology                                                                                                                           [Pg 9]                                             Introduction  From the earliest ages of the world’s history the subject of Astrology has excited the interest of, and exercised a great inﬂuence over, the minds of a certain order of thinking men.
The science has never been universal in its acceptance, though it is safe to say that, with its countless adherents in the East and the ever-increasing number of its advocates in the West, there is no faith which has a more universal application than the belief in the inﬂuence of the heavenly bodies over the destinies of human beings.
It is not possible within the limits of a small handbook such as this to adequately consider the philosophic paradox which makes of Freewill in man a “necessity in play; but it is obvious that the concept is not altogether unscientic, seeing that it is customary to speak of the “free path of vibration in chemical atoms while at the same time it is known that these atoms have their restricted characteristics, modes of motion, &c., and are all subject to the general laws controlling the bodies of which they form integral parts.
Let it suﬃce that if we can trace an actual connectedness between the disposition of the heavenly bodies at the moment of a birth and the known life and character of the individual           [Pg 10]  then born, and an exact correspondence between the course of events in that life with the changes occurring in the heavens subsequent to the moment of birth, we shall do well to accept the fact for what it is worth, and arrange our philosophic notions accordingly.
As far back as the year B.C.
2154, we nd mention of the great importance attaching to the celestial phenomena in the minds of Chinese rulers.
It is recorded in the Historical Classic of China that at that time the astrologers Hi and Ho neglected their duties so that when, on the 10th of October, there was a great eclipse of the Sun at Peking between seven and nine o’clock in the morning, the people were wholly unprepared for it, and “ran about here and there in the utmost consternation. For this oﬀence Hi and Ho were deprived of their oﬃces, their estates were conscated and they were driven from the kingdom.
Among the Hindus we have the classical writers Garga, Parashara, and Mihira, together with their legions of commentators.
The Assyrian records are full of astrological allusions regarding the inﬂuence of planetary conjunctions and stellar positions.
The Greek mythology is nothing but a vast system of cosmographical astrology, and there is no other history in it than what you may read in the constellations of the heavens and the corresponding evolution of the human race.
Aristotle made it a part of his philosophy.
Hipparchus, Hippocrates, Thales, Galenius, and others subscribed an intelligent belief in its principles.
To Claudius Ptolemy, however, we are indebted for the rst concise and scientic statement of its principles and practice, so far as Europe is concerned.
He wrote the Tetrabiblos, or          [Pg 11]  Four Books, and laid the foundations of a true astrological science.
Julius Firmicus conrmed Ptolemy and enlarged upon his observations.
The subsequent discovery of the planets Uranus and Neptune by Herschel and Adams, widened the eld of research and gave to later astrologers the clue to much that hitherto had been imperfectly understood.
Not that these discoveries overturned the whole system of astrology, as some have imagined and foolishly stated, or that they negatived the conclusions drawn from the observed eﬀects of the seven anciently known bodies of the solar system, but it became possible after a lapse of time to ll in the blank spaces and to account for certain events which had not been traced to the action of any of the already known planets.
The discovery of argon did not destroy our conclusions regarding the nature and characteristics of oxygen or hydrogen or nitrogen, nor give an entirely new meaning to the word “atmosphere. If even so many as seven new planets should be discovered, there would yet not be a single paragraph of this book which would need revising.
What is known regarding planetary action in human life is known with great certainty, and the eﬀects of one planet can never be confounded with those of another.
Incomplete as it must needs be, it is yet a veritable science both as to its principles and practice.
It claims for itself a place among the sciences for the sole reason that it is capable of mathematical demonstration, and deals only with the observed positions and motions of the heavenly bodies; and the man who holds to the principia of Newton, the solidarity of the solar system, the interaction of the planetary bodies and their consequent electrostatic eﬀects upon the Earth, cannot, while              [Pg 12]  subject to the air he breathes, deny the foundation principles of astrology.
The application of these principles to the facts of everyday life is solely a matter of prolonged research and tabulation upon an elaborate scale which has been going on for thousands of years in all parts of the world, so that all the reader has to do is to make his own horoscope and put the science to the test of true or false.
The present writer is in a position to know that the study of astrology at the present day is no less sincere than widely spread, but few care to let their studies be known, for, as Prof. F. Max Müller recently said, “So great is the ignorance which confounds a science requiring the highest education, with that of the ordinary gipsy fortune-teller. That to which the great Kepler was compelled “by his unfailing experience of the course of events in harmony with the changes taking place in the heavens, to subscribe “an unwilling belief, the science which was practised and advocated by Tycho Brahe under all assaults of fortune and adverse opinion, the art that arrested the attention of the young Newton and set him pondering upon the problems of force and matter, which fascinated the minds of such men as Francis Bacon, Archbishop Usher, Haley, Sir George Witchell, Flamstead, and a host of others, is to-day the favourite theme of thousands of intelligent minds and bids fair to become a subject of popular inquiry.
It is believed that the present work will be of considerable assistance to those who seriously contemplate an initial study of the science of horoscopy, and although it by no means exhausts what is known on the subject, yet it will be found accurate and reliable as far as it goes, and will enable any one of ordinary intelligence to test   [Pg 13]  the claims of Astrology for himself.
This is as much as can be expected in the limits of a small handbook.
The literature of the subject is considerable, and the present writer only takes credit to himself so far as his own wide experience and practice have enabled him to present the subject in a simple and brief manner.
[Pg 15]                                                 Contents                                            SECTION I                                  THE ALPHABET OF THE HEAVENS                        CHAP.
PAGE                             I.
THE PLANETS, THEIR NATURES AND TYPES                       17                            II.
THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC                                    24                           III.
THE CELESTIAL HOUSES                                       29                           IV.
THE ASTRONOMICAL ASPECTS                                    31                                         SECTION II                             THE CONSTRUCTION OF A HOROSCOPE                              I.
THE EPHEMERIS AND ITS USES                                  34                             II.
TO ERECT A FIGURE OF THE HEAVENS                            36                            III.
THE TABLES OF HOUSES                                        39                            IV.
PLANETARY TRANSITS                                           43                             V. TABLE OF ECLIPSES                                            47                                           SECTION III                                  HOW TO READ THE HOROSCOPE                              I.
THE PLANETS IN THE HOUSES                                   51                             II.
THE CONSTITUTION                                            54                            III.
HEALTH AND SICKNESS                                         56                            IV.
HOW TO READ CHARACTER AND DISPOSITION                        59                             V. FINANCIAL PROSPECTS                                          64                            VI.
THE POSITION IN LIFE                                         69                           VII.
THE CHOICE OF OCCUPATION                                     72                           VIII.
MARRIAGE CIRCUMSTANCES                                      76                            IX.
INDICATIONS OF PROGENY                                       81                             X. VOYAGES AND JOURNEYS                                         84                            XI.
OF FRIENDS AND ENEMIES                                       87                           XII.
THE END OF LIFE                                              91                                            SECTION IV                                   THE STARS IN THEIR COURSES                              I.
THE TIME-MEASURE                                           94                             II.
THE EFFECTS OF TRANSITS                                   101                            III.
HOW TO SUMMARISE A HOROSCOPE                              105                                 HOW TO BECOME A SUCCESSFUL                           IV.
108                                 ASTROLOGER                             V. A POPULAR ILLUSTRATION                                     114                           VI.
PLANETARY PERIODS, ETC.
127                           VII.
REVOLUTIONS, ECLIPSES, INGRESSES, ETC.
137                                                                                                                              [Pg 17]                                                                                                  [Pg 108]                                              CHAPTER IV                     HOW TO BECOME A SUCCESSFUL ASTROLOGER   I take it that nobody nowadays can aﬀord to fritter away time in the study of subjects which are not likely to become a source of benet to himself and others.
If there be such people among my readers, which I consider unlikely, I may dismiss them oﬀhand with the remark that they will never become successful astrologers, for the rst word of practical astrology is Utility.
If the science had not its practical application to the aﬀairs of everyday life, if its principles contained no word of assurance and hope for the myriad toilers of this world, no word of admonition for the self-indulgent parasites of modern social life, if, in short, it did not make for the betterment of human life and thought, it would never have attracted the attention of Aristotle, Cicero, Galen, Claudius Ptolemy, Thales, and others of the old world, and such men as Bacon, Cardan, Archbishop Usher, Naibod, Mercator, Ashmole, Kenelm Digby, Sir Christopher Heydon, Dryden, Dr. John Butler, Sir George Wharton, Vincent Wing, George Witchel, Tycho Brahe, Kepler, and Flamstead of more recent biography.
Indeed, in whatever age or country we may elect to make our inquiries concerning Astrology, there are to be found a host             [Pg 109]  of intelligent and even illustrious advocates in every department of life and learning.
Suﬃce it to say that the modern student of this most ancient of all sciences is at all times in very good company.
Let it rst be understood that there is an object to be attained in the study of Astrology, and that the pursuit of it in the gratication of an idle curiosity alone will inevitably entail the waste of time which invariably attaches to idleness of all descriptions, and we may then protably consider whether or not the subject is worth the labour which it will demand from the man who has something to do in the world and little enough time in which to do it.
These are stressful times, and we have to be economical in our eﬀorts.
We have strength enough to carry us through, but neither strength enough to thresh the wind nor time enough to fish in puddles.
What, then, does Astrology offer to the patient worker, the man who would become a successful Astrologer?
First and foremost it will enable him to gain an insight into individual motive and character which no other science can possibly aﬀord.
It will enable him to know himself, his own strength and weakness, and so t him to deal harmoniously and justly with others.
It will enhance his opportunities to the extent that he is able to foresee and make use of all benec inﬂuences operating through his own environment.
It will give him timely warning of his approach to the quicksands and pitfalls which occur in his passage through life.
He will discern his special          [Pg 110]  physical weaknesses, and the times of his predisposition to sickness, the nature thereof, and the precautions which are necessary.
He will know whom to cultivate and whom to avoid, and in selecting a partner in business or a wife for his home, he will be guided by a foreknowledge of evils to be avoided and of good things to be gained.
He will choose his path in life with the condence that it is for him the line of least resistance and therefore that of greatest progress.
He will not become obsessed by ambitions beyond his power to achieve.
He will learn the power of adaptation to environment, and thereby eﬀect his work in the world with the least possible friction and waste of force.
He will know when to make provision against sickness, accident, and death.
He will not invest capital where interest is not to be gained.
He will see the end from the beginning.
It may not make him a brilliant success in the world, but it will assuredly save him from being a failure.
He will nd causes for inexplicable things, and his mind will rest content in the knowledge hat while he is working out the highest potentialities of his own horoscope, the major problems and intricacies of life are not of his making or needful of his solving.
And nally, when his time comes to “shuﬄe oﬀ this mortal coil, he will be prepared, and will know that it is the will of Heaven, expressed and determined from the moment of his birth.
Rightly employed, Astrology cannot fail to improve the man who makes of it a serious study, tting him to be of greater use to others and of higher service to the race at large.
But to become a successful Astrologer he must study patiently for several years, testing each statement that is           [Pg 111]  made in the books by reference to his own and several other horoscopes.
He must be able to erect a gure of the Heavens with mathematical accuracy for any given time and place, work out directions by the use of the sphere or trigonometrical tables, and have a competent knowledge of the motions and periods of the various planetary bodies.
When thus satised in his own mind that Astrology is a dependable science, and that he is capable of demonstrating it under test conditions, he must be generous in the use of it.
Here and there he will nd one who is opposed to the belief that the stars have any inﬂuence in human aﬀairs.
Let him not waste logic with such a man, but go straight to the task of convincing him by an appeal to facts.
For preference, select a period when the directional inﬂuences are such as seem likely to hit the sceptic with considerable force, dene the event, make a careful calculation of the time of its fullment, and put them on paper, which, being yet unread by the man of Common-sense, should be placed under cover, sealed, and endorsed to be opened only after a certain date.
Now a man who has been hammered rather severely and in quite an unexpected manner, is usually open to conviction of truth when he nds that the nature and date of his disaster have been accurately foretold.
Being a man of “common-sense and not of intuition, he will probably think that the Astrologer might even have saved him from the consequences of his own lack of foresight.
So indeed might the Astrologer have done had he taken the management of aﬀairs from the beginning; but to step in half-way to arrest causes which are already in operation and charged with inevitable effects, is requiring too much of any man short of a Prime Minister!
[Pg 112]  There are certain things which even the most astute deductive reasoner cannot foresee, and these are the points that should be utilised by the Astrologer who seeks to convince others of the truth of his science.
A man cannot reason from his doorstep to a street accident.
If he could he would avoid it.
All men are not subject to accidents, however.
But almost all are subject to bereavements, losses, sicknesses, and changes of fortune.
Those are the points which the Astrologer intent on proselytising, usually makes use of.
But events need not be in futurity to carry conviction.
If it can be shown that by mathematical calculations the events of the past can be recited with precision and exactness, it is evident to the meanest intellect that nothing hinders from an extension of such calculations into the future.
And once convinced of the reliability of such claims to foreknowledge, the practical man of the world is not slow to avail himself of its uses.
But Astrology is not exhausted in the study of individual horoscopes, for there are other departments of this extensive science.
The inﬂuence of the planets upon the weather, as embodied in Astro-meteorology; the rise and fall of Empires, political changes, the outbreak of wars, of revolutions, of epidemics, as dened by State Astrology so much in repute among the Oriental rulers; the occurrence of tidal waves, earthquakes, and other seismic phenomena, all form a part of the complete equipment of the practical Astrologer.
It would be superﬂuous to recite here the numerous and strikingly accurate forecasts which have been madeby           [Pg 113]  modern exponents of the science, but it is only right to say that they reﬂect considerable credit upon their authors, for the above-mentioned departments of astrological learning are by no means in the same eﬃcient state as Genethliacal Astrology, to an outline of which this work is devoted.
Anciently it was otherwise, and even in the East at this day they hold some secrets of traditional knowledge, concerning which they are unduly mysterious and of which we have only the evidence afforded by more exact prediction upon certain points.
Prejudice and Ignorance are the twin giants which bar the path of the world’s progress to-day, even as they have ever done.
Step by step they have been beaten back, baﬄed by the light of Reason, harassed by the arrows of Truth.
The world is redeeming its ancient heritage.
All that is now required to establish the paramount truth of Astrology as a science is an impartial and thorough investigation, preferably at the hands of scientic men, of its methods and principles.
Not that the truth is to be ratied at the hands of modern scientists, seeing that their own teaching constitutes a mere shifting orthodoxy, liable at any moment to undergo a fundamental change in theory by the discovery of a single new fact—but that to such men rightly belongs the duty of disproving the claims of Astrology to be considered as a science, for it is a fact to be regretted that certain members of their body have written against the subject in a spirit of prejudice and without adducing any data in support of their contention, which ill becomes any man of scientic pretensions and is above all things detrimental to the cause of Truth.
[Pg 114]                                             CHAPTER V                                     A POPULAR ILLUSTRATION   In order to summarise and illustrate the principles which have been enunciated in the course of this work, I shall avail myself of the horoscope of Mr. Joseph Chamberlain, who was born on the 8th of July, 1836, at Highbury, the time of birth being stated to have been at about 2.30 in the morning.
Calculations have since enabled us to x the exact time of birth as at 2 h. 36 m. a.m.
I subjoin the horoscopical gure for that time, the calculation of which is as follows:—                                                                              H.   M.   S.                              Midheaven in R.A. at                                                        7th July, 1836… 7 1 58                              Noon                              Add time elapsed since        …      … … 14 36 0                                      Equation for 14h.
33m.
at 10 secs.
2 25                              Midheaven in Right Ascension at Birth … 21 40 23                                                  The Constitution.
Born under the sign Gemini, with Mercury rising in the sign Cancer, the Sun near the conjunction with Jupiter and in close sextile to the Moon, there is little doubt that the late Colonial Secretary is by nature gifted with an   [Pg 115]                                                                                                                        [Pg 116] excellent constitution.
The sextile of the luminaries is a powerful co-ordinator, and whenever sickness supervenes there will be a speedy recovery.
The semisquare aspect of Mars, while disposing to gouty aﬀections of the hands and feet, will contribute vital energy and power to throw oﬀ diseases, while at the same time predisposing to accidents and wounds to the right shoulder or clavicle.
The rising sign gives nervous energy and enormous capacity for work, which is due to high nervous tension supported by a sound vitality.
The only hereditary predisposition is that indicated by Mars, which induces to fevers, and gouty affections due to acidity.
The Health.
The Moon is strong in the sign Taurus, but not particularly well placed in the 12th House.
It has, moreover, the square aspects of Neptune and Venus from xed signs.
These indications point to functional disorders of the heart, throat and excretory system.
On the other hand, there are the good aspects of the Sun, Jupiter and Uranus to counteract these adverse tendencies, and it is certain that strong recuperative powers together with a normally good co-ordination of functions would induce a speedy recovery from any illness to which he may be liable.
Considerable immunity from sickness of all sorts may therefore be predicated.
Character and Disposition.
The majority of the planets being in Cardinal signs, with three planets (including the Moon) in Fixed signs,           [Pg 117]  indicates a character that is energetic, ambitious, active, sharp, ingenious, lively, and persevering; capable of cutting out a line in life for himself and making headway against obstacles; disposed to ride roughshod over the weaknesses and prejudices of those who oppose him; gifted with a pioneer spirit, incisive manner, and disposed at times to eﬀect his ends regardless of the feelings and opinions of others.
At the same time there is suﬃcient patience, method, caution, and watchfulness to make this extreme denition of purpose very eﬀective.
Laborious, rm (at times obstinate), systematic, and self-reliant, he is capable of waiting for opportunities.
But finally he carries his purpose with a tour de force.
That which he lacks is adaptability, suavity, and ability to enter into the feelings of others.
He is too ambitious to be self-centred, but yet too intent to be sympathetic.
The rising of Mercury in trine aspect to Saturn and Uranus gives considerable mental capacity, a wide grasp of facts, a well-informed, apt and business-like mind; some originality, constructiveness, and power of marshalling facts and gures; patience, caution, and secrecy.
There is not much imagination, and the sympathies are not wide.
His methods and actions are governed by literal fact and mathematical certainty.
He is an omnivorous devourer of the accessible.
He takes the small sh by the handful and makes a meal of them; but he leaves the ponderous whales for those of greater imagination and more leisurely habit.
The quadrature of Mars to Uranus will induce momentary outbursts of temper and some irritability of nature, but the character I am delineating is not such as can easily be played upon, for it is remarkably lacking in emotional       [Pg 118]  susceptibility.
Nevertheless, the inspirational faculty is by no means absent, and the presence of Neptune in the 9th House in trine to the rising Mercury, is an index of considerable inventive genius, extreme range of mental perception, and telescopic discernment of future events.
Venus in the 3rd House shows some artistic tastes and fancies, considerable appreciation of art and culture, a fondness for ﬂowers, bright lights, &c. But dominant above all are the two angular inﬂuences of Uranus and Mercury, which render the mind mathematical and precise, commercial, apt, business-like, energetic, and eminently magnetic.
Finance.
The position of the Sun in conjunction with Jupiter in the sign Cancer, in sextile to the Moon, is the index of a high fortune and means exceeding a competence.
It is here worthy of note that Cancer, which in this horoscope holds the Sun, Jupiter, and Mercury, is the ruling sign of South Africa, with which Colony Mr. Chamberlain’s fortunes have been for a long time so intimately associated.
It is also worthy of note that both Cecil Rhodes and Barney Barnato were born on the same day of the year, the 5th of July, with the Sun in the 14th degree of Cancer.
In the former case the Sun was conjoined with Moon and Venus, in sextile to Uranus and trine to Neptune, while in the latter case the Sun was in trine to Jupiter.
In regard to Mr. Chamberlain’s horoscope, it will be observed that Jupiter, which holds such eﬀective power for increase in the 2nd House, is also the ruler of the 7th, and it is to be remembered that all partnerships, commercial or social, which he has contracted have so         [Pg 119]  far proved highly satisfactory from a merely monetary point of view.
Further, the Moon is aﬀected with the good aspect of the Sun in the 2nd House, which is a further indication that on a purely nancial basis Mr. Chamberlain is a man worth going into partnership with.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Influence of the Stars, by Rosa Baughan  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with  almost no restrictions whatsoever.
You may copy it, give it away or  re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included  with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license  Title: The Influence of the Stars  A book of old world lore  Author: Rosa Baughan  Release Date: June 7, 2013 [EBook #42889]  Language: English  Character set encoding: UTF-8  *** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INFLUENCE OF THE STARS ***  Produced by Charlene Taylor, Delphine Lettau and the Online  Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net  THE INFLUENCE OF THE STARS  PLYMOUTH  WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON  PRINTERS  WHEEL OF PYTHAGORAS.
FACSIMILE FROM AN OLD WOODCUT  DATE.
1657.
Frontispiece and Cover.
THE INFLUENCE OF THE STARS  A Book of Old World Lore  BY  ROSA BAUGHAN  AUTHOR OF "THE HANDBOOK OF PALMISTRY"; "CHARACTER IN HANDWRITING";  ETC., ETC.
IN THREE PARTS  Part I. Astrology.Part II.
ChiromancyPart III.
Physiognomy  TO WHICH ARE ADDED  CHAPTERS ON THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE MOLES OF THE BODY ASTROLOGICALLY  CONSIDERED,  THE MYSTICAL WHEEL OF PYTHAGORAS AND THE METHODS OF WORKING IT  Fourth Edition,  Revised and Enlarged by the Author  ILLUSTRATED WITH TEN PLATES  LONDON  KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Ltd.  DRYDEN HOUSE, GERRARD STREET, SOHO  1904  "Ye stars which are the poetry of Heaven!
If, in your bright leaves we read the fate  Of men and empires—'tis to be forgiven,  That in our aspirations to be great,  Our destinies o'erleap this mortal state  And claim a kindred with you; for ye are  A beauty and a mystery and create  In us such love and reverence from afar,  That Life, Fame, Power, and Fortune have named themselves a star."
Byron.
CONTENTS  Part I.  ASTROLOGY  CHAPTER     PAGE  I.  Astrology  4  II.
The Alphabet of Astrology  12  III.
Concerning the Signs of the Zodiac  17  IV.
Of the Natures of the Seven Planets and of their  Essential and Accidental Dignities  23  V.  Of the Influences of the Seven Planets  34  VI.
Concerning the Twelve Houses of Heaven and their  Powers  50  VII.
An Explanation of Various Terms used in Astrology  54  VIII.
Of the Figure of the Heavens  59  IX.
Of the Influences of the Fixed Stars  65  X.
Of the Effect of each Planet in each of the  Twelve Houses  70  XI.
On Forming a General Judgment on a Nativity  76  XII.
Concerning Directions and Horary Questions  92  XIII.
Solar Horoscopes  103  XIV.
Aphorisms culled from the Works of Ptolemy and other  Ancient Astrologers  120  PART II.
CHIROMANCY  XV.
Chiromancy and its Origin  125  XVI.
Concerning the Principal Lines in the Hand  and the Mounts  129  XVII.
The Line of Life  137  XVIII.
The Line of Heart and Line of Head  143  XIX.
The Saturnian Line  150  XX.
The Line of the Sun and Line of Health  155  XXI.
On the Ring of Venus, the Wrist Lines and the Letter  M to be seen in most Hands  160  XXII.
Concerning Chance Lines; that is, Lines which are  sometimes—but only rarely—seen on any Hand  166  XXIII.
Concerning the Fingers and Thumb and Nails  169  XXIV.
Of the Various Marks to be seen on the Hand  177  XXV.
The Triangle, the Quadrangle and the Happy Hand  182  Part III.
PHYSIOGNOMY  XXVI.
Physiognomy  185  XXVII.
The Forehead and Eyebrows  194  XXVIII.
The Eyes and Eyelashes  201  XXIX.
The Nose  211  XXX.
The Mouth, Teeth, Jaw and Chin  221  XXXI.
The Hair and Ears  231  XXXII.
The Signatures of the Planets  237  XXXIII.
The Moles on the Face  246  XXXIV.
Moles having no Corresponding Moles on the Face  254  XXXV.
The Zodiacal Marks  258  XXXVI.
Concerning Alfridaries  263  XXXVII.
Concerning the Wheel of Pythagoras and the Method  of Working It  267  LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS  Wheel of Pythagoras     Frontispiece and Cover  The Earth  To face Chapter  VI.
Natus.
9th January, 1889  "  "  VIII.
Facsimile of a Map of a Horary Question from Lilly's  "Astrology"  "  "  XII.
Principal Lines on the Palm of the Hand  "  "  XVI.
The Line of Life  "  "  XVII.
Chance Lines on the Hand  "  "  XXII.
Various Marks on the Hand  "  "  XXIV.
The Happy Hand  "  "  XXV.
The Planets' Places on the Face  "  "  XXVII.
Alfridary Table  "  "  XXXVI.
FOREWORD  Of all subjects that have at any time engaged the attention of the  world, there is none more ancient than astrology.
In the East—where it  first arose at a period of very remote antiquity—it still holds sway  and in every part of the world (especially among the learned) it  reigned supreme until the middle of the seventeenth century.
That it  not only ruled the daily actions of individuals but swayed the councils  of princes, is shown by the records of every nation that has a history  (and by none more fully than by that of England); yet the present  generation seems never, until quite lately, to have cared to inquire on  what basis this belief could have been for so many ages supported.
During the past ten years, however—possibly from a reaction growing  out of the realism by which we have been so long oppressed—a new  interest in these old-world beliefs has sprung up and it is to satisfy  that interest that this book (containing the results of many years'  study) was written.
Chiromancy and Physiognomy are both based on astrology and are,  therefore, quite in place as the second and third parts of a work  treating of the influence of the stars.
Many of the modern writers on  Chiromancy seem disposed to deny its affinity to astrology, with which  it is, however, inseparably connected.
Dr. Saunders, in the preface to  his exhaustive work on Chiromancy and Physiognomy, published in 1671,  and dedicated to his friend Lilly, the great astrologer, says: "For our  more orderly proceeding with the body of this work, it is in the first  place necessary to be observed that there are seven planets, named  Stellæ Errantes—wandering stars—which have each of them its  separate character as they are used in astrologie; the which stars have  great power over inferior bodies and do, each of them, govern some part  or other of man's body and they especially have their material  existence in the hand and without astrology Chiromancy could not  subsist and be subservient to true wisdom."
Now, why, in the face of this and many other equally forcible words  among the old-world authorities, do the modern writers try to force  their own crude theories upon us?
To drag the time-honoured study of  Chiromancy into the turmoil of nineteenth-century existence and—by  robbing it of its mysticism—to strain it into unison with the realism  of modern thought, strikes the earnest student with the same sense of  incongruity as would the hanging of a carnival mask over the mystically  calm features of an antique statue.
Rosa Baughan.
November, 1904.
THEINFLUENCE OF THE STARS  ASTROLOGY  "To doubt the influence of the stars is to doubt the wisdom and  providence of God.
"—Tycho Brahe.
CHAPTER I.
That a certain power, derived from æthereal nature, pervades the whole  earth, is clearly evident to all.
Fire and air are altered by the  motions of the æther, and these elements, in their turn, encompassing  all inferior matter, vary it, as they themselves are varied, acting  equally on earth and water, on plants and animals.
The Sun, not only by  the change of the seasons, brings to perfection the embryo of animals,  the buds of plants and the springs of water, but also, by his daily  movement, brings light, heat, moisture, dryness and cold.
The Moon, being of all the heavenly bodies the nearest to earth, has  also much influence, and things animate and inanimate sympathise and  vary with her.
By her changes rivers swell or are reduced, the tides of  the sea are ruled by her risings and settings, and animals and plants  are influenced as she waxes or wanes.
The stars also produce in the  ambient      CHAPTER II.
THE ALPHABET OF ASTROLOGY  The Science of Astrology consists of four branches, namely, Mundane  Astrology, which is the art of foreseeing, by the aspect of the  stars, at certain periods, the events likely to happen to nations, such  as pestilences, wars, inundations and earthquakes; Atmospherical  Astrology, which is the art of foreseeing, by the positions of the  heavenly bodies, the quality of the weather at any particular time or  place; the Casting of Nativities, or the art of foretelling,  from the position of the stars at the moment of birth, the fate and  character of the native; and Horary Astrology, or the art of  foreseeing, by the positions of the heavens at the moment, the result  of any business or circumstance.
As the two former branches are treated in the astrological almanacks  issued every year by Zadkiel, Raphael, Orion, and others, it is  needless to go into them; but as the casting of nativities and the  answering of horary questions require individual treatment, the working  of these two branches of astrology (after the ancient methods)  shall be described as clearly as possible.
Before the student can do anything in astrology he must master its  alphabet—that is, he must make himself thoroughly acquainted with the  symbols used to represent the planets, the signs of the zodiac and the  aspects.
The planets recognised by the ancient astrologers are, as we have seen,  seven in number, and are as follows, with their symbols:—Saturn,  ; Jupiter, ; Mars, ; Sol, ; Venus,  ; Mercury, ; Luna, .
There are also the Dragon's Head, thus symbolised, ; and the  Dragon's Tail, .
These are neither planets nor signs of the  zodiac, nor constellations, but are only the nodes or points where the  ecliptic is crossed by the Moon.
One of these points looks northward,  where the Moon begins her northern latitude, and the other points  southward, where she commences her south latitude.
The head of the  Dragon is considered of a benevolent nature; the tail of the Dragon is  of evil tendency.
There are also the twelve signs of the zodiac, which are as follows,  with their symbols:—  Northern.
Southern.
Aries     Libra  Taurus     Scorpio  Gemini     Sagittarius  Cancer     Capricorn  Leo     Aquarius  Virgo     Pisces  Through these twelve signs the planets continually move, and are ever  in one or other of them.
They are divided into north and south.
The first six,  from Aries to Virgo, are northern; the latter six, from Libra to  Pisces, are southern; this is because the Sun and planets when  in the first six are north of the equator, and when in the last six  they are south of that line.
Each point of the zodiac rises and sets once every twenty-four hours,  occasioned by the earth's revolution on its axis once every day;  therefore, when any given point is rising, the opposite point  must be setting.
[3]  As the zodiac consists of 360 degrees from the first point of Aries  until we come to that point again, and as these are divided into twelve  portions or signs, they must consist of 30 degrees each.
The aspects are five in number; they represent certain positions which  the planets bear to each other as they move through the signs of the  zodiac; they are as follows, with their symbols:—  Conjunction, when two planets are in the same place, viz., in same  degree of the same sign.
Sextile, when they are 60 degrees or two signs apart.
Square, when they are 90 degrees or three signs apart.
Trine, when they are 120 degrees or four signs apart.
Opposition, when they are 180 degrees or six signs asunder.
The conjunction () is rather a position than an aspect, as  planets can hardly be said to aspect each other when they are in the  same place.
When Saturn is in the first degree of Aries, and any planet  in the same degree of that sign, they are said to be in conjunction;  this is good or evil, according to the nature of the planets thus  posited.
The Trine () is the most powerful of all the good aspects.
The Sextile () is favourable.
The Square () is evil.
The Opposition () is also very evil.
There are several other aspects (sometimes called the "modern aspects")  invented by Kepler; but as they only appear to complicate what is at  best a very intricate study, it is best to ignore them and adhere in  this, as in the matter of the planets, to the old methods.
CHAPTER III.
CONCERNING THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC  The zodiac is a band or belt, measuring about 14 degrees in breadth,  but, as Venus sometimes appears to have more than her real latitude, it  is more correctly considered to be 18 degrees in breadth.
The  ecliptic, or path of the Sun, passes exactly through the centre  of the zodiac, longitudinally.
The ancients divided the zodiac into ten signs—Libra being  omitted altogether, Virgo and Scorpio being merged into one, thus:  Virgo-Scorpio.
This accounts for the similarity of their symbols,  .
Ptolemy divides the zodiac into twelve equal parts, of 30 degrees each.
He says: "The beginning of the whole zodiacal circle (which in its  nature as a circle can have no other beginning or end capable of being  determined) is, therefore, assumed to be the sign Aries, which  commences at the vernal equinox in March."
One of the many objections urged against Ptolemy's system of astrology  is that the signs are continually moving from their positions; but  Ptolemy seems to have been aware of this motion of the signs, and has  met this objection by what he says in the twenty-fifth chapter of the  first book of the Tetra-biblos, where he makes it clear that the  respective influences he ascribes to the twelve signs were considered  by him to belong rather to the places they occupied in the  ambient than to the stars of which they are composed; and he especially  speaks of the ambient as producing the effects attributed to the  respective signs of the zodiac when in the ascendant in a nativity;  thus his astrology is just as applicable to modern astronomy as it was  to his own.
The signs have been divided into four triplicities, thus:  fiery , , ; earthy, , ,  ; airy, , , ; and watery,  , , .
The bicorporal, or double-bodied, signs are , , and  the first half of .
The fruitful signs are ,  , ; the barren signs are , , and .
These descriptions are useful in showing the modifications brought to  bear (by the sign ascending) on the planet's influence.
But, when no  planets are in or near the ascendant at birth, the following  descriptions of the temperament and form of body produced by each sign  ascending at birth should be used.
Aries () is a hot and fiery sign and produces a lean body,  spare and strong, large bones, grey eyes, with a quick glance and sandy  or red-coloured hair.
The temper is violent.
It governs the head and  face; its colour is white.
Taurus () differs greatly, in its effects, from the preceding  sign; it is cold and dry, and gives a broad brow and thick lips.
A  person born under it is melancholy and slow to anger but, when roused,  furious and difficult to be appeased.
It governs the neck and throat;  its colour is red.
Gemini () is in nature hot and moist and produces a person of  straight, tall body, sanguine complexion, brilliant eyes and light  brown hair.
The temperament of those born under Gemini is lively and  the understanding good.
This sign governs the arms and shoulders; its  colours are red and white.
Cancer () is by nature cold and moist; it produces a native  fair and pale, short in stature, with a round face, sand-coloured brown  hair and grey eyes.
Those born under it are phlegmatic, indolent and  gentle tempered.
Women born under this sign generally have many  children.
It governs the breast and stomach; its colours are green and  russet-brown.
Leo () is a fiery, hot and dry sign.
When it rises at birth  without any planet being near the ascendant, the native will be of tall  stature, with yellow hair, ruddy complexion and oval face, and he will  have a quick glance and a strong voice.
It governs the heart, the back  and the neck; its colours are red and green.
Virgo () is an earthy, cold, barren, feminine sign.
When it  ascends, it shows a well-formed body, slender and tall, straight,  dark-brown hair and a round face.
The mind of the native is ingenious,  but rather inconstant.
It governs the belly; its colour is black  speckled with blue.
Libra () is an aërial, sanguine, masculine, hot and moist sign.
Rising at birth it produces a well-made body, with long limbs, an oval  and beautiful face, sanguine complexion, straight flaxen hair and grey  eyes.
Those born under it are courteous, just and honourable.
It  governs the loins; and the colours under its rule are black, crimson  and tawny.
Scorpio () is a moist, phlegmatic, feminine sign.
It gives a  strong, corpulent body, low stature, thick legs, hair growing low on  the forehead and heavy eyebrows.
Those born under this sign are  reserved, thoughtful, subtle and malicious.
It governs the lower parts  of the body; the colour under its rule is brown.
Sagittarius () is a fiery, masculine sign.
The person born  under its rule is handsome, with a rather long face and features,  chestnut hair, inclined to baldness and ruddy complexion; the body  strong and active.
Those born under this sign are fond of field sports,  are good riders, and are lovers of animals.
They are kindly, generous  and careless of danger.
This sign governs the thighs and hips, and  rules yellow and green.
Capricorn () is an earthy, cold, dry, feminine sign.
It  produces a person of slender stature, with a long neck, narrow chest  and dark hair.
The mind is quick, witty and subtle.
It governs the  knees and hams and, in colours, it rules black or dark brown.
Aquarius () is an airy, moist, masculine sign.
In a nativity  where no planets are in or near the ascendant, it would produce a  person of a well-set, strong body, long face and delicate complexion,  with brown hair.
It governs the legs and ankles and rules the  sky-colour or blue.
Pisces () is a watery, cold and feminine sign.
It produces a  person of short stature and fleshy body, with a rather stooping gait.
Those born under its influence are indolent and phlegmatic.
It governs  the feet and toes and presides over the pure white colour.
It is  needful to remember the colours belonging to the signs, as they are  especially useful in horary questions.
CHAPTER IV.
OF THE NATURES OF THE SEVEN PLANETS AND OF THEIR  ESSENTIAL AND ACCIDENTAL DIGNITIES  Of the seven planets Jupiter and Venus, because of the heat and  moisture predominant in them, are considered by the ancients as  benefics or causers of good.
The Moon is so considered for the same  reasons, though in a less degree.
Saturn and Mars are causers of evil or malefic; the first from his  excess of cold, and the other from his excess of heat.
The Sun and  Mercury are deemed of common influence—that is, either of good or  evil, according to the planets with which they are connected.
The planets have particular familiarity with certain places in the  zodiac by means of parts designated as their houses, and also by their  triplicities, exaltations and terms.
The nature of their familiarity by houses is as follows:—  Cancer and Leo are the most northerly of all the twelve signs; they  approach nearer than the other signs to the zenith of this part of the  earth, and thereby cause warmth and heat; they are consequently  appropriated as houses for the two principal and greater luminaries;  Leo for the Sun, as being masculine; and Cancer for the Moon, as being  feminine.
Saturn, since he is cold and inimical to heat, moving also in a  superior orbit most remote from the luminaries, occupies the signs  opposite to Cancer and Leo; these are Aquarius and Capricorn, and they  are assigned to him in consideration of their cold and wintry nature.
Jupiter has a favourable temperament, and is situated beneath the  sphere of Saturn; he, therefore, occupies the next two signs,  Sagittarius and Pisces.
Mars is dry in nature and beneath the sphere of Jupiter; he takes the  next two signs, of a nature similar to his own, viz., Aries and  Scorpio, whose relative distances from the houses of the luminaries are  injurious and discordant.
Venus, possessing a favourable temperament, and, placed beneath the  sphere of Mars, takes the next two signs, Taurus and Libra.
These are  of a fruitful nature and preserve harmony by the sextile distance; this  planet is never more than two signs distant from the Sun.
Mercury never has greater distance from the Sun than the space of one  sign, and is beneath all the other planets; hence he is nearest to both  luminaries, and the remaining two signs, Gemini and Virgo, are allotted  to him.
The "houses" of the planets are readily shown by the following table.
It is exactly the same as that found in the mummy-case of the Archon of  Thebes, in ancient Egypt, as may be seen at the British Museum:                                   It will be seen, at once, from this table that the Sun and Moon have  each only one house assigned them.
All planets are most powerful in  that sign which constitutes one of their houses.
Planets receive  detriment in the signs opposite to those of their houses.
Thus, Saturn  would receive detriment in Cancer and Leo, which are the signs opposite  to his houses, Capricornus and Aquarius.
There are some signs in which  the planets are found to be very powerful, though not to the same  extent as when in their own houses; these are called the "exaltations"  of the planets, and the signs opposite to these are those in which they  receive their "fall" when they are considered to be weak in power.
Saturn has his exaltation in Libra; his "fall" would therefore be in  Aries.
He governs the airy triplicity, which is composed of the signs  Gemini, Libra and Aquarius by day, and in all the twelve signs he has  these degrees (zodiacal signs) allotted him by Ptolemy for his Terms:  In Aries  27, 28, 29, 30.
In Taurus  23, 24, 25, 26.
In Gemini  22, 23, 24, 25.
In Cancer  28, 29, 30.
In Leo  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
In Virgo  19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
In Libra  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
In Scorpio  28, 29, 30.
In Sagittarius  21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
In Capricornus  26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Aquarius  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
In Pisces  27, 28, 29, 30.
The meaning of which is that if Saturn should rise in any of these  degrees it is a sign that he is not void of essential dignities; or, if  he is posited in any of the following degrees (which he is allowed for  his Face or Decanate) he is still not devoid of dignities.
This is to  be understood of all the planets.
Saturn is allotted for his Face these degrees:  In Taurus  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Leo  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
In Libra  11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
In Sagittarius  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Pisces  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Jupiter has his exaltation in Cancer and his fall in Capricornus.
He  rules the fiery triplicity, Aries, Leo and Sagittarius, by night.
He has these degrees allotted for his Terms:  In Aries  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
In Taurus  16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
In Gemini  8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
In Cancer  7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
In Leo  20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
In Virgo  14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
In Libra  12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
In Scorpio  7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
In Sagittarius  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
In Capricornus  13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
In Aquarius  21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
In Pisces  9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
He has for his Face, or Decanate:  Of Gemini  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Of Leo  11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Of Libra  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
Of Capricornus  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Of Pisces  11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Mars has Aries for his day-house and Scorpio for his night-house.
He is  exalted in Capricornus, and has his fall in Cancer.
He governs the watery Triplicity, viz., Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces, and  he has these degrees in each sign for his Terms:  In Aries  22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
In Taurus  27, 28, 29, 30.
In Gemini  26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Cancer  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
In Leo  26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Virgo  25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Scorpio  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
In Aquarius  26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Pisces  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
He has allotted to him for his Face these degrees:  In Aries  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
In Gemini  11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
In Leo  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Virgo  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
In Pisces  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
The Sun rules the fiery Triplicity—Aries, Leo and Sagittarius—by day.
He is exalted in the sign of Aries, and receives his fall in Libra.
He has no degrees admitted him for his Terms, but in the twelve signs  he has the following degrees for his Face:  In Aries  11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
In Gemini  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Virgo  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
In Scorpio  11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
In Capricornus  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
Venus governs the earthy Triplicity—Taurus, Virgo and Capricornus—by  day.
She is exalted in Pisces, and has her fall in Virgo.
She has the  following degrees for her Terms:  In Aries  7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
In Taurus  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
In Gemini  15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
20.
In Cancer  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
In Leo  14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
In Virgo  8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
In Libra  7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
In Scorpio  15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
In Sagittarius  9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
In Capricornus  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
In Aquarius  13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
In Pisces  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
The following degrees are allowed for her Face:  In Aries  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Cancer  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
In Virgo  11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
In Scorpio  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Pisces  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Mercury governs the airy Triplicity, viz., Gemini, Libra and Aquarius,  by night.
He has his exaltation in Virgo, and his fall in Pisces.
He  has the following degrees for his Terms:  In Aries  15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
In Taurus  9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
In Gemini  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
In Cancer  14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
In Leo  7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
In Virgo  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
In Libra  20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
In Scorpio  22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
In Sagittarius  15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
In Capricornus  7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
In Pisces  15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
These degrees are assigned him for his Face:  In Taurus  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
In Cancer  11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
In Virgo  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Sagittarius  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
In Aquarius  11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
The Moon governs the earthy Triplicity, viz., Taurus, Virgo and  Capricornus, by night.
She is exalted in Taurus, and has her fall in Scorpio.
The Sun and the  Moon have no terms assigned them.
In the twelve signs she has these degrees assigned her for her Face:  In Taurus  11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
In Cancer  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
In Libra  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
In Sagittarius  11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
In Aquarius  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
CHAPTER V.  OF THE INFLUENCES OF THE SEVEN PLANETS  The planet Saturn is the most remote of the seven planetary orbs  recognised by the ancient writers on astrology.
He is of a pale ash  colour, slow in motion, only finishing his course through the twelve  signs of the zodiac in 29 years and about 157 days.
His greatest north  latitude from the ecliptic is 2 degrees 48 minutes; his south latitude  is 2 degrees 49 minutes.
Those born with this planet well-dignified  [4] are studious, grave,  economical, prudent, patient and in all their actions sober and  somewhat austere.
They are not much given to the love of women, but  they are persons of much depth of feeling, and, when they do love, they  are very constant.
They are given to the study of occult matters,  [5]  and are of a melancholic, suspicious and jealous temperament.
In person  when well-dignified Saturn gives a rather tall stature and long  limbs.
The hair is dark, the eyebrows much marked and generally meeting  between the eyes, which are dark brown, deep set and close together.
The nose is long and generally somewhat bent over the lips and the  under jaw slightly protrudes.
The complexion is sallow, the ears large  and the hands and feet are generally long, but not fleshy.
Those born under the potent aspect of Saturn are generally slow of  speech and their voices are harsh; when Saturn rises in a horoscope  devoid of dignities, the native is envious, covetous, malicious,  subtle, untruthful and of a discontented disposition.
In person  frequently deformed, with long and irregular features, the eyes and  hair dark and the skin yellow and harsh.
In man's body this planet rules the spleen, the right ear, the lips and  the teeth.
In illness he gives ague, palsy, ruptures (especially should  he rule in the sign of Scorpio), jaundice, toothache and all affections  of the sight, of the ear, of the teeth and jaws and of the legs.
The herbs he governs are the hemlock, hellebore, burdock, sage,  henbane, rue, nightshade and mandrake.
The trees under his rule are the willow, the yew, the cypress, the  box-tree and the pine.
The beasts he governs are the elephant, the wolf, the bear, the dog,[6]  the basilisk, the crocodile, the scorpion, the serpent, the rat, the  mouse and all manner of creeping things; among birds, the crow, the  cuckoo, the raven, the owl and the bat.
Of fish he rules the eel, the tortoise and all shell fish.
The minerals he governs are lead and the dross of all metals.
His stones are jet, onyx and all dark stones which are incapable of  polish.
The colour he rules is black.
He rules Saturday—the first hour after sunrise, and the eighth hour of  the same day.
His number is 55.
In gathering the herbs under his rule  the ancients were particular to do so in his hours, as this rendered  the medicament more powerful.
This is to be observed regarding the  herbs ruled by all the planets.
Saturn's orb is nine degrees before and after any aspect; that is, his  influence begins to operate when either he applies to any planet or it  applies to him within nine degrees of his perfect aspect, and his  influence continues in force until he is separated nine degrees from  the aspect.
His angel is Cassiel.
His friends are Jupiter, Venus,  Mercury and the Moon; his enemies are Mars and the Sun.
Jupiter is the next planet below Saturn and is of a bright, clear,  azure colour.
He much exceeds Saturn in motion, as he finishes his  course through the twelve signs in twelve years.
His greatest north  latitude is 1 degree 38 minutes, and his greatest south latitude 1  degree 40 minutes.
When he rises at birth well-dignified he gives an  erect, tall stature, sanguine complexion, oval face, large grey eyes,  thick brown hair, full lips and good teeth.
In temperament those born  under the good influence of this planet are honourable, generous and  hospitable, but loving material pleasures, kind and affectionate to  wife and family, charitable, desiring to be well thought of and hating  all mean and sordid actions.
The voices of those born under Jupiter are  clear and sonorous.
When this planet rises devoid of dignities  the native will be gluttonous, profligate, vain, and boastful, of mean  abilities and shallow understanding, easily seduced to extravagance and  a tyrant to those of his family and household.
In man's body he rules the lungs and the blood, and of diseases he  gives apoplexy, gout, inflammation of the lungs, pleurisy and all  illnesses proceeding from corruption of the blood.
The herbs he governs are cloves, mace, nutmeg, gilliflower, marjoram,  mint, borage and saffron.
Of trees, he rules the mulberry, the olive, the vine, the fig, the  beech and the pear-tree.
Of beasts, the sheep, the hart, the ox and all those animals that are  useful to man.
Of birds, the stork, the snipe, the lark, the eagle, the pheasant, the  partridge and the peacock.
Of fishes, the whale, the dolphin and the sword-fish.
His metal is tin.
His stones are the sapphire, the amethyst and the emerald.
Of colours he rules red mixed with green.
His day is Thursday and he rules the first hour after sunrise and the  eighth hour.
His number is 78.
His orb is 9 degrees before and after any aspect.
All the planets except Mars are his friends.
His angel is Zadkiel.
Mars in order succeeds Jupiter.
He appears of a red colour, and  finishes his course through the zodiac in 1 year 321 days.
His greatest  north latitude is 4 degrees 31 minutes.
His south latitude is 6 degrees  47 minutes.
When he is well-dignified in a horoscope, the native is  courageous, confident, loving war and all that belongs to it, jealous  of honour, hot-tempered and a great lover of field-sports.
In person he  will be of middle stature, broad-shouldered and with big bones; the  complexion of a red fairness; the hair is crisp or curly and also red,  but this varies slightly according to the sign rising at birth; in  watery signs the hair is not so red, and in earthy signs it is more  chestnut; the eyes are grey and have a bold, fixed glance like that of  a hawk.
When he is ill-dignified at birth, the native is turbulent, cruel,  boastful, a promoter of sedition, ungracious in manners and  unscrupulous in his actions, with no fear of either God or man.
He  rules the head and face, the gall, the throat and intestines; and the  diseases he gives are fevers, carbuncles, smallpox, all throat  affections, all hurts to the head and face (especially by iron), and  all diseases which arise from too much heat of blood; also accidents  from four-footed beasts.
The herbs over which he rules are the nettle, the thistle, onions,  scammony, garlic, horehound, cardamons, mustard and all herbs giving  heat.
Of trees, all those which are of a prickly nature, such as the holly,  the thorn and the chestnut.
Of beasts, all fierce animals—the tiger, the panther, the wolf, the  horse, the leopard, the wild ass and the bear.
The dog is sometimes assigned to Mars on account of its courage and  combativeness.
This delightful animal is probably ruled by both Saturn  and Mars; the former giving it the quality of fidelity which it  possesses in a degree beyond all other creatures.
Of fish, the pike, the barbel and the sword-fish.
Of birds, the hawk, the vulture, the kite, the eagle, the magpie and  the cock, all of which are combative.
The metal he rules is iron.
The colour he rules is red.
The stones, the carbuncle, the ruby and the blood-stone.
His orb is 7 degrees before and after any aspect.
He governs Tuesday—the first hour after sunrise, and the eighth.
His  number is 39.
His friend among the planets is Venus, all the others are his enemies.
His angel is Samael.
The Sun passes through all the twelve signs of the zodiac in one year  and a few hours over the 365 days which constitute the year.
He has no  latitude.
When the Sun rises at a birth well-dignified, the native is of an  honourable disposition, but always desiring to rule, loving pomp, yet  affable, speaking with gravity and without too many words and  possessing much self-reliance and dignity of manner.
In person he will  be tall, well made, with golden hair, yellowish skin, large and  piercing eyes and long, straight and well-formed features.
When ill-aspected the native is arrogant, boastful, a spendthrift,  proud, yet in poverty hanging on other men's charity, very loquacious,  restless and without judgment.
He governs the heart, the brain, the right eye and the arms; and the  diseases he causes are all illnesses of the heart, such as swoons,  palpitations, cramps, also diseases of the mouth, the brain, and the  eyes.
Of colours he rules the yellow and orange colour.
CHAPTER VI.
CONCERNING THE TWELVE HOUSES OF HEAVEN AND THEIR POWERS  The ancient astrologers divided the heavens into twelve houses.
The First House.—This is called the Ascendant, and the  planet rising therein—whether well or ill-dignified—will materially  affect the mind, bodily appearance and fate of the native through his  whole existence.
This house is masculine, and governs the head and face  of man and, if the planet Mars be in this house at the time of birth,  there will always be some blemish or mole in the face of the native; if  a few out of the degrees have ascended the scar or blemish is, without  fail, on the upper part of the head; if the middle part of the sign  ascends the mark is in the middle of the face; if the latter part of  the sign is ascending the mark is near the chin.
This house represents  the head, the tongue and the memory, and it governs in colours white.
The Second House.—This house has signification of the native's  wealth and worldly goods.
The house is feminine, ruling the neck, and  the colour is green.
The Third House.—This governs brothers and sisters, short  journeys, neighbours, letters and writings.
It is masculine and governs  the hands, arms and shoulders; its colours are red and yellow mixed.
The Fourth House.—This rules the father, inheritances or  property of the native, and shows his condition at the close of life.
It is feminine, and rules the stomach, breast and lungs; its colour is  red.
The Fifth House.—This signifies the children of the native,  also his success in speculation and hazardous games, the pleasures he  enjoys and the wealth of the father.
It rules the heart, back and  liver, is masculine, and represents in colour black and white mixed.
The Sixth House.—This concerns the native's servants, sheep,  goats and small cattle.
It also signifies the father's kindred.
This  house is feminine.
It rules the belly and intestines and its colour is  black.
The Seventh House gives judgment of marriage and describes the  man or woman in all love questions.
It is masculine, it rules the  haunches, and its colour is black.
The Eighth House argues of death, of legacies and wills, also of  the kind of death a man shall die; it is a feminine house.
It rules the  lower parts of the trunk of the body; its colours are green and black.
The Ninth House gives judgment on voyages and long journeys, and  also on events happening to the wife's kindred.
It rules the hips and  thighs.
It is a masculine house; its colours are green and white.
The Tenth House is called the Mid-heaven, and is  feminine.
This concerns the native's mother, and also his calling.
It  rules the knees and hams, and its colours are red and white.
The Eleventh House represents friends and friendship.
It is  masculine and rules the legs.
The Twelfth House.—This house is often called the Evil  Dæmon, for it is the house of sorrow, self-undoing, enemies and  imprisonment.
It governs great cattle.
It is feminine, and rules the  feet and toes, and in colour it governs green.
The strongest houses are the first (the Ascendant) and the tenth  (the Mid-heaven).
The first, fourth, seventh, and tenth are  called Angular Houses, and represent the four cardinal points of the  compass; thus the first is east, the seventh west, the fourth is north,  and the tenth south.
The second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh houses are  called Succedent Houses; the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth houses  are termed Cadent Houses (see plate 1).
Any planet posited in a Cadent  House is regarded as weak in its effects on the native.
It is necessary  to have thoroughly mastered the influences of the twelve houses, as  well as those of the seven planets, and of the signs of the zodiac,  before attempting to cast a nativity or to work a horary question.
CHAPTER VII.
AN EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS TERMS USED IN ASTROLOGY  Ascension, Right.—The distance any body or point in the heavens  is from the beginning of the ecliptic or first point of Aries.
It is  measured in degrees and minutes of a degree.
It is thus abbreviated, A.  R.  Ascension, Oblique.—If a star be not on the equator, it will,  when it rises, form an angle with that part of the equator which is  rising at the same time, and this is called its  Ascensional Difference.—This, added to its right ascension (A.  R.) if it have south declination, but subtracted from it if it  have north declination, gives its oblique ascension.
Application signifies the approach of two planets and is of  three kinds: first, when a planet, swift of motion, applies to one of  slower progress: for example, we will suppose Mercury posited in 16  degrees of the sign Gemini, and Mars in 21 degrees of the same sign  (both being in direct motion), Mercury being swifter would  overtake and form a conjunction with Mars, which is termed a direct  application.
The second kind of application is formed by two  retrograde planets: thus we will suppose Mercury in 16 degrees of  Gemini and Saturn in 15 degrees of the same sign, both retrograde.
Mercury being the swiftest planet, applies to Saturn, a more ponderous  planet, by retrogradation, and this is called a retrograde  application.
The third kind of application is when one planet,  being direct in motion, meets another which is retrograde: for  instance, we will suppose Mercury retrograde in 16 degrees of Gemini,  and Saturn direct in motion in 12 degrees of the same sign; here  Mercury, being the higher planet, applies to a conjunction of  Saturn by a retrograde motion.
These two last are considered  evil applications.
It should also be remembered that the  superior planets, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, never apply to the inferior  planets, Venus, Mercury and the Moon, except by retrograde motion; but  the inferior planets apply in both ways.
Besieging signifies a planet situated between the two malevolent  planets, Saturn and Mars: thus, if Saturn were in the 12th degree of  Aries, Jupiter in the 14th, and Mars in the 16th, Jupiter would then be  besieged by the two malefic planets, Saturn and Mars.
This is,  of course, an evil position.
Cazimi.—A planet is said to be in cazimi when it is in  the heart of the Sun: that is, only 17 minutes before or after the Sun.
All astrologers agree that a planet is fortified by this position, but  a planet when combust is very evil in its influences.
Direct motion signifies that a planet is moving on its natural  course, according to the succession of the signs of the zodiac: thus a  planet is direct in motion when it moves from Aries to Taurus,  or from Taurus to Gemini.
Frustration means the approach of a swift planet to an aspect  with one of slower motion; but before it can approach near enough to  join that aspect the more weighty planet is joined to some other, by  which the first aspect is frustrated.
Hayz is when a masculine diurnal planet is situated above the  horizon in the daytime, or when a feminine nocturnal planet is placed  below the horizon in the night-time; this is fortunate in its  influence.
Node.—That part of the ecliptic where a planet passes out of  north into south latitude is its south node; that where it goes into  north latitude is its north node.
Oriental and Occidental.—A planet, when oriental, rises before  the Sun; when occidental sets after him and is seen above the horizon  when the Sun is down; consequently, when a planet is oriental it is  posited in the east, and when occidental, in the west.
From the fourth house eastward to the tenth is oriental and from the  tenth westward to the fourth is occidental.
But or  are oriental between the first and tenth and its  opposite quarter and are occidental between the tenth and  seventh and its opposite quarter.
Void of course is when a planet is separated from another  planet, and does not, during its continuance in the same sign, form any  aspect with any other planet.
This most usually happens with the Moon.
The effect of this is  To face Chapter VIII.
CHAPTER VIII.
OF THE FIGURE OF THE HEAVENS  This was formerly termed a horoscope, but is now more generally  called a figure of the heavens.
It is simply a scheme, or plan,  representing an accurate picture of the heavens—that is, of the  positions of the Sun, Moon, and planets, and, in some instances, of the  fixed stars also, for the moment at which a child is born.
In horary  questions the figure is drawn for the required time, which may be the  moment of the propounding of a question to an astrologer, or of the  occurrence of any event of the result of which astrological information  is desired.
This map, which contains the twelve divisions already described as the  twelve houses of heaven, may be drawn in either a square or circular  form.
Lilly and other mediæval writers use both forms indiscriminately;  but as the latter is more easily understood, the diagram (plate 2) is  drawn up in that manner.
It will be seen that it is formed of three  circles.
In the centre space the date, time and place of the event of a  horary question are entered, and in a nativity the name, sex and moment  of birth of the native.
The next space (divided into twelve equal parts  for the houses) is reserved for the planets and in the outer space are  placed the signs of the zodiac, with the number of their degrees, on  the cusp of each house.
The cusps of the Houses are represented by that  line between each house.
Having obtained an Ephemeris, or astrological  almanack  [7] for the year required, we must find the Sidereal Time for  the day and month of the birth, or question; then, if the time of the  event be before noon we must deduct the difference  between the given time and noon from the Sidereal Time of the day; for  example, on the day of the event (the 9th January, 1889), the Sidereal  Time at noon is shown by the Ephemeris to be 19 hours 16 minutes 51  seconds, if the birth had been at 9 a.m.
The difference between 9 a.m.  and noon is 3 hours.
We should, therefore, have to deduct 3  hours from 19 hours 16 minutes 51 seconds, which gives 16 hours 16  minutes 51 seconds, the Sidereal Time required.
As the event is supposed to happen at 3 in the afternoon, we  must add the difference between noon and the time given to the  Sidereal Time of the day.
The difference between noon and 3 p.m. is 3  hours, and, as the Sidereal Time on the 9th January, 1889, is 19 hours  16 minutes 51 seconds, we add 3 hours to this amount, which  gives 22 hours 16 minutes 51 seconds, the Sidereal Time required.
We must now proceed to place the signs for 3 p.m. on the 9th January,  1889, which is thus done: We turn to the "Table of Houses" (which will  be found at the end of the Ephemeris), and having found (under the  column headed "Sidereal Time") the nearest time to 22 hours 16 minutes  51 seconds, which in this case is 22 hours 16 minutes 48 seconds for the  latitude of London, we see in the next column (headed 10) the sign  (Pisces), and the number 3° opposite our Sidereal Time,  showing that the third degree of Pisces is on the cusp of the 10th  house, In the next column (headed 11) we see , and the number  7°; we therefore place 7° on the cusp of the 11th  house, next 24° on the 12th; then 7° 5′ on the  Ascendant (or first house), 23° on the 2nd and 10°  on the 3rd; for the remaining houses we place the signs in  order opposite to those already given, keeping the same number of  degrees to each corresponding house and sign.
The opposite house to the  10th is the 4th, and the opposite sign to is ; we  therefore place 3° on the cusp of the 4th house, and so on  of the rest.
It will, however, now be seen that the two signs   and are missing; these signs are "intercepted," which means that  they lie between two houses without occupying the cusp of either; they  must, therefore, be placed in their order between the cusps of  the houses.
This is, of course, not always the case, and some horoscopes  will have no intercepted signs.
HOW TO PLACE THE PLANETS.
In the Ephemeris the longitudes of the planets are given daily for mean  noon; so, to find the exact place of a planet for a given time,  we must note the difference of longitude between the previous noon and  noon of the day for drawing the map for a.m. and for p.m., the  difference between noon of the day and noon of the day after.
This  difference is the motion of the planet in 24 hours, which we  must work thus: As 24 hours are to—hours (i.e., the difference  between the given time and noon), so is the daily motion to the motion  required.
For example, the at noon on the 6th January is  (omitting seconds) in 19° 29′ , and on the 10th January at  noon he is in 20° 30′ , which gives a daily motion  of 59 minutes.
We must find his place for 3 p.m. on the 9th January.
As  24 hours are to 3 hours, so are 59 minutes to the time required; this  equals about 7 minutes, which we add to the 's longitude at noon  on the 9th.
If the event had been for a.m. this amount would have been  deducted from the 's longitude at noon on the day  of the event.
We must proceed in the same way for the other planets and  place them in the map according to their positions in respect to the  degrees on the cusps of the houses.
The will be in 19°  36′ , or about the middle of the 7th house.
And note  that the number of degrees of a sign on the cusp of any house shows  that that sign commenced in the previous house.
Supposing the  had been 1° of , we should then have  placed it in the 6th house, a little below the cusp of the 7th.
When a  planet is Retrograde (shown in the Ephemeris thus, R.),  we add the amount to the longitude when the event is before noon  or a.m., and deduct it from the longitude when the event is  after noon or p.m.
The mode of giving the judgment on a horoscope will  be shown farther on.
CHAPTER IX.
OF THE INFLUENCES OF THE FIXED STARS  The fixed stars are so called because they appear to keep at the same  distance from one another in the heavens.
All of these stars have their  respective influences analogous to those of the planets.
The following  table of the principal fixed stars, with their several magnitudes and  natures, will be found useful.
It is only those of the first and second  magnitude which much affect us; the influence of those stars marked as  of fourth magnitude is very slight.
The time of the rising and setting  of the fixed stars varies according to the latitudes of the places of  observation.
Their longitudes increase at the annual rate of 50  seconds, but their latitudes vary very little.
The right ascension and  declinations of the numerous fixed stars are given every year in the  Nautical Almanack.
Table of the Principal Fixed Stars, with their Magnitudes and  Natures.
Stars.
Magnitudes.
Natures.
South End of the Tail of the Whale  2  Of the nature of Saturn.
The Star in the Wing of Pegasus  2  Mars and Mercury.
The Head of Andromeda  2  Jupiter and Venus.
The Whale's Belly  4  Saturn.
The Girdle of Andromeda  2  Venus.
The Bright Star in the Head of Aries  3  Saturn and Mars.
The Left Foot of Andromeda  2  Venus.
The Bright Star in the Jaw of the Whale  2  Saturn.
Caput Algol  2  Saturn and Jupiter.
The Pleiades or Seven Stars  5  Mars and the Moon.
The Middle Star in the Pleiades  3  Mars and the Moon.
Oculus Taurus  3  Venus.
Aldebaran  1  Mars.
Rigel  1  Jupiter and Venus.
The Foremost Shoulder of Orion  2  Mars and Mercury.
The She-Goat  1  Mercury and Mars.
The Middle Star in Orion's Belt  2  Jupiter and Saturn.
The Highest Star in the Head of Orion  4  Jupiter and Saturn.
The Star in the Horn of the Bull  3  Mars.
Propus  4  Mars.
The Right Shoulder of Auriga  2  Mars and Mercury.
The Foot of Gemini  2  Mercury and Venus.
Castor  2  Mars, Venus and Saturn.
Pollux  2  Mars.
The Smaller Dog Star  2  Mercury and Mars.
Præsepe  [8]  1  Mars and the Moon.
North Asellus  4  Mars and the Sun.
South Asellus  4  Mars and the Sun.
Cor Leonis or Regulus  1  Mars.
Heart of Hydra  1  Saturn and Venus.
Vindemiatrix  3  Saturn, Venus and Mercury.
The Back of the Lion  2  Saturn and Venus.
The Tail of the Lion  1  Saturn, Venus and Mercury.
Crater  4  Venus and Mercury.
Arcturus  1  Jupiter and Mars.
The Virgin's Spike or Arista  1  Venus and Mars.
The South Balance  2  Saturn and Venus.
The North Balance  2  Jupiter and Mars.
The Left Hand of Ophiucus  3  Mars and Saturn.
The Highest Star in Head of Scorpio  2  Saturn and Venus.
The Left Knee of Ophiucus  3  Saturn and Venus.
Cor Scorpio  2  Mars and Jupiter.
Antares  1  Mars.
The Right Knee of Ophiucus  3  Saturn and Venus.
The Bright Star of the Vulture  2  Saturn and Mercury.
The Mouth of Pegasus  3  Venus and Mercury.
The Tail of the Goat  3  Saturn.
Marchab  2  Mars and Mercury.
Fomalhaut  1  Venus and Mercury.
Scheat-Pegasi  2  Saturn.
To know when any of these fixed stars will affect the horoscope we must  note the sign and degree on the cusps of the houses, and if (on  consulting the Ephemeris) any of these stars should be found to be  ascending or descending within five degrees of the signs upon the cusps  of the several houses, they must be entered in the same manner as the  planets, and their qualities weighed according to the nature of the  planet or planets with which they correspond, as shown by the table  given.
CHAPTER X.
OF THE EFFECT OF EACH PLANET IN EACH OF THE TWELVE HOUSES  Saturn in the first house, or ascendant, shows melancholy and many  sorrows, and if near the ascendant probability of early death; in the  second house pecuniary troubles; in the third quarrels with brothers  and sisters, and dangers and losses in travelling; in the fourth house  death of father or mother, and loss of friends; in the fifth barrenness  or death of children; in the sixth illness, worries with servants and  losses from cattle; in the seventh an ungovernable wife and unhappy  marriage; in the eighth violent death and loss of legacies; in the  ninth losses by sea; in the tenth dishonour and imprisonment; in the  eleventh deep depression and false friends; in the twelfth sorrow,  trouble and persecution from secret enemies.
If the planet is  strong—that is, well-dignified—these evils are much lessened.
Jupiter in the first house gives a good, happy and long life; in the  second riches; in the third family affection and fortunate short  journeys; in the fourth lands and inheritance with an honourable life  and end; in the fifth many children who are good and affectionate; in  the sixth faithful servants and fortunate dealings respecting cattle;  in the seventh honourable marriage; in the eighth long life and natural  death; in the ninth profitable sea voyages; in the tenth preferment and  honours; in the eleventh faithful friends; in the twelfth victory over  secret enemies.
This, of course, means when the planet is strong in  dignities; if weak the good will be somewhat abated.
Mars in the first house shows shortness of life and scars on the head  or face; in the second poverty and troubles; in the third quarrels with  kindred and dangers in travelling; in the fourth short life to the  fathers; in the fifth disobedient children; in the sixth fevers, bad  servants, and loss of cattle; in the seventh sensuality and unhappiness  in marriage; in the eighth a violent death; in the ninth irreligion and  losses at sea; in the tenth military preferment, but troubles from  great dignitaries; in the eleventh false friends and loss of money; in  the twelfth imprisonment.
This is when Mars is afflicted, but if  well-aspected these evils are somewhat abated.
The Sun in the first house gives honour, glory, and long life; in the  second much riches, but great extravagance; in the third good brethren  and fortunate journeys; in the fourth a noble inheritance and honours  in old age; in the fifth few children, yet such as will be a comfort;  in the sixth diseases of the mind; in the seventh a good wife,  honourable adversaries, and sickness; in the eighth good dowry with the  wife, but danger of a violent death; in the ninth gain by the sea, and  ecclesiastical dignities; in the tenth gain from princes and noble  women; in the eleventh distinguished friendships; in the twelfth  powerful adversaries.
This is if the Sun is well-dignified; if weak the  good fortune is not so pronounced.
Venus in the first house gives good health, but sensuality as regards  the opposite sex; in the second riches by means of women; in the third,  in a woman's horoscope, by means of lovers above her in rank; in the  fourth inheritance; in the fifth many children; in the sixth illness  from excesses; in the seventh a good and beautiful wife and very few  enemies; in the eighth a good dowry with the wife and a natural death;  in the ninth good fortune by sea; in the tenth honour and preferment  through the means of some one of the opposite sex; in the eleventh  sympathetic friends; in the twelfth freedom from the power of private  enemies.
This if Venus be strong; if weak the good fortune is less  pronounced.
Mercury in the first house gives noble thoughts, graceful elocution,  and love of art and science; in the second profit by intellectual work;  in the third mathematical skill, swift and prosperous journeys; in the  fourth the gain of an inheritance by craftiness; in the fifth clever  children; in the sixth thieving servants and diseases of the brain; in  the seventh a fomenter of quarrels, but a discreet wife; in the eighth  death by consumption; in the ninth wonderful ability, especially in  occult matters; in the tenth much preferment for ability; in the  eleventh inconstant friends; in the twelfth secret enemies, but they  will not much affect the destiny.
This is when Mercury is  well-dignified.
If weak the good fortune is much lessened.
The Moon in the ascendant, or first house, shows the native will travel  and will gain the favour of noble persons; in the second she sometimes  gives unstable fortune, riches, and poverty alternately; in the third  long journeys; in the fourth profit by travelling; in the fifth many  children; in the sixth diseases of the brain, but good servants; in the  seventh honourable marriage; in the eighth danger by drowning, but  otherwise a long and healthy life; in the ninth many long sea voyages,  inconstancy in religion, and love of art; in the tenth great honours;  in the eleventh the friendship of noble personages; in the twelfth the  common people will be the native's enemies and do him much wrong.
The Dragon's Head when posited in the first house shows poverty; in the  second a good estate; in the third honest kindred and fortunate  journeys; in the fourth gain by travels; in the fifth long life and  good children; in the sixth health and good servants; in the seventh a  virtuous wife; in the eighth many legacies and a natural death; in the  ninth prosperity at sea; in the tenth honour; in the eleventh faithful  friends; in the twelfth open enemies.
The Dragon's Tail in the same places signifies the contrary in all  things.
CHAPTER XI.
ON FORMING A GENERAL JUDGMENT ON A NATIVITY  Respecting the distribution of the doctrine of nativities, we are to  consider first the parents, then the duration of life; the shape  and figure of the body; after these the quality of the mind; then as to  fortune in regard to honours as well as wealth.
In succession to these  the character of the employment; the questions relative to marriage,  children, and friendships; then that concerning travel; and lastly,  that concerning the kind of death which awaits the native from  the configuration of the heavens at his birth.
The Parents.—In conformity with nature, says Ptolemy, the Sun  and Saturn are allotted to the person of the father, and the Moon and  Venus to that of the mother; and the mode in which these luminaries and  planets may be found posited, with reference to each other as well as  to other planets and stars, will intimate the situation of affairs  affecting the parents.
If Mars should be in bad aspect to the Sun, the father will receive  some injury to the face or die suddenly; but a long life is presaged if  Jupiter or Venus be in any mode whatever configurated with either the  Sun or Saturn.
If Mars be succedent to the Moon or Venus, or in quartile or opposition  to them, or if Saturn be similarly aspected to the Moon only, and both  of them be void of course or retrograde, or cadent, adverse accidents  and disease will attend the mother; should they, on the other hand, be  swift in motion and placed in angles, they portend that her life will  be short or grievously afflicted.
Should the Sun be configurated, in any mode whatever, with the Moon or  Venus, or should Venus herself be harmoniously configurated with the  Moon, either by the sextile, the trine, or the conjunction, the mother  will live long.
Concerning the duration of the native's own life, the Hylegliacal[9]  places are, according to Ptolemy, the sign on the angle of the  ascendant from the fifth degree above the horizon to the twenty-fifth  degree below it; the thirty degrees in dexter sextile thereto  constituting the eleventh house; also the thirty degrees in dexter  quartile forming the Mid-heaven above the earth; those in dexter trine  making the ninth house; and, lastly, those in opposition belonging to  the angle of the west.
Among these places, the degrees which constitute the Mid-heaven are  entitled to preference, as being of a more potent influence; the  degrees in the Ascendant are next in virtue; then the degrees in the  eleventh house, succedent to the Mid-heaven; then those in the angle of  the west; and, lastly, those in the ninth house, which precedes the  Mid-heaven.
He also holds that "the Sun, the Moon, and the Ascendant to be  considered as the four principally liable to be elected to the office  of prorogator"—or Hyleg.
These views are not adopted by the modern astrologers, but as this is a  book setting forth the ancient methods it is needless to discuss  the various objections made by them to this, as to some other of the  theories laid down by Ptolemy.
Among the four prorogators already given, the Sun by day is to be  preferred, provided he is placed in one of the Hylegliacal places, and  if not, the Moon; but if the Moon also should not be so posited that  planet is to be elected as Hyleg which may have most claims to dominion  in reference to the Sun, the Moon and the Ascendant, which means that  the planet should have dominion, in any one of the places where these  are situated, by at least three dignities.
If, however, no planet  should be so circumstanced the Ascendant is then to be taken as Hyleg.
By night the Moon is to be elected as prorogator, provided, in like  manner, she should be in some prorogatory place; and if she be not, the  Sun; if he also be not in any prorogatory place, then that planet which  may have most right of dominion in reference to the Moon, and the  antecedent full Moon, and the Part of Fortune.
But if there be no  planet claiming dominion in the mode prescribed the Ascendant must be  taken; in case a new Moon had last preceded the birth; but if a full  Moon, the Part of Fortune.
If the two luminaries and also some ruling planet of appropriate  condition should be each posited in a prorogatory place, then, provided  one luminary may be found to occupy some place more important and  influential than the others, that luminary must be chosen; but should  the ruling planet occupy the stronger place, and have prerogatives of  dominion suitable to the conditions of both luminaries, the planet must  then be preferred to either of them.
When the Hyleg has been determined by the foregoing rules, then note  whether it is supported by benevolent planets in good aspects towards  it and free from affliction—that is, from evil aspects from evil  planets—if so, the life is likely to continue and the constitution to  be strong; but if the Hyleg, whether it be the Sun, the Moon, or the  Ascendant, be afflicted with evil planets and there be no assistance  from good planets, the child will die in infancy: if there be some  assistance from good planets, but yet the evil aspects exceed the good,  the constitution will be weak and the first train of evil directions  will destroy the life.
Concerning the disposition and quality of the mind, we must look  principally to the planets in the Ascendant, the influences of which  over mind and body have already been given in the chapter on the seven  planets.
We must, however, always bear in mind that Mercury has chief  dominion over the mental faculties, whilst the sentient passions are  governed by the Moon and the planet in the ascendant.
The Moon  well-aspected, that is, in trine, sextile, or conjunction to Mercury at  birth, will give to the native excellent abilities, ingenuity,  versatility and wit.
Even the evil aspects of the square and opposition  are better than no aspects at all, though these sometimes produce a  cynical and obstinate nature.
The abilities of those born when Mercury is in "cazimi" (that is,  within seventeen minutes of the Sun's centre) are of the highest order.
Mercury in conjunction with Saturn at birth gives clear judgment and a  love of occult subjects.
Venus in good aspect with Mercury gives love of music and an artistic  nature.
If Mercury and the Moon throw no aspect to each other and are afflicted  by Mars and Saturn, the native will be liable to become insane.
[10]  The fortune of wealth is determined by the Sun and the Moon; if they  are in good position, that is, angular and well-aspected by the two  luminaries, the native will be rich.
If the Sun and the Moon are well  placed, and if there be benefic stars in the Mid-heaven, the native  will rank high in the world.
If the contrary, the native never rises  above mediocrity; and if Saturn afflicts the Mid-heaven, he meets  disgrace.
If Mars is strong and in good aspect to the Sun and Moon, he  will gain military glory.
Jupiter on the Mid-heaven and the Sun and  Moon in trine to each other, the Moon, having the trine of Jupiter, is  one of the best positions for rising in the world.
Jupiter in the tenth  house will cause the native to do fairly well in the world; but Saturn  in that house, if not extremely well-aspected, will bring him to shame  and beggary.
Concerning the nature of employment, the dominion of the employment is  claimed by the Sun and by the planet on the Mid-heaven.
If Mercury  should rule alone he produces writers, teachers of science, merchants  and bankers; also, if well-aspected to Saturn and the Moon, astrologers  and students of all occult matters; if Jupiter is in conjunction, then  the native will be an orator, actor, or painter and his pursuits will  lead him into the society of persons of rank.
Venus ruling makes wine-merchants, dealers in colours, dyes, perfumes,  drugs, garments or apparel, &c.; if connected with Saturn, she makes  persons have to do with amusement, players, jugglers, &c.; if with  Jupiter, persons attending exhibitions and priests who have much  personal decoration such as Catholic priests, bishops, &c. and they  will gain by women.
Mars ruling alone makes martial men and, if in  Scorpio, Cancer, or Pisces, naval men.
[11] The Sun joined with him,  being near the Mid-heaven, or in aspect, makes persons dealing with  fire or metals, the latter especially if in Taurus or Leo.
If Mars be  separated from the Sun, he makes shipwrights, smiths, agriculturists,  stonemasons and carpenters.
If Saturn bear testimony in addition to Mars, persons become mariners,  workers in mines, wells, vaults, &c., underground, keepers of cattle,  cooks, butchers.
If Jupiter join with Mars, they will be soldiers,  innkeepers, tax-gatherers, mechanics.
If Mercury and Venus become joint  arbiters of employment, they produce musicians, dancers, poets, weavers  and painters, &c. Jupiter in connection with them makes magistrates and  senators and also teachers of youth.
Mercury with Mars makes surgeons,  statuaries, boxers.
If Mercury be more powerful, they will be  scientific; and if Mars be stronger, they will be more violent and  cruel in their practices.
[12] If Saturn join these two, they will be  thieves (especially if the Moon be in ill aspect to Mercury); if  be in ill aspect to , they will be robbers  or assassins.
If Jupiter join and ,  they engage in honourable warfare and are industrious.
If Venus and  Mars rule together, persons will be dyers, workers in tin, lead, gold,  silver and medical drugs.
The Moon regulating the employment and, separating from the Sun and  forming an aspect with Mercury, inclines to the pursuit of astrology,  spiritualism and magic.
Concerning Marriage, Ptolemy has laid down some very clear  rules.
He advises persons about to marry to have a care that the  luminaries—that is, the Sun and Moon in their respective  nativities—are in concord.
It is of happy augury if the Moon in the  bridegroom's nativity is in good aspect—that is, in trine or sextile  to the Sun in the bride's nativity.
The Square or Opposition aspects  formed between the luminaries in the two nativities indicate discord  and separation, and very evil effects follow if the malefic planets,  Saturn and Mars, have a bad aspect to the Sun and Moon in both  nativities.
If Venus be with them the separation will be caused by  adultery.
Good planets, such as Jupiter and Venus, placed between the  luminaries in both nativities, show much happiness.
In men's nativities the Moon must be chiefly considered in regard to  marriage.
Should she be in her first or third quarter at birth, the man  will marry under thirty, or if older his wife will be a very young  woman.
If the Moon be configurated with Saturn, she entirely denies marriage.
If she should be in a sign of single form, such as Libra or Taurus, the  native will marry only once, but if she should be placed in a  double-bodied sign, such as Pisces or Sagittarius, the man will marry  more than once.
If the Moon make application to the benefics, the wives will be good  and true; but if she make application to evil planets, the wives will  prove either bad or of a quarrelsome disposition.
For example: If  Saturn receives the Moon's application the wife will prove troublesome  and morose, yet constant and industrious; if Jupiter receive it, the  wife will be decorous, good and economical; if Mars, bold and  refractory; if Venus, cheerful, handsome and agreeable; if Mercury,  sensible, prudent and clever.
Women in whose nativities Venus is configurated with Jupiter or Mercury  are virtuous and well-conducted; but, when Venus is with Mars and no  other planet is there, women born under such aspects are liable to  become licentious.
Mars in square to Venus shows adultery.
For women the Sun is to be chiefly regarded in estimating their chances  of marriage and happiness.
If the Sun be oriental (i.e., between  the Ascendant and Mid-heaven, or between the Descendant and Nadir) the  native will marry in her youth; or when old, to a young man.
If the Sun  be occidental, the native will marry late in life; or when young, to an  old man.
If the Sun be in a sign of single form, she will marry but  once; if in a double-bodied sign, or configurated with several oriental  planets (in one sign) she will marry more than once.
If Saturn be  configurated with the Sun, the husband will be steadfast, prosperous  and industrious.
Jupiter configurated with the Sun gives a good, benevolent and  honourable husband.
"Mars," says Ptolemy, "gives a severe husband, void  of affection and intractable."
Venus gives an amiable husband of  handsome appearance.
Mercury gives one who is provident and expert in  business and of a lively and cheerful temperament.
If Mars be separated from Venus and Saturn, yet have the assistance of  Jupiter, men will lead virtuous lives.
If Mars be configurated with  Venus only men are of a licentious temperament.
Saturn, when in the 7th house of a nativity, brings either unhappiness  in marriage or early death of one or other of the married people.
The  Sun badly aspected by Saturn in the nativity of a woman and the Moon  afflicted by the same planet in the nativity of a man, will bring  trouble in love and marriage.
Description of the wife or husband.—The planet with the sign in  which it is placed, which is posited near the cusp of the 7th house,  must be taken to describe the person.
If no planet should happen to be  so placed, then we must go by the sign alone.
Benefic planets in the  8th house show that the wife or husband will be rich; unfortunate  planets show the reverse.
Children.—As regards the probability of having children, the  10th and 11th houses must be consulted and, should there be no planets  in them, then the opposite, the 4th and 5th houses, must be considered.
The Moon, Jupiter and Venus are said to be givers of children; the Sun,  Mars and Saturn deny children, or give very few and those either die  early, or are a source of trouble to their parents.
Mercury either  gives or denies according to the planets with which he may happen to be  posited.
If the Sun and malefics be in barren signs or in masculine signs and in  the before-named houses, there will be no children; but if they be in  fruitful or feminine, or common signs, there may be children, but they  will be delicate and short-lived.
If Jupiter, the Moon and Venus, are well-dignified in the 10th and 11th  houses, the children born will attain rank and distinction in the  world.
Friends and Enemies.—Persons born under the same sign of the  zodiac are likely to be sympathetic; so also if the planet in the  ascendant of one person's nativity is one which is friendly to that  which rises in the ascendant in the other's.
Thus, a person whose  ruling planet is Venus would be attracted by one in whose ascendant  Mars is dominant and a person whose ruling planet is the Moon rarely  contracts a warm friendship with one who has Mars in the ascendant of  his nativity and vice versâ.
The friendships and enmities of the  planets have already been given in the chapter on the influences of the  seven planets.
Mars in bad aspect to the Sun or Moon in the 7th house causes quarrels  in married life.
Travelling.—The position of the Moon and Mars are here to be  considered.
If they should be in a cadent position the native will  travel a great deal.
The Moon in a watery sign causes much travelling  by water.
Ptolemy tells us that Mars in square or opposition to the Sun  or Moon will cause much travelling in foreign countries.
If the  benefics are conjoined with the Moon, the journeys will be safe and  pleasant; if with the malefics they will produce mischances and  ill-health in travelling.
Mercury ascending at birth, in a  double-bodied or moveable sign, shows a great disposition to travel.
If  a malefic affecting the Moon should be in the watery signs of Cancer,  Scorpio, or Pisces, shipwreck and even death by drowning may ensue  during travelling.
Of the Manner of Death.—If the Hyleg and Ascendant should be  well-aspected and if either Jupiter, Venus, Mercury or the Moon  well-dignified should appear in the eighth house the native will die a  natural death.
If either the Sun or Moon should be badly aspected by  Mars or Saturn in the eighth house it is significant of a violent or  remarkable death.
Saturn causes lingering deaths and Mars those which  are sudden.
Saturn indicates death by chronic diseases, rheumatism, ague and  paralysis.
CHAPTER XII.
CONCERNING DIRECTIONS AND HORARY QUESTIONS  We have seen in the chapter on the judgment of a nativity that by the  consideration of the position of the planets and of the Sun and Moon in  the twelve houses, what the general fortune of the native will  be in the whole course of his life; but the art of Direction measures  out the time into years, months, weeks and days and thus informs us  when we may expect in particular what is generally  promised us in the nativity.
Directions are of two kinds, primary and secondary, and  are based upon arithmetical calculations of the time of the events  caused by the aspects of the significators (that is, of the Sun or the  Moon), with the places of the planets.
They are founded upon the  familiarities of the stars amongst each other in the zodiac (after  the nativity), and show, by calculations, the distance of the place  of a significator at the moment of the nativity from the place it must  reach before it can join the aspect, which distance is called the  Arc of Direction.
Some astrologers consider what are called  "Mundane Directions," which are distances in the world measured  by the semi-arc, and are wholly independent of the zodiac.
These were  invented by Placidus, but as Ptolemy does not treat of them they will  not be considered here.
It must always be remembered that—in directions—the place of a  planet, at the time of the nativity, is called the planet itself,  although it may not be there when the significator arrives; thus, if we  wish to direct the Sun to the conjunction of Jupiter, we must do so to  the position which that planet occupied at the moment of the  nativity.
When the Arc of Direction is found the Sun's right ascension  must be added to it, and the Sun will be the right ascension (without  latitude) of that place in the zodiac at which, when the Sun arrives,  the direction will be completed.
For every day of the Sun's approach to  this point a year must be added, and thus the time when the event is  likely to happen is pointed out: these primary directions, however,  cannot be depended upon to produce an event of great importance unless  the secondary directions agree; but where the nativity is weak the  primary direction alone is powerful enough to kill (especially if it  should be opposed to the Hyleg), and misfortune will always happen if  the positions of the planets, at the moment of birth, are unfortunate,  without the coincidence of any secondary direction.
Secondary Directions are those daily aspects to the luminaries  which happen after birth, every day of which is reckoned for a year,  two hours for a month, thirty minutes for a week, and four minutes for  a day.
[13] Thus, whatever aspects take place in the first day of  the native's life will develop their effects in the first year and  those of the second day in the second year, so that, should the native  live fifty years, his secondary direction for his fiftieth year will  arise from the aspects which took place on the fiftieth day after his  birth.
The ancient astrologers—particularly the Egyptians—used to  predict the events of a nativity wholly from these secondary  directions,[14] in which the Moon should be chiefly considered; for in  those days on which she comes to an evil aspect with the malefics,  Saturn or Mars, the years corresponding to those days will be  peculiarly unfortunate and dangerous to the native; and where, on the  contrary, the Moon is well-aspected to the benefics, the years  corresponding to those days will be very fortunate: a good direction  gives prosperity in that matter which the significator indicates; thus  we direct the Sun to signify the native's preferment or disgrace, his  good or bad health, and the favour or disesteem of great personages.
The direction of the Moon refers to the nature of the native's  journeys, whether prosperous or the reverse, his marriage, his wife,  his women friends and kinsfolk.
The direction of Saturn signifies the native's inheritance, buildings,  possessions, and also his fears, jealousies and mistrusts.
Jupiter is directed as regards glory, renown, riches, children and  religion.
Mars is directed for the native's law-suits, animosities and victories;  he also shows the estates of brethren.
Venus is directed for marriage, love and pleasure and all matters in  connection with women.
Mercury is directed for a knowledge of the amount of wit,  understanding, trade, industry, and journeys of the native; also for  distinction in scholarship and all intellectual pursuits.
The Horoscope or Ascendant is directed to signify the life, affections  and manners of the native.
The Mid-heaven's direction affects the position and career of the  native.
If the directions are to good aspects of benevolent planets, they  signify prosperity both of mind and body, cheerfulness and all manner  of earthly happiness; but if the horoscope should have directions to  the ill aspects of the malefics, Mars or Saturn, then evil is to be  expected of the nature given by the malevolent star.
If directed to the  good aspects, such as the trine or sextile of these evil planets, the  misfortune is not so great, and even in some instances good may be  predicted.
As, for example, the horoscope directed to the trine or  sextile of Mars gives preferment by arms; the same aspects towards  Saturn would indicate success in building or in mines, or some calling  connected with metals.
The occasional differences in the life, tastes, health, marriage and  pecuniary affairs of twins, born within ten or twenty minutes of each  other, are accounted for by the fact that at the birth of the first  child the last degree of a sign may ascend with planets therein, or a  planet in the 2nd house at 5 p.m. may be in the 1st at 5.15 p.m. and  the early degrees of another sign may be exactly on the ascendant at  the birth of the second child.
A planet may reach the M.C., or any other of the four cardinal points  at, say, 10 p.m. and ten minutes later have passed off, when its powers  would have greatly diminished.
Though the signs rise and set at the  rate of 15° per hour, in our latitude from 50° to 60° North, it often happens that 30° will ascend in fifty-two minutes.
Horary questions are questions asked at a certain time when a person  feels anxious concerning any undertaking or impending event.
A figure  or map of the heavens, like that erected for a nativity, is drawn out  for the minute in which the question is asked; and, if the astrologer  be skilful, and the querist sincere—that is, not putting the question  from frivolous motives—the answer will, in general, be true, for the  whole is the effect of that sympathy which pervades all nature and  which is the keynote of all divination under whatsoever form it is  practised.
In horary questions the sign ascending and its lord represent the  querent, and to these the Moon is added and must be considered with the  lord of the ascendant.
The house to which the thing belongs—about which enquiry is made—is  the significator of that person and thing, and every other house and  its lord are to be considered according to their respective  significations, so as to indicate the means and persons by which the  event, about which the enquiries are made, will be accelerated or  retarded.
The dates of events are regulated by the signs and angles.
For example,  should the significator of the event be in a movable sign and an angle  the event will come to pass in the same number of days as there are  degrees between the significator's aspect and the star to which it is  directed if the aspect be by application; if by  separation, the thing will not take place at all.
In one  of the succedent houses movable signs give months, common signs years  and fixed signs bring about the event, after much delay, and when all  hopes of it are past.
Significators in any of the cadent houses seldom do anything and,  should they bring about an event at all, they do so after much waiting  and with much trouble and vexation.
The matter of horary questions is very well treated in Lilly's  Grammar of Astrology, published in 1647, and, by way of  explaining the manner in which this branch of astrology is worked, we  give a fac-simile of a map of a horary question to be found in  this book, with (verbatim) Lilly's method of dealing with that  particular question.
Judgment of the Figure given in Plate.—"Living in London, where  we have few or no small cattle as in the country, I cannot give example  of such creatures, but I once set the figure preceding concerning a  Dogge (which is in the nature of small beasts), which dogge was  missing.
The question to me was what part of the city they should  search and if he should ever be recovered.
"The querent was signified by the sign ascending and the lord thereof,  for, in his person, he was Saturnine and vitiated (according to the  Dragon's Tail in the ascendant) in his nature, mind and  understanding—that is, he was deformed in body and of a covetous  disposition.
The sign of the sixth house and his lord signifies the  dogge, for that sign stands for sheep, hogs and small cattle.
"The sign of Gemini is west, and by south the quarter of the heaven is  west; Mercury (the significator of the dogge) is in Libra, a western  sign, but southern quarter of heaven, tending towards the west; the  Moon is in Virgo, a south-west sign, and verging towards the western  angle.
The strength of the testimonies being thus examined I found the  plurality to signify the west, and therefore I judged that the dogge  ought to be westward from the place where the owner lived, which was at  Temple Bar, wherefore I judged that the dogge was about Long Acre, or  the upper part of Drury Lane.
In regard that Mercury (the significator  of the beast) was in a sign of the same triplicity as Gemini the  ascendant, which signifies London, and applied to a trine aspect of the  cusp of the sixth house, I judged that the dogge was not out of the  lines of communication, but was in the same quarter, of which I was  more confirmed by the trine of the Sun and Saturn.
The sign in which  Mercury appeared was Libra—an airy sign; therefore I judged that the  dogge was in some chamber or upper room, and kept privately, or in  great secrecy, because the Moon was under the beams of the Sun; and  Mercury, the Moon and the Sun were in the eighth house: and because the  Sun on the Monday following would apply by trine to Saturn, the lord of  the ascendant, and the Moon to trine of Mars having exaltation in the  ascendant, I intimated to the owner of the beast that, in my opinion,  he should have his dogge again, or news of his dogge or small beast,  upon the Monday following, or near that time, which was true; for a  gentleman of the querent's acquaintance sent home the dogge the very  same day, about ten in the morning, who, by accident, coming to see a  friend in Long Acre, found the dogge chained up under a table, and,  knowing the dogge to be the querent's, sent him home as above said, to  my very great credit," and no doubt also to the great satisfaction of  "the dogge" himself.
CHAPTER XIII.
SOLAR HOROSCOPES[15]  JANUARY.—AQUARIUS  The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-second of January  to the Twenty-first of February.
The man born under this influence will be of medium stature, good  genius and a great speaker.
He will achieve what he desires and will  become famous in his own country.
He will be subject to melancholy, very religious and of a highly  conscientious nature.
The stars, however, destine him to pass through  much poverty in his youth and he will have other troubles in the matter  of deaths of relations and friends before he is thirty.
He will travel  much and, in his early youth, he will suffer from illness.
He will be  much influenced by women to his own detriment.
He will lose his first  wife and will marry twice, but the second marriage will not be very  fortunate.
At thirty he will be very seriously ill, but will recover  and live on to about sixty-four years.
The woman who is born at the above-mentioned dates will have a charming  and expressive face; her eyes will be soft and beautiful in shape and  her hair of a medium brown colour, neither very dark nor very fair.
In  character she will be slightly melancholy and of a romantic turn of  mind.
She will be happy in her marriage.
She will have a serious  illness at fifty, but will recover from it through the affectionate  care of her husband, and will live to a good old age, surrounded by her  children's children.
FEBRUARY.—PISCES  The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-second of February  to the Twentieth of March.
The man who is born under the influence of this sign will be above  middle height, his chin will be fleshy, his eyes blue and his  complexion rather colourless.
His forehead will be low and broad and  his eyes will express much kindness and goodness of disposition.
He  will be very fond of aquatic pursuits and take great delight in  angling.
He will not be studious, for he has not much perseverance, but  he will take delight in conversation of an instructive order.
He will  not be much of a talker and will be slow to give his opinions on any  subject.
He will be of a luxurious temperament and will be much  influenced by women.
He will be economical in his household expenses,  but will spend money freely on his own pleasures out of his family  circle.
He will be fond of travelling and will be more fortunate in  other places than in his own country.
He will be ingenious and of good  counsel, yet wiser for others than for himself.
He will lose his wife  early in life, but will not marry again, yet this more from indolence  than constancy of feeling.
The woman born at this time will be fairly good looking; her eyes will  be light blue and she will have a fair complexion and a dimple in the  right cheek.
She will be of a good disposition and kind to the poor;  but yet she will be self-indulgent and much given to luxury of all  sorts.
She will marry twice and have many children, but the stars do  not promise her much happiness.
She will die at sixty-eight.
MARCH.—ARIES  The qualities given by this sign of the Zodiac last from the  Twentieth of March to the Twentieth of April.
The man born under this sign will be of medium stature, of fierce  countenance, with an aquiline nose, quickly moving eyes and a strongly  marked dimple in the chin.
His hair will be of a reddish tint, his  forehead broad and his complexion florid.
He will be a loud talker and  have much inclination for women and also for the pleasures of the  table.
He will be fond of field sports and very courageous.
He will be  subject to accidents, both from fire and from four-footed beasts.
He  will be capricious in his affections and will suffer much from his  affairs with women in his youth, but will grow wiser towards middle  age.
He will not marry.
At fifty he will lose much money and will fall  into poverty, and thus become alienated from the friends of his youth.
His life will not be prolonged much beyond fifty-five years.
The woman born at this time will have a florid complexion, large  round-shaped eyes and a square chin.
She will be of middle height and  rather strongly made.
She will be quick-tempered, strong-willed, very  courageous and rather selfish.
She will marry at twenty-three, but will  not have many children.
She will be a widow in middle life and will  marry again within a year of her first husband's death.
She will die  suddenly by an accident in her fifty-sixth year.
APRIL.—TAURUS  The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-first of April to  the Twenty-first of May.
The man born under this sign will have full lips, a short throat, and a  mole at the back of his neck.
He will be subject to sudden fits of  anger and will be fierce and cruel.
He will be fond of women, but will  not be much liked by them and will suffer much in consequence.
He will  be ambitious, fortunate in business and energetic.
He will not be very  prudent in speech and will often get himself in trouble by  over-communicativeness.
He will marry a rich wife and will acquire much  money by legacies from her relations.
He will be very ill at forty, but  he will survive it and come into much riches soon after it.
His life  will go on to about sixty-two, when he will die of much the same  illness which he had at forty.
The woman born at this time will be graceful and well formed, with  luxuriant hair and a full and well-formed mouth.
She will have a good  complexion and will have fascinating manners, so that she will much  attract men.
She will run great risks both from fire and water, and she  will be subject to weakness of the eyes to such excess that towards the  end of her life she will have reason to fear blindness, but she will  escape this calamity.
Although she will have many lovers she will only  marry once, for her husband will survive her.
She will have many  children and they will all live.
She herself will die before sixty.
MAY.—GEMINI  The influences of this sign will last from the Twenty-second of May  till the Twenty-first of June.
The man born under the influence of this sign will be subject to ulcers  and all skin diseases.
He will be tall, well formed and of florid  complexion.
He will be much liked for his amiable qualities and will  govern his family well.
He will travel much in foreign countries and  will acquire many beautiful things in the course of his travels.
He  will be attentive to women, very conscientious, gracious and valiant.
He will not be at all given up to luxury, but will be of a pious and  self-denying temperament.
He will be bitten by some venomous reptile,  yet will not die of the wound, but will recover entirely from it in a  short time.
He will be falsely accused of some sin and will be  imprisoned for it; but he will come out victorious and his innocence  will be acknowledged by all.
His marriage is uncertain.
The woman who is born at this time will be fluent of speech, gracious  in manners, witty and intelligent, but rather sensitive in temper.
She  will be small of stature, slight in figure and of a fair complexion.
She will have well marked yet delicate eyebrows, brilliant eyes and  small white teeth; her hands will be slender, with pointed fingers.
By  reason of her grace and wit she will be much loved, but she will not  marry until she is twenty-five.
She will be passionately loved by her  husband, but she will not return his affection.
She will have very few  children who will not live beyond childhood.
She herself will die at  sixty-seven.
JUNE.—CANCER  The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-first of June to  the Twenty-first of July.
The man born under this sign will be of medium height and will have  light hair and eyebrows.
He will be given to deceit in his manners with  women and will be very inconsistent, yet always with such gracious  manners towards them that he will be much beloved by them.
He will  travel much, and will suffer many misfortunes in the way of accidents.
He will in middle age lose much money through the misconduct of his  brothers, who will, by their extravagance, spend all the father's money  and thus leave only a poor inheritance.
He will occupy himself with  agriculture and be successful with it.
At forty he will suffer from a  very serious illness and his life will probably end at forty-eight.
The woman born at this time will have large grey eyes, full lips and an  abundance of soft, rather colourless hair.
She will be fond of luxury  and ease, and will be much given to the pleasures of the table, and  will eat much and drink more.
She will marry early, but will not agree  with her husband by reason of her own inconstancy.
She will be married  three times, and will get on better with her last husband than with the  two others.
She will have several children, but they will all be of a  sickly constitution.
She herself will have a very serious illness at  seventy which will cure her of all her troubles.
JULY.—LEO  The influences of this sign extend from the Twenty-first of July to  the Twenty-first of August.
The man born under this sign will be of middle height, but more  inclined to be tall than short; his hair will be of a red colour, and  his eyebrows will be well marked and much arched in their form.
He will  be valiant, hot tempered, very talkative, somewhat boastful, but  pleasant and jovial in his manners.
He will be a great admirer of  women, but not constant in his affection.
He will marry once, but not  the woman he so much loves.
The woman born at this time will be tall, with bright hair of a reddish  gold colour, grey eyes, with a bold fierce glance, and long features.
Her nose will be aquiline and the face a long oval.
The lips will be  full but firmly closed and the teeth good and large.
She will be quick  of temper and difficult to please, fond of pleasure and very ambitious  of shining in society.
Her great desire for admiration will cause her  to be much talked about—not always in a manner pleasing to her  husband.
She will marry early.
She will lose her husband in early youth  and will marry again soon after her widowhood.
She will be much subject  to illnesses through the blood, and at forty-eight she will have a very  serious illness; but she will recover and live another fifteen years,  but her life will always be full of anxieties and troubles.
AUGUST.—VIRGO  The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-second of August to  the Twenty-third of September.
The man born under this influence will have an abundance of hair and  will have a large chin and a good complexion.
He will be ambitious,  enterprising, and very valiant, but a little capricious.
He will suffer  much illness and, when he is about thirty years of age, he will be  menaced by death or imprisonment, yet he shall escape both evils.
He  will be of a sympathetic and benevolent disposition and will give good  counsel to his friends.
He will have a beautiful wife whom he will  tenderly love, although she will not return his affections.
A woman born at this time will be graceful and charming, with a  well-formed face, an agreeable expression, small mouth and  well-proportioned figure.
Her voice will be one of her charms, and will  be clear and soft and singularly harmonious.
She will be much loved and  admired for her wit, and will show much taste for music and dancing.
She will have fairly good health, and her beauty and charm of manner  will make her much sought after in marriage, but she will not accept  any of her numerous lovers until after her twenty-second birthday.
She  will be much loved by her husband, and being inclined to be devout, she  will educate her children in the fear of God.
She will die at  sixty-nine.
SEPTEMBER.—LIBRA  The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-third of September  to the Twenty-third of October.
The man born under this sign will be fluent of speech and his voice  will be sonorous and will sound angry even when he is not so.
He will  be wise and prudent and will be much esteemed by good men.
He will be  just and honourable in all his dealings and will acquire the respect of  all who know him for his conscientious dealings with his fellow-men.
He  will marry twice.
His second wife, whom he will marry when he is turned  forty, will be extravagant, and will so worry him by spending all his  substance, that she will bring on his death before he is fifty.
The woman born at this period will be, say the astrologers, cheerful  and of a kindly disposition.
She will be of a lively temperament and  will easily learn both music and dancing and will excel in both.
She  will be amiable, very caressing in manner and much loved by all who  know her.
She will marry twice.
Her first husband will be rich and of  mature age and very prudent.
The second will be young and will soon  spend the greater part of the money left her by her first husband.
She  will be gay, fond of pleasure and rather a coquette, which will much  displease the second husband.
She will be rather given to gambling and  will lose money in this way, which will cause her much discomfort and  anxiety in her latter years.
OCTOBER.—SCORPIO  The influences of this sign will last from the Twenty-second of  October to the Twenty-first of November.
A man born under this sign will be short and broad in figure and  ungraceful in his movements.
He will be dark in complexion; but the  hair will be of a red-brown colour, the eyebrows thick and meeting over  the nose.
He will be prompt in judgment, but very wily and inconstant,  promising one thing and doing another, so much so, that those who have  once had dealings with him will never again have confidence in him,  knowing how likely he is to deceive them.
He will be of a perverse and  irritable temper, which will cause him to have many enemies; and  notwithstanding all his acuteness, he will always be poor.
He will  travel much and will lead a somewhat vagabond life.
He is very unlikely  to marry, and he will probably die a violent death.
The woman who is born under the influence of the Scorpion will be of a  reddish colouring and of middle height and strongly built.
As regards  her character, she will be affable, much beloved by her relations, fond  of pleasure, yet very energetic in the discharge of her household  duties, sensitive in temper, a little revengeful and very ingenious and  of quick judgment.
In her youth she will have much trouble from  lawsuits, but she need not fear the result, for as she is pious God  will always protect her.
She will only marry once, at about her  twenty-sixth year, and will die at sixty-eight.
She will have no  children.
NOVEMBER.—SAGITTARIUS  The influences of this sign continue from the Twenty-second of  November till the Twenty-first of December.
The man born under this sign will be of pale complexion and he will  have long features and dark hair and eyes.
He will be prudent, studious  and economical.
He will see many foreign countries and will gain much  money in his youth, by reason of which he will excite the envy of his  friends.
He will receive much injury from a relative, who will  endeavour to prejudice people against him, but he will always be well  received and much liked in society.
He will be generous to his friends,  but he will be badly recompensed for his kindness.
He will be  persevering in his profession and will attain a good position in it.
He  will be subject to internal complaints, but will live long.
He will be  untrue to his wife, but he will be careful that she does not know it.
He will have several children, but they will be no comfort to him, as  they will be always ungrateful to him.
The woman who is born at this time will be well formed, with luxuriant  hair and well-marked and rather arched eyebrows; her forehead will be  broad and her intellect good, but her temper easily irritated and over  sensitive, especially where her affections are concerned.
She will be  timid, very constant both in love and friendship, generous in her  affections, yet very ill-requited in this respect.
She will marry at  twenty-six and will have many children.
She will suffer much from the  evil tongues of false friends, who will malign her to her husband, but  her innocence will be made known and in the end she will be fully  justified.
She will live to sixty-eight.
DECEMBER.—CAPRICORNUS    CHAPTER XIV.
APHORISMS CULLED FROM THE WORKS OF PTOLEMY AND OTHER ANCIENT  ASTROLOGERS  Whosoever may be adapted to any particular event or pursuit will  assuredly have the star indicative thereof very potent in his nativity.
If Virgo or Pisces be on the ascendant the native will create his own  dignity; but if Aries or Libra be there he will cause his own death.
Venus gives pleasure to the native in that part of the body which may  be ruled by the sign she occupies.
It is the same with other stars.
Should a disease begin when the Moon may be in a sign occupied at the  birth by some malefic, or in quartile or opposition to any such sign,  such disease will be most severe; and if the malefic also behold the  said sign, it will be dangerous.
On the other hand, there will be no  danger if the Moon be in a place held at the time of birth by some  benefic.
In all horary questions remember that there is no affliction to the  Moon so great as when she is in conjunction with the Sun; the ill  aspects for the malefics must affect her, but no evil aspect is so  powerful as her conjunction.
Mercury in trine or sextile to the Moon gives the capacity for  acquiring foreign languages.
In bad aspect to the Moon makes the native  envious, sarcastic, ill-natured, given to lying and thieving.
Saturn in trine or sextile to Venus shows much power of attachment to  wife and family.
In a woman's nativity this is very good, as it  indicates purity.
Those born near noon are generally successful in life, owing to the  Sun's influence being then most powerful.
Those born near midnight are  by no means so fortunate as those born at midday, and it is a singular  peculiarity in such nativities that the most remarkable events of their  lives take place after their thirtieth year, and they are also  certain of some kind of a name after death, meritorious or otherwise,  according to what their horoscope declares.
Persons born near midnight  are very imaginative, and subject to see visions, dream dreams, and to  be believers in the unseen world.
In all travels the Moon is to be considered, for she is a general  signifier of journeys, whether by sea or land.
When the moon is besieged between Mars and the Sun in a nativity, it  argues a short life to the native.
Mercury, if posited in one of the houses of Saturn, in trine or sextile  to that planet, gives excellent understanding; and if the moon be also  well-dignified, the native is much given to the study of occult  science, and will have much renown in that particular.
Those born with the Moon powerful in their horoscopes would do well to  be guided by her aspects in their daily avocations.
If she should be in  trine or sextile to Jupiter, it is a good day to seek favours of the  great, or to make arrangements with employers.
When she is in trine or  sextile to Mercury, all intellectual matters taken in hand will be  likely to prosper.
When she is so aspected to Venus, matters undertaken  with reference to love, marriage, or friendship will have a happy  issue.
When she is in square or opposition she would have, of course,  the contrary effects.
The Sun and Moon in conjunction with Mercury give to the native great  intellectual abilities.
Those who have the benevolent planets, Jupiter and Venus, well posited  in either the ascendant or the mid-heaven at birth will always be much  beloved during the whole course of their lives.
He who is born with the sun in trine to Jupiter is fond of rule, and  very famous in his generation.
Venus in square to Saturn at a birth causes the native to be sensual  and given to unnatural vices.
All the planets, or most of them above the earth, make the native  eminent and famous, and if all should be well-dignified, he will—like  a comet—outshine all others in the world's esteem.
If, on the  contrary, all the planets are under the earth at a birth, the native  will be of a falling fame and fortune, or if they promise by their  natures honour, dignity and fortune (that is, if they appear  essentially dignified in nocturnal genitures), these good things will  only come in the latter part of the native's life.
Jupiter in conjunction with the Moon in a watery sign gives  drunkenness.
Venus in conjunction, trine or sextile to the Moon, gives happy  marriage, but in square to the Moon, prodigality, indolence and  drunkenness.
Saturn in square to Mars means a malicious and murderous temperament,  and liability to imprisonment.
It is advantageous to make choice of days and hours at a time well  constituted by the nativity.
Should the time be adverse, the choice  will in no respect avail, however favourable an issue it may chance to  promise.
A sagacious mind improves the operation of the heavens, as a skilful  farmer by cultivation improves nature.
Part II.
CHIROMANCY  "God has placed signs in the hands of all men, that every man may  know his work.
"—Job xxxvii.
7 (St. Hierom's Translation).
I. W. KELLY                        RECENT SHIFTS IN ASTROLOGICAL     IDEAS       Classical (traditional) astrology was associated with prognostication and relatively specific, testable hypotheses about planetary configurations and human activities.
Until the twentieth century, astrologers have held that the stellar connection mainly reflected actual outward human behavior, but to- day there is a tendency to claim that the stellar connection reflects only in- ner life.
To appreciate the shlft in claim, consider first the view of Charles Carter, who was the leadmg British astrologer in the mid-twentieth century: Practical experiment wiU soon convince the most sceptical that the bodies of the solar system indicate, if they do not actually produce, changes in (1) our minds, (2) Our feelings and emo- [ions, (3) Our physical bodies, (4) Our external affairs and relationships with the world at large (1925, p. 14).
Although every birth chart was different and many astrological factors had to be assessed (often with mutually conflicting indications), it was conceded that there was an observable, relatively specific something in common that should be exhibited by people with a particular planetary configuration in their birth chart (horoscope).
As the Dutch psychologist Jan Van Rooij pointed out, If one takes 100 people w~rhthe sun in Aries, they should have something in common, irre- spective of other astrolog~cdfactors.
And this commonality should be d&erent from the com- mon factor in 100 people uith the sun in Taurus, irrespective of additional factors (1994, p. 55).
On this basis we should not expect to see the influence of a particular factor on a particular person.
But examining large groups of people should allow commonalities to be detectable, if they exist.
Contrast this with the views of psychotherapist and astrologer Dr. Glenn Perry, perhaps the leadmg propo- nent of modern inner psychological astrology (also known as astropsychology and archetype astrology) in the United States today: Astrology does not deal with quantities that can be objectively measured.. .
the [birth] chart depicts the structure and dynamics of consciousness.. .
[it] shifts the emphasis from predicting outcomes to interpreting the meonirzg of outcomes as they relate to the inner life of the person (1993, pp.
7, 8, 9).
Further, "astrology only plays a role in the mental plane and does not ex- press itself consistently or systematically in events or behavior" (Terpstra, 1994, p. 42).
Here Carter's direct connection with outward behavior and ex- ternal events is denied.
Instead the connection is with the unobservable in- ner life.
When leadmg astrologers cannot even agree on what astrology deals with, other conficts and problems can only further reduce the plausibhty of astrology.
Since the 1950s many studies were conducted by both astrologers and sympathetic researchers.
The picture that emerged out of this research, as                              MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                       1039  pointed out, was mostly bad for astrology.
But negative studes, even when they are cumulative, have been 'explained away' and dismissed in many dif- ferent ways by astrologers, allowing them to maintain their belief in astrolo- gy whatever the evidence or criticisms.
~ e a l i with           n ~ Criticisms the Astrological Way       Some typical ways astrologers have reacted to negative findmgs and cri- tiques are briefly considered.
Ignore bad news.-First of all, such findings can be ignored or played down.
As the astrologer Robert Hand said, "Positive results in the scientific study of astrology have to be taken seriously undeniably, but negative results not so seriously" (cited in Perry, 1995a, p. 37).
Overall, this has been the dominant response by the astrological community.
This tack is taken by John Anthony West in his "The Case for Astrology" (1991) where he says "Since the aim of this book is to present the positive evidence, intimate de- t d s of the bulk of the negative evidence do not really concern us" (p. 234).
But nearly all the evidence is negative, so West's dehberate suppression of it is irresponsible (Dean, 1993).
A visit to any astrology bookstore WIN quickly confirm that research into astrology is rarely cited and when it is, it usually only involves a distorted presentation of the Gauquelin findings (Kelly & Saklofske, 1994)' and an outdated reliance and misinterpretation of studies    'The research of the late Michael Gauquelin and his d e Francoise have been consistently mis- understood and distorted by astrologers and those sympathetic to astrolo y The Gauquehns found evidence of a weak relationship between planetary positions in the        5; Eminent professionals in Some occupations.
For exam le, Mars tended to occur more often                                                                                        and the birth of than ex ected by chance in some sectors of the sky ar t f e birth of o u t s t a n d q athletes in many sports.
h e Gauquelins attempted to explain these Eindings by suggestin that the underlying processes involved an inherited temperament (character traits) imprinted       Ey    planetary geomag- netic effects.
An implication here was chat, if thc suggested mediatin factors were correct, one would expect such lanetary relationshi s to be Lnked ro hereditary factors.
An initial study by G a u q u e h indeed Pound a (weak) tenBency for chlldren to be born with the same particular planets in the same secrors of the sky as their parents.
Un€ortunatel , follow-up studies by Gau- quelin with twice 4s lar e a sample as the initial study did nor conirm the reality of the plane- tary link with herecllry &auquelin, 1988).
A further re-analysis of Gauquelin's heredity hypoth- esis, by Errel (1989.
1992) usin an improved methodology, also ave negative results.
In addi- tion, in a s e r m of studies by g ~ r t e l(1990, 19931, Gau u e h ' s Aaracter-rrait hypotheses and planetary geornagnerjc hypotheses were nor supported,                                                   - -                                                             ?caving     wide open the meaning of the findings.
-       It 1s of interest to note that the over-all findings of Gauquelin were hardly supportive of astrology.
First of all, the planetary relationships were only found with Ot~tstandingpeo le in some occupations.
No planetary relationships were uncovered for the rest of the popu&rion, namely, the vast ma'ori of people who visit astrologers.
Second, even within the restricted group of eminent indivixals, the effect was extremely weak; there was only abour a 2% ddfer- ence benveen those with the hypothesized planets in the relevant sectors and chance expecta- tions.
Third, the data supporting planetary relationshi s &d not support other central asrrologi- cal h potheses such as zodiac signs, transits, and pfanetary aspects.
Fourth, Gauquelin only found(sorne of the planets (the moon, Venus, Mars, Ju iter, and Saturn) to be related to the birth-times of the eminent individuals considered.
No etfects were found for the other astrolog- ically significant planets, namely, Mercury, Uranus, Ne tune, Pluto, or the sun.
And the rela- tionships that were found were also inconsistent w i l astrology in rhat astrological theory 1040                                      I. W. KELLY  examining alleged lunar effects on human behavior (see Kelly, Rotton, & Culver, 1996 for a recent review of studes on lunar effects).'
Knock science.-A second popular response is the ever-applicable argu- ment that the limitation is with the present day science and not astrology.
Hand again said: "I don't think that science is yet capable of dealing with the full complexity of the symbolic language as employed by astrologers" (cited by Perry, 1995a, p. 37).
Unfortunately, this promissory note may never be cashed in.
How would an appropriate science differ from our present one?
As Gross said, "Like all Utopians these [astrologers] are short on spe- cifics and we are never told what such a science as science would look hke, even in o u t h e , much less in detail, nor how [such a future science] is likely to dlffer as science from present day science" (1994, pp.
434-435; Actually Gross was tallung about extreme views on Feminist science, but the analogy is perfect).
Move goalposts.-Criticisms and serious long lasting anomahes can also  would predct weakness rather than strength for the planetary results obtained by Gauquelin.
F i n d y , Gauquelin tested the ability of astrolo ers using the whole chart to discern important life characteristics of peoples' Lives.
The astrofogers inevitabl failed his tests.
H e concluded that horosco es did not provide information of any useful varue in understanding human be- havior and ciaracter (Gauquelin, 1983).
Seymour (1990, 1996) recently ar ed for the validity of a limited astrolo y based on the Gau uelin findings.
Alon these lmes,           has attempted to strengthen the case for the Gauque.
lin &netary-occupation findlngh by proposing a s eculacive mechanism based on the aUcgcJ response of our neural network< ro fluctuations in $e earth's geomagnetic field which, m [urn, interacts with the gravitational fields of the planets.
Udortunately, while Seymour's t h e o r ~ z ~ n ~ does not contradict modern physical theories, to make a plausible case, one needs much more than an ad hoc fit to the Gauquelin results.
And, it is precisel at this point that Seymour's proposals lack substance.
Inrerestin Iy, he cited as support for %is explanatory theory the he-          and eomagnetic effects h i t i d y uncovered by Gauquelin but neglected to inform readers :$Loth       Eauqudinvs own research and later studies b E n d did not repPcate such findings.
Furthermore, Seymour never satisfactorily addressed X e problem of the mismatch between planetary and biological frequencies or how the nervous system is influenced (other than by vague reference to 'inducing currents in the neural networks,' whch tells us nothing).
For all of Seymour's appealing to the scientific status of his ex lanation he never s ecified tests by which his theory could be examined.
The entire edifice o?~eymour's theory aEo relied on the trust- worthiness of the G a u x e l i n d a ~ base                                         a    which has been challenged by the Dutch mathematician Nienhuys (in press).
e rehabhty of the G a u q u e h database has been the scene of a bitter controversy.
Interested readers might consult the debate between Ertel and Irving (1997) and Furtz, Nienhuys, and Sandhu (1997) for the most recent exchange on this topic.
The quality of much astrological thinking is summarized by astrologer Joanna Ashmun's de- scriptions of internet exchanges between astrologers: "Skepticism is not in evidence and is in fact discouraged.. .
.
The way astrologers treat researchers and ske tics is just the way they treat other astrologers who disagree with them-continuing on as        f    they and their disagree- ments never existed.
.
.
.
The thing that I find least comfortable about astrolo discussions (and not just on the Internet) is their irnmateriahty, their lack of grounding.
~stro!&ers are less literate than average; they write badly and they read badly; there is almost no critical res onse; errors are ignored, corrections are not acknowled ed They answer off the top of their Eeads, quote from memory, claim that anythin publishef anywhere at an time is general knowled e and then get sidetracked into arguing atout who's a liar instead orsorting out the facts of I%C original question.
There is nothing resembling peer review, except in regard ro political correct- ness.
The fact is they don't look stuff up, not even when they d ~ s a ~ r cwith     e    you!
Most astrologers would rather have an dfy quotation from Dane Rudhyar or C G. Jung to supporr their opinions than some good research" (Ashmun, 1996, pp.
41-43).
MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                      1041  be dealt with by hand-waving in another drection and the elevation of spec- ulation to a futuristic higher plane.
For example, a serious problem for as- trology is the great &vide between the Eastern Sidereal zo&ac and the West- ern Tropical zodiac.
These zodiacs currently differ by almost one sign.
One may be an Aries in North America but a Pisces in Lndia (Cornelius, Hyde, & Webster, 1995, p. 31).
Is this conact between zodiacs a problem for as- trology?
Of course not!
Cornehus stated this could occur because there are "two different orders of influence, one from the constellations and the other from the earth-sun cycle" or, alternatively, we can view "both zodiacs as two reflections of the same symbolic forms.
.
.
[that] both show in their own dif- ferent ways" (p. 32).
The obfuscations 'orders of influence' and 'reflecuons .
.
.
showing in their own ways' are nowhere clarified, hence we are no h r - ther in our understanding after being told this than we were before.
\Xlhat about people who are born at the same time and have M e r e n t destinies?
l h s has been a standard argument against astrology.
The same as- trologers tell us: "The singular horoscope [can be1 read as a signature for these particular twins with M e r e n t groups of planets describing the two individuals .
.
.
where frequently one twin answers to the sun and the other to the moon in the same horoscope" (Cornelius, et al., 1995, p. 131).
Here the term 'frequently' refers to inching not compeUmg, to avoid dsconfir- mation.
We are also entitled to ask how one would tell which one is sun and which one is moon, but no answer is p r ~ v i d e d If                                                     .
~ that doesn't work, Cor- nelius, et al.
reminded us that we can always interpret astrological symbolism in a metaphorical way, for example, "Sigmund Freud was born on a differ- ent continent but within minutes of Robert Perry.
Freud discovered the un- conscious and Perry discovered the North Pole" (p. 131; see also p. 96).
Hence, these time-twins were both &scoverers!'
If interpretations encom- passing both literal and symbolic (including metaphorical) are equally adrnis- sible with astrological claims, then we cannot fail to find a fit between the horoscope and the person.
The positive side to this is never having to admit you are wrong, the negative side saying very little of import.
Invoke negatives.-A fourth popular response is to say that the phe- nomena astrology deals with are very subtle and elusive and what we need are more creative ways of investigating them.
For example, even though a large, consistent body of research converges on the view that sun signs are   'A variety of ad hoc rules could be used, for example, oldest=Sun, o r (for op osite-sex wins) Male=Sun, or it could be whichever one on inspection fits best.
At the end o r t h e day all chat          .
matters to astrolo ers is having a ~ r a c t i c a strategy                                                    l        no matter how arbitrary.
'Ac,tud Freud j i d n ' ~discover t e vnconscious.
There is a l a q e pre-Freudian literature on the toplc.
&at Freud did was use the term as a working tool chat could be investi ated psycho- logically (Fine, 1973, pp.
36-37).
Further, the Noccb Pole wasn't 'discovered' at a%.
Everybody knew where and what it was.
1042                                    I. W .
KELLY  not valid, the astrologer Harvey could still say "It is absolutely correct to say that there is no evidence for signs and houses as yet.
.
.
(1982, p. 47, itahcs Harvey's) and twelve years later, after again acknowledging the lack of evi- dence, tell us "I am personally still convinced that, given more sensitive and imaginative tests, confirmation of the reality of sun-sign typologies, and the signs generally, will be obtained" (1994, p. v).
Since it is difficult to prove a negative in such cases, this position can be maintained indefinitely.
A col- lorary is that astrologers with incompatible positions on fundamental tents can adopt the same intransigent attitude in regard to their own beliefs.
Such a posture in the face of negative evidence can guarantee a static system and a lack of progress.
It also contradicts the supposed ease with which astrolog- ical connections were first recognized.
As Perry (1993) tells us of the an- cients, "the partial if not complete validlty of astrology was self-evident to anyone w h g to attempt a serious study of the subject" (p. 3 ) .
This dis- crepancy is in need of explanation.
Furthermore, appeals to the self-evident have not been very fruitful guides to truth in the history of ideas.
Blame faulty methods.-Finally, one can say that, if you are obtaining negative results, you must be doing it wrong.
You are using the wrong meth- odology, the wrong paradigm or both.
This approach has been adopted by increasing numbers of astrologers since the 1950s, when research (and nega- tive results) got undenvay.
West (1991), for example, contended that scien- tific criticisms of astrology are irrelevant because astrology is "a system of magic" (p. 223), where magic is "the attempt to master the fundamental laws of resonance that have produced the cosmos" (p. 220).
West was insuf- ficiently explicit about this 'system of magic' and we are left with a conjunc- tion of unformulated statements about 'the creative powers of nature' or the 'laws of harmony' and appeals to authority ('ancient wisdom').
As Evans  (1994) pointed out, West's magical system is a closed system.
W e are invited to bcheve that it is true, not because it con- nects up with other things which experience has shown to be true, but by some inherent truth of its own which will have it that the planet Saturn symbolizes contraction whereas Jupiter symbolizes expansiveness.
.
.
(p. 413).
While, in general, astrologers pretend that claims about zochacal signs, houses, planetary aspects, and so on are empirical statements, that is, claims capable of being rejected or modified by research or theory, to most astrolo- gers such claims actually function as necessarily true claims.
The "truth" of central astrological tenets themselves is never in doubt.'
'A more general underlying issue here is why astrologers themselves beheve in astrology.
As Dean, Mather, and Kell (1996) point out, the steps in b&ef are roughly: (1) Read astrology books, become aware o r h e system.
(2) Learn more, calculate charts, see that they appear to work.
(3) Become dazzled by the history, majesty, and sheer appeal of it all.
(4) Adopt the sys-  The Origin of Astrological Ideas     A legitimate query here concerns how these astrological connections were established in the first place.
To make it easier, let us initially consider a relatively straightforward                    -          astrological claim and examine the theories ad- vanced by astrologers to explain the origin of these connections.
If astrolo- gers have no plausible explanation, then we have good reasons to reject more complicated claims based on these connections.
According to traltional astrology, the planets are supposed to be asso- ciated with certain character traits; for example, Mars is associated with com- bativeness and courage, and Uranus is associated with originality and inde- pendence.
How did astrologers find this out or determine this?
G a u q u e h (1980) and Startup (1981) have described five such theories that are taken seriously by members of the astrological community.
Ln what 1046                                     I. W. KELLY  follows, I w d describe each of these theories, relying heavily on many of the insights of Startup to examine them critically:       (1) The planetary connections were revealed to the ancients by a higher intelligence, for example, by gods, angels, demons, or extraterrestrials.
Apart from begging the question about the existence of these beings in the first place, explaining mysteries in terms of other mysteries does not take us any further than we were before.
"We have not explained how these aliens got their knowledge" and so it merely pushes the problem elsewhere (Startup, p. 26).
It is also not clear how this proposal could be independently tested.
(2) The early astrologers acquired this information about planets and person&ty by paranormal means.
This similarity begs the question in that it assumes ESP has been demonstrated and is capable of establishing relation- ships far and beyond the claims of the majority of even the most fervent advocates of the paranormal.
Also, which parricular psi ability is to be invoked?
Surely telepathy is not good here since, prior to the esrablishment of the typology, there was no one's mind to read.
Clairvoyance is equally du- bious since it is difficult to imagine what state of affairs could have been paranormally per- ceived which was not available to ordinary perceptions.
That leaves precognition.
.
.
but this would presumably require that the ancient astrologers somehow saw the results of modern in- vestigauons which were themselves, in turn, inspired, albeit indirectly, by the 'insights' of the ancients (Startup, 1981, p. 26).
There are other problems.
What is the 'it' we are detecting by paranormal means?
Some 'force' emanating from the celestial object?
How do the items detected paranormally relate to items detected by normal perception?
(For example, if we detect all sorts of paranormal 'rays' around us, how can we tell that they are coming from what we visually perceive as Mars?)
How do we know that there is a correlation between the normal and the paranormal items?
By paranormal means?-That's doubly question begging!
By normal means?
If so, then why could not we have noticed the paranormal item through normal channels?
Psychological astrology involves four fundamental claims.
The first two are common to other h d s of astrology, namely, that there is a correlation between celestial and terrestrial phenomena, and that everything in the birth chart affects everything else in the birth.
The third and fourth claims are the unusual ones, namely, that the birth chart indicates not behavior or events but changes in consciousness, and that astrology should be viewed in the perspective of a magical, organic world-view.
A look at these four claims can now be taken one by one.
1.
Relationships Postulated by Astrologers Between Celestial Phenomena and Terrestrial Phenomena Are Only Correlational.
Traditional astrology usually adopted the notion that the relationship between celestial and terrestrial affairs was some h d of causal one.
As Placidus said in 1657, "It is impossible for the efficient heavenly causes (as being so very far distant from things below) to influence sublunary bodes, unless by some rnedum or instrumental virtue.
.
.
the instrumental cause of the stars is light," and "the stars, where they do not rise, are inactive," so astrologers should "reject a secret influence as superfluous, nay, even im- possible" (p. 1, 3 ) .
Most modern astrologers reject this causal approach.
Per- ry (1994) tells us that the relations between people and their birth charts are not causal but correlational.
The astronomical bodes reflect human life expe- riences rather hke a mirroring reflecting a landscape which has to be inter- preted.
But there is much disagreement over the kinds of celestial configura- tions that are relevant and how they are to be interpreted.
In fact, no matter what an astrologer may claim, a search of the literature VJLU invariably find a conflicting claim.
This dsagreement exists even at the most fundamental lev- el for entire populations of astrologers, for example, Western astrologers dis- agree with Eastern astrologers on which zodiac to use and how many planets to use.
This lack of agreement is widespread within Western astrology itself: Ln horary astrology (Answering questions, e.g., Should I marry X?)
the moon's north node is a point of ill-fortune, but in humanistic astrology it is the direction of personal growth (Jones, 1996).
Such systems are mutually incompatible, yet are seen as completely vahd by their users.
tern as true, and reject attacks to avoid cognitive dissonance.
The sequence from 1 to 4 is not unreasonable.
Students of astrolo y are not told to accept astrolo without question, they are told ro try thin s out for themsefves, so at first sight, what c o u l ~ b efairer?
The roblem, of course, is that [ley are nor made aware of all the pidalls of personal valtdation (ancfthe conEir- mation bias), nor are they told how to make controlled tests or to design research that actually tests astrological hy otheses and not auxiliary hypotheses.
Nor are they presented the vast body of criticism oE astro?ogical tenets, as is, for example, found in h i s artic e and references.
Once they reach (4) then any internal inconsistencies and disagreements can lo ically be accomrno- dated as minor hiccu s due to the complexities of astrology or inevitable fuman fallibility (see Dean, Mather, & ~ e f 1996).~ , 1044                                     I. W .
KELLY       Astrologers' meanlngs of astrological signs and houses are not very clear- cut and there are no agreed upon rules for weighing their effects.
For exam- ple, as the astrologer Prudence Jones (1996, p. 282) says, [The zodiac signs] rest on shaky foundations from the modern point of view.
How in heaven do twelve 30' sectors of the ecliptic, measured from the vernal equinox but named after now- far-distant constellations, impart any qualities at all to the planets, houses, parts and nodes which we view against their backgrounds?
Do they do so in fact, or is this wishful thinking?
Some astrologers justdy the signs (taking, u s u d y without explanation, the sun in the signs as their exemplar) as shorthand For seasonal characteristics.
But this implies that their order should be reversed in the southern hemisphere, which seldom happens.
And what, in any case of horoscopes for equatorial latitudes where seasonal change is minimal, but where, of course, astrology was invented?
The meanings of signs depend upon which zodiac is used and the meanings of houses depend on which house system is used.
House systems differ with regard to number, sequence, method of division, and interpretation (Mar- tens & Trachet, 1995).
Western astrologers also dlffer in how many planets should be used, some use undiscovered hypothetical planets, others use as- teroids (Dean & Mather, 1977).
This dversity in fundamentals gives us grou!lds to be sceptical of claims that astrologers are speakmg about some- thir-;<they have actually apprehended.
2.
The horoscope is a whole syslem in which every part is influenced by every other part.
Astrological factors cannot be examined in isolation; the whole birth chart is needed.
So the golden rule is that "only the whole chart should be considered, for any astrological purpose whatever" (Dwyer, 1985, p. 1).
As Perry pointed out ".
.
.
no one part of a horoscope can be isolated.
.
.
since everything influences everything else" and ".
.
.
you cannot empirically ob- serve a pure [astrological factor] isolated from other factors in the chart" (Perry, 1993, p. 6).
But astrologers disagree over which individual factors are important, so they dsagree over what the whole chart consists; they just agree that whatever it is, it is important to keep it in mind when doing as- trology.
As the psychologist Jan Van Rooij (1994) asked: Where does the whole chart end?
With ten planets, rwelve signs, twelve houses, midpoints, Ar- abic points, nodes, aspects and whatever other astrological concepts may be used, it is simply impossible to interpret a "whole chart."
When astrologers claim that they use the whole chart, they only refer to the fact that they use more factors than just one.
Nevertheless, no matter how many factors they may use, they always use a restricted nzrrmber of factors, and therefore only a part of the horoscope.
They neuer use the whole chart.
But then the question becomes how many factors would be considered, and which Factors?.
.
.
Suppose that I consider as many as 20 fac- tors, then undoubtedly an astrologer will come up who claims that I should use 21 factors (p. 56 italics mine).
The "whole chart" therefore has a different meaning to different schools of astrology.
Some astrologers use asteroids in birth charts.
As Hand                       MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                          1045  (1981) pointed out, size of an astronomical body is unrelated to astrological effectiveness, therefore "[tlhe lsaster is that there are thousands of aster- oids and other minor bodes orbiting the sun, and using present-day astro- logical techniques there is no way of accounting for all of them in a chart" (p. 93).
Other astrologers use hypothetical planets such as Vulcan that have not been detected by astronomers (Hand, 1981, p. 95).
There is no evidence that astrologers using asteroids or hypothetical planets are more insightful or more successful counsellors than those using "incomplete charts," or nonas- trologically oriented psychotherapists or even lay therapists (Dean, 1985; Mc- Grew & McFall, 1992).
How can dlfferent sets of parts give the same meaningful whole?
This problem would seem to be exacerbated when we remember that conflicting Western astrologies uthze different factors, and even when the same factors are used, they are often weighted differently.
If different schools of astrology use different astrological factors and hence operate with ddferent notions of the "whole chart," then any reference to the supposed commonality of the "whole chart" is less than meaningful.
Perry stated "every planet and every sign of the z o l a c is influenced by the whole in which it is embedded" (1995, p. 34).
But if my whole chart and your whole chart involve factors that are ddferent in type or number, the end result must (according to Per- ry) be open to question.
It is as if we thought we were taking about the same thing, but upon investigation found that I meant Volkswagens, while you were referring to Cadillacs.
So when we are told by astrologers that "astrology works," we are not sure what to make of it.
It is like being told that you will survive your de- mise in some form by ddferent rehgions and have little idea how this wdl be accomplished.
(WLLIyou be a disembodied spirit, a resurrected body, an as- tral body, or even come back as a mosquito, etc?)
SOMEPROBLEMS    O F MODERN   ASTROLOGICAL  IDEAS      (3) Astrology predicts changer in consciousness not behavio~or events.
It is here that the new psychological astrology departs from tradition.
Here the relationship between celestial patterns and human beings is not with outward, observable patterns of behavior and tendencies but rather with the unobservable, inner Me of a person, or what Perry called the "psy- chic structure which underlies personality" (Perry, 1995b, p. 123; see also, Perry, 1988).
He said A horoscope symbolizes the complex, evolving narure of consciousness.. .
the depths of per- sonality.. .
the dynamic relations between psychological drives.
For example, Sun square Saturn symbolizes a conflict between the need for self-expression and the need for self-control.. .
(Perry, 1995b, p. 124).
Zodiac signs symbolize general, ".
.
.
fundamental human needs, or motiva- tional drives, inherent in the human condition" (Perry, 1988, p. I), whereas the house positions and planetary aspects symbolize a particular inlvidual's "map of consciousness" or "inborn personality structure" (Perry, 1988, p. 2, 3 ) .
The extreme problems of accounting for the relations between celestial factors and observable, relatively specific outcomes postulated by the trad- tional astrologer are further exacerbated by the psychological astrologer's ad- dtional conjectures.
How do we know such invisible psychological processes underlie the astrological symbolism?
Perry stated such cognitive processes and structures are distded from the composite descriptions associated with traditional astrological symbolism.
For example, ".
.
.
the need of a [zodiac] sign can be inferred from the behavior which is characteristic of that sign, e.g., leonian pride, creativity, and a~niabilityevidence the universal human need for vabdation of perceived identity" (Perry.
1988, p. 2).
It is ddficult to see how it follows in the f i s t place from the character- istic behaviors of a sign that one intrinsic motivational factor ties them all together, and even if the case could be made, a further case would need to be independently made for the particular human drives postulated by Perry.
H e never clearly set out how he arrived at these conclusions.
No sets of studles of a quantitative or qualitative nature are discussed, nor is there any kind of an appeal to any careful examination of the astrologically symbolized behaviors by independent astrologers or psychologists to determine what   T w o harbingers and precursors of modern astrops chology are Dane and Rudhyar and Alan Leo.
In the earl rwentiech century, the British astrofoger Leo in.ected theosophist and mystical ideas into astroLgy.
The move away from traditional ideas in d e United States was begun by Rudhyar and his humanistic astrology orientation during the third decade of the century.
In their "inner" orientation, Rudhyar and Perry overlap, the main difference being that Rudhyar is more i n c h e d to Eastern mysticism and rehgion.
A critical examination of Rudhyar's ideas can be found in Kelly and Krutzen (1983).
1052                             I. W. KELLY  one might infer from them.
Furthermore, if only the whole chart will do, in- ferences based on parts are by definition meaningless.
Perry elevated psychological astrology to miracle status by further in- forming us that the dynamic relations between various psychological drives symbolized by the horoscope are "fluid and changing, varying in accord with situational specificity, developmental age, emotional maturity, and level of psychological integration" (1995b, p. 123; 1994, p. 34).
Further, ".
.
.
un- like the boundaries of physical objects, the contents and processes of con- sciousness involve meanings whose boundary regions are fuzzy.
.
.
.
[mlean- ings are indefinite, arbitrary, relational and culturally embedded" (Perry, 1995a, p. 34).
The psychological astrologer claims these incredbly complex, changing, amorphous, inner complexities (which may not even be conscious) have been inferred from clusters of behaviors associated with astrological symbolism.
It is clear that no theory of consciousness based on physical processes can perform the role demanded, so Perry opted for dualism, the existence of a nonphysical, immaterial mind.
While psychological astrology was described as a theory of "extraordinary complexity and a model of consciousness" (Perry, 1995a, p. 32; 1994, p. 33), epistemological questions regarding this dualistic view of consciousness were never addressed; we are merely offered tidbits such as, consciousness is a "nonphysical system" (1995a, p. 32) and "a subjective experience of awareness that has no material correlates..
."
(1995a, p. 34).
Nowhere &d Perry articulate the intrinsic nature of his ver- sion of the nonphysical mind.
It is also far from clear how the postulation of a soul/nonphysical mind can contribute toward clarlfylng and informing our understanding of central notions such as purposive behavior, values, internal self-causation, meanings and creativity, over that offered by contemporary models consistent with materialism (such as those offered by Flanagan, 1992; Searle, 1992; Crick, 1994; Penrose, 1994; Dennett, 1996).
Neither does he offer us any inkling as to the mediating role the nonphysical mind plays be- tween cosmos and psychic structure.
Since psychological astrology does not have a theory of its own regard- ing the nature and structure of the inner psychological processes supposedly mirrored by planetary configurations, it rests m a d y on those postulated by modern psychodynamic theories.
More specifically, Perry related the birth chart (horoscope) to "conscious and unconscious processes, areas of repres- sion and conflict, pathways of sublimation, transference dynamics, projec- tions and the lke" (Perry, 1995b, p. 123; see also, Perry, 1988).
Even if we contend that psychological astrologers have refined the crude approxima- tions of the traditional astrologers (who do not offer plausible scenarios of how their correlations were established), this case is very difficult to make.
The reason is simple.
Twentieth century theorizing was influenced by a great                            MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                      1053  variety of areas of research, including invest~gat~ons    into brain function, Hu- manistic and existential schools of psychology, artificial intelligence, physical- ism and functionahsm in philosophy, and so on.
Ancient, medieval, and re- naissance theories of mind uthzed by the astrologers of the past were quite ddferent.
And, to complicate the picture further, as philosophers of science such as Thomas Kuhn (1970) have pointed out, when new paradigms come and go, the same or similar terms often acquire new meanings.
For example, the contemporary terms 'motion' and 'matter' were also used by Aristotle with ddferent interconnections and meaning.
Therefore, Perry's claim that "there is near uniform agreement based on centuries of observation, as to the meaning of [astrological symbolism]" (1993, p. 7 ) is clearly problematic in light of the historical disagreements over the nature and constituents of the mind.
Consider also the psychological astrologers' claim that inner mental dy- namics can be expressed in a great variety of ways.
Here they reject as sim- plistic the traditional astrologer's claim that celestial patterns are typically as- sociated with relatively specific outcomes.
But in rnakmg this rejection, they stepped from the frying pan into the volcano, because it further increases the already impossible complexity of possible associations.
As an example of this new complexity, the British astrologer Charles Harvey (1995) claimed:       The same [planetary] combination can express itself In a whole range of ways.
For exam- ple, Uranus in hard aspect with the midpoint of Sun and ,kloon may produce a Napoleon or a Hitler, but equally it may produce a Margaret Thatcher, d S p ~ k eM d i g a n , a Martin Luther or a particular [spiritual, caring1 astrologer [such] as Dr. Zip Dobyns (p. 52).
Similarly, Perry claimed that the Psychological Astrology does not pre- dtct specific behaviors or life outcomes but rather "predicts qualttative expe- riences of consciousness that can be reflected in a variety of manifestations" (Perry, 1994, p. 34; 1995a, p. 34).
H e affirmed that "The meanings of the parts may be stable, [but] the emergent qualities they ~ r o d u c ewhen com- bined are not [because] real people are changing, evolving entities that are far too complex to type or tag with a few simple key words" (Perry, 1993, p. 7).
Ln other words, according to Perry and Harvey, the birth chart accu- rately shows our underlying subjective processes, but as to their outward manifestation, astrologers can only guess at a range of possible happenings.
The inner psychic state is shown in the birth chart, but after that just about anything goes.
As Perry said, "we all have the potential to behave in any way that is humanly possible, and we frequently do" (1995a, p. 36).
We can see that the psychological astrologer is worlung with a challeng- ing system.
To start with, it involves celestial configurations that can never be examined in isolation and whose variety when combined is immensely larger than anyone could possibly cope with.
Nevertheless, the planetary 1054                                      I. W. KELLY   configurations supposedly correlate with an invisible, largely unconscious, psychlc structure that underlies personality, and that is associated with out- comes so varied and so uncertain that the astrologer can only make guesses.
Finally, this psychic structure is based on psychoanalytic and humanistic psy- chological theories that since the 1950s have come under very heavy criti- cism.
10 If this criticism is successful then psychological astrology in its pres- ent form will go down with the ship (e.g., see Macmdan, 1991; Esterson, 1993; Grunbaum, 1993; Kerr, 1993; Spence, 1994; Webster, 1995; Crews, 1996; Dean, 1996a).
After all, if the psychological structure symbolized by the planets and their interrelationships is problematic, the rest of the theory is on shaky ground.
4.
Astrology can only be appropriately evaluated in a magical, animistic world-view.
Traditional astrology emphasizes the prehction of events, the associa- tion of relatively spechc, observable outcomes with astrological factors, sometimes with the view that planets are transmitters of physical influence.
Thus the clients of the famous 17' century astrologer WdLam L1Uy ex- pected predictions and decision making, not psychology and rehgion.
Such an orientation is not adverse to experimental investigation.
A main problem for this approach, as Perry acknowledged, is that the vast majority of studies have not supported such claims (Perry, 1995a).
Further, there is no prospect that plausible physical hkages wdl be discovered that explain astrological associations with human activity (Perry, 1995a, pp.
26-33; Culver & Ianna,    "'Astrolo ers are forever trying to increase the surface plausibility of astrology b associating it with theqatest theories that have caught the public imagination.
So ~ l u m e n t h i ( 1 9 9 4 p.                                                                                                 , 19) appealed to the relevance of "fuzzy logic" to astrology, while Perry alluded to "chaos theory" (1994, p. 34) and the "new physics" exemplified by Fritjof Capra and David Bohm.
Townley (1994) informed us that "the more advanced areas of systems mathematics [complexity theory, information theory] and neuroscience [could] be very friendly to the type of structural thinking that the best of astrology has to offer and to which astrology could make important contribu- tions" ( p 43).
Tewsbury (1988) noted how Rupert Sheldrakes' g c i p l e o€ formative causauon "should remove the objection that astrology is impossible," ad g m an interesting circularity that "astrology ~ r s d fis a further poinrer to its truth."
A negative feature of these astrologers' writings 1s (llelr penchant to be crucially vague at critical points.
We are not provided specifics of how these juxtapositions wdl take place.
We are on1 given promissory notes.
It is never made clear how the new physics and other modern disci iines can provide support for the sup- position that specific planetary configurations can synzbojze Fundamental human needs, or moti- vational drives (e.g., How Sun square Mars symbolizes over-all strength and vigor in the person- ality) [see Stengler (1995.
1996) for critical comments on misinterpretations of Quantum Me- chanics by advocates of New Age claims].
Further, such modern approaches in             ysics do not explain why the planetary positions of a moment in the past (birth) describe             supposedly continuing nature of a person in the present.
And what about the 'birth' of a country, a com- pany, a resolution, a domicile, and so on, all of whch astrologers confidently taking as having their own natal charts?
(Jones, 1996).
\Ve have also heard it all before.
In the past, the same confidence was expressed by                     s every prominent theory of the time.
The two millennia of failures provides a s t ~ o l o ~ e rwith some good inductive grounds for believing that the confidence of present-day astrologers is as misplnced as that of their predecessors.
Such represents the triumph of hope over experience.
MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                         1055  1988; Crowe, 1990).
For example, no proposed physical explanation can ex- plain, in advance, how Sun-Jupiter contacts symbolize expansive, optimistic beliefs rather than something else, how Scorpio can symbolize secrecy rather than something else, or how the 2nd House can symbolize possessions rather than something else, and so on.
Perry stated, even though studies relating astrological configurations with specific observable outcomes have failed, this poses no ddficulty for psychological astrology since it is concerned with the 'inner Me' of an indi- vidual, which cannot be adequately tested by modem, materiahstic, scienufic methodology.
Besides, he claimed, astrologers already have independent ex- periential (clinical) evidence that astrology works" (Perry, 1995a, pp.
14, 26).
While astrology seems implausible from the perspective of modern physical theories, if we adopt a different set of metaphysical assumptions (for exarn- ple, a more magical-animistic framework) we are told, astrology becomes     The seductive phrase 'ex eriential evidence' is roblematic.
Practitioners of psychological a ;aches         Perry disavowecf (e.g., Skinnerian bepaviorism, Freudian psychoanalysis) and ;!tt many competin schools of astrolo in both h e East and West, many of whom would contest Perry's approacf, all cite tesrimoniyevidence and case studies which support.
But if we can all cite experiential evidence for our r i t i o n s , that can hardly, by itreg distinguish the good from the bad, the better theory €ram t e worse.
As Meehl pointed out, "the scholarly authors of Malleus MaleJironrm pursued .
.
.
an enterprise detailing symptoms that diagnose witchcraft.
De- spite their scholarly efforts, we know today there are no persons who have made a solemn pact wch Satan and thereby gained preternatural powers.
If asked to su port their theoretical sys- rem m d the technical procedures warranted by it, [they] would J u b d e s s have invoked the med~evalequivalent of 'clinical experience"' (1995, p. 1021).
A salutary lesson here is provided by other nonmainstream approaches such as phrenology, graphology (handwriting analysis), and palmistry which cover the same ground as psycholog~cal astrology.
Phrenology was immensely popular in the nineteenth century and both hrenolog~sts and their clients were very satisfied with phrenological readings.
Graphology has t e e n around for centuries and is still very popular.
It is instructive to compare the Following endorsements of psychological astrolog/, renology, graphology, and palm-reading: (1) "[Tlhe client's char- acter and hfe story inevita~Fyconform to the range o potenoals symbolzed by the [horo- scope], often in exmaordinary specific ways" (Perry, 1994,                35).
(2) "The phrenologist has shown thar he is able to read character Wte an open book an$.to lay bare the hidden springs of conduct with an accuracy that the most inrimate friends cannot ap roach" (Alfred Russel Wallace, cited in Severn, 1913, 6).
(3) "Your handwriting is a l l - r e v e k g .
To the trained eye it lays open your secret mind.
%very whirl or line you en ex oses your true character and   ersonality .
.
."
(Marne.
1988, p. 2).
(4) "A study of the :and tees much a b o u t .
.
.
he physical E o d y .
.
.
health, vitality.
.
.
the emotional nature--love potential.
.
.
the will and individuality .
.
.
success in business.
.
.
talent.
.
.
creativity.
.
.
fame.
.
.
self-fu&ent-travel,      life experi- ence, spiritual developmeni" (Wilson, 1971, pp.
7-8).
Astrolog is only one of a very lar e number of contenders, past and present, which rely on ma ical dinlung and purport to yi$d knouded e unattainable to materialistic science.
No plausib?e reasons have been provided that all of i e s e extrascience contenders are intercon- nected, or mutually sup orting (Lo tson 1996).
Planets or head.bumps or palms or handwriting, at least one o?
them is rezundint.
Astrology is in the unenviable position of hav- ing to show either that it provides enuine insight into areas not covered by the social sciences and related disciplines, o r to show k a t it can meliorate our unde~stand~ng        in the same domains covered by contemporary psychological and sociological theories.
Astrologers have to show they can provide insight or benefits beyond those provided by nonastrological theories.
Third, many sources of bias operate in such personal experiences that can lead clinicians to claims of personal knowledge that are invahd, despite their association with high levels of conviction (Dawes, 1994; Grove & Meehl, 1996; Dean, Kelly, Saklofske, & Furnham, 1992).
1056                                          I. W. KELLY  plausible.
l2 Perry (1995a) stated the world-view needed to make sense of as- trology must involve "a sacred realm that unites, orders, and animates the cosmos" (p. 19), or what West called "a system of magic" (1991, p. 223) and Cornelius (1994, p. 19) called "some other element" (that is, other than delusion and ESP).
The metaphysical perspective proposed by Perry reintro- duced ancient notions of teleological causation, occult powers of attraction, psychospiritual explanation, and most importantly, the notion that psyche and cosmos are alike, and correspond through symbolic action-at-a-distance (1995a, pp.
15-16).
Further, Perry explained, this will involve a return, at least in part, to beliefs that were common in prescientific cultures in which a 'world soul or consciousness' was immanent in all parts of the universe.
The universe, so conceived, involved a hierarchy with parts interconnected by "sympathetic resonances."
Astrology played a large part in such world-views because it gave people a symbolic language "for understanding the various meanings and correspondences of natural phenomena" (Perry, 1995a, p. 15; also, 1993, p 2).
Perry and most other Western astrologers tended to avoid specifics when describing their animistic world-views.
Lstead we are provided sprin- h g s of opaque terms and expressions such as 'laws of resonance,' 'spiritual reality,' 'the soul,' 'the sacred,' 'occult cause,' and 'inherent powers to attract other things.'
While most of us have some familiarity with such terms it is unlikely that we could give a coherent account of them.
So an explication of astrological theories should explain these central elements.
But instead of clarification, we are offered evasions such as "Astrology seems to belong to some other order of knowing things, barely conceivable in the modern    "The astrologer Pottenger (1994) said "Opponents of astrology like to quote 'extraordinary claims require extraordinary proof without giving any roof that 'as above so below' is an ex- traordinary c l a h .
It is only extraordinary in some ~ h ~ o s o p l u e sespecially                                                                             .
materxa[i$B frame- works which den meaning" (p. 37).
As it stands, w at Pottenger stated is trivally true.
Whal- euer is ostulatei(barring logical im ossibilitiesl is more 'plausible' within some world-view(s) than o k r s .
For example, fairy b u b b L , oblins, and Guardian angels are extraordinary claims in materialistic conceptions of the world ?and perhaps many ochers as well), but this alone does not provide any reason to believe in cheir existence.
The claim that the universe has meaning and provides us with signs or portents does not imply that the signs are to be found 'up there,' they might only be found in entrails, the tracks and movements of nature, or only in messages from angels or similar beings, or in a number of other forms.
It does not follow that an animistic/magical universe nust have, or even might have, meaning reflected everywhere.
W e need cogent reasons to prefer the animistic universe of astrologers to ocher possible animistic universes, and furthermore evidence for a particular as- trological system than other alternatives.
There are also an incredibly large number of ossible pairings between 'as above, so below.'
The possibilities are even larger for a system Eased on the symbolic meaning of si ns For example, there are probably more possible pairings of two things in, say, Jungian sym%ol: ism than if we confiie o u n d v e s to putative causal (material) r d a t i o n s h i ~ ~so; it is even more incumbent on astrologers to provide a reason why they connect two t lngs cogether than it would be for a materiahsc.
THED T V E R SOFI ~ASTROLOGICAL WORLD   VIEWS      Societies that did possess what we would recognize as a form of astrol- ogy were associated with world-views that differed radcally in their concep- tions regardmg the nature of ultimate reality, their basic hierarchical struc- tures, the modes of divine activity (and whether the divine nature was per- sonal or nonpersonal), the nature of the self, the destiny of human beings, and so on.
Likewise, the associated astrologies often differed from each oth- er along essential dimensions.
For example, the circumpolar stars, the pole star, and the quadrant &visions of the sky uthzed in Chinese astrology are used differently in Western astrology.
The circle of 12 animals in Chinese as- trology bear little resemblance to the Western zodiac.
The ascendant is irn- portant in Western astrology but not in Chinese astrology, and so on (Cul- ver & lama, 1988, p. 25; Dean, Mather, & Kelly, 1996, pp.
56-57).
In Lndia there are also a number of astrological systems which conhct both with each other and with Western approaches [see Premanand, Bhatty, & Risbud (1993) for an overview and critique of I n l a n astrology].
In the Dasha-paddhati system the names of the planets are written in a sequence that is not only arbitrary from a Western astrological perspective but is also not related to any physical characteristics of the planets or their lstance from the earth.
Each planet is alleged to have a certain period of influence over the destiny of people.
These periods vary from 6 years to 20 years.
Each planet takes control over a person's destiny in the order specified by the system and the duration assigned to them.
The sequence of the planets is the same for all people provided you are following the Vinshotiari 120- year system.
On the other hand, if an astrologer uses the Ashtottari dasha system, the last four planets appear in a reversed order and together have a 1058                                    I. W. KELLY  different duration of 108 years.
During one's life-time, the same planet can- not take charge of your destiny again, unless you live for more than 120 years (or 108 years).
Both of these mutually exclusive systems are satisfying to the astrologers themselves and to their clients.
When we turn to the Mayans of the Americas, other fundamental dif- ferences in world-view, along with astrological differences, emerge.
In terms of hierarchical structures and ahed astrology, the Mayan cosmology was quite different from the orbital-themed earthbr sun-centered ideas of other cultures.
For a start, Mayan astrology assigned a very central role for Venus.
Ln addtion, the position of Venus relative to the horizon was, contrary to Western astrology, more important for the Mayans than its movement.
They also associated the morning and evening appearances of Venus with lunar phasing and eclipses which have no counterparts in other astrological sys- tems.
Finally, astrology in Mayan Me was closer to the astrology of In&a and traditional Western astrology than Perry's vision in that the central focus was divination and prophecy (Aveni, 1992; Danien & Sharer, 1992).
ASTROLOGICAL   SYMBOLISM    IS MAGICAL   THINKING      While the astronomical and mathematical bases of the cosmologies and astrologies developed by the Mesopotanian, Chinese, Mayan, and 1ndian cul- tures were sophisticated, the meaning or quality ascribed to planetary con- junctions and movements were dependent on the religious and mythological beliefs of the particular societies in question.
This explains why many of the physical characteristics of the celestial bodies (size, distance, etc.)
are consid- -   ~     ered irrelevant with regard to their effects or meaning, or even whether a planetary body actually exists (e.g., Vulcan) because what matters is the sym- bolism or mythology attached to the body's name.
The influences, effects, or correlations attributed to the planetary configurations are based on a prior1 endemic "magical correspondences," relying on superficial sidarities and analogies.
For example, the medieval astrologer-physician William of En- gland appealed to the magical doctrine of " k e affects k e , " as have astrolo- gers of all periods.
Hence, he argued, ".
.
.
the sun and Mars affect red bile (because all three are hot) and the moon and Venus affect phlegm (because they are cold)" and "Should the hot and dry Mars be causing a disturbance of the blood, then when Mars moves into a house that has a dsturbance of the chest, the patient d spit blood" (French, 1996, p. 478). "
The modern astrologer Davidson (1963) stated, "Without the sun there would be no life.
"Venus was widely believed at the time to be a cold planet, whereas Mars was characterized as hot and dry.
Hot(h), cold(c), wet(w), and dry(d) were the four ¶ualities underlyin the four ele- ments considered by Greek philosophers to be the basic constituenrs of the p!ysical      world, namely, earth=cd, air=hw, fire= hd, water=cw.
ELements with common quahties were able to change inro each other, e.g., water= cw could change into earth = cd because both included the                           MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                  1059  It is the driving force behind the whole solar system.
It represenrs Will Power, Vitality, Leadership, Creativity .
.
."
(p. 29) and "The rings of Saturn symbolize the hitations imposed by Saturnian action that operate as a harsh external disciphe until we have learnt to disciphe ourselves" (p. 32).
The practice of present day astrologers gives add~tionalgrounds for the independence of their symbolism from any observational or testable theory base.
Whenever a newly discovered astronomical body is found, the attribu- tion of its earthly connections is not based on the results of published inves- tigations with extensive public discussion to establish its relationships with worldly affairs.
Rather, if the name can be identified, e.g., by looking it up in dictionaries of mythology, and could be plausibly related to existing plan- etary mythology (not difficult), then the result will be long articles in astrol- ogy~journalsby authors surfing the mythology wave, where readers will be moved to tears or to outrage by the beauty and insight of the connections.
When Pluto was discovered in 1939 and Chiron in 1977 (a minor planet or moon between the orbits of Saturn and Uranus), astrologers did not publish research to establish their relationships with human and worldly affairs.
Plu- to is given, as one might expect from mythology, a malefic influence on hu- man Me.
As Davidson (1963) stated, "The planet named after the God of Hades represents the Underworld of man's consciousness, those elements in his nature that have not been redeemed .
.
."
(p. 33).
Could it be otherwise?
It is difficult to imagine that astrologers would ever inform us that a planet named "Pluto" would be associated with love of Me and fellow human be- ings, sensitivity and lea sure (Ilke Venus)!
Similarly, Hand (1981) remarked "(Chiron) is believed by many to have a connection with conscious-expand- ing teachings and with initiation into higher consciousness" (p. 94).
In the case of Chiron, as with Pluto, these relationships are those we would expect astrologers to attribute to them if they were based entirely on mythology (Cdver & Ianna, 1988).
Similarly, as the astrologer Press (1993) said about asteroids, ".
.
.
the particular mythology, whether Greek, Roman, Egyptian, etc., is relevant to the expression of the asteroid in the [birth] chart" (p. 178).
What happens here is that, having determ~ned the asteroid's mythology, the astrologer looks at the asteroid's posit~on(e.g., by sign, by house, by aspect) in various peoples' charts to see if there 1s anything in the personality or case history that could match the interpretation of that position.
For example, "The as- teroid Icarus represents flying too close to the sun.
The position (house,          of coldness.
Most Greek scholars, of course, considered science (as we know it roda ) ro be an insignificant part of philosophy, which meant that their world view was based m a d y on hilosophical ideals rather than empirical observations.
So hot and cold, etc.
do not neces- sarfy correspond to what we today call hor and cold, etc.
1060                                        I. W. KELLY  sign, numerical) and exact aspects of Icarus w d show where a person wlll take risks" (p. 197).
Whenever possible, some astrologers will add physical symbolism to the mythological symbolism.
For example, The orbit of Icarus is between the sun and Jupiter.
This containment surrounds Icarus with the irradiation of the Sun and the expansiveness of Jupiter.
Icarus' orbit is in and crosses the orbits of Mercury, Venus, the Earth and Mars.
Being in those orbits gives Icarus a smattering of the restlessness of Mercury, the sensuousness of Venus, the earthiness of the Earth and the self-as- sertiveness of Mars" (Press, 1993, p.
1961.'"
What happens if the new astronomical bodies are named after modern indi- viduals?
Startup (1981) said, A popular modern astrological doctrine maintains that newly discovered planets are inevitably given appropriate names [from which the correct terrestrial relationships can be inferred], even though the names are bestowed by astronomers nowadays.
This is usually taken as one more example of synchronicity (p. 33).
Asteroids without classical names have a special lund of importance, again based purely on symbolic considerations.
Here we enter the realm of "personal name asteroids."
Press (1993, p. 212) concluded (after much un- controlled research), that if an asteroid has your name, or something close to it, then its position in your horoscope describes your relationship to yourself (whatever that means).
If an asteroid has the name of another person (e.g., asteroid 3085 is called Donna), then its position in your horoscope (birth chart) describes your relationship to that person.
This would seem to imply that your relationships to all the Donnas in the world would have much in common.
Along the same lines, magical or unknown influences are appealed to whenever astrology is in ddficulty.
Earlier in this article (p. 1044) the prob- lem of includmg all the asteroids in the birth chart or horoscope was de- scribed.
Hand (1981) pointed out that astrologer Eleanor Bach 'solved' the problem by using just the first four asteroids to be discovered.
Hand (1981) justified this arbitrary choice by informing us that: One way of defending the use of the first four to be discovered (rather than the four largest) is to say that the effect of celestial bodies is in some way related to human consciousness of them rather chan to their physical properties.
As the first to be discovered, they no doubt made a greater impact chan the thousands later to be discovered (p. 93).
"The diversity of symbolisms used b astrologers with ap arently no rules about being consis- rent is noteworthy.
Davidson (1963) Lased his a s t r o ~ o ~ i c a mbolism                                                                       fs      variously on physical at- tributes of the planets and on attributes of che G r e e k g d s .
!he a ~ t m l o P~ yr s (1993).
on the other hand, uthzed other mythologies and adds ano er d m e n s ~ o no physical characteristics to her symbolism such as a celestial body's proximity to other celestial bodies.
Which particular magical correspondences are perceived as relevant are in the eye of the beholder, and there are many dfierent astrologer beholders.
MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                   1061       Such speculations have the great advantage of requiring no argument and the disadvantage of saying nothing.
We are left in the dark as to what the "some way related" and "greater impact" are intended to mean here.
What about people who have never heard of the first four asteroids?
Does this mean the asteroids cannot be used in constructing their charts, or does the awareness of academics of their existence cover for the rest of us?
No doubt another set of "special rules" can be devised by astrologers to 'solve' this problem.
Some of the grave ddficulties of magical correspondences as explana- tions were described by Dean, Loptson, and Kelly (1996): First, magical correspondences are arguments from analogy, which can be expressed in the form object X has properties A and B, object Y has property A, therefore Y also has B. John Smith is tall, therefore John Brown is tall.. .
The inference is vivid and quick, and therefore (as in astrology) agreeably seductive, but our changes of its being correct are not good.
.
.
No longer do midwives open the door to ease a painful labour.
No longer do alchemical ideas ap- pear in chemistry courses.
In fact, magical correspondences have been so spectacularly unsuc- cessful that in Western education today the doctrine survives only as an example of fallacious thinlung.
Second, it is impossible to spec& any nvo things, no matter how dissimilar, that do not show some kind of correspondence.
A raven is like a writing desk because both begin with the 'r' sound, both cast shadows, both contain quds.
A speck of sand is like the Empire State Building because h e y have the same color, both contain shca, and have the same number of atoms as bricks.. .
.
The point is, how can we distinguish a magical correspondence from other correspondences?
The books do not td us.
Third, we have no immediate way of choosing be- tween opposing magical correspondences.
Black cats were lucky ro ancient Egyptians but un- lucky to medieval Europeans.
The moon was male to the Babylonians but female to the Greeks .
.
.
.
Is Mars unfortunate because red=blood (war), or fortunate because red=blood (life)?
Who can believe any magical correspondence when it is so easily denied by another?
(pp.
28-29).
Other criticisms of magical thlnking can be found from a philosophical view- point by Thagard (1980) and from a psychological perspective by Zusne and Jones (1989).
Conclusion      The arguments given in this article show that accounts put forward by astrologers for the origin and justification of postulated celestial relationships with outward behavior or activities of human beings (traditional astrology), or inner structures of consciousness (modern psychological astrology) are problematic and implausible in the extreme.
We can conclude that astrology, as presently practiced, is not a source of information or knowledge about ourselves.
Anomalies and problems do not result in constructive attempts to revise the conceptual basis of astrology or extend it in ways that would allow astrologers to learn from failures as they do in orthodox disciplines (Mayo, 1996).
Rather, they are dealt with by the use of metaphors that lead nowhere and constantly shking ad hoc hy- 1062                                    I. W. KELLY  potheses that are not independently testable.
Confirmations are readily attributed as support, but failures can be hidden in the complexity of astrol- ogy and never need confront any specific astrological hypotheses.
Hence, the general indifference of astrologers to negative evidence (Mayo, 1996, pp.
280-282; Kelly, 1997).
But astrological rhetoric, hyperbole, and bluff are not adequate grounds for claims of knowledge (see Dean & Loptson, 1996 for other conceptual criticisms of astrology).
The failure of physical models to provide an underpinning for astrologi- cal tenets has resulted in a shift to more animistic, magical worldviews.
While astrology is more "plausible" within such worldviews, it is so only in the banal sense that such frameworks provide fewer constraints on what may be postulated than modern scientific formulations of the world.
The appeal to magical world-views allows astrologers' postulations to override or side- step any physical laws that may conbct (Evans, 1994).
Astrologers who advocate such worldviews do not provide articulated positions capable of constructive evaluation and improvement, but rather, couch their 'frame- work' in terms of a hodgepodge of spiritualloccult expressions, along with passing references to modern physics and &ed disciphes to appear con- temporary and fashionable.
These occult convolutions, e.g., 'animating spir- its,' 'sympathies,'         .
-          'pure consciousness,' 'resonant bonds of vibratory frequen- cies,' 'psychic anatomy,' etc., are not ascribed properties to be of any useful explanatory value.
We are left with a &sparate set of ideas taken out of con- text from various, often incompatible, ancient worldviews, juxtaposed without any coherent, interlocking metaphysics.
Astrology, as currently practiced, does not have any plausible observa- tional or theoretical basis for the groundmg of its particular claims (Dean, Loptson, & Kelly, 1996).
There is little agreement on what astrological fac- tors should be considered in a birth chart (that is, what factors can be ig- nored) and how they should be combined, or even consensus regarding how to collect relevant data to resolve even the most basic astrological dlsputes (Dean & Mather, 1996).
Astrology consequently does not have the concep- tual resources to deal with its own anomalies or to benefit from, or contrib- ute to, findings in other fields such as psychology or biology in any way other than by arbitrary means and sophistry.
The basis and structure of as- trology is entirely based on culturally specific mythology and symbolism in a magical context.
Astrology is part of our past, but astrologers have given no plausible reason why it should have a role in our future.
Psychological Reports, 1997,81, 1035-1066.
O Psychological Reports 1997                       MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                            I. W. KELLY                                University of Saskatchewan, Ca~zada            Summary.-Astrology, as presently practiced (in either its tradiuonal or psycho-     logical form), has no relevance to understanding ourselves or our place in the cosmos.
Modern advocates of astrology cannot account for the underlying basis of astrological     associations with terrestrial affairs, have no plausible explanation for its claims, and     have not contributed anything of cognitive value to any field of the social sciences.
Further, astrology does not have the theoretical or conceptual resources to resolve its     own internal problems adequately or external anomalies or to adjudicate among con-     flicting astrological claims or systems.
The initial assumptions of scientists and astrologers were not so very different until quite re- cently.
Some astrologers, however, fearing that science was catching up to them, have back- tracked very rapidly, c r e a h g a smokescreen of symbolism, inner reality, holistic understanding, etc.
Arthur Mather (1979, p. 106)        In Western culture until Newton the views of astrologers and scientists were not so very different.
There was general belief that -all phenomena in the inferior elemental world of nature were governed in some way by the motions of the superior and incorruptible celestial bodies.
Since Newton, however, the views of astrologers and scientists have become increasingly opposed.
Astrologers today stdl hold that the connection between celestial and earthly phenomena is so strong that knowing one allows us to predict the other.
But scientists disagree.
They point out that there is no plausible way the connection could work, or even a plausible theory of how it could work.
Surveys of research into astrology have provided no evidence that astrology does work, at least not in the way and to the extent claimed by astrologers.
Of course, every time we wake up with the sun, or plan barbe- cues on m o o d t nights, or go fishing at high tide, we are showing how celes- tial bodies have real influence in our lives; but this IS very different from the connection clamed by astrologers.
Going from one co the other is a quite unjusufied leap of faith.
Leahey and Leahey (1983) noted that "Most popular works on astrol-   'Address correspondence to Ivan W. Kelly, De artment of Educational Psychology, 28-Campus                                                 !
?rive, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, askatchewan Canada S7N 0x1.
This article is an ex anded version of a presentation at the First World Skeptics Congress: Science in the A e o?
(~is)~nformation,Buffalo, New York, June 20.23, 1996.
1 reco nize the signi€icant contrigutions of Geoffrey Dean to all drahs of this manuscript In a myriajof ways he contributed to a more readable and accurate article.
I also thank €or their comments on   arts of an earlier draft J. W. Nienhuys, Anthony Aveni (on Mayan astrology), Dale Beyerstein, guitbert Ertel, Perer Loptson, and M. S. Risbud.
1036                             I. W. KELLY  ogy today do not even attempt to defend it but simply teach their readers how to use it" (p. 39).
Similarly, Nias and Dean (1986) pointed out, "no- body should be surprised to learn that the hardest things to find in astrology are facts" (p. 357).
But if you know where to look they can certainly be found.
Before 1950 very few scientific studies of astrology existed.
Something h e a dozen major statistical compilations by astrologers had appeared since 1900, notably in France, Germany, England and the USA, but none were widely known, and in any case their methodology was too poor, e.g., no controls, for meaningful results.
Not surprisingly, the few published critiques were confined mostly to historical surveys (e.g., Thomen, 1938; Bok & Mayall, 1941; Eisler, 1946).
The only extensive scientific critique available was by the French astronomer Paul Couderc (1951/1974).
Then in 1955 Michel G a u q u e h published his landmark L'lnfluence des Astres, the first rigorous study of astrological claims, with generally negative results but with what seemed to be provocative exceptions (Gauqueh, 1955).
During the next two decades various factors combined to establish a small but continuing interest in astrological research, namely, the booming popular interest in astrology, further work by Gauquelin (e.g., 1966, 1969), the occasional astrology-related paper in a scientific journal, and not least by astrologers themselves founding research-oriented bodles such as the Astro- logical Association (UK) in 1958 and the International Society for Astrologi- cal Research (USA) in 1970.
The result was a notable increase in the number of critical studies.
Ln the 1970s there appeared various critiques of the occult that in- cluded astrology (e.g., Freedland, 1972; Cooper, 1974; Sladek, 1974; Cazeau & Scott, 1979) and critiques devoted entirely to astrology (e.g., Parker, 1970; Russell, 1972; Gallant, 1974; Dean & Mather, 1977; Jerome, 1977; Standen, 1977; Kelly, 1979).
The last was the first comprehensive critical review of as- trology's scientific research base.
It took seven person-years to prepare, sur- veyed many hundreds of books and articles, and documented over 150 em- pirical stucbes published in astrology journals and over twenty published in psychology journals (Dean & Mather, 1977).
By 1996, new studles and pre- viously missed studies had brought these totals to about 300 and 70, respec- tively (Dean, Nias, & French, 1997).
The research interest that Dean and Mather (1977) stimulated led to the foundation in 1981 of Correlation, an international peer-reviewed journal devoted entirely to scientific research into astrology, followed in 1982 by Astro-Psychological Problems, oriented more toward Gauquelin interests.
By then the advent of home computers in the late 1970s had revolutionized astrological practice and research.
Calculating a birth chart once took any- where from an hour to a day; now it could be done in seconds, allowing                       MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                          1037  researchers to do studies that were previously unthinkable.
Today there is a scholarly research base that covers most of the basic claims of astrology.
Even sun slgn columns have been tested.
The outcome from all this, in what probably amounts to well over two hundred person-years of research, is al- most uniformly negative (Dean, Mather, & Kelly, 1996).
Unfortunately, much of this work is neither widely known nor easily accessible, a point to which I will return shortly.
Critical reviews of astrology in the light of research findings, post-1980, include those by psychologists Eysenck and Nias (1982), astronomers Culver and Ianna (1988), Crowe (1990), Martens and Trachet (1995), and the Bible scholars, Ankerberg and Weldon (1989).
The most recent reviews and the first to include meta-analyses are by Kelly, Dean, and Saklofske (1990) and Dean, Mather, and Kelly (1996).
Critiques of philosophical, rehgious or so- cial aspects of astrology include Kelly and Krutzen (19831, Leahey and Leahey (1983), Kanitscheider (1991), Dean (1992), and Dean and Loptson (1996).
Reviews of the arguments of astrologers include Kelly, Culver, and Loptson (1989), and Dean, Mather, and Kelly (1996).
Theories of astrology (including Jung's synchronicity) are critically examined in Dean, Loptson, and Kelly (1996).
Descriptions of the Gauquelin work include Gauquelin (1983, 1988) and Ertel (1992).
The 'Mars effect' is specifically addressed by Benski, Caudron.
Gahfret, Krivine, Pecker, Rouze, and Schatzman (19961, whose conclusions have been dsputed by Ertel and Inlmg (1996).
The cog- nitive and perceptual biases that can underlie belief in astrology are briefly reviewed by Dean (1992) and in detail by Dean, Kelly, Saklofske, and Furn- ham (1992), and Dean, Mather, and Kelly (1996).
Recent critiques of the occult that cover astrology include Couttie (19881, Hmes (19881, and Neher (1990).
There is, of course, an extensive and ongoing literature on the his- tory of astrology, for example, ancient astrology (Baigent, 1994; Barton, 1994; Stewart, 1996), medieval psychology (Kemp, 19901, pre- 19' century astrology (Tester, 1987), and 19' century astrology (Curry, 1992).
Why the present article?
Since the mid-1970s psychology journals have averaged a steady total per year of about two empirical studies of astrologi- cal claims, plus an equal number devoted to related topics such as the accep- tance of astrological statements or the prevalence of belief in astrology, all of them easily accessible via PsycLIT, the American Psychological Association's computerized abstract database.
But for every such empirical study there are at least four more of equal qu&ty in journals not accessible via PsycLIT.
Fortunately, most of the major reviews listed above cover this wider informa- tion base.
On the other hand, the reviews are generally more focussed on empirical findtngs than with paradigms and conceptual arguments.
The pres- ent article focuses on the latter and brings together previously scattered ma- terial.
REPRESENTATION OF THE PLANETS IN INDIAN ASTROLOGY Author(s): DAVID PINGREE Source: Indo-Iranian Journal, Vol.
8, No.
4 (1965), pp.
249-267 Published by: Brill Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24649692 Accessed: 01-02-2020 18:15 UTC   REFERENCES Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24649692?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive.
We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship.
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms                      Brill is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Indo-Iranian                  Journal                                     This content downloaded from 165.106.124.63 on Sat, 01 Feb 2020 18:15:37 UTC                                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms REPRESENTATION OF THE PLANETS IN INDIAN ASTROLOGY*                                              by                                    DAVID PINGREE                                           Beirut     There is in India a well-known iconographie tradition of the deities,1 at first eight in number (excluding Ketu), and later navagrahas).
Several Puränas2 and various texts on silpasästra these images in detail, and a number of early examples surv are the images ordinarily worshipped and propitiated by th who believe in the reality of astrological influences.
There is also a separate tradition regarding the image of S Sun god, introduced by the Zoroastrian Magi5 and Kusänas w   * The author wishes to thank Prof. D. H. H. Ingalls of Harvard University the manuscript of this article and offering several suggestions for its impro 1 See W. Jones in Asiatick Researches, 2 (1790), opposite p. 303; E. Moo Pantheon (London, 1810), p. 281 and plate 10; E. Mollien, "Remarqu zodiaques copiés dans les pagodes indiennes", Mémoires présentés par d à l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-lettres, lre série, 3 (1853), 275-276 "The Navagrahas or Nine Planets and their Names", Indian Antiquary 61-66; T. A. Gopinatha Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography, vol.
1 (M pp.
299-323 ; J. N. Banerjea, The Development of Hindu Iconography, 2nd  1956), pp.
443-445; and C. Sivarämamürti in Enciclopedia Universale dell' (Roma, 1958), cols.
134-138.
2 The most recent work is that of P. Shah, Vifnudharmottara-Puräna.
T  vol.
2 (=Gaekwad's Oriental Series, 137) (Baroda, 1961), pp.
148-151 an  of other Puränas containing descriptions of the planetary images will p. 222.
3 Many of these texts are published by Gopinatha Rao, suppl., pp.
91-100.
4 Besides the many images referred to in the works cited in note 1 a large number of others can be found in the various Annual Reports of the Archaeological Survey of India (e.g., 2, 1902-03, 45, 47, 48, and 205).
See also A. Coomaraswamy in Rüpam, 18 (1924), 67-68 and fig.
6 (this image, despite Coomaraswamy's conjecture, probably never included Ketu) and N. K. Bhattasali, Iconography of Buddhist and Brahmanical Sculptures in the Dacca Museum (Dacca, 1929), pp.
136-137.
There may be some Indian influence on the Buddhist iconography of the planets in China, for which see P. W. Meister, "Buddhistische Planetendarstellungen in China", Oriens Extremus, 1 (1954), 1-5.
6 On the Maga Brähmanas (Magi) see R. C. Hazra, Studies in the Upapurânas, vol.
1 (=Calcutta Sanskrit College Research Series, 11) (Calcutta, 1958), pp.
29-108.
This content downloaded from 165.106.124.63 on Sat, 01 Feb 2020 18:15:37 UTC                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms  250         DAVID           PINGREE   India             toward                   the           beginning                       of   th  graphy                 of       Sürya               strongly                       influenced  the         navagrahas,                         but          it     also           can   be   fo     In       Sanskrit                     astrological                              works,       o  scriptions                     of       the         planetary                       deities     w  going.
These texts delineate not on  gods, but also their characters.
In  intend the description of each pla  born            under               its       influence                     as      well   as   t   In a previous article I have shown  Horas and Drekänas is derived fro  Decans               ;8     it      is     possible                 to      demonstrat  characterizations                                   of       the         planets           and  is, however, this difference.
Whe  Horas and Drekänas are essentially  manuscript illustrations, their des  derive from illustrations at all.
T  supposition                            is      that            the          planets           are  attributes,                       a    fact          which               indicates            th  expanded) rather than that a draw  peculiarity is the portrayal of Ven  this may either be due to their ide  Indian mythology, or to the fact t  describing                      the          planetary                     gods,         in   fac  natives.
As        was          true           in      the         case          of       the   descr  the         earliest               transmitter                           of        the   Helle  to India was the Sanskrit translatio  by Yavanesvara in A.D. 149/150.
T  versification                                 by          Sphujidhvaja,                         t   8 There was, of course, a Vedic tradition  The Religion and Philosophy of the Ved  Series, 31), pp.
104-106.
But a representa  period is not known.
7 E.g., Varähamihira, Brhatsamhitä 57, 4  8 See J. N. Banerjee, "The Representat  Antiquary, 54 (1925), 161-171 and T. N Sculpture from Koiiärka, Orissa", Sarüpa-Bhärati or The Homage of Indology (= Vishveshvaranand Indological Series, 6) (Hoshiarpur, 1954). "
Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, 26 (1963), 223-254.
10 1, 123-136; edited from the unique manuscript, 1180 K, in the Durbar Library, Kathmandu.
This content downloaded from 165.106.124.63 on Sat, 01 Feb 2020 18:15:37 UTC                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms              REPRESENTATION OF THE PLANETS IN INDIAN ASTROLOGY 251  But it is clear that similar descriptions were transmitted by a second translation from the Greek which was utilized in the now lost astrological poem of Satya (second or third century); Satya's verses are reflected in the Vrddhayavanajâtaka11 of Mînarâja (fourth century), and in the Laghujätaka12 and Brhajjâtaka13 of Varähamihira (sixth century).
But Varähamihira has also used the Yavanajâtaka, as has pseudo-Prthuyasas, who claims to be Varähamihira's son, in the Horâsâra.1* Pseudo Paräsara (seventh or eighth century) has copied from the Brhajjâtaka in the Pürvakhanda of his Brhatpäräsarahoräsästra,15 while Kalyänavarman (c. A.D. 800) has used both the Yavanajâtaka and the Brhajjâtaka in the relevant verses of the Särävali,16 An anonymous author cited by Sivaräja (fifteenth century) in his Jyotirnibandha17 and Mantresvara (sixteenth century) in the Phaladîpikâ18 rely on Kalyänavarman, while Gunäkara (fourteenth century?)
in his Horâmakaranda19 depends on both the Brhajjâtaka and the Sârâvalï.
Less important characterizations of the planets can be found in the Täjika20 of Nilakantha (who finished the Varsatantra in 1587) and the Jâtakâbharana21 of Dhundhiräja (who wrote in 1628).
The most obvious dissimilarity between Sphujidhvaja s verses and those of the later Indian astrologers lies in the order of the planets.
By the fourth century in India it had become an unbreakable rule that the planets must be named in the order of their lordships of the week days: Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn.
Sphujidh vaja was early enough to escape this law, and here arranges the planets  11 2, 25-31 ; edited from the following three manuscripts in the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona: 104 of 1873-74, 211 of 1883-84, and 558 of 1899-1915.
12 2, 17-25 (pp.
22-23) in the edition published by the Verïka tes vara Press (Bombay, 1936) ; 4,1-7 in the edition of Sitäräma Jhä (Benares, 1948) and in that of Bhänusankara Nïlakantha Äcärya (Bhävanagara, 1953).
13 2, 8-11 in the edition with the Tikä of Utpala lithographed by Mahädeva Gopäla SästrI Amaräpurakara (Bombay, 1874).
14 2, 24-30 in the edition of V. Subrahmanya Sastri and M. Ramakrishna Bhat (Bangalore, 1949).
16 2, 13-19 in the Venkatesvara Press edition (Bombay, 1951); 3, 23-29 in that of Sitäräma Jhä (Benares, 1952).
18 4, 21-27 in the editions of Subrahmanya Sästri (Bombay, 1928), and of Sitäräma Jhä (Benares, 1953).
I have made a few obvious emendations. "
Edited by V. G. Apte, Ânandàsrama Sanskrit Series, 85 (Poona, 1919), p. 273.
18 2, 8-14 in the edition of V. Subrahmanya Sastri (Bangalore, 1950).
19 2, 9-15 in MS. 1029 of 1886-92 of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona.
20 Edited by Madhukänta Jhä, Haridas Sanskrit Series, 143, (Benares, 1950), pp.
84-87. sl Edited by Acyutänanda Jhä Wmä, Haridas Sanskrit Series, 212 (Benares, 1951), pp.
62-64.
This content downloaded from 165.106.124.63 on Sat, 01 Feb 2020 18:15:37 UTC                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms  252       DAVID              PINGREE   after the Sun and Moon according  of beneficent (Venus and Jupiter  (Mars and Saturn).
At first sight the Western mater  these Sanskrit texts seems compl  planetary                     deities22                    and         even        fewer     d  from Greco-Roman antiquity; and  readily be compared with the epit  emphasize features not easily recog   But there are in Greek and Latin  correspond to those of the Indian  chapter                 on        the         identification                         of    thie  of       Sidon             (first             century                   A.D.)      ;     excerp  of Thebes (fl.
381),25 while                                                               the Farrukhän at-Tabarï (died c. 200 A.H. or A.D. 815/816) of a fifth century redaction of the third century Pahlavi version26 was utilized by Abu Bakr al-Hasan ibn al-KhasIb (ninth century),27 al-Qabis!
(died   22 For a discussion of or references to all the material known a decade ago, see H. Stern, Le Calendrier de 354 (Paris, 1953), pp.
178 ff.
; see also M. J. Vermaseren, Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae (The Hague, 1956), p. 249, no.
677.
The illustrations in Medieval Latin manuscripts and some conclusions concerning their relationships to ancient models will be found in the Verzeichnis astrologischer und mythologischer illustrierter Handschriften des lateinischen Mittel alters: the first volume, by F. Saxl, deals with manuscripts in the libraries of Rome and the Vatican (Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philos hist.
Klasse, 1915, Abh.
6-7, Heidelberg, 1915); the second, also by F. Saxl, with manuscripts in Vienna (Sitz.-ber.
Heidelberger Akad.
Wiss., Philos.-hist.
Kl., 1925-26, Abh.
2, Heidelberg 1927) ; and the third, by F. Saxl and H. Meier, with those in English libraries (London, 2 pts., 1953).
This important work is being continued by E. Boer.
For the use of images of the planets on amulets in antiquity and in Islamic countries, see U. F. Kopp, Palaeographica critica, vol.
3 (Mannheim, 1829), p. 326; J. Ruska, Griechische Planetendarstellungen in arabischen Steinbiichern (=Sitz.-ber.
Heidelberger Akad.
Wiss., Philos.-hist.
Kl., 1919, Abh.
3) (Heidelberg, 1919); Catalogus Codicum Astrologorum Graecorum (hereafter CCAG), 10; 76-79; and H. Ritter and M. Plessner, "Picatrix".
Das Ziel des Weisen von Pseudo-Magriti (=Studies of the Warburg Institute, 27) (London, 1962), pp.
114 ff.
23 Besides the usual sources such as Fulgentius and Albricus, see Porphyrius' nepi ÜYttXuatojv of which the fragments were collected by J. Bidez in his Vie de Porphyre (Gand-Leipzig, 1913), appendix 1.
24 5 , 37 in the Arabic translation; f. 63 of MS 784 of Yeni Jami, Istanbul.
26 2, 2 in CCAG, 8, 2; 57-59 (cf.
8, 1 ; 147) and in V. Stegemann, Die Fragmente des Dorotheos von Sidon ( = Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte und Kultur des Altertums und des Mittelalters, Reihe B, Heft 1), 2 pts.
(Heidelberg, 1939-43), fr.
25a.
26 See Isis, 54 (1963), 230 fn.
10 and 241 fn.
97.
27 Dorotheus, fr.
25c Stegemann.
This content downloaded from 165.106.124.63 on Sat, 01 Feb 2020 18:15:37 UTC                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms            REPRESENTATION OF THE PLANETS IN INDIAN ASTROLOGY 253  356 A.H. or A.D. 966/967),28 'Ali ibn ab!
'r-Rijäl (died after 432 A.H. or A.D. 1040/1041),29 and an unknown Byzantine author.30      Related to this Dorothean tradition are passages in Ptolemy's (second century) Tetrabiblos on the influence of the five star-planets on the bodies31 and souls32 of natives and in Firmicus Maternus' (fl.
334-337) Ma thesis.
'M Both of these, however, contain additions to Dorotheus' text, some of which are paralleled in the Yavanajätaka.
Some of these additions are also found attributed to Pythagoras in some Greek manuscripts,34 and in others they are incorporated in a longer treatise which pretends to be derived from an Egyptian source.35 This "Pythagorean" or "Egyptian" text was combined with Hephaestio's quotations from Dorotheus by Rhetorius of Egypt (early sixth century).36 Outside of both these tradi tions, but to some extent similar to the "Pythagorean", are two short documents, one ascribed to an unknown Anatolius,37 the other tentatively (and undoubtedly wrongly) to Heliodorus.38      Finally, one must mention the planetary iconography in the temples of the "Säbians" of Harrän known from several descriptions in Arabic sources,39 as it was thought by Saxl to preserve an ancient Babylonian tradition.40 With this can also be compared the descriptions of the planetary images of the "Sipasians" in the Dabistàn of Moshan FänI.41   29   Dorotheus, fr.
1 Stegemann.
29   Dorotheus, fr.
25d Stegemann.
30   Dorotheus, fr.
25b Stegemann.
31   3, 12, 3-7 Boll-Boer.
32 3, 14, 10-36 Boll-Boer.
33 4, 19, 5-35.
34 CCAG, 11, 2; 124-125.
35 CCAG, 12; 125-126.
39 CCAG, 7; 213-224.
37 CCAG, 8, 3; 188.
38 CCAG, 8, 4; 240.
One may also mention the work of Teucer of Babylon (first century A.D.), which was one of the sources of Vettius Valens (1,1) and of the chapter of Rhetorius cited above.
This, however, is concerned almost exclusively with the natives' activities and occupations, not their appearances or characters.
Similar to Teucer's text is that ascribed to Abu Ma'shar (787-886) in Greek manuscripts (CCAG, 11, 1; 178-184).
39 See D. Chwolsohn, Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus (St. Petersburg, 1856), vol.
2, pp.
382 ff.
and M. Dozy and J. de Goeje, "Nouveaux documents pour l'étude de la religion des Harranians", Actes du sixième congrès international des orientalistes, tenu en 1883 à Leide, pt.
2 (Leyden, 1885), pp.
281-366; with the latter compare "Picatrix", pp.
146-147.
40 F. Saxl, "Beiträge zu einer Geschichte der Planetendarstellungen im Orient und im Okzident", Der Islam, 3 (1912), 151-177.
41 Translated by D. Shea and A. Troter, 3 vols.
(Paris, 1843) (see vol.
1, pp.
35-41); an abridgement appeared in Washington and London in 1901 (see pp.
22-25).
Nothing           This content downloaded from 165.106.124.63 on Sat, 01 Feb 2020 18:15:37 UTC                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 254          DAVID           PINGREE   Unfortunately,                                      though                    there       are  images              of       some            divine              bei        ngs,42       none  and            the     little            that           is     known              of     the   i  who            were           associated                     with            the       planets  described                       as      having                   been             in   Harrä Hellenistic characterizations of the natives born under the influences of the planets are in part borrowings from Babylonian astrology, but we are not yet in a position to determine the extent of this influence.
Surely many particulars of the images supposedly erected by the "Säbians" and "Sipasians" and those described elsewhere in Islamic sources are derived from the Indian tradition investigated in this paper.
In the following pages I give the more important Sanskrit texts and translations thereof.
The words underlined with a solid line in the Vrddhayavanajdtaka, Brhajjdtaka, Laghujätaka, and Särävali correspond to words in the Yavanajdtaka; those italicized represent ideas similar to those in the Yavanajdtaka.
In an appendix I list the parallels to the adjec tives of Sphujidhvaja and Satya which I have found in the Hellenistic characterizations of the natives born under the influence of each planet.
The planetary melothesia and dosas which appear in these texts will be discussed in detail in my edition of the Yavanajdtaka.
Project Gutenberg's Astronomical Lore in Chaucer, by Florence M. Grimm  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with  almost no restrictions whatsoever.
You may copy it, give it away or  re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included  with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org  Title: Astronomical Lore in Chaucer  Author: Florence M. Grimm  Release Date: October 11, 2011 [EBook #37711]  Language: English  Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1  *** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRONOMICAL LORE IN CHAUCER ***  Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at  http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images  generously made available by The Internet Archive.)
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA  STUDIES INLANGUAGE, LITERATURE AND CRITICISM  Number 2       ASTRONOMICAL LORE IN CHAUCER     BY  FLORENCE M. GRIMM, A. M.Assistant in the University ofNebraska Library       EDITORIAL COMMITTEE  Louise Pound, Ph.
D., Department of EnglishH.
B. Alexander, Ph.
D., Department of PhilosophyF.
W. Sanford, A.
B., Department of Latin.
LINCOLN1919       [Pg 2]  CONTENTS  I.  Astronomy in the Middle Ages   3  II.
Chaucer’s Scientific Knowledge  9  III.
Chaucer’s Cosmology  12  IV.
Chaucer’s Astronomy  27  V.  Astrological Lore in Chaucer  51     Appendix  79       [Pg 3]  ASTRONOMICAL LORE IN CHAUCER     I  Astronomy in the Middle Ages  The conspicuousness of astronomical lore in the poetry of Chaucer is due  to its importance in the life of his century.
In the mediaeval period,  astronomy (or ‘astrology,’ for the two names were used indifferently to  cover the same subject) was one of the vital interests of men.
The  ordinary man of the Middle Ages knew much more than do most men to-day  about the phenomena of the heavens; conveniences such as clocks, almanacs,  and charts representing celestial phenomena were rare, and direct  observations of the apparent movements and the relative positions of the  heavenly bodies were necessary for the regulation of man’s daily  occupations.
Furthermore, the belief in a geocentric system of the  universe, which in Chaucer’s century was almost universally accepted, was  of vast significance in man’s way of thinking.
Accepting this view, all  the heavenly bodies seemed to have been created for the sole benefit of  man, inhabiting the central position in the universe; their movements,  always with reference to the earth as a center, brought to man light,  heat, changes of season—all the conditions that made human life possible  on the earth.
Not only did the man of the Middle Ages see in the regular movements of  the celestial spheres the instruments by which God granted him physical  existence, but in the various aspects of heavenly phenomena he saw the  governing principles of his moral life.
The arrangement of the heavenly  bodies with regard to one another at various times was supposed to exert  undoubted power over the course of terrestrial events.
Each planet was  thought to have special attributes and a special influence over men’s[Pg 4]  lives.
Venus was the planet of love, Mars, of war and hostility, the sun,  of power and honor, and so forth.
Each was mysteriously connected with a  certain color, with a metal, too, the alchemists said, and each had  special power over some organ of the human body.
The planet’s influence  was believed to vary greatly according to its position in the heavens, so  that to determine a man’s destiny accurately it was necessary to consider  the aspect of the whole heavens, especially at the moment of his birth,  but also at other times.
This was called “casting the horoscope and was  regarded as of great importance in enabling a man to guard against  threatening perils or bad tendencies, and to make the best use of  favorable opportunities.
It is not astonishing, then, that the great monuments of literature in the  mediaeval period and even much later are filled with astronomical and  astrological allusions; for these are but reflections of vital human  interests of the times.
The greatest poetical work of the Middle Ages,  Dante’s Divina Commedia, is rich in astronomical lore, and its dramatic  action is projected against a cosmographical background reflecting the  view of Dante’s contemporaries as to the structure of the world.
Milton,  writing in the seventeenth century, bases the cosmology of his Paradise  Lost in the main on the Ptolemaic system, but makes Adam and the  archangel Raphael discuss the relative merits of this system and the  heliocentric view of the universe.
The latter had been brought forth by  Copernicus a century earlier, but even in Milton’s day had not yet  succeeded in supplanting the old geocentric cosmology.
The view of the universe which we find reflected in Chaucer’s poetry is  chiefly based on the Ptolemaic system of astronomy, though it shows traces  of very much more primitive cosmological ideas.
The Ptolemaic system owes  its name to the famous Alexandrian astronomer of the second century A. D.,  Claudius Ptolemy, but is based largely on the works and discoveries of the  earlier Greek philosophers and astronomers, especially Eudoxus,  Hipparchus, and Aristarchus, whose investigations Ptolemy compiled[Pg 5] and,  along some lines, extended.
Ptolemaic astronomy was a purely geometrical  or mathematical system which represented the observed movements and  relative positions of the heavenly bodies so accurately that calculations  as to their positions at any given time could be based upon it.
Ptolemy  agreed with his contemporaries in the opinion that to assign causes for  the celestial movements was outside the sphere of the astronomer.
This was  a proper field of philosophy; and the decisions of philosophers,  especially those of Aristotle, were regarded as final, and their teaching  as the basis upon which observed phenomena should be described.
According to the Ptolemaic system the earth is a motionless sphere fixed  at the center of the universe.
It can have no motion, for there must be  some fixed point in the universe to which all the motions of the heavenly  bodies may be referred; if the earth had motion, it was argued, this would  be proportionate to the great mass of the earth and would cause objects  and animals to fly off into the air and be left behind.
Ptolemy believed  this reason sufficient to make untenable the idea of a rotatory motion of  the earth, although he was fully aware that to suppose such a motion of  the earth would simplify exceedingly the representations of the celestial  movements.
It did not occur to him that to suppose the earth’s atmosphere  to participate in its motion would obviate this difficulty.
The earth was  but a point in comparison with the immense sphere to which the stars were  attached and which revolved about the earth once in every twenty-four  hours, imparting its motion to sun, moon, and planets, thus causing day  and night and the rising and setting of the heavenly bodies.
The irregular  motions of the planets were accounted for by supposing them to move on  circles of small spheres called ‘epicycles’, the centres of which moved  around the ‘deferents’, or circles of large spheres which carried the  planets in courses concentric to the star sphere.
By giving each of the  planets an epicycle and deferent of the proper relative size and velocity  the varied oscillations of the planets, as far as they could be followed  by means of the simple instruments then in use, were almost perfectly  accounted for.
[Pg 6]Though it was a purely mathematical system which only attempted to give a  basis for computing celestial motions, Ptolemaic astronomy is of great  importance historically as it remained the foundation of theoretical  astronomy for more than 1400 years.
Throughout the long dark centuries of  the Middle Ages it survived in the studies of the retired students of the  monasteries and of the few exceptionally enlightened men who still had  some regard for pagan learning in the days when many of the Church Fathers  denounced it as heretical.
Ptolemy was the last of the great original Greek astronomers.
The  Alexandrian school produced, after him, only copyists and commentators,  and the theoretical astronomy of the Greeks, so highly perfected in  Ptolemy’s Almagest, was for many centuries almost entirely neglected.
The Roman State gave no encouragement to the study of theoretical  astronomy and produced no new school of astronomy.
Although it was the  fashion for a Roman to have a smattering of Greek astronomy, and famous  Latin authors like Cicero, Seneca, Strabo and Pliny wrote on astronomy,  yet the Romans cared little for original investigations and contributed  nothing new to the science.
The Romans, however, appreciated the value of  astronomy in measuring time, and applied to the Alexandrian school to  satisfy their practical need for a calendar.
What Julius Caesar obtained  from the Alexandrian Sosigenes, he greatly improved and gave to the  Empire, as the calendar which, with the exception of the slight change  made by Gregory XIII, we still use.
The pseudo-astronomical science of astrology, or the so-called ‘judicial  astronomy’ was pursued during the Roman Empire and throughout the Middle  Ages with much greater zeal than theoretical astronomy.
The interest in  astrology, to be sure, encouraged the study of observational astronomy to  a certain extent; for the casting of horoscopes to foretell destinies  required that the heavenly bodies be observed and methods of calculating  their positions at any time or place be known.
But there was no desire to  inquire into the underlying laws of the celestial motions or to  investigate the real nature of the heavenly phenomena.
[Pg 7]If the Roman State did not encourage astronomy, the Roman Church  positively discouraged it.
The Bible became and long remained the sole  authority recognized by the Church Fathers as to the constitution of the  universe.
By many of the Patristics Ptolemaic astronomy was despised; not  because it did not describe accurately the observed phenomena of the  heavens, for it did this in a way that could scarcely have been improved  upon with the facilities for observation then available; and not because  it was founded upon the false assumption that the earth is the motionless  center of the universe about which all heavenly bodies revolve; but  because there was no authority in Scripture for such a system, and it  could not possibly be made consistent with the cosmology of Genesis.
Allegorical descriptions of the universe based on the Scriptures held  almost complete sway over the mediaeval mind.
The whole universe was  represented allegorically by the tabernacle and its furniture.
The earth  was flat and rectangular like the table of shew bread, and surrounded on  all four sides by the ocean.
The walls of heaven beyond this supported the  firmament shaped like a half-cylinder.
Angels moved the sun, moon, and  stars across the firmament and let down rain through its windows from the  expanse of water above.
II  Chaucer’s Scientific Knowledge  It was in the fourteenth century that Chaucer lived and wrote, and his  interest in astronomical lore is, therefore, not surprising.
Although the  theories of astronomy current in Chaucer’s century have been made  untenable by the De Revolutionibus Orbium of Copernicus, and by Kepler’s  discovery of the laws of planetary motion; although the inaccurate and  unsatisfactory methods of astronomical investigation then in use have been  supplanted by the better methods made possible through Galileo’s invention  of the telescope and through the modern use of spectrum analysis; yet, of  all scientific subjects, the astronomy of that period could most nearly  lay claim to the name of science according to the present acceptation of  the term.
For, as we have seen, the interest in astrology during the  Middle Ages had fostered the study of observational astronomy, and this[Pg 10]  in turn had furnished the science a basis of fact and observation far  surpassing in detail and accuracy that of any other subject.
Practically all of Chaucer’s writings contain some reference to the  movements and relative positions of the heavenly bodies, and to their  influence on human and mundane affairs, and in some of his works,  especially the treatise on The Astrolabe, a very technical and detailed  knowledge of astronomical and astrological lore is displayed.
There is  every reason to suppose that, so far as it satisfied his purposes, Chaucer  had made himself familiar with the whole literature of astronomical  science.
His familiarity with Ptolemaic astronomy is shown in his writings  both by specific mention[1] of the name of Ptolemy and his Syntaxis,  commonly known as the ‘Almagest,’ and by many more general astronomical  references.
Even more convincing evidence of Chaucer’s knowledge of the scientific  literature of his time is given in his Treatise on the Astrolabe.
According to Skeat, Part I and at least two-thirds of Part II are taken,  with some expansion and[Pg 11] alteration, from a work on the Astrolabe by  Messahala[2], called, in the Latin translation which Chaucer used,  “Compositio et Operatio Astrolabie. This work may have been ultimately  derived from a Sanskrit copy, but from Chaucer’s own words in the  Prologue to the Astrolabe[3] it is clear that he made use of the Latin  work.
The rest of Part II may have been derived from some general  compendium of astronomical and astrological knowledge, or from some other  of the treatises on the Astrolabe which Chaucer says were common in his  time.
[4]  Other sources mentioned by Chaucer in The Astrolabe are the calendars of  John Some and Nicholas Lynne, Carmelite friars who wrote calendars  constructed for the meridian of Oxford[5]; and of the Arabian astronomer  Abdilazi Alkabucius.
[6] In The Frankeleyns Tale Chaucer mentions the  Tabulae Toletanae,[7] a set of tables composed by order of[Pg 12] Alphonso X,  king of Castile, and so called because they were adapted to the city of  Toledo.
Works which served Chaucer not as sources of information on  scientific subjects but as models for the treatment of astronomical lore  in literature were the De Consolatione Philosophiae of Boethius, which  Chaucer translated and often made use of in his poetry; and the works of  Dante, whose influence on Chaucer, probably considerable, has been pointed  out by several writers, notably Rambeau[8] who discusses the parallels  between The Hous of Fame and the Divina Commedia.
III  Chaucer’s Cosmology  Chaucer wrote no poetical work having a cosmographical background as  completely set forth as is that in Dante’s Divine Comedy or that in  Milton’s Paradise Lost.
Although his cosmological references are often  incidental they are not introduced in a pedantic manner.
Whenever they are  not parts of interpolations from other writers his use of them is due to  their intimate relation to the life his poetry portrays or to his  appreciation of their poetic value.
When Chaucer says, for example, that  the sun has grown old and shines in Capricorn with a paler light than is  his wont, he is not using a merely conventional device for showing that  winter has come, but is expressing this fact in truly poetic manner and in  words quite comprehensible to the men of his day, who were accustomed to  think of time relations in terms of heavenly phenomena.
Popular and scientific views of the universe in Chaucer’s century were by  no means the same.
The untaught man doubtless still thought of the earth  as being flat, as it appears to be, as bounded by the waters of the ocean,  and as covered by a dome-like material firmament through which the waters  above sometimes came as rain;[Pg 13] while, as we have seen, by the fourteenth  century among scholars the geocentric system of astronomy was firmly  established and the spheres and epicycles of Ptolemy were becoming more  widely known.
It is the view held by the educated men of his century that  Chaucer’s poetry chiefly reflects.
1.
The Celestial Spheres and their Movements  When we read Chaucer we are transported into a world in which the heavenly  bodies and their movements seem to bear a more intimate relation to human  life than they do in the world in which we live.
The thought of the  revolving spheres carrying sun, moon, and planets, regulating light and  heat on the earth, and exercising a mysterious influence over terrestrial  events and human destiny was a sublime conception and one that naturally  appealed to the imagination of a poet.
Chaucer was impressed alike by the  vastness of the revolving spheres in comparison to the earth’s smallness,  by their orderly arrangement, and by the unceasing regularity of their  appearance which seemed to show that they should eternally abide.
In the  Parlement of Foules he interpolates a passage from Cicero’s Somnium  Scipionis in which Africanus appears to the sleeping Scipio, points out  to him the insignificance of our little earth when compared with the  vastness of the heavens and then admonishes him to regard the things of  this world as of little importance when compared with the joys of the  heavenly life to come.
[9]  “Than shewed he him the litel erthe, that heer is,  At regard of the hevenes quantite;  And after shewed he him the nyne speres.  The regular arrangement of the planetary spheres clings often to the  poet’s fancy and he makes many allusions to their order in the heavens.
He  speaks of Mars as “the thridde hevenes lord above[10] and of Venus as  presiding over[Pg 14] the “fifte cercle.[11] In Troilus and Criseyde the poet  invokes Venus as the adorning light of the third heaven.
[12]  “O blisful light, of which the bemes clere  Adorneth al the thridde hevene faire![13]  Mediaeval astronomers as we have seen, imagined nine spheres, each of the  seven innermost carrying with it one of the planets in the order mentioned  below; the eighth sphere was that of the fixed stars, and to account for  the precession of the equinoxes, men supposed it to have a slow motion  from west to east, round the axis of the zodiac; the ninth or outermost  sphere they called the primum mobile, or the sphere of first motion, and  supposed it to revolve daily from east to west, carrying all the other  spheres with it.
The thought of the two outer spheres, the primum  mobile, whirling along with it all the inner spheres, and the firmament,  bearing hosts of bright stars, seems to have appealed strongly to the  poet’s imagination.
In the Tale of the Man of Lawe the primum mobile  is described as crowding and hurling in diurnal revolution from east to  west all the spheres that would naturally follow the slow course of the  zodiac from west to east.
[14] Elsewhere the primum mobile is called the  “whele that bereth the sterres and is said to turn the heavens with a  “ravisshing sweigh:  “O thou maker of the whele that bereth the sterres, which that art  y-fastned to thy perdurable chayer, and[Pg 15] tornest the hevene with a  ravisshing sweigh, and constreinest the sterres to suffren thy lawe;[15]  The firmament, which in Chaucer is not restricted to the eighth sphere but  generally refers to the whole expanse of the heavens, is many times  mentioned by Chaucer; and its appearance on clear or cloudy nights, its  changing aspects before an impending storm or with the coming of dawn,  beautifully described.
[16]     2.
The Harmony of the Spheres  Some of the cosmological ideas reflected in Chaucer’s writings can be  traced back to systems older than the Ptolemaic.
The beautiful fancy that  the universe is governed by harmony had its origin in the philosophy of  the Pythagoreans in the fourth century B. C., and continued to appeal to  men’s imagination until the end of the Middle Ages.
It was thought that  the distances of the planetary spheres from one another correspond to the  intervals of a musical scale and that each sphere as it revolves sounds  one note of the scale.
When asked why men could not hear the celestial  harmony, the Pythagoreans said: A blacksmith is deaf to the continuous,  regular beat of the hammers in his shop; so we are deaf to the music which  the spheres have been sending forth from eternity.
In ancient and mediaeval cosmology it was only the seven spheres of the  planets that were generally supposed to participate in this celestial  music; but the poets have[Pg 16] taken liberties with this idea and have given  it to us in forms suiting their own fancies.
Milton bids all the celestial  spheres join in the heavenly melody:  “Ring out, ye crystal spheres,  Once bless our human ears,If ye have power to touch our senses so;  And let your silver chime  Move in melodious time,And let the base of heaven’s deep organ blow;  And with your ninefold harmony,  Make up full consort to the angelic symphony.[17]  Shakespeare lets every orb of the heavens send forth its note as it moves:  “There’s not the smallest orb which thou behold’st  But in his motion like an angel sings,  Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins;[18]  Chaucer, too, makes all nine spheres participate:  “And after that the melodye herde he  That cometh of thilke speres thryes three,  That welle is of musyke and melodye  In this world heer, and cause of armonye.[19]  Only in unusual circumstances can the music of the spheres be heard by  mortal ears.
In the lines just quoted the celestial melody is heard during  a dream or vision.
In Troilus and Criseyde, after Troilus’ death his  spirit is borne aloft to heaven whence he beholds the celestial orbs and  hears the melody sent forth as they revolve:  [Pg 17]  “And ther he saugh, with ful avysement,  The erratik sterres, herkeninge armonye  With sownes fulle of hevenish melodye.[20]     3.
The Cardinal Points and the Regions of the World  More primitive in origin than the harmony of the spheres are references to  the four elements, to the divisions of the world, and to the cardinal  points or quarters of the earth.
Of these, probably the most primitive is  the last.
The idea of four cardinal points, the “before, the “behind,  the “right, and the “left, later given the names North, South, East, and  West, appears among peoples in their very earliest stages of civilization,  and because of its great usefulness has remained and probably will remain  throughout the history of the human race.
Only one of Chaucer’s many  references to the cardinal points need be mentioned.
In the Man of Lawes  Tale (B.491ff.)
the cardinal points are first suggested by an allusion to  the four ‘spirits of tempest,’ which were supposed to have their  respective abodes in the four quarters of earth, and then specifically  named in the lines following:  “Who bad the foure spirits of tempest,  That power han tanoyen land and see,  ‘Bothe north and south, and also west and est,  Anoyeth neither see, ne land, ne tree?’  Of almost equal antiquity are ideas of the universe as a threefold world  having heaven above, earth below, and a region of darkness and gloom  beneath the earth.
Chaucer usually speaks of the threefold world, the  “tryne compas, as comprising heaven, earth and sea.
Thus in the Knightes  Tale:[21]  “‘O chaste goddesse of the wodes grene,  To whom bothe hevene and erthe and see is sene,  Quene of the regne of Pluto derk and lowe,’  [Pg 18]Fame’s palace is said to stand midway between heaven, earth and sea:  “Hir paleys stant, as I shal seye,  Right even in middes of the weye  Betwixen hevene, erthe, and see;[22]  Again in The Seconde Nonnes Tale, the name ‘tryne compas’ is used of the  threefold world and the three regions are mentioned:  “That of the tryne compas lord and gyde is,  Whom erthe and see and heven, out of relees,  Ay herien;[23]     4.
Heaven, Hell and Purgatory  In mediaeval cosmology ideas of heaven, hell, and purgatory, as more or  less definitely located regions where the spirits of the dead were either  rewarded or punished eternally, or were purged of their earthly sins in  hope of future blessedness, play an important part.
According to Dante’s  poetic conception hell was a conical shaped pit whose apex reached to the  center of the earth, purgatory was a mountain on the earth’s surface on  the summit of which was located the garden of Eden or the earthly  paradise, and heaven was a motionless region beyond space and time, the  motionless sphere outside of the primum mobile, called the Empyrean.
Chaucer’s allusions to heaven, hell and purgatory are frequent but chiefly  incidental and give no such definite idea of their location as we find in  the Divine Comedy.
The nearest Chaucer comes to indicating the place of  heaven is in The Parlement of Foules, 55-6, where Africanus speaks of  heaven and then points to the galaxy:  “And rightful folk shal go, after they dye,  To heven; and shewed him the galaxye.  [Pg 19]Chaucer describes heaven as “swift and round and burning, thus to some  extent departing from the conception of it usually held in his time:  “And right so as thise philosophres wryte  That heven is swift and round and eek brenninge,  Right so was fayre Cecilie the whyte.[24]  In using the terms “swift and round Chaucer must have been thinking of  the primum mobile which, as we have seen, was thought to have a swift  diurnal motion from east to west.
His use of the epithet “burning is in  conformity with the mediaeval conception of the Empyrean, or heaven of  pure light as it is described by Dante.
Chaucer does not describe the form and location of hell as definitely as  does Dante, but the idea which he presents of it by incidental allusions,  whether or not this was the view of it he himself held, is practically the  one commonly held in his day.
That hell is located somewhere within the  depths of the earth is suggested in the Knightes Tale;[25]—  “His felawe wente and soghte him down in helle;  and in the Man of Lawes Tale;[26]  “O serpent under femininitee,  Lyk to the serpent depe in helle y-bounde,  In the Persones Tale hell is described as a horrible pit to which no  natural light penetrates, filled with smoking flames and presided over by  devils who await an opportunity to draw sinful souls to their  punishment.
[27] Elsewhere in the same tale the parson describes hell as a  region of disorder, the only place in the world not subject to the  universal laws of nature, and attributes this idea of it to Job:  [Pg 20]“And eek Iob seith: that ‘in helle is noon ordre of rule.’ And  al-be-it so that god hath creat alle thinges in right ordre, and  no-thing with-outen ordre, but alle thinges been ordeyned and nombred;  yet nathelees they that been dampned been no-thing in ordre, ne holden  noon ordre.[28]  The word purgatory seldom occurs in a literal sense in Chaucer’s poetry,  but the figurative use of it is frequent.
When the Wife of Bath is  relating her experiences in married life she tells us that she was her  fourth husband’s purgatory.
[29] The old man, Ianuarie[30], contemplating  marriage, fears that he may lose hope of heaven hereafter, because he will  have his heaven here on earth in the joys of wedded life.
His friend  Iustinus sarcastically tells him that perhaps his wife will be his  purgatory, God’s instrument of punishment, so that when he dies his soul  will skip to heaven quicker than an arrow from the bow.
To Arcite,  released from prison on condition that he never again enter Theseus’  lands, banishment will be a worse fate than the purgatory of life  imprisonment, for then even the sight of Emelye will be denied him:  “He seyde, ‘Allas that day that I was born!
Now is my prison worse than biforn;  Now is me shape eternally to dwelle  Noght in purgatorie, but in helle.’[31]  The idea of purgatory, not as a place definitely located like Dante’s  Mount of Purgatory, but rather as a period of punishment and probation, is  expressed in these lines from The Parlement of Foules (78-84):  [Pg 21]  “‘But brekers of the lawe, soth to seyne,  And lecherous folk, after that they be dede,  Shul alwey whirle aboute therthe in peyne,  Til many a world be passed, out of drede,  And than, for-yeven alle hir wikked dede,  Than shul they come unto that blisful place,  To which to comen god thee sende his grace!’  Chaucer uses the idea of paradise for poetical purposes quite as often as  that of purgatory.
He expresses the highest degree of earthly beauty or  joy by comparing it with paradise.
Criseyde’s face is said to be like the  image of paradise.
[32] Again, in extolling the married life, the poet says  that its virtues are such  “‘That in this world it is a paradys.’[33]  And later in the same tale, woman is spoken of as  “mannes help and his confort,  His paradys terrestre and his disport.[34]  When Aeneas reaches Carthage he  “is come to Paradys  Out of the swolow of helle, and thus in Ioye  Remembreth him of his estat in Troye.[35]  Chaucer mentions paradise several times in its literal sense as the abode  of Adam and Eve before their fall.
In the Monkes Tale we are told that  Adam held sway over all paradise excepting one tree.
[36] Again, the  pardoner speaks of the expulsion of Adam and Eve from paradise:  “Adam our fader, and his wyf also,  Fro Paradys to labour and to wo  Were driven for that vyce, it is no drede;  For whyl that Adam fasted, as I rede,[Pg 22]He was in Paradys; and whan that he  Eet of the fruyt defended on the tree,  Anon he was out-cast to we and peyne.[37]     5.
The Four Elements.
The idea of four elements[38] has its origin in the attempts of the early  Greek cosmologists to discover the ultimate principle of reality in the  universe.
Thales reached the conclusion that this principle was water, Anaximines,  that it was air, and Heracleitus, fire, while Parmenides supposed two  elements, fire or light, subtle and rarefied, and earth or night, dense  and heavy.
Empedocles of Agrigentum (about 450 B. C.) assumed as primary  elements all four—fire, air, water, and earth—of which each of his  predecessors had assumed only one or two.
To explain the manifold  phenomena of nature he supposed them to be produced by combinations of the  elements in different proportions through the attractive and repulsive  forces of ‘love’ and ‘discord.’ This arbitrary assumption of four  elements, first made by Empedocles, persisted in the popular imagination  throughout the Middle Ages and is, like other cosmological ideas of  antiquity, sometimes reflected in the poetry of the time.
The elements in mediaeval cosmology were assigned to a definite region of  the universe.
Being mortal and imperfect they occupied four spheres below  the moon, the elemental region or region of imperfection, as distinguished  from the ethereal region above the moon.
Immediately within the sphere of  the moon came that of Fire, below this the Air, then Water, and lowest of  all the solid sphere of Earth.
[Pg 23] Fire being the most ethereal of the  elements constantly tends to rise upward, while Earth sinks towards the  center of the universe.
This contrast is a favorite idea with Dante, who  says in the Paradiso i.
112-117:  “‘wherefore they move to diverse ports o’er thegreat sea of being, and each one withinstinct given it to bear it on.
This beareth the fire toward the moon; thisis the mover in the hearts of things that die;this doth draw the earth together and unite it.’  Elsewhere Dante describes the lightning as fleeing its proper place when  it strikes the earth:  “‘but lightning, fleeing its proper site, ne’er  darted as dost thou who art returning thither.’[39]  And again:  “‘so from this course sometimes departeth thecreature that hath power, thus thrust, to swerveto-ward some other part,  (even as fire may be seen to dart down fromthe cloud) if its first rush be wrenched asideto earth by false seeming pleasure.’[40]  The same thought of the tendency of fire to rise and of earth to sink is  found in Chaucer’s translation of Boethius:[41]  “Thou bindest the elements by noumbres proporcionables, ... that the  fyr, that is purest, ne flee nat over hye, ne that the hevinesse ne  drawe nat adoun over-lowe the erthes that ben plounged in the wateres.  Chaucer does not make specific mention of the spheres of the elements, but  he tells us plainly that each element has been assigned its proper region  from which it may not escape:        IV  Chaucer’s Astronomy  Chaucer’s treatment of astronomical lore in his poetry differs much from  his use of it in his prose writings.
In poetical allusions to heavenly  phenomena, much attention to detail and a pedantic regard for accuracy  would be inappropriate.
References to astronomy in Chaucer’s poetry are,  as a rule rather brief, specific but not technical, often purely  conventional but always truly poetic.
There are, indeed, occasional  passages in Chaucer’s poetry showing so detailed a knowledge of  observational[50] astronomy that they would seem astonishing and, to many  people, out of place, in modern poetry.
They were not so in Chaucer’s  time, when the exigencies of practical life demanded of the ordinary man a  knowledge of astronomy far surpassing that possessed by most of our  contemporaries.
Harry Bailly in the Introduction to the Man of Lawes  Tale determines the day of the month and hour of the day by making  calculations from the observed position of the sun in the sky, and from  the length of shadows, although, says Chaucer, “he were not depe expert in  lore.[51] Such [Pg 28]references to technical details of astronomy as we find  in this passage are, however, not common in Chaucer’s poetry; in his  Treatise on the Astrolabe, on the other hand, a professedly scientific  work designed to instruct his young son Louis in those elements of  astronomy and astrology that were necessary for learning the use of the  astrolabe, we have sufficient evidence that he was thoroughly familiar  with the technical details of the astronomical science of his day.
In Chaucer’s poetry the astronomical references employed are almost wholly  of two kinds: references showing the time of day or season of the year at  which the events narrated are supposed to take place; and figurative  allusions for purposes of illustration or comparison.
Figurative uses of  astronomy in Chaucer vary from simple similes as in the Prologue to the  Canterbury Tales, where the friar’s eyes are compared to twinkling  stars[52] to extended allegories like the Compleynt of Mars in which the  myth of Venus and Mars is related by describing the motions of the planets  Venus and Mars for a certain period during which Venus overtakes Mars,  they are in conjunction[53] for a short time, and then Venus because of  her greater apparent velocity leaves Mars behind.
One of the most  magnificent astronomical figures employed by Chaucer is in the Hous of[Pg 29]  Fame.
Chaucer looks up into the heavens and sees a great golden eagle  near the sun, a sight so splendid that men could never have beheld its  equal ‘unless the heaven had won another sun:’  “Hit was of golde, and shone so bright,  That never saw men such a sighte,  But-if the heven hadde y-wonne  Al newe of golde another sonne;  So shoon the egles fethres brighte,  And somwhat dounward gan hit lighte.[54]  Besides mentioning the heavenly bodies in time references and figurative  allusions, Chaucer also employs them often in descriptions of day and  night, of dawn and twilight, and of the seasons.
It is with a poet’s joy  in the warm spring sun that he writes:  “Bright was the day, and blew the firmament,  Phebus of gold his stremes doun hath sent,  To gladen every flour with his warmnesse.[55]  and with a poet’s delight in the new life and vigor that nature puts forth  when spring comes that he writes the lines:  “Forgeten had the erthe his pore estat  Of winter, that him naked made and mat,  And with his swerd of cold so sore greved;  Now hath the atempre sonne al that releved  That naked was, and clad hit new agayn.[56]  Chaucer’s astronomical allusions, then, except in the Treatise on the  Astrolabe and in his translation of Boethius de Consolatione  Philosophiae, in which a philosophical interest in celestial phenomena is  displayed, are almost [Pg 30]invariably employed with poetic purpose.
These  poetical allusions to heavenly phenomena, however, together with the more  technical and detailed references in Chaucer’s prose works give evidence  of a rather extensive knowledge of astronomy.
With all of the important  observed movements of the heavenly bodies he was perfectly familiar and it  is rather remarkable how many of these he uses in his poetry without  giving one the feeling that he is airing his knowledge.
1.
The Sun  Of all the heavenly bodies the one most often mentioned and employed for  poetic purposes by Chaucer is the sun.
Chaucer has many epithets for the  sun, but speaks of him perhaps most often in the classical manner as  Phebus or Apollo.
He is called the “golden tressed Phebus[57] or the  “laurer-crowned Phebus;[58] and when he makes Mars flee from Venus’  palace he is called the “candel of Ielosye.[59] In the following passage  Chaucer uses three different epithets for the sun within two lines:  “The dayes honour, and the hevenes ye,  The nightes fo, al this clepe I the sonne,  Gan westren faste, and dounward for to wrye,  As he that hadde his dayes cours y-ronne;[60]  Sometimes Chaucer gives the sun the various accessories with which  classical myth had endowed him—the four swift steeds, the rosy chariot  and fiery torches:  “And Phebus with his rosy carte sone  Gan after that to dresse him up to fare.[61]“‘now am I war  That Pirous and tho swifte stedes three,  Which that drawen forth the sonnes char,[Pg 31]Hath goon some by-path in despyt of me;’[62]  “Phebus, that was comen hastely  Within the paleys-yates sturdely,  With torche in honde, of which the stremes brighte  On Venus chambre knokkeden ful lighte.[63]  Almost always when Chaucer wishes to mention the time of day at which the  events he is relating take place, he does so by describing the sun’s  position in the sky or the direction of his motion.
We can imagine that  Chaucer often smiled as he did this, for he sometimes humorously  apologizes for his poetical conceits and conventions by expressing his  idea immediately afterwards in perfectly plain terms.
Such is the case in  the passage already quoted where Chaucer refers to the sun by the epithets  “dayes honour, “hevenes ye, and “nightes fo and then explains them by  saying “al this clepe I the sonne; and in the lines:  “Til that the brighte sonne loste his hewe;  For thorisonte hath reft the sonne his light;  explained by the simple words:  “This is as muche to seye as it was night.[64]  Thus it is that Chaucer’s poetic references to the apparent daily motion  of the sun about the earth are nearly always simply in the form of  allusions to his rising and setting.
Canacee in the Squieres Tale, (F.  384 ff.)
is said to rise at dawn, looking as bright and fresh as the  spring sun risen four degrees from the horizon.
“Up ryseth fresshe Canacee hir-selve,  As rody and bright as dooth the yonge sonne,  That in the Ram[65] is four degrees up-ronne;  Noon hyer was he, whan she redy was;  Many of these references to the rising and setting of the sun might be  mentioned, if space permitted, simply for their beauty as poetry.
One of  the most beautiful is the following:  [Pg 32]  “And fyry Phebus ryseth up so brighte,  That al the orient laugheth of the lighte,  And with his stremes dryeth in the greves  The silver dropes, hanging on the leves.[66]  When, in the Canterbury Tales, the manciple has finished his tale,  Chaucer determines the time by observing the position of the sun and by  making calculations from the length of his own shadow:  “By that the maunciple hadde his tale al ended,  The sonne fro the south lyne was descended  So lowe, that he nas nat, to my sighte,  Degrees nyne and twenty as in highte.
Foure of the clokke it was tho, as I gesse;  For eleven foot, or litel more or lesse,  My shadwe was at thilke tyme, as there,  Of swich feet as my lengthe parted were  In six feet equal of porporcioun.[67]  We must not omit mention of the humorous touch with which Chaucer, in the  mock heroic tale of Chanticleer and the Fox told by the nun’s priest,  makes even the rooster determine the time of day by observing the altitude  of the sun in the sky:  “Chauntecleer, in al his pryde,  His seven wyves walkyng by his syde,  Caste up his eyen to the brighte sonne,  That in the signe of Taurus hadde y-ronne  Twenty degrees and oon, and somewhat more;  And knew by kynde, and by noon other lore,  That it was pryme, and crew with blisful stevene.
‘The sonne,’ he sayde, ‘is clomben up on hevene  Fourty degrees and oon, and more, y-wis.’[68]  [Pg 33]Moreover, this remarkable rooster observed that the sun had passed the  twenty-first degree in Taurus, and we are told elsewhere that he knew each  ascension of the equinoctial and crew at each; that is, he crew every  hour, as 15° of the equinoctial correspond to an hour:  “Wel sikerer was his crowing in his logge,  Than is a clokke, or an abbey orlogge.
By nature knew he ech ascencioun[69]  Of th’ equinoxial in thilke toun;  For whan degrees fiftene were ascended,  Thanne crew he, that it mighte nat ben amended.[70]  Chaucer announces the approach of evening by describing the position and  appearance of the sun more often than any other time of the day.
In the  Legend of Good Women he speaks of the sun’s leaving the south point[71]  of his daily course and approaching the west:  “Whan that the sonne out of the south gan weste,[72]  and again of his westward motion in the lines:  “And whan that hit is eve, I rene blyve,  As sone as ever the sonne ginneth weste,[73]  Elsewhere Chaucer refers to the setting of the sun by saying that he has  completed his “ark divine and may no longer remain on the horizon,[74] or  by saying that the ‘horizon has bereft the sun of his light.’[75]  Chaucer’s references to the daily motion of the sun about the earth are  apt to sound to us like purely poetical figures, so accustomed are we to  refer to the sun, what we know to be the earth’s rotatory motion, by  speaking of his apparent daily motion thus figuratively as if it were  real.
Chaucer’s manner of describing the revolution of the heavenly bodies  about the earth and his application of poetic epithets to them are  figurative, but the motion itself was[Pg 34] meant literally and was believed in  by the men of his century, because only the geocentric system of astronomy  was then known.
If Chaucer had been in advance of his century in this  respect there would certainly be some hint of the fact in his writings.
References in Chaucer to the sun’s yearly motion are in the same sense  literal.
The apparent motion of the sun along the ecliptic,[76] which we  know to be caused by the earth’s yearly motion in an elliptical orbit  around the sun, was then believed to be an actual movement of the sun  carried along by his revolving sphere.
Like the references to the sun’s  daily movements those that mention his yearly motion along the ecliptic  are also usually time references.
The season of the year is indicated by  defining the sun’s position among the signs of the zodiac.
The Canterbury  pilgrims set out on their journey in April when  “the yonge sonne  Hath in the Ram his halfe course y-ronne.[77]       V  Astrological Lore in Chaucer  Astrology, though resembling a science in that it makes use of observation  and seeks to establish laws governing its data, is in reality a faith or  creed.
It had its beginning, so tradition tells us, in the faith of the  ancient Babylonians in certain astral deities who exerted an influence  upon terrestrial events and human life.
The basis of this faith was not  altogether illogical but contained a germ of truth.
Of all the heavenly bodies, the sun exerted the most obvious effect upon  the earth; the sun brought day and night, summer and winter; his rays  lured growing things from mother earth and so gave sustenance to mankind.
But to the ancient peoples of the Orient the sun was also often a baneful  power; he could destroy as well as give life.
Therefore, the ancients came  to look upon the sun as a great and powerful god to be worshipped and  propitiated by men.
And if the sun was such a power, it was natural to  believe that all the other bright orbs of the sky were lesser [Pg 52]divinities  who exercised more limited powers on the earth.
From this beginning,  based, as we have seen, on a germ of fact, by the power of his imagination  and credulity, man extended more and more the powers of these sidereal  divinities, attributing to their volition and influence all the most  insignificant as well as the most important terrestrial events.
And if the  heavenly bodies, by revolving about the earth in ceaseless harmony,  effected the recurrence of day and night and of the seasons, and if their  configurations were responsible for the minutest events in nature, was it  not natural to suppose that, besides affecting man thus indirectly, they  also influenced him directly and were responsible for his conduct and for  the very qualities of his mind and soul?
Perhaps the astonishing variety  of the influences that the celestial bodies, from ancient until modern  times, were supposed to exercise over the world and the life of mankind  can be accounted for by imagining some such process of thought to have  been involved in the beginnings of astrology.
It was but a step from faith in stellar influence on our earth to the  belief that, as the heavenly movements were governed by immutable laws, so  their influence upon the world would follow certain laws and its effects  in the future could be determined as certainly as could the coming  revolutions and conjunctions of the stars.
Out of this two-fold belief was  evolved a complex system of divination, the origin of which was forgotten  as men, believing in it, invented reasons for believing, pretending that  their faith was founded on a long series of observations.
The Chaldeans  believed that in discovering the unceasing regularity of the celestial  motions, they had found the very laws of life and they built upon this  conviction a mass of absolutely rigid dogmas.
But when experience belied  these dogmas, unable to realize the falsity of their presuppositions and  to give up their faith in the divine stars, the astrologers invented new  dogmas to explain the old ones, thus piling up a body of complicated and  often[Pg 53] contradictory doctrines that will ever be to the student a source  of perplexity and astonishment.
On its philosophical side astrology was a system of astral theology  developed, not by popular thought, but through the careful observations  and speculations of learned priests and scholars.
It was a purely Eastern  science which came into being on the Chaldean plains and in the Nile  valley.
As far as we know, it was entirely unknown to any of the primitive  Aryan races, from Hindostan to Scandinavia.
Astrology as a system of  divination never gained a foothold in Greece during the brightest period  of her intellectual life.
But the dogma of astral divinity was zealously  maintained by the greatest of Greek philosophers.
Plato, the great  idealist, whose influence upon the theology of the ancient and even of the  modern world was more profound than that of any other thinker, called the  stars “visible gods ranking them just below the supreme eternal Being;  and to Plato these celestial gods were infinitely superior to the  anthropomorphic gods of the popular religion, who resembled men in their  passions and were superior to them only in beauty of form and in power.
Aristotle defended with no less zeal the doctrine of the divinity of the  stars, seeing in them eternal substances, principles of movement, and  therefore divine beings.
In the Hellenistic period, Zeno, the Stoic, and  his followers proclaimed the supremacy of the sidereal divinities even  more strongly than the schools of Plato and Aristotle had done.
The Stoics  conceived the world as a great organism whose “sympathetic forces  constantly interacted upon one another, governed by Reason which was of  the essence of ethereal Fire, the primordial substance of the universe.
To  the stars, the purest manifestation of the power of this ethereal  substance, were attributed the greatest influence and the loftiest divine  qualities.
The Stoics developed the doctrine of fatalism, which is the  inevitable outcome of faith in stellar influence on human life, to its  consequences; yet they proved by facts that fatalism is not incompatible  with [Pg 54]active and virtuous living.
By the end of the Roman imperial period  astrology had transformed paganism, replacing the old society of Immortals  who were scarcely superior to mortals, except in being exempted from old  age and death, by faith in the eternal beings who ran their course in  perfect harmony throughout the ages, whose power, regulated by the  unvarying celestial motions, extended over all the earth and determined  the destiny of the whole human race.
Astrology, as a science and a system of divination, exerted a profound  influence over the mediaeval mind.
No court was without its practicing  astrologer and the universities all had their professors of astrology.
The  practice of astrology was an essential part of the physician’s profession,  and before prescribing for a patient it was thought quite as important to  determine the positions of the planets as the nature of the disease.
[139]  Interesting evidence of this fact is found in the Prologue to the  Canterbury Tales where Chaucer speaks of the Doctour’s knowledge and use  of astrology as if it were his chief excellence as a physician:  “In al this world ne was ther noon him lyk  To speke of phisik and of surgerye;  For he was grounded in astronomye.
He kepte his pacient a ful greet del  In houres, by his magik naturel.
Wel coude he fortunen the ascendent  Of his images for his pacient.[140]  Yet in spite of the esteem in which astrological divination was held by  most people in the Middle Ages, Dante, the greatest exponent of the  thought and learning of that period, shows practically no knowledge of the  technical and practical side of astrology.
When he refers to the specific  effects of the planets it is only to those most familiarly known, and he  nowhere uses such technical terms as “houses or “aspects of planets.
But  Dante, like the great philosophers of the earlier periods, was undoubtedly  [Pg 55]influenced by the philosophical doctrines of astrology, and a general  belief in the influence of the celestial spheres upon human life was  deeply rooted in his mind.
To him the ceaseless and harmonious movements  of the celestial bodies were the manifestations and instruments of God’s  providence, and were ordained by the First Mover to govern the destinies  of the earth and human life.
We can see this conviction of Dante’s with perfect certainty when we read  the Divina Commedia.
For Dante’s poetry is highly subjective; on every  page his own personal thoughts and feelings are revealed quite openly.
Chaucer’s poetry, on the other hand, is objective; he tells us almost  nothing directly about himself and what we learn of him in his writings is  almost entirely by inference.
Chaucer’s frequent use of astrology in his  poetry would make it hard to believe that he was not considerably  influenced by its philosophical aspects, at least in the general way that  Dante was.
Part and parcel of the dramatic action in most of his poems is  the idea of stellar influences.
Yet we cannot assert, with the same  assurance that we can say it of Dante, that Chaucer believed, even in a  general way, in the influence of the stars on human life.
In Dante’s  poetry, as we have said, the poet himself is always before us.
Chaucer,  with Socratic irony, always makes it plain to the reader that his attitude  is purely objective, that he is only the narrator of what he has seen or  dreamed, only the copyist of another’s story.
Even when Chaucer makes  himself one of the protagonists, as in the Hous of Fame and the  Canterbury Tales, it is only that his narrative may be the more  convincing.
He tells a story and makes its protagonists actually live  before us, as individual men and women.
It is possible to imagine all of  his use of astrology in his poetry not as the reflection of his own faith  in its cosmic philosophy, but the expression of his genius for  understanding people and truthfully describing life and character.
Considerable discussion as to Chaucer’s attitude towards astrology has  been called forth by passages in which[Pg 56] he speaks in words of scorn with  regard to some of the practices and magic arts that were often used in  connection with astrology.
In the Astrolabe after describing somewhat at  length the favorable and unfavorable positions of planets he says:  “Natheles, thise ben observauncez of iudicial matiere and rytes of  payens, in which my spirit ne hath no feith, ne no knowing of hir  horoscopum.[141]  Again in the Franklin’s Tale he speaks in a similar disdainful tone of  astrological magic:  “He him remembred that, upon a day,  At Orliens in studie a book he say  Of magik naturel, which his felawe,  That was that tyme a bacheler of lawe,  Al were he ther to lerne another craft,  Had prively upon his desk y-laft;  Which book spak muchel of the operaciouns,  Touchinge the eighte and twenty mansiouns  That longen to the mone, and swich folye,  As in our dayes is not worth a flye:  For holy chirches feith in our bileve  Ne suffreth noon illusion us to greve.[142]  And elsewhere in the same tale he writes:  “So atte laste he hath his tyme y-founde  To maken his Iapes and his wreccednesse  Of switch a supersticious cursednesse.[143]  Here follows a long description of the clerk’s instruments and  astrological observances, ending in the lines  “For swiche illusiouns and swiche meschaunces  As hethen folk used in thilke dayes;  For which no lenger maked he delayes,  But thurgh his magik, for a wyke or tweye,  It seemed that alle the rokkes were aweye.[144]  [Pg 57]On the strength of these passages Professor T. R. Lounsbury[145] holds  that Chaucer was far ahead of most of his contemporaries in his attitude  toward the superstitious practices connected with the astrology of his  day; that his attitude toward judicial astrology was one of total  disbelief and scorn; and he even goes so far as to say that Chaucer was  guilty of a breach of artistic workmanship in expressing his disbelief so  scornfully in a tale in which the very climax of the dramatic action  depends upon a feat of astrological magic.
THE LUCK OF FLOWERS  It has been a favorite pastime with maidens in all ages to try to foretell  their future by the aid of flowers and plants.
One of the most popular fancies is provided by the four-leaved clover, the  story of which is told in various legends.
One runs to the effect that three  beautiful sisters, Faith, Hope and Charity, came from over the seas, and  wherever they walked three-leaved clovers, crimson, white and yellow,  bloomed profusely.
In their footsteps came another more beautiful being,  whose name was Love, and in his honor the clover added a fourth petal  to the trefoil.
In time, it became the talisman of love-sick maidens, who wore it in their  shoe to ensure a speedy meeting with their sweetheart, wore it over their  heart to frighten away evil spirits and to prevent being jilted.
In the case  of a quarrel, it served to effect a reconciliation.
Apart from its sentimental associations, a four-leaved clover has long been  regarded as an emblem of good luck, and has been worn by those who  believe in such things when they wished to increase their chances of good  fortune.
SPRING FLOWERS.—Naturally, many beliefs flourish around the flowers  of the garden and the hedgerow.
If you chance to find the first flower of the season on a Monday, it means  good luck.
If on a Tuesday, big undertakings are likely to be successful.
If on a Wednesday, it denotes your approaching wedding.
If on a Thursday, hard work with little profit will fall to your lot.
If on a Friday, unexpected wealth reaches you.
If on a Saturday, you may look out for misfortune.
If on a Sunday, phenomenal good luck will come to you.
THE FIRST WILD FLOWER.—From the first wild flowers which you  gather in spring, it is possible to discover the initials of your future husband or  wife.
If, for instance, they should chance to be daisies, violets and buttercups,  then expect to find some suitable person with the initials D. V. B.,  but they may not be necessarily in this order.
If someone presents you with a yellow flower, then you may expect a  gift of money directly.
If you can turn a bluebell inside out without breaking it, then your lover  will be true as long as both of you live.
[100]  No.
21.
THE PANSY.—If you wish to know your future destiny, pluck a pansy,  which takes its name from pensee, a thought.
Count the streaks or lines upon  the petals.
Four streaks tell that your dearest wish will be fulfilled.
Five streaks stand for hope with fear.
Six streaks suggest a surprise.
Seven streaks tell of constancy in your lover.
Eight streaks, fickleness.
Nine streaks, a change and then riches.
Markings leaning towards the left denote trouble.
Markings leaning to the right denote prosperity.
Should the central streak be the longest, then Sunday should be chosen  as your wedding day.
THE DAISY.—One of the oldest of flower charms is to pluck at the petals  of a daisy or marguerite.
At first pluck, these words are said, "He loves  me"; at the second, "He loves me not."
These sentences are repeated alternately  until the flower is deprived of all its petals.
Whichever sentence  was uttered last describes "his" affections.
[101]  THE IVY.—  Ivy, ivy, I thee pluck,  And in my bosom, I thee put.
The first young man who speaks to me  My own true lover he shall be.
No.
22.
THE HAWTHORN OR MAY.—Once upon a time, every porch was decorated  with a branch of May to avert the evil eye and prevent witchcraft, but the  idea has been departed from, and now it is regarded as a harbinger of  ill-luck, and is rarely brought inside a house.
THE MISTLETOE.—From very ancient times, this plant has been regarded  with curious veneration.
Probably it gained special fame, in the first instance,  owing to the peculiar manner in which it grew.
The Druids looked  upon it as a plant possessing marvelous properties, and they esteemed nothing  in the world more sacred than it.
They gathered it when the moon was  just six days old because the moon was then thought to be at its greatest  power.
This done, they sacrificed two young bullocks which were milk-white.
After that, the mistletoe was cut into small pieces with the aid of  a golden hook or bill and distributed among the people present.
These  took it home and suspended it in a prominent place to ward off evil spirits.
From these associations, the mistletoe has become an emblem under which  young people may kiss, without any evil coming to them through their act.
HOLLY is used as a Christmas decoration because the Romans chose it to  hang in their houses on the fast in honor of Saturn.
Friends gave bunches of it  to those whom they wished to endow with luck and happiness, probably  because the prickly leaves symbolized the crown of thorns worn by Christ  and the red berries the blood of the cross.
[102]  BIRTHDAY FLOWERS  Just as there are birth stones, so there are flowers which stand for each  month of the year.
By wearing the blossom named for your month, you may  count on good fortune as the result.
JANUARY.—The Snowdrop which is the emblem of purity, hope and  gentleness.
FEBRUARY.—The Violet, the emblem of modesty, kindness and faith.
MARCH.—The Daffodil, the emblem of daintiness, sincerity and graciousness.
APRIL.—The Primrose, the emblem of lovers.
MAY.—The White Lily, the emblem of purity and sweetness.
JUNE.—The Wild Rose, the emblem of love and loyalty.
JULY.—The Carnation, the emblem of kindly thoughts.
AUGUST.—The White Heather, the emblem of luck and the best of  good fortune.
SEPTEMBER.—The Michaelmas Daisy, the emblem of riches and happiness.
OCTOBER.—The Rosemary, the emblem of remembrance and kind  thoughts.
NOVEMBER.—The Chrysanthemum, the emblem of faith and truth.
DECEMBER.—The Ivy, the emblem of loyalty, fidelity and faithfulness.
THE LANGUAGE OF FLOWERS  For many generations, certain flowers have been accepted as having definite  meanings.
Thus, a gift of any of the examples listed below, may be taken  to infer whatever description is appended.
CAMELLIA.—Beauty, loveliness.CANDYTUFT.—Indifference, lack of affection.CARNATION (Red).—Alas for my poor heart!CARNATION (White).—Disregard, disdain.CLOVER (Four-leaved).—Be mine.COLUMBINE.—Foolishness.DAISY.—Innocence, purity.DEADLY NIGHTSHADE.—Falsehood, untrue.FERN.—You fascinate me.FORGET-ME-NOT.—The same as the name.FOXGLOVE.—I bow down to you.GERANIUM.—To console you.GOLDEN ROD.—Be on your guard.
[103]HELIOTROPE.—I am devoted to you.HYACINTH (White).—Your beauty is recognized.IVY.—Faithfulness.
I cling to you.LILY (White).—Sweetness.LILY (Yellow).—Gay, happy, joyful.LILY OF THE VALLEY.—Happiness will return.MIGNONETTE.—Your qualities are even greater than your charms.MYRTLE.—Love.ORANGE BLOSSOM.—Chastity.PANSY.—Thoughts.PASSION FLOWER.—Willing to suffer hardships for you.PEACH BLOSSOM.—I am captivated by you.PRIMROSE.—A token of love.ROSE.—A token of love, also.ROSE (Red).—Bashful, shy.ROSE (White).—I will be worthy of you.ROSE (Yellow).—Jealousy.ROSEBUDS.—A confession of great love.SWEET PEA.—Leave me and depart, or I leave you.VERBENA.—Pray for me.
COMBINATIONS OF FLOWERS  In order to convey definite phrases, lovers have long been used to resorting  to certain combinations of flowers.
A bunch made up of them has the  meaning which we print below.
DAISY AND MIGNONETTE.—Your qualities surpass even your great  beauty.
FERNS AND LILY OF THE VALLEY.—You are sweet and charming,  and you fascinate me.
IVY LEAVES AND YELLOW ROSE.—Your jealousy has put an end  to our friendship.
COLUMBINE, DAISY AND LILY.—You have played false and broken  our friendship.
PINK AND LAUREL LEAVES.—Your high qualities have been noticed  by me.
GOLDEN ROD, SWEET PEA AND FORGET-ME-NOT.—Danger is  at hand, be careful.
I go away but do not forget me.
[104]  SUPERSTITIONS REGARDING ANIMALS  SERPENTS.—These creatures have been regarded from very different angles,  according to the time and the country.
The story of the serpent in the Garden  of Eden has caused many people to detest them: but numerous are the  references in histories which go to show that serpents and snakes have been  reverenced.
In ancient Rome, the serpent was a household god: at other  times, it was regarded as a symbol of life and vitality, and it was frequently  used as a medium for healing the sick.
In India, this creature is looked upon  as a mascot for time and wisdom.
Thus, it is worn by fanatics as a part of  their headgear, and people make metal replicas and wear them as rings,  bracelets, etc.
Clearly, then, serpents have found more favor than disapproval,  and they may be counted as mascots, standing for wisdom, long life and good  health.
CATS.—Cats, the most domestic of animals, are regarded with mixed feelings.
Generally speaking, they are supposed to be unlucky, though oddly  enough a black cat is credited with good qualities when it takes up its abode  in a house.
This is due to the fact that, during the Middle Ages, black cats  were supposed to be associated with witches and in league with the evil one.
As a result, people treated them kindly and showered favors on them, not  because they liked them, but because they thought that this treatment would  avert bad luck.
The person who drowns or kills a cat may look for ill-fortune for nine  years.
Bad luck attends the vessel or ship on which a cat is found, but on no  account may the creature be thrown overboard after the vessel has sailed.
This would only make matters worse.
If a cat leaves a house, it is supposed to take the luck with it, and leave  nothing but bad fortune behind.
If a white cat enters a home, it announces  trouble and sickness.
A cat licking itself all over signifies fair weather, but  if it merely washes its face, it means the approach of rain or storms.
DOGS.—A dog howling under a window indicates death.
Dogs begin in jest and end in earnest.
A dog, a woman, a walnut tree,  The more you beat 'em, the better they be.
If a dog bark, go in: if a bitch, go out.
A dog will bark ere he bite.
HARES.—If a hare crosses your path, you may look out for a disappointment.
If it runs past houses, there will soon be a fire in one of them.
In the Isle of Man, hares are believed to be the spirits of old women, and  on that account are shunned as articles of food.
In other parts, those who  wish to look beautiful for a week make a point of eating hare.
[105]  BIRDS.—Robins are variously regarded in different parts of the country.
Some people think them unlucky, possibly because of their association with  the tragedy of the Babes in the Wood.
But generally they are welcomed to  a garden or house, which is supposed to be all the luckier for their coming.
Robins that show signs of being friendly are considered to foretell a hard  winter.
Woodpeckers and kingfishers are also lucky, and any suggestion of ill-luck  is only possible when birds are deliberately killed after having built their nest  and claimed the hospitality of a home.
The screech of a peacock is best unheard when luck is particularly wanted.
The feathers of this bird, known to everyone by reason of their beautiful  coloring, should never be taken indoors, as they are reckoned specially unlucky.
There is an old superstition regarding the cuckoo.
Should a maiden, hearing  its notes for the first time that season, kiss her hand to it and say:—  Cuckoo, cuckoo,  Tell me true,  When shall I be married?
she may tell the number of years which will elapse until her wedding by  counting the number of times the bird cries "Cuckoo."
She must reckon  each cry as a year.
Another superstition relating to the cuckoo is that what you are doing  when you hear its cries for the first time in any season is what you will spend  most time at during the remainder of the year.
Folk in the Channel Islands  claim that they are sure to be fortunate if they jingle their purses and run a  short distance when hearing the cuckoo for the first time in the year.
Owls, crows and magpies do not presage any good: in fact, many people  would rather not meet them when anxiety is at hand.
An old jingle says of  magpies:—  One for anger,  Two for mirth;  Three for a wedding  Four for a birth.
Ravens are supposed to bring luck to the house where they build their nests,  so it is unlucky to kill one.
It is unlucky to touch a yellowhammer in May, since there is the devil's  blood in it then.
For a white pigeon to single out a house and hover round it is a sure sign  of an early marriage or engagement in that house.
A cock crowing during the night-time means a bad illness for someone close  at hand: if it crows during the afternoon, a visitor will arrive.
Sailors are not over-fond of seagulls, believing them to be the spirits of their  dead mates, yet they are most indignant if anyone tries to shoot or kill one  of them.
[106]  OTHER ANIMALS.—A cricket singing within a house ensures good luck  for all the household.
Kill a spider and it will surely rain.
See a moth on your clothes and you will get new ones.
A death's head moth indicates bereavement.
Pigs are unlucky creatures when seen singly.
To see a white horse and then, shortly after, a red-haired person, tells of  approaching good fortune.
Moles are unlucky to find alive.
Of bees, the following rhyme is prophetic:—  A swarm of bees in May  Is worth a load of hay.
A swarm of bees in June  Is worth a silver spoon.
A swarm of bees in July  Is not worth a fly.
Country people are still given to treating bees as if they belonged to the  family.
For instance, not a few folk tell the bees of the betrothal, marriage  and other outstanding events happening in the home.
PROPHECIES REGARDING ANIMALS  (a) When black snails cross your pathBlack clouds much moisture hath.
(b) When the peacock loudly bawls,Soon we'll have both rain and squalls.
(c) When rooks fly sporting high in air,It shows that windy storms are near.
(d) Bees will not swarm before a near storm.
(e) When the cuckoo comes to the bare thorn,Sell your cow and buy your corn.But when she comes to the full bit,Sell your corn and buy some sheep.
(f) Little bantams are great at crowing.
(g) Good luck for a grey horse.
(h) Let a horse drink what he will, not when he will.
(i) Trust not a horse's heel, nor a dog's tooth.
(j) Plenty of ladybirds, plenty of hops.
(k) Never offer your hen for sale on a rainy day.
(l) When the glow-worm lights her lamp,The air is always damp.
(m) Unlucky to hear the cuckoo sing sitting.Or to sit and see the first swallow flitting.
[107]  CRYSTAL GAZING  Before we start this chapter, will you just take a look at the following short  list of terms used in crystal gazing and spiritualism?
You will find that they  will make what follows quite clear, and that they will be useful to refer to.
SPIRITUALISTIC.—Belonging to the spirit world.
SECOND SIGHT.—The power which all have (but few develop).
The  power to see the future and other things with the spirit eye.
AURA.—The circle of thought which each one of us is unconsciously sending  out by our characters and personalities.
THE CRYSTAL.—Any object which helps to fix our attention; i.e., a crystal,  a bowl of water, shining metal.
There is nothing about the crystal that is  magical by itself.
PSYCHIC PERSONS.—Persons possessing second sight.
LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE  It is believed that this portion of the book will be found particularly  interesting because it is here that we touch upon spiritualism, perhaps one of  the most talked-of subjects of today.
In crystal gazing we actually see many things happen which maybe have  not happened as yet.
In palmistry and astrology we see the signs but not the  actual events.
Another distinct difference is that in crystal gazing it is  impossible to give definite instructions as to how to receive these messages  or visions because there is no "how."
What we hope to do in this chapter is to show you that perhaps you  possess powers of which you know nothing.
Without making the foolish  mistake of taking this subject too seriously, you will be able to interest and  amuse your friends.
You may say, "But I haven't got this power—I could never see anything  in a crystal."
Don't say that, and don't think it!
We all have a little of this power  sleeping within us.
If we wish to improve it, we must use and practise it,  but don't overdo the thing.
To understand crystal gazing even a little, it is quite important to know  just a few simple facts about spiritualism (the study of the spirit world.)
This second sight, or clairvoyance (call it what you will) is merely in its  childhood as yet.
A very short while ago we should have thought it a miracle  for anyone to speak from New York to London along a wire.
Now we  think no more of it than we should of crossing a road!
So with the crystal.
At present a few of us only are able to see, more or[108]  less clearly, those visions of the future.
Who knows but that in some future  time we shall consider this quite an ordinary and natural thing to do, just like  telephoning, for instance.
The first thing to get hold of is this: we have not one body but two.
An  earthly body and its exact copy in a spirit body.
By this I do not mean the  soul, but rather our earthly body with all its features just as before, is copied  in a spirit of ether body.
This may sound difficult, but just try to grasp the  idea.
In spiritualism there are two of each one of us; one an earthly you, the  other (dwelling usually in your earthly body) a spiritual you.
But sometimes  this spirit body escapes from its earthly prison, maybe, during sleep, sometimes  when we look into the crystal, and sometimes in what is called a trance  or artificial sleep.
It is then (when the spirit body is free) that visions of  future things are seen, and maybe premonitions (or feelings) of the future  are felt.
Our spirit body, with its ten thousand times more clear-sighted eyes, sees  things which are invisible to the earthly eyes.
This body is able to travel  swiftly from place to place, although it always keeps a link or connection  with its earthly double.
When a person goes off into a trance, this is what has happened.
The  earthly body sleeps while the spiritual body roams about the future, past and  present, or perhaps visits distant places.
It is, of course, able to speak with  other spirit bodies, and thus get information about other folk who have  "passed over," as the spiritualists call death.
Now perhaps you can better appreciate the wonderful stories which you  hear about mediums (people who pass into these trances), who have spoken—or  are alleged to have spoken, for the verdict of science is "Not proven"—with  the voices of folk long dead, and whom they have never seen.
While everyone does not actively possess this power of releasing his spirit  body, we all have it.
That this is true can be seen in several ways.
Have you  never had a presentiment or feeling of evil to come, a strong feeling which  it took all your determination and common sense to drive away?
Anyway,  you will have frequently heard other people saying, "I had a feeling that so-and-so  would happen."
That feeling is explained by this wandering of the spirit body; for a short  time we have had our spirit eyes freely opened, and have gained a glimpse  of the unknown.
As our spirit eyes are as yet undeveloped it is but a glimpse,  then down falls the thick curtain, and the mystery is once more hidden from  us!
Just as some children learn to walk more easily than others, so do some  people learn to walk with their spirit body and to speak the spirit language  more quickly than others.
Which seems very natural, doesn't it?
Let us briefly refresh our minds with the absolutely necessary facts which  you must know to understand the first steps in fortunetelling by the crystal.
What we are going to say next will then be more readily understood:—  [109]  FIRSTLY.—We have not one body but two, an earthly and a spiritual  body.
SECONDLY.—Though normally contained in the earthly body, it is possible  for the spirit to escape from its prison, and pass from place to place at a  speed greater than light.
This occurs during sleep, the artificial or forced  sleep of the trance, and also when one gazes into the crystal.
THIRDLY.—We have four eyes.
Two earthly eyes, and two very much  keener spirit eyes.
It is with these spirit eyes that we see the future and the  past in the crystal.
FOURTHLY.—Each one of us is sending out thought-waves at this moment.
These are known by spiritualists as our aura.
It is found in different  colors, which depend on our characters or the thoughts leaving us.
Certain reds  show rage, for instance.
WHAT THE CRYSTAL IS FOR  The first thing to get hold of is that there is nothing magic or in any way  wonderful about the crystal itself.
It is merely a means of fixing the attention  of our earthly eyes, so that we may see the more clearly with our spirit eyes.
Now for a few hints upon actually looking into the crystal.
When you gaze into whatever object you have chosen, your earthly body  and earthly eyes pass into a more or less sleepy state, thus enabling your spirit  body to escape.
That gives us our first point to remember.
Here it is: When you look into the crystal, whatever you do don't worry  about whether or not you will see anything!
Try to think steadily of what  you wish to see; this will at first seem hard, but practice will help you, and  practice makes perfect.
Then remember to keep any glare of light from the eyes; it is wise to sit  with one's back towards the light.
Let your surroundings be quiet and peaceful;  there must be absolutely nothing which may catch your attention and so  take it off the crystal.
If, for instance, a noisy bus or other vehicle were to  pass during the time in which you were making your attempt, it would  probably disturb things very much.
One should never be discouraged if nothing whatever is seen at the first  few attempts.
A puppy cannot at first see out of its eyes, and it is the same  with a beginner in crystal gazing; his spirit eyes may take some little time to  open, while others, more fortunate, may find theirs open almost at once.
Never strain the eyes in an unwinking stare.
Let them wink and blink quite  naturally.
To do anything else would be sure to take your attention from  the picture which you wish to see.
HOW TO BEGIN  The best thing to do is to try these various methods, and then see for yourself  which is the most successful in your own individual case.
Here are a few means you might try, in order to test this for yourself.
[110]  Use either a (1) crystal, (2) a polished object, (3) a bright coin, (4) a  sparkling gem, or (5) ordinary glass in the shape of a sphere or ball.
There  are others, but they are not important.
In conclusion, it will be of interest to know just what you may expect to see  when, and if, your spirit eyes open.
Probably a misty, fogged appearance will  first be seen in the crystal.
This will remain for some little time, until finally  the scene or person (whatever it may be) will appear.
The latter may be  faint and dim, or it may be clear-cut like a good photograph.
The clearness or otherwise will depend among other things upon the  keenness of sight of the spirit eye.
It will also be influenced by the degree of  quiet, and upon the absence of anything likely to disturb the searcher in the  realms of the future.
[111]  THE MOON AND THE LUCK IT BRINGS  People of all ages have looked upon the moon as a provider of good and  bad luck, and most of us have probably noticed that it has influenced our  actions, at times.
Here are some of the beliefs that are centuries old.
If you see a new moon over your right shoulder, it means that you will  experience good luck all the month.
If you have money in your pocket and you meet the new moon face to  face, turn the money over and you will not run short of money that month.
It is unlucky to see the new moon through glass.
If you do, go out of  doors, curtsey three times to the moon and turn some silver in your hand.
This will break the spell which will be cast over you if you do not do as  directed.
There is one little point, connected with this superstition, which  has set us thinking.
What of all those individuals who wear glasses?
We do  not know the answer.
There is a strongly prevalent idea that everything falling to the lot of man  when the moon is waxing will increase or prosper; but things decrease and  do not prosper when the moon is on the wane.
Irish colleens were wont to drop on their knees when they first caught sight  of the new moon, and say, "Oh, moon, leave us as well as you have found  us."
And, long ago, Yorkshire maidens "did worship the new moon on their  bent knees, kneeling upon the earth-cast stone."
If the full moon known as the Harvest Moon appears watery, it is an ill  sign for the harvest.
(The Harvest Moon is due about the middle of September.)
If the moon shows a silver shield, be not afraid to reap your field: but if  she rises haloed round, soon we'll tread on deluged ground.
If the moon changes on a Sunday there will be a flood before the month  is out.
A Saturday moon, if it comes once in seven years, comes too soon.
A fog and a small moon bring an easterly wind soon.
In the waning of the moon,  Cloudy morning: fair afternoon.
Pale moon doth rain; red moon doth blow,  White moon doth neither rain nor snow.
When the moon's halo is far, the storm is n'ar (near).
When the moon's halo is n'ar, the storm is far.
It has long been a custom for girls to go to the nearest stile, to turn their  back on the first new moon after Midsummer and to chant these verses:  All hail, new moon, all hail to thee.
I prithee, good moon, reveal to me,  This night, who shall my true love be.
Who he is and what he wears,  And what he does all months and years.
[112]  If she were to be married in the course of the next twelve months, the  moon answered her questions during her sleep of the same evening.
In many parts of the country it is supposed that, on Christmas Eve, the  moon will help maidens to find out when they are to be married.
The plan  is for a maiden to borrow a silk handkerchief from a male relation and to  take it and a mirror to some sheet of water, while the night is dark.
She  must go quite alone; but the sheet of water may be an unromantic pail, full  to the brim, stationed at the bottom of the garden.
As soon as the moon  shows itself, the maiden places the flimsy piece of silk in front of her eyes, and,  by holding the mirror half towards the moon and half towards the water, it  is possible for her to see more than a pair of reflections.
The number of  reflections are the months which will ensue before her wedding bells ring out.
We recently came across the following information in a document quite  three hundred years old:  "The first, second and third days of the moon's age are lucky for buying  and selling; the seventh, ninth and eleventh are lucky for engagements and  marriage; the sixteenth and twenty-first are not lucky for anything."
The same document affirmed that:  "A baby born before the new moon is twenty-four hours old is sure to be  lucky.
Anything lost during the second twenty-four hours of the moon's  age is sure to be found.
All things begun on the fifth twenty-four hours will  turn out successfully.
A dream experienced on the eighth twenty-four hours  must come true."
[113]  CHAPTER XV.
CHIROMANCY AND ITS ORIGIN  Chiromancy is a science which teaches us to read not only the character  but the whole destiny—for good or evil, the length of life and often  the manner of death of a man by the lines and marks to be seen in his  hand.
This study is sometimes called Palmistry, in which case, however,  it properly refers only to a judgment formed from what appears  in the palm of the hand, whilst Chiromancy (taken from the word  Cheir, a hand, and Manteia, divination) signifies the  revelations made by the hand, taken as a whole.
Chiromancy is nearly as  ancient as astrology, with which it is indissolubly connected,  for the hand represents, as has been before said, a natural horoscope,  which is placed upon it at the time both of the conception and the  birth by the influence of the stars.
The seven planets are all  represented in the hand and also the twelve signs of the zodiac, so  that the casting of a nativity is needless, as by simply examining a  hand by the light of Chiromancy we can indicate what planets have been  powerful at the time of birth, and what, therefore, will be their  effect for good or evil over the existence; and we can also find the  dates of the principal events of the life.
We find many allusions to  this subject in the Bible, and still more in the ancient Kabbala.
The Holy Kabbala, as it was called by the Magi, must not be confounded  with what is called "The Black Art"; it is, on the contrary, the  quintessence of reason and morality as they were understood by the  ancients and contains that traditional science of the secrets of nature  which, from age to age, is borne towards us as the wave is carried by  the tide to the shore; but it has been transmitted obscurely, because  the doctrines of the Kabbala were known only, in those early ages, to  the adept and the initiation, later on, of neophytes was only yielded  after a series of severe and terrible ordeals, whilst the revelation of  its mysteries to the uninitiated was punished by death.
The necessity of silence was, in fact, one of the principal tenets of  the Kabbala and is represented, in the figure of Adda-Nari,[16] by the  position of the fingers of the hand holding the flowering branch of  Abundance; the thumb and the first two fingers, which in Chiromancy  represent will, power and fatality, are held open;  whilst the third and fourth fingers, representing light and science,  are closed.
This was meant to indicate to the good—the initiated—that  they would have, when united, strength and will to direct Fate; but  that they must keep hidden from the wicked and ignorant both light and  science.
It must, however, in justice to the ancient Kabbalists, be  suggested that their inculcation of silence probably arose, not so much  from a desire of domination, but rather from the fact that, feeling  themselves superior in knowledge, they thought they were obeying a  divine law in refusing to the wicked those lights which, when possessed  by them, led, as perhaps they had sometimes found, to error.
We, seeing  things in a wider light, give, or try to give, equal knowledge to all,  without submitting the ignorant to the ordeal of initiation to prove  their worthiness as recipients; but, after all, it amounts to much the  same thing—give to all men truth and light in abundance, but all will  not profit by it.
We see this every day in our college system; the  lesson is the same for all, but it is only the few who profit by it;  and although we appear to be obeying a divine law in opening the way of  light and life—the life of knowledge—to all, as God makes His sun to  shine on good and bad equally, still we can, in some sort, understand  the feeling of the ancient Magi, whose motto was: "Know, Dare, Will,  but keep Silence."
To face Chapter XVI.
CHAPTER XVI.
THE PRINCIPAL LINES IN THE HAND AND THE MOUNTS  In the plate belonging to this chapter we give a hand on which are  marked the principal lines seen on the palm; three of which, viz., the  Line of Life, the Line of Head and the Line of Heart, are found in a  clearer or fainter degree on all hands, but which vary, as regards  their relative position, in every hand.
The first and largest, that  which encircles the thumb, is called the Line of Life; by the length,  colour and evenness, or the reverse, of this line the length of life is  indicated, and also the illnesses and accidents by which the life is  menaced in running its course.
The line immediately above it, crossing  the palm of the hand, is the Line of Head; by it we are to judge of the  intellectual powers.
Above it is the Line of Heart, from which we form  an opinion of the strength of affection, or the want of it, in the  native.
The lines which are not always to be found are the lines going from the  wrist to the finger of Saturn, which is called the Saturnian line, and  which shows the events of the life; the Line of the Sun, which goes  towards the finger of the Sun and which indicates success in art,  literature, or the pursuit of riches; and the Line of Health, which  goes from the wrist to the finger of Mercury: this line is often absent  in a hand.
All these lines will be more fully discussed further on; at present it  is only necessary to name them in order to explain the plate belonging  to this chapter.
At the base of each figure there is a mount, more or less developed, on  every hand.
Now, each of these mounts corresponds with one of the  planets from which it has received more or less influence, according to  its development, and the signs or marks to be found upon it.
It will be seen also, from the plate, that the ancients gave to each  finger the name of one of the planets, thus:—  The first finger represented Jupiter, the mount at its base being  called the Mount of Jupiter.
The second, Saturn, the mount at its root being the Mount of Saturn.
The third, the Sun, the mount below being the Mount of the Sun.
The fourth, Mercury, the mount at its base being called the Mount of  Mercury.
The thumb is sacred to Venus, and the root of the thumb is called the  Mount of Venus.
It will also be seen that the planet Mars (although no finger is  dedicated to it) is twice represented in the hand, along the side of  the palm by the Mount of Mars, and in the palm, between the Line of  Life and the Line of the Head, which is called the Plain of Mars.
The Moon is only represented by the Mount of the Moon, at the lower  part of the palm on the opposite side of the hand to the thumb.
When these mounts are well in their places, and clearly but not too  strongly defined, they give the qualities of the planet they represent;  but when any mount is not well marked, or even, as frequently happens,  is quite deficient, there is a want of the qualities shown to exist  where the mount is clearly defined.
If the mounts are not only  ill-defined, but represented by a cavity, that cavity would indicate  the existence of qualities which are the reverse of those indicated by  the mount; whereas an exceeding development would denote an excess of  the qualities given by the mount.
Thus the Mount of Jupiter, which is immediately under the index finger,  when fairly developed, indicates noble ambition, will-power, love of  nature, kindliness, generosity, religion and happy marriage.
When in  excess—that is, when the mount is so large as to invade that next  it—the Mount of Saturn—it gives superstition, exaggerated pride and  domineering self-assertion.
The total absence of this mount (which is  sometimes, but rarely, seen) indicates coldness, selfishness,  irreligion and that want of dignity which is produced by the utter  absence of self-respect.
The Mount of Saturn is found immediately beneath the second finger,  which the ancients assigned to Saturn, the planet of Fatality.
Saturn  gives extreme misfortune, or extreme good fortune, according to the  development of the mount and the signs and lines to be seen upon it,  and the course of the Saturnian Line, or Line of Fate (of which we will  speak further on), in the palm of the hand.
This mount also denotes a  tendency to occult science.
Those born specially under the influence of  Saturn are timid, lovers of solitude, and very seldom marry, but are  very persistent in their affections when they do love.
Saturn, when well developed, gives prudence, wisdom and, to a certain  extent, success; when in excess it gives sadness, taciturnity,  asceticism, dread of the after-life and yet, sometimes, a  predisposition to suicide.
The total absence of the mount indicates an  insignificant existence.
The Mount of the Sun is placed at the root of the third finger, which  was sacred to the Sun; when this mount is well developed it indicates  love of art and literature, which shows itself (according to  temperament) in poetry, painting, sculpture, or music; it gives also  religion of the æsthetic, tolerant sort, grace, riches and celebrity;  in excess it gives love of show, frivolity and vaingloriousness.
The  total absence of the mount means a thoroughly material existence;  absence of all taste for art—a life without colour, a day without  sunlight.
The Mount of Mercury is found at the base of the fourth finger, and,  when well defined, indicates intelligence, success in science and in  occult studies, the love of work and activity, both of mind and body  and eloquence; in excess it gives impudence, theft and falsehood:  absence of the mount indicates no aptitude for science, no  intellectuality—a negative existence.
Of course, should the Mount of  the Sun be well defined, the last quality would be overridden by the  success which that indicates.
The Mount of Mars is at the side of the hand opposite the thumb, just  below the Mount of Mercury, and, when well developed, indicates  courage, ardour and resolution; in excess it gives cruelty, anger,  revenge and tyranny: the absence of the mount gives cowardice and want  of self-command.
The Mount of the Moon is found immediately below that of Mars, and,  when well developed, gives imagination of the dreamy, sentimental  order, gentle melancholy and love of solitude; in excess it gives  morbid melancholy, caprice and fantastic imagination: the absence of  the mount indicates want of poetry in the nature, positivism.
The Mount of Venus, which is formed by the root of the thumb,  indicates, when fairly developed, love of the beautiful, melody in  music, the desire of pleasing and sensuous tenderness; in excess it  gives love of material pleasures, coquetry, inconstancy and (when other  signs, afterwards to be explained, are also seen in the hand) extreme  sensuality.
VIII.
THE SACRED PICKAXE  TOLD BY THE MAGISTRATE  The first wolf-grey of the dawn was creeping over the scene, and turning  to a sickly yellow the flare of the little oil lamps arranged around the  veranda.
The morning air bit shrewdly, and more than one of the seated  or reclining figures had gathered his robes more closely around him.
All  eyes were now turned on the kotwal.
He alone of the company had not  contributed from his store of experiences.
"Methinks it is too late for any more story-telling," he protested  diffidently, with gesture and glance toward the east in token that he  spoke truly.
"Nay, nay," cried the Rajput, "this night will not be complete without  the full measure of our entertainment.
Come, come, friend; the sun is  yet an hour below the horizon."
Murmurs of approval showed that the general wish had been interpreted.
"Be it so, then," assented the magistrate.
"I have heard so many stories  this night that it would indeed be churlish on my part to refuse to give  you one of mine.
Well, listen.
"Know, my friends, that I am a district judge in[Pg 171] Delhi, presiding over  that quarter known as the Bara Bazaar, where the merchants most do  congregate.
One day some few years ago it befell that I was seated alone  in the hall where I hold my court.
It was the afternoon hour, all the  suits of the day had been disposed of, punishment had been meted out to  those who deserved it, justice had been done to rich and poor alike, in  accordance with the orders of our most righteous master Akbar, to whom  be all honour and glory.
"I had taken from my garments my silver betel-nut box, and was leisurely  spreading on a leaf the smear of lime preparatory to enjoying my pan  supari, musing the while on the strange little ironies of life that came  to my knowledge each day in the discharge of my magisterial functions.
All at once a shadow from the open doorway fell across the room.
Raising  my eyes, I beheld the tall figure of a man.
On meeting my look he bowed  his body, and with both hands outstretched, courteously salaamed me.
"'Protector of the poor, listen to my story,' he said.
"In silence, while I adjusted the fragments of betel-nut on the limed  leaf and rolled up the morsel, I motioned him to a place on the edge of  the carpet whereon I myself sat.
For my first glance had shown me that  the stranger was a man of consequence, his garments being rich and his  look that of one accustomed to the exercise of authority.
"He took his seat, and arranged his flowing and finely embroidered robes  around him.
I proffered[Pg 172] him the pan supari I had prepared, but with a  wave of the hand he declined this courtesy.
So I placed the morsel in my  own mouth, fell to its meditative mastication, and awaited the beginning  of his tale.
"'I am a well-to-do traveller, as you would think.
O kadi—a pilgrim on  my way to the sacred shrine of Juggernaut, as I profess myself to all  who make inquiry and to whom an answer is due.
But I am not what I  appear to be.
In reality you behold in me—a thug.'
"The man lowered his voice mysteriously when he pronounced the last  word, bending forward so that I might hear it.
"'And what may be a thug?'
I asked, for the name to me was quite a new  one.
"'Listen,' he said eagerly, and still in a low whisper.
'The thugs are  worshippers of Bowani.'
"'There are countless thousands who worship Kali, the dread goddess,' I  replied.
"'Yes, but we, the thugs, not only worship her as the wife of Siva, god  of destruction, but we are her devoted priests who put men to death in  her name and for her glory.'
"Now indeed did I prick up my ears and listen intently.
But I did not  suffer my awakened interest to betray itself in look or tone of voice.
"'Some fanatics may seek to justify human sacrifice,' I said.
I was  treading cautiously; later I would tell the man that such foul deeds  were against the decrees of Akbar, and involved the penalty of death[Pg 173]  under the feet of elephants.
But meanwhile I wanted his confession.
"'Ah, you know nothing about the thugs,' continued the stranger.
'But  hearken to me, for I have come to tell you all, and for a reason you  will presently understand.
We are thousands strong, and we live in all  parts of Hindustan and the Deccan.
We are caste brothers, and are bound  together by our worship of Bowani.
The traditions of our creed have been  handed down for generations from father to son.
You have never heard of  the thugs, O kadi, although you sit in the place of justice.
Do you know  why?
Because I am the very first of the sect who has broken his vows of  silence, and spoken the word thug to one outside our secret  association.'
"'Yet you say you are thousands strong.'
"'Yes, we are strong in numbers, but stronger still in our fidelity to  our vows.
When once we have sworn on the sacred pickaxe, it is  impossible to speak words of treachery.'
"'If it be for the good and happiness of all men,' I interpolated,  encouraging him to keep on speaking freely, 'there can be no treachery,  no breaking of vows in revealing the truth.'
"'It is to reveal the truth that I have come to you.
It is by the orders  of Bowani herself; for I have wronged her, and she is angry and has  loudly proclaimed to me that thuggee is ended—that her protection is  for ever withdrawn from me and my fellows, because, O misery, we have  grievously offended her.
Hark!
Do you not hear the voice of Bowani even  now?'
"The man raised his face toward the rafters of the room, and, with right[Pg 174]  hand uplifted, his attitude was one of intent listening.
"'Unworthy, unworthy, unworthy,' he murmured, in a strange absent  monotone, as if repeating words he was actually hearing.
'You have  broken my laws.
Go now to your doom, you and all your brothers.
Such  priests Kali will not have.
Thuggee is no more.
I will seek some other  worshippers.'
"After a pause of tense silence, as if the listener was awaiting for  more, he dropped hand and eyes.
And now my mind took a new turn of  thought.
There was the confused, unmistakable glare of insanity in the  man's eyes.
Half unconsciously, I leaned back on my cushions and placed  a hand upon the dagger in my kummerbund.
"The stranger noticed the movement, and, lunatic though he undoubtedly  appeared to be, interpreted my thoughts.
"'Be not afraid of me, master,' he said.
'This is the only weapon I  carry.'
"And with these words he slipped off a silken scarf that he had been  wearing loosely around his throat, and tossed it on the carpet between  us.
"Now was I all the more confirmed in my estimate of his madness.
To call  such a thing a weapon!—a strip of soft fabric that might kill a  butterfly but would be poor defence indeed to rely on against sword or  dagger.
I suppose I smiled contemptuously, for again the man read my  thoughts.
"Then instantly did he do a thing that made my[Pg 175] blood run cold.
With a  toss of the scarf into the air, he formed it into a noose, and this he  threw over one upbended knee.
Next with a swift twist of fierce hands he  drew the knot tight, and so terribly realistic was his action that for  the moment I saw above his knee the contorted mouth and protruding eyes  of his suddenly strangled victim.
"There was horror in my gaze now, but only calm professional pride in  his, as he flung back the still looped and knotted kerchief on to the  carpet.
"'Yes, I am a strangler,' he said calmly, 'as are all the thugs, born to  become stranglers, and taught how to use the roomal in early youth by  their own fathers' hands.'
"Of strangling as a means of murder I of course knew, and, indeed,  during the years of my magistracy, I had heard vague rumours of robbers  habitually resorting to this method of dispatching their victims rather  than to clubs or swords.
But such appalling dexterity as this man  displayed in the handling of an innocent-looking silken scarf I had  never imagined.
