

chapter IV 

you have fed upon my seignories, 

dispark’d my parks, and fell’d my forest woods, 

from mine own window torn my household coat, 

raze out my impress, leav me no sign, 

save men’ opinion and my live blood, 

To show the world I am a gentleman. 

richard ii. 

when the boat which carri the worthi captain on board hi vessel had 

accomplish that task, the sail began to ascend, and the ship wa got 

under way. she fire three gun as a salut to the hous of ellangowan, 

and then shot away rapidli befor the wind, which blew off shore, under 

all the sail she could crowd. 

‘ay, ay,’ said the laird, who had sought manner for some time, and now 

join him, ‘there they go--ther go the free-traders--ther go captain 

dirk hatteraick and the yungfrauw hagenslaapen, half manks, half dutchman, 

half devil! run out the boltsprit, up mainsail, top and top-gal sails, 

royals, and skyscrapers, and away--follow who can! that fellow, mr. 

mannering, is the terror of all the excis and custom-hous cruisers; they 

can make noth of him; he drub them, or he distanc them;--and, 

speak of excise, I come to bring you to breakfast; and you shall have 

some tea, that--’ 

manner by thi time wa awar that one thought link strang on to 

anoth in the concaten of worthi mr. bertram’ ideas, 

like orient pearl at random strung; 

and therefore, befor the current of hi associ had drift farther 

from the point he had left, he brought him back by some inquiri about dirk 

hatteraick. 

‘O he’ a--a--gud sort of blackguard fellow eneugh; naebodi care to 

troubl him--smuggler, when hi gun are in ballast--privateer, or pirate, 

faith, when he get them mounted. He ha done more mischief to the revenu 

folk than oni rogu that ever came out of ramsay.’ 

‘but, my good sir, such be hi character, I wonder he ha ani 

protect and encourag on thi coast.’ 

‘why, mr. mannering, peopl must have brandi and tea, and there’ none in 

the countri but what come thi way; and then there’ short accounts, and 

mayb a keg or two, or a dozen pounds, left at your stable-door, instead 

of a d--d lang account at christma from duncan robb, the grocer at 

kippletringan, who ha aye a sum to make up, and either want readi money 

or a short-dat bill. now, hatteraick will take wood, or he’ll take bark, 

or he’ll take barley, or he’ll take just what’ conveni at the time. 

i’ll tell you a gude stori about that. there wa anc a laird--that’ 

macfi of gudgeonford,--h had a great number of kain hens--that’ hen 

that the tenant pay to the landlord, like a sort of rent in kind. they 

aye feed mine veri ill; lucki finniston sent up three that were a shame 

to be seen onli last week, and yet she ha twelv bow sow of victual; 

inde her goodman, duncan finniston--that’ him that’ gone--(w must all 

die, mr. mannering, that’ ower true)--and, speak of that, let us live 

in the meanwhile, for here’ breakfast on the table, and the domini readi 

to say the grace.’ 

the domini did accordingli pronounc a benediction, that exceed in 

length ani speech which manner had yet heard him utter. the tea, which 

of cours belong to the nobl captain hatteraick’ trade, wa pronounc 

excellent. still manner hinted, though with due delicacy, at the risk 

of encourag such desper characters. ‘were it but in justic to the 

revenue, I should have supposed--’ 

‘ah, the revenu lads’--for mr. bertram never embrac a gener or 

abstract idea, and hi notion of the revenu wa personifi in the 

commissioners, surveyors, comptrollers, and ride offic whom he 

happen to know--’th revenu lad can look sharp eneugh out for 

themselves, no ane need to help them; and they have a’ the soldier to 

assist them besides; and as to justice--y ‘ll be surpris to hear it, 

mr. mannering, but I am not a justic of peace!’ 

manner assum the expect look of surprise, but thought within 

himself that the worship bench suffer no great depriv from 

want the assist of hi good-humour landlord. mr. bertram had now 

hit upon one of the few subject on which he felt sore, and went on with 

some energy. 

‘no, sir, the name of godfrey bertram of ellangowan is not in the last 

commission, though there’ scarc a carl in the countri that ha a 

plough-gat of land, but what he must ride to quarter-sess and write 

j.p. after hi name. I ken fu’ weel whom I am oblig to--sir thoma 

kittlecourt as good as tell’d me he would sit in my skirt if he had not 

my interest at the last election; and becaus I chose to go with my own 

blood and third cousin, the laird of balruddery, they keepit me off the 

roll of freeholders; and now there come a new nomin of justices, and 

I am left out! and wherea they pretend it wa becaus I let david 

mac-guffog, the constable, draw the warrants, and manag the busi hi 

ain gate, as if I had been a nose o’ wax, it’ a main untruth; for I 

grant but seven warrant in my life, and the domini wrote everi one of 

them--and if it had not been that unlucki busi of sandi mac-gruthar’s, 

that the constabl should have keepit twa or three day up yonder at the 

auld castle, just till they could get conveni to send him to the 

counti jail--and that cost me eneugh o’ siller. but I ken what sir thoma 

want veri weel--it wa just sic and siclik about the seat in the kirk o’ 

kilmagirdle--wa I not entitl to have the front galleri face the 

minister, rather than mac-crosski of creochstone, the son of deacon 

mac-crosskie, the dumfri weaver?’ 

manner express hi acquiesc in the justic of these variou 

complaints. 

‘and then, mr. mannering, there wa the stori about the road and the 

fauld-dike. I ken sir thoma wa behind there, and I said plainli to the 

clerk to the truste that I saw the cloven foot, let them take that as 

they like. would ani gentleman, or set of gentlemen, go and drive a road 

right through the corner of a fauld-dik and take away, as my agent 

observ to them, like twa rood of gude moorland pasture? and there wa 

the stori about choos the collector of the cess--’ 

‘certainly, sir, it is hard you should meet with ani neglect in a countri 

where, to judg from the extent of their residence, your ancestor must 

have made a veri import figure.’ 

‘veri true, mr. mannering; I am a plain man and do not dwell on these 

things, and I must need say I have littl memori for them; but I wish ye 

could have heard my father’ stori about the auld fight of the 

mac-dingawaies--that’ the bertram that now is--wi’ the irish and wi’ the 

highland that came here in their berl from ilay and cantire; and 

how they went to the holi land--that is, to jerusalem and jericho, wi’ a’ 

their clan at their heels--they had better have gaen to jamaica, like sir 

thoma kittlecourt’ uncle--and how they brought hame relic like those 

that cathol have, and a flag that’ up yonder in the garret. If they 

had been cask of muscavado and puncheon of rum it would have been better 

for the estat at thi day; but there’ littl comparison between the auld 

keep at kittlecourt and the castl o’ ellangowan; I doubt if the keep’ 

forti feet of front. but ye make no breakfast, mr. mannering; ye’r no 

eat your meat; allow me to recommend some of the kipper. It wa john 

hay that catcht it, saturday wa three weeks, down at the stream below 

hempse ford,’ etc. etc. etc. 

the laird, whose indign had for some time kept him pretti steadi to 

one topic, now launch forth into hi usual rove style of conversation, 

which gave manner ampl time to reflect upon the disadvantag 

attend the situat which an hour befor he had thought worthi of so 

much envy. here wa a countri gentleman, whose most estim qualiti 

seem hi perfect good-nature, secretli fret himself and murmur 

against other for caus which, compar with ani real evil in life, must 

weigh like dust in the balance. but such is the equal distribut of 

providence. To those who lie out of the road of great afflict are 

assign petti vexat which answer all the purpos of disturb their 

serenity; and everi reader must have observ that neither natur apathi 

nor acquir philosophi can render countri gentlemen insens to the 

grievanc which occur at elections, quarter-sessions, and meet of 

trustees. 

curiou to investig the manner of the country, manner took the 

advantag of a paus in good mr. bertram’ string of stori to inquir 

what captain hatteraick so earnestli want with the gipsi woman. 

‘o, to bless hi ship, I suppose. you must know, mr. mannering, that these 

free-traders, whom the law call smugglers, have no religion, make it 

all up in superstition; and they have as mani spell and charm and 

nonsense--’ 

‘vaniti and waur!’ said the dominie;’ it is a traffick with the evil 

one. spells, periapts, and charm are of hi device--choic arrow out of 

apollyon’ quiver.’ 

‘hold your peace, dominie; ye’r speak for ever’--bi the way, they were 

the first word the poor man had utter that morning, except that he 

said grace and return thanks--’mr. manner cannot get in a word for 

ye! and so, mr. mannering, talk of astronomi and spell and these 

matters, have ye been so kind as to consid what we were speak about 

last night?’ 

‘I begin to think, mr. bertram, with your worthi friend here, that I have 

been rather jest with edge-tools; and although neither you nor I, nor 

ani sensibl man, can put faith in the predict of astrology, yet, as 

it ha sometim happen that inquiri into futurity, undertaken in 

jest, have in their result produc seriou and unpleas effect both 

upon action and characters, I realli wish you would dispens with my 

repli to your question.’ 

It wa easi to see that thi evas answer onli render the laird’ 

curios more uncontrollable. mannering, however, wa determin in hi 

own mind not to expos the infant to the inconveni which might have 

arisen from hi be suppos the object of evil prediction. He therefor 

deliv the paper into mr. bertram’ hand, and request him to keep it 

for five year with the seal unbroken, until the month of novemb wa 

expired. after that date had interven he left him at liberti to examin 

the writing, trust that, the first fatal period be then safe 

overpassed, no credit would be paid to it farther contents. thi mr. 

bertram wa content to promise, and mannering, to ensur hi fidelity, 

hint at misfortun which would certainli take place if hi injunct 

were neglected. the rest of the day, which mannering, by mr. bertram’ 

invitation, spent at ellangowan, pass over without anyth remarkable; 

and on the morn of that which follow the travel mount hi 

palfrey, bade a courteou adieu to hi hospit landlord and to hi 

cleric attendant, repeat hi good wish for the prosper of the 

family, and then, turn hi horse’ head toward england, disappear 

from the sight of the inmat of ellangowan. He must also disappear from 

that of our readers, for it is to anoth and later period of hi life 

that the present narr relates. 
