

chapter xii 

reputation! that’ man’ idol 

set up against god, the maker of all laws, 

who hath command us we should not kill, 

and yet we say we must, for reputation! 

what honest man can either fear hi own, 

Or els will hurt another’ reputation? 

fear to do base unworthi thing is valour; 

If they be done to us, to suffer them 

Is valour too. 

ben jonson. 

the colonel wa walk pensiv up and down the parlour when the 

offici landladi reenter to take hi commands. have given them in 

the manner he thought would be most accept ‘for the good of the 

house,’ he beg to detain her a moment. 

‘I think,’ he said, ‘madam, if I understood the good peopl right, mr. 

bertram lost hi son in hi fifth year?’ 

‘O ay, sir, there’ nae doubt o’ that, though there are moni idl clash 

about the way and manner, for it’ an auld stori now, and everybodi tell 

it, as we were doing, their ain way by the ingleside. but lost the bairn 

wa in hi fifth year, as your honour says, colonel; and the news be 

rashli tell’d to the leddy, then great with child, cost her her life that 

samyn night; and the laird never throve after that day, but wa just 

careless of everything, though, when hi daughter miss luci grew up, she 

tri to keep order within doors; but what could she do, poor thing? So 

now they’r out of hous and hauld.’ 

‘can you recollect, madam, about what time of the year the child wa 

lost?’ the landlady, after a paus and some recollection, answered, ‘she 

wa posit it wa about thi season’; and ad some local recollect 

that fix the date in her memori as occur about the begin of 

novemb 17--. 

the stranger took two or three turn round the room in silence, but sign 

to mrs. mac-candlish not to leav it. 

‘did I rightli apprehend,’ he said, ‘that the estat of ellangowan is in 

the market?’ 

‘in the market? It will be sell’d the morn to the highest bidder--that’ 

no the morn, lord help me! which is the sabbath, but on monday, the first 

free day; and the furnitur and stock is to be roupit at the same time 

on the ground. it’ the opinion of the haill countri that the sale ha 

been shame forc on at thi time, when there’ sae littl money 

stir in scotland wi’ thi weari american war, that somebodi may get 

the land a bargain. deil be in them, that I should say sae!’--th good 

lady’ wrath rise at the suppos injustice. 

‘and where will the sale take place?’ 

‘on the premises, as the advertis says; that’ at the hous of 

ellangowan, your honour, as I understand it.’ 

‘and who exhibit the title-deeds, rent-roll, and plan?’ 

‘A veri decent man, sir; the sheriff-substitut of the county, who ha 

author from the court of session. he’ in the town just now, if your 

honour would like to see him; and he can tell you mair about the loss of 

the bairn than oni body, for the sheriff-deput (that’ hi principal, 

like) took much pain to come at the truth o’ that matter, as I have 

heard.’ 

‘and thi gentleman’ name is--’ 

‘mac-morlan, sir; he’ a man o’ character, and weel spoken o’.’ 

‘send my compliments--colonel mannering’ compliment to him, and I would 

be glad he would do me the pleasur of sup with me, and bring these 

paper with him; and I beg, good madam, you will say noth of thi to 

ani one else.’ 

‘me, sir? ne’er a word shall I say. I wish your honour (a courtesy), or 

oni honour gentleman that’ fought for hi countri (anoth courtesy), 

had the land, sinc the auld famili maun quit (a sigh), rather than that 

wili scoundrel glossin, that’ risen on the ruin of the best friend he 

ever had. and now I think on’t, i’ll slip on my hood and pattens, and gang 

to mr. mac-morlan mysell, he’ at hame e’en now; it’ hardli a step.’ 

‘do so, my good landlady, and mani thanks; and bid my servant step here 

with my portfolio in the meantime.’ 

In a minut or two colonel manner wa quietli seat with hi write 

materi befor him. We have the privileg of look over hi shoulder 

as he writes, and we willingli commun it substanc to our readers. 

the letter wa address to arthur mervyn, esq., of mervyn hall, 

llanbraithwaite, westmoreland. It contain some account of the writer’ 

previou journey sinc part with him, and then proceed as follows:-- 

‘and now, whi will you still upbraid me with my melancholy, mervyn? Do you 

think, after the laps of twenty-f years, battles, wounds, 

imprisonment, misfortun of everi description, I can be still the same 

lively, unbroken guy manner who climb skiddaw with you, or shot 

grous upon crossfell? that you, who have remain in the bosom of 

domest happiness, experi littl change, that your step is as light 

and your fanci as full of sunshine, is a bless effect of health and 

temperament, cooper with content and a smooth current down the cours 

of life. but MY career ha been one of difficulti and doubt and errors. 

from my infanc I have been the sport of accident, and, though the wind 

ha often born me into harbour, it ha seldom been into that which the 

pilot destined. let me recal to you--but the task must be brief--th odd 

and wayward fate of my youth, and the misfortun of my manhood. 

‘the former, you will say, had noth veri appalling. all wa not for the 

best; but all wa tolerable. My father, the eldest son of an ancient but 

reduc family, left me with little, save the name of the head of the 

house, to the protect of hi more fortun brothers. they were so fond 

of me that they almost quarrel about me. My uncle, the bishop, would 

have had me in orders, and offer me a living; my uncle, the merchant, 

would have put me into a counting-house, and propos to give me a share 

in the thrive concern of manner and marshall, in lombard street. so, 

between these two stools, or rather these two soft, easy, well-stuf 

chair of divin and commerce, my unfortun person slip down, and 

pitch upon a dragoon saddle. again, the bishop wish me to marri the 

niec and heiress of the dean of lincoln; and my uncle, the alderman, 

propos to me the onli daughter of old sloethorn, the great 

wine-merchant, rich enough to play at span-count with moidor and make 

thread-pap of bank-notes; and somehow I slip my neck out of both 

nooses, and married--poor, poor sophia wellwood. 

‘you will say, my militari career in india, when I follow my regiment 

there, should have given me some satisfaction; and so it assuredli has. 

you will remind me also, that if I disappoint the hope of my guardians, 

I did not incur their displeasure; that the bishop, at hi death, 

bequeath me hi blessing, hi manuscript sermons, and a curiou 

portfolio contain the head of emin divin of the church of 

england; and that my uncle, sir paul mannering, left me sole heir and 

executor to hi larg fortune. yet thi availeth me nothing; I told you I 

had that upon my mind which I should carri to my grave with me, a 

perpetu alo in the draught of existence. I will tell you the caus 

more in detail than I had the heart to do while under your hospit 

roof. you will often hear it mentioned, and perhap with differ and 

unfound circumstances. I will therefor speak it out; and then let the 

event itself, and the sentiment of melancholi with which it ha impress 

me, never again be subject of discuss between us. 

‘sophia, as you well know, follow me to india. she wa as innoc as 

gay; but, unfortun for us both, as gay as innocent. My own manner 

were partli form by studi I had forsaken, and habit of seclus not 

quit consist with my situat as command of a regiment in a 

countri where univers hospit is offer and expect by everi 

settler claim the rank of a gentleman. In a moment of peculiar pressur 

(you know how hard we were sometim run to obtain white face to 

counten our line-of-battle), a young man name brown join our 

regiment as a volunteer, and, find the militari duti more to hi fanci 

than commerce, in which he had been engaged, remain with us as a cadet. 

let me do my unhappi victim justice: he behav with such gallantri on 

everi occas that offer that the first vacant commiss wa 

consid as hi due. I wa absent for some week upon a distant 

expedition; when I return I found thi young fellow establish quit as 

the friend of the house, and habitu attend of my wife and daughter. 

It wa an arrang which displeas me in mani particulars, though no 

object could be made to hi manner or character. yet I might have been 

reconcil to hi familiar in my family, but for the suggest of 

another. If you read over--what I never dare open--th play of “othello,” 

you will have some idea of what followed--i mean of my motives; my 

actions, thank god! were less reprehensible. there wa anoth cadet 

ambiti of the vacant situation. He call my attent to what he led 

me to term coquetri between my wife and thi young man. sophia wa 

virtuous, but proud of her virtue; and, irrit by my jealousy, she wa 

so imprud as to press and encourag an intimaci which she saw I 

disapprov and regard with suspicion. between brown and me there 

exist a sort of intern dislike. He made an effort or two to overcom 

my prejudice; but, prepossess as I was, I place them to a wrong motive. 

feel himself repulsed, and with scorn, he desisted; and as he wa 

without famili and friends, he wa natur more watch of the 

deport of one who had both. 

‘it is odd with what tortur I write thi letter. I feel inclined, 

nevertheless, to protract the operation, just as if my do so could put 

off the catastroph which ha so long embitt my life. but--it must be 

told, and it shall be told briefly. 
