

chapter xiv 

the bell strike one. We take no note of time 

but from it loss. To give it then a tongu 

Is wise in man. As if an angel spoke, 

I feel the solemn sound. 

young. 

the moral which the poet ha rather quaintli deduc from the necessari 

mode of measur time may be well appli to our feel respect that 

portion of it which constitut human life. We observ the aged, the 

infirm, and those engag in occup of immedi hazard, trembl as 

it were upon the veri brink of non-existence, but we deriv no lesson from 

the precari of their tenur until it ha altogeth failed. then, 

for a moment at least-- 

our hope and fear start up alarm’d, and o’er life’ narrow verg 

look down--on what? a fathomless abyss, A dark eternity, how sure 

ours! 

the crowd of assembl gazer and idler at ellangowan had follow the 

view of amusement, or what they call business, which brought them 

there, with littl regard to the feel of those who were suffer upon 

that occasion. few, indeed, knew anyth of the family. the father, 

betwixt seclusion, misfortune, and imbecility, had drifted, as it were, 

for mani year out of the notic of hi contemporaries; the daughter had 

never been known to them. but when the gener murmur announc that the 

unfortun mr. bertram had broken hi heart in the effort to leav the 

mansion of hi forefathers, there pour forth a torrent of sympathi like 

the water from the rock when stricken by the wand of the prophet. the 

ancient descent and unblemish integr of the famili were respect 

remembered; abov all, the sacr vener due to misfortune, which in 

scotland seldom demand it tribut in vain, then claim and receiv it. 

mr. mac-morlan hastili announc that he would suspend all farther 

proceed in the sale of the estat and other property, and relinquish 

the possess of the premis to the young lady, until she could consult 

with her friend and provid for the burial of her father. 

glossin had cower for a few minut under the gener express of 

sympathy, till, harden by observ that no appear of popular 

indign wa direct hi way, he had the audac to requir that the 

sale should proceed. 

‘I will take it upon my own author to adjourn it,’ said the 

sheriff-substitute, ‘and will be respons for the consequences. I will 

also give due notic when it is again to go forward. It is for the benefit 

of all concern that the land should bring the highest price the state 

of the market will admit, and thi is sure no time to expect it. I will 

take the respons upon myself.’ 

glossin left the room and the hous too with secreci and despatch; and it 

wa probabl well for him that he did so, sinc our friend jock jabo wa 

alreadi harangu a numer tribe of bare-leg boy on the proprieti 

of pelt him off the estate. 

some of the room were hastili put in order for the recept of the young 

lady, and of her father’ dead body. manner now found hi farther 

interfer would be unnecessary, and might be misconstrued. He observed, 

too, that sever famili connect with that of ellangowan, and who 

inde deriv their princip claim of gentil from the alliance, were 

now dispos to pay to their tree of genealog a tribut which the 

advers of their suppos rel had been inadequ to call forth; 

and that the honour of superintend the funer rite of the dead 

godfrey bertram (a in the memor case of homer’ birthplace) wa 

like to be debat by seven gentlemen of rank and fortune, none of whom 

had offer him an asylum while living. He therefor resolved, as hi 

presenc wa altogeth useless, to make a short tour of a fortnight, at 

the end of which period the adjourn sale of the estat of ellangowan wa 

to proceed. 

but befor he depart he solicit an interview with the dominie. the 

poor man appeared, on be inform a gentleman want to speak to him, 

with some express of surpris in hi gaunt features, to which recent 

sorrow had given an express yet more grisly. He made two or three 

profound rever to mannering, and then, stand erect, patient 

wait an explan of hi commands. 

‘you are probabl at a loss to guess, mr. sampson,’ said mannering, ‘what 

a stranger may have to say to you?’ 

‘unless it were to request that I would undertak to train up some youth 

in polit letter and human learning; but I cannot--i cannot; I have yet 

a task to perform.’ 

‘no, mr. sampson, my wish are not so ambitious. I have no son, and my 

onli daughter, I presume, you would not consid as a fit pupil.’ 

‘of a sureti no,’ repli the simple-mind sampson. ‘nathless, it wa I 

who did educ miss luci in all use learning, albeit it wa the 

housekeep who did teach her those unprofit exercis of hem and 

shaping.’ 

‘well, sir,’ repli mannering, ‘it is of miss luci I meant to speak. you 

have, I presume, no recollect of me?’ 

sampson, alway suffici absent in mind, neither rememb the 

astrolog of past years, nor even the stranger who had taken hi patron’ 

part against glossin, so much had hi friend’ sudden death embroil hi 

ideas. 

‘well, that doe not signify,’ pursu the colonel; ‘I am an old 

acquaint of the late mr. bertram, abl and will to assist hi 

daughter in her present circumstances. besides, I have thought of make 

thi purchase, and I should wish thing kept in order about the place; 

will you have the good to appli thi small sum in the usual famili 

expenses?’ He put into the dominie’ hand a purs contain some gold. 

‘pro-di-gi-ous!’ exclaim domini sampson. ‘but if your honour would 

tarry--’ 

‘impossible, sir, impossible,’ said mannering, make hi escap from him. 

‘pro-di-gi-ous!’ again exclaim sampson, follow to the head of the 

stairs, still hold out the purse. ‘but as touch thi coin money--’ 

manner escap downstair as fast as possible. 

‘pro-di-gi-ous!’ exclaim domini sampson, yet the third time, now 

stand at the front door. ‘but as touch thi specie--’ 

but manner wa now on horseback, and out of hearing. the dominie, who 

had never, either in hi own right or as truste for another, been 

possess of a quarter part of thi sum, though it wa not abov twenti 

guineas, ‘took counsel,’ as he express himself, ‘how he should demean 

himself with respect unto the fine gold’ thu left in hi charge. 

fortun he found a disinterest advis in mac-morlan, who point 

out the most proper mean of dispos of it for contribut to miss 

bertram’ convenience, be no doubt the purpos to which it wa destin 

by the bestower. 

mani of the neighbour gentri were now sincer eager in press 

offer of hospit and kind upon miss bertram. but she felt a 

natur reluct to enter ani famili for the first time as an object 

rather of benevol than hospitality, and determin to wait the opinion 

and advic of her father’ nearest femal relation, mrs. margaret bertram 

of singleside, an old unmarri lady, to whom she wrote an account of her 

present distress situation. 

the funer of the late mr. bertram wa perform with decent privacy, and 

the unfortun young ladi wa now to consid herself as but the 

temporari tenant of the hous in which she had been born, and where her 

patienc and sooth attent had so long ‘rock the cradl of 

declin age.’ her commun with mr. mac-morlan encourag her to 

hope that she would not be suddenli or unkindli depriv of thi asylum; 

but fortun had order otherwise. 

for two day befor the appoint day for the sale of the land and estat 

of ellangowan, mac-morlan daili expect the appear of colonel 

mannering, or at least a letter contain power to act for him. but none 

such arrived. mr. mac-morlan wake earli in the morning, walk over to 

the post-office,--ther were no letter for him. He endeavour to 

persuad himself that he should see colonel manner to breakfast, and 

order hi wife to place her best china and prepar herself accordingly. 

but the prepar were in vain. ‘could I have foreseen this,’ he said, 

‘I would have travel scotland over, but I would have found some one to 

bid against glossin.’ alas! such reflect were all too late. the 

appoint hour arrived; and the parti met in the masons’ lodg at 

kippletringan, be the place fix for the adjourn sale. mac-morlan 

spent as much time in preliminari as decenc would permit, and read over 

the articl of sale as slowli as if he had been read hi own 

death-warrant. He turn hi eye everi time the door of the room opened, 

with hope which grew fainter and fainter. He listen to everi nois in 

the street of the village, and endeavour to distinguish in it the sound 

of hoof or wheels. It wa all in vain. A bright idea then occurred, that 

colonel manner might have employ some other person in the 

transaction; he would not have wast a moment’ thought upon the want of 

confid in himself which such a manoeuvr would have evinced. but thi 

hope also wa groundless. after a solemn pause, mr. glossin offer the 

upset price for the land and baroni of ellangowan. No repli wa made, and 

no competitor appeared; so, after a laps of the usual interv by the 

run of a sand-glass, upon the intend purchas enter the proper 

sureties, mr. mac-morlan wa obliged, in technic terms, to ‘find and 

declar the sale law completed, and to prefer the said gilbert 

glossin as the purchas of the said land and estate.’ the honest writer 

refus to partak of a splendid entertain with which gilbert glossin, 

esquire, now of ellangowan, treat the rest of the company, and return 

home in huge bitter of spirit, which he vent in complaint against 

the fickl and capric of these indian nabobs, who never knew what 

they would be at for ten day together. fortun gener determin to 

take the blame upon herself, and cut off even thi vent of mac-morlan’ 

resentment. 

An express arriv about six o’clock at night, ‘veri particularli drunk,’ 

the maid-serv said, with a packet from colonel mannering, date four 

day back, at a town about a hundr miles’ distanc from kippletringan, 

contain full power to mr. mac-morlan, or ani one whom he might employ, 

to make the intend purchase, and state that some famili busi of 

consequ call the colonel himself to westmoreland, where a letter 

would find him, address to the care of arthur mervyn, esq., of mervyn 

hall. 

mac-morlan, in the transport of hi wrath, flung the power of attorney at 

the head of the innoc maidservant, and wa onli forcibl withheld from 

horse-whip the rascal messeng by whose sloth and drunken the 

disappoint had taken place. 
