

your handwrit reveal 

your charact 

your handwrit is you; disguis it as you will, it still reveal your character. 

As a matter of fact, it is a sheer imposs for an ordinari person 

to alter hi or her write completely. the natur hand and the purposely-chang 

hand will bear sever resemblances, howev hard the individu 

may tri to make them dissimilar. thi is due to the fact that the same 

charact lie behind both efforts. not onli is your handwrit you, but 

the handwrit of your friend is "him or her." thi be so, you will 

find it a simpl matter to arriv at hi or her qualiti by analyz a few 

line of the person' handwriting. To becom suffici expert for this, 

you will not need more than half-an-hour' study. 

first of all we must attend to the direct of the line of writing, as, 

should these be level, a normal and calm state of mind is shown, gener 

reliable, and not subject to change. 

when the line slope toward the right, much energi is indicated; when 

the line slope downward, a lack of energi is shown, usual from depress 

which may result from ill health. 

If the write slope upward with excess, it show recklessness; if downwards, 

with a veri slope inclination, it show mental depress verg 

almost on loss of reason. 

If the signatur slope upwards, then we may expect to find person 

ambition, but if downwards, some physic weakness. If instead of the 

whole line ascend onli word here and there will ascend, thi indic 

"hope," but if scatter word ascend and descend in the same line, we may 

read a lack of tenac in emotions. 

secondly.—th line form the letter may appear:— 

(a) practic upright; or 

(b) slope slightli to the right. 

(c) slope veri much to the right as if each letter were fall 

over the rest. 

(d) slope to the left, and lastly, 

(e) "back-hand writing." 

between A and B might be call normal. 

A show pluck and self-possession, and, if pointed, mathematics. 

B tenderness, but should the write be pointed, a quick, acut mind, 

with no sympathi with sentiment. 

C show indolence; if with point letters, mental power, but should 

the letter be rounded, mental and physic indolence. 

[33] 

D show a love of ease, while 

E look peculiar and indic self-consciousness, and, as a rule, hidden 

sentimentality. 

thirdly.—th write small and pointed, we get curiosity; if medium 

in size, and gradual increas toward the end of the line, it show an 

outspoken nature; should the write diminish toward the end of the line 

we read tact. 

If it is fine and threadlik in appearance, it show a sensit mind, diplomacy. 

larg write show promptness, but if the stroke are veri fine, we see 

appreci of other people' work—a connoisseur. 

small, clear write show love of the abstruse, and if the line are veri 

delicate, a feel for the mystic. If the write is extrem small, it show 

petti of nature, fussi over unimport details. 

letter of differ size show unreli of nature, exagger trifl 

and ignor more import things. 

light and fine write mean delicaci of feeling, but if carri to excess 

it show fastidiousness. 

fourthly.—th connect of the letter with each other must be 

judged. If the connect stroke is long, it show some facil in talk 

and expression, the power of use word well, not talkativeness. 

letter ingeni connect show constructiveness, but should they be 

separate, we get percept and intuition. 

ani eccentr indic that the person' career ha not been ordinary. 

mark originality, especi of capitals, show unusu taste. tremul 

tendenc result neither from ill nor old age—irritability. highli 

restrained, small—refractori disposition, difficult to live with. regular and 

well-plac lines, follow by those careless and irregular—a mind quick 

to embark on an enterprise, but lack perseverance. back-hand less 

suscept than inclined—th head rule the heart. 

gener the bodi of the letter or specimen give the present character, 

the signatur the past. 

crotchets.—egotism, self-satisfact (a return upon self.) 

harpoon (hooks).—tenacity, unit perhap with weak will. 

dashes.—perfectli straight—persistence. 

undulating.—art, levity. 

undulating, begin or finish with a crotchet or ungrac flourish.—lack 

of taste, slight vulgarity. 

light.—writ attach littl idea to thing expressed. 

end thickly.—resolution, desir idea to carri weight. 

curv ascendingly.—versatility; slight inconsistency; speak without 

thought. 

[34] 

tremulous.—timidity, hesitation. 

place at end of line or paragraph.—lack of self-assertion. 

end abruptly, thick and hard.—distrust, reserve. 

sharpli elongated.—impuls nature; prudenc taught by experience. 

use instead of "full stops."—cultiv caution. 

capit letters.—larg and well-formed.—pride. 

print-lik in shape.—dignity. 

thin strokes.—boasting. 

exagger in height.—lov of ceremonial. 

the angl veri pointed.—acuteness, penetrative, leadership. 

larg and badly-formed.—egomania. 

larg upper hall.—self-assertion. 

larg bases.—self-confidence. 

the capit letter of christian name larger than that of surname.—lov 

of home. 

the capit letter of surnam larger.—lov of position. 

small capitals.—lack of self-assertion. 

capit letter made like small ones.—said to show poetic feeling, love of 

nature. 

print-lik in form.—originality. 

eccentr in ani way.—pos or whim. 

wide spaced.—lov of open air. 

curv far below the line, and almost encircl the word.—protect 

love of animals. 

letter incorrectli used.—smal detail made over-important. 

tendenc to replac by print.—sens of form, artist and poetic. 

special letters.—a.m.n.h., g.o., r.u.w.—norm width.—well-pois 

mind. 

too wide.—self-contentment, satisfaction. 

nearli touching.—timidity, want of knowledg of the world. 

first leg slightli raised.—aristocrat tastes. 

second leg exaggerated.—pose, affectation. 

unconnected, end with crotchet rentrant.—egotistical, selfish. 

the letter begun and end with a small crotchet rentrant.—avarice, 

meanness. 

letter and word connected.—pow of assimil ideas, but lack of 

originality; logic. 

letter disconnect even with their parts.—cr power, want of logic. 

equal connect or disconnected.—balanc intuit and deduction. 

[35] 

last letter increas in size.—lack of power of concealment. decreasing.—finesse. 

handwrit doe not invari show sex, as the qualiti indic are 

common to both men and women. 

the write develop as the soul develops, and imit come befor 

originality. 

qualiti shown IN handwrit alphabet 

arrang 

ability.—smal writing, angular, clear, decid capitals. 

accuracy.—neat, well-plac line and words, punctuat correct. 

affection.—softli slope writing, rounded, fairli thick. 

amiability.—round letters, often unfinished, medium capitals. 

ambition.—larg first stroke of capit "m's" ascend line of writing. 

impos signature. 

analytical.—small-pointed, clear writing, letter divided, decid 

capitals. 

argument.—word connected, give logic, and occasion extra long 

connect strokes, small writing. (see a.2.) 

authority.—larg capitals, especi the letter "i" and first letter of 

surname, level cross to t's. 

boastful.—larg writing, exagger capital, fli cross bar to t's. 

(see a.1.) 

bold.—larg well-form capitals, clear rounded, but not point writing. 

broad-minded.—well-spac words, clear capitals, o' and a' wide 

and rounded. 

candour.—o' and a' open at the top. 

caprice.—eccentr letters, irregular writing, no punctuation. 

care.—se accuracy. 

carelessness.—ill-form letters, open o's, no punctuation. 

caution.—dash use instead of full stops. 

ceremonious.—capit important, all larg abov the line, some ad 

flourishes. 

changeable.—lett differ formed, eccentr capitals, variabl 

of line. 
