

section I 
the alphabet OF the heaven 
chapter I 
the planets, their natur and type 


the luminari and planet are known to astronom under the follow name and symbols:— 
the sun ☉, moon ☽, neptun ♆, uranu ♅, saturn ♄, jupit ♃, mar ♂, venu ♀, and mercuri ☿. 
neptun revolv around the sun in it distant orbit onc in about 165 years. uranu complet it orbit 
revolut in 84 years, jupit in 12 years, mar in about 15 months, venu in 11 months, and mercuri in 18 
weeks. If you imagin these bodi to be revolv in a plane around the sun and yourself to be stand within 
the sun, the motion of these bodi will appear almost uniform and alway in one direction. were the orbit of 
the planet circular and the sun hold the centr of the circle, their motion would be constant, that is to say, 
alway in the same direct and at the same rate. but the orbit are elliptical, and the sun hold a posit in 
one of the foci of each ellipse. consequ the planet are at time further from the sun than at others, and [pg 18] 

they are then said to be in their aphelion, the opposit point of the orbit where they are nearest to the sun be 
call the perihelion. when at aphelion the planet move slower, and when at perihelion they move quicker 
than at the mean distance. astronom employ an imaginari circular orbit for the planets, in which they move 
at an uniform rate of velocity, which is call the mean motion. thi is subject to an equat depend on the 
posit of the planet in it orbit, and it determin the diﬀer between the imaginari planet and the true 
planet. the equat itself depend on the eccentr of the orbit, that is to say, it relat to a circl drawn 
around the same focal centre. the earth follow the same law as all other bodi of the same system. 
but if we imagin the earth to be stationari in space and the centr around which the planet revolve, their 
motion present sever irregularities. mercuri and venu will then appear to revolv around the sun while the 
sun revolv around the earth, sometim be between the earth and the sun, which is call an inferior 
conjunction, sometim on the further side of the sun away from the earth, as at their superior conjunction; and 
again, at other time to the right or left of the sun, in east or west elongation. the other planets, have orbit 
greater than that of the earth, will appear to revolv around it at constantli vari distanc and velocities. At 
certain point in their orbit they will appear to remain stationari in the same part of the zodiac. the annex 
illustr will assist the lay reader perhaps. the bodi M is mercuri when at inferior conjunct with the sun, [pg 19] 

as seen from the earth. the letter V is the planet venu at superior conjunct with the sun. the point W and 
E are the point of greatest elong west and east, and the letter S show the point in the orbit at which 
those bodi appear to be stationari when view from the earth, at G. As seen from the earth, venu would 
appear to be direct and mercuri retrograde. 




astrolog we regard the earth as the passiv subject of planetari inﬂuence, and we have therefor to 
regard it as the centr of the ﬁeld of activity. If we were make a horoscop for an inhabit of the planet mars, 
we should make mar the centr of the system. the planets’ posit are therefor taken as from the centr of 
the earth (geocentric), and not as from the centr of the sun (heliocentric). An astrolog ephemeri of the [pg 20] 

planets’ motion is employ for thi purpos (see sect. ii., chap, i.), and there are 480,000 of these sold to 
astrolog or student of astrolog everi year, from which fact it is possibl to draw one’ own conclus as 
to the state of astrolog in the west. these ﬁgures, of course, do not includ the million of almanac reader 
nor the orient students, who prepar their own ephemerides. 
know the simpl natur of the sever planet we are abl to arriv at an estim of their eﬀect when 
act in combination. 
neptun act upon the mind of man to produc a highly-strung nervou temperament, often alli to either 
insan or genius; neurosis, aphasia, &c. It produc complic in busi and an involv state of aﬀair 
generally. dispos to fraud, double-dealing, and irrespons actions. In the bodi it produc wast of tissu 
and a consumpt habit. 
uranu give an eccentr mind, waywardness, originality, inventiveness. act on the aﬀair of business, it 
produc sudden and unexpect developments, irregularities, rapid rise and fall, instability, unexpect turn 
of good and bad fortune. In the bodi it ha relat to the nervou system, and it diseas are those of 
paralysis, lesion, and nervou derangement. 
saturn produc a thoughtful, sober, ponder mind; steadfastness, patience, and endurance; disposit to 
routin and habit, method. In ﬁnancial aﬀair it give steadi result commensur with labour, success that is 
slow but sure, durance, hardships, privations. In the bodi it is relat to the osseou system, and it eﬀect are [pg 21] 

brought about by obstructions, chills, and inhibit of function. 
jupit give joviality, optimism, bountifulness, generosity, a rich and fruit mind. It render the subject 
fortun in hi aﬀairs, give success and frequent opulence. with thi planet strong in the horoscop a 
person never “goe under.” In the bodi it ha relat to the arteri process, and it diseas are those which 
aris from surfeit, congestion, and plethora. 
mar confer a sens of freedom, much ambit and execut ability, frankness, truthfulness, and scorn of 
consequence. It render the mind forc and militant, stimul to new project and enterprises, and in the 
bodi of man ha relat to the muscular system. it diseas are those which aris from inﬂammatori action in 
the tissues. 
venu confer poesy, good taste, ﬁne feeling, artist powers, gentleness, docility, dalliance, and love of 
pleasure. It render the aﬀair pleasant and prosperous, give proﬁt from both artist and rustic pursuits. next 
to jupit it is the most beneﬁc of the planet in it action on mankind. In the bodi it ha relat to the venou 
system, and it diseas are those which aris from impur of the blood, scorbut and zymot diseases, 
eczema, smallpox, measles, &c. 
mercuri render it subject active, versatile, apt and business-like, dispos to much commerce, whether of 
the mind or the market, and eager in the pursuit of knowledge; alert, and well-informed. it inﬂuenc on aﬀair of 
life is variable, for it alway translat the natur of that planet to which at birth it is in nearest aspect (sect. i., 
chap. iv.). In the bodi it is relat to the sensorium, the centr of sensation, and reﬂexli control the nerv of [pg 22] 

action. 
the moon give grace of manner and suaviti of speech, soft and adapt of nature, 
variableness, love of change, romance, and adventure; dispos to explor and voyaging. In the bodi it 
correspond to the glandular system, and it diseas are those incident to the lymphat gland and vascular 
tissue. 
the sun render it subject magnanimous, noble, proud, despis all mean and sordid actions; loyal, truthful, 
and fearless. It produc honour and the favour of dignitaries, and render the subject fortun in the control 
of hi affairs. In the bodi it control the vital principle. 
the type of person produc by the variou planet are veri distinct, the chief featur of each be as 
follows:— 
neptune—thin, nervous-look people, blue eyes, soft, silki hair, thin and usual long faces, frequent 
wear a strain or startl look. uranus—tall, wiry, and energet ﬁgures, alert, muscular, spasmodic, and 
with some touch of eccentricity. saturn—dark and lean people, small, deep-set eyes, heavi brows, long noses, 
thin lips, and sallow complexions. jupiter—ful bodied, robust men, larg and express blue or brown eyes, 
arch brows, high foreheads, oval faces, and rich brown hair. mars—strong, muscular, and athlet bodies, 
ruddi complexion, grey eyes, promin brows, slope forehead, and usual some mark or scar in the face. 
sun—fresh, clear complexion, blue or grey eyes, round head, broad shoulders, strong jaws, upright and 
digniﬁ carriage. venus—elegant, well-groomed, and often dainty-look people, with blue or soft brown [pg 23] 

eyes, brown hair, ﬁne teeth and ﬁnger-nails, small feet and short ﬂeshi hands. mercury—thin, tall, and activ 
bodies, alert appearance, small and usual dark eyes; wide, thin lips, long arm and slender hands. frequent 
great talker and quick walkers. moon—rath short and ﬂeshi people, with pale face, soft limpid eyes, sad 
brown or medium colour hair, ﬁne teeth, broad chest, and a tendenc to a squat ful of body. the 
forehead is usual high and broad. 
look at the peopl as they pass you in the street. bring them if possibl under one or other of these types. 
consid what ha been said of the planets’ natures, and you have a readi key to someth of their charact 
and destiny. 





