

chapter viii. 

OF the figur OF the heaven 

thi wa formerli term a horoscope, but is now more gener 

call a figur of the heavens. It is simpli a scheme, or plan, 

repres an accur pictur of the heavens—that is, of the 

posit of the sun, moon, and planets, and, in some instances, of the 

fix star also, for the moment at which a child is born. In horari 

question the figur is drawn for the requir time, which may be the 

moment of the propound of a question to an astrologer, or of the 

occurr of ani event of the result of which astrolog inform 

is desired. 

thi map, which contain the twelv divis alreadi describ as the 

twelv hous of heaven, may be drawn in either a squar or circular 

form. lilli and other mediæv writer use both form indiscriminately; 

but as the latter is more easili understood, the diagram (plate 2) is 

drawn up in that manner. It will be seen that it is form of three 

circles. In the centr space the date, time and place of the event of a 

horari question are entered, and in a nativ the name, sex and moment 

of birth of the native. the next space (divid into twelv equal part 

for the houses) is reserv for the planet and in the outer space are 

place the sign of the zodiac, with the number of their degrees, on 

the cusp of each house. the cusp of the hous are repres by that 

line between each house. have obtain an ephemeris, or astrolog 

almanack 

[7] for the year required, we must find the sider time for 

the day and month of the birth, or question; then, if the time of the 

event be befor noon we must deduct the differ 

between the given time and noon from the sider time of the day; for 

example, on the day of the event (the 9th january, 1889), the sider 

time at noon is shown by the ephemeri to be 19 hour 16 minut 51 

seconds, if the birth had been at 9 a.m. the differ between 9 a.m. 

and noon is 3 hours. We should, therefore, have to deduct 3 

hour from 19 hour 16 minut 51 seconds, which give 16 hour 16 

minut 51 seconds, the sider time required. 

As the event is suppos to happen at 3 in the afternoon, we 

must add the differ between noon and the time given to the 

sider time of the day. the differ between noon and 3 p.m. is 3 

hours, and, as the sider time on the 9th january, 1889, is 19 hour 

16 minut 51 seconds, we add 3 hour to thi amount, which 

give 22 hour 16 minut 51 seconds, the sider time required. 

We must now proceed to place the sign for 3 p.m. on the 9th january, 

1889, which is thu done: We turn to the "tabl of houses" (which will 

be found at the end of the ephemeris), and have found (under the 

column head "sider time") the nearest time to 22 hour 16 minut 

51 seconds, which in thi case is 22 hour 16 minut 48 second for the 

latitud of london, we see in the next column (head 10) the sign 

(pisces), and the number 3° opposit our sider time, 

show that the third degre of pisc is on the cusp of the 10th 

house, In the next column (head 11) we see , and the number 

7°; we therefor place 7° on the cusp of the 11th 

house, next 24° on the 12th; then 7° 5′ on the 

ascend (or first house), 23° on the 2nd and 10° 

on the 3rd; for the remain hous we place the sign in 

order opposit to those alreadi given, keep the same number of 

degre to each correspond hous and sign. the opposit hous to the 

10th is the 4th, and the opposit sign to is ; we 

therefor place 3° on the cusp of the 4th house, and so on 

of the rest. It will, however, now be seen that the two sign 

and are missing; these sign are "intercepted," which mean that 

they lie between two hous without occupi the cusp of either; they 

must, therefore, be place in their order between the cusp of 

the houses. thi is, of course, not alway the case, and some horoscop 

will have no intercept signs. 

how TO place the planets. 

In the ephemeri the longitud of the planet are given daili for mean 

noon; so, to find the exact place of a planet for a given time, 

we must note the differ of longitud between the previou noon and 

noon of the day for draw the map for a.m. and for p.m., the 

differ between noon of the day and noon of the day after. thi 

differ is the motion of the planet in 24 hours, which we 

must work thus: As 24 hour are to—hour (i.e., the differ 

between the given time and noon), so is the daili motion to the motion 

required. for example, the at noon on the 6th januari is 

(omit seconds) in 19° 29′ , and on the 10th januari at 

noon he is in 20° 30′ , which give a daili motion 

of 59 minutes. We must find hi place for 3 p.m. on the 9th january. As 

24 hour are to 3 hours, so are 59 minut to the time required; thi 

equal about 7 minutes, which we add to the 's longitud at noon 

on the 9th. If the event had been for a.m. thi amount would have been 

deduct from the 's longitud at noon on the day 

of the event. We must proceed in the same way for the other planet and 

place them in the map accord to their posit in respect to the 

degre on the cusp of the houses. the will be in 19° 

36′ , or about the middl of the 7th house. and note 

that the number of degre of a sign on the cusp of ani hous show 

that that sign commenc in the previou house. suppos the 

had been 1° of , we should then have 

place it in the 6th house, a littl below the cusp of the 7th. when a 

planet is retrograd (shown in the ephemeri thus, r.), 

we add the amount to the longitud when the event is befor noon 

or a.m., and deduct it from the longitud when the event is 

after noon or p.m. the mode of give the judgment on a horoscop will 

be shown farther on. 


