

chapter xi. 

ON form A gener judgment ON A nativ 

respect the distribut of the doctrin of nativities, we are to 

consid first the parents, then the durat of life; the shape 

and figur of the body; after these the qualiti of the mind; then as to 

fortun in regard to honour as well as wealth. In success to these 

the charact of the employment; the question rel to marriage, 

children, and friendships; then that concern travel; and lastly, 

that concern the kind of death which await the nativ from 

the configur of the heaven at hi birth. 

the parents.—in conform with nature, say ptolemy, the sun 

and saturn are allot to the person of the father, and the moon and 

venu to that of the mother; and the mode in which these luminari and 

planet may be found posited, with refer to each other as well as 

to other planet and stars, will intim the situat of affair 

affect the parents. 

If mar should be in bad aspect to the sun, the father will receiv 

some injuri to the face or die suddenly; but a long life is presag if 

jupit or venu be in ani mode whatev configur with either the 

sun or saturn. 

If mar be succed to the moon or venus, or in quartil or opposit 

to them, or if saturn be similarli aspect to the moon only, and both 

of them be void of cours or retrograde, or cadent, advers accid 

and diseas will attend the mother; should they, on the other hand, be 

swift in motion and place in angles, they portend that her life will 

be short or grievous afflicted. 

should the sun be configurated, in ani mode whatever, with the moon or 

venus, or should venu herself be harmoni configur with the 

moon, either by the sextile, the trine, or the conjunction, the mother 

will live long. 

concern the durat of the native' own life, the hylegliacal[9] 

place are, accord to ptolemy, the sign on the angl of the 

ascend from the fifth degre abov the horizon to the twenty-fifth 

degre below it; the thirti degre in dexter sextil thereto 

constitut the eleventh house; also the thirti degre in dexter 

quartil form the mid-heaven abov the earth; those in dexter trine 

make the ninth house; and, lastly, those in opposit belong to 

the angl of the west. 

among these places, the degre which constitut the mid-heaven are 

entitl to preference, as be of a more potent influence; the 

degre in the ascend are next in virtue; then the degre in the 

eleventh house, succed to the mid-heaven; then those in the angl of 

the west; and, lastly, those in the ninth house, which preced the 

mid-heaven. 

He also hold that "the sun, the moon, and the ascend to be 

consid as the four princip liabl to be elect to the offic 

of prorogator"—or hyleg. 

these view are not adopt by the modern astrologers, but as thi is a 

book set forth the ancient method it is needless to discuss 

the variou object made by them to this, as to some other of the 

theori laid down by ptolemy. 

among the four prorog alreadi given, the sun by day is to be 

preferred, provid he is place in one of the hylegliac places, and 

if not, the moon; but if the moon also should not be so posit that 

planet is to be elect as hyleg which may have most claim to dominion 

in refer to the sun, the moon and the ascendant, which mean that 

the planet should have dominion, in ani one of the place where these 

are situated, by at least three dignities. if, however, no planet 

should be so circumstanc the ascend is then to be taken as hyleg. 

By night the moon is to be elect as prorogator, provided, in like 

manner, she should be in some prorogatori place; and if she be not, the 

sun; if he also be not in ani prorogatori place, then that planet which 

may have most right of dominion in refer to the moon, and the 

anteced full moon, and the part of fortune. but if there be no 

planet claim dominion in the mode prescrib the ascend must be 

taken; in case a new moon had last preced the birth; but if a full 

moon, the part of fortune. 

If the two luminari and also some rule planet of appropri 

condit should be each posit in a prorogatori place, then, provid 

one luminari may be found to occupi some place more import and 

influenti than the others, that luminari must be chosen; but should 

the rule planet occupi the stronger place, and have prerog of 

dominion suitabl to the condit of both luminaries, the planet must 

then be prefer to either of them. 

when the hyleg ha been determin by the forego rules, then note 

whether it is support by benevol planet in good aspect toward 

it and free from affliction—that is, from evil aspect from evil 

planets—if so, the life is like to continu and the constitut to 

be strong; but if the hyleg, whether it be the sun, the moon, or the 

ascendant, be afflict with evil planet and there be no assist 

from good planets, the child will die in infancy: if there be some 

assist from good planets, but yet the evil aspect exceed the good, 

the constitut will be weak and the first train of evil direct 

will destroy the life. 

concern the disposit and qualiti of the mind, we must look 

princip to the planet in the ascendant, the influenc of which 

over mind and bodi have alreadi been given in the chapter on the seven 

planets. We must, however, alway bear in mind that mercuri ha chief 

dominion over the mental faculties, whilst the sentient passion are 

govern by the moon and the planet in the ascendant. the moon 

well-aspected, that is, in trine, sextile, or conjunct to mercuri at 

birth, will give to the nativ excel abilities, ingenuity, 

versatil and wit. even the evil aspect of the squar and opposit 

are better than no aspect at all, though these sometim produc a 

cynic and obstin nature. 

the abil of those born when mercuri is in "cazimi" (that is, 

within seventeen minut of the sun' centre) are of the highest order. 

mercuri in conjunct with saturn at birth give clear judgment and a 

love of occult subjects. 

venu in good aspect with mercuri give love of music and an artist 

nature. 

If mercuri and the moon throw no aspect to each other and are afflict 

by mar and saturn, the nativ will be liabl to becom insane.[10] 

the fortun of wealth is determin by the sun and the moon; if they 

are in good position, that is, angular and well-aspect by the two 

luminaries, the nativ will be rich. If the sun and the moon are well 

placed, and if there be benef star in the mid-heaven, the nativ 

will rank high in the world. If the contrary, the nativ never rise 

abov mediocrity; and if saturn afflict the mid-heaven, he meet 

disgrace. If mar is strong and in good aspect to the sun and moon, he 

will gain militari glory. jupit on the mid-heaven and the sun and 

moon in trine to each other, the moon, have the trine of jupiter, is 

one of the best posit for rise in the world. jupit in the tenth 

hous will caus the nativ to do fairli well in the world; but saturn 

in that house, if not extrem well-aspected, will bring him to shame 

and beggary. 

concern the natur of employment, the dominion of the employ is 

claim by the sun and by the planet on the mid-heaven. If mercuri 

should rule alon he produc writers, teacher of science, merchant 

and bankers; also, if well-aspect to saturn and the moon, astrolog 

and student of all occult matters; if jupit is in conjunction, then 

the nativ will be an orator, actor, or painter and hi pursuit will 

lead him into the societi of person of rank. 

venu rule make wine-merchants, dealer in colours, dyes, perfumes, 

drugs, garment or apparel, &c.; if connect with saturn, she make 

person have to do with amusement, players, jugglers, &c.; if with 

jupiter, person attend exhibit and priest who have much 

person decor such as cathol priests, bishops, &c. and they 

will gain by women. mar rule alon make martial men and, if in 

scorpio, cancer, or pisces, naval men.[11] the sun join with him, 

be near the mid-heaven, or in aspect, make person deal with 

fire or metals, the latter especi if in tauru or leo. If mar be 

separ from the sun, he make shipwrights, smiths, agriculturists, 

stonemason and carpenters. 

If saturn bear testimoni in addit to mars, person becom mariners, 

worker in mines, wells, vaults, &c., underground, keeper of cattle, 

cooks, butchers. If jupit join with mars, they will be soldiers, 

innkeepers, tax-gatherers, mechanics. If mercuri and venu becom joint 

arbit of employment, they produc musicians, dancers, poets, weaver 

and painters, &c. jupit in connect with them make magistr and 

senat and also teacher of youth. mercuri with mar make surgeons, 

statuaries, boxers. If mercuri be more powerful, they will be 

scientific; and if mar be stronger, they will be more violent and 

cruel in their practices.[12] If saturn join these two, they will be 

thiev (especi if the moon be in ill aspect to mercury); if 

be in ill aspect to , they will be robber 

or assassins. If jupit join and , 

they engag in honour warfar and are industrious. If venu and 

mar rule together, person will be dyers, worker in tin, lead, gold, 

silver and medic drugs. 

the moon regul the employ and, separ from the sun and 

form an aspect with mercury, inclin to the pursuit of astrology, 

spiritu and magic. 

concern marriage, ptolemi ha laid down some veri clear 

rules. He advis person about to marri to have a care that the 

luminaries—that is, the sun and moon in their respect 

nativities—ar in concord. It is of happi auguri if the moon in the 

bridegroom' nativ is in good aspect—that is, in trine or sextil 

to the sun in the bride' nativity. the squar or opposit aspect 

form between the luminari in the two nativ indic discord 

and separation, and veri evil effect follow if the malef planets, 

saturn and mars, have a bad aspect to the sun and moon in both 

nativities. If venu be with them the separ will be caus by 

adultery. good planets, such as jupit and venus, place between the 

luminari in both nativities, show much happiness. 

In men' nativ the moon must be chiefli consid in regard to 

marriage. should she be in her first or third quarter at birth, the man 

will marri under thirty, or if older hi wife will be a veri young 

woman. 

If the moon be configur with saturn, she entir deni marriage. 

If she should be in a sign of singl form, such as libra or taurus, the 

nativ will marri onli once, but if she should be place in a 

double-bodi sign, such as pisc or sagittarius, the man will marri 

more than once. 

If the moon make applic to the benefics, the wive will be good 

and true; but if she make applic to evil planets, the wive will 

prove either bad or of a quarrelsom disposition. for example: If 

saturn receiv the moon' applic the wife will prove troublesom 

and morose, yet constant and industrious; if jupit receiv it, the 

wife will be decorous, good and economical; if mars, bold and 

refractory; if venus, cheerful, handsom and agreeable; if mercury, 

sensible, prudent and clever. 

women in whose nativ venu is configur with jupit or mercuri 

are virtuou and well-conducted; but, when venu is with mar and no 

other planet is there, women born under such aspect are liabl to 

becom licentious. mar in squar to venu show adultery. 

for women the sun is to be chiefli regard in estim their chanc 

of marriag and happiness. If the sun be orient (i.e., between 

the ascend and mid-heaven, or between the descend and nadir) the 

nativ will marri in her youth; or when old, to a young man. If the sun 

be occidental, the nativ will marri late in life; or when young, to an 

old man. If the sun be in a sign of singl form, she will marri but 

once; if in a double-bodi sign, or configur with sever orient 

planet (in one sign) she will marri more than once. If saturn be 

configur with the sun, the husband will be steadfast, prosper 

and industrious. 

jupit configur with the sun give a good, benevol and 

honour husband. "mars," say ptolemy, "give a sever husband, void 

of affect and intractable." venu give an amiabl husband of 

handsom appearance. mercuri give one who is provid and expert in 

busi and of a live and cheer temperament. 

If mar be separ from venu and saturn, yet have the assist of 

jupiter, men will lead virtuou lives. If mar be configur with 

venu onli men are of a licenti temperament. 

saturn, when in the 7th hous of a nativity, bring either unhappi 

in marriag or earli death of one or other of the marri people. the 

sun badli aspect by saturn in the nativ of a woman and the moon 

afflict by the same planet in the nativ of a man, will bring 

troubl in love and marriage. 

descript of the wife or husband.—th planet with the sign in 

which it is placed, which is posit near the cusp of the 7th house, 

must be taken to describ the person. If no planet should happen to be 

so placed, then we must go by the sign alone. benef planet in the 

8th hous show that the wife or husband will be rich; unfortun 

planet show the reverse. 

children.—a regard the probabl of have children, the 

10th and 11th hous must be consult and, should there be no planet 

in them, then the opposite, the 4th and 5th houses, must be considered. 

the moon, jupit and venu are said to be giver of children; the sun, 

mar and saturn deni children, or give veri few and those either die 

early, or are a sourc of troubl to their parents. mercuri either 

give or deni accord to the planet with which he may happen to be 

posited. 

If the sun and malef be in barren sign or in masculin sign and in 

the before-nam houses, there will be no children; but if they be in 

fruit or feminine, or common signs, there may be children, but they 

will be delic and short-lived. 

If jupiter, the moon and venus, are well-dignifi in the 10th and 11th 

houses, the children born will attain rank and distinct in the 

world. 

friend and enemies.—person born under the same sign of the 

zodiac are like to be sympathetic; so also if the planet in the 

ascend of one person' nativ is one which is friendli to that 

which rise in the ascend in the other's. thus, a person whose 

rule planet is venu would be attract by one in whose ascend 

mar is domin and a person whose rule planet is the moon rare 

contract a warm friendship with one who ha mar in the ascend of 

hi nativ and vice versâ. the friendship and enmiti of the 

planet have alreadi been given in the chapter on the influenc of the 

seven planets. 

mar in bad aspect to the sun or moon in the 7th hous caus quarrel 

in marri life. 

travelling.—th posit of the moon and mar are here to be 

considered. If they should be in a cadent posit the nativ will 

travel a great deal. the moon in a wateri sign caus much travel 

by water. ptolemi tell us that mar in squar or opposit to the sun 

or moon will caus much travel in foreign countries. If the 

benef are conjoin with the moon, the journey will be safe and 

pleasant; if with the malef they will produc mischanc and 

ill-health in travelling. mercuri ascend at birth, in a 

double-bodi or moveabl sign, show a great disposit to travel. If 

a malef affect the moon should be in the wateri sign of cancer, 

scorpio, or pisces, shipwreck and even death by drown may ensu 

dure travelling. 

Of the manner of death.—if the hyleg and ascend should be 

well-aspect and if either jupiter, venus, mercuri or the moon 

well-dignifi should appear in the eighth hous the nativ will die a 

natur death. If either the sun or moon should be badli aspect by 

mar or saturn in the eighth hous it is signific of a violent or 

remark death. saturn caus linger death and mar those which 

are sudden. 

saturn indic death by chronic diseases, rheumatism, agu and 

paralysis. 
