
psycholog astrolog involv four fundament claims. the first two 
are common to other h d s of astrology, namely, that there is a correl 
between celesti and terrestri phenomena, and that everyth in the birth 
chart affect everyth els in the birth. the third and fourth claim are the 
unusu ones, namely, that the birth chart indic not behavior or event 
but chang in consciousness, and that astrolog should be view in the 
perspect of a magical, organ world-view. A look at these four claim can 
now be taken one by one. 
1. relationship postul by astrolog between celesti phenomena 
and terrestri phenomena are onli correlational. 
tradit astrolog usual adopt the notion that the relationship 
between celesti and terrestri affair wa some h d of causal one. As 
placidu said in 1657, "it is imposs for the effici heavenli caus (a 
be so veri far distant from thing below) to influenc sublunari bodes, 
unless by some rnedum or instrument virtue. . . the instrument caus of 
the star is light," and "the stars, where they do not rise, are inactive," so 
astrolog should "reject a secret influenc as superfluous, nay, even im- 
possible" (p. 1, 3 ) . most modern astrolog reject thi causal approach. per- 
ry (1994) tell us that the relat between peopl and their birth chart are 
not causal but correlational. the astronom bode reflect human life expe- 
rienc rather hke a mirror reflect a landscap which ha to be inter- 
preted. but there is much disagr over the kind of celesti configura- 
tion that are relev and how they are to be interpreted. In fact, no matter 
what an astrolog may claim, a search of the literatur vjlu invari find a 
conflict claim. thi dsagreement exist even at the most fundament lev- 
el for entir popul of astrologers, for example, western astrolog dis- 
agre with eastern astrolog on which zodiac to use and how mani planet 
to use. thi lack of agreement is widespread within western astrolog itself: 
Ln horari astrolog (answer questions, e.g., should I marri x?) the 
moon' north node is a point of ill-fortune, but in humanist astrolog it is 
the direct of person growth (jones, 1996). such system are mutual 
incompatible, yet are seen as complet vahd by their users. 


tern as true, and reject attack to avoid cognit dissonance. the sequenc from 1 to 4 is not 
unreasonable. student of astrolo y are not told to accept astrolo without question, they are 
told ro tri thin s out for themsefves, so at first sight, what c o u l ~ b efairer? the roblem, of 
course, is that [ley are nor made awar of all the pidal of person valtdat (ancfth coneir- 
mation bias), nor are they told how to make control test or to design research that actual 
test astrolog hy othes and not auxiliari hypotheses. nor are they present the vast bodi 
of critic oE astro?og tenets, as is, for example, found in h i s artic e and references. onc 
they reach (4) then ani intern inconsist and disagr can lo ical be accomrno- 
date as minor hiccu s due to the complex of astrolog or inevit fuman fallibl (see 
dean, mather, & ~ e f 1996).~ , 
1044 I. W . kelli 

astrologers' meanlng of astrolog sign and hous are not veri clear- 
cut and there are no agre upon rule for weigh their effects. for exam- 
ple, as the astrolog prudenc jone (1996, p. 282) says, 
[the zodiac signs] rest on shaki foundat from the modern point of view. how in heaven 
do twelv 30' sector of the ecliptic, measur from the vernal equinox but name after now- 
far-dist constellations, impart ani qualiti at all to the planets, houses, part and node 
which we view against their backgrounds? Do they do so in fact, or is thi wish thinking? 
some astrolog justdi the sign (taking, u s u d y without explanation, the sun in the sign as 
their exemplar) as shorthand for season characteristics. but thi impli that their order 
should be revers in the southern hemisphere, which seldom happens. and what, in ani case 
of horoscop for equatori latitud where season chang is minimal, but where, of course, 
astrolog wa invented? 

the mean of sign depend upon which zodiac is use and the mean 
of hous depend on which hous system is used. hous system differ with 
regard to number, sequence, method of division, and interpret (mar- 
ten & trachet, 1995). western astrolog also dlffer in how mani planet 
should be used, some use undiscov hypothet planets, other use as- 
teroid (dean & mather, 1977). thi dversiti in fundament give us 
grou!ld to be sceptic of claim that astrolog are speakmg about some- 
thir-;<they have actual apprehended. 
2. the horoscop is a whole syslem in which everi part is influenc by 
everi other part. 
astrolog factor cannot be examin in isolation; the whole birth 
chart is needed. So the golden rule is that "onli the whole chart should be 
considered, for ani astrolog purpos whatever" (dwyer, 1985, p. 1). As 
perri point out ". . . no one part of a horoscop can be isolated. . . sinc 
everyth influenc everyth else" and ". . . you cannot empir ob- 
serv a pure [astrolog factor] isol from other factor in the chart" 
(perry, 1993, p. 6). but astrolog disagre over which individu factor are 
important, so they dsagre over what the whole chart consists; they just 
agre that whatev it is, it is import to keep it in mind when do as- 
trology. As the psychologist jan van rooij (1994) asked: 
where doe the whole chart end? with ten planets, rwelv signs, twelv houses, midpoints, ar- 
abic points, nodes, aspect and whatev other astrolog concept may be used, it is simpli 
imposs to interpret a "whole chart." when astrolog claim that they use the whole chart, 
they onli refer to the fact that they use more factor than just one. nevertheless, no matter how 
mani factor they may use, they alway use a restrict nzrrmber of factors, and therefor onli a 
part of the horoscope. they neuer use the whole chart. but then the question becom how mani 
factor would be considered, and which factors?. . . suppos that I consid as mani as 20 fac- 
tors, then undoubtedli an astrolog will come up who claim that I should use 21 factor (p. 
56 ital mine). 
the "whole chart" therefor ha a differ mean to differ 
school of astrology. some astrolog use asteroid in birth charts. As hand 
modern astrology: A critiqu 1045 

(1981) point out, size of an astronom bodi is unrel to astrolog 
effectiveness, therefor "[tlhe lsaster is that there are thousand of aster- 
oid and other minor bode orbit the sun, and use present-day astro- 
logic techniqu there is no way of account for all of them in a chart" 
(p. 93). other astrolog use hypothet planet such as vulcan that have 
not been detect by astronom (hand, 1981, p. 95). there is no evid 
that astrolog use asteroid or hypothet planet are more insight or 
more success counsellor than those use "incomplet charts," or nonas- 
trolog orient psychotherapist or even lay therapist (dean, 1985; mc- 
grew & mcfall, 1992). 
how can dlfferent set of part give the same meaning whole? thi 
problem would seem to be exacerb when we rememb that conflict 
western astrolog uthz differ factors, and even when the same factor 
are used, they are often weight differently. If differ school of astrolog 
use differ astrolog factor and henc oper with ddferent notion of 
the "whole chart," then ani refer to the suppos common of the 
"whole chart" is less than meaningful. perri state "everi planet and everi 
sign of the z o l a c is influenc by the whole in which it is embedded" 
(1995, p. 34). but if my whole chart and your whole chart involv factor 
that are ddferent in type or number, the end result must (accord to per- 
ry) be open to question. It is as if we thought we were take about the 
same thing, but upon investig found that I meant volkswagens, while 
you were refer to cadillacs. 
So when we are told by astrolog that "astrolog works," we are not 
sure what to make of it. It is like be told that you will surviv your de- 
mise in some form by ddferent rehgion and have littl idea how thi wdl be 
accomplished. (wlliyou be a disembodi spirit, a resurrect body, an as- 
tral body, or even come back as a mosquito, etc?) 
