


II 

chaucer’ scientif knowledg 

It wa in the fourteenth centuri that chaucer live and wrote, and hi 

interest in astronom lore is, therefore, not surprising. although the 

theori of astronomi current in chaucer’ centuri have been made 

unten by the De revolutionibu orbium of copernicus, and by kepler’ 

discoveri of the law of planetari motion; although the inaccur and 

unsatisfactori method of astronom investig then in use have been 

supplant by the better method made possibl through galileo’ invent 

of the telescop and through the modern use of spectrum analysis; yet, of 

all scientif subjects, the astronomi of that period could most nearli 

lay claim to the name of scienc accord to the present accept of 

the term. for, as we have seen, the interest in astrolog dure the 

middl age had foster the studi of observ astronomy, and this[pg 10] 

in turn had furnish the scienc a basi of fact and observ far 

surpass in detail and accuraci that of ani other subject. 

practic all of chaucer’ write contain some refer to the 

movement and rel posit of the heavenli bodies, and to their 

influenc on human and mundan affairs, and in some of hi works, 

especi the treatis on the astrolabe, a veri technic and detail 

knowledg of astronom and astrolog lore is displayed. there is 

everi reason to suppos that, so far as it satisfi hi purposes, chaucer 

had made himself familiar with the whole literatur of astronom 

science. hi familiar with ptolema astronomi is shown in hi write 

both by specif mention[1] of the name of ptolemi and hi syntaxis, 

commonli known as the ‘almagest,’ and by mani more gener astronom 

references. 

even more convinc evid of chaucer’ knowledg of the scientif 

literatur of hi time is given in hi treatis on the astrolabe. 

accord to skeat, part I and at least two-third of part II are taken, 

with some expans and[pg 11] alteration, from a work on the astrolab by 

messahala[2], called, in the latin translat which chaucer used, 

“compositio et operatio astrolabie.” thi work may have been ultim 

deriv from a sanskrit copy, but from chaucer’ own word in the 

prologu to the astrolabe[3] it is clear that he made use of the latin 

work. the rest of part II may have been deriv from some gener 

compendium of astronom and astrolog knowledge, or from some other 

of the treatis on the astrolab which chaucer say were common in hi 

time.[4] 

other sourc mention by chaucer in the astrolab are the calendar of 

john some and nichola lynne, carmelit friar who wrote calendar 

construct for the meridian of oxford[5]; and of the arabian astronom 

abdilazi alkabucius.[6] In the frankeleyn tale chaucer mention the 

tabula toletanae,[7] a set of tabl compos by order of[pg 12] alphonso X, 

king of castile, and so call becaus they were adapt to the citi of 

toledo. work which serv chaucer not as sourc of inform on 

scientif subject but as model for the treatment of astronom lore 

in literatur were the De consolation philosophia of boethius, which 

chaucer translat and often made use of in hi poetry; and the work of 

dante, whose influenc on chaucer, probabl considerable, ha been point 

out by sever writers, notabl rambeau[8] who discuss the parallel 

between the hou of fame and the divina commedia. 


