
IV 

chaucer’ astronomi 

chaucer’ treatment of astronom lore in hi poetri differ much from 

hi use of it in hi prose writings. In poetic allus to heavenli 

phenomena, much attent to detail and a pedant regard for accuraci 

would be inappropriate. refer to astronomi in chaucer’ poetri are, 

as a rule rather brief, specif but not technical, often pure 

convent but alway truli poetic. there are, indeed, occasion 

passag in chaucer’ poetri show so detail a knowledg of 

observational[50] astronomi that they would seem astonish and, to mani 

people, out of place, in modern poetry. they were not so in chaucer’ 

time, when the exig of practic life demand of the ordinari man a 

knowledg of astronomi far surpass that possess by most of our 

contemporaries. harri bailli in the introduct to the man of law 

tale determin the day of the month and hour of the day by make 

calcul from the observ posit of the sun in the sky, and from 

the length of shadows, although, say chaucer, “he were not depe expert in 

lore.”[51] such [pg 28]refer to technic detail of astronomi as we find 

in thi passag are, however, not common in chaucer’ poetry; in hi 

treatis on the astrolabe, on the other hand, a professedli scientif 

work design to instruct hi young son loui in those element of 

astronomi and astrolog that were necessari for learn the use of the 

astrolabe, we have suffici evid that he wa thoroughli familiar 

with the technic detail of the astronom scienc of hi day. 

In chaucer’ poetri the astronom refer employ are almost wholli 

of two kinds: refer show the time of day or season of the year at 

which the event narrat are suppos to take place; and figur 

allus for purpos of illustr or comparison. figur use of 

astronomi in chaucer vari from simpl simil as in the prologu to the 

canterburi tales, where the friar’ eye are compar to twinkl 

stars[52] to extend allegori like the compleynt of mar in which the 

myth of venu and mar is relat by describ the motion of the planet 

venu and mar for a certain period dure which venu overtak mars, 

they are in conjunction[53] for a short time, and then venu becaus of 

her greater appar veloc leav mar behind. one of the most 

magnific astronom figur employ by chaucer is in the hou of[pg 29] 

fame. chaucer look up into the heaven and see a great golden eagl 

near the sun, a sight so splendid that men could never have beheld it 

equal ‘unless the heaven had won anoth sun:’ 

“hit wa of golde, and shone so bright, 

that never saw men such a sighte, 

but-if the heven hadd y-wonn 

Al new of gold anoth sonne; 

So shoon the egl fethr brighte, 

and somwhat dounward gan hit lighte.”[54] 

besid mention the heavenli bodi in time refer and figur 

allusions, chaucer also employ them often in descript of day and 

night, of dawn and twilight, and of the seasons. It is with a poet’ joy 

in the warm spring sun that he writes: 

“bright wa the day, and blew the firmament, 

phebu of gold hi streme doun hath sent, 

To gladen everi flour with hi warmnesse.”[55] 

and with a poet’ delight in the new life and vigor that natur put forth 

when spring come that he write the lines: 

“forgeten had the erth hi pore estat 

Of winter, that him nake made and mat, 

and with hi swerd of cold so sore greved; 

now hath the atempr sonn al that relev 

that nake was, and clad hit new agayn.”[56] 

chaucer’ astronom allusions, then, except in the treatis on the 

astrolab and in hi translat of boethiu de consolation 

philosophiae, in which a philosoph interest in celesti phenomena is 

displayed, are almost [pg 30]invari employ with poetic purpose. these 

poetic allus to heavenli phenomena, however, togeth with the more 

technic and detail refer in chaucer’ prose work give evid 

of a rather extens knowledg of astronomy. with all of the import 

observ movement of the heavenli bodi he wa perfectli familiar and it 

is rather remark how mani of these he use in hi poetri without 

give one the feel that he is air hi knowledge. 



1. the sun 

Of all the heavenli bodi the one most often mention and employ for 

poetic purpos by chaucer is the sun. chaucer ha mani epithet for the 

sun, but speak of him perhap most often in the classic manner as 

phebu or apollo. He is call the “golden tress phebus”[57] or the 

“laurer-crown phebus;”[58] and when he make mar flee from venus’ 

palac he is call the “candel of ielosye.”[59] In the follow passag 

chaucer use three differ epithet for the sun within two lines: 

“the day honour, and the heven ye, 

the night fo, al thi clepe I the sonne, 

gan westren faste, and dounward for to wrye, 

As he that hadd hi day cour y-ronne;”[60] 

sometim chaucer give the sun the variou accessori with which 

classic myth had endow him—th four swift steeds, the rosi chariot 

and fieri torches: 

“and phebu with hi rosi cart sone 

gan after that to dress him up to fare.”[61]“‘now am I war 

that pirou and tho swift stede three, 

which that drawen forth the sonn char,[pg 31]hath goon some by-path in despyt of me;’”[62] 

“phebus, that wa comen hast 

within the paleys-y sturdely, 

with torch in honde, of which the streme bright 

On venu chambr knokkeden ful lighte.”[63] 

almost alway when chaucer wish to mention the time of day at which the 

event he is relat take place, he doe so by describ the sun’ 

posit in the sky or the direct of hi motion. We can imagin that 

chaucer often smile as he did this, for he sometim humor 

apolog for hi poetic conceit and convent by express hi 

idea immedi afterward in perfectli plain terms. such is the case in 

the passag alreadi quot where chaucer refer to the sun by the epithet 

“day honour,” “heven ye,” and “night fo” and then explain them by 

say “al thi clepe I the sonne;” and in the lines: 

“til that the bright sonn lost hi hewe; 

for thorisont hath reft the sonn hi light;” 

explain by the simpl words: 

“thi is as much to sey as it wa night.”[64] 

thu it is that chaucer’ poetic refer to the appar daili motion 

of the sun about the earth are nearli alway simpli in the form of 

allus to hi rise and setting. canace in the squier tale, (f. 

384 ff.) is said to rise at dawn, look as bright and fresh as the 

spring sun risen four degre from the horizon. 

“up ryseth fressh canace hir-selve, 

As rodi and bright as dooth the yong sonne, 

that in the ram[65] is four degre up-ronne; 

noon hyer wa he, whan she redi was;” 

mani of these refer to the rise and set of the sun might be 

mentioned, if space permitted, simpli for their beauti as poetry. one of 

the most beauti is the following: 

[pg 32] 

“and fyri phebu ryseth up so brighte, 

that al the orient laugheth of the lighte, 

and with hi streme dryeth in the greve 

the silver dropes, hang on the leves.”[66] 

when, in the canterburi tales, the mancipl ha finish hi tale, 

chaucer determin the time by observ the posit of the sun and by 

make calcul from the length of hi own shadow: 

“bi that the mauncipl hadd hi tale al ended, 

the sonn fro the south lyne wa descend 

So lowe, that he na nat, to my sighte, 

degre nyne and twenti as in highte. 

four of the clokk it wa tho, as I gesse; 

for eleven foot, or litel more or lesse, 

My shadw wa at thilk tyme, as there, 

Of swich feet as my length part were 

In six feet equal of porporcioun.”[67] 

We must not omit mention of the humor touch with which chaucer, in the 

mock heroic tale of chanticl and the fox told by the nun’ priest, 

make even the rooster determin the time of day by observ the altitud 

of the sun in the sky: 

“chauntecleer, in al hi pryde, 

hi seven wyve walkyng by hi syde, 

cast up hi eyen to the bright sonne, 

that in the sign of tauru hadd y-ronn 

twenti degre and oon, and somewhat more; 

and knew by kynde, and by noon other lore, 

that it wa pryme, and crew with blis stevene. 

‘the sonne,’ he sayde, ‘i clomben up on heven 

fourti degre and oon, and more, y-wis.’”[68] 

[pg 33]moreover, thi remark rooster observ that the sun had pass the 

twenty-first degre in taurus, and we are told elsewher that he knew each 

ascens of the equinocti and crew at each; that is, he crew everi 

hour, as 15° of the equinocti correspond to an hour: 

“wel siker wa hi crow in hi logge, 

than is a clokke, or an abbey orlogge. 

By natur knew he ech ascencioun[69] 

Of th’ equinoxi in thilk toun; 

for whan degre fiften were ascended, 

thann crew he, that it might nat ben amended.”[70] 

chaucer announc the approach of even by describ the posit and 

appear of the sun more often than ani other time of the day. In the 

legend of good women he speak of the sun’ leav the south point[71] 

of hi daili cours and approach the west: 

“whan that the sonn out of the south gan weste,”[72] 

and again of hi westward motion in the lines: 

“and whan that hit is eve, I rene blyve, 

As sone as ever the sonn ginneth weste,”[73] 

elsewher chaucer refer to the set of the sun by say that he ha 

complet hi “ark divine” and may no longer remain on the horizon,[74] or 

by say that the ‘horizon ha bereft the sun of hi light.’[75] 

chaucer’ refer to the daili motion of the sun about the earth are 

apt to sound to us like pure poetic figures, so accustom are we to 

refer to the sun, what we know to be the earth’ rotatori motion, by 

speak of hi appar daili motion thu figur as if it were 

real. chaucer’ manner of describ the revolut of the heavenli bodi 

about the earth and hi applic of poetic epithet to them are 

figurative, but the motion itself was[pg 34] meant liter and wa believ in 

by the men of hi century, becaus onli the geocentr system of astronomi 

wa then known. If chaucer had been in advanc of hi centuri in thi 

respect there would certainli be some hint of the fact in hi writings. 

refer in chaucer to the sun’ yearli motion are in the same sens 

literal. the appar motion of the sun along the ecliptic,[76] which we 

know to be caus by the earth’ yearli motion in an ellipt orbit 

around the sun, wa then believ to be an actual movement of the sun 

carri along by hi revolv sphere. like the refer to the sun’ 

daili movement those that mention hi yearli motion along the eclipt 

are also usual time references. the season of the year is indic by 

defin the sun’ posit among the sign of the zodiac. the canterburi 

pilgrim set out on their journey in april when 

“the yong sonn 

hath in the ram hi half cours y-ronne.”[77] 



