

the luck OF flower 

It ha been a favorit pastim with maiden in all age to tri to foretel 

their futur by the aid of flower and plants. 

one of the most popular fanci is provid by the four-leav clover, the 

stori of which is told in variou legends. one run to the effect that three 

beauti sisters, faith, hope and charity, came from over the seas, and 

wherev they walk three-leav clovers, crimson, white and yellow, 

bloom profusely. In their footstep came anoth more beauti being, 

whose name wa love, and in hi honor the clover ad a fourth petal 

to the trefoil. 

In time, it becam the talisman of love-sick maidens, who wore it in their 

shoe to ensur a speedi meet with their sweetheart, wore it over their 

heart to frighten away evil spirit and to prevent be jilted. In the case 

of a quarrel, it serv to effect a reconciliation. 

apart from it sentiment associations, a four-leav clover ha long been 

regard as an emblem of good luck, and ha been worn by those who 

believ in such thing when they wish to increas their chanc of good 

fortune. 

spring flowers.—naturally, mani belief flourish around the flower 

of the garden and the hedgerow. 

If you chanc to find the first flower of the season on a monday, it mean 

good luck. 

If on a tuesday, big undertak are like to be successful. 

If on a wednesday, it denot your approach wedding. 

If on a thursday, hard work with littl profit will fall to your lot. 

If on a friday, unexpect wealth reach you. 

If on a saturday, you may look out for misfortune. 

If on a sunday, phenomen good luck will come to you. 

the first wild flower.—from the first wild flower which you 

gather in spring, it is possibl to discov the initi of your futur husband or 

wife. if, for instance, they should chanc to be daisies, violet and buttercups, 

then expect to find some suitabl person with the initi D. V. b., 

but they may not be necessarili in thi order. 

If someon present you with a yellow flower, then you may expect a 

gift of money directly. 

If you can turn a bluebel insid out without break it, then your lover 

will be true as long as both of you live. 

[100] 

no. 21. 

the pansy.—if you wish to know your futur destiny, pluck a pansy, 

which take it name from pensee, a thought. count the streak or line upon 

the petals. 

four streak tell that your dearest wish will be fulfilled. 

five streak stand for hope with fear. 

six streak suggest a surprise. 

seven streak tell of constanc in your lover. 

eight streaks, fickleness. 

nine streaks, a chang and then riches. 

mark lean toward the left denot trouble. 

mark lean to the right denot prosperity. 

should the central streak be the longest, then sunday should be chosen 

as your wed day. 

the daisy.—on of the oldest of flower charm is to pluck at the petal 

of a daisi or marguerite. At first pluck, these word are said, "he love 

me"; at the second, "he love me not." these sentenc are repeat altern 

until the flower is depriv of all it petals. whichev sentenc 

wa utter last describ "his" affections. 

[101] 

the ivy.— 

ivy, ivy, I thee pluck, 

and in my bosom, I thee put. 

the first young man who speak to me 

My own true lover he shall be. 

no. 22. 

the hawthorn OR may.—onc upon a time, everi porch wa decor 

with a branch of may to avert the evil eye and prevent witchcraft, but the 

idea ha been depart from, and now it is regard as a harbing of 

ill-luck, and is rare brought insid a house. 

the mistletoe.—from veri ancient times, thi plant ha been regard 

with curiou veneration. probabl it gain special fame, in the first instance, 

owe to the peculiar manner in which it grew. the druid look 

upon it as a plant possess marvel properties, and they esteem noth 

in the world more sacr than it. they gather it when the moon wa 

just six day old becaus the moon wa then thought to be at it greatest 

power. thi done, they sacrif two young bullock which were milk-white. 

after that, the mistleto wa cut into small piec with the aid of 

a golden hook or bill and distribut among the peopl present. these 

took it home and suspend it in a promin place to ward off evil spirits. 

from these associations, the mistleto ha becom an emblem under which 

young peopl may kiss, without ani evil come to them through their act. 

holli is use as a christma decor becaus the roman chose it to 

hang in their hous on the fast in honor of saturn. friend gave bunch of it 

to those whom they wish to endow with luck and happiness, probabl 

becaus the prickli leav symbol the crown of thorn worn by christ 

and the red berri the blood of the cross. 

[102] 

birthday flower 

just as there are birth stones, so there are flower which stand for each 

month of the year. By wear the blossom name for your month, you may 

count on good fortun as the result. 

january.—th snowdrop which is the emblem of purity, hope and 

gentleness. 

february.—th violet, the emblem of modesty, kind and faith. 

march.—th daffodil, the emblem of daintiness, sincer and graciousness. 

april.—th primrose, the emblem of lovers. 

may.—th white lily, the emblem of puriti and sweetness. 

june.—th wild rose, the emblem of love and loyalty. 

july.—th carnation, the emblem of kindli thoughts. 

august.—th white heather, the emblem of luck and the best of 

good fortune. 

september.—th michaelma daisy, the emblem of rich and happiness. 

october.—th rosemary, the emblem of remembr and kind 

thoughts. 

november.—th chrysanthemum, the emblem of faith and truth. 

december.—th ivy, the emblem of loyalty, fidel and faithfulness. 

the languag OF flower 

for mani generations, certain flower have been accept as have definit 

meanings. thus, a gift of ani of the exampl list below, may be taken 

to infer whatev descript is appended. 

camellia.—beauty, loveliness.candytuft.—indifference, lack of affection.carn (red).—ala for my poor heart!carn (white).—disregard, disdain.clov (four-leaved).—b mine.columbine.—foolishness.daisy.—innocence, purity.deadli nightshade.—falsehood, untrue.fern.—y fascin me.forget-me-not.—th same as the name.foxglove.—i bow down to you.geranium.—to consol you.golden rod.—b on your guard.[103]heliotrope.—i am devot to you.hyacinth (white).—your beauti is recognized.ivy.—faithfulness. I cling to you.lili (white).—sweetness.lili (yellow).—gay, happy, joyful.lili OF the valley.—happi will return.mignonette.—your qualiti are even greater than your charms.myrtle.—love.orang blossom.—chastity.pansy.—thoughts.pass flower.—wil to suffer hardship for you.peach blossom.—i am captiv by you.primrose.—a token of love.rose.—a token of love, also.ros (red).—bashful, shy.ros (white).—i will be worthi of you.ros (yellow).—jealousy.rosebuds.—a confess of great love.sweet pea.—leav me and depart, or I leav you.verbena.—pray for me. 

combin OF flower 

In order to convey definit phrases, lover have long been use to resort 

to certain combin of flowers. A bunch made up of them ha the 

mean which we print below. 

daisi and mignonette.—your qualiti surpass even your great 

beauty. 

fern and lili OF the valley.—y are sweet and charming, 

and you fascin me. 

ivi leav and yellow rose.—your jealousi ha put an end 

to our friendship. 

columbine, daisi and lily.—y have play fals and broken 

our friendship. 

pink and laurel leaves.—your high qualiti have been notic 

by me. 

golden rod, sweet pea and forget-me-not.—dang is 

at hand, be careful. I go away but do not forget me. 

[104] 
