

chapter xv. 

chirom and it origin 

chirom is a scienc which teach us to read not onli the charact 

but the whole destiny—for good or evil, the length of life and often 

the manner of death of a man by the line and mark to be seen in hi 

hand. thi studi is sometim call palmistry, in which case, however, 

it properli refer onli to a judgment form from what appear 

in the palm of the hand, whilst chirom (taken from the word 

cheir, a hand, and manteia, divination) signifi the 

revel made by the hand, taken as a whole. chirom is nearli as 

ancient as astrology, with which it is indissolubl connected, 

for the hand represents, as ha been befor said, a natur horoscope, 

which is place upon it at the time both of the concept and the 

birth by the influenc of the stars. the seven planet are all 

repres in the hand and also the twelv sign of the zodiac, so 

that the cast of a nativ is needless, as by simpli examin a 

hand by the light of chirom we can indic what planet have been 

power at the time of birth, and what, therefore, will be their 

effect for good or evil over the existence; and we can also find the 

date of the princip event of the life. We find mani allus to 

thi subject in the bible, and still more in the ancient kabbala. 

the holi kabbala, as it wa call by the magi, must not be confound 

with what is call "the black art"; it is, on the contrary, the 

quintess of reason and moral as they were understood by the 

ancient and contain that tradit scienc of the secret of natur 

which, from age to age, is born toward us as the wave is carri by 

the tide to the shore; but it ha been transmit obscurely, becaus 

the doctrin of the kabbala were known only, in those earli ages, to 

the adept and the initiation, later on, of neophyt wa onli yield 

after a seri of sever and terribl ordeals, whilst the revel of 

it mysteri to the uniniti wa punish by death. 

the necess of silenc was, in fact, one of the princip tenet of 

the kabbala and is represented, in the figur of adda-nari,[16] by the 

posit of the finger of the hand hold the flower branch of 

abundance; the thumb and the first two fingers, which in chirom 

repres will, power and fatality, are held open; 

whilst the third and fourth fingers, repres light and science, 

are closed. thi wa meant to indic to the good—th initiated—that 

they would have, when united, strength and will to direct fate; but 

that they must keep hidden from the wick and ignor both light and 

science. It must, however, in justic to the ancient kabbalists, be 

suggest that their inculc of silenc probabl arose, not so much 

from a desir of domination, but rather from the fact that, feel 

themselv superior in knowledge, they thought they were obey a 

divin law in refus to the wick those light which, when possess 

by them, led, as perhap they had sometim found, to error. we, see 

thing in a wider light, give, or tri to give, equal knowledg to all, 

without submit the ignor to the ordeal of initi to prove 

their worthi as recipients; but, after all, it amount to much the 

same thing—giv to all men truth and light in abundance, but all will 

not profit by it. We see thi everi day in our colleg system; the 

lesson is the same for all, but it is onli the few who profit by it; 

and although we appear to be obey a divin law in open the way of 

light and life—th life of knowledge—to all, as god make hi sun to 

shine on good and bad equally, still we can, in some sort, understand 

the feel of the ancient magi, whose motto was: "know, dare, will, 

but keep silence." 

To face chapter xvi. 



chapter xvi. 

the princip line IN the hand and the mount 

In the plate belong to thi chapter we give a hand on which are 

mark the princip line seen on the palm; three of which, viz., the 

line of life, the line of head and the line of heart, are found in a 

clearer or fainter degre on all hands, but which vary, as regard 

their rel position, in everi hand. the first and largest, that 

which encircl the thumb, is call the line of life; by the length, 

colour and evenness, or the reverse, of thi line the length of life is 

indicated, and also the ill and accid by which the life is 

menac in run it course. the line immedi abov it, cross 

the palm of the hand, is the line of head; by it we are to judg of the 

intellectu powers. abov it is the line of heart, from which we form 

an opinion of the strength of affection, or the want of it, in the 

native. 

the line which are not alway to be found are the line go from the 

wrist to the finger of saturn, which is call the saturnian line, and 

which show the event of the life; the line of the sun, which goe 

toward the finger of the sun and which indic success in art, 

literature, or the pursuit of riches; and the line of health, which 

goe from the wrist to the finger of mercury: thi line is often absent 

in a hand. 

all these line will be more fulli discuss further on; at present it 

is onli necessari to name them in order to explain the plate belong 

to thi chapter. 

At the base of each figur there is a mount, more or less developed, on 

everi hand. now, each of these mount correspond with one of the 

planet from which it ha receiv more or less influence, accord to 

it development, and the sign or mark to be found upon it. 

It will be seen also, from the plate, that the ancient gave to each 

finger the name of one of the planets, thus:— 

the first finger repres jupiter, the mount at it base be 

call the mount of jupiter. 

the second, saturn, the mount at it root be the mount of saturn. 

the third, the sun, the mount below be the mount of the sun. 

the fourth, mercury, the mount at it base be call the mount of 

mercury. 

the thumb is sacr to venus, and the root of the thumb is call the 

mount of venus. 

It will also be seen that the planet mar (although no finger is 

dedic to it) is twice repres in the hand, along the side of 

the palm by the mount of mars, and in the palm, between the line of 

life and the line of the head, which is call the plain of mars. 

the moon is onli repres by the mount of the moon, at the lower 

part of the palm on the opposit side of the hand to the thumb. 

when these mount are well in their places, and clearli but not too 

strongli defined, they give the qualiti of the planet they represent; 

but when ani mount is not well marked, or even, as frequent happens, 

is quit deficient, there is a want of the qualiti shown to exist 

where the mount is clearli defined. If the mount are not onli 

ill-defined, but repres by a cavity, that caviti would indic 

the exist of qualiti which are the revers of those indic by 

the mount; wherea an exceed develop would denot an excess of 

the qualiti given by the mount. 

thu the mount of jupiter, which is immedi under the index finger, 

when fairli developed, indic nobl ambition, will-power, love of 

nature, kindliness, generosity, religion and happi marriage. when in 

excess—that is, when the mount is so larg as to invad that next 

it—th mount of saturn—it give superstition, exagger pride and 

domin self-assertion. the total absenc of thi mount (which is 

sometimes, but rarely, seen) indic coldness, selfishness, 

irreligion and that want of digniti which is produc by the utter 

absenc of self-respect. 

the mount of saturn is found immedi beneath the second finger, 

which the ancient assign to saturn, the planet of fatality. saturn 

give extrem misfortune, or extrem good fortune, accord to the 

develop of the mount and the sign and line to be seen upon it, 

and the cours of the saturnian line, or line of fate (of which we will 

speak further on), in the palm of the hand. thi mount also denot a 

tendenc to occult science. those born special under the influenc of 

saturn are timid, lover of solitude, and veri seldom marry, but are 

veri persist in their affect when they do love. 

saturn, when well developed, give prudence, wisdom and, to a certain 

extent, success; when in excess it give sadness, taciturnity, 

asceticism, dread of the after-lif and yet, sometimes, a 

predisposit to suicide. the total absenc of the mount indic an 

insignific existence. 

the mount of the sun is place at the root of the third finger, which 

wa sacr to the sun; when thi mount is well develop it indic 

love of art and literature, which show itself (accord to 

temperament) in poetry, painting, sculpture, or music; it give also 

religion of the æsthetic, toler sort, grace, rich and celebrity; 

in excess it give love of show, frivol and vaingloriousness. the 

total absenc of the mount mean a thoroughli materi existence; 

absenc of all tast for art—a life without colour, a day without 

sunlight. 

the mount of mercuri is found at the base of the fourth finger, and, 

when well defined, indic intelligence, success in scienc and in 

occult studies, the love of work and activity, both of mind and bodi 

and eloquence; in excess it give impudence, theft and falsehood: 

absenc of the mount indic no aptitud for science, no 

intellectuality—a neg existence. Of course, should the mount of 

the sun be well defined, the last qualiti would be overridden by the 

success which that indicates. 

the mount of mar is at the side of the hand opposit the thumb, just 

below the mount of mercury, and, when well developed, indic 

courage, ardour and resolution; in excess it give cruelty, anger, 

reveng and tyranny: the absenc of the mount give cowardic and want 

of self-command. 

the mount of the moon is found immedi below that of mars, and, 

when well developed, give imagin of the dreamy, sentiment 

order, gentl melancholi and love of solitude; in excess it give 

morbid melancholy, capric and fantast imagination: the absenc of 

the mount indic want of poetri in the nature, positivism. 

the mount of venus, which is form by the root of the thumb, 

indicates, when fairli developed, love of the beautiful, melodi in 

music, the desir of pleas and sensuou tenderness; in excess it 

give love of materi pleasures, coquetry, inconst and (when other 

signs, afterward to be explained, are also seen in the hand) extrem 

sensuality. 


