
I. the maid OF jhalnagor 

told BY the rajput chief 

well, sinc you would have it so, listen to the stori of rukpur singh, 

hereditari chief of jhalnagor, mansabdar of five hundr men, captain of 

the bodyguard of akbar the great, king of kings, lord of the earth. 

"thi day in the hall of assembly, in the presenc of the great padishah 

himself, we have listen to the argument of men of divers faiths. It 

is well. As akbar, the most high, himself ha said, all religion are 

good; each man ha the god or god of hi fathers; let there be no 

obstacl place against worship the divin power in ani manner that 

seemeth fit. that is both wisdom and justice. that is whi I, a hindu, a 

rajput, one of the twice born, can serv my lord, the moslem emperor 

akbar, with loyalti of heart and of sword that no man may question." 

At these word the captain of the bodyguard touch the jewel hilt of 

hi scimitar lie on the cushion by hi side. He glanc around, as if 

to see whether anyon present dare to question the fidel he had 

professed. but there wa neither movement nor remark among hi 

listeners, and with a disdain littl smile of self-complac he 

resumed. 

"dure to-day' discussion, in the spirit of toler that akbar[pg 6] 

teach to all of us, we rajput have had to harken to sever 

upbraiding. We are accus of inhuman becaus in our home a femal 

child may be done away with at birth, law and without dishonour. Be 

it so; the fact itself I shall not dispute. nor shall I defend the 

practic except to point out that a woman more or less in the world doe 

not matter, that the babe suffer no pain and know no ill, that had she 

live it might have been to a life of widowhood—if courag were want 

to choos the suttee—and therefor to long day of shame and sorrow. 

"furthermore, ha it to be rememb that the marriag of one of our 

daughter cost much money. accord to the rule of our cast and the 

custom of our race, the ceremoni must be worthi of the parent and of 

the posit they occupy; all of the district must be feasted, and let 

the expens be grievou as it may it must be borne. To some who are rich 

the money thu spent is of no account. but to other who are poor yet 

proud—and all rajput are proud—a wed that is seemli for a 

daughter of the hous may mean poverti and ruin for the father and 

brother dure twenti year to follow. In certain circumst thi 

misfortun cannot be thought of. the honour of the race, the veri safeti 

of a whole clan, may depend on rigid economi as a provis against 

danger. So it may be both right and wise for an infant daughter to be 

put painlessli to her death. such wa the doctrin my father taught me, 

and hi name is blessed." 

the speaker drop hi eyes, fold hi hand across hi breast, and[pg 7] 

for a full minut remain in silent meditation. when at last he look 

up again, there had come over the usual stern and haughti face a 

wonder glow of kindliness, and hi voic took a softer modulation. 

"however, know this, my friends, that in my zenana at jhalnagor there 

are littl girls—three, and more will be welcom should the divin 

krishna send them. three littl daughter have I, all born of my wife 

lakmibai, the jewel of jhalnagor. with son also am I blessed—two brave 

littl boys, of whom I may well be proud. but I love them not more than 

my daughters, nor would I chang ani one daughter for a son. thi do I 

say out of the truth of my heart, and in no wise becaus fortun ha 

been kind to me and mine, and ha given us such prosper that there is 

a fit dower for each daughter without my treasuri know the loss. 

"so when the learn mullah from stamboul denounc infanticide, I wa 

one with him in sympathy, for my inclin is to cherish with love and 

care everi femal child the god send. 

"now would you hear how a rajput came to thi manner of thinking? My 

stori is that of a littl maid. listen. It happen just five year gone 

by. 
