

ii. the hollow column 

told BY the tax-collector 

"everi man' fate is fore-ordained," said the tax-collector, 

reflect stroke hi beard. "although we may not understand it at 

the moment each particular event that happen is simpli a mean prepar 

for some destin end that may be mani year remot in time. vishnu the 

preserv save the life of the littl maid of jhalnagor so that her 

father' life might later on be saved. but none can read the future, so 

that we are all blindli do the thing of to-day without know their 

real bear on the thing of a far-away to-morrow. and one man can make 

or mar the happi of anoth man, even though their live be 

separ by hundr of leagu in space or hundr of year in time." 

"in your mind doubtless is some tale to illustr the truth of what you 

teach," remark the astrologer, with a shrewd uplift of hi 

eyebrows. "the star can help us to read the future, as I can prove to 

you by a stori of actual experience. but befor I proceed to my 

narrative, pray, friend, let us hear from you." 

"gladly," assent the tax-collector. "the stori of thi nobl rajput 

ha brought to memori an incid in my own life mani year ago, 

likewis serving[pg 20] to show that the god prepar long year ahead for the 

work out of each particular man' destiny. listen: 

"a a youth I wa a keeper of account in the servic of a rich 

zemindar, whose estat lay in the countri of the five rivers. He wa a 

usur as well as a landowner, as had been hi father befor him for 

mani generations. So in hi castl wa an accumul of great store 

of wealth—gold and silver and preciou stones, cloth of gold, silks, 

brocades, and muslins, ivori and amber, camphor, spices, dye stuffs, and 

other merchandis of diver kinds." 

the afghan gener stirred, and the scabbard of hi sword rattl on the 

floor as, rais himself from hi elbow that rest on a cushion, he 

sat up and assum an attitud of keen attention. 

"where is thi place?" he asked, a wolfish gleam in hi eyes, and hi 

lip curv to a smile that revealed, under the black, curl moustache, 

the white gleam of sharp-point teeth. 

the story-tel also smiled, knowingly, and rais a deprecatori hand. 

"nay, friend, thi zemindar, my first master, wa not fate to be 

reliev of hi treasure, as my stori will tell, even though a skil 

plot had been laid for hi spoliation. which is the veri point of my 

tale, although I may seem to come to it by a roundabout way of telling." 

the afghan sank back on hi cushion, but hi gaze remain rivet on 

hi narrator' face. 

"one day I wa seat in my home, cast up my book of account, for i[pg 21] 

had onli that morn complet the take of tax from the crop of 

the rayats, the tenant of my lord. all of a sudden a white-rob figur 

enter the doorway and threw himself prostrat befor me. when at last 

the face wa rais I recogn the dhobi of the villag that nestl 

under the hill on which wa perch the castl of the zemindar. 

"'o thou washer of clothes,' I asked, 'what is thi plaint?' 

"'protector of the poor,' repli my visitor, 'behold my bandag feet, 

beaten with rod until they are swollen and torn.' 

"I looked, as requested, and saw the blood-stain soak through the 

wrap of linen. 

"'thou art an honest and a peac man, bhagwan. whi thi cruel 

punishment?' 

"'i know not, indeed. but I have come to thee, becaus I have endur 

the wrong at the hand of thi master.' 

"'tell me thi story.' 

"'a you have said, O my protector,' began the dhobi, assum a sit 

postur and spread the fold of hi loose-flow cotton garment over 

hi bandag feet, 'I am an honest man. and it is for that veri reason I 

have suffered. yesterday, among the apparel I receiv from the home of 

the zemindar to be made clean and white wa the bodic of a woman, and 

tie in one corner of thi piec of raiment wa a ring set with bright 

red stone that[pg 22] gleam as if they were aflame. straightway I return 

to the palac of the zemindar, and, enter the audienc chamber where, 

as is hi wont at that particular hour each day, he wa seat receiv 

the complaint of the oppressed, did my humbl obeisance, and then 

place in hi hand the jewel I had discovered. He ask me where I had 

found it, and when I repli truthfully, hi eye flash with anger, 

and hi voic thunder at me in rebuke. although I had done no wrong, 

but rather a virtuou deed, I implor for pardon. but in vain. My mind 

grew confused, and the next thing I rememb wa the sharp cut of bamboo 

rod upon the sole of my feet. I wa in a small vault chamber, bound 

to a wooden bench, surround by the zemindar' soldiers, and powerless 

except to scream out in the agoni of each blow. thirti stroke were 

counted, and then I wa flung out of the gate of the castle, to limp my 

way home.' 

"tear of self-piti were in the dhobi' eye as he recount hi tale of 

woe. even then I wa reflect on the real caus of the zemindar' 

wrath. the jewel had been discov in the fold of a garment worn by 

one of the women in hi zenana, and hi quick access of anger show 

that the gift had come from some other hand than his. savag jealousy, 

therefore, had prompt the act of injustic inflict upon the 

unfortun washerman. I knew my master so well hi sullen moods, hi 

outburst of passion, that alreadi I could arriv at thi conclus 

with certainty. 

"'proceed,' I said, indifferently, for it is well that a[pg 23] man should 

keep hi own counsel in such delic affairs. 'what is my concern with 

your misfortune?' 

"'harken, O dispens of bounties! last night when I lay nurs my 

wounds, I rememb that the ring which had prove the caus of my 

miseri had been wrap in a fragment of paper whereon were some strang 

mark and line as in the book of learn men. thi I had flung away, 

at that time deem onli the ring to be of ani consequence. but the 

thought came to me in the night that perhap the paper might tell 

someth about the ring. So all thi day have I search among the 

bush by the stream where I beat the cloth on stone and wash them. 

and behold, I have found that for which I have been seeking.' 

"hereupon the dhobi loosen the loin cloth beneath hi upper garment, 

and extract from it fold a tini roll of paper. thi he present to 

me, with a bow of defer to my superior understand of such things. 

"'thi time I have come to you,' he said, 'a man of learn and of 

justice, not like unto the cruel zemindar. doe the paper tell whi I 

should have suffer such shame and pain at hi hands?' 

"I had unrol the scroll, the fold of which show that it had serv 

as a wrap for the ring. the write wa in neat persian characters, 

and I had no difficulti in deciph it, for the four line that met 

my eye had been recit to me onli a few day befor by the veri man 

who claim to be their author. 

"now did my veri heart trembl with agitation.[pg 24] but to the dhobi I 

appear cold as the water of the snow that melt on the mountains. 

"'thi write would onli add to your troubles,' I said. 'here, let me 

destroy it.' and, turn to the red ash burn in a brazier near at 

hand, I dexter substitut a fragment of paper, on which I had been 

figur my accounts, for the paper received, from the dhobi, place 

the former on the glow charcoal ember and bestow the latter in 

the secur of my girdle. A curl of white smoke, a puff of flame, and 

the work of destruct was, to all appearance, completed. 

"'in view of your misfortune, my friend,' I resumed, 'I bestow upon you 

in the name of my master ten maund of dal, which will be sent to your 

home on the morrow.' 

"the recipi of thi unexpect bounti prostrat himself befor me. 

"'o princ of justice, no longer do my wound pain me. the belli of my 

children will be fill for mani long day to come.' 

"'then go thi way, rejoic in thi heart even though limp on thi 

feet. and rememb that silenc is golden. say not one word more to 

anyon about the ring or the paper, your punish or the reward that 

ha now redress the wrong. Go in peace.' 

"and the dhobi, after profus express of gratitude, hobbl from my 

presence. 

"alon with my thoughts, I felt sore troubled. the writer of the 

vers of ardent poetri written on[pg 25] the paper brought to me by the 

washerman wa my cherish friend, a youth from far-away bokhara, abdul 

by name. thi young man had come to our countri onli a year or so 

before, bring sever beauti arab hors for sale. these the 

zemindar had purchased, and had retain abdul in hi service, for the 

youth wa skill in the manag of horses, and in the rear of 

young stock. 

"abdul and myself were much of an age, and my regul of expenditur 

in the stabl had brought us constantli together. So a close friendship 

had resulted, valu greatli on my side, for I had soon come to know 

that abdul wa a man of refin and learn such as I had never 

befor encount in ani man of so humbl a calling. and despit the 

fact that he wa a moslem and I a hindu, he had chosen me as hi 

intim friend, hi onli confidant. thu had it come about that at 

time he had read to me of an even song of hi own composing, and 

even on occas had sung them to the accompani of a small harp, the 

string of which he touch with wondrou skill and sensibility. 

"now did I know that thi dear friend of mine had endang not onli 



