

vi. the tiger OF the pathan 

told BY the afghan gener 

"in my case the philosophi of life is of the simplest," remark the 

afghan general. "I neither crave the wealth of the prince, nor do I 

inflict upon myself the mortif of the ascetic. for the one rich 

robe and the sceptre, for the other a loin cloth and a begging-bowl; 

but for me the good sword that command respect from my enemies, 

confid from my friends, and my due share of the good thing of 

existence. In thi frame of mind I find the full measur of joy in each 

day that passes." 

He smile the smile of the man content with the world and with 

himself, but there wa the light of proud determin in hi eye that 

beli the mere sybarite. 

"then for you the greatest good consist in the happi you can snatch 

from the pass hour," suggest the magistrate. 

"that is so," concur the soldier, "if to the word happi you give 

the right interpretation. To me the perform of one' present duti is 

the onli real thing that bring contentment. and duti need not alway be 

stern and forbidding; to laugh and play and be merri may, at the proper 

time and in the proper circumstances, be a duti both to ourselves[pg 129] and 

to others. when one live philosoph for the present, he take men 

in all their mood and life in all it phases. the past is count as 

dead and to be forgotten, except for the experi gain to guid the 

do of the thing that lie now to one' hand. the futur is unseen, 

but is none the less determin by our deeds, words, and thought of the 

pass moment, each one of which, be it remembered, whether deed or 

rash word, or unspoken thought, ha consequ that are eternal." 

"so for the man whose mind is thu attuned," again interpos the 

magistrate, "the present becom all supreme, shape by the past, 

shape the future." 

"which mean that destini never degener into mere blind and helpless 

fatalism," respond the afghan. "to do the right now suffic to give 

absolut trust in god for the hereafter. that is the key of destiny, and 

each man hold it in hi own keeping." 

"A simpl religion," smile the rajput. 

"and therefor the best. It is the religion of islam freed from all the 

controversi of rival sect and over-learn mullahs. It is the 

religion of my father and the religion of my youth, and in it I abide. 

let me tell you a stori of the rough school in which I receiv my earli 

train and where such thought as these first began to sink deep into 

my mind. 

"have you ever heard of shir jumla khan? no? well, that is doubtless 

becaus he ha been dead for a full score of years, and becaus he held 

hi sway in a land remot from these plain of hindustan, up[pg 130] in the 

rug mountains, where brave tribesmen guard the valley which their 

ancestor tilled, and yield allegi to no one but their own 

hereditari chieftains. such wa my countri and my people, for I am proud 

that in my vein run the blood of the man who for a hundr mile 

around my boyhood home wa known as the tiger of the pathans. behold in 

me a grandson of shir jumla khan." 

the narrat fold hi arm across hi breast, in an attitud of quiet 

dignity. after just a moment' paus he continued: 

"we were all born fighters, the member of my clan, for dure hundr 

of year mani a swarm host had swept past the gateway of our 

territory, persians, arabs, afghans, moguls, turkmans, hord of 

fight men of everi race and tongue, sometim march south bent on 

conquest, at other time return to their home laden with rich 

spoils, and yet at other time defeat and broken, with enemi 

press at their heels. and it wa the patrimoni right of our tribe 

to take toll from all alike, from victor and vanquished, from pursuer 

and pursued. 

"sometim an armi would pass through our mountain under safe conduct 

from all the tribes, and the price paid in money, horses, camels, and 

cattle, cloth and other goods, would be divid among the sever 

clans. but in thi practic there had grown to be more danger for 

ourselv than from foray or assault on pass enemies, becaus over 

the divis of the spoil there would be[pg 131] quarrelling, follow by 

fighting, among the tribes. thu had origin mani a blood feud 

endur through mani generations. 

"in the earli day of shir jumla khan it had come about that sever 

rich caravan had fallen exclus into hi hands. with the money thu 

provid by the bounti of allah, he had been enabl to build for 

himself a citadel that for vast and secur surpass those of all 

hi rival among the tribal chiefs. within it wide wall were well and 

water tanks, garden for the grow of fruit and vegetables, 

warehous for goods, granari store with barley, wheat, and dal, 

stabl for a hundr horses, shed for the hous of cattle, sheep, 

and camels, and dwell place for a goodli multitud of arm men, 

their wive and their children. and all of these thing endur until 

thi day, for the fortress town amid the mountain built by my 

grandsire, the tiger of the pathans, ha ever remain unconqu and 

unconquerable. 

"but as shir jumla khan grew rich in possess and in power—for 

score of fight men from afar were attract to hi service—at the 

same time did hi posit among the tribesmen becom one of increas 

isolation. all fear him and envi him, and fear and envi have ever 

been breeder of hate. yet wa he a just and a benevol man, honour 

and belov by everi one within hi domain, where hi slightest word wa 

gladli accept law, not becaus of the might he wield but becaus of 

hi fair to all men. 

"I wa yet a young man when a wide spread plot among the rival[pg 132] 

tribesmen to destroy shir jumla khan' power had come to a head, and had 

result in a determin and prolong attack upon hi citadel. number 

had told, our outli field had been devastated, our flock and herd 

driven away, and crowd within the wall of the fortress were refuge 

from all the surround countryside. We had been coop up through the 

summer, we had lost our annual crops, and without the usual 

replenish granari and warehous were begin to wear an empti 

look, with but sorri promis for the winter. but, calm and undismayed, 

hi proud look and seren smile ever the same, shir jumla khan continu 

to feed the hungri host within hi gate and now absolut depend 

upon hi protection. 

"the come of winter would mean for us some relief, for the first snow 

would scatter the beleagu hosts, send them back to their own 

valleys, and give us the chance, in the interv of the season' 

storms, to make a few foray on our own account on neighbour 

communities, which, taken one at a time, would be pretti well at our 

mercy. but if we reason in thi wise so did our enemies; for it wa 

now toward the close of the month of august and redoubl effort were 

be put forth to accomplish the breach of our walls, so that the 

tiger of the pathan might be slain befor there wa the chanc of hi 

fang and claw again becom dangerous. 

"the tribesmen, no doubt by captur and enforc service, had secured[pg 133] 

the help of some engin vers in the method of sieg and assault 

on fortifi place as practis in hindustan. At that time I had never 

befor seen a sabat, but now from our fortif I beheld the 

gradual extension, day by day, of a broad cover way, with bull-hid 

roof stretch across the trench be dug, and effectu protect 

the labour below from our gun and musket and catapults. We had made 

sever salli with a view to tri and stop thi work, but these had 

onli result in loss on our side out of all proport to the 

harass and delay inflict on the besiegers. So we could but 

impot watch the subtl and inexor approach of the skill men 

who would eventu reach our walls, drive mine beneath them, and blow 

us to perdition. 

"our one chanc lay in the question of time. If the winter began earli 

we should be saved, but if the snow held off till late in the year it 

look as if our doom must be sealed. 

"but quit unexpectedli a ray of hope came from anoth quarter. 

dissens had broken out in the rank of our foes! 

"the first word wa brought to us by a desert from the besiegers' 

camp, who one night had crept up to the gateway of the fort and whine 

for admittance, declar that he had import news to tell and hope 

for a reward. 

"I wa with my grandfath when, awaken from hi sleep, he listen to 

the man' story. It told of a[pg 134] fierc quarrel the preced even 

between two of the lead chieftains. they had been convers alon in 

one of their tents, when suddenli those without had heard angri words. 

then it would seem that the owner of the tent had sent for one of the 

slipper which hi visitor had left at the doorway, and with thi had 

administ five or six stroke over the head, drive hi guest forth 

insult and disgraced. everi one in the camp wa on the alert for 

fight in the morning. 

"with a grim smile shir jumla khan listen to thi narrative. but he 

made no comment; he mere issu instruct for the inform to be 

fed and for the present close guarded. 

"but if there had been ani linger doubt as to the truth of the story, 

confirm came ere the break of the dawn. for we were onc again 

disturb from our rest, thi time by the nois of a great tumult in the 

camp of the besiegers, loud shout follow by the discharg of 

muskets, the sound gradual die away in the distanc as if a fight 

and a pursuit had taken place. when day broke such inde prove to be 

the case; we could descri in the camp a row of tent thrown down and 

dismantled, also dead or wound men be brought in from the countri 

beyond, while away on a distant ridg wa a consider bodi of 

tribesmen retreat toward their homes. 

"at thi sight joy huzza resound through the fortress, and we did 

inde all feel that allah, by disrupt the forc of the enemy, wa 

fight on[pg 135] our side. and as I spread my prayer carpet, and prostrat 

myself toward mecca, the piou thought in my heart wa one that had mani 

time been inculc by my nobl grandsir himself: 'let the wise man 

reflect that he can in no way succeed without the help of god most 

high.' 

"dure the day we took counsel as to the advis of an attack on 

the somewhat attenu host without the walls. but from our post of 

observ we could see that everi one in the camp wa under arm and 

on the alert, no doubt forese that such an attempt wa like on our 

part. So we conclud to let event develop, and content ourselv 

with watch the progress of the sabat. here there wa no relax of 

endeavour, for the protect trench made a consider advanc ere the 

sun onc again sank over the western hills. 

"dark had not long fallen when anoth bleat voic of a suppliant 

for admitt wa heard by the sentri at the gateway. introduc to our 

presence, the newcomer, a goatherd by hi appearance, and with the sign 

of travel on hi garments, remov hi head dress, untwist the long 

lock of hair bound accord to custom around hi head, and, produc 

a small packet from the midst of hi tresses, flung it on the floor. I 

pick up the missive, and hand it to our chieftain. 

"shir jumla khan unti the packet, and produc therefrom a heavi gold 

signet ring. while he wa examin this, the seem goatherd rais 

hi voice: 
