the project gutenberg ebook of astral worship, by J. H. hill 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 

almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 

re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 

with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

title: astral worship 

author: J. H. hill 

post date: april 6, 2014 [ebook #8855] 

releas date: september, 2005 

first posted: august 14, 2003 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook astral worship *** 

produc by david deley 

astral worship 

BY 

J. H. hill, M. D. 

“now, what I want is—facts.”—boz. 

contents. 

introduct 

5 

the geocentr system OF natur 

13 

the earth 

13 

the firmament 

13 

the planet 

14 

the constel 

15 

the zodiac 

15 

the sacr number 7 and 12 

17 

the twelv thousand year cycl 

18 

the ancient triad 

19 

god sol 

22 

the ancient cosmogoni 

30 

fall and redempt OF man 

31 

incarn OF god sol 

33 

fabl OF the twelv labor 

36 

anniversari OF solar worship 

40 

the nativ 

40 

epiphani or twelfth day 

41 

lent or lenten season 

42 

passion week 

44 

passion play 

45 

resurrect and easter festiv 

46 

annunci 

48 

ascens 

49 

assumpt 

49 

the lord' supper 

50 

transubstanti 

50 

autumn crucifixion 

51 

michaelma 

56 

personif OF the divis OF time 

57 

the hour 

57 

the day 

57 

the month 

58 

the season 

60 

half year of increas day 

63 

half year of decreas day 

63 

last quarter of the year 

64 

zodiac symbol OF solar worship 

64 

the sphinx 

65 

the dragon 

66 

the bull 

67 

the ram 

68 

the lamb 

68 

the fish 

71 

sign OF the cross 

72 

futur reward and punish 

74 

the orient system 

75 

the occident system 

75 

the second or gener judgment 

77 

jewish, OR ancient christian 

79 

the propheci 

83 

roman OR modern christian 

88 

freemasonri and druidism 

109 

the sabbath 

117 

piou fraud 

121 

conclus 

125 

introduction. 

In an article, entitl "then and now," publish in 

the decemb number, 1890, of "the arena," it author, 

a distinguish unitarian d.d. of boston, mass., says. 

"astronomi ha shatter the fallaci of astrology;" 

and peopl have found out that the star are mind their 

own busi instead of meddl with theirs." now, 

while it is true that modern astronomi ha supersed 

the ancient system, and peopl have ceas to believ that 

the star are interven in mundan affairs, noth 

could be further from the truth than the assert that 

"astronomi ha shatter the fallaci of astrology; 

and those of our reader who will accord to thi work an 

unprejud perus can hardli fail to be convinc that 

a larg major of the peopl of christendom are domin 

as much by these fallaci as were our pagan ancestry—th 

onli differ be a chang of name. the 

dogmat element of religion, which wa ancient design 

as astrology, is now known as theology. 

all the evid bear upon the subject indic 

that the founder of the primari form of religion were a 

sect of philosophers, known as magi, or wise men, of the 

aryan race of central asia, who, have live age befor 

ani concept of the supernatur had obtain in the 

world, and specul rel to the "begin of 

things," were necessarili confin to the contempl 

and studi of nature, the element of which they believ 

to be self-exist and endless in duration; but, be 

wholli without knowledg of her inher forces, they 

explain her manifold process by conceiv the idea 

that she wa anim by a great and inher soul or 

spirit, eman from which impress all her part 

with life and motion. thus, endow man, and other 

animals, with soul eman alik from the imaginari 

great soul of nature, they believed, and taught, that immedi 

after death all soul were absorb into their 

source, where, as "the dewdrop slip into the shine 

sea," all person ident wa forev lost. henc we see 

that although recogn the soul as immortal, consid 

it, not as an entiti exist independ of matter, but 

as the spirit of matter itself, the primari religion wa the 

expon of the purest form of materialism. 

be the astronom of their day, and mistak 

the appar for the real, the ancient magi construct 

that erron system of natur known as the geocentric, 

and, in conform thereto, compos a collect of astronom 

allegories, in which the eman from the 

imaginari great soul of nature, by which they believ 

all materi we'r impress with life and motion, were 

personifi and made to play their respect parts. base 

the religion they institut upon their system of allegor 

astronomy, and make it personif the 

object of worship, they thu origin the anthropomorph 

or man-lik gods, and, claim to have compos 

them under the inspir of these self same divinities, 

they design them as sacr records, or scriptures, 

and taught the ignor mass that they were liter histories, 

and their personif real personages, who, 

have onc live upon earth, and; for the good of mankind, 

perform the wondrou work imput to them, 

were then in heaven whenc they came. 

thu we see that the primari religion, which is popularli 

known as paganism, wa found in the worship 

of personifi nature; that, accord special homag to 

the imaginari genii of the stars, and inculc suprem 

ador to the divin suppos to resid in the sun, it 

wa ancient known by the gener name of astrolatry, 

and by the more specif one of solar worship; and that it 

founders, arrog to themselv the titl of astrologers, 

gave to it dogmat element the name of astrology. 

In studi the primit form of religion it will be 

found that none of them taught anyth rel to a 

futur life, for the simpl reason that their founder had 

no concept of such a state. henc it follow that the 

law they enact were intend sole for the regul 

of their social relations, and, to secur their observance, 

they were embodi into their sacr record and made 

part of their religion. one form of that most ancient 

worship wa known as sabaism, or sabism. anoth 

form of the same religion wa the ancient judaism, as 

portray in the old testament, and more especi in 

the pentateuch, or first five books; in the decalogu of 

which the onli promis made for the observ of one of 

the command is length of day on earth; and, in a 

gener sum up of the bless and curs to be 

enjoy or suffered, for the observ or violat of the 

laws, as record in the 28th chapter of deuteronomy, it 

will be seen they are all of a tempor charact only. At 

the begin of the christian era there were still in exist 

a sect of jew known as sadducees, who were strict 

adher to the primit form of worship, and their belief 

rel to the state of the dead we find record in 

ecclesiast xii., 7, which reads: "then shall the dust return 

to earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to god 

who gave it." 

for age the doctrin of soul absorption, immedi 

after death, constitut the belief of mankind; but ultim 

recogn the fact that the tempor punish 

of the exist law were wholli inadequ to the 

prevent of crime, and conceiv the idea that the 

ignor and viciou mass could be govern with a 

surer hand by appeal to the sentiment of hope and 

fear in relat to the reward and punish of an 

imaginari futur life, the ancient astrolog resolv to 

remodel the dogmat element of religion so as to includ 

that doctrine. but realiz the necessity, of suppress 

the belief in the absorpt of all souls, immedi 

after death, they ceas to teach it, and ultim it 

wa embodi in that secret and unwritten system known 

as the esoter philosophy, in which the astrolog 

formul their own privat belief, and which for mani 

centuri wa kept from the knowledg of the uniniti 

by their successor in the priestli office. As they were 

the sole custodian of the scriptures, they made do chang 

in their verbiage, but, ad the doctrin of futur reward 

and punish to that written and openli taught 

system of faith known as the exoter creed, they made it 

the more impress by institut a system of impos 

rite and ceremonies, which they design as mysteries, 

into which they initi the neophytes, and in which were 

portrayed, in the most vivid manner, the reward and 

punish of the imaginari futur life, which they 

taught were the award of the god for the observ or 

violat of the laws. these teach were inculc in 

the lesser degre only, but those who were found worthi 

of so great a distinct were also induct into the higher 

degrees, in which wa impart the knowledg of the 

esoter philosophy. In both the lesser and higher degre 

the initi receiv instruct in an oral manner 

only; and all were bound by the most fear oath not to 

reveal the secret impart to them. 

thu were the votari of the ancient astral worship 

divid into two distinct classes, the esoterics, or gnostics; 

and the exoterics, or agnostics; the former compris 

those who knew that the god were mythic and 

the scriptur allegorical; and the latter, those who were 

taught that the god were real, and the scriptur historical; 

or, in other words, it wa philosophi for the cultur 

few, and religion for the ignor multitude. the initi 

into the secret of these two system recogn 

them as the two gospels; and paul must have had refer 

to them in hi epistl to the galatian ii., 2, where he 

distinguish the gospel which he preach on ordinari 

occas from that gospel which he preach "privat 

to them which were of reputation." 

such wa the system of astrolatry, which, origin 

in the orient, and becoming, after be remodel 

in egypt, the prototyp of all occident form of worship, 

wa recognized, successively, as the state religion of 

the grecian and roman empires; and we propos to describ 

the erron system of natur upon which it wa 

based, and to develop the origin of it cycles, dogmas, 

ordinances, anniversaries, personif and symbols, 

with the view to prove that it wa the veri same system 

which wa ultim perpetu under the name of 

christianity. We also propos to present the origin and 

abridg histori of it two forms, the jewish, or ancient, 

and the roman, or modern; and to give an account of the 

conflict between the votari of the latter, and the adher 

to the establish form of worship, which culmin 

in the fourth centuri in the substitut of christian 

as the state religion of the roman empire. We furthermor 

propos to show the chang to which the creed and 

scriptur were subject dure the middl ages, and at 

the reform in the sixteenth century, through which 

they assum the phase as now taught in the theologies, 

respect of catholic and orthodox protestantism. 

We also present an articl rel to freemasonri and 

druidism, for the purpos of show that, primarily, they 

were but differ form of the ancient astrolatry. We 

also devot a few page to the subject of the sabbath, and 

to that of "piou frauds." 

note.—for the matter publish in thi work, we are 

princip indebt to the write of robert taylor, an erudit 

but recus minist of the church of england, who flourish 

about seventi year ago, and who, be too honest to 

continu to preach what, after thorough investigation, he did 

not believe, began to give express to hi doubt by write 

and lecturing. not be abl to cope with hi arguments, the 

clergy, under the charg of the imposs crime of blasphemy, 

had him imprison for more than two years, dure which 

time he wrote hi great work entitl "the diegesis," which 

should be read by all person who are investig the claim 

of the christian religion to divin authenticity. 



roman OR modern christianity. 

have present the evid that the jewish, or 

ancient christianity, origin at the univers of alexandria, 

under greek rule, we now propos to show that it 

modern form eman from the same source, under roman 

rule; but, befor enter upon thi investigation, it 

is import to becom convers with the sentiment 

manifest toward religion by the cultur element of 

roman societi in that enlighten era, which, design 

as the golden age of literature, wa adorn by such distinguish 

orators, philosophers, historians, poet and 

naturalist as cicero, tacitus, pliny, horac and virgil. 

