the geocentr system OF nature. 

In construct their system of nature, the ancient 

astronom constitut it of the earth, the firmament, 

the planets, the constel and the zodiac, and we 

will refer to them in the order named. 

the earth. 

believ that the earth wa the onli world, that it 

wa a vast circular plane, and that it wa the fix and 

immov center around which revolv the celesti 

luminaries, the ancient astronomers, in conform to the 

requir of the doctrin of futur reward and punishments, 

as inculc in the egyptian version of the 

exoter creed, divid it into an upper and an under, 

or nether world, which they connect by a sinuou and 

tenebri passage. 

the firmament. 

the azur dome, call the firmament in the book of 

genesis, wa believ to be a solid transparency, which 

we find described, in the fourth chapter and sixth verse, 

of that collect of astronom allegories, call the 

apocalypse, or book of revelation, "a a sea of glass like 

unto crystal." It wa repres as be support by 

four pillars, rest upon the earth, one at each of the cardin 

points, which were design as "the pillar of 

heaven." conceiv the idea that there were window 

in the firmament, the ancient astronom call them 

"the window of heaven" and taught that they were 

open when it rained, and close when it ceas to rain. 

henc it is evid that the ancient astronom did not 

refer to these pillar and window in a figur sense, 

but as real appurten to a solid firmament, as will be 

seen by refer to gen. vii. 11, and viii. 2, job xxvi. 11, 

and malachi iii. 10. 

the planets. 

believ that the star were but mere flambeaux, 

suspend beneath the firmament, and revolv round 

the earth, for the sole purpos of give it light and heat; 

and observ that seven of these, answer to the sun, 

moon, mercury, venus, mars, jupit and saturn, had 

percept movements, in relat to the other luminaries, 

the ancient astronom design them as planet 

or wander stars. 

the constellations. 

perceiv that the other celesti luminari maintain 

the same relat to each other, and design 

them as fix stars, the ancient astronom group 

those visibl to them into forty-eight constellations; and 

give name to these, they also attach name to the 

star of larger magnitude, which wa done for the purpos 

of locat and distinguish them with greater 

ease. 

the zodiac. 

through twelv of these constellations, mostli contain 

within a belt of 16 degre in width, and within 

which the planet appear to revolve, the ancient astronom 

inscrib a central line repres the ecliptic, or 

appar orbit of the sun, which they divid into 360 

degrees; and quarter these to denot the seasons, they 

name the cardin point the summer and winter solstices, 

and the vernal and autumn equinoxes; the 

former refer to the longest and shortest day of the 

year; and the latter to the two period when the day and 

night are equal. An abbreviatori sign have been attach 

to each of these constellations, the great celesti 

belt contain them wa call "the wheel of the signs," 

or "a wheel in the middl of a wheel," as design by 

that old astrologer, ezekiel the prophet, in chap. i. and 

16th verse. but for the reason that, with onli one exception, 

the form of live things, either real or mythical, 

were given to them, thi belt, ultimately, wad design 

as the zodiac; or circl of live creatures, see ezekiel, 

chap. i. constitut the essenti featur of the ancient 

astronomy, we present, in our frontispiece, a diagram of 

the zodiac, as ancient represented, to which, as well as 

to burritts' celesti atlas, our reader will be necessit 

to make frequent reference. 

recent research among the ruin of ancient citi 

have develop the fact that sever centuri befor the 

begin of our era the astronom had invent the 

telescope, and discov the true or heliocentr system 

of nature; but for the reason that religion had been base 

upon the false, or geocentr system, it wa deem prudent 

not to teach it to the masses. hence, hide it away 

among the other secret of the esoter philosophy, the 

knowledg of it wa lost dure the middl ages; and 

when rediscovered, the hierarchi of the church of rome, 

upon the plea that it wa contrari to the teach of 

scripture, resort to inquisitori tortur to suppress 

it promulgation; but, in spite of all their efforts, it ha 

been univers accepted; and, in thi otherwis enlighten 

age, we have present to us the anomali of a religion 

base upon a fals system of astronomy, while it 

votari believ in the true system. 

