
fall and redempt OF man. 

religion have been base upon the worship of personifi 

nature, it is evid that it founder fabric 

it dogmat element from their concept of her destruct 

and reproduct process as manifest in the 

rotat and divers of the seasons. the appar retreat 

of the sun from the earth, in winter, and hi return in 

the spring, suggest the idea of a figur death and 

resurrect of the geniu of that luminary, they appli 

these phenomena of the year to man, and compos the 

allegori rel to hi fall and redemption, as inculc 

in the exoter creed. In the allegori relat to the fall, 

it wa taught that, after make the first human pair, the 

lord of good or the lord god place them in a beauti 

garden—correspond to the season of fruit and flower 

or month of spring and summer, with the injunction, 

under a penalty, not to eat of the fruit of a certain tree. 

when the lord of evil, or devil, symbol by the serpent 

and repres by the constel "serpens" 

place in conjunct with the autumn equinox, meet 

them on the confin of hi dominion, and tempt 

the woman, and she the man, they ate of the forbidden 

fruit; thus, fall from their first estate, and commit 

the origin sin, they involv the whole human race in the 

consequ of their disobedience. then the lord god, 

pronounc a curs against the serpent, cloth the man 

and woman with skin to protect them against the inclem 

of his, dominion as lord of evil, and drove them 

from the garden; after which they were necessit to 

earn their bread by till the ground. 

in, refer to the plan of redemption, the ancient 

astrolog divid the 6,000 year appropri to man, 

as the durat of hi race on earth, into ten equal cycles, 

and taught that at the conclus of each god sol, as 

lord of good, would manifest himself in the flesh, to destroy 

hi work as lord of evil, and through suffer 

and death make an aton for sin. thu have origin 

the doctrin of origin sin, incarn and vicari 

atonement, as part of the plan of redemption, and 

make it final correspond, in point of time, to the conclus 

of the 12,000 year cycle, their successor in the 

priestli offic ultim inculc the addit dogma 

of the gener judgment and futur reward and punishments, 

as we have shown in our introduction. 

have base the fabl of the fall and redempt of 

man upon the idea that he wa impelled, without hi 

volition, to pass from the dominion of god to that of the 

devil, or in other words, upon hi subject to the inexor 

necess which make the inclement season 

of autumn and winter succeed the benefic one of 

spring and summer, it author compos the origin 

of the text which, found in roman viii., 20, read that 

"the creatur wa made subject to vaniti (evil), not willingly, 

but by reason of him who hath subject the same 

in hope." 

but for the popular teach in favor of it be 

liter history, no one could read the account of the fall of 

man, as record in the third chapter of genesis, without 

recogn it as simpli an allegory; or fail to realize, the 

forc of the argument of no fall, no redemption, and if no 

redemption, no god to reward or devil to punish; no hell 

to suffer, or heaven to enjoy. the fact is that these are 

but antithet idea which came in together, and must 

surviv or perish together. they cannot be separ 

without destroy the whole theolog fabric. 

incarn OF god sol. 

believ that god sol wa necessit to remain at 

hi post to direct the cours of the sun, the ancient astrolog 

conceiv the idea of teach that, attend by a 

retinu of subordin genii, he descend to earth 

through the medium of incarn at the end of 600 year 

cycles, to perform the work of man' redempt and, 

have made virgo of the zodiac the mother of the solar 

divinity, they taught in their allegor astronomy, or 

scriptures, that hi incarn were born of a virgin. 

henc we find that god sol, usual design by the 

titl of the word, "wa made flesh, and dwelt among us." 

john i., 14. 

In a discours upon thi text deliv by tillotson, 

archbishop of canterbury, in the year 1680, publish in 

the fourth volum of woodhouse' edit of hi grace' 

sermons, in the year 1744, concern the incarn of 

our bless saviour, he explain the necess of incarn 

by say that "there wa likewis a great inclin 

in mankind to the worship of a visibl deity, so god wa 

pleas to appear in our nature, that they, who were so 

fond of a visibl deity, might have one, even a true and 

natur imag of god the father, the express imag of 

hi person." It onli requir a littl reflect to appreci 

the prelate' covert ironi and want of faith. 

have ascrib to the imaginari incarn of 

god sol the characterist of heaven-descending, virgin-born, 

earth-walking, wonder-working, dying, resuscit 

and ascend son of god, the ancient astrolog 

attach to them the sever titl of saviour, redeemer, 

avatar, divine-helper, shiloh, messiah, christ; and, in 

refer to their foster-father, that of son of man. 

teach that they continu to make intercess for sin, 

after their ascens to the right hand of the father, they 

were also call intercessors, mediat or advoc 

with the father. from teach their appear everi 

600 year origin the egyptian legend of the phoenix, 

a bird said to descend from the sun at these intervals, and, 

after be consum upon the altar in the templ of on, 

or citi of the sun—cal heliopoli by the greeks—would 

rise from it ash and ascend to it source. accord 

to the civil law of egypt, manhood wa not 

attain until the age of thirti years. henc the earthli 

mission of incarn saviour wa made to begin at that 

age; and for the reason that, relat to the appar transit 

of the sun through the twelv sign of the zodiac, it 

wa complet dure the period of one year. 

To impress the ignor mass with the belief that 

the scriptur were liter histories, and the incarn 

saviour real personages, the ancient astrolog caus 

tomb to be erect in which it wa claim they were 

buried. such sepulchr were erect to hercul at 

cadiz, to apollo at delphi, and to other saviour at mani 

other places, to which their respect votari were induc 

to perform pilgrimages. In egypt the pyramid 

were built, partli for astronom purposes, and partli 

as tomb for saviours, claim to have been kings, who 

had onc rule over the country; and whi should we not 

recogn that magnific structur known as the church 

of the holi sepulchre, at jerusalem, as but anoth of 

those tomb of saviour in which no saviour wa ever entombed? 

thu we have shown that it wa god sol, the onli 

begotten of the father, or second person in the sacr 

triad, to whom suprem ador wa inculc in all 

form of the ancient astrolatry; and that it cultur 

votaries, understand that the doctrin pertain to 

the fall and redempt of man were evolv from the 

figur death and resurrect of the solar divinity, 

recogn the doctrin of incarn as a priestli invent 

intend onli for the ignor masses. 

