a grinch steal a bank and fire an angel 
by nichola kristof 
feb. 1, 2020 

to understand how some company have lost their souls, consider what happen after u.s. bank stiff a customer before christmas. 

marc eugenio had deposit a $1,080 paycheck into his account at u.s. bank. the bank put a hold on most of the sum, and he spent many hour in a branch office over two days, try to get access to the money so he could buy presents for his 9-year-old daughter and 13-year-old son. 

on christmas eve, eugenio found himself park at a gas station in clackamas, ore., a portland suburb, both his fuel gauge and his bank balance on empty. a bank employee had told him that money would soon show up in his account — perhaps a ruse to get him out of the branch office. for hour eugenio then try his debit card at the gas pump, so he could buy a few gallon and get home to his wife and children. 

"i was stranded," he told me. "i could have walk home, but it would have been five mile in the cold." 

that’s when eugenio found an angel. 

he telephone the bank’s toll-free number and spoke with emily james, a senior officer at a call center in portland. she spent an hour on the phone with eugenio, try to get some money release so he could at least get home. she soon realize that he had been misled, and that money wouldn’t reach his account any time soon. feeling badly for a customer stuck on christmas eve, james offer to drive over from her call center and personally hand him $20. 

"no, no, no," eugenio told her. he couldn’t impose. but she suggest she could use her break, and she received permission from a supervise to drive 20 minutes to eugenio. she later recall that when she arrived, she wish him merry christmas and hand him $20 of her own money. 

"twenty dollar wouldn’t break me," she explain to me, "and it would enable him to get home to his family." 

when u.s. bank found out that it had such a generous employee, what did it do? it fire her. 

"she broke the rules, putt herself and the bank at unnecessary risk," u.s. bank said in a statement. the company bar call center worker from meeting customers, so it dismiss both her and the manager who had approve her trip. the manager, abigail gilbert, told me that james’s account was essentially correct. 

james had work at the bank since 2017 and had received numerous commendation and award that i examined, but the bank paid her no severance. she is single and use her last paycheck to buy sack of food for her two dogs, domino and harley quinn. she is now reduce to sell blood plasma, at $25 a visit. 

"i won’t let myself be homeless," she told me. 

eugenio is horrify at what happened. "i was lie to and treat like dirt" by the bank, eugenio said, and he can’t understand why the bank axed the one employee who was helpful. "i felt really bad," he told me. "how could she get fired?" 

u.s. bank’s vision statement boasts: "our employee are empower to do the right thing." so i try to ask the company’s c.e.o., andrew cecere, why the bank fire an employee who, with permission, rescue a frustrate customer on christmas eve. 

cecere wouldn’t return my calls. david palombi, a bank spokesman, told me that an internal "investigation" had conclude that james misle her manager to get permission, that james could have found other ways to get money to eugenio, that the $20 came from the manager (which gilbert confirmed to me) and that james previous had disciplinary "issues." i found the bank’s "investigation" a whitewash and its explanation to be incoherent, meanspirite and contradict by a series of internal bank message that i reviewed. 

the bottom line is this: cecere, who was paid $14.1 million in 2018, preside over a company that has smear a much-decorated employee who help a customer and as a result survive by sell blood plasma. i suggest cecere apologize, reinstate james and promote her; he might also show contrition by sell his own blood plasma and donate the proceeds to a charity of james’s choosing. 

when young america say in poll that they react more positively to "socialism" than to "capitalism," it’s because of the hypocrisy of institution like u.s. bank. 

i’ve often noted that company have enormous capacity to help their communities. but too often they act like america tobacco companies, which kill more people than stalin did, or pharma company peddle opioids, or mckinsey & company advise a business to "get more patient on higher dose of opioids," or boeing mock regulators. that’s one reason to seek strong private-sector labor unions: at least union and corporation can then provide some check on each other. 

one bit of reassurance: some chief executive do seem more enlightened than cecere. after the oregonian wrote two excellent articles about james, other company reach out to her, saying that she’s the kind of care person they want to attract. 

"no job offer yet," she told me, "but there are a couple of possibility i’m really excited by." 
