brexit is here! sort of 
by the editorial board 
jan. 31, 2020 

finally, after 1,317 days of confusion, rancor and endless vote in parliament, it was time for brexit. on wednesday, teary member of the europe parliament join hand and sang "auld lang syne," a clock project onto 10 down street count down the minutes, union jack line the mall before buckingham palace. 

"a new dawn for europe," leader of the europe union wrote in a joint article. 

"this is the moment when the dawn breaks," came prime minister boris johnson’s echo from across the newly raise divide line. 

it was left to the dispassionate bbc to cut short the bathos: "brexit is far from ‘done,’" the beeb cold said, before list the many travail still to come, most notably the negotiation that now begin with the e.u. on the detail of britain’s future relationship with the continent. mr. johnson has promise not to seek an extension of the dec. 31 deadline, which he could, though a less complex trade deal between the e.u. and canada took seven years to finish. to discourage other member from exiting, the e.u. is not likely to cut britain much slack on e.u. standard and rule in their trade. 

britain will now also reach across the atlantic to what president trump has held out as a "very big trade deal, big than we’ve ever had with the u.k.," which mr. johnson has tout as a benefit of quit the e.u. that, too, could prove a disappointment. a former britain ambassador to washington, kim darroch — who resigned in july after his derogatory comment about mr. trump leak out — was among those who noted in interview that mr. trump is not given to generous trade concessions, least of all in an election year. 

in the same europe parliament session at which ursula von der leyen, the president of the e.u. commission, promise depart britain delegates, "we will always love you, and we will never be far," aileen mcleod of the scotland national party spoke of scotland’s anger over being "dragged" out of the union and ask that the member "leave a light on" for scotland, where brexit has fuel demand for a new referendum on independence. 

still, the fact was that after 47 years in the e.u., britain was officially out, and there was no go back, at least not in the foreseeable future. for many britons, the long and bitter debate had been less about economics and politics than about identity. those who fought to leave the e.u. fought for what they saw as lost sovereignty, often tinge with a sense of lost empire; those who fought to stay saw the union as post-imperial britain’s place in the future, join with the rest of europe in values, standard and security. in the end, after nearly three years of uncertainty and bitterness, voter elect mr. johnson out of exhaustion, to get it over with, not because they had reach agreement. 

headline reflect the divide. pro-brexit tabloid join in gleeful celebration: "our time has come," proclaim the sun, offering a "free giant brexit poster"; "yes, we did it!" cheer the daily express in what it describe as a historic edition; "free and independent once more after 47 years," declared the daily mail over a photograph of the white cliff of dover. those same cliff feature on the cover of the guardian, a strong advocate of stay in the e.u., over a crumble sand castle surmount by a tiny britain flag. the headline: "small island." 

try to reconcile these divergent worldview will be the main task of coming years, as mr. johnson appear to recognize when he declared in a speech to the nation friday evening: "our job as the government, my job, is to bring this country together now and take us forward. … this is not an end but a beginning." 

for the moment, what "forward" meant remain unclear. for at least the coming years not much would change in economic, trade and practical terms, but many potential battle loom over the shape of the future relationship with europe, america and the rest of the world. 

perhaps in paraphrase winston churchill on whether the moment was an end or a beginning, mr. johnson would have done better to use his predecessor’s entire quote, that one about a military campaign 78 years ago: "now this is not the end. it is not even the beginning of the end. but it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning." 
