china didn’t want us to know. now its own file are do the talking. 
by adrian zenz 
nov. 24, 2019 

no more denying, no more dodging. the china communist party can no long hide its relentless campaign of mass internment against the ethnic minority in the northwestern region of xinjiang, or claim that the effort is an innocuous educational program. what was already widely known, vastly report and confirmed by firsthand account has now been prove beyond doubt by the government’s own record — gigabyte of files, ream of reports, thousand of spreadsheet — some of them classified and highly confidential. 

last weekend, the new york times disclose and analyze the contents of a trove of leak internal china government document that outline specific policy for how to repress xinjiang’s predominantly muslim minority — and reveal that president xi jinp himself set out the foundation for them. 

this sunday, the contents of two more set of document — all of which i have review — are being disclosed. among the first batch, also leaked, is a confidential telegram sign by zhu hailun, xinjiang’s deputy party secretary, which detail how local authority should manage and operate the "vocational skill training centers" — a euphemism for the internment camps. (all translate here are mine.) the second set of documents, a large cache of file and spreadsheet from local governments, reveal the internment campaign’s devastating economic and social impact on the family and community it targets. 

the telegram — dated nov. 5, 2017, and address to local politics and legal affair bureau — is marked "extremely urgent" and bear the second-highest level of secrecy within china’s classified-document scheme. it reveal the extent of the security and surveillance measure taken around the camps, partly to shield the camp from external scrutiny. the message, a directive, note that the work conduct there is "strictly confidential" and "highly sensitive" in nature. even staff at the camp are forbidden from aggregate detainee figures. 

the authorities’ attempt to enforce absolute secrecy is confirmed by another document dated november 2018, this one from a local government file in hotan county. it chide official for not "protecting secrets" related to the internment campaign well enough. it stipulate that "no person is under any circumstances permit to disseminate information about detention or re-education via telephone, smartphone, or the internet," and that official are "strictly forbidden" from receiving "related media interviews" or make "unauthorized disclosure" about the internment campaign. that the china authority so deliberate sought to shield from external scrutiny information about operation at the xinjiang camp suggest that they are only too aware of how incriminate their policy and practice are. 

i was also able to obtain a massive cache of local government file from within xinjiang. among the most revealing document are thousand of detailed spreadsheet with the names, identification numbers and address of ten of thousand of people, mostly uighur and many of them in detention, prison or re-education camps. 

in yarkand, a county of about 800,000 people in southwestern xinjiang, 96 percent of the population is uighur. six official spreadsheet about six village dated 2018 show that, on average, nearly 16 percent of the rural adult population was either interne or in prison. in two village in kosherik township — which the document describe as "heavily pollute by extremist ideology" — nearly 60 percent of all household had one person or more interned. 

in addition to the extraordinary scale of the internment campaign, the file reveal its devastating impact well beyond the camp — deep into the community and family of xinjiang. 

the spreadsheet show that the government has primarily target middle-age men, most often the head of the household and main wage-earners. beijing’s occasional tour of its so-called model camp often feature attractive young women. in reality, people between 30 and 59 were especially likely to be interned, according to the spreadsheets. 

the policy’s socioeconomic fallout is dire — and local government are keeping a meticulous record of it. one spreadsheet from 2017 for one town in yarkand county, which list household with low income that might qualify for welfare, included a young family with five children between the age of three and 14. the father had been imprisoned, the mother placed in a re-education camp and the children, in effect, orphaned. 

in another, hardly unusual, case, a household’s two working-age parent were detained, leave elderly grandparent — including a grandmother describe as "seriously ill" — to care for two toddlers. in a column with the header "reason for poverty," the relevant spreadsheet offer this explanation: "lacks labor force and finances." the toddlers’ father isn’t schedule to be release until 2030. 

another spreadsheet from september 2018 show lists of loan default in pile township, akto county. in 80 percent of the case where the reason for default was list as "internment," most of the borrow funds were shown to still be in the bank. 

a particularly depress example come from a village in yarkand county. a uighur farmer and head of a family of five was interne in 2017. in october 2016, he had received a loan of 40,000 renminbi (nearly $5,700) to purchase agriculture machinery. the equipment went unused during his detention — no other family member knew how to operate it — and the loan could not be repaid as scheduled. the government direct the family to rent out the equipment and send its oldest child, a son, to work. the family was then officially marked as have been "poverty-alleviated by benefit from policies." in june 2018, after his release, the farmer applied for financial assistance so he could repay the loan and related interest. in january 2019, he start to work in the yarkand county textile industrial park, earn just 800 rmb (about $113) a month. by then, the son, age 20, had somehow become disabled and was list on government form as unable to work. 

thanks to these new document disclosures, we now have hard evidence — and the government’s own evidence — that in addition to implement a vast internment program in xinjiang, the china communist party is deliberate break up family and force them into poverty and a form of indenture labor. for all its effort at secrecy, the china government can no long hide the extent, and the reach, of its campaign of repression in xinjiang. 

some important elements are still unknown. the total internment figure remains a well-guarded secret. (based on the new evidence, i have revise my own estimate: i think that between 900,000 and 1.8 million people have been detain in xinjiang since the spring of 2017.) also missing from the official document that have surface so far are precise record of how the detainee are treat and how, exactly, the process of re-education works. (about those things, however, we have witness accounts.) the confidential telegram and local file do not mention the use of physical violence — but for one notable exception. the telegram states that people who resist brainwashing must be single out for "assault-style re-education." yet another sinister understatement, and it suggest that force and torture may, in fact, be widely used. 

in a way, though, we already know all that we really need to know. the document that have been disclose these past few week reveal the staggering scale of the repression in xinjiang and its ruinous effects on the region’s ethnic communities, well beyond the camp themselves. consider this: official statistics show that the combine net population growth rate of hotan and kashgar, two of the largest uighur regions, drop by about 84 percent between 2015 and 2018. 

the china communist party set out, it claimed, to "transform through education" ethnic minority in xinjiang. in fact, it is rip apart entire community and subjugate them on a colossal scale. and this, at the direction of president xi himself. 
