china’s new civil religion 
by ian johnson 
dec. 21, 2019 

beije — in the northern suburbs of this city is a small temple to a china folk deity, lord guan, a famous warrior deify more than a millennium ago. renovate five years ago at the government’s expense, the temple is use by a group of retire who run pilgrimage to a holy mountain, schoolchildren who come to learn traditional culture and a taoist priest who preach to wealthy urbanite about the traditional value of ancient china. 

perch atop a hillock overlook the sprawl capital, the temple is a microcosm of a new civil religion taking shape in china — an effort by the china communist party to satisfy china people’s search for moral guidelines by supplement the largely irrelevant ideology of communism with a curate version of the past. 

this new state-guided religios is the flip side of the government’s harsh policy toward islam and christianity. official believe these two global faith are hard to control because of their foreign ties, and they have use negotiation or force — diplomacy with the vatican, arrest of prominent protestants, internment camp for muslim — to try to bring these religion to heel. 

yet beijing’s recent turn to tradition may be even more significant. even though islam and christianity are world religions, in china they remain minor, with the number of their combine adherent amount to less than 10 percent of the population. most china believe in an amalgam of buddhism, taoism, confucianism and other traditional value and idea that still resonate deeply. 

for this silent majority of hundred of million of people, the government’s newfound support for things like the temple to lord guan is welcome — a feeling that the china communist party hope will bolster its legitimacy, especially given the irrelevance today of its found ideas. the benefit of its move to embrace the past may seem obvious, but the shift mark a radical departure, not just for a party officially committed to atheism but also from how reform over the past century have imagine a modern, prosperous china. 

from the 19th century onward, china’s elite argue that the country’s tradition and faith were a major reason for its decline. reform in 1898 call for temple to be convert into schools. while the nationalist party under chiang kai-shek approve of four religion — buddhism, taoism (sometimes call "daoism"), christianity and islam — it largely considered traditional china belief to be superstition and advocate the destruction of temples. 

scholar estimate that by the middle of the 20th century, half of the temple that exist in china at the end of the 19th century had been destroyed. an 1851 survey of the old city of beije list 866 temples; today, i count just 18. at the end of the 19th century, most village had at least one temple and many had half a dozen; vast section of the china countryside now have no temple at all. 

when the communist took power in 1949, they, like the nationalists, officially recognize four religion — but then prompt began persecute them. traditional faith came under especially harsh treatment, with the government ban bedrock traditional practices, from worship ancestor and local deity to following the advice of geomance master and spirit mediums. 

the three decade of reform that start in the late 1970s loosen control over society, allow the revival of all religion and many tradition that had been proscribed. despite periodic crackdowns, church and mosques, but also temples, were rebuilt, and clergy trained. although all faith were supposed to remain under party control, religious feeling boomed, with the number of believer in china topping 500 million by 2010. 

xi jinping’s rise to power in late 2012 mark a new era, the third, in the history of the china communist party’s religious policies. instead of the destruction of the mao years and the relatively laissez-faire approach of the reform period, the state has embark on a form of highly curate revivalism. 

one part of its approach rest on a deep suspicion of christianity and islam. the party’s policy toward islam has been the most draconian. some believers, especially uighur in the northwestern province of xinjiang, have been subject to a policy of forced secularization. this has included send hundred of thousand of muslim to re-education camps, compel restaurant to serve pork and alcohol, and forbidding fast during ramadan. 

the policy toward christianity is more nuanced. last year, beije struck a deal with the vatican to joint appoint catholic bishops. the vatican seem to hope to reverse the decline in the number of catholic in china. but for beijing, the measure was a way to tighten control over the catholic clergy — and, by extension, the church itself. 

protestant pose an especially vex problem for the party. it is arguable china’s fastest-growing religion, with an estimate 60 million or more adherent today (compared with one million in 1949), including some 20 to 30 million who are thought to worship in unregistered (or underground) protestant churches. but the faith lack a unify structure that would allow for negotiations. and so the government has fire a few shot across the bow, close several of the country’s best-known underground churches. 

in many ways, however, the xi administration’s embrace of traditional faith is more radical. since taking office, the president has met with buddhist leaders, and his government has allow taoism to flourish. the state recently issue a landmark plan to improve social mores, the first such program since 2001. 

the plan stem from a widespread feeling that china’s relentless drive to get ahead economically has create a spiritual vacuum, and sometimes justify break rule and trample civility. many people do not trust one another. the government’s blueprint for handle this moral crisis call for endorse certain traditional beliefs. 

the epic paper — it runs to 10,000 china characters, and would be significant long translate into english — doesn’t mention communist china’s found father, mao zedong, or his successor and their ideologies, focus instead on mr. xi and his effort to fix social problem like "money worship and hedonism." it do invoke communist slogan such as "core socialist values," but in contrast to the previous such document from 2001 — which made only passing reference to china tradition — it call the past a "rich source of morality." the plan orders party official to promote "ancient and worthy sages," as well as to "deeply expound" traditional concept such as "ren’ai" (benevolence), "zhengyi" (righteousness) and "jianyi zhengwei" (standing up brave for the truth). 

this effort is not an attempt to replace communism with confucianism. yet it is fair to say that for the first time since china’s imperial order collapse in 1911, a central government is embrace the idea that made up the political-religious order that ran china for much of the past 2,500 years. why? not only to address china’s moral vacuum, but also as a populist measure. the country is enter a more uncertain era, of slow growth and rising inequality, and beije is drape itself in the mantle of tradition to broaden its appeal. 

in do so, the government seem to be assume that traditional china value and belief are easy to control than foreign religions, and that support them will outweigh the costs of suppress islam and christianity. but i have my doubts. 

during a visit this fall to the lord guan temple, i saw a dozen or so people, mostly in their 30s and 40s, reading works by wang yangming, a philosopher born in the late 15th century. on the face of it, this was in line with government policy: the party has embrace wang for exemplify an incorruptible spirit and matching words with deeds. 

but after reading a passage of wang’s work, the men and women sat around a big wooden table, wield brush to write out, over and over again, his most famous phrase: "zhi xing he yi" (knowledge and action are one). this knowledge, according to wang, come from an inner light, a conscience — one that no government, no matter how powerful, can control. 
