devin nun is danielle steel 
by frank bruni 
nov. 15, 2019 

i came to your house with a gun. at least imagine i did. i tie you to a chair, took a step back and repeatedly fired. but my arm twitched; every bullet missed. meanwhile, you slip your knot and fled. 

by the reasoning of representative jim jordan, i did absolutely nothing wrong. 

you’re alive! not a drop of blood on you! an unconsummated crime is no crime at all, or so jordan, one of the republican party’s more rococo philosophers, argue on wednesday in defense of president trump. ukraine got its military aid; trump did not get his investigate of the bidens. to jordan, that’s proof of innocence. 

to a normal person, that’s proof of incompetence, which doesn’t exonerate the president but should definitely reassure us. trump’s an autocrat all right, but the silver lining is that he’s an inept one. all strongmen should be this weak. 

and all of us should have the mental limber and ethical elasticity that jordan and his troupe possess. they’re the cirque du soleil of c’est la vie. i’ve never seen anything like the republican effort to defend trump, which chart the frontier of creativity, explore the outer limit of audacity, mutate like the monster in the "alien" movies and restore my faith in america ingenuity. 

my faith in washington, too. i long fear that politics had stop attract the country’s top talent, but some of our finest storyteller are working in the united states capitol. john grisham has nothing on jordan. danielle steel can’t hold a candle to devin nunes. 

nun was among the first republican to pipe up on day 1 of the impeach inquiry’s public hearings, held by the house intelligence committee, and it wasn’t just his narrative ambition that mesmerize me. it was his bold descent into his thesaurus, a sort of semantic spelunking. 

the hearings, he said, marked the "pitiful finale" and "spectacular implosion" of the "russia hoax." they amount to a "scorched-earth war against president trump" that was "horrifically one-sided" and "preposterous." this "low-rent ukraine sequel" had already involved a "closed-door audition process in a cultlike atmosphere in the basement of the capitol." cultlike, no less! that’s a more fitting description of republicans’ obeisance to the president and launder of his wrongdoing, but then one hallmark of trump and his sycophant is the projection of their own flaw onto their adversaries. 

nunes’s best bit on wednesday and then again on friday was his portrayal of trump’s democratic detractor as amateur pornographer intent on finding nude pictures of the president. i’m fairly confident that no one is intent on finding nude photograph of the president. 

but at this point it wouldn’t surprise me if trump himself tweet one out. would that be any crazy than what he did on friday, as marie yovanovitch, the former ambassador to ukraine, testified? 

there she was, a pained, stoic state department amalgam of erin brockovich and norma rae, and trump use his twitter account to call her an international wreck ball, single-handedly responsible for the mess that is mogadishu. (one of her post before ukraine was somalia.) 

this accomplished nothing in the way of silence her but raise the prospect of witness intimidation being add to any articles of impeachment. clearly, the republican response to this impeach inquiry isn’t some elegant strategy. it’s an epic snit. 

its leitmotif is hypocrisy. nun open friday’s hearing by lament all the important government business that was on hold because democrat prefer to torture trump. i somehow miss his plea that lawmaker keep their eyes on the ball and devote themselves to practical problem-solving when the president stir up one culture war after another just to change the topic of a given news cycle or hear a rally audience’s roar. but along come the impeach inquiry, and sudden house republican are stymie steward of levelheade government. 

they’re dismiss wednesday’s and friday’s hearings, held in public, as pure theater. but they complain about the closed-door testimony beforehand. they’re shrug off the account of william taylor, george kent and other as hearsay. but the white house has decree that such firsthand witness as mick mulvaney not cooperate. 

one moment, mulvaney public acknowledge the shakedown of ukraine’s president, insist that it’s how foreign policy is done and tell the media to "get over it." the next, he tell the media that they’re reprehensible fabulist for report exactly what he said. one moment, republican completely ignore trump’s infamous july 25 phone call and claim that there’s no direct evidence of his bully and — yes, nance pelosi is right — his bribery. the next, they acknowledge the call, sigh over trump’s behavior but say that it’s hardly impeachable. 

in fairness, that’s only slightly more confuse to me than the democrats’ perspective on the call, a definitive piece of evidence that they may be inadvertent downgrading. usually, a process like the one that they’ve been engaged in over the last seven week is about finding a smoking gun. this process began with the smoking gun, and the farther the democrat travel from it — eight witness this coming week? — the more they risk imply that it wasn’t enough. 

but for curious behavior, republican have them easily beat, and their conduct during the impeach inquiry is the culmination and apotheosis of their conduct since trump wrap up the republican presidential nomination: an utter sellout of principle and a pure embrace of fiction to pacify an emotional infant and keep him from spit up on them. 

during wednesday’s hearing, republican again suggest — while maintain straight face — that trump’s foremost concern was corruption in ukraine. steve castor, the republicans’ chief counsel, also gave one of the president’s most convenient (and thus favorite) conspiracy theory a fresh whirl, posit that perhaps america intelligence official had it all wrong and ukraine, not russia, hack democratic email in 2016 and otherwise interfere in the election. 

how would this make trump’s demand that ukraine smear joe biden in return for million of dollar of already-authorized aid o.k.? it wouldn’t — but what a juicy distraction! and what a perfect gateway for castor’s attempt to get taylor to testify that trump legitimate believe that ukraine were, in castor’s words, "out to get him." 

try to follow along. not only do incompetence equal innocence, but also paranoia is exculpatory. same go for the relative dastard of a deed, which become innocuous if it’s not maximal obnoxious. that’s my takeaway from when castor, refer to rudy giuliani’s shenanigans, ask taylor: "this irregular channel of diplomacy, it’s not as outlandish as it could be — is that correct?" clarence darrow, move over. another genius of jurisprudence demand space in the history books. 

all that wednesday’s hearing lack was lindsey graham. yes, i know, he serve in the senate, and the hearing took place in the house. but he’s the standard-bearer for trump-coddling contortionism, the reign king of the kind of contradiction that were on display. 

presage jordan’s approach at the hearing, graham a week and a half ago shrug off the impeach inquiry by calling trump’s policy toward ukraine so "incoherent" that the president and his minion "seem to be incapable of form a quid pro quo." 

he said at one point that he’d be open to any evidence that back up such a quid pro quo, but then, more recently, he announce that he wouldn’t and couldn’t be bother to follow the testimony, because he’d already made up his mind. as billy bin of reason magazine noted, "graham has bemoan the democrats’ lack of transparency, only to shield his eyes once the curtain was lifted." 

maybe graham will storm the hearing room yet, an effigy of hunter biden in tow. that would match the dignity of what we’ve seen from republican so far. 
