four key things you should know about health care 
by ezekiel j. emanuel and victor r. fuch 
sept. 12, 2019 

health care, so far perhaps the biggest issue in the democratic primary, is also the most complicated issue facing government and the public. unfortunately the debate is fill with persistent misconceptions, from the role insurance company profit play in health care costs to who is actually pay for workers’ health coverage. 

clarify four fundamental health care fallacy could make it easy for voter to square some of the democratic proposal — and their critique — with reality: 

fallacy no. 1: employer pay for employees’ health insurance. 
employer write check that cover most health insurance premium for employee and their dependents. but as the princeton health economist uwe reinhardt once explained, employer-sponsored insurance is like a pickpocket taking money out of your wallet at a bar and buy you a drink. you appreciate the cocktail until you realize you paid for it yourself. 

with health coverage, employer write the check to the insurer, but employee bear the cost of the premium — the entire premium, not just the portion list as their contribution on their pay stub. the premium money that go to the insurance company is cash that employer would otherwise deposit in employees’ account like the rest of their salary. 

the fallacy is in thinking an employer’s contribution come out of profits. in fact, higher health insurance premium mean lower wages for workers. since 1999, health insurance premium have increase 147 percent and employer profit have increase 148 percent. but in that time, average wages have hardly moved, increase just 7 percent. clearly workers’ wages, not corporate profits, have been pay for higher health insurance premiums. 

health care costs are one — though not the only — reason wages have stagnate over the last few decades. with health insurance costs rising fast than growth in the economy, more labor costs go to benefit like health insurance and less to take-home pay. 

yet the belief that employee don’t pay for their own health insurance is widespread. one reason is that individual cannot be sure what cause their wages to change or remain stagnant for decades. another reason is that employer want america to believe that they pay for their workers’ health insurance. still another reason is that there are those who profit from the employment-based system: drug companies, device manufacturers, specialty physician and high-income individuals. they all want you to believe company are being magnanimous in give you insurance. 

who else benefit from the belief in this fallacy? opponent of national health insurance. 

fallacy no. 2: medicare for all is unaffordable. 
the key to evaluate the cost of medicare for all is to distinguish between increase spend on health care and shift expenditure from private insurance to the federal government. 

true, medicare for all would increase federal health care spending. but that is not the same as increase total health care spending, which was over $3.5 trillion last year. instead, medicare for all would move money from one column (private health insurance spending) to another (federal health spending); it do not automatic increase total costs. 

a recent study by the mercatu center at george mason university — a free-market center generally hostile to government program — estimate that for the 10 years between 2022 and 2031 the total national health costs for senator bernie sanders’s medicare for all plan would actually be $50.1 trillion. that would be $2 trillion less than if we let the system operate as it current does. however, mercatu research doubt that the sanders’s plan would ultimately save trillion because they believe congress would have to increase medicare rate paid to hospital and physician to get the legislation enacted. they may be right — or wrong. but that is a different argument — a prediction about the politics of enact law — than that medicare for all would inherently increase total health care spending. 

we have our doubt about medicare for all. but unaffordable is not a reason to oppose it. whether it’s our current arrangement or a future medicare for all, the per capita cost of our health care system already far exceed that of any other industrialize country — including those with single-payer systems. when you hear a health care price tag in the trillions, know that the existing system has already brought us there. 

fallacy no. 3: insurance companies’ profit drive health care costs. 
in the second democratic presidential debate, senator bernie sander declared that the health care industry make $100 billion in profits. he once rail against the insurance company anthem for deny a claim while note that it report "fourth-quarter profit for 2017 had increase by 234 percent to $1.2 billion." 

many america believe that profit have no place in health care. they see for-profit health insurance, like buy and sell kidney and liver for transplantation, as what the nobel prize winner alvin roth term a "repugnant industry" — something that should not be exchange in the market. 

that is an important moral stand, but it make no difference to the claim that eliminate for-profit insurer will reduce high health care costs. the fact is, we could eliminate those profit and it would hardly matter to the cost of health care. you would not notice it in your premiums. 

for the eight largest for-profit health insurance companies, in 2016, their cumulative revenue amount to nearly $452.2 billion and profit were $22.1 billion, for a profit margin of about 5 percent. by contrast, technology companies, bank and major drug company generally make more than 20 percent profit. 

true, $22.1 billion is a lot of money — but it is 0.6 percent of health spending. and last year alone health care costs increase over $130 billion — six times insurance company profits. health care spend would not be significant cheap if all insurance companies’ profit were zero. 

there are far more savings to be had in other effort — by cutting unnecessary patient services, for example, or by making physician and hospital more efficient — to deliver the same care at a lower cost. 

fallacy no. 4: price transparency can bring down health care costs. 
"hospitals will be require to publish price that reflect what people pay for services," said president trump when he sign his executive order on health care price transparency. "prices will come down by numbers that you wouldn’t believe. the cost of health care will go way, way down." 

there is no doubt that price for medical procedure can range widely even within the same city or state. for instance, m.r.i.s of the spine can vary threefold in massachusetts and mammogram fivefold in san francisco. 

conservative argue that inform patient of price for test and treatment will induce them to shop for lower-cost services, saving them, insurer and the country money. in theory, the beauty of price transparency is that neither the government nor insurer impose cost controls; the invisible hand of the market do it all. 

yet demonstration of price transparency have been try many times in many places, and in reality, it has not reduce the cost of care. 

one recent study by harvard medical school research involved hundred of thousand of employee and use a website telling them what they would pay out-of-pocket if they chose particular physician and hospitals. the result: no savings. a follow-up study use another set of employer and another price transparency tool found the same result: no savings. 

since 2007, new hampshire has had a state website, n.h. health cost, that allow patient to select a medical procedure, insurer and zip code and then get a list of price for the procedure from various providers. the most promising study of n.h. health cost suggest a few million dollar in savings per year. that works out to be about $5 per new hampshire resident. 

the fact is, price transparency will not make health care costs "go way, way down." health insurance insulate the patient from price. over 80 percent of the cost of medical care is paid by private and public insurance. patient have little incentive to seek out the cheapest provider. when price website exist, few patient use them. even in the most favorable studies, when offer a price transparency tool, only 12 percent of patient took advantage of it; usually it’s less than 4 percent of patients. 

furthermore, price consideration are useful for choose only about 40 percent of procedure — routine service like colonoscopies, m.r.i. scan and laboratory tests. most of the expensive service — think heart catheterizations, cancer chemotherapy and organ transplant — are not the kind of thing you decide base on price. 

finally, in health care, america usually put relationship ahead of money. once patient find a physician they trust and a hospital they like, they tend to stick with them even if there is a lower-cost alternative nearby. 

*** 

america health care is complex and any simplistic solution is likely to be base on a fallacy. but that doesn’t mean there is nothing we can do. there are solution — they just don’t make for bumper sticker phrase like medicare for all or eliminate for-profit insurer or price transparency. 
