george soros: mark zuckerberg should not be in control of facebook 
by george soro 
jan. 31, 2020 

at a dinner last week in davos, switzerland, i was ask if i thought facebook was behave more responsibly today than it did during the 2016 presidential election. 

"not at all," i answered. "facebook help trump to get elect and i am afraid that it will do the same in 2020." i explain that there is a longstanding law — section 230 of the communications decency act — that protect social media platform from legal liability for defame and similar claims. facebook can post deliberate mislead or false statement by candidate for public office and others, and take no responsibility for them. 

i went on to say that there appear to be "an informal mutual assistance operation or agreement develop between trump and facebook" in which facebook will help president trump to get re-elected and mr. trump will, in turn, defend facebook against attack from regulator and the media. 

"this is just plain wrong," a facebook spokesman told business insider. 

i disagree. i believe that mr. trump and facebook’s chief executive, mark zuckerberg, realize that their interests are align — the president’s in winning elections, mr. zuckerberg’s in making money. 

let’s look at the evidence: in 2016, facebook provided the trump campaign with embed staff who help to optimize its advertising program. (hillary clinton’s campaign was also approached, but it decline to embed a facebook team in her campaign’s operations.) brad parscale, the digital director of mr. trump’s 2016 campaign and now his campaign manager for 2020, said that facebook help mr. trump and gave him the edge. this seem to have marked the beginning of a special relationship. 

more recently, direct contact between the two men has raise serious questions. mr. zuckerberg met with mr. trump in the oval office on sept. 19, 2019. we don’t know what was said. but from an interview on the sideline at the world economic forum on jan. 22, we do know what mr. trump said about the meeting: mr. zuckerberg "told me that i’m no. 1 in the world in facebook." mr. trump apparently had no problem with facebook’s decision not to fact-check politics ads. "i’d rather have him just do whatever he is go to do," mr. trump said of mr. zuckerberg. "he’s done a hell of a job, when you think of it." 

the president’s 2016 campaign mount a robust data-centric communications effort and has continue to build on that program over the past few years, use facebook as a key part of their strategy. 

facebook’s decision not to require fact-checking for politics candidates’ advertising in 2020 has flung open the door for false, manipulated, extreme and incendiary statements. such content is reward with prime placement and promotion if it meet facebook-designed algorithm standard for popularity and engagement. 

what’s more, facebook’s design tend to obscure the source of inflammatory and false content, and fail to adequate punish those who spread false information. nor do the company effectively warn those who are expose to lies. 

i express my fear that with facebook’s help, mr. trump will win the 2020 election. the recent hire of a right-wing figure to help manage its news tab has reinforce those fears. in my comment in davos, i also pointed out that facebook has been use to cause worse damage in other country than the united states. in myanmar, for example, military personnel use facebook to help incite the public against the rohingya, who were target in a military assault of incredible cruelty including murder, rape and the burning of entire villages: around 700,000 rohingya flee to bangladesh. the international court of justice in the hague is current deliberate whether these atrocity qualify as genocide. 

but within the last year, facebook has introduce new features on its mobile app that actually intensify the fire of incendiary politics attack — making them easy and quick to propagate. the system is cost-free to the poster and revenue-generating for facebook. good for facebook, bad for democracy. 

the responsible approach is self-evident. facebook is a publisher not just a neutral moderator or "platform." it should be held accountable for the content that appear on its site. 

speak at a cocktail party in davo on jan. 22, facebook’s chief operate officer, sheryl sandberg, repeated the worn silicon valley cliché that facebook is try to make the world a better place. but facebook should be judge by what it does, not what it says. 

i repeat and reaffirm my accusation against facebook under the leadership of mr. zuckerberg and ms. sandberg. they follow only one guide principle: maximize profit irrespective of the consequences. one way or another, they should not be left in control of facebook. 
