gone with the windsor 
by maureen dowd 
jan. 11, 2020 

i never had much use for the queen. 

maybe it’s the ireland in me. as winston churchill said: "we’ve always found the ireland a bit odd. they refuse to be english." 

or maybe it’s the america in me. we did go to an awful lot of trouble to break away from that corgi-and-gin-loving racket 244 years ago. 

at some visceral level, though, america must regret being torn away from the royal family. how else to explain our enduring fascination with dynasties? have spent my career covering four dysfunctional politics dynasties, i rebel more than ever at the idea that biology entitle you to authority. 

the ghost of diana gone rogue animate the fracture fairy tale of meghan and harry, and their intemperate attempt to upend century of starchy rule and break away from the firm. 

princess di’s dangerous tango with the tabloid left harry with no taste to play that game again, especially with streak of rac against markle add to the mix. he recently confessed that every click or flash of a camera brought memory of his mother’s death racing back into his mind. 

i cover diana’s first trip as the princess of wales to america in 1985. she seem happy then, in that year before charles resume his relationship with camilla parker bowles. she and the prince share amuse eye contact, wink and tease remarks. 

nance reagan plan an evening of candlelit dance at the white house worthy of a 24-year-old cinderella in a midnight blue velvet gown. mrs. reagan arrange for the marine band to play "night fever" as john travolta spun a euphoric diana around the floor. ("she’s a great little mover," he said afterward.) 

i wonder how prince charles would deal with a young wife with so much star power, absorbing so much attention. we were all mesmerize when she tuck her chin down in that shy pose and cast that modest yet saucy look up at us. 

the answer was: he did not deal with it well. twelve years later, when the unimaginable tragedy hit, the royal ice cube were furious at the expectation that they should emote for the woman who had public rip the monarchy as a bloodless, soulless gang and christen herself the prisoner of wales. 

the firm was out of its depth then, and it is again now. how can the queen and prince philip and prince charles possibly understand the desire of meghan and harry to rebrand as a goopish lifestyle enterprise? the news that they have applied to trademark hundred of items, from sock to hoodies, under the "sussex royal" logo make walli simpson’s exile in the bahamas, spent matching the color on the wall to her face powder, seem positively monastic. 

can you really call yourself "financially independent" when all you’re do is cash in on the royal name? 

given the state of the world and the implosion of the britain empire — with scot once more contemplate an off ramp, ireland unity in play, australia on fire and boris johnson trick the queen into suspend parliament in a brexit ploy — it is hard to feel sorry for the duchess of sussex complain that her diamond are heavy. the pathos for markle, trap in a designer cage, go only so far. 

it’s easy for royal to come to north america, where they are lavish embrace as celebrity without all those pesky restriction about class and role. (see "the crown" episode about a wild, imbibe princess margaret charming l.b.j.) 

still, i think meghan markle should have wield her woke where it is most need — in buckingham palace. she could have channel the obamas, who did a magnificent job of rising above racist taunt and working within the institution to imprint a new image of racial possibility in america. 

markle had already successful brought a refreshing dose of semi-radical chic to the royal family. her visit to a mosque that house londoner displace by the grenfell tower fire led to her putt out a 2018 cookbook, the proceeds of which went to the victims. 

at its best, the monarchy has been able to lift up people, as it did during the blitz in world war ii. 

i saw that ability to alchemize emotion and opinion when i cover the queen on her visit to ireland in 2011, the first by a britain monarch in a century. it was impossible not to be impress watch her speak gaelic and offering regret about how britain had made ireland suffer, bowing her head at the scene of bloody sunday and the garden of remembrance, the sacred ground for slain ireland patriots. 

the ireland start out skeptical, but by the end of her visit, many were calling her "betty" on twitter. 

the queen of england hold out the idea that she and her family should have some sort of vestigial moral authority. but with the prince andrew imbroglio in the seraglio of jeffrey epstein, and with harry’s run for the hollywood hills, it is clear that many in her family are not interested in moral authority. 

the collapse of the authority of the britain monarchy mirror the collapse of authority generally, scar by years of scandal about clergymen abuse children, athlete beating up girlfriend and university official accept bribes. 

and yet, even if the royals’ role in the culture is now akin to the kardashians, it wasn’t cool for meghan and harry to pants the 93-year-old queen, defy her instructions, dump their megxit plan on instagram and intensify the sad split between the brothers. (if ever there was a time for some dry gin. …) 

what’s the rush to give up real influence to be an instagram influencer? besides, who unfollow their own grandmother? 
