good for meghan and harry 
by the editorial board 
jan. 9, 2020 

"and they live happily ever after," affirm the story we tell our children about a beautiful commoner marry prince charming. just make sure your kid don’t see thursday’s headline in the london dailies. 

"civil war as harry & meg quit the royals," scream the sun. "queen’s fury as harry and meghan say: we quit," blare the daily mail in a "royal bombshell special issue." "they didn’t even tell the queen," lament the daily mirror. any other news, from the drum of war in iran to passage, at last, of a brexit bill in parliament was swept away for megxit, as the tabloid prompt call the decision by prince harry and his wife, meghan, to "step back" from the ribbon-cutting, kindergarten-visiting and foreign-traveling duty they’ve been assign as their royal highness the duke and duchess of sussex. they will try, they said in a statement post on instagram wednesday, "to become financially independent" and to balance their lives between britain and north america. 

how that will work is hard to predict. no one has ever resigned from the "firm," as the britain call the royal clan, though some have been exile or fire — most notably edward viii, who had to renounce the throne and leave britain to marry an america divorcée, and most recently prince andrew, queen elizabeth ii’s second son, over his connection to the sex offender jeffrey epstein. 

true to the intense attention the duke and duchess of sussex have attract since their marriage in may 2018, the press was quick fill with story about their finances and prospects, and about how the queen, the prince’s grandmother, would handle the defection. a few articles actually show sympathy for a couple trap in a gilded cage that expose them to constant scrutiny — and, in the duchess’s case, virulent racism. 

sarcasm and exaggeration come easily when writing about royals, and the story of prince harry, the rambunctious second son of prince charles and diana, princess of wales, reach across the atlantic to marry an america actress was custom-made for the tabloid — and, yes, for serious papers like this one. their wedding at windsor castle and the birth of an adorable son, archie, a year later was grand copy, a morality tale of a change world, a fairy tale update with diverse millennials. but as the children’s story fail to warn unsuspect youngsters, being royal isn’t all about living happily, and certainly not ever after. 

almost from the outset, a parallel line of nasty story spread in the tabloid about meghan’s difficulty with her america family and purport rift among the royal family. instead of adopt the britain tradition of a stiff upper lip in the face of adversity, as queen elizabeth has so admirable done throughout her long and crisis-riddled reign, prince harry and meghan proclaim that they did not intend to play by the old rules. the prince, who lost his mother to a horrific car chase through paris, spoke openly about his emotional struggles; the duchess made no secret of the difficulty of her new role. "not many people have ask if i’m o.k.," she told one interviewer. 

in october, the couple struck back, file a lawsuit against the mail on sunday over the publication of a private letter from meghan to her father. in a statement explain the suit, prince harry assail the tabloid and the suffering they cause his wife. "for these select media this is a game, and one that we have been unwill to play from the start," he wrote. "i have been a silent witness to her private suffering for too long. to stand back and do nothing would be contrary to everything we believe in." 

given this background, the couple’s decision to withdraw from the firm should not come as a surprise, though it appear to be just that to the queen and the heir apparent, prince charles. rear in the tradition of monarchy as the symbol and mainstay of the nation, they have stoical carry on in their duty even as their world, and their family, has been batter by the wind of change, discontent and scandal, as dramatize in the netflix series "the crown." evidently they expect the duke and duchess of sussex to do just that, and to rear children who would as well. 

but the real value of the royal family has never been in cutting ribbon and prove endless fodder for the tabloids; it has been in the continue saga of fairy tale kings and queens coming to terms with the world. in this story, prince harry and meghan should not be lament as defect from the old order, but celebrated as the hero of the next installment, as modern royal renounce some level of privilege to seek their fortune in the real world. may they live happily ever after. 
