how much of harvard’s $40 billion endowment is invest in fossil fuels? 
by devi lockwood 
jan. 29, 2020 

in my senior year at harvard, i was invite to a dinner in honor of the writer margaret atwood, the recipient of the 2014 harvard arts medal. on my way out the door i lingered, shrug on my coat, took a deep breath and walk up to the university’s president at the time, drew gilpin faust. we had met twice: once during her office hour and at an ice cream social. 

"please divest from fossil fuels," i said, hope to catch her off guard. 

the president, at first seemingly happy to see me, rearrange her face. her shoulder crept up toward her ears. 

"you student don’t understand investments," she said. then she walk out of the room. 

i have benefit immeasurable from harvard’s investment in me. but recognize where some of harvard’s $40 billion endowment is invest was a cause of grow unease for me and some of my classmates. student at other campus were similarly concerned about the endowment of their schools. 

figure out exactly how much of harvard’s endowment is invest in oil, gas and coal company is a near-impossible task. harvard is require to disclose only direct investment in which the university own shares of a specific company. 

harvard say its direct investment amount to $394 million as of may 2019, or roughly 1 percent of the endowment total. divest harvard, a student group, determined that of that approximate amount, $5.6 million was invest in company that produce or own reserve of oil, natural gas and coal, and large electric utility power by natural gas and coal. 

harvard doesn’t comment on its individual investments. but in 2015, the south pole group, a carbon finance consultant in zurich, analyze $989 million of harvard’s then $36.4 billion endowment at the request of divest harvard and 350.org. base on those investments, the group estimate that the overall endowment was responsible for annual emission of 11 million ton of carbon dioxide, roughly equivalent to the annual emission from delaware. 

it’s easy to get bog down in the numbers, but the exact amount of harvard’s fossil fuel investment or the emission it is responsible for isn’t all that important. as the world face a climate crisis, any amount of investment in company that extract or burn fossil fuel is too much, especially by one of the world’s leading universities. 

lawrence bacow, the university’s current president, explain in the harvard gazette last fall that rather than divest, the university believe that "engaging with industry to confront the challenge of climate change is ultimately a sound and more effective approach for our university." 

but many student have not been content with that approach. 

as part of a divest campaign, in may 2014 an undergraduate, brett roche, was arrest by harvard university police for block an entrance to massachusetts hall, where president faust and member of the administration had their offices. in april 2015, during harvard heat week, students, faculty, alumni and community member blockade president faust’s office once more. last november, at the harvard-yale football game, climate change protest storm the field at half time, delay the game for roughly an hour. to date, 532 faculty member have sign a petition in favor of divest from fossil fuels. 

the result? nothing has happened. 

other campus have had more luck. after pressure from student groups, stanford announce in 2014 that it would not make direct investment in public trade company whose principal business is coal mining. the university of maine follow suit in 2015, divest all direct holding from coal companies. in 2017, columbia university announce divest from producer of coal burn to generate electricity. 

other school have taken additional steps, divest not only from coal producers, but also from oil and gas companies. these include sterling college in 2013; the university of hawaii, university of dayton, syracuse university and the rhode island school of design in 2015; and the university of oregon in 2016. the university of california system announce last september that it would divest $13 billion of its $83 billion endowment and $70 billion of pension from fossil fuel producers. 

recognize that student activism hasn’t work on its own, two harvard college alumni from the class of 2018, danielle strasburger and nathán goldberg start thinking about the harvard board of overseer election. last year, they found harvard forward, an alumni-run organization that aim to elect five recently graduate candidate to the board. the board of overseer mostly advise the university on strategic decisions, though it do have the power to consent to the election of member to the harvard corporation. 

the average age of the five candidate is 28 — the same number of years that, on average, have pass since the current overseer were harvard students. their platform includes: "complete and swift divest of all university asset from fossil fuels." 

the board is compose of 30 harvard alumni who sit for six-year terms. each year in april, five new member are vote in by alumni. a nomination committee of the harvard alumni association generally choose eight candidate who will be add to the slate. 

there’s another way in, though — though a petition process. to qualify, each candidate needs 2,936 sign nomination forms, equivalent to 1 percent of eligible voter (living harvard alumni, with the exception of current professors, administrator and staff). 

the first test will come on feb. 1, the deadline to qualify for the ballot. when we spoke last week, ms. strasburger estimate that between 2,300 and 2,400 nomination form had already been sign in favor of each candidate. they are nearly there. 

this is not just about harvard. and it’s also not just about whether you think divest is a strategy that is worth pursuing, or whether it has an impact. 

rather, harvard forward is a model for building power by young people — of break the logjam within large institution and making change happen. 

this approach is not new. from 1985 to 1991, harvard and radcliffe alumni/ae against apartheid campaign for harvard to divest its stock in company operate in south africa. the organization use the same nominate-by-petition system to elect four member to the board, including archbishop desmond tutu, who state that he would return his honorary degree unless harvard divest entire from south africa. by the 1980s, harvard did. 

younger alumni realize then that they need a seat at the decision making table to create change. that is exactly what harvard forward is seeking. 

on jan. 15, harvard global network night, over 100 volunteer for harvard forward — many of them alumni from the 1960s, ’70s and ’80s — attend 50 alumni event in 20 states and 20 country with petition in hand. that night alone, they gather over 1,000 signatures. 

alumni can submit petition to nominate the younger slate of candidate until the deadline on saturday at 5 p.m. harvard forward has volunteer in 35 city to collect form at signature party this week. 

"a lot of people want to know how they can make an impact when it come to climate," ms. strasburger told me. "if you have a chance to influence a $40 billion endowment, that’s a pretty big deal." 
