how to avoid the coronavirus? wash your hand 
by elisabeth rosenthal 
jan. 28, 2020 

america are watch with alarm as a new coronaviru spread in china and case pop up in the united states. they are barrage with information about what kind of mask are best to prevent viral spread. student are hand out mask in seattle. mask have run out in brazo county, tex. 

hang on. 

i’ve work as an emergency room physician. and as a new york times correspondent in china, i cover the sar outbreak in 2002 and 2003 during which a novel coronaviru first detect in guangdong sicken more than 8,000 people and kill more than 800. my two children attend elementary school in beije throughout the outbreak. 

here are my main takeaway from that experience for ordinary people on the ground: 

1. wash your hand frequently. 

2. don’t go to the office when you are sick. don’t send your kid to school or day care when they are ill, either. 

notice i didn’t say anything about masks. have a mask with you as a precaution make sense if you are in the midst of an outbreak, as i was when out report in the field during those months. but wearing it constant is another matter. i don a mask when visiting hospital where sar patient had been housed. i wore it in the market where wild animal that were the suspect source of the outbreak were being butchered, blood droplet flying. i wore it in crowded enclose space that i couldn’t avoid, like airplane and trains, as i traveled to city involved in the outbreak, like guangzhou and hong kong. you never know if the guy cough and sneeze two row ahead of you is ill or just has an allergy. 

but outdoors, infection don’t spread well through the air. those photo of people walking down street in china wearing mask are dramatic but uninformed. and remember if a mask has, perchance, intercept virus that would have otherwise end up in your body, then the mask is contaminated. so, in theory, to be protect maybe you should use a new one for each outing. 

the simple mask are better than nothing, but not all that effective, since they don’t seal well. for anyone tempt to go out and buy the gold standard, n95 respirators, note that they are uncomfortable. breathing is more work. it’s hard to talk to people. on one long flight at the height of the outbreak, on which my few fellow passenger were mostly epidemiologist try to solve the sar puzzle, many of us (including me) wore our mask for the first couple of hour on the flight. then the food and beverage cart came. 

though virus spread through droplet in the air, a big worry to me was always transmission via what doctor call "fomites," infect items. a virus get on a surface — a shoe or a doorknob or a tissue, for example. you touch the surface and then next touch your face or rub your nose. it’s a great way to acquire illness. so after walking in the animal markets, i remove my shoe careful and did not take them into the hotel room. and of course i wash my hand immediately. 

remember, by all indication sars, which kill about 10 percent of those infected, was a deadly virus than the new coronaviru circulate now. so keep things in perspective. 

face with sars, many foreigner chose to leave beije or at least to send their children back to the united states. our family stayed, kid included. we want them with us and didn’t want them to miss school, especially during what would be their final year in china. but equally important in making the decision was that the risk of get sar on an airplane or in the airport seem greater than being smart and careful while stay put in beijing. 

and we were: i stop taking my kid to indoor playground or crowded mall or delicious but dense packed neighborhood beije restaurants. out of an abundance of caution we cancel a family vacation to cambodia — though my fear was less about catching sar on the flight than that one of the kid would have a fever from an ear infection upon our return at a border screening, and would be stuck in a prolonged quarantine in china. we instead took a vacation within china, where we carry mask with us but didn’t use them except on a short domestic flight. 

in time, during the sar outbreak, the government shut down theater and school in beijing, as it is do now in many china city because these virus are more easily transmit in such crowded places. 

but there was also a lot of irrational behavior: enter a village on the way to a hike near the great wall, our car was stop by local who had set up a roadblock to check the temperature of all passengers. they use an oral thermometer that was only minimal clean after each use. what a great way to spread a virus. 

the international school of beijing, where my children were students, was one of the few in the capital — perhaps the only one — that stay open throughout the sar outbreak, though the class were emptier, since so many kid had departed to their home countries. it was a studied but brave move, since a parent at the school had gotten sar at the very beginning of the outbreak on a flight back from hong kong. she recover fine, but it was close to home and family were scared. 

the school institute a bunch of simple precautionary policies: a stern note to parent remind them not to send a child to school who was sick and warning them that student would be screen for fever with ear thermometer at the school door. there was no share of food at lunch. the teacher led the kid in frequent hand washing throughout the day at classroom sinks, while singing a prolonged "hand washing song" to ensure they did more than a cursory pass under the faucet with water only. 

if a family left beije and came back, the child would have to stay at home for an extend period before return to class to make sure they hadn’t caught sar elsewhere. 

with those precaution in place, i observe something of a public health miracle: not only did no child get sars, but it seem no student was sick with anything at all for month on end. no stomach bugs. no common colds. attendance was more or less perfect. 

the world health organization declared the sar outbreak contained in july 2003. but, oh, that those habit persisted. the best first-line defense against sar or the new coronaviru or most any virus at all are the one that grandma and common sense taught us, after all. 
