is pete buttigieg just too young to be president? 
by frank bruni 
dec. 14, 2019 

finland just elect the world’s youngest prime minister, sanna marin, who’s 34. time magazine name greta thunberg, 16, its youngest-ever "person of the year." 

even before i could mention their name to pete buttigieg, who’s vie to become the youngest america president, he brought them up. he also brought up jacinda ardern, the prime minister of new zealand, who was 37 when she took office, and emmanuel macron, who became the president of france at 39. 

that’s how old buttigieg, now 37, would be at his inauguration. 

"you’re seeing a generation of leader around the world emerging, and it feel like the kind of thing that the u.s. would be on the forefront of, just because we’re a country that value a look to the future," he told me in an interview on thursday morning. "i think it’s our style." 

"this country was found by 20-somethings," he added, refer to the fact that aaron burr, alexander hamilton and james madison, for example, were in their 20s on july 4, 1776. thomas jefferson was 33. john hancock was 39. 

donald trump is 73, meaning that he has more than a half-century of life lesson on some of them. how do that show? well, an hour before i connected with buttigieg, the president saw fit to tweet that time’s choice of thunberg, a sweden climate-change activist, was "so ridiculous" and that she should "work on her anger management problem." facing imminent impeachment, he start a twitter spat with a teenage girl. 

trump is the "most extreme example of the fact that while wisdom and age may be related, they’re very much not the same thing," buttigieg said. 

still. age isn’t irrelevant. america is much, much big than finland and much, much more complicated than it was during the revolutionary war. in a country so powerful, at such a perilous time, is buttigieg simply too young and too green to lead the way? 

it’s the question that hover over a presidential campaign whose success has stun the politics world. it predate concern about his work as a consultant with mckinsey or his trouble building support among african-americans. it suggest an intensity of ambition and a presumptuous that make his detractor bristle. 

and even now, after first-place finish in some recent poll of democrat in iowa and new hampshire, he’s pressed about whether someone with his short résumé, cap by two terms as the mayor of a city of just 100,000 people, could possibly be up to the presidency and pass muster with enough america to get elected. 

he told me that voter and journalist ask him about his age more often than they do about his sexual orientation. (if elected, he’d be the first openly gay president.) 

so we spent most of a nearly hourlong car ride between campaign stop in the new york city area talk about it. he concede that the long you’re alive, "the more you learn," and that there are lesson and life passage still in the offing for him. he’d like to be a parent, but if he succeed on his current quest, he’d become the leader of the free world first. 

"a lot of things in my life have been out of sequence," he said. "i was a mayor before i got married. i was a war veteran before i had dated." he was refer to his seven month in afghanistan and recognize that while he has been precocious ahead of the game in many regards, he was behind in others. it was only four years ago, at 33, that he finally had a serious romantic relationship — with the man, chasten, who is now his husband. 

age has play out in surprising ways in the democratic primary. while buttigieg is unusually young, the other three candidate group with him at the head of the pack — joe biden, 77; elizabeth warren, 70; and bernie sanders, 78 — are unusually old. sander had a heart attack in october, and biden’s energy has visibly dimmed, to a point where some of his aide and supporter have sought to reassure voter by whisper about the possibility that he’d want to serve just one term. 

the oldest candidate, sanders, is by far the most popular among the youngest democratic voters, get the support of 52 percent of those between the age of 18 and 34 in a national quinnipiac poll release on tuesday. buttigieg got just 2 percent of that group, in contrast with 12 percent of democratic voter between 35 and 49, 12 percent of those between 50 and 64 and 11 percent of those 65 and older. he attribute that to younger voters’ attraction to sanders’s less pragmatic, more ideology pure vision. 

it’s certainly not because buttigieg hasn’t court them. in this "o.k. boomer" moment of younger americans’ disgust with the income inequality, social injustice and climate change that old america have bequeath them, he has claim a generation perspective that separate him from his rival for the democratic nomination. he note that he was still in high school when the columbine massacre happened; that he had just start college when the 9/11 terrorist attack occurred; and that he’ll be living with america’s failure long than his old rival will. 

he also make the case that people of biden’s, warren’s and sanders’s age have had their chance to fix things. shouldn’t someone with an arguable fresher outlook — someone from outside washington — take a turn? with that reasoning he frames politics vulnerable as politics virtues. 

"you know the stat about three of the last four president emerge from the summer of 1946?" he asked, refer to trump’s birth in june 1946, george w. bush’s in july of that year and bill clinton’s in august. "it means that one generation has been in charge for a very long time." 

but his youth is in some ways a bind that put me in mind of the even greater predicament for female candidates. they’re expect to show that they’re as tough as men, but then that tough is describe as bossiness, shrillness. buttigieg has to muster extra poise, extra confidence, lest any deficit be interpret as immaturity. but then that poise and confidence, in the context of his age, are interpret as arrogance. his detractor constant tell me that he’s cocky — or robotic. 

"one of the things i get is, ‘why aren’t you more passionate?’" he said. "i’m very passionate. but i’m also very disciplined. if i weren’t, it would be hard to be taken seriously." 

is he maybe too disciplined? too contained? wonder if he’d yet confront the responsibility of helping to care for a sick parent, i ask about his own parents, and learned only then that his father die last january. while i’d kept reasonably close tab on buttigieg’s candidacy, this was something that he hadn’t mention enough that i’d heard it. and he said relatively little about it during our chat. 

the constitution decree that a house member must be at least 25, a senator at least 30, a president at least 35. no america president has been under 40, and only two took office before the age of 45: teddy roosevelt, who was 42, and john f. kennedy, who was 43. 

shouldn’t and doesn’t that give buttigieg pause? 

"of course you have those moments," he acknowledged. "we’re talk about a role of unbelievable importance and complexity and challenge. and yet every person who’s done it has been a mortal, a human being — and of course so much depend not just on the individual but on how you build a team." 

"the audacity of propose to do it at a young age is nowhere near the audacity of propose to do it at all," he said. so age "becomes like a detail." 

he repeated something that he has said score if not hundred of times on the campaign trail: as mayor of south bend, ind., for the past eight years, he has had a kind of executive experience that someone who has serve in congress for that long or long hasn’t. besides, he said, experience isn’t the only font of wisdom. education matters. intuition, too. 

he come armed with historical example beyond the founder of people who made remarkable contribution early on. "i’m not go to compare myself to martin luther king," he said, "but he’s certainly an example of somebody who had a huge impact, mainly in his 30s." king die at 39. buttigieg noted that stephen biko, one of the most prominent anti-apartheid activist in south africa in the 1970s, die at 30. 

trump has mocking refer to buttigieg as alfred e. neuman, the gaptoothed, big-eared, boyish mascot for mad magazine. he did so at a rally in pennsylvania on tuesday, ask his audience, "can you believe he’s do well?" 

"i dream about him," trump added. "it’s true." 

buttigieg’s response? 

"i don’t want to be anywhere near that guy’s dreams," he told me. 

it’s a good answer. maybe he’d match up well against trump. i’m not sure, and how i wish i were, because the likeliest trump slay is the democratic nominee i want and america needs. both substantive and in terms of electability, buttigieg would be better off if he were older, with higher position under his belt, but then all of the leading democrat have worry shortcomings. his youth is a concern. it shouldn’t be a deal-breaker. 
