jeff bezos’ phone hack should terrify everyone 
by charlie warzel 
jan. 24, 2020 

if the saudi crown prince, mohammed bin salman, wants to chat on whatsapp, polite decline. 

that’s the lesson from a series of report this week base off a forensic examination of jeff bezos’ communications with the crown prince. the investigate — conduct at mr. bezos’ request by fti consulting — found that his phone had most likely been attack in 2018 after he received a whatsapp message from the prince’s personal account. while my colleague in the times newsroom have piece together detail of the investigation, there’s still a great deal unknown. and cybersecur expert have serious question about fti’s report, which, according to cyberscoop, “has not impress the information security community." 

still, the story seem to have everything: from lighthearted, embarrassing earnest texts, “divorced guy" meme and world leader who awkward sign their text message with their full name to the deep problematic issue of revenge porn and steal of private nude photos. though it’s a gilded example of digital theft, there’s something trouble and relate about it all. billionaires, they’re just like us! 

or maybe not. look at one way, the attack on mr. bezos’ phone could be seen as yet more proof of what my colleague kara swish call “the death of privacy." if the richest man in the world — the man who sell listen device use in million of home and whose server create the internet’s infrastructure — can be hacked, what hope is there for us mere mortals? 

turn out, there’s some. yes, your personal privacy and security are constant under threat. and yes, you should be try to safeguard against malware, phish and bulk data collection. but the bezo attack is an example of extremely target surveillance, the potential expensive and risky kind that is aim at high-value target like executives, government officials, celebrity and billionaires. and as it turn out, many of those with the most to lose are woeful inept at safeguard their privacy. 

not long after the bezo news broke this week, i spoke to christopher pierson, who found blackcloak, a cybersecur company for high-net-worth and high-profile individual — executives, celebrity and billionaires. according to mr. pierson, few people take their digital lives as seriously as they should. 

“the majority of client we onboard come on in some kind of hack state," he told me. “their computer are compromise or their login credentials are available on dark web. their home camera system are accessible to people on internet or their entire home and appliance are vulnerable and view by person remotely." mr. pierson suggest that’s in part because high-value target choose to focus on physical security over digital and invest in private bodyguards, camera system and protection like kidnap insurance. 

how bad is it? “we see password in little black books on desk by the machine and in file on the computers. we see password that are the same everywhere. we absolutely do not see good use of dual factor authenticate on email, health care and financial accounts. i’d say we see less than 1 percent of high-net-worth individual use dual factor." 

mr. pierson said blackcloak has found more than 82 percent of its clients’ current password on the dark web when it ran an initial search. “in the case of high-net-worth individuals, the same compromise password is frequent use by 20 to 40 different account — some of those are personal, some are in the office." 

what mr. pierson describe is low-hanging fruit — the kind of security flaw that can quick be fixed with a little knowledge and attention to detail. even then, he said, it take time for the true nature of clients’ vulnerable to sink in. “they’re shock when we give them their password and tell them where we found it, but it doesn’t hit as hard as when we tell them their entire home automation system has been potential online and view for three or five or eight years," he said. 

when it come to a bezos-style breach — potential at the hand of a nation-state’s intelligence service — high-profile target would most likely be even less prepared. as mr. bezos’ lengthy investigate into the 2018 attack shows, it’s difficult to get straight answer even when you have the money and resources to run full forensics. 

of course, it’s not just wealth that turn somebody into a person of interest for hackers. journalists, government employees, worker at energy company and utility could all be target for someone. those who work for financial companies, airlines, hospitals, universities, hollywood studio and tech business are all potential at risk. you can take steps to secure yourself from corporate data collection by use privacy setting on your phone. and to protect yourself from cyberattack there are helpful guide you can use that have been vet by security professionals. 

for most of us, the attack against mr. bezo isn’t the death of privacy, but a reminder of the risk of living a connected life. it should be a moment to think as critical about what you do online as you might in the real world. invest in a password manager. turn on dual factor authentication. be skeptical of any communication that looks out of place. 

for the ultrarich and influential, the bezo hack should be a terrify revelation. as the former state department employee and whistle-blower john napier tye told me last autumn, “for someone who’s truly a high-value target, there is no way to safe use a digital device." the stakes are astronomical high. not just personally, as mr. bezo found, but professionally. company secrets, matter of national security, access to critical infrastructure and the safety of employee could all be compromise by lax security at the top. 

the internet has long been thought of as a truly democratic tool, flatten and democratize the ability to publish and communicate. it’s also the great privacy equalizer. money can buy a lot of things. but on a dangerous internet full of exploits, flaw code, shady actor and absent-minded humans, total, foolproof security is not one of them. 
