joe biden is strong than you think 
by david brook 
jan. 23, 2020 

it was yet another epic failure of politics punditry. go back to the early month of joe biden’s presidential campaign and read what the consultant and commentator were saying about him: his support is just name recognition; he’ll fade! he’s too old! he’s running a zombie campaign! the party has move left and he’s out of touch! he vote for the crime bill! 

almost everybody was bearish on joe. but now look where we are, week from actual voting. if the poll are to be believed, biden will win iowa, he’ll come in second in new hampshire, he will easily win nevada, he will dominate in south carolina. he’s now tie for the lead in california and he’s way ahead in texas. 

i don’t know if he’ll win the nomination (both he and bernie sander look strong), but this is not where a lot of people six month ago thought we’d be. 

it’s the 947th consecutive sign that we in the coastal chatter class have not cure our insularity problem. it’s the 947th case in which we see that every second you spend on twitter detract from your knowledge of america politics, and that the only cure to this insularity disease is constant travel and interviewing, close attention to state and local data and raw abject humility about the fact that the attitude and academic degree that you think make you clever are actually the attitude and academic degree that separate you from the real texture of america life. 

biden didn’t just luck into this. he and his team grasp six truths: 

understand the year you are running in. sander and elizabeth warren are running the same basic campaign they would have run in 2012 or 2016. biden’s campaign is completely focus on the central problem of 2020: that donald trump is a steam hot mess in the middle of national life. 

biden has fixate his campaign on the trump problem and fight for the soul of america. nearly twice as many democrat say it’s more important to beat trump than to have a candidate with whom they agree on all issues. 

understand your party’s core challenge. all around the world party on the left are lose because they have lost touch with the working class. these party think they can reconnect with that class by swinging even further left. but jeremy corbyn in britain and bernie sander here are a doctoral student’s idea of a working-class candidate, not an actual working person’s idea of one. 

biden has criticize his own party for lose touch with this class. he emerge from it, is focus his attention on it and is winning support from it. 

moderate are still powerful. the democratic party is moving left, but about half of democrat still say they are moderate or conservative. no candidate has ever won a nomination without strong support from these voters, while college-town candidate — howard dean, gary hart — tend to falter. in every presidential general election that democrat have won since 1988, they carry moderate by more than 12 percentage points. in every race they have lost, they fail to do that. biden kept his moderate credentials when many other candidate saw a.o.c. on twitter and decided to move left. 

many democrat resent their own elites. there is a quiet tension between democrat who wield cultural power and those who don’t. the former are active on social media, and clobber the latter — people who say or write the "wrong" thing. 

the non-elites tend to feel judge and look down on by the self-appointed savior class. "politically correct" has become the phrase people use to define those who use cultural power to enforce ideology conformity. seventy percent of democrat who are not on social media say politics correct is a big problem. these are people silent but vehement react against this social reign of terror. biden communicate affection, not judgment, acceptance, not expulsion. 

have a better theory of social change. sander and warren imagine they can rally movements of progressive supermajor to transform america politics. the reality is that if they are elect we’ll be stuck with the same 42 percent-to-42 percent stagnant politics war we have now. 

biden start with the understanding that we are a close divide nation. he understand the elemental fact that if you want to pass law you have to go through congress. as damon link pointed out recently in the week, biden’s argument is that a center-left congressional coalition is the best we can do under present circumstances. that’s a more realistic theory of change. a beloved legislator like biden is more likely to transform the politics landscape than a down-the-line progressive. 

connection. connection. connection. many candidate pound the podium and lecture at their rallies. it’s the big leader onstage and the passionate mass of follower down below. nobody make an individual connection as well as biden. in a time when people feel exhausted, isolated and alienated, a candidate who seem normal and emotionally relate is go to have a lot of appeal. 

the ironic fact is that the candidate who can be vulnerable has a surprising power. 
