john bolton get the last laugh 
by frank bruni 
jan. 28, 2020 

president trump’s reaction to the leak of incriminate detail in john bolton’s forthcoming book shock me. not the part where the president said that bolton was making up a ukraine quid pro quo in the service of the best-seller list — that he was lie for lucre. trump see that transaction everywhere he looks, because he see it first and foremost in the mirror. 

no, i was surprise that the president didn’t dispute knowing bolton, or at least didn’t say that he was so slightly acquaint with his own former national security adviser that he couldn’t pick him — chinchilla-bushy mustache and all — out of a lineup. that’s trump’s favorite ploy. ask michael cohen, anthony scaramucci, prince andrew, stormy daniels, gordon sondland, lev parnas. fall into disrepute, cross trump or claim to have the goods on him and you’re wipe clean from his memory, no matter the existence of contradictory forensics. ivanka, beware. you’re one bad manicure away from paternal amnesia. 

bolton is the impeach star of the week, whether he wind up testify or not, and i can’t shake the feeling that he plot all of this out: keeping his head down during the hearing in the house; letting it be known only afterward that he’d be willing to testify in the senate; the revelation this week — simultaneous with assertion by trump’s defense team that there were no firsthand witness to the president’s wrongdoing — that his book indeed address ukraine and fully back up the charge in the articles of impeachment. 

bolton has always been vain, brilliant and ruthless, and this is the timeline that a vain, brilliant and ruthless operator would cinch. i’m not personally acquaint with the sound of his laughter, but i’m certain i hear it. 

when trump came down that escalator in june 2015, the law of politics gravity were suspended, and bolton’s emergence as a darling of democrat is the latest example. he was so far to the right and such a ferocious hawk that president george w. bush bypass the senate to sneak him in as ambassador to the united nations. he later feather a nest at fox news, also known as the trump administration applicant pool. 

and at a time when most self-respecting foreign-policy maven had conclude that trump was toxic, bolton open his lip wide to the poison, sign on to become the president’s third national security adviser. of course, the president is now on his fourth. 

trump can’t dismiss bolton’s account of event as partisan. bolton’s conservative credentials prove otherwise. trump can’t bellow "deep state," not when he handpick bolton at a stage of his presidency when he’d already become sensitive to that supposedly pernicious force. all trump can do is command his republican minion in the senate to fall in line. sadly, most of them will. 

don’t be impress by the possibility that now — and, i stress, only now — some senate republican may press for witnesses, including bolton, in the trial. this isn’t a stirring of conscience. it’s a cloak of humiliation. if they ignore bolton, their still-unshaken commitment to acquit trump become even more naked. 

besides, hearing from witness wouldn’t erase republican senators’ awful behavior to this point in the trial: all the ugly gloat from the likes of lindsey graham that adam schiff’s undeniable eloquence was for naught; marsha blackburn’s pathological exuberant attack on the integrity of lt. col. alexander vindman; martha mcsally’s disgraceful snip at a perfectly polite television reporter ("liberal hack," she spewed) and then her cynical use of that trumpian outburst to raise money for her re-election campaign. this is sycophant at its most shameful. 

scratch that superlative: i was forget mike pompeo. according to the times’s scoop about bolton’s book, he write that pompeo, too, was aware of the ukraine pressure campaign — the same pompeo who did nothing to stop the vilification of marie yovanovitch; the same pompeo who promote the debunk conspiracy theory that ukraine interfere in the 2016 election; the same pompeo who once warn that trump would be "an authoritarian president who ignore our constitution" and then, when trump gave him a really neat job, decided that a little authoritarian never hurt anyone. 

of late he seem to be have a meltdown. i attribute it to his realization that his reputation and belief in his own rectitude won’t survive trump. he’s assess the bargain he made and understanding how completely his ambition eclipse his integrity. it’s hell when you’re reveal to yourself. 

bolton, meanwhile, is probably feeling pretty content. he know how badly the trump presidency will be judge and has position himself on the right side of history — this time around. maybe bitter brought him here, maybe ego, maybe this quaint old thing call patriotism. he survive trump. i’d read that book. 
