let us all now weep for donald trump 
by frank bruni 
jan. 21, 2020 

donald trump obviously relish the role of bully. but his greatest talent by far lie in play the victim. 

he’s a victim of adam schiff. a victim of nance pelosi. a victim of all democrats, really, and of his own seedy henchmen (michael cohen, lev parnas) and of the "deep state" and of the "fake news media" and of the entire establishment, whatever that is. 

he’s a victim of so many forces so many times over that even "martyr" doesn’t do justice to his lot, which is what you get when you multiply job in the old testament by mel gibson in "braveheart" and add the protagonist of "unbroken." 

no president has ever been treat so badly. i’m not being sarcastic. i’m taking dictation: he has made this exact claim — repeatedly. 

his victimhood is front and center in his defense against the articles of impeach and in the legal papers file by his lawyer on monday, as his trial in the senate move forward. 

the lawyer write of a process "rigged" against trump. they portray his democratic accuse as unhinge tormentors, too consume with his destruction to see how unimpeachable he has really behaved. the 171-page document is so soggy with trumpian self-pity it weeps. 

it’s so bloated with trumpian hyperbole it waddles. on just one of those pages, his lawyer recount how democrat exercise "shameful hypocrisy" as they "concocted an unheard-of procedure" and held those infamous "secret hearing in a basement bunker" while journalist "happily fed the public a false narrative" and the poor president was deny any rights whatsoever. this is the bodice rip of politics sob stories. it’s a harlequin harangue. 

it expand on — and continue in the precise spirit of — a preliminary legal brief that his lawyer file last weekend. "the scream of a wound animal" was how two legal expert who contribute to the atlantic assess that argument. they could as easily have been describe the rest of trump’s presidency, the whole of his politics career and much of his life. 

he’s always right and yet always wronged. he demand that we marvel at his invincible even as we tremble at his degradation. he can vanquish any enemy — and his enemy are legion! — but look at how he’s pushed around. trump take a textbook oxymoron and give it presidential form. behold, at the resolute desk, a jumbo shrimp. 

"this go all the way back to his childhood," michael d’antonio, the author of "the truth about trump," told me. d’antonio said that at the military-themed boarding school that trump attended, he was known for complain to superior about unfair treatment. "it’s a strategy for him. he believe and has said that whine is a way to get what you want." 

timothy o’brien, who wrote the trump biography "trumpnation," recall that in the 1980s, when trump fail to get the support that he want from mayor ed koch for an enormous development in manhattan, he threw himself a pity party, railing that "the system and local government were conspire against him." 

trump similarly fashion himself as a beleaguer hero battle dark forces when he bought into the fledgling united states football league and sought to make it competitive with the national football league. goad by trump, the u.s.f.l. file an antitrust suit against the n.f.l. 

the suit was a bust; the n.f.l. was ordered to pay $3 in damages. but that didn’t throw him off his game, which he upsize for his presidential campaign. 

as the conservative columnist rich lowry noted in august 2015: "by trump’s own account, he’s the baddest, smartest thing going, except if you ask him a challenging question, in which case he kicks and scream and demand to know how anyone could treat him so unfairly." lowry crown trump "the most fabulous whiner in all of america politics." 

the cnn anchor chri cuomo subsequent ask trump about lowry’s words. 

"i am the most fabulous whiner," trump conceded. "i keep whine and whine until i win." 

he whine operate as november 2016 approach and it seem that he’d lose to hillary clinton. "the election is go to be rigged," he pouted, ever the victim. then he beat clinton — and still whined, insist without proof that she’d done better in the popular vote because of million of illegal ballots. 

woe is he, the object of a "witch hunt" regarding russia assistance to his campaign, the butt of a "hoax" about improper pressure on ukraine, the commander in chief of armed forces that the whole world take advantage of. 

in a key passage of the new book "a very stable genius," by the washington post reporter carol leonnig and philip rucker, trump rant at top military brass about what he perceive as america’s exploit by south korea and by nato allies, barking, "you’re a bunch of dope and babies." 

it’s disgusting. it’s also part of his politics genius. he has turn himself into a symbol of americans’ victimization, telling frustrate voter who crave easy answer that they’re being pushed around by foreigner and dupe by the condescend custodian of a dysfunctional system. 

he’s their proxy, suffering on their behalf, and in that way he collapse the distance between a billionaire with multiple golf resort and displace factory worker struggle to hold on to their one and only homes. 

but while it’s a fact that they’ve been dealt a bad hand, it’s a farce that he has. his fortune began with money from dad. he has stiff creditors, evade taxes, attach his name to a bogus diploma mill, skim money from a fraudulent philanthropy, run afoul of campaign finance laws, signal receptive to russia interference in the 2016 election and try to obstruct the investigate of that — all without any commensurate punishment. 

thanks to republican in the senate, he’s poised to evade punishment again. we should all be such victims. 
