no, team trump, the coronaviru isn’t good for america 
by paul krugman 
jan. 30, 2020 

how frightened should you be about the coronavirus? i’m no epidemiologist, but what i’ve seen looks pretty scary. it doesn’t help that the trump administration, as part of its general war against science and expertise, has seriously reduce america’s capacity to respond if we do face a dangerous pandemic. 

it also looks quite possible that the virus will inflict a lot of economic damage — even if it doesn’t kill you, it might kill your job. and one special source of concern is that top official in the trump administration are talk nonsense about the economic threat. 

so, about that economic threat: many people are drawing parallel between the coronaviru and the 2002-3 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or sars, which also originate in china. like the current outbreak, sar led to the imposition of economically disrupt quarantines, which appear to have had a significant if temporary adverse effect on china’s economy, and a modest negative impact on the world economy as a whole. 

we still don’t know whether the coronaviru is more or less dangerous than sars. what we do know is that the global economic implication of a pandemic in china are likely to be much more severe now than they were then, for the simple reason that china is a vastly big player than it use to be. 

in 2002 china was still in the early stage of its great economic surge; it account for only around 8 percent of global manufacture value added, far less than the shares of the u.s., japan and europe. today, however, china is the workshop of the world, account for more than a quarter of global manufacturing. 

now, you might think that this imply an upside to china’s troubles, that disrupt china’s vast manufacture sector would offer opportunity to producer in other countries, including the united states. that is, you might think this if you knew nothing about 21st-century economics. 

sure enough, wilbur ross, the commerce secretary, appear on fox business on thursday morning to declare that he "didn’t want to talk about a victory lap," but that the coronaviru "will help to accelerate the return of job to north america." by saying this, he demonstrate a couple of things: (1) why gail collins’s reader vote him trump’s worst cabinet member, and (2) why trump’s trade war has been such a failure. 

what ross and his colleague apparently still don’t understand — although some of them may be get an inkling — is that modern manufacture isn’t like manufacture a couple of generation ago, when different countries’ industrial sector were engaged in fairly straightforward head-to-head competition. these days we live in a world of global value chains, in which much of what any given nation import consist not of consumer goods but of "intermediate" goods that it use as part of its own production process. 

in such a world, anything that disrupt import — whether it’s tariff or a virus — raise production costs, and as a result if anything hurt manufacturing. indeed, a recent study by the federal reserve found that trump’s tariffs, which were concentrated on intermediate goods, have reduced, not increased, manufacture output and employment. sure enough, while overall economic growth in 2019 was decent (not great), manufacture is in a recession. (and the uncertainty create by the trade war may explain why business investment is down despite a huge cut in corporate taxes.) 

as i said, some of trump’s people seem to have gotten an inkling here. last week the white house basically admitted that tariff on steel and aluminum have done more harm than good, hurt industry that use these materials. but the administration’s answer isn’t a reconsider of its policy — it is to impose more tariffs, on a wide range of products. 

which bring me back to the coronavirus. let’s leave aside the public health issue — although the trump administration has clearly left us much less prepared than we had been to deal with these issue if they become serious — and focus on the economics. 

what we can say is that if the virus seriously disrupt china production, its impact on the u.s. economy will be like an extreme version of trump’s trade war, except without any compensation in the form of tariff revenue. and the two things we know about the trade war are that it has been an economic bust and that trump’s official still appear clueless about why it has been a bust. 

bear in mind that so far trump has been remarkably lucky. aside from hurricane maria — which he mishandled, and in which thousand of america die — he has face essentially no crises, domestic or foreign, that weren’t of his own making. and he has surround himself with the gang that couldn’t think straight, which raise severe doubt about how well he would handle a crisis that he didn’t create himself. 

if wilbur ross’s bonehead remark on thursday are any indication — and i fear they are — the trump administration is even less prepared to deal with the economic fallout from a possible pandemic than it is to deal with the public health crisis. be afraid. 
