notorious d.j.t. on trial 
by maureen dowd 
jan. 25, 2020 

republican know very well who they are. 

that’s why it was such a juicy moment when hakeem jeffries, the congressman from brooklyn and democratic impeach manager, quote a lyric by fellow b-town native son biggie smalls to rebut jay sekulow when the president’s lawyer disingenuous wondered, “why are we here?" 

refer to the democrats’ crystal-clear case that donald trump abuse his power and corrupt the highest office in the land, jeffry proclaimed, “and if you don’t know, now you know." 

i went to the press gallery one afternoon to check out the tableau vivant. the visitors’ gallery was only half full, and there was none of the passion and titillate that infuse the clinton impeachment, which also, oddly enough, revolve around a power disparity between two people. 

one democratic senate staff mourn the apathy. “our phone aren’t ringing," he told me. “nobody cares. it’s the saddest thing ever." 

one side of the room seem to be smirking. 

mitch mcconnell is resort to his merrick garland playbook. he’ll let the democrat make all their noble points, but it’s kabuki. republican have perfect the dark art of “there’s nothing to see here, just keep moving." mcconnell long ago choreographe the end, with democrat lose the argument and the acquit scoundrel triumphant sweeping into the capitol to make his state of the union address. 

at night, tipsy republican staff treat senate office building as a pub crawl, roam the hall with celebratory bottle of wine. 

some republican were pay attention at the trial — or want to be seen pay attention. susan collins was glue to the proceedings, as was the senator to her left in a magma-colored shawl, lisa murkowski. republican like collins who are vulnerable in 2020 have to be alert and figure out how to find their way out of the hearing without do more politics harm. a trump confidant told cbs news that republican senator were warned, “vote against the president and your head will be on a pike." 

seat at the back of the class, mitt romney look dutiful, and the thought must have cross his mind that’s he’s in a position to inflict payback on trump for calling him “a pompous ass" and trick him into an interview for secretary of state only to humiliate him. (revenge is a dish best serve with milk.) 

but more senator on the republican side were telegraph boredom. 

lindsey graham yawn and rearrange his yellow pencil and went on walkabouts, later telling reporters, “about the fourth time you tell me the same thing is twice too much." he cleave to his lap-dog role, saying preposterous of trump: “what he wants to do is get to the truth." 

tom cotton play with the fidget spinner richard burr had hand out to all the republicans. marsha blackburn and other left to trash the proceedings on fox news. 

the senator in the democratic presidential race could not have been happy to be stuck there, either. bernie sanders, accustomed to making like leonard bernstein at big rally and upset he’s not in iowa to relish his surge, had a hard time keeping his hand still, moving them restlessly, silent clapping, and finally holding them together on his chest over his blue sweater. 

but head on both side did snap to attention whenever that unholy, jangly, self-impeaching peal, so inescapable in the last three years, rang out in the hallow chamber. trump’s voice was impossible to ignore when the house impeach manager play incriminate video clip of the human fidget spinner himself, sometimes howling over the blade of his chopper on the south lawn. 

so many people in this very room had try and failed, or are now trying, to vanquish the guy. romney, cruz, rubio, graham, klobuchar, sanders, bennet, booker, gillibrand, warren, harris. trump had savage all his fellow republican and yet here they were listen to an unend recitation of his crime and coming out to be his praetorian guard. 

adam schiff try to warn the former nemese turn defend of trump that if the president is not removed, he could turn on them the way he had turn on marie yovanovitch and joe biden, use the power of the presidency to cheat, lie and smear. (now rudy’s buddy lev parna say he has forked over to congressional democrat a 2018 recording of trump personally order yovanovitch to be fired.) 

“the next time, it just may be you," schiff told the republican senators. “do you think he wouldn’t ask you to be investigated? do you think for a moment that he wouldn’t?" 

schiff also remind republican that trump had invert their dogma, embrace the evil empire and authoritarian and trust crazy rudy’s conspiracy theory over his own intelligence services. 

“you don’t realize how important character is in the highest office in the land until you don’t have it," schiff said. 

but the more impressive the democrats’ case is, the more depress the reality becomes. they want to convince themselves that character matters. but many america knew they were vote for a thug. they want a thug who would bust up washington, and they got one. 

the democrat are rely on facts, but the republican are rely on fox. 

and if you don’t know, now you know. 
