bernie’s angry bro 
by bret stephen 
jan. 31, 2020 

barbara boxer mince no words when it come to describe the people usually known as the bernie bro — a subset of bernie sander supporter who hope to take over the democratic party and remake it in their image. 

"there is so much negative energy; it’s so angry," say the former four-term democratic senator from california. "you can be angry about the unfair in the world. but this become a personal, deep-seated anger at anyone who doesn’t say exactly what you want to hear." 

i ran into boxer early this week and got to talk about a superb report in the times by my colleague matt flegenheimer, rebecca r. ruiz and nellie bowles: "bernie sander and his internet army." the piece brief mention a 2016 incident in which boxer went to nevada to try to unify the party after hillary clinton defeat bernie sander in the state’s caucus. 

boxer was an early clinton supporter. but she’s also a liberal lioness and felt sure she could mollify the crowd. "i thought i could get the boo down," she recalled. "i said: ‘why are you booing? i’m bernie’s friend. when you boo me, you’re boo bernie.’" 

things only got worse. the heckle got louder. someone picked up a chair as if to throw it. "security whisper in my ear, you’ve got to get off the stage," boxer said. "when i left, my heart was pounding. i’d never had that before." 

boxer’s story is one of the mild one the times tell about the internet troll whose goal seem to have less to do with building sander up than with hound and humiliate anyone who stand in their man’s way. 

"when mr. sanders’s supporter swarm someone online, they often find multiple access points to that person’s life, compile what can amount to investigate dossiers," the times reported. "more commonly, there is a barrage of jab and threat sometimes frame as jokes. if the target is a woman, and it often is, these insult can veer toward her physical appearance." 

do this mean sander himself support this kind of behavior? no, and occasional he try to disavow it. but not very hard: last year, he hire as a top aide and speechwriter david sirota, accurate describe by the atlantic as "his twitter attack dog." 

nor do it mean that anything like a majority of sanders’s supporter support the nasty carry out in his name. yet no other democratic candidate has so many venomous follower — no biden brother or warren sister to return fire with fire. the only real analog in u.s. politics today to the bernie nasty are the trump nasties. they resemble each other in ways neither side care to admit. 

the most obvious resemblance is the adulation they bestow on their respective champions, whom they treat less as normal politician than as savior who deserve uncritical and uncompromising support. 

"surrender to a leader is not a means to an end but a fulfillment," the philosopher ere hoffer observe in "the true believer," a book that remains as relevant in our populist era as it was in the totalitarian one. "whither they are led is of secondary importance." 

since it’s the usual destiny of savior to be persecute before they’re exalted, the response of their follower often is to persecute back. but persecute whom? in the demonology of most mass movements there is usually a near enemy and a far one, and the near enemy must be dealt with first and hardest. to this day, hard-core trump supporter reserve their deepest spite for republican nevertrump holdout ("human scum," according to the president). 

just so with the bernie bros, who see more moderate democrat not as kindred spirits or potential convert but as sellouts, even traitor — the proverbial enemy within. partly this is about the normal competition for power, in which the show of ideology purity is treat as evidence of moral superiority. 

but it also go to the heart of what the bernie bro are really about. as they see it, ordinary civility isn’t a virtue. it’s a ruse by which those with power manipulate and marginal those without. democrat like joe biden who play by the rule of civility and bipartisanship aren’t just fall prey to the insidious manipulation. they are perpetrate and legitimize it. no wonder nearly half of sanders’s supporter won’t commit to or are unsure about vote for the democratic nominee in the event it isn’t bernie, according to a recent poll. why bother vote for oligarchy lite? 

if there is a silver lining here, it’s that the world has long experience with this brand of zealotry. bernie sander may not be one of his own awful bros, and may condemn their worst excesses. but there’s no reason to think they’ll lose their influence should he win the white house — just as trump’s presidency has embolden and empower many of his own worst followers. 

is this the democratic party the democrat want? they will cast their first vote for president on monday evening at the party caucus in iowa. now is the moment for second thoughts. 
