only you can prevent dystopia 
by farhad manjoo 
jan. 1, 2020 

the new year is here, and online, the forecast call for several season of hell. tech giant and the media have scarcely figured out all that went wrong during the last presidential election — viral misinformation, state-sponsored propaganda, bot aplenty, all of us cleave into our own tribal reality bubble — yet here we go again, headlong into another experiment in digital mediate democracy. 

i’ll be honest with you: i’m terrified. i spend a lot of my time look for edify ways of interact with technology. in the last year, i’ve told you to meditate, to keep a digital journal, to chat with people on the phone and to never tweet. still, i enter the new decade with a feeling of overwhelming dread. there’s a good chance the internet will help break the world this year, and i’m not confident we have the tool to stop it. 

unless, that is, we are all really careful. as smokey bear might say of our smolder online discourse: only you can prevent dystopia! 

and so: here are a few tip for improve the digital world in 2020. 

viral is a red flag. suspect it. 
if i were king of the internet, i would impose an ironclad rule: no one is allow to share any piece of content without wait a day to think it over. 

viral was once the delightful miracle of a network age; you’d see a funny video go around, get caught up in the collective wonder and hilarity, and forward it on to your 100 closest pals. at its meme-ified best, participate in this sort of viral feast felt like a boon to collective social bonding. remember, kids, that one glorious day we were all talk about the crazy dress? what times, what times! 

but, the dress notwithstanding, in the 2010s viral got too easy, and then it grew sour, venal and dishonest. nobody’s counting, but by my unscientific estimate almost everything that became instantly popular online in the last decade turn out to be problematic in one way or another. that photo of the shark wash onto a freeway by a hurricane? fake. the culture-war-defining outrage your aunt just post to facebook? debunked, of course. the sudden popular influencer? a "milkshake duck" running from his past. 

social network and even government are look into ways to curb viral misinformation, but this fight will define our age. the root of the problem is that human are weak, gullible dolts; every day many of us, even people who should know better — folks with fancy job and blue check mark next to our handle — keep fall for online hoaxes. viral hijack our better instincts, and because so many of the internet’s business model benefit from instant popularity, there’s a great deal of money and power riding on our failings. 

there is only one long-term fix: that a critical number of us alter how we approach viral content. let’s all conscious embark on a mind-set shift. in 2020, question anything that everyone’s talk about, especially if it fit all your priors, or there’s some kind of ad money involved. (hint: there’s always ad money involved.) if you can’t stop sharing, at least slow your roll. the stakes are enormous; there’s no room for error. strive to be better, please. 

resist the easy dunk. 
in the 2010s, twitter became the center of the politics universe. in some ways this was for the better — twitter is a haven for righteous activism against the global powers that be — but most times, it was for the worse. twitter is a daily toxic nightmare of reflexive egotism and groupthink that will prompt you to question your priorities, not to mention your sanity. 

which is why, if you’re on twitter and can’t muster the will to never tweet, you should at least consider it your duty in 2020 to resist the network’s worst impulses, for your sake and all of ours, too. 

what’s twitter’s most damage sin? i say it’s the too-easy mock joke — what’s known, in the jargon, as the "quote-tweet dunk." 

here are two canonical examples: 

this scurrilous maneuver works like so: you spot an easily ridicule tweet by a member of some rival social or politics tribe. like a 1990s fourth grade with phase set to "moded!" you add a pithy rejoinder that’s sure to please your side. it’s best if you elide context, depth or any intention of dialogue; just straight-up make fun of the person. then mash on the retweet button to broadcast your supposedly clever jape. 

the mechanism is part of the problem — when you quote-tweet someone on twitter, the service show off your remark to your own follower while leave the original poster’s follower in the dark. (another twitter feature, the reply, let follower of both user see a response.) if twitter is a cocktail party, the quote-tweet dunk is the equivalent of overhear a guy across the room say something ridiculous, then inviting the whole room to point and giggle at the idiot over there. the imbalance discourage any possibility of meaningful conversation and reduce all of politics discourse to empty, shallow quippery. 

the thing about the quote-tweet dunk is that it can feel incredible intoxicating; in the heat of some white-hot politics moment, it’s always tempt to shoot the fish in the barrel and watch the likes roll in. i swore off dunk years ago, but i still find myself aping michael jordan now and again. 

twitter could instantly improve itself by remove quote-tweet as a feature. failing that, take the oath with me: if the joke’s too obvious to resist, let it go. 

find a well-moderated corner of the internet. 
it can sometimes seem as if all the internet is deep fake and culture wars, trump tweet and influence scams. it’s not, of course. the internet still abound in lovely, wholesome niche — the fantasy sports circles, the youtube and instagram community devoted to any kind of craft, the many subreddit where stranger come together to help one another out of real problem in life. 

what distinguish the productive online community from the disturb ones? often it’s something simple: content moderation. the best place online are bound by clear, well-enforced community guidelines for participation. twitter and facebook are toxic because there are few rule and few penalty for flout them. a reddit community like r/relationships, meanwhile, is a haven of incredible, empathetic discussion because its host spend a lot of effort police the discussion toward productive dialogue. 

this get at the plain truth of the internet: a better digital world take work. it’s work all of us should do. 
