‘sesame street’ is opening up to syria refugee 
by alex carp 
jan. 31, 2020 

in its 50 years on television, "sesame street" has present an expansive idea of the challenge of childhood, offering lesson on divorce, racism, grieve and autism — as well as help with the alphabet and accept friends who are a bit tall and more birdlike. 

next week, a new version of the show will begin airing for an audience that, less than a decade ago, didn’t exist: children displace by the war in syria and their neighbor in the community where many of the refugee have flee or sought asylum. "at this point, there are lot of 7-year-olds who were born as refugee from syria" and remain far from permanent resettlement, a staff member on the project said recently. "that’s not change soon." 

since the start of the conflict, in 2011, nearly seven of every 10 resident of syria have been forced from their homes. more than 11 million have flee to unfamiliar parts of syria or to the country across its borders, with only around 150,000 permanent resettled. they are now the largest displace population in the world. and displacement, in the middle east and elsewhere, last long than ever before: "once refugee are displace for at least five years, as is the case for most syria refugees," the president of the international rescue committee, david miliband, said at a senate hearing last year, they’re likely to stay displace for more than two decades. 

"sesame street" began as an experiment in television and became a global model for early-childhood education. its new project, launch with the i.r.c. and educator in syria, iraq, jordan and lebanon, is an effort to rethink humanitarian aid. "aid is good at keeping people alive," mr. miliband has argued. "but it doesn’t give them the tool to thrive." it has traditional been direct to immediate needs — nutrition, security, shelter — but displacement that can last for decade presents a very different kind of problem. 

parent often carry the trauma of forced migration with them in unexpected ways, and a childhood of makeshift housing, isolation from an extend community of familiar faces, and few safe place to play can affect not only children’s behavior and learning skill but also brain development, gene expression and the ability to build the fundamental tool of resiliency. "it can be very hard to moderate, or to cope," said sherrie westin, sesame workshop’s president of social impact and philanthropy. preliminary research conduct in jordan and lebanon found that displace children have trouble finding the language to express their emotions. they describe what they feel only very broadly: sad, happy, scared. 

the show will focus on identify and manage emotions, and will be couple with thousand of outreach worker go to clinics, community centers, home and other gathering space in the four countries, where they will meet with children, parent and caregiver to provide support and extend many lesson of the series. today, less than 2 percent of humanitarian aid worldwide is target at education, "and just a tiny fraction of that go to early education," ms. westin said. "we’re talk about a generation-scale intervention." 

just as america "sesame street" teach count and the alphabet before deep literacy and numeracy, the new series, call "ahlan simsim," or "welcome sesame," will start with the basics. "we want this first season to dive into identify different emotions, like frustration and anger, nervous and loneliness, fear," scott cameron, an executive producer at sesame workshop, said. "but we also have to make that entertaining. and we have to do that without, in the case of fear, terrify the kids." 

to do that, mr. cameron and his colleague built on technique develop throughout the program’s years on the air. "we thought a lot about the icon ‘sesame’ character who’ve been useful for curriculum goal in the past," he said. "we need some kind of comedy foils, but we don’t want to do negative model — we don’t want villains." 

"oscar the grouch, for example, was develop in the very early stage of ‘sesame’ as a way to represent differences, and a kind of mutual respect," mr. cameron explained. "he’s grumpy, and he think smelly fish are great. but he can help model different perspectives. oscar and grove and cookie monster are all monster — meaning they’re not humanoid, like bert and ernie — so they’re a little bit remove from humans," mr. cameron explained. "you get a little more leeway that way." 

"ahlan simsim," which will air in arabic and kurdish, has two main characters. both were built at jim henson’s creature shop in queens, where row of desk are cover with half-constructed muppet and old one midrepair. (muppets big than a desk — mr. snuffleupagus, for example — might lean against a wall.) jordan pioneer production company, base in jordan, collaborate with sesame workshop to develop the characters, write script and shoot the episodes. when producer from "sesame" made a series of visit to the creature shop last year to discuss muppet design and look at prototypes, zaid baqaeen and khale haddad of jordan pioneers, the show’s head writer and an executive producer, join from amman via video chat. 

"jordan pioneer pitch us a boy and a girl character that were roughly the same age, and we love that," mr. cameron said. "two new friends who go on adventure together." for names, they suggest basma and jad. "basma means smile, and jad has a bunch of meanings, but connote somebody who’s kind of generous but a little bit button up. very earnest." 

mr. baqaeen added: "completely different, but they complement each other. basma is dynamic, adventurous, go-go-go. she’s kind of impatient when she’s excited about an idea or a challenge that she wants to take on. jad, we think of him as the planner, meticulous." he’s a painter, and he likes to paint plan in midair; viewer will learn that his brush once belong to his grandfather, who is absent from the show. 

what basma should look like came relatively easily — a purple non-humanoid girl ("like elmo is a boy, but not necessarily a human boy," mr. cameron explained.) skew pigtails, oval face, no bracelets or jewelry. and no clothing, which can bring in local connotation that interfere with a character’s identity. it can also be hard to adjust: bert and ernie have been stuck in striped shirt since 1969. 

jad was trickier. the team pass around some early sketches. "we drag a whole bunch of our monster muppet out," said rollie krewson, a master builder at the creature shop. she and jason weber, the creature shop’s new york creative supervise and an expert fabric painter and dyer, call them "anything muppets" — on occasion, they sit in for firefighter or police officer in the background of a scene, or once, for elmo’s grandmother. 

"we had one in a drawer that sound like what they were describing, just character-wise," mr. weber said. "it has this beautiful roundish head, and the mouth is straight across, but when you change the angle to make eye contact with the viewer, you can start to see a friendly, open smile just underneath." 

ms. krewson adjust the design to communicate jad’s introversion and express the challenge he sometimes has letting his feelings out. "he can also look very contemplative," she said. "he’s got a very loose jaw. i can push it way forward, and i can pull his chin back, so he can look perplexed and sad, more internal." 

mr. weber added, "he has what we call a very good smile curve." small touch link the character visually. jad’s nose is purple, like basma’s, and basma’s nose is jad’s golden yellow. 

the pair is join by ma’zooza, a goat sidekick who provide comic relief, mostly by eat everything in sight. "she’s a baby, learning how to walk and climb, and she’s voracious," in the tradition of cookie monster, mr. cameron said. "cookie has trouble with self-regulation, self-control. and ma’zooza allow basma and jad, who are almost 6, to have a younger friend that they can nurture, so they’re not always the one being nurtured. she also has these long, floppy ears, which are adorable." 

ms. westin said that "with basma and jad, one has left his home, become best friends with someone from somewhere else. you can see where that create opportunity for children to relate to those story and feel less alone." most refugee family live in host community and neighborhoods, and "the benefit of mass media is that we know we can reach not only displace syria children, but we can reach them side by side with their new neighbors." 

before shoot could begin, basma, jad and ma’zooza were bagged, packed in box and ship to amman. sesame estimate that the project, through television, mobile phones, home visits, preschool and the effort of educator across the region, will reach as many as nine million children — what they expect to be the largest early-childhood intervention in the history of humanitarian response. to measure its effectiveness with parents, caregiver and on tv, childhood development specialist will design and conduct study during the project’s first five years. 

their work will double the amount of research available on the experience of childhood in humanitarian crisis. "we’re go to share what works and what doesn’t work, and not just to help us achieve the outcome we’re setting out to achieve here," ms. westin said. it will be one of the first project of its scale to think about how fuller lives might be live within the consequence of the conflict and within long-term crisis elsewhere. "we want this project to be a model for humanitarian response not just in the middle east," ms. westin added, "but for refugee children wherever they may be." 
