starr chamber: the sequel 
by maureen dowd 
jan. 18, 2020 

can a woman be president of the united states? 

hell, yes. 

i’ve cover the men who run the world my whole life. and there have been a lot of screw-ups, from vietnam to watergate to afghanistan to iraq to push the economy off a cliff. there has also been plenty of creepy behavior, culminate in the news that donald trump, ken starr and alan dershowitz have join together in a pervy, hypocrite cabal to argue that trump did not smirch the constitution. 

so please, elizabeth warren and amy klobuchar, stop whingee about sexism and just show how you could wield power like a boss. ibid: nance pelosi. 

when steve bannon call pelosi a "total assassin," according to the hot new book "a very stable genius," by washington post writer phil ruck and carol leonnig, he meant it as the highest compliment. you won’t find pelosi keen about gender; she’s too busy taking care of business. 

hillary clinton did not lose because she was a woman. she face sexism, of course, just as barack obama face racism. she lost because she ran an entitled, joyless, nose-in-the air campaign and because she didn’t emulate her husband’s ethos of campaign ’til the last dog die and the last bowling alley closes, and always make it about the voters. she lost because she and her campaign manager, robby mook, didn’t listen to bill clinton, the world’s leading expert on the white, male, rural vote, when he warn them that there was trouble and offer to help out. 

donald trump operate from the id, which is fitting because he represent a last-gasp primal scream from working-class america threaten by the change transform the country. women are now a majority of the work force and whites are heading toward a minority status. hollywood cannot cling to its benighted — and self-defeating — desire to stay a white male club forever, despite the fact that women have always made up half the audience. 

trump’s ascent do not make it hard for women to ascend — just the opposite. look at the throng of women who were outrage enough about trump to march and run and get elect in 2018. 

once a woman electrify democrat the way j.f.k., bill clinton and obama did — and the way trump do his base — she will win. 

trump is once more do his part to energize women voters. on friday, we learned that the president will get help from starr and dershowitz for the impeach trial in the senate. 

the starr chamber was a shameful period of america history, with the prissy puritan independent counsel hound and virtually jail monica lewinsky and produce hundred of page of panting, bodice-ripping prose that read more like bad erotica than a federal report, rife with lurid passage about breasts, stain and genitalia. like the rev. arthur dimmesdale and other pharisaic holy roller before him, the prosecutor who read the bible and sang hymn when he jog became fixate on sex in an unhealthy, warp way. 

even trump was appalled. "starr’s a freak," the bloviate builder told me back in 1999. "i bet he’s got something in his closet." in other interviews, he call starr "a lunatic," "a disaster" and "off his rocker," and express sympathy for hillary have to stand by her man when he was "being lambaste by this crazy ken starr, who is a total wacko." 

starr, who once clutch his pearl over bill clinton’s sexual high jinks, is now go to bat for president "access hollywood." after play an avenge javert about foreplay in the oval, starr will now do his utmost to prove that a real abuse of power undermine congress and america foreign policy is piffle. 

in 2007, he defend jeffrey epstein. by 2016, starr was being oust as president of baptist baylor university for failing to protect women and look the other way when football player were accused and sometimes convict of sexual assaults. in other words, he’s a complete partisan hack who doesn’t give a damn about sexual assault. 

and then there’s dershowitz, whose past client have included such sterling fellow as epstein, clau von bülow, o.j. simpson and harvey weinstein. how did he miss ted bundy? still, dershowitz has put himself on the side of an impressive pantheon of villainy in the realm of violence against girl and women. 

virginia giuffre, prince andrew’s accuser, has also claim that she was offer as a teenager to dershowitz for sex — a contention that dershowitz has deny in a countersuit. 

on fox news, dershowitz has made the case that it is pelosi who put herself above the law by delay the delivery of the articles of impeachment. good luck with that one. 

the government accountable office, a nonpartisan government watchdog, a few days ago deem that trump’s slimy ukraine gambit violate a law. yet dershowitz will somehow argue that it doesn’t represent high crime and misdemeanors. 

he tweet that he’s nonpartisan because he oppose bill’s impeach and vote for hillary, even as he join up with bill’s persecutor. dershowitz said that he is participate "to defend the integrity of the constitution." 

that assertion may fly in foxworld. but in the real world, it’s ridiculous. you can bet that trump and his buddy will continue to turn out the women’s vote. 
