the meaning and melodrama of an italian-american christmas 
by frank bruni 
dec. 24, 2019 

grandma bruni live in a working-class neighborhood in a two-family home that i’d struggle to describe — it was that ordinary, that humble. but it was known for block in every direction, at least around this time of year, and not because she went wild with multicolore lights or put one of those sleigh-plus-santa monstrosity on the roof, the way some christmas exhibitionist did. 

no, it was famous because it was where jesus was born. 

and born. and born. year after year, decade upon decade, in a ritual as reliable as the sunrise and equally comforting. president came and president went. the economy roared; the economy whimpered. friends move away, favorite television show went dark. but i could count on baby jesus in all his plaster-of-paris glory. 

grandma, you see, had this beloved crèche, but it wasn’t the kind of miniature tableau that enable the entire sprawl cast of the nativity to fit on an end table or a bureau. hers took up a significant patch of her front lawn in white plains, n.y., and its centerpiece was a big wood shack, the pieces of which were haul every year from a backyard shed and hammer together so that mary and joseph would have somewhere dry to hang out from the end of november until the big day. 

they and their entourage were more than half life-size. it was as if grandma had invite a large party of anachronistic dress dwarf to camp out in her yard for the holiday season. 

but for most of december, something was missing: baby jesus, who was perhaps three-quarters life-size. he would stay missing — metaphorical in utero, though technical in a bottom drawer of grandma’s bedroom dresser — until the midnight moment when christmas eve became christmas day. 

grandma held to this schedule as if historical accuracy depend on it and white plain occupy the same time zone as bethlehem of millennium ago. at 11:58 p.m. on dec. 24, she’d dim the lights. she’d put on a record of "silent night." and she’d fetch baby jesus from that drawer, where he lay swaddle in her finest white linens. 

gently cradle him in her arms, she’d walk slow through the living room, out the front door and over to the shack. then she’d place him in a manger between mary and joseph. and she’d cry, because the moment was an emotional one and, she’d somber inform us, this christmas just might be her last. her talent for pasta was surpass only by her gift for melodrama. 

religion play a small part in her midwifery than you’d think. grandma was nominal and notional roman catholic and saw the church as the proper, even necessary, setting in which to mark the milestone of a life: birth, marriage, death. but that was as much about continuity — about a predictable rhythm, with reliable ornament — as it was about creed. 

jesus was a character in a commonly adopt narrative, a lyric in a widely sung song. he was a totem. above all he was a tradition, and the nativity scene in front of her house went hand in hand with a christmas eve menu of seven fishes, in accordance with italian-american convention, and with the rule that gift opening start with the youngest of the clan and proceed upward in accordance with age. do things "the right way" ground her. it was her center of gravity. 

she die some three decade ago, and i’ve no idea what happen to that crèche. but i know what happen to the family who found it both bonkers and beautiful, extravagant and essential. in the manner of modern america, we scattered — pull in this direction by work, in that direction by adventure, our commitment metastasizing, our free time shriveling. 

we do better than most at forging moments together, but they’re less and less predictable. where i could once tell you without hesitation how i’d spent the previous two, three or four christmas eve — with grandma and baby jesus — i now have to strain to remember. last year, in a peculiar mood, i went alone to las vegas. the year before that? i’m honestly not sure. 

that sadden me in ways that it would regardless of what’s happening in this seethe country and this fractious world, but current event intensify my appreciation for customs now lost, for touchstone that have crumbled. 

we’re at one of those juncture where so little can be taken for granted, so much is up for grabs. the worthiest of value come under fire. the sturdiest of institution buckle. i’m sure i’m not alone in finding that holiday matter more, as do the familiar script and cherish prop with which they’re celebrated. 

they’re assertion of normalcy amid change and loss. the solace is in the details. grandma understood this. she had a wisdom as ancient as the birth of baby jesus. 
