the next decade will be just as bad 
by farhad manjoo 
nov. 20, 2019 

we will remember the 2010s as a grifter’s paradise. these were the years when our collective sense of objective reality total fell apart and when politics, business, technology, culture and even ordinary life fell fully under the sway of a new breed of swindler, huckster, influencer, troll and hacker. 

scam and fakery were not just ascendant this decade — they were often the dominant story line. it was a time of "life come at you fast" and "milkshake duck." the primary feeling of the 2010s was one of punch-drunken disorientation, of always have the rug pull out from under you. and this was the big lesson of the 2010s: almost nothing is as it seems. doubt everything. trust no one. 

not that this idea works very well: doubt everything may be a workable plan for individual survival in a fracture media universe dominate by algorithm and digital media of dubious authenticity, but pervasive doubt could just as well bring on civilization ruin. get through modern life seem to require adopt a corrosive view of society that make a hash of our fundamental idea about the value of cooperation and trust among our fellow humans. we’re bring on a death-spiral of distrust — and i fear that in the 2020s and beyond, grifter peddle alternative fact may come to suffocate us all. 

the most obvious example of the huckster’s rise was, of course, donald trump. when trump announce his bid for the presidency in 2015, much of the politics and media establishment, including many leading republicans, thought the idea of a self-dealing, conspiracy theorize reality tv star winning the white house was a pretty funny joke. few of them understood trump’s effectiveness at hack the news landscape to command our attention completely. few of them could have guess that rather than the establishment foil trump, his slippery style and overwhelming blizzard of lie would so fully alter politics and media culture that by the end of the decade, member of the g.o.p. would be embrace and echo his conspiracy theory as a way to forestall his removal from office. 

while conspiracy thinking took full flower on the right, it began to bloom on the left, too. trump’s election was follow by the rise of anti-trump online influence who came to dominate news and activism. these were the "resistance grifters" — michael avenatti, the brother ed and brian krassenstein, the nearly self-parodic louise mensch — who peddle a self-serving brand of breathless anti-trumpism heavy pepper with call to buy their books and other merch. a specter of foreign disinformation led to widespread suspicion, and it became a handy defense for grifter to dismiss opposition as bot or russia shills. 

the grift wasn’t limited to politics. the tech industry welcome huckster with open arms. look at wework, uber and therano — once high-flying start-ups that promise to change the world in big ways and small, each unmask for peddle false prospects, unreal tech or hiding systemic corruption and abuse. facebook and other social media service were not just a haven of state-sponsored disinformation; with dodgy, easily game stats, social media increasingly came to provide a false view of the world. 

facebook admitted a series of error overstate advertising metrics. youtube’s stat were shown to be lousy with fake views, twitter’s were overwhelm by fake follower and amazon was full of fake luxury goods. scam pervade new technology and old ones. the spectacular rise in the price of bitcoin in 2017 was later found to be the product of market manipulation. and, according to a report by the telecommunications firm first orion, about 29 percent of all voice call placed in 2018 were scam robocalls; one estimate put the volume of spam call at billion per month. 

why are we being overrun by scams? society’s signal for judge reputation and trustworthy haven’t caught up with the change tech. even though we know better, we reflexive mistake instagram for reality — online influence is seen as a proxy for real-world authenticity, and so we are constant fall under the sway of people who’ve found ways to game the digital realm. on your phone, the fyre festival looks irresistible. 

we are also too easily blind by wealth, or marker for wealth. anna sorokin, the russia immigrant convict this year of con new york society into thinking she was a germany heiress name anna delvey, defraud hotel and bank of hundred of thousand of dollar by pretend to be rich. she’d hand out $100 bill to anyone and everyone. "for a stretch of time in new york, no small amount of the cash in circulation was coming from anna delvey," jessica pressler wrote. 

you could argue that my take on the end of truth is too gloomy. consider the clarify power of #metoo — how in the case of harvey weinstein, jeffrey epstein, bill cosby and other once-powerful men, we witness the power of fact and objective, clear eye investigate to alter the brutal power structure that had long held victim in silence. 

you might also argue that collectively, we’re get better at spot huckster and frauds. the resistance grifter had a good run, but we found them out. less than a year from now, if not sooner, trump, too, may hit the end of his run. 

but i’m skeptical that these things signal some reason for optimism. our information system has slip its moorings, and as a result, lie and scheme and fraud has simply become too effective a life strategy. as i argue in march, when the celebrity college admission scandal broke, we’re seeing the "uberization" of corruption — bend the rule is becoming routine and pervasive, a push-button cheat code for modern life. 

it’s not a big leap from "trust no one" to "swindle everyone." happy new decade, i guess. 
