the perverse servile of bill barr 
by frank bruni 
dec. 10, 2019 

donald trump famously said that he could shoot somebody in the middle of fifth avenue and not "lose any voters." i don’t know about that. but i’m confident that he wouldn’t lose bill barr. 

execution privilege, barr would probably call it. he’d release a statement or hold a news conference to say that trump had a spastic trigger finger or was trigger by adam schiff or was set up by those dastard ukrainians, who are never up to any good. such is the magnitude of barr’s servility, the dogged of his deference. he’s the president’s moral launderer. trump do evil, and barr wash him clean. 

as attorney general, he’s supposed to be the nation’s lawyer. but he has bought into the autocrat delusion that trump equal america, that national interest and presidential prerogative are inextricable intertwined. so he’s trump’s advocate, come hell or high crimes, as surely as pat cipollone or rudy giuliani is. 

on monday, showing fresh contempt for the people who work under him in the justice department, barr renounce a determination by the department’s inspector general that the f.b.i.’s investigate into the trump campaign’s tie to russia was legitimate and that anti-trump bias was not its animate force. he did this instantly. 

and then, on tuesday, did it again, with even less subtlety and more sanctimony. "it was a travesty," he said of the investigation, and he was speak not just of the sloppy and haste of some of the f.b.i.’s actions, with which the inspector general also took issue. he was dismiss the whole effort as rotten. 

it was an eerie echo of his effort last spring, when he sought to neuter robert mueller’s finding about the trump campaign’s open to russia help and the president’s attempt to obstruct justice. give barr points for consistency. he has bought fully into the idea that the zeal of trump’s detractor matter more than the presidents’ abuse of power. 

but what of the constitution? what of common decency? barr isn’t concerning himself with those. to do so would call into question the honor of serving in this administration, the compliment of holding the job that trump gave him. and he wants that compliment. that pedestal. he prefer to see himself as a holy warrior than as an unholy dupe. 

to appreciate his perspective, you must travel back two months, to the university of notre dame, where he deliver a speech that garner some headline but not nearly enough of them. 

you should read it. you should savor its grandiose — it has reference to the dawn of homo sapiens, the twilight of the judeo-christian order, edmund burke, james madison — so that you can understand his current overreach, born of his certainty that he know better than the rest of the body politic and is call to heal us. 

you should note his remarks’ obsession with morality and you should try not to laugh, the same way you stifle chuckle when you’re remind that mike pompeo is a putative worshipful christian and you try to square that with how he abet the persecution of marie yovanovitch, leaves his state department charge twist in the wind and genuflect before a false prophet. in trump he trusts. 

you should dwell on the part of barr’s jeremiad where he say that "men are subject to powerful passion and appetite and, if unrestrained, are capable of ruthless riding roughshod over their neighbor and the community." ruthless? roughshod? that’s trump in an alliterative nutshell, but barr seem to be perverse oblivious to that. he was making a case for trump’s presidency. 

the wonder of this wretched moment has never been the existence and stench of a bad egg in the oval office. that’s hardly strange, given how ably shameless serve ambition. the wonder is how many other bad egg the current president has assemble or hatched. the wonder is this fluffy, funky omelet of unscrupulousness. 

all these supposedly godly men — barr, pompeo, mike pence, ben carson, rick perry and more — cluster around such a demonstrable godless one. they rationalize that trump’s indulgence of certain religious faction absolve him of his sins. barr is the principal agent of that absolution. 

he’s also a paragon of hypocrisy, telling pete williams of nbc news that the f.b.i. investigate of trump’s campaign was an ominous abuse of government power for partisan aims. that description better suit the conduct for which trump is about to be impeached. i don’t know how barr kept a straight face. 

actually, i do. since betroth himself to trump, he has had ample practice. in the notre dame speech, without any palpable sense of irony, he urge a "moral renaissance" and deliver this priceless line: "no society can exist without some means for restrain individual rapacity." i agree. 

in our society, impeach is one of those means. the law is another. and if barr could dig out his conscience from under all those layer of ego, he’d see that the rapacious individual in direst need of restraint is the one he’s letting roam free. 
