the politics of exhaustion 
by david brook 
dec. 12, 2019 

there are two power bloc driving politics today. first, there’s the proletariat. these are the working-class voter who go to trump rally in the u.s. and power brexit and boris johnson’s campaign in the u.k. they see their best world recede and they want a tough guy to bring it back. 

second, there is the precariat. these are the young and educated voter caught in the gig economy, who see no career security ahead. they want leader like bernie sander and jeremy corbyn who will promise envelop policy — free college, free internet, free child care — to give them some sense of safety. 

these two group are different in some ways. when the proletarian attack their enemies, they do so from a position of perceive social inferiority, so their attack are resentful and brutal. when the precariat attacks, it do so from a position of perceive moral superiority, so its attack are fill with ridicule, mockery and scorn. 

but the movements do have parallels. both are driven by a fear of the future, and of each other. both have a tendency to embrace catastrophic, apocalyptic vision of the ruin around us. dystopia has become the opiate of the activist class. 

haunt by economic insecurity, they will tolerate any sin in their leader — racism, anti-semitism, dishonesty — so long as that person is willing to fight and be on their side. they both support massive, unrealistic policy proposals, because they reject the idea that politics is simply the muddle way we settle difference with people we disagree with. 

these two power bloc are driving the debate and setting the agenda. but there’s another group of people, who have become the most interesting part of the electorate, both here and in britain. it’s the exhaust 75 percent, people who are define not by any common ideology but by an affect state — they are simply worn out by the endless war between these two armies. exhaustion has become an independent force in modern politics. many people are vote for whatever candidate will exhaust them less. 

thursday’s britain election was define by the fact that most voter were simply ground down by johnson and corbyn. the economist call the election "britain’s nightmare before christmas." 

writing in the guardian, rafael behr observed, "we live with the undertow of sad and dread. we are brace for that feeling, like seeing callous hand rummage in a private drawer where a delicate, tangle identity is store and pull at the threads. it feel like exile." 

people in the exhaust camp are tired of have politics thrust in their face every hour. as ryan street of the america enterprise institute has found, young people who are "lonely at least once in a while" are more than seven times more likely to be active in politics than those who are social active. those who are exhaust have other things to do. they want to restore politics to its rightful place, and find meaning, attachment, entertainment and morality in something else besides twitter war and election campaigns. 

years and years of exhaustion have also made these people weary, cynical and disgusted. exhaustion, as always, induce a sort of pessimism, a feeling that we are living in terrible times, a sort of weary of the soul. as peter stockland of the think tank cardu put it, "the combine effect of fear and exhaustion" is "producing a cynicism so deep and murky and toxic that it verge on the sin of bearing false witness against reality." 

but the chief feature of the voter in the exhaust group is timidity. they do not get energy from conflict, the way, say, trump does. their instinct is to keep their head down and just get through this craziness. 

on campus 10 percent of student are able to intimidate the other 90 percent, who don’t want to say the wrong thing and get canceled. in congress, the trumpian are able to intimidate the member who realize what a problem he is. the people in the two big power bloc are not good at winning the war against each other, but they are really good at intimidate the moderate on their own side. 

in this way, those in the exhaust camp perpetuate their own misery. they complain about the terrible choice each election cycle, but never organize enough or become imaginative enough to offer something they themselves might want. 

in britain they’ve mostly taken money out of politics, but they still had an election even worse and more polarize than our own. in the end, if johnson, as expected, win easily, it will be in part because exhaust voter will have swung to trump/johnson nationalist demagogy since the only alternative is a corbyn/sanders class war. 

in the states, voter still have a chance to turn the emotional page, to elect a person who display that you can be a progressive or you can be a conservative without turning politics into perpetual war. pete buttigieg is rising and joe biden’s support is resilient precisely because they are not exhausting. 

the interesting question is whether, in the heat of battle, the exhaust voter can get over their fatigue, cynicism and timid and take their own side in a fight. 
