a ridiculous optimistic history of the next decade 
by david brook 
jan. 2, 2020 

look back at the 2020s from our vantage point in 2030, the first great event was the complete destruction of donald trump’s republican party. as the former republican consultant mike murphy had noticed, there were roughly 300 state and federal election during the trump years and republican did horrible in most of them. the 2020 vote was a continuation of that trend. trump’s landslide defeat left him humiliated, and the republican lost their senate majority. 

trump cry fraud and try to whip up his followers, but they turn their backs. he went from idol to scapegoat in an instant. it seem they could forgive him everything but losing. many temporary retreat from politics life, the way evangelical christian did after the ignominy of the scope trial. 

president joe biden face an interesting dynamic in his party. the politics power was with moderates. the intellectual power was with the left. people of color, whose view were largely more moderate, became the crucial swing faction. 

as president, biden resist the interest group that want him to address health care first. instead, he did child and earned-income tax credits, infrastructure, expand early childhood education, expand prison reform, and so on — what some writer call "reparations by any other name." he gave regulatory czar elizabeth warren a special portfolio to take on big tech. 

the major event of the decade were cultural, not political. the trump era had witness a crisis of connection at the bottom of society and a crisis of authority at the top. social repair was the top order of the day once a new president took office. 

the first whiff of the cultural restoration was the "accountability clubs" that spread across the nation’s campuses. college student realize that america stink at accountability. either there is no accountable (wall street after the financial crisis) or people have their lives destroy for a "problematic" tweet. 

the accountable club bore the motto "truth and mercy." student want to restore a culture in which fact mattered. they were also searching for a way to judge other in a graduate and humane manner, allow for repentance, forgiveness and restoration. marshall mcluhan once remark that "moral indignation is a technique use to endow an idiot with dignity." sudden indignation, the keystone emotion of the trump years, was lame. empathy made a comeback. 

the second cultural trend of the decade was the rise of the urban church. suburban megachurch attendance fell, because the pastor had disgrace themselves under trump. but sudden there was a surge in church plant in place like brooklyn, washington, d.c., chicago and san francisco, as highly educated people found home for their spiritual longings. 

the church were liturgical highly charismatic (bethel music) and highly universalistic and intellectual (richard rohr). their politics were an odd mix — pro-l.g.b.t.q., pro-life, active on climate change, pro-animal rights (one of the signature moral cause of the decade). the religious left gain on the religious right. 

at the same time, the racial justice conversation went intimate. america is involved in a multigenerational process of truth and reconciliation. in the teens, the truth-telling had generally revolve around historic event — slavery, lynching, redlining. in the 2020s, a series of writers, artist and director gave us vivid description of the subtlety of contemporary black life. 

the profusion of video stream network allow a new generation of artist to take audience inside the psychological lives of people of color. these artist realize that structural change would happen when people learned to see one another whole. 

the most important cultural change came to be known as the civic renaissance. during the first two decade of the century, hundred of thousand of new civic organization came into being — heal politics divides, fight homelessness, promote social mobility and weave communities. but these organization were small. they did not grow into the big national chapter-based structure that had repair america’s social fabric a century early — the y.m.c.a., the rotary, the boy scouts. 

by the 2020s, philanthropist and community builder realize the only way to change culture and weave the social fabric was by create an a.f.l.-c.i.o. of civil society, with big national voice and large, decentralize national organization so that people across america had easy and practical pathway to get involved in community revival. 

in the 2010s, it seem like the liberal order was crack up. in the 2020s, that feeling vanished. the decline of the china economy delegitimize the authoritarian model. it turn out you can’t run a central control economy without a lot of waste, corruption and riot police. 

meanwhile, the america politics system began to work better. the g.o.p. re-emerged under josh hawley and marco rubio as a better version of a working-class party — social right, economically left. democrat remain dominant through the decade. their party’s biggest accomplishment was in foreign affair — the repair of america’s alliance and the restoration of global america leadership. 

america were more collaborate in the 2020s. and the new york met won the world series every single year. 
