the sidney award 
by david brook 
dec. 19, 2019 

i’ve been give out the sidney award (initially call the hookies) for long-form essay since 2004, in honor of the late great philosopher sidney hook. this year there were more phenomenal articles than ever before, many more than i can list. the topic they tackle were also more downbeat than ever before. it’s been that kind of year. 

several of the people who sent me their own lists of favorite suggest candace vogler’s essay "a spiritual autobiography," in comment. it’s unlike any essay you’ve ever read. vogler suffer a childhood of unimaginable sexual abuse and neglect. "i was afraid to be alone. i was afraid of the other children in school. i was afraid of the other children in the neighborhood. i fear that an evil thing had attach itself to me, and could injure anyone who got close to me." 

her life took a series of improbable turns: berkeley feminism, quakerism, a range of gay friends in society high and low, family disruption, bar fights, an afro-brazilian spiritual practice call umbanda. from jesus she learned that not all men are toxic. she is now an esteem philosopher at the university of chicago. you can’t summarize this essay because it’s so hard to encapsulate this life’s twist and turns. "i enjoy a kind of peace now that i could not have imagine before. i am the luckiest person i know," vogler writes, reflect on the arrival of many graces into her life. 

i’ve co-taught with her a couple of times (she’s an amazing teacher) and had no idea of the back story that she carry around — a reminder that many people we meet carry back story that are simply mind-boggling. 

in "when the culture war come for the kids," in the atlantic, george packer describe what happen when the ferocious competitive meritocratic culture of the new york educated class collide with the ferocious social justice warrior of the new york educated class. packer trace his own family’s perilous adventure through a few brooklyn school and write a piece that capture the zeitgeist of our age. 

his son’s public school coerce parent into opt out of standardize test and made the bathroom gender neutral, leading female student to hold their bladder all day rather than go to the bathroom with boys. it taught the oppression of every out-group but never the history of the america founding. it’s not the school’s decision themselves that are so remarkable but the atmosphere of p.c. religious zealotry that surround them, and the anguish of progressive parent who have to send their precious children into the maw of ideology re-education camp that in theory they agree with. 

in "the unthinkable has happened," in vulture, jayson greene describe what happen when a brick fell from an eighth-floor windowsill and hit his daughter in the head. it’s a father’s wrench and beautiful minute-by-minute account of the next few days. at one point he and his wife are in the hospital absorbing the doctor’s prognosis: "we know greta is go to die, all of us, although we haven’t allow the thought into our conscious mind yet. none of us is ready for it to maraud through our subconscious, killing and burning everything it sees. but we hear bang at the gates. we glance around us, realize this is the last we’ll ever see of the world as we’ve known it. whatever come next will raze everything to the ground." you will read it and cry and hug your children tighter. 

i’ve always given sidney to individual essays, but this year it seem right to give one to an entire issue of a magazine, the december issue of the atlantic, titled "how to stop a civil war." that issue felt like a civic act. i’d particularly recommend yoni appelbaum’s essay, "how america ends," which capture the politics moment we are in. america is undergo a demography revolution, with the dominant white majority becoming a minority. we’re also at a moment when hyperpartisan fear that lose an election will be more catastrophe than lose our democracy. such people are willing to destroy democratic norm to stay in power (look around you). appelbaum also argue that the key to the country’s future is building a healthy center-right. as someone who’s work on this problem for 25 years, i say good luck with that. 

i’d also recommend caitlin flanagan’s "the dishonesty of the abortion debate" from that issue. flanagan do something that should be more common: she take the most vivid argument from each side of a controversy and she jam them into one essay. the most vivid argument of the pro-choice side is the back-alley and other dangerous abortion that result when you make the procedure illegal and the women who die as a result. flanagan take you there. 

the most vivid argument of the pro-life side is the sonogram, and the grow evidence that cognitive life begin soon than we thought. these images, flanagan writes, "are proof that what grow within a pregnant woman’s body is a human being, living and unfold according to a timetable that has exist as long as we have. obviously, it would take a profound act of violence to remove him from his quiet world and destroy him." there’s a reason this debate is so hard. 

on a lighter note, sports illustrate had an essay by emma baccellieri, call "mud maker: the man behind mlb’s essential secret sauce." in 1920, the cleveland indian shortstop ray chapman was kill when a pitch hit him in the head. baseball need a way to help pitcher have greater control of their pitches. the solution was to coat the balls with a thin layer of mud, thus improve their grip. 

jim bintliff is the man who collect that mud, with shovel and buckets, from a secret spot along the delaware river. his mud now coat roughly 240,000 balls per season. the story is about bintliff, who cultivate the mud as if it were fine wine. "i know the mud. i’m the only one on the planet who does," he says. 

in "the day the dinosaur died," in the new yorker, douglas preston describe what happen when an asteroid struck the earth 66 million years ago, the most significant event in the history of our planet. twenty-five trillion metric ton of debris were thrown up into the atmosphere. the energy release was more powerful than a billion hiroshima bombs. a mountain rose up higher than mount everest. fire consume 70 percent of the world’s forest and kill 99.9999 percent of all living organisms. preston’s tale get more astound from there. 

in "magic eraser juice," in hazlitt, elizabeth rosen describe what it’s like to be an e.m.t. in the age of the opioid epidemic. the piece is gripping throughout but especially when she’s describe how people who have overdose are brought back to life when she administer narcan. some are overcome with grief that they have fallen so low. other are nonchalant: "oh, i’ve od’d a bunch of times." 

i hope everybody has read richard powers’s phenomenal novel "the overstory," about how tree communicate (and a lot more). robert macfarlane’s essay "the understory," in emergence magazine, is even more astounding, explain how tree communicate underground. one of the ways they do it is through hyphae, which are superfine thread that fungi send out through the soil to create an interconnecte social network. a single teaspoonful of soil can hold up to seven mile of hyphae. 

i found the america scholar essay "how i learned to talk," by emily fox gordon, a pure delight. when she was a young woman, gordon found a psychoanalyst, leslie farber, who didn’t try to force epiphany and breakthrough "aha!" moments. he didn’t treat therapy as work. he saw it as an occasion for friendship and beautiful talk. this kind of talk, gordon writes, "is playful and gratuitous. though it often contain elements of argument and analysis, its first aim is not to solve problems. in the case of farber’s practice, any therapeutic benefit lay in the talk itself, the self-forgetting human connection that can lift a person out of desperate isolation and remind him that in the future such reprieve will continue to be possible." gordon’s narrative voice is lovely and wise. farber is someone we would all like to have known — and can through this essay. 

the final sidney winner is a bit of a cheat. "cop diary" by edward conlon was first publish in the new yorker in 1997 and was reposte this year by the sun. it’s certainly the most realistic description of police work that i have read. "i take prisoners," conlon writes, "and to exercise that authority is to invoke a profound social trust. each time a surgeon undertake the responsibility of cutting open a human being, it should be awesome and new, no matter how necessary the operation, no matter how routine. a police officer who take away someone’s freedom bear a burden of at least equal gravity. let me tell you, it’s a pleasure sometimes." 

when i read these essay at the end of the year, i feel like i’ve been given gift and a deep appreciation of the reality around us. when i spend the rest of the year following impeach on twitter, not so much. 

a lot of people help me find great essay each year, but i’m especially grateful to robert cottrell, who runs one of my favorite spot on the web, the browser; con friedersdorf, whose the best in journalism newsletter is a weekly dose of intellectual nutrition; and robert atwan, who runs the best america essay series at houghton mifflin. all three are generous with their time and erudition. full disclosure: my wife is editor in chief of comment, where the vogler essay appeared. 
