the wisdom your body know 
by david brook 
nov. 28, 2019 

this has been a golden age for brain research. we now have amazing brain scan that show which network in the brain ramp up during different activities. but this emphasis on the brain has subtle fed the illusion that thinking happen only from the neck up. it’s fed the illusion that the advanced parts of our thinking are the "rational" parts up top that try to control the more "primitive" parts down below. 

so it’s interesting how many scientist are now focus on the thinking that happen not in your brain but in your gut. you have neuron spread through your innards, and there’s increase attention on the vagu nerve, which emerge from the brain stem and wander across the heart, lungs, kidney and gut. 

the vagu nerve is one of the pathway through which the body and brain talk to each other in an unconscious conversation. much of this conversation is about how we are relate to others. human thinking is not primarily about individual calculation, but about social engagement and cooperation. 

one of the leader in this field is stephen w. porge of indiana university. when you enter a new situation, porge argues, your body reacts. your heart rate may go up. your blood pressure may change. signal go up to the brain, which record the "autonomic state" you are in. 

maybe you walk into a social situation that feel welcoming. green light. your brain and body get prepared for a friendly conversation. but maybe the person in front of you feel threatening. yellow light. you go into fight-or-flight mode. your body instantly changes. your ear, for example, adjust to hear high and low frequency — a scream or a growl — rather than midrange frequencies, human speech. or maybe the threat feel like a matter of life and death. red light. your brain and body begin to shut down. 

according to porges’s "polyvagal theory," the concept of safety is fundamental to our mental state. people who have experienced trauma have body that are highly reactive to perceive threat. they don’t like public place with loud noises. they live in fight-or-flight mode, stress and anxious. or, if they feel trap and constrained, they go numb. their voice and tone go flat. physical reaction shape our way of seeing and being. 

lisa feldman barrett, of northeastern university, also argue that a main purpose of the brain is to read the body, and to regulate what she call the body budget. you may see a bully on the playground. your brain then predict your next action and speed your heart rate and breathing to deal with it. you experience these change as emotion — oh, this is fear or oh, this is anger — because your brain has create an emotion concept to make those physical change meaningful. 

"you might think that in everyday life, the things you see and hear influence what you feel, but it’s mostly the other way around: what you feel alter your sight and hearing," barrett write in "how emotion are made." 

when we’re really young we know few emotion concepts. young children say, "mommy, i hate you!" when they mean "i don’t like this" because they haven’t learned their culture’s concept for hatred vs. badness. but as we get old we learn more emotional granularity. the emotionally wise person can create distinct experience of disappointment, anger, spite, resentment, grouchy and aggravation, whereas for a less emotionally wise person those are all synonym for "i feel bad." 

a wise person may know the foreign words that express emotion we can’t name in english: tocka (russian, roughly, for spiritual anguish) or litost (czech, roughly, for misery combine with the hunger for revenge). people with high emotional granular respond flexible to life, have better mental health outcome and drink less. 

if bodily reaction can drive people apart they can also heal. martha g. welch of columbia university points to the importance of loving physical touch, especially in the first 1,000 minutes of life, to lay down marker of emotional stability. 

under the old brain-only paradigm, welch argues, we told people to self-regulate their emotion through conscious self-talk. but real emotional help come through co-regulation. when a mother and a child physically hold each other, their bodily autonomy states harmonize, connect on a metabolic level. together they move from separate distress to mutual calm. 

welch has create something call the welch emotional connection screen, which measure the emotional connection between mother and pre-term babies. by encourage this kind of deep visceral connection through 18 months, her therapy can mitigate the effects of autism. 

when you step back and see the brain and body thinking together, the old distinction between reason and emotion doesn’t seem to make sense. your very perception of the world is shaped by the prediction your brain is making about your physical autonomy states. 

you also see how important it is to teach emotional granularity, something our culture pay almost no attention to. 

you also see that we’re not separate brains, cool observing each other. we’re physical viscera, deep interact with each other. the important communication is happening at a much deep level. 
