trump wants law and order front and center 
by thomas b. edsall 
jan. 8, 2020 

unexpectedly, the 2020 presidential campaign is drill down on petty crime and homelessness. donald trump and his republican ally are revive law-and-order theme similar to those use effectively by richard nixon and spiro agnew in the late 1960s and early 1970s to demon racial minorities. 

to this end, republican seek to discredit liberalize law enforce initiative adopt by a new breed of democratic prosecutors. 

these democratic district attorney — in cities, county and suburbs from philadelphia, orlando, chicago and st. louis to contra costa county, calif., suffolk county, mass., and durham county, n.c. — are pursue policy intended to decriminalize vagrancy, and eliminate cash bail, and they are aggressive pursue charge in case of shoot by police officers. 

they are play a key role in a hotly politicize movement to curb mass incarcerate and to roll back what has become known as "the carceral state." 

the decarceration movement is back by a wide array of organization tight align with the progressive wing of the democratic party: the real justice pac, black lives matter, the brennan center for justice, the aclu, justice democrats, moveon.org and brand new congress. 

michael waldman, president of the brennan center, and adureh onyekwere, a senior research and program associate there, along with inimai chettiar and priya raghavan, describe the goal of the movement in a may 2019 essay, "ending mass incarceration: idea from today’s leaders": 
mass incarcerate is the civil rights crisis of our time. the racial disparity pervasive in our justice system compound at every juncture: africa america are more likely to be stop by police, arrested, detain before trial, and given harsh sentence than whites. 

how do we achieve change, the author ask? the solution they envisage range broad 
from eliminate prison for lower-level crime to incentive states to decarcerate, from ending bail to abolish private prisons, from reform housing and employment law to change the public perception of the justice system and cultivate respect for all lives. 

at the same time, as this movement has been gain momentum, it has provided ammunition for a powerful counterattack from president trump, his attorney general, william barr, and other law-and-order republicans. 

the result is that the 2020 election is expand the 50-year-old culture war into new territory as democrat — often under pressure from younger voter — seek to extend broad rights to those who have been previous stigmatize or marginalized, now moving beyond protection for minorities, women and gays, to provide more freedom to criminal defendants, the homeless, the mental ill and unknown numbers of men and women imprison through prosecutor misconduct, judicial error or other form of systemic failure. 

republicans, in turn, are bet that the democratic presidential candidate have move substantially farther to the left on issue of crime and punishment than the vote public. 

leading democratic presidential candidates, for their part, are not shy away from the challenge, endorse in whole or in part the decarceration and decriminalize agenda. 

even joe biden, one of the more moderate 2020 candidates, argue at the september democratic presidential debate that "we should be talk about rehabilitation. nobody should be in jail for a nonviolent crime" and that "nobody should be in jail for a drug problem. we build more rehabilitate centers, not prisons." 

once a strong supporter of the death penalty, biden now call for its elimination, note on his website: 
over 160 individual who’ve been sentence to death in this country since 1973 have later been exonerated. because we cannot ensure we get death penalty case right every time, biden will work to pass legislation to eliminate the death penalty at the federal level. 

while many of the democratic presidential candidate have effectively join the decarceration movement, the same unity cannot be found among house and senate democrats. at this level, the movement is one more source of conflict between the alexandria ocasio-cortez wing and the many member of the house and senate who must fight for re-election in more moderate district and states, including those that cast majority for trump in 2016. 

laurence tribe, a professor of constitutional law at harvard, describe the thinking underpin progressive democratic policy broaden the rights of the homeless. in an email, tribe wrote: 
the supposed "rights" of those who are upset or psychological threaten by the homeless, the deinstitutionalized, or other similarly situated are what i would call second-order rights, rights that a polity cannot fairly treat as have as strong a claim to protection, as trumps that override utilitarian claim as is true of genuine rights. 

put another way, tribe continued, 
my "right" not to be upset by your appearance or life choice cannot occupy the same plane as your right to live your life as you opt to, or are compel to, live it if we are to have a viable social and legal system. one needn’t be a libertarian to recognize that there is a difference in kind between someone’s genuine right to be free of another’s physical intrusion or displacement and someone’s ersatz right to be free of another’s merely offend or upset behavior or circumstances. 

in this view, according to tribe, "rights of the first, or primary, sort can be universally recognized; rights of the second sort must be subordinate if social life is to be tolerable." 

trump, for his part, clearly reject tribe’s distinction between first versus second order, or genuine versus ersatz, rights. for trump, the people who come into contact with the homeless have first order rights. in a july 1, 2019, interview with fox’s tucker carlson, trump declared: 
you can’t have what’s happening — where police officer are get sick just by walking the beat. i mean, they’re get actually very sick, where people are get sick, where the people living there living in hell, too. 

trump went on: 
we cannot ruin our cities. and you have people that work in those cities. they work in office building and to get into the building, they have to walk through a scene that nobody would have believe possible three years ago. and this is the liberal establishment. this is what i’m fighting. 

republican are respond to the initiative of progressive prosecutor with a vengeance. 

in a fiery speech on aug. 12 at the grand lodge fraternal order of police’s conference in new orleans, barr warn that progressive prosecutor in city across the nation are "demoralizing to law enforce and dangerous to public safety." 

this threat, barr continued, come from 
the emergence in some of our large city of district attorney that style themselves as ‘social justice’ reformers, who spend their time undercut the police, letting criminal off the hook, and refuse to enforce the law. 

these prosecutors, barr declared, 
have been announce their refusal to enforce broad swathe of the criminal law. most disturb is that some are refuse to prosecute case of resist police. some are refuse to prosecute various theft case or drug cases, even where the suspect is involved in distribution. and when they do deign to charge a criminal suspect, they are frequent seek sentence that are pathetic lenient. so these city are head back to the days of revolving door justice. the result will be predictable. more crime; more victims. 

three days later, william m. mcswain, the trump-appointed united states attorney for the eastern district of pennsylvania, call a news conference to explicit attack the philadelphia district attorney, larry krasner. krasner was elect in 2017 on a platform promising to 
end mass incarceration; stop prosecute insufficient and insignificant cases; review past convictions, free the wrongful convicted; stop cash bail imprisonment; treat addiction as a medical problem, not a crime. 

to mcswain these policy are heretical: 
there is a new culture of disrespect for law enforce in this city that is promote and champion by district attorney larry krasner — and i am fed up with it. it start with chant at the da’s victory party — chant of "f*** the police" and "no good cop in a racist system." 

there are, mcswain argued, 
plenty of criminal law in this city — but what we don’t have is robust enforce by the district attorney. instead, we have diversionary program for gun offenses, the routine downgrade of charge for violent crime, and entire section of the criminal code that are ignored. 

most recently, president trump, at a rally on dec. 10 in hershey, pa., told the crowd "you have the worst district attorney," refer to the philadelphia d.a., roughly 95 mile east. "i’ve been hearing about this guy, he let killer out almost immediately. you better get yourself a new prosecutor." 

turning the decarceration movement into a 2020 campaign issue fit into trump’s go-to strategy of inflame divisive conflicts, especially those involve dispute rights — particularly those benefit minority — in order to activate racial resentment, to mobilize his core voter and to goad swing voter into lining up against the democratic party. 

while trump’s strategy was successful in 2016, it is by no means clear that this strategy will work as well in 2020. 

a february 2019 paper, "evaluating the impact of eliminate prosecutor request for cash bail," by aurélie ouss, professor of criminology at the university of pennsylvania, and megan stevenson, a law professor at george mason, examine the consequence of philadelphia’s "no-cash-bail" policies. 

contrary to fear that the eliminate of cash bail would "decrease accountable and increase failure-to-appear in court," the author detect 
no change in failure-to-appear in court or in recidivism, suggest that reduction in the use of monetary bail can be made without significant adverse consequences. 

at the same time, however, the violent crime rate in philadelphia has increase by 5 percent from 2018 to 2019, according to the city’s police department. while homicide and rape both decline by 5 and 9 percent respectively, robbery without a gun increase 11 percent, aggravate assault with a gun by 13 percent and assault without a gun by 3 percent. 

there is no evidence that the partial eliminate of cash bail cause the increase in violent crime. in fact, in 2018, the first full year when the policy were in effect, crime drop 5 percent. 

in some other city that have elect to reduce the use of cash bail, crime has gone down. 

in boston, crime drop 5 percent from 2018 to 2019, the first full year in office for rachel rollins, the suffolk county district attorney. rollin pledge that she would not prosecute such crime as 
larceny under $250, disorderly conduct, disturb the peace, receiving stolen property" along with "breaking and enter — where it is into a vacant property or where it is for the purpose of sleep or seek refuge from the cold and there is no actual damage to property break and entering, wanton or malicious destruction of property, drug possession with intent to distribute and a stand-alone resist arrest charge, i.e. case where a person is charged with resist arrest and that is the only charge. 

the approach to prosecution adopt by rollin and other directly contradict the "broken windows" police strategy that was widely popular among both democrat and republican in the 1990s. the economist describe the premise behind broken window law enforce this way: "in environment where disorderly behavior go unchecked — where prostitute visibly ply their trade or beggar accost passers-by — more serious street crime flourishes." 

over the past four years, many progressive democrat have turn sharp against the aggressive police that broken window enforce produced, argue that it has contribute to excessive incarcerate that result in the disproportionate imprison of african-americans and other minorities. 

at the presidential debate in september, virtually every candidate voice strong opposition to mass incarcerate and support for the release or sentence reduction of those convict of nonviolent crime. 

many of the crime progressive prosecutor are decline to press charge on are link to homelessness, vagrancy, drug possession, disorderly conduct, break into vacant property, and so forth — which, from a strategic point of view, enable trump and his ally to link homeless with progressive democratic law enforce policies. 

on this issue, one of trump’s key ally is tucker carlson. every night this week, carlson is devote segment of his fox news show to homelessness. his show will reinforce the 2020 republican election theme that democrat are foster endemic social disorder. 

on jan. 3, carlson tweeted: "drugs. homelessness. third world inequality. san francisco’s radical left wing government has turn their city into an america dystopia." 

this week’s series is the second time in less than a year that carlson has devoted five straight nights to homelessness, with footage of men and women inject themselves, evidence of public defecation, the vagrant mental ill, and sidewalk in california line for block with tents. 

the trump administration has been working for month to develop a new, hard-nosed federal policy on homelessness. citylab and other publication report that the administration is expect to fund local police effort to remove public encampment and to put the homeless in federal shelter require strict adherence to rule of sobriety and non-disruptive behavior. 

"the white house is taking steps toward decisive new action on homelessness, buck policy favored by advocate in favor of an aggressive approach that center the role of law enforcement," citylab report on dec 17, 2019: 
advocate say that they expect an executive order on homeless to assign new resources to police department to remove homeless encampment and even strip housing funds from city that choose to tolerate these encampments. 

the trump campaign is gamble that democrat are outside the mainstream of public opinion on these issues, while the leading democratic candidate are convinced that enough of the electorate has become sufficient skeptical of law-and-order strategy — and the accompany racial undertone (and overtones) — to produce a democratic victory on nov. 3, 2020. 

over the past 50 years, democratic strategy base on the presumption of increase liberalism among voter at large have rarely succeeded. perhaps 2020 will be different. 
