tucker carlson is not your new best friend 
by frank bruni 
jan. 11, 2020 

sudden you’re digging him. at least a little bit. i know, i’ve seen the tweets, read the commentary, heard the chatter, detect the barely suppress cheer: hurrah for tucker carlson. if only we had more brave, principled republican like him. 

right out of the gate, he protest president trump’s decision to kill qassim suleimani, the iran military commander, note that it didn’t square with the president’s determination not to get bog down in the middle east and warning of the possibility and horror of full-blown war. your pulse quickened. you perk up. 

he sound that same alarm on his next show and the show after that. every night at 8 p.m., he worried about the bellicose itch of our leaders. when all around him on fox news were play their usual role (indeed, his usual role) as masseur for the president’s tender ego, he administer slaps, hard ones, the kind that leave angry red handprints. ouch — and don’t stop. 

you rejoiced. it’s one thing when democrat challenge what looks like a rush to war by a republican president. it’s another when typically fawn member of his own party do. 

and while carlson was hardly alone in his rebellion — three house republican vote with democrat to check the president’s war-waging authority and, over in the senate, mike lee and rand paul raise a dissident ruckus — no one else had his ardor, his articulateness, his megaphone. 

carlson to the rescue! 

oh, please. 

the fascination with him is itself fascinating, for many reasons. can you recall a modern president before trump whose mood and movements could be reflect and predict simply by watch one news organization and, for that matter, just a few of its offerings? in lieu of a normally function white house communications department or a press secretary who hold actual press briefing (what a thought!), we have "fox & friends" in the morning and carlson’s and sean hannity’s show in the evening. 

they don’t chronicle this presidency. they shape it, not just in terms of the volume of their applause for trump, who crave the loudest possible clapping, but in terms of actual interactions. carlson — like hann and another fox fixture, lou dobbs — has in fact advise him behind the scenes. 

hence the rapt reaction to carlson’s antiwar jeremiads. they may well matter. 

also, those of us who regard trump as a menace can be so eager — too eager — to welcome newcomer to our shore that we overlook the pollute sea they sail to get there. in a recent moment on the abc talk show "the view" that was awkward at best, joy behar announce excited that the prominent white nationalist richard spencer had just disavow trump because of iran. 

carlson, mind you, has not disavow trump. in fact he perform semantic acrobatics to denounce america’s military maneuver against iran without precisely blame trump. those slap i mention landed more forceful on the administration in general than on the man-child at its apex, who is, in carlson’s torture rendition, a gullible marionette, his strings pull by inveterate, habitual warmongers. if these profiteer elite would just let trump be trump and train his wrath on mexico instead of iranians, a great presidency would get its groove back. 

during his tuesday show, carlson perform politics jujitsu and held two of the president’s principal democratic adversary responsible for exacerbate tension with iran. refer to the washington establishment and single out nance pelosi and chuck schumer, he said, "these are people who have been basically advocate for a kind of war against iran for an awfully long time." 

"it’s infuriating," he added. "it’s because of schumer and pelosi and people like them that we got into iraq in the first place." 

come again? a republican president, george w. bush, urge and oversaw the invasion of iraq, and while schumer authorize it, pelosi vote against it, as did many more democrat than republicans. 

and carlson’s portrait of trump as puppet contradict report from the times and other news organization that some pentagon official were stun when the president ordered the strike against suleimani, a measure more extreme than other option present to him. 

carlson remains true to carlson: selective with facts, slant with truth and — this is the most important part — committed to his vision of america as a land imperil by nefarious democrat and the dark-skinned invade they would open the gate to if not for sentry like him and trump. 

as matt gertz of media matter perceptive noted, carlson’s antiwar stance "is not a break from his past support for trump or his channel of white nationalist tropes, but a direct a result of both." gertz explain that in the mind-set of carlson and many of his fan on the far right, energy spent on mission in another hemisphere is energy not spent on our southern border. it’s no accident that, in regard to the middle east, he and spencer are on the same page. 

following suleimani’s death, carlson ask his audience, "why are we continue to ignore the decline of our own country in favor of jump into another quagmire?" 

carlson is define not by a bold willing to check trump’s excesses or ugliest impulse but by his indulgence — no, his fervent encouragement — of those impulse as they pertain to rac and immigration. on those fronts, carlson himself grow ever uglier, as my colleague farhad manjoo and other have noted. it’s why many sponsor have defect from carlson’s show. 

carlson repeatedly use variation of the word "invasion" to characterize migrant from central america. he insist that "white supremacy" is a fiction, a hoax. he has use language that buy into and promote "replacement theory" — a far-right fixation on the idea that decline birthrate among whites will cause a nonwhite takeover — and recently castigate immigrant for litter along the potomac river. 

just last month he gave precious time on his show to an obscure republican congressional candidate in north carolina, pete d’abrosca, who has warn white america that they’re "being replace by third world peasants." d’abrosca has also brag of his support from the "groyper army," a far-right group with more than a whiff of anti-semitism. 

is carlson himself abet hatred of jews? in a rare point of agreement, some jew and white nationalist believe so, point to an on-air rant last month in which he bash a jewish billionaire, paul singer, by compare him unfavorable with henry ford, who own a newspaper that ran a lengthy series allege a jewish plot to dominate the world. 

"the fox news host go full anti-semite," wrote tablet, a jewish publication, while mike enoch, who rally with the neo-nazis in charlottesville, va., said on his podcast, "if you didn’t catch the germany shepherd whistle where he praise henry ford and then went into a diatribe of a jewish financier, you know, i don’t know what universe you’re existing in." 

so that’s some of what carlson was up to just before he turn his attention to iran. 

how warm and fuzzy are you feeling toward him now? 
