black briton know why meghan markle wants out 
by afua hirsch 
jan. 9, 2020 

the britain press has succeed in its apparent project of hound meghan, duchess of sussex, out of britain. the part it perhaps didn’t bargain for, however, is the loss of prince harry — a much love royal and a key part of the family’s global brand — along with her. 

in a statement release this week, the couple said they want to "carve out a progressive new role" within the royal family and would "step back as ‘senior’ members, and work to become financially independent." 

the britain press react with surprise at the "shock move abroad," describe variously as "seismic," "selfish," "rogue" and "an atrocious lapse of judgment." 

if the media paid more attention to britain’s community of color, perhaps it would find the announcement far less surprising. with a new prime minister whose track record include overt racist statements, some of which would make even donald trump blush, a brexit project link to native nationalism and a desire to rid britain of large numbers of immigrants, and an ever thicken loom of imperial nostalgia, many of us are also thinking about moving. 

from the very first headline about her being "(almost) straight outta compton" and have "exotic" dna, the racist treatment of meghan has been impossible to ignore. princess michael of kent wore an overt racist brooch in the duchess’s company. a bbc host compare the couple’s newborn baby to a chimpanzee. then there was the sublime ludicrous suggestion that meghan’s avocado consumption is responsible for mass murder, while her charity cookbook was portray as somehow helping terrorists. 

those who claim frequent attack against the duchess have nothing to do with her race have a hard time explain these attempt to link her with particularly racial form of crime — terrorism and gang activity — as well as the fact that she has been most venomous attack for acts that attract praise when other royal did them. her decision to guest-edit britain vogue, for example, was roundly condemn by large parts of the britain media, in stark contrast to prince charles’s two-time guest editorship of country life magazine, prince harry’s of a bbc program and kate middleton’s at huffington post, all of which were quiet praise at the time. 

her treatment has prove what many of us have always known: no matter how beautiful you are, whom you marry, what palace you occupy, charity you support, how faithful you are, how much money you accumulate or what good deed you perform, in this society rac will still follow you. 

in britain’s rigid class society, there is still a deep correlation between privilege and race. the relatively few people of color — and even few if you count only those who have africa heritage — who rise to prominence and prosperity in britain are often told we should be "grateful" or told to leave if we don’t like it here. 

the legacy of britain’s history of empire — a global construct base on a doctrine of white supremacy — its pioneer role in the slave trade and ideology of rac that enable it, and policy of recruit people from the caribbean and africa for low-paid work and then discriminating against them in education and housing, is with us today: the scandal surrounding the wrongful deport of black britain people in recent years is still reverberating. 

meghan’s decision to join the family that is the symbolic heart of the establishment responsible for this trouble history was perplex to many black britain people, as we wonder whether she fully appreciate the institution she had entered. 

both she and harry appear to have gain crystal clear vision as to their reality. it’s no wonder the couple want to leave and — as the code statement that they want to raise their son, archie, "with the space to focus on the next chapter" seem to suggest — protect him from the bile to which they’ve been exposed. 

the britain press, have attack the couple continuously, now react with shock at this move. but the clue have been there for some time for anyone willing to read them. 

there was the decision not to give archie a title from birth — something that is expect among royal children of this rank but which meghan and harry appear to have chosen to avoid. then there were the rumor last spring that they might relocate to a country in southern africa. 

in recent months, the couple have begun bypass official royal channel and communicate with the press directly — most notably when the duchess said in a television documentary that she found adjust to royal life "hard," and harry reveal that the tragic experience of the death of his mother, diana, princess of wales, made him want to "protect" his wife and family. 

all were sign that the couple would not abide by royal business as usual, to the extent that even announce this decision to step down from their role as senior royal appear to have taken buckingham palace by surprise. 

i am not at all surprised. this was the bitter shadow of their sunny may 2018 wedding. how many of us suspect — hope but doubt we were wrong — that what would really initiate meghan into her new role as a briton with africa heritage would be her experience of britain racism. and ironically, by taking matter into their own hands, harry and meghan’s act of leave — two finger up at the rac of the britain establishment — might be the most meaningful act of royal leadership i’m ever likely to see. 
