two death and my life 
by roger cohen 
jan. 10, 2020 

samuel beckett, when ask one beautiful spring morning whether such a day did not make him glad to be alive, responded, "i wouldn’t go as far as that." life is a predicament, death the elephant at the horizon that loom large as the years pass. 

still, life is what we have. to give less than everything to it is dereliction. in the end its wonder is unimaginable without the presence of death. as the dew dispels, the mist dissolves, and the sap rise on a morning such as the one that did not quite win over beckett, the force of life is unmistakable. that is what put us here in the first place. 

great soul resemble the elements in their immensity. they absorb everything — pain, injustice, insult, folly — and give back decency and kindness. they are not born of a piece. they come into being through unflinching confrontation with life’s spears. they reach quiet. discipline is the backbone of graciousness. stoicism is the other face of wounds. in the most beautiful smile, painful knowledge hovers. 

midwinter is not what prompt these reflections, although when a freezing wind whip off the east river all thought turn to refuge. no, the death in quick succession of two friends was the catalyst. they were old than me. but they were not old enough and not so distant in age that their memento mori feel less than urgent. 

sonny mehta, who die last month at the age of 77, would caress the books he loved. for them he lived. he guide alfred a. knopf through more than three decade of rapid change. he was a complete publisher, eclectic in his tastes, ferocious in his will, guide by a mission to bring the finest books to knopf and publish them only once edit had hone them to irreproachable form. yet he want to be remember above all as a reader. 

i knew sonny for three decades. he publish my last two books. his civility never wavered. the twinkle in his eye never faded. his friendship was constant. whisky and a cigarette and the meander conversation that went with them were more his thing than the treadmill. he was a beautiful man. 

how so? in his gentle that contained wisdom, in his diffidence that contained enthusiasm, in his discretion that contained curiosity. you had to listen carefully, for he spoke softly, to the clue he offered. his long marriage to his wife, gita, brought to my mind, in its respectful and vitality, rilke’s phrase about love as protect the solitude of the other. 

a child of india, brown-skinned in what was when he start the white preserve of britain publishing, once ask if he was perhaps seek a job in the stockroom, mehta never stoop to unkindness. his writer knew they had come home. he command the unswerving loyalty of the likes of michael ondaatje, kazuo ishiguro, germaine greer and julian barnes. "i feel that my heart has been rip out," jon segal, his longtime colleague at knopf, told me. 

when mehta’s father, a diplomat, die in vienna, mehta found in his desk a folder with every article ever publish about him. the pride of his father, who had never compliment his son, was evident. remote fathers: vast subject. hearing this story, i understood more of my friend’s elegant stoicism. 

early in december, ward just, a journalist who turn to fiction, a great washington post correspondent in vietnam who became a great novelist, die at the age of 84. like mehta, he was a lover of scotch. i had not seen much of just since we became friends in berlin 20 years ago, but his death hit me hard. i recall him saying to me back then: "i was useless for journalism after vietnam. i knew i was not go to do any better work." 

truth, he decided, must be pursue elsewhere. "many of the things that make you a good journalist have to be discard to make you a good writer," he said. "in a novel, every fact is a rock thrown in the hull, and the boat sink a bit." 

just probe the delusion of people and nations, and the damage they suffer. his prose was understated. in "a dangerous friend," one character observes, "i have always believe that a mountainous ego result from an absence of conscience." and that was before his needy seize the oval office. 

as with mehta, just’s prod was subtle, his smile contained sorrows, his wisdom was hard-earned, his constant humor wry. wound by a grenade blast in 1966, winch to safety by a chopper, he later wrote, as quote in his washington post obituary: "when you got there, you said instinctively, i made it. and over and over again, jesus christ." 

i can hear my friend saying that, stress on the christ. life hang by a thread. pay attention to its ephemeral gifts. of truman schockley, dead at 19 in vietnam, just wrote in 1967: 

"smoking a lucky strike and staring off into the mountains, schockley die with a sniper’s bullet through the heart and stop breathing before the cigarette stop burning." 

now there’s a perfect sentence that might even have persuade beckett. spring passes. truth distill do not. 
