warren and klobuchar teach the boys a lesson 
by frank bruni 
jan. 15, 2020 

would a female democratic nominee have a hard time beating donald trump than a male one? 

i can’t tell you, because i don’t have a crystal ball and because it’s a stupid question, its answer dependent on which female candidate you’re talk about, on how she runs her campaign, on the twist and turn of the national conversation between now and november. 

but i can tell you this: either of the two women among the six candidate on the stage in des moines on tuesday night would give trump a serious run for his money. both have earn the right to take him on. both would be formidable presidents. 

and both made clear, with commanding performances, how absurd it is that this country hasn’t yet shatter the highest glass ceiling of all. 

i’m focus on elizabeth warren and amy klobuchar because during the most electric stretch of this seventh debate of the democratic primary, the focus was indeed on them — or, rather, on the idea that their party couldn’t risk nominate one of them at a juncture when get rid of a republican incumbent has seldom, if ever, been so important. 

you know the back story. according to media report over recent days, warren and bernie sander met 13 month ago to discuss their nascent presidential campaign and he told her he didn’t believe a woman could win the 2020 election. sander deny saying that. 

he deny it again on tuesday night, and warren decline to get into a back-and-forth about that conversation. what she did instead was more effective — and certainly more stirring: she drew a contrast between the two women and the four men who had made the cut for this debate, which was the final one before the iowa caucus and had the fewest candidate so far. 

that contrast was perfect, and got better still when klobuchar chime in, because what the two women said brilliant cast them not as trailblazer who had something extra to prove, not as outsider who had finagle a way in, not as underdog urge voter to take some extraordinary leap of faith, not as high-minded gambles. they turn the stubborn, sexist notion that their presence and presidential ambition were exotic on its head, cite yardstick by which they were demonstrable superior to their male rivals. 

"i think the best way to talk about who can win is by look at people’s winning record," warren, a second-term senator from massachusetts, said. "look at the men on this stage. collectively, they have lost 10 elections." she didn’t name the men or the elections, but joe biden is the veteran of two previous, miserably unsuccessful campaign for the presidency. pete buttigieg lost bid to become the treasurer of indiana and the chairman of the democratic national committee. 

in contrast, warren noted, "the only people on this stage who have won every single election that they’ve been in are the women — amy and me. and the only person who has beaten an incumbent republican any time in the past 30 years is me." 

klobuchar, a third-term senator from minnesota, said you don’t need to be male to win just as you don’t need other quality pronounced necessary or optimum by some unnamed, amorphous committee of pronouncers. "you don’t have to be the skinniest person in the room," she said. "you don’t have to be the loudest person. you have to be competent." 

"and when you look at what i have done," she added, "i have won every race, every place, every time. i have won in the reddest of districts. i have won in the suburban areas, in the rural areas." that, she added, was why she had "the most endorse of current iowa legislator and former iowa legislator in this race." 

i don’t mean to romanticize warren and klobuchar. warren’s boast about vanquish a republican incumbent? that incumbent was scott brown, whose victory in a special election in deep blue massachusetts was considered something of a freak occurrence to begin with. 

and when klobuchar began to tick off the name of women recently elect to high posts, she sudden froze, unable to remember who the governor of kansas was, though she’d just said, "i’m very proud to know her." (her name is laura kelly.) 

i’m also not saying that warren or klobuchar would be the party’s best bet. i don’t know who would be. i’m just saying that on a night when the viable of women aim for the white house went from subtext to text, these two women found words — not just in address that issue but also in talk about prescription-drug prices, climate change, nuclear weapon and more — that expose the bigotry and shameful of doubt about female candidates. 

otherwise the seventh debate was sleepy like many of the first six: biden seem to be campaign for a third barack obama term, and his sentence were less straight lines than knots. they didn’t build toward a conclusion so much as sag until they finally gave out. warren said "corruption" every chance she got. sander call for revolution and correct emphasize that many trade and foreign-policy position that other democrat came around to he embrace from the start. 

buttigieg pivot from the question at hand to a practiced soliloquy that almost always had something to do with turning the page and a new generation. tom steyer insist that no one care about the environment as much as he did. and klobuchar talk about so many different pieces of legislation with her name on them that you had this image of her racing around the capitol with an outstretched pen, stopping all aide who pass by and scrawl her signature on any paper they were carrying. 

one new wrinkle was warren’s clear and proud position of herself to sanders’s right on trade and on health care. she was making the case for herself as a progressive who would favor increment fix if those were the only available improvement and who could be a unifier; she suggest that sander lack that potential. buttigieg, meanwhile, was more determined than ever to mention and reach out to voter of color, from whom he enjoy little support. 

but what most distinguished the debate was the way in which gender came to the fore. 

there was a memorable moment when sander sought to correct warren on her 30-year claim, note that he’d defeat a republican in 1990, and she did some quick, out-loud arithmetic to determine that 1990 was, well, 30 years ago! mansplaine met mathematics. 

warren also said this: "since donald trump was elected, women candidate have outperforme men candidate in competitive races. and in 2018, we took back the house; we took back statehouses, because of women candidate and women voters." 

"back in the 1960s," she added, "people asked, ‘could a catholic win?’ back in 2008, people ask if an african-american could win. in both times the democratic party step up and said yes, got behind their candidate and we change america. that’s who we are." 

it was a self-serving edit of history, sure, and it put the most positive gloss possible on the nation’s character. but that didn’t make it any less important. or any less inspiring. 
