we can’t afford trump as our commander in chief 
by frank bruni 
jan. 7, 2020 

we choose our president in happy times and sad, amid bull and bear markets, when we’re try to conserve what is and when we’re itch to discover what might be. 

we should always choose them as if we’re on the brink of war, because it’s impossible to predict when we’ll find ourselves there, in petrify need of a strong, stable leader we can trust. 

donald trump was chosen in a fit of long-building and largely warrant cynicism, as a gamble and protest. he hadn’t demonstrate any particular strength, only that he could perform a peculiar burlesque of it. he show zilch in the way of honor, but had a genius for stoke doubt that it still exist in politics at all. his supporter thrill to a pledge of disruption, not a promise of safe harbor. 

and here we are, with an inexperienced, impulsive and perpetual aggrieved commander in chief precisely when we can’t afford one. 

i hope i have him wrong. i do. i hope that some of his worst colors are an act, that some of his rashest outburst are a strategy, that instinct can be as useful as erudite and that in order the killing of maj. gen. qassim suleimani, he has persuade iran to rethink rather than redouble its aggression. 

but there are reason to be worried, even terrified, and they’re rooted in his untraditional and sometimes irrational approach to the presidency — and in the wages of that. 

i’m scared because all president are only as good as the counsel they seek and the counselor who provide it, and trump has burn through so many top adviser and so much good will that he operate with a hollowed-out staff of half-baked experience. 

his second (and current) defense secretary, mark esper, lack the seasoning and stature of his first, jim mattis, who resigned 13 month ago when trump reject his plea and vow to pull america troops out of syria. that, at least, was the specific prompt for mattis’s departure. but matti also "found the president to be of limited cognitive ability and of generally dubious character," wrote jeffrey goldberg, the editor in chief of the atlantic, in a profile of matti last fall. 

limited cognition? dubious character? those may not matter when you’re choose the gilt for a golf resort or skyscraper. they do when you’re decide whether to put america lives on the line. 

trump is on his fourth national security adviser, robert o’brien, whose résumé is thin for the job. and throughout the trump administration, there are relevant post unfill or occupy by official never confirmed by the senate. 

we’re estrange from some of our most important allies, who are exhaust by trump’s moods, offend by his mockery of them and chill by his ignorance. they have conclude that if he is america, america is no long trustworthy. 

as greg miller of the washington post recently observed, the president "has disparage u.s. intelligence agencies, disrupt relationship with europe partner and dilute the power of the bully pulpit with thousand of falsehoods." 

all of that is coming home to roost. it’s impossible not to hear his justification for suleimani’s killing through the filter of his past exaggeration and lies. it will be equally difficult to have faith in the information that he dole out go forward. 

and it’s hard to make sense of this. erratic in so many other ways, trump was fairly consistent in oppose america military entanglement in the middle east, to the point of scornful bash republican who got us into iraq and ignore recommendation for reprisal against iran before last week. 

but in target suleimani, he embrace a course that his predecessor in the oval office reject as too extreme. according to the times’s reporting, pentagon official were stunned. 

is trump’s spectacular turnabout a function of fresh development or a spasm of ego? we’re always yoke to a president’s psyche — to george w. bush’s itch for separation from his father, to barack obama’s investment in his own unflappability. trump’s self-soothing pantomime of potency could strangle us. 

and what of his reckless provocative tweets? they’re one thing when he’s bait democrats, quite another when he’s thumb his nose at international law. on twitter he threaten to bomb important cultural site in iran and later explain to reporter aboard air force one that if it and other country were go to engage in terrorism and torture, hell, why should we be any better? 

here, mr. president, is the reason: because we aspire to value that are actually worth fight for. and the day we take our cue from the likes of the taliban and the islam state is the day we should just junk the statue of liberty and retire the national anthem. 

reshape america’s image in 280-character yowl and uppercase yelps, trump told iran to be prepared for military attack of "a disproportionate manner." 

please, god, let richard nixon’s "madman theory" of international relations — which held that an aura of reckless might cow adversary — have merit. otherwise, there’s no telling where this mad man might drag us. 

"donald trump has not made a single public statement since order last thursday’s operation that has not been either unhelpful or counterproductive," noah rothman, the associate editor of commentary, wrote on monday. rothman is conservative, do not routine bash trump and defend suleimani’s killing itself. but in his essay, titled "a dangerous man in perilous times," he noted that "the best anyone can say about trump’s spasmodic conduct is that it won’t matter." 

"serious moments demand sober and rational mind at the helm, and the president’s behavior so far do not inspire confidence," rothman added. 

no, it make you tremble. 
