what do it mean to have a serious drink problem? 
by nance wartik 
jan. 31, 2020 

one day in the fall of 2018, i woke up feeling wrecked. the night before i’d had beer with colleague and wound up bray loud to one of them about something she’d confide and what i thought she should do. 

"i wish i’d never told you this," she finally blurted, and i knew i’d betray a trust. 

a few nights before, i’d been more inept. a group of us had held a memorial for a friend. at a gathering later, i’d had a martini with prosecco chasers, then picked a senseless quarrel with our hostess, a close friend as bereaved as i was. 

now i sat there, head pounding, stomach roiling. it was another in a string of mornings when i’d woken wanting to smother myself with a pillow. 

booze: it didn’t take much for me to feel the effects. alcohol could make nights glittery and fun, make me love all humankind. it could also, and unpredictably, rouse demon that turn me into a wifely shrew, spark bruising arguments, unleash embarrass faux pas. this morning, a new thought struck, penetrating to the bone. 

"i can’t do it anymore. i quit." 

although i’d grapple for decade with my relationship to alcohol, i didn’t consider myself an alcoholic. in online quizze ask how many drink i typically had per day, i could fairly accurate answer "two" (very generous drinks). 

on the world health organization’s audit quiz, which test for drink problems, i score eight of 40 points, making me a "medium" drinker with a "risky" pattern. but medium didn’t sound too bad and the website said i could alter my drink "without too much difficulty." 

plus, i had the vaunt female triumvirate: husband, kid, respectable job. friends, when they weren’t mad at me. o.k., sometimes i overdid it. but it was easy to imagine myself as your average fun-loving parisian oenophile. 

and yet. 

i was in my late teens when i discover what alcohol could do: quash my inhibitions; kindle false intimacies; provoke brilliant revelation that i soon forgot. alcohol made me the outgoing person my unconfident self want to be, let me talk to people i normally wouldn’t have. yes, occasional i awoke to see a head on the adjoin pillow and felt a bolt of regret. 

"damn! why did this guy seem cute last night?" 

but i’d call a friend: "guess what i did this time?" i’d ask, turning discomfort into a hilarious anecdote. 

or a friend would inform me of my revelry: "nancy, the bartender threw you out. you couldn’t stay on your stool." 

alcohol was also medication. i drank to quiet angst or because i was lonesome. i drank, it took years to realize, because i had clinical depression. eventually i treat the depression but kept drinking. alcohol was my stress reducer, my reality fighter, the confer of artificial joys. 

life change in my 40s. i married, and with my husband, adopt our beloved daughter, now 17. working from home, i made dinner, drink wine with a neighbor mom. my morning-after headache were worsening, though. nights, rather than reading or chat with my husband, i’d crash. i fear my drink was destroy brain cells. i’d written about how alcohol is hard on women than men and that worried me, too. 

some years ago, to prove i had control, i cut down to five nights a week. it was tough. how could i not drink after a rough day? i couldn’t manage two consecutive sober nights. achieve my two sober nights was always an exercise in military-level strategizing. but every sunday, i felt virtuous. an actual alcoholic couldn’t skip any nights, i thought. but i could. 

what do it mean to have a serious drink problem? the answer is surprising vague. 

"alcoholism" isn’t an actual diagnosis. in 1980, the america psychiatric association’s authoritative diagnostic and statistic manual of mental disorder establish two different classifications: alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence. in 2013, the d.s.m. combine the category to create "alcohol use disorder," a spectrum range from mild to severe, base not on how much someone drink but on how many of 11 behavior or psychological symptom a person has. 

meanwhile, the center for disease control and prevention has its own standards, focus more on quantity of alcoholic consumption. seven drink per week or few is considered safe for women, 14 or few for men. but guidelines fluctuate internationally, according to a stanford university study from 2016. in canada or france, you can drink more weekly and be considered "low risk." 

moreover, a recent study in the lancet conclude alcohol is so tough on health that there’s no safe level. 

in short, if you wonder whether you drink too much, sometimes it’s best to trust your gut. 

i don’t know exactly what happen that fall morning as i sat in bed, achy and humiliated. as visceral as i’ve known anything, i knew i was in trouble. so what if i didn’t swig a bottle of scotch daily? i’d hit "medium drinker" rock bottom and it was enough. 

despite the website saying i could change my drink "without too much difficulty," quit booze is one of the hardest things i’ve ever done. i pine for it: at restaurants, i’d gaze at ruby goblet as if at a divine elixir. after workout i’d crave a beer. and what was the point of socialize sober? 

eventually, i had to try. guzzle nonalcoholic beer — before i wise switch to seltzer — while chat with people savor complex pinot noir was initially daunting. but astonishingly, my non-intoxicated brain still found what they said funny, touching or interesting. 

i didn’t join a.a., though i don’t rule it out. i sought support from my husband, daughter and friends — those i’d offended, those surprise i even had a problem. i devour others’ stories, watch movies about alcoholics, reading memoirs, lurk in sub-reddits for people struggle to quit. but what really kept me on the path was the remarkable difference between the drink and not drink me. i hadn’t grasp the degree to which a sense of shame had insidious undergirded my life. now it was gone, replace by an unaccustomed pride. 

the long i abstained, the better i felt, in ways that spill into marriage, work, parenting, friendships. recently, someone unaware i’d quit told me i look years younger. i’m more patient. my headache are infrequent, my energy up. 

those result fit with a study publish in the canada medical association journal, among the first focus on moderate drinkers’ mental health. research study cohort of people in hong kong and the united states found even "safe" drinkers, women in particular, show improve well-being if they stopped. 

today, i can label myself. i had moderate alcohol use disorder, a "chronic relapse brain disease" marked by loss of control over alcohol. the national institute on alcoholism and alcohol abuse say 6.2 percent of america adults, more than 15 million people, are on the alcohol use disorder spectrum. (other research put the numbers higher.) i’d guess many, like me, drink modest enough that they don’t believe they have a problem. i feel lucky i quit before anything worse happened. 

sobriety can still be a challenge. if all go according to plan, i’ll never again experience the soft scrim that drops between me and reality, as wine drain from my glass. it seem sad, until i remember that three times since quitting, i’ve try a celebratory drink. most recently, in peru, i had one of the country’s famous pisco sours. it gave me a mild buzz and a hangover. i haven’t had a drop since. 

these days, i awaken clearheaded. i’m close than ever to being the mother, wife, relative and friend i want to be. it feel good. really good. i get up the next morning. i do it again. 
