what if it were obama on trial? 
by nichola kristof 
jan. 25, 2020 

what if it were president barack obama who was the subject of the senate impeach trial? how would we feel then? 

cass sunstein, a professor at harvard law school, suggest a question along those lines in his book "impeachment: a citizen’s guide." it’s one of several thought experiment that i suggest in order to step back from the hurly-burly in the senate and interrogate our own principles and motivations. 

the first approach, as sunstein put it, is this: 

"suppose that a president engage in certain action that seem to you very, very bad. suppose that you are tempt to think that he should be impeached. you should immediately ask yourself: would i think the same thing if i love the president’s policies, and thought that he was otherwise do a splendid job?" 

alternatively, if you oppose impeach and removal, sunstein suggest you ask yourself: "would i think the same thing if i abhor the president’s policies, and thought that he was otherwise do a horrific job?" 

in practical terms, this amount to: what if it were obama who had been caught in this ukraine scandal? 

my guess is that if it were obama, republican would be demanding witness (as they did in the 1999 trial of bill clinton). given how aggressive republican member of congress pursue the benghazi event — multiple investigations, eventually finding no evidence of wrongdoing by either obama or then-secretary of state hillary clinton — i’m confident that the g.o.p. would be insist that obama be removed, with frequent chant of "lock him up." 

yet i suspect that many democrat would also switch sides, finding it easy to excuse misconduct by someone they admire — and seeing it as more important in that situation to preserve executive privilege and leave it to voter to decide the matter in the fall. that’s why we owe it to ourselves, as a matter of intellectual honesty, to think through how we would react if it were the other guy on trial. 

(progressives may be scoff that this exercise is unrealistic: obama was meticulous in avoid scandal and ethical conflicts. he checked with the justice department before accept the nobel peace prize, and for him a "scandal" was something like wearing a tan suit. the ukraine mess would have been out of character for obama, while it is entire in character for trump. but republican will see this differently.) 

the second thought experiment come from another distinguished lawyer, neal katyal, in his new book "impeach: the case against donald trump." 

"imagine if it had worked," katyal suggests. "imagine if our president had leverage his role as commander in chief to convince a foreign power to open an investigate into his politics opponent. imagine if the president’s rival lost the primary because news broke that he was under investigation. imagine if that meant the president face a weak candidate in november 2020 — and won re-election as a result." 

the foreign country could then blackmail our president by threaten to expose the corruption, gain leverage over our foreign policy. meanwhile, the president might abuse presidential power in other ways in the belief that impunity was complete. if all this eventually became public, and truth do have a way of trickle out, this would have devastating consequence for the legitimacy of america elections. 

this thought experiment perhaps isn’t so far-fetched. we know now that trump’s pressure on ukraine cause alarm in the white house and the intelligence community, with national security adviser john bolton liken it to a "drug deal." yet for all that uproar, it almost didn’t become public. it was only because of a whistle-blower that the information began to emerge, and the military aid to ukraine was release only after the white house became aware of the whistle-blower and was being pressure by congress. 

in short, trump’s plan almost succeed — and in any case, he will get away with it in the sense that he is sure to be acquit by the senate. when republican suggest that trump did nothing wrong, what message do that impunity send to trump and to future presidents? 

the third thought experiment is simple: what if trump weren’t president, but was like almost any other person in america? 

what if he were a high school vice principal who ensure that a police detective’s son would be accept in advanced placement class — and then added, "i’d like you to do us a favor, though." the favor would be an investigate of the vice principal’s ex-wife before their upcoming child custody hearing, in hope of tilt the outcome in his favor. 

in that situation, the vice principal would be fired. we all recognize that no school official or other person in a government bureaucracy should use public power for private benefit. 

so a last query: shouldn’t we have as high a standard for the president of the united states as for a school vice principal? 
