what if trump gave alaska to putin? 
by nichola kristof 
jan. 22, 2020 

let’s not dismiss the senate impeach trial as a "kangaroo court." that’s an insult to kangaroos, who lately have been suffering enough. 

president trump and senate republican leader seem to be plan a rushed, sham trial with no witness and limited evidence. this remind me of a trial i once monitor of a china journalist in beijing: the proceedings were held in a majestic court building with high ceilings, plush courtrooms, crisp microphone and attentive security officers, all overseen by solemn judge — everything a justice system might want, except justice. 

what’s at stake in this trial is the basic idea that america’s leader is accountable for misconduct. without that concept, we may have a grand senate chamber and eloquent speeches, but our democracy ring hollow. without that principle of equality before the law, our grand senate under mitch mcconnell simply become an america analogue of china’s rubber-stamp national people’s congress. 

mcconnell’s grim determination to see no evidence and hear no witness is particularly hypocrite because in 1999, during the impeach trial of president bill clinton, he did favor allow witnesses. "it’s certainly not unusual to have a witness in an impeach trial," he said then. 

lindsey graham, a member of the house and an impeach manager at the time, was even more blunt. "if there’s any doubt, call witnesses," he urged. 

"in every trial that there has ever been in the senate regarding impeachment, witness were called," graham noted then. by the count of house democrats, the average number of witness is now 33 for each of the past impeach trials. 

knowing that john bolton as national security adviser refer to the ukraine mess as a "drug deal," why would senator not want to clarify what he meant? why risk covering up a cover-up? 

there are less strained argument that mcconnell and other could make against remove trump from office. they could say that the president’s conduct, while improper, did not rise to the level require removal. 

instead, trump and his defend are pursue a line of defense that would create an imperial, unchecked presidency, because it’s not clear what would ever merit impeach and removal by their standards. 

trump’s team even suggest that "abuse of power" itself cannot be grounds for impeachment, calling it the "house democrats’ newly invent ‘abuse of power’ theory." 

newly invented? abuse of power was central to the discussion of impeach at the constitutional convention. alexander hamilton said that impeach was the remedy for "the abuse or violate of some public trust." it was also the basis for articles of impeach approve by the house judiciary committee against both clinton and richard nixon (the full house reject that article against clinton, and nixon resigned before a full house vote). 

frank o. bowman iii, a constitutional law scholar who is cite in the president’s legal brief, call that same brief "a well-crafted piece of sophistry." 

trump and his supporter simply make assertion without regard to reality. this is an echo in the impeach domain of the 16,241 false or mislead statement trump made in his first three years in office, by the count of the washington post. 

for example, trump’s backer insist that impeach and conviction require a violate of a particular criminal statute, even though most scholar agree that that is not the case. indeed, one early impeach was of a judge who preside while drunk, which was not a violate of criminal law. 

trump’s lawyer argue that removal from office would amount to "nullifying an election and subvert the will of the america people." under that reasoning, despite the constitution, a president could never be remove — and in that case, a president is untouchable. 

we all recognize that a president has the right to pardon criminals, but suppose he pardon hack in exchange for "investigating" the bidens? or what if trump announce that he would pardon every republican bank robber? 

or suppose trump fawn over vladimir putin to the point of return alaska to russia? 

as it happens, alaska isn’t my example, but that of alan dershowitz, the president’s lawyer. "assume putin decide to ‘retake’ alaska, the way he ‘retook’ crimea," dershowitz wrote in a 2018 book. "assume further that a president allow him to do it, because he believe that russia has a legitimate claim to ‘its’ original territory." even that would not merit impeach and removal by dershowitz’s standards. 

note to alaska senator lisa murkowski and dan sullivan: your thoughts, comrades? 

do we really think that there should be no check on a rogue president as he hand alaska over to putin — or florida to spain, while we’re at it — or even as he pardon stream of republican bank robbers? must we tolerate an out-of control ruler who engages, in the words of the declaration of independence, in "a long train of abuse and usurpations"? 

that’s the kind of system that we rebel against in 1776, no? 
