what will you do when the culture war come for you? 
by charlie warzel 
jan. 29, 2020 

the culture war will come for us all. 

on sunday, it came for a washington post reporter, felicia sonmez. 

nine people were kill in a helicopter crash in calabasas, calif., that morning, including the basketball legend kobe bryant and his 13-year-old daughter, gianna. the news rocket around social media, where mourner share their heartbreak at the news. as is common with major break news, some report were inaccurate or false, layer anxiety on top of grief. 

into the mix, ms. sonmez tweet the link to a 2016 article from the daily beast about a young woman’s accusation that mr. bryant had rape her in colorado. criminal charge against him were drop in 2004 and a civil suit was settled out of court. 

the tweet highlight the fact that mr. bryant’s legacy is fraught and complicated, and attract the attention of fan as well as troll who bombard her inbox with abuse and post her home address online. ms. sonmez then post a selection of the threat she received, without obscure the name of the people who had sent her hate mail. she slept in a hotel on sunday night, fear for her safety at home, she said. 

we don’t know all the details, but it seem that the post’s manage and executive editor were not pleased. they chastise her over email and placed her on administrative leave while the organization review whether she had violate the company’s social media guidelines. their reasoning on monday: "the tweet display poor judgment that undermine the work of her colleagues." the post reverse her suspension on tuesday, roughly 36 hour after the initial tweets, state that senior manager had conclude that ms. sonmez’s tweet didn’t violate company policy. 

this, of course, was obvious to almost everyone but the post’s higher-ups. it was impossible to imagine how posting a link to a story by a different publication on twitter could undermine the work of colleagues. just as it was impossible to imagine which colleague would have felt undermine (more than 300 of ms. sonmez’s colleague express solidarity with her in a letter from the post’s union to management). 

there remain glaring questions. did the executive editor, marty baron, inquire about ms. sonmez’s safety when he emaile her to criticize her tweets? what, beyond a reflex for online civility, led the post to determine the reporter was "hurting this institution" by discuss a part of mr. bryant’s legacy that appear in the post’s own news pages? why, after years of watch journalists, women and vulnerable individual being troll and abuse by viral outrage online, are newsroom still fall for the same gamergate-style tactics? the post’s official statement (it doesn’t quite rise to the level of an apology), which included the caveat "we consistent urge restraint" for reporter online, doesn’t begin to answer these questions. 

the incident also raise heady questions, including: in the world of online journalism, what specifically do writer owe to their publication via their social media presence? surely, there’s a bare minimum if they’re collect a paycheck. journalist obviously shouldn’t undermine their colleague with cheap shot or reckless speculation as to others’ work. they should stay professional. after that, things get murky. 

twitter is a gordian knot of news and opinion that can’t be untangled. inside publications, news and opinion bleed together; opinion writer report while reporter opine via news analysis. partisan commentary, once a third rail for objective reporters, is omnipresent on twitter. in the past, news organization — and the people who work for them — would never have call the president a racist. some now do so explicitly. newsroom and even the platform have struggle with finding a new standard in the trump era of disinformation; meanwhile, journalist are expect to sort it out in real time, while on the job. and to get it right or face consequences. 

journalist who build following online, in part by being incisive, combative, funny and omnipresent on twitter, are often hire because of that exposure — because they’re a known quantity. 

at a large organization, though, those same attribute may quick be seen as a liability. publication hire diverse outspoken writer and then get anxious when these writer start tweet about politics. some outlet ask staff who don’t cover incendiary beat like politics to refrain from comment on politics goings-on. but what happen when politics touch everything? for those who’ve made a name being outspoken, sudden saying nothing is a statement in itself. for newsroom leader the question get tough, fast. few if any outlet seem to want to draw exact lines. and so they become blurred. 

there’s also a double standard. while few publication would say it, it’s all but require for young journalist to jump into the culture war online. it’s a way to find stories. and in a volatile industry it get you noticed. being "part of the discourse" each day means being marketable. it help writers, but it also bolster publications, helping promote big story and create all kind of dystopian form of content like "microscoops," or break news too small to merit its own article but enough to tout to competitor on twitter. 

this exposure is a drug for journalists. the real-time spar and feedback is seductive, and the endorphin boost of constant mention is addictive. but it’s also exposure in the truest sense: great visibility and great vulnerable blend seamless together. 

though an argument could be made that all the time-wasting, in-jokes and gaffe from idle reporter and editor on twitter subtle undermine the rigorous parts of the work, newsroom benefit greatly from the constant exposure of their journalists. reporter use twitter to poke and prod sources. writer sometimes enhance their story with long tweet thread that explain the report process. and reporter build trust with audience by including or signal to their audience perspective in their online analysis (ms. sonmez, who has come forward with detail of her own sexual assault, told her colleague erik wemple that her tweet were, in part, to make survivor like herself who follow her feel seen). when important news breaks, newsroom claim credit when their reporter break it first on twitter. 

which is why the post’s statement, especially its urge of restraint, is so fraught. the same editor who want restraint from reporter online during a celebrity death would most likely also be furious if their capitol hill reporter were slow in live-tweeting a hearing or impeach proceeding and fell behind the competition. restraint is a virtue in journalism, no doubt, but so are tenacity and transparency. the message is contradictory: broadcast everything, but exercise restraint. twitter isn’t real life, but tweet can and will get you fire or suspended. 

but these quality have been in conflict and competition for long before twitter and newsroom understood a journalist's exposure during break news and had their back accordingly. evidence suggest that’s not always the case in the face of a cascade of online outrage. that’s less a change in the industry than it is a failure of newsroom leader to understand the information war it send its journalist out to fight in each day. 

while the internet’s culture war dynamics are fraught, they’re not all that hard to understand. they come in the form of intimidation and threat toward journalist and angry campaign toward advertise and executives. some of the response are posture and some are real, but all are engineer for maximum viral and outrage. yes, sometimes journalist make mistakes. sometimes work will harm the institution or undermine co-workers, but newsroom leader ought to be train to distinguish troll from good-faith criticism. 

it’s a weird moment that newsroom aren’t talk about enough. just as social media platform allow celebrities, politician and influence to circumvent traditional press gatekeeping, the same thing has happen to journalism’s own practitioners. despite all the social media guidelines, there’s an unanswered question: who do those follower really belong to? 

perhaps it’s most accurate to say they’re an asset and a liability for both parties. everyone’s exposed. but there’s an asymmetry to that exposure. the culture war will come for us all, institution and individual alike. one group can weather the storm, the other needs protection. newsroom need to get smart, prepare and protect their foot soldiers. it’s the least they can do. 
