where the fraud are all legal 
by elisabeth rosenthal 
dec. 7, 2019 

much of what we accept as legal in medical bill would be regard as fraud in any other sector. 

i have been circle around this conclusion for this past five years, as i’ve listen to patients’ story while covering health care as a journalist and author. now, after a summer of firsthand experience — my husband was in a bike crash in july — it’s time to call out this fact head-on. many of the democratic candidate are talk about practical fix for our high-priced health care system, and some legislate or regulate solution to the maddening world of medical bill would be welcome. 

my husband, andrej, flew over his bicycle’s handlebars when he hit a pothole at high speed on a sunday ride in washington. he was unconscious and lie on the pavement when i caught up with him minutes later. the result: six broken ribs, a collapse lung, a broken finger, a broken collarbone and a broken shoulder blade. 

the treatment he got via paramedic and in the emergency room and intensive care unit were great. the trouble began, as i knew they would, when the bill start arriving. 

i will not even complain here about some of the crazy high charges: $182 for a basic blood test, $9,289 for two days in a room in intensive care, $20 for a pill that costs penny at a pharmacy. we have great insurance, which negotiate these rate down. and at least andrej got and benefit from those services. 

what i’m talk about here were the bill for things that simply didn’t happen, or only kind-of, sort-of happened, or were mislabele as things they were not, or were so nebulous define that i couldn’t figure out what we might be pay for. 

to be clear, many of the charge that i would call fraudulent — maybe all of them — are technical legal (thanks sometimes to lobby by providers), but that doesn’t make them right. and no one would accept them if they appear on bill deliver by a contractor, or a lawyer or an auto mechanic. there were so many of these charge that i came up with category to keep track of them: 

1. medical swag 
in the trauma bay, someone slap a hard brace around andrej’s neck until scan confirmed that he had not suffer a grievous spinal injury. it was remove within an hour. 

the medical equipment company that provided that piece of plastic bill $319. our insurer paid $215 (90 percent of its discount rate of $239). we were bill $24, our "patient responsibility." 

company are permit by insurer to bill for "durable medical equipment," stuff you receive for home use when you’re in the hospital or doctors’ office. that yield some familiar marked-up charges, like the sling you can buy at walgreen for $15 but for which you or your insurer get a bill for $120 after it is given to you at urgent care. the policy has also led to widespread abuse, with patient sent home with equipment they don’t need: my mom’s apartment, for example, hold an unused wheelchair, a walker and a commode paid for by medicare, by which i mean our tax dollars. it’s as if you were given a swag bag at a conference and then sent a bill for hundred or thousand of dollars. 

at least with swag, you get to keep it. my husband’s hardly worn neck brace didn’t even come home with us as a souvenir. 

2. the cover charge 
the biggest single item on andrej’s e.r. bill was a $7,143.99 trauma activate fee. what was that for, since every component of his care had been bill and bill handsomely? 

among the line items: $3,400 for a high-level e.r. visit. $1,030 for the trauma surgeon. between $1,400 and $3,300 for five purport ct scans. and i say "purported" because one trip into a scanner examine the head, upper spine and maxillofacial bones, but was bill as three separate things. there was also an administration fee of more than $350 each for four injections. 

trauma activate fee have been allow since 2002, after 9/11, when the trauma center association of america, an industry group, convinced regulator that they need to be compensate for maintain a state of "readiness." 

wait. isn’t the purpose of an e.r. to be "ready"? isn’t that why the doctors’ service and scan are bill at higher rate when they are perform in an emergency department? 

despite scrutiny from research about whether trauma fee are deserved, trauma activate fee have only grown in size, 15 percent annual in recent years, and can reach into the ten of thousand of dollars. (on average, medicare pay a fee of about $1,000.) some have liken trauma activate fee to a cover charge for being wheel into an e.r. with major trauma. but do a cover charge typically cost more than the meal? 

3. impostor bill 
we received bill from doctor my husband never met. some of these bill were understandable, like for the radiologist who read the scans. but other were for bedside treatment from people who never came anywhere near the bed to deliver the care. 

andrej had a small finger fracture with a cut that need some stitches, which a resident, a surgeon-in-training, sutured. but the $1,512 bill came in the name of a senior surgeon, as if he had done the work. 

physician and many other health professional are allow to bill for the work of "extenders" — stand-ins with less training who see patient and work under the supervise doctor. these might be residents, physician assistant or nurse anesthetists, for example. for bill purposes, this allow the senior provider to be in two, three, sometimes more than half a dozen place at once, often even when they are physically mile away. 

the resident did a fine job on my husband. but if an assistant did the work, shouldn’t it be bill for less? at law firms, the hourly rate for paralegal and junior attorney are lower than those for partners. 

on a website call clinical advisor, a reimbursement expert himself seem to wonder at the profession’s luck that such bill is tolerated: "i hear people ask, ‘how can i do that? the doctor never saw the patient, never had any interaction with the patient and yet i can still bill this service under the physician?’" 

4. the drive-by 
the day before andrej left the hospital, a physical therapist visit and ask a few questions. from that brief encounter, the therapist noted "ambulation deficits, balance deficits, endurance deficits, pain-limiting function, transfer deficits." that translate into a bill of $646.15 for what was record as a p.t. evaluate "1st session only (billable)." he said he was there for 30 minutes, but he was not. he said he walk andrej up 10 steps with a stabilize belt for assistance. he did not. there was no significant health service given. just an appearance and some box checked on a form. it’s a phenomenon call drive-by doctoring. 

more shockingly, the drive-bys continue at our home, presage by a call on andrej’s cellphone a day after he was discharged. a physical therapist from a private company want to visit him for at-home therapy. in his discharge instructions, no one had mention this service, and his injury was clearly too fresh to benefit. she came. she didn’t know which body part had been injure and conclude he was in too much pain to participate. 

the same company call twice more the following week to schedule visits. by the third time, i told andrej not to open the front door. nonetheless, our insurer was bill — and paid — for three visits. 

it’s as if alexa notice that my dishwasher make too much noise (it does) and took it upon herself to send over a repair guy. but if i turn him away at the front door, saying i’m o.k. with the racket (i am), would i still be bill for the visit? 

5. the enforce upgrade 
one monday when andrej was in pain and out of pills, the trauma doctor suggest we meet in the emergency room, because the trauma clinic was open only from 8 to 10:45 a.m. on wednesday and thursdays. 

so we met the trauma doctor in the e.r., and they talk to andrej, who remain in his street clothes. they gave him a prescription. because the interaction — which could have happen in the lobby — happen in the e.r., it result in an e.r. visit charge of $1,330. but when the trauma clinic is open less than six hour a week, bill for an e.r. visit that doesn’t tap into any of the emergency room resources feel like a scam. is an e.r. visit determined by the content of the service rendered, or merely by the location? 

andrej had a similar experience when his broken finger was treat with a plastic splint that fold over his fingertip. he complain because the upper layer pressed on the fracture. at a follow-up visit, someone took a pair of scissors and cut off the upper half of the splint and tape the lower half back in place. that translate into a $481 charge for "surgery," in addition to the $375 charge for the office visit and a $103 facility fee. doesn’t surgery, by definition, involve cutting into flesh or an animate object — not a piece of plastic? 

sure, it sound fancy to upgrade a meeting to an e.r. visit, or to call the tweak of a splint "surgery," but if an airline overbook my flight and put me on another flight where the only seat available is in first class, it do not charge me for the more expensive ticket. 

my insurer paid for most of these questionable charges, though at discount rates. but even a discount payment for something that never really happen or didn’t need to happen or that we didn’t agree to have happen is still, according to common sense, a fraud. 

why do insurer pay? partly because insurer have no way to know whether you got a particular item or service. but also because it’s not worth their time to investigate the million of medical interaction they write check for each day. despite the advertise concern about your well-being, as one benefit manager enlightened me: they’re "too big to care about you." electronic records, which auto-fill bill boxes, have probably made things worse. for example, the birth of a baby boy may automatic prompt a bill for a circumcision; have day surgery may prompt a check for sedation. 

so what is the appropriate payment for swag i didn’t ask for, outrageous cover charges, stand-in doctors, drive-by visit and faux surgery? in some cases, zero; in others, far less than was paid. and yet, these are all everyday, normal experience in today’s health care system, and they may be perfectly legal. if we want to tame the costs in our $3 trillion health system, we’ve got to rein in this behavior, which is fraud by any other name. 
