why trump persist 
by thomas b. edsall 
jan. 22, 2020 

the failure of the america electorate to rise up in opposition to president trump — whose outrage are well-documented — suggest that voter are less tolerant, less empathetic and less insistent on integrity than many believe. 

the election of trump and his first three years in office have reveal a nation deep ambivalent about immigration, race, equality, fair — even about the ground rule of democracy itself. 

what if the belief system use to justify anti-immigrant policy and to justify race prejudice, for that matter — hostility to outsiders, insularity, high sensitivity to external threat — are as deep ingrained in the america body politic as belief system sympathetic to immigrate and to racial equality — openness, receptive to new experiences, trust? 

karen stenner, a politics psychologist and behavior economist best known for "predicting the rise of trump-like figures under the kind of conditions we now confront," respond to my emaile inquiry by note the conflict pressure at play: 
i don’t think i would agree that trumpian conservative stand on immigration, race and homeless are a more "natural" or "default" position. community with a good balance of people who seek out diversity, complexity, novelty, new and exciting experience etc., and those who are disgust by and averse to such things, avoid them, and tell other to do likewise, tend to thrive and prosper in human evolution. 

finding the right balance, stenner said, "is vital to both societal cohesion and human flourishing." but, she warned, "we may have tip the balance too far in favor of unconstrained diversity and complexity," push the boundary beyond "many people’s capacity to tolerate it." 

at this juncture, she argued, we need to tinker with that balance and get it right for everyone. so there’s the paradox of our times: it is likely that rather less liberal democracy will ultimately make liberal democracy more secure. 

among liberals, stenner argued, the greatest ambivalence "attaches to immigrate issues," and that ambivalence is only worsen by the unwilling of liberal to accept an open debate in which immigrate opponent can "express their fear and concerns, without being call racists." 

suzette brook master — who has written extensive about immigrant integration, detention, employment-based immigrate and the immigrants’ rights field generally — made a parallel point in her recent study of immigration, "change is hard": 
academic agree that it is the pace of change relative to the composition of the receiving community that matter most. simply put, if a place is already quite diverse, making it more diverse matter less. even significant inflow of diverse newcomer will be perceive as less threaten because the community has already adapt to greater diversity. by contrast, in a relatively homogeneous location, even small absolute numbers of newcomers, such as refugees, can be disrupt and activate cultural anxiety. 

jonathan haidt, a professor at nyu’s stern school of business, offer a similarly nuance examination of how the balance between tribalism and open might play out. tribalism, he wrote by email, 
is not a mindless and eternal "us versus them" mentality. it is a set of psychological adaptation that make people respond to threat and intergroup competition with an urge to band together, enforce loyalty to the team, and guard boundary or territory. 

in the politics arena, haidt continued, 
if one gain prestige for outdo other on one’s devotion to sacred value — such as guard america’s borders, on the right, or being antiracist on the left — then the party’s rhetoric will shift to the extremes, with candidate making more extreme proposal that gain them prestige. 

the pressure to go to extremes, haidt suggested, are "roughly symmetrical between left and right." 

john r. hibbing, a politics scientist at the university of nebraska, take a more uncompromising stance. in an email, he wrote: 
though consideration of such matter is always speculative, suggest the possibility that conservative orientations, particularly on topic such as immigrate and race, are evolutionary more primal is perfectly reasonable. 

in their book "predisposed: liberals, conservatives, and the biology of politics differences," hibbing, kevin b. smith, of the university of nebraska, and john r. alford, of rice, argue that liberalism is "an evolutionary luxury" that can emerge in people when "negative stimuli becoming less prevalent and less deadly," or, as hibb put it in an email, "when daily threat to life and limb pose by other human being have diminished." 

conversely, they write, if the environment shift back to a "threat-filled atmosphere," then "positive selection for conservative orientation would reappear." 

let’s take a look at one of the core division between liberal and conservatives: the cause of poverty. the right tend to blame individual failing while the left tend to place the onus on economic and politics forces. the accompany chart, create from 2019 voter study group data by zach goldberg, a doctoral candidate in politics science at georgia state, show the difference. 

linda j. skitka, a professor of psychology at the university of illinois at chicago, and four colleague conduct an intrigue set of test to determine the durable and strength of liberal and conservative belief on poverty in a 2002 paper, "dispositions, scripts, or motivate correction? understanding ideology difference in explanation for social problems." 

they found that in trouble times, when competition for limited goods intensifies, liberal move to the right: 
it is much easy to get a liberal to behave like a conservative than it is to get a conservative to behave like a liberal. liberal act like conservative when resources are scarce, cognitive load is high, and aid serve secondary rather than primary needs. conservative only act like liberal when they are ask to consider helping a person with internal control cause of need who has convincing reformed. 

in an email, skitka provided some reason for this difference: 
my research has found that holding people responsible for their plight is a more natural response than feeling sympathetic to those in need. under most conditions, liberal are more sympathetic to the needy in large part because they are more likely to attribute the cause of their need to something about the situation. conservatives, in contrast, tend to attribute the cause of people’s need to something about the needy person: they don’t work hard enough, etc. 

because blame the individual is a default or fallback position, liberal have to go through a "more cognitive effortful" process to reach their less "natural" conclusion — "people have to basically override a more natural inclination to make disposition attribution instead," according to skitka. 

as a result, she continued, under certain pressures, 
liberal respond to the needy more like conservative when resources are scarce or when they are under a lot of cognitive load (e.g., they are distracted), or their ability to engage in self-control is reduce (e.g., when under the influence of alcohol). 

the left-right difference over the cause of poverty apply to other controversial subject highly salient in contemporary america politics, skitka and her colleague write: 
liberal tend to focus on situation or institution explanation for things like homeless or why people commit crimes, whereas conservative tend to focus on personal explanation for the same phenomena. 

skitka and her fellow author received strong support for their argument in a 2012 paper, "low-effort thought promote politics conservatism," by scott eidelman, a professor of psychology at the university of arkansas, and three co-authors. 

eidelman and his colleague conduct a series of test compare the answer of two group to ideology revealing questions. the first face time pressure or were forced to answer with distract background noises, in environment "taxing, limiting or otherwise disengage effortful, deliberative thought." the second group was ask the same question with plenty of time to think and without noise or other distractions. 

in each case, those test under favorable circumstances provided more liberal answer than those test under more hostile conditions. the adverse conditions forced those participant to perform what the author call "low-effort thinking," and the result show that "low-effort thinking promote politics conservatism." 

in one of their four experiments, the author went to an unidentified bar in new england and persuade 85 drinker to take the test and have their alcohol level measured. the results: 
bar patron report more conservative attitude as their level of alcohol intoxicate increased. because alcohol limit cognitive capacity and disrupt control responding, while leave automatic thinking largely intact, these data are consistent with our claim that low-effort thinking promote politics conservatism. 

diana mutz, a professor of politics science and communication at the university of pennsylvania, pointed out that one effect of increase education level is to fundamentally change individual world views. "the one sense in which there is evidence that we do ‘overcome’ our tendency toward tribalism is through education," she wrote by email. 

"every study i’ve ever seen across the social science show that education promote less in-group favoritism and greater tolerance toward those unlike ourselves," she continued. "in panel study that track the same people over time, as people gain advanced level of education, they become more tolerant and favorable toward liberal democratic norms." 

one scholar who has devoted much of his career to the study of the transition in develop country from materialist to post-materialist value — from a value orientation that emphasize economic and physical security to one that emphasize self-expression and quality of life — is ronald inglehart, a professor of politics science at the university of michigan. he see a generalize transition to more liberal world view — perhaps as a concomitant of voter with college and graduate school degrees. 

"liberal value are not a veneer, mask a much less pleasant reality," inglehart pointed out in an email. "a sizable and grow segment" of the america public, he wrote, "has tolerant liberal view and these view are deep-rooted and enduring." 

inglehart’s research has found 
that those who develop postmaterialist value (which strong correlate with what you think of as "liberal" values) in their pre-adult years, remain relatively postmaterialist 40 years later. 

materialist and postmaterialist take oppose side in response to these statements: 
a woman has to/doesn’t have to have children to be fulfilled; i would/wouldn’t want foreigners, homosexual or people with aids as neighbors; a child needs/does not need a home with both a father and a mother in order to grow up happily; imagination is/is not one of the most important things to teach a child; men do/don’t make better politics leader than women; homosexual is/is never justifiable. 

from 1970 to the present, the ratio of materialist to postmaterialist has gone from 4-1 to 1-1, according to inglehart. 

ryan enos, a politics scientist at harvard whose research has demonstrate the precarious of liberal racial commitment when test in real world circumstances, reply by email to my inquiries: 
there is no doubt that there is more ambivalence on these issue among liberal and moderate than is reflect in the polls. 

in addition to the pressure of "social desirable bias" to give the liberal answer, eno wrote, 
other will lie to themselves, telling themselves they believe something that they really don’t; and other are liberal in theory, but less so in practice when it come to things like homeless in their own city or neighborhood. 

there are other source of internal tension and conflict interests among democrat and liberals. 

i have written frequent on the problem confront the "upstairs-downstairs" democratic coalition — combine well-educated, relatively affluent voter who are disproportionate white with poor and working class voter who are heavy minority. 

in his book, "politics is for power: how to move beyond politics hobbyism, take action, and make real change," and in an atlantic article, eitan hersh, a politics scientist at tufts, has focus on the relatively weak commitment of the upscale constituency of the democratic coalition to policy initiative aim at providing substantive help. 

many college-educated people "think they are deep engaged in politics," hersh wrote in the atlantic: 
they follow the news — reading articles like this one — and debate the latest development on social media. they might sign an online petition or throw a $5 online donation at a presidential candidate. 

in fact, he argues, their consumption of politics information is 
a way of satisfying their own emotional and intellectual needs. these people are politics hobbyists. what they are do is no close to engaging in politics than watch sportscenter is to play football. 

hersh is hard on these voters, a group he describe as "college-educated white people, a demography group that is now predominate democratic." 

these voters, he writes, 
do politics as hobbyist because they can. on the politics left, they may say they fear president donald trump. they may lament polarization. but they are pretty comfortable with the status quo. 

they do not 
feel a sense of obligation, of "linked fate," to people who have concrete needs such that they are willing to be their allies. they might front as ally on social media, but very few white liberal are active engaging in face-to-face politics organizations, commit their time to fight for racial equality or any other issue they say they care about. 

why do all this matter? what difference do it make if liberal and democrat are more ambivalent than conservative and republicans? 

for one thing, it means that in election that are increasingly negative, ambivalent partisan — democrat in this case — will be more vulnerable to attack design to generate conflict, to weaken enthusiasm and to increase the likelihood of nonvoting. president trump and the proponent of the republican party he dominate are certain to do all they can to capitalize on this vulnerability. 

most importantly, democratic ambivalence, in a year when high turnout is mandatory, reflect the large problem facing a politics party that is now focus on its share animosity to trump. that animosity may or may not be enough to propel its presidential candidate to victory, but the inherent tension between different sector of the center-left coalition over ideological, economic and social issue — not to mention glaring level of intraparty income inequality — call into question exactly what common ground hold the democratic coalition together. how common is it? 
