fabl of the twelv labors. 

the author of the origin solar fables, have live 

in that remot age in which physic prowess was recogn 

as the highest attribut of humanity, conceiv the 

idea that god sol, while pass through his appar 

orbit, had to fight his way with the anim of the zodiac, 

and with other in conjunct with them. hence, design 

him as the mighti hunter, and call his exploit 

the twelv labors, they made the incarn saviour 

the hero of similar one on earth, which they taught 

were perform for the good of mankind; and that, after 

fulfil their earth mission, they were exhal to 

heaven through the agenc of fire. when these fabl 

were compos the summer solstic was in the sign of 

leo, and make the twelv labor begin in it, the first 

consist in the kill of a lion, and the second, in rescu 

a virgin (virgo) by the destruct of a hydra, the 

constel in conjunct with her. upon one of the 

assyrian marbl on exhibit in the british museum 

these two labor are repres as have been perform 

by a saviour by the name of nimroud. in the constel 

of taurus, the bull of the zodiac, and of orion, origin 

known as horns, in conjunct therewith, we 

have group of star repres the latter as one of 

the mighti hunter of the ancient astrolatry, support 

on his left arm the shield of the lion skin, the trophi of 

the first labor, and hold a club in his uplift right 

hand, is engag in perform the tenth labor by a conflict 

with the former. 

the fabl of the twelv labor constitut the sacr 

record or scriptur of the older form of astrolatry, one 

version of which, written with the cuneiform charact 

upon twelv tablet of burnt clay, exhum from the ruin 

of an assyrian city, and now on exhibit in the british 

museum, is ascrib to nimroud, the prototyp of the 

grecian hercules, and of nimrod, the mighti hunter of 

the old testament. 

anniversari of solar worship. 

the nativity. 

appli the anniversari inculc in the worship 

of god sol to his imaginari incarnations, the founder of 

the ancient astrolatri made them refer to the sever 

stage of human exist from infanc to matur age. 

hence, compar the first day of infantil life to the 

shortest day of the year, it would natur be expect 

that they would have place the anniversari of the nativ 

exact at the winter solstice; but, have conceiv 

the idea that the sun stood still for the space of three day 

at each of the cardin points, and make it repres the 

figur death of the genius of that luminary, they fix 

the date for it observ three day later, or on the 25th 

of december. the gnostic adher to the ancient 

solar worship, or those who were convers with the 

teach of the esoter philosophy, know that the 

dramati personæ of the fabl of incarn were pictur 

with star upon the azur vault, recogn the 

woman "cloth with the sun, and the moon under her 

feet, and upon her head a crown of twelv stars," refer 

to in revel xii. 1, as the virgo of the zodiac; they 

also knew that she was the true queen of heaven and 

mother of god; and that the infant, ancient repres 

in her arms, and with whom, in their day, she aros on the 

eastern horizon at midnight on the 24th of december, 

was the same of whom the peopl were taught to sing at 

christma "unto us a child is born this day." 

with the knowledg of these fact we can readili see 

that this is the virgin and child which constitut the 

origin of those exquisit paintings, by the old masters, 

known as the madonna and child. 

epiphani or twelfth day. 

in refer to the twelv sign through which the 

sun make his appar annual revolution, the twelfth 

day after christmas, answer to the 6th of january, was 

observ by the votari of the ancient astrolatri as the 

anniversari of the epiphani or twelfth day. in the 

solar fables, it was taught that a star appear in the 

heaven on that day to manifest the birthplac of the 

infant saviour to the magi or wise men of the east, who 

came to pay him homage, and to present him with the 

gift of gold, frankincens and myrrh, as relat in matthew ii. 11. 

the reason for present these gift is explain by 

the fact that of the seven metal dedic to the genii of 

the planets, gold was the one consecr to god sol; and 

frankincens and myrrh were the gum burn in censer 

in his worship. 

in read the account of the magi visit to the infant 

saviour, we have but to exercis our think faculti to 

realiz that it is allegori instead of liter history. 

lent or lenten season. 

in the ancient solar fabl it was taught that the persecut 

to which the incarn saviour were subject 

while pass through the dominion of god sol as lord of 

evil, rage with greatest furi dure the forti day 

preced the festiv of easter, which period, begin 

when the day were percept lengthening, was call 

lent, or the lenten season. it was dure this season 

that the votari of the ancient religion were taught to 

manifest their sympathi for the saviour in his imaginari 

conflict with the devil by abstain from all festivities, 

and by fast and prayer; and, as that was the season 

in which the flock and herd were poor in flesh, while the 

sea and river abound with fish in good condition, the 

ancient priests, make a virtu of necessity, enjoin a 

diet princip of fish, and for that reason place the constel 

pisc at the point in the zodiac in which the 

lenten season ancient began; which, without regard to 

the day of the week, was alway observ on the 15th day 

of february, the name of that month have been deriv 

from the februa, or feast of purif and expiat of 

the old roman calendar. 

at the council of nice the lenten season was made 

to begin on the fourth day of the week, and in refer to 

the ancient custom of the more devout sprinkl ash 

upon their head at the feast of the februa, it is call ash 

wednesday. 

henc we see that all year in which ash wednesday 

doe not come on the 15th of february, the lenten 

season must necessarili contain a greater or lesser number 

than the origin assign of forti days. 

passion week. 

the last seven day of lent is call passion week, in 

refer to the appar passag of the sun across the 

celesti equat at the vernal equinox or 21st of 

march; the ancient astrolog have conceiv the idea 

that the sun stood still for the space of three day at each 

of the cardin points, and make it repres the figur 

death of the genius of that luminary, it was observ 

as the anniversari of the vernal crucifixion or passion of 

the incarn saviours; and in commemor of their 

imaginari suffer and death it was the custom to expos 

in the templ dure the last three day of passion 

week figur repres their dead bodies, over which 

the votari of solar worship, especi the women, made 

great lamentation. it was in refer to one of these 

images, laid out in the templ at jerusalem, to which the 

jealous jehovah, consid it a great abomin in his 

own house, is made to direct the attent of ezekiel, the 

prophet, who, looking, beheld "women weep for tammuz" 

as record in the eighth chapter. this divin 

was the phoenician prototyp of the grecian adonis, to 

whom the women of judea prefer to pay homage. 

it was dure the last three day of passion week 

that the votari of solar worship perform their severest 

penance. besid fast and prayer, the more devout 

flagel and slash themselv and other with knive 

and thongs, and carri heavi cross up steep acclivities. 

in all ultra-cathol countri the priests, in imit of 

the ancient custom, expos in the church figur repres 

the dead saviour, over which the laity, especi 

the women, weep and mourn; and the more devout 

men cut and slash themselves, and each other, with 

knive and thongs; and, in imit of the imaginari 

tramp of jesus with his cross up calvari rug side, 

bear heavi cross up steep acclivities. 

passion plays. 

ancient drama repres the passion of incarn 

saviours, call passion plays, were enact upon the 

stage. the most celebr of these divin tragedies, 

known as prometheus bound, and compos by the 

greek poet æschylus, was play at athen 500 year 

befor the begin of the christian era. to show that 

this sin-aton saviour was not chain to a rock, while 

vultur prey upon his vitals, as popular taught, but 

was nail to a tree; we quot front potter translat of 

the play, that passag which, readili recogn as the 

origin of a christian song, read as follows: 

"lo, stream from the fatal tree, 

his all aton blood: 

is this the infinite? tis he— 

prometheus and a god. 

well might the sun in dark hide, 

and veil his glori in, 

when god the great prometheus die 

for man, the creatur sin." 

the veil of the sun, as repres in these plays, 

have refer to the imaginari sympathi express by 

god sol for the suffer of his incarn son, was shown 

upon the stage by shade the lights. the monk of the 

middl age enact play repres the passion of the 

christian saviour, and the bavarian peasantry, perpetu 

this custom, perform the play everi tenth year. 

resurrect and easter festival. 

in conform to the ancient teachings, the incarn 

saviours, consid as figur dead for the space of 

three day at the vernal equinox, or 21st of march, were 

rais to new of life after the expir of that time. 

hence, the 25th of march, without regard to the day of 

the week, was celebr as the anniversari of the vernal 

resurrection. on the morn of this day it was the 

custom of the astrolog to say to the mourner assembl 

in the temples, "be of good cheer, sacr band of initiates; 

your god has risen from the dead, his pain and his 

suffer shall be your salvation." anoth form of 

this admonition, quot from an ancient poem in refer 

to the phoenician tammuz, read as follows: 

"trust ye saints, your god restored, 

trust ye in your risen lord, 

for the pain which he endured, 

your salvat hath procured." 

then would begin the festiv of easter, which 

corrupt from eostre, and deriv from the teuton 

mythology, was one of the mani name given to the goddess 

of spring. in the observ of this festiv the 

templ were adorn with floral offerings; the hilari 

sang their joy lays; the fire upon the pyres, or the fire-altars, 

were extinguish and rekindl with new fire, or 

sacr fire of the stars, which the astrolog taught was 

brought down from heaven by the wing genius perseus, 

the constel which, anciently, was in conjunct 

with the vernal equinox; paschal candles, lit from 

the new fire, were distribut to the faith and the paschal 

feast, easter feast, or the feast of the passover, was 

eaten in commemor of the passion of the incarn 

saviours, or, in other words, of the passag of the sun 

across the celesti equator. 

in ultra-cathol countri the descent of the sacr 

fire is repres by some secret arrang pyrotechny, 

and the credul laity, believ they have wit a 

miracul display, eager solicit paschal candl lit 

from it; and in imit of the ancient festiv in honor 

of the return of spring, all cathol churches, and most of 

protest ones, are adorn with flowers, the bell ring 

out their merriest peals, and "gloria in excelsis" and 

other jubil songs, similar to the lay of the ancient hilaries, 

are sung. 
