annunciation. 

the anniversari of the nativ have been place 

on the 25th of december, accord to the cours of nature, 

the 25th of march was ancient celebr as the 

anniversari of the annunciation, and is still observ on 

that day, and the duti of salut the virgin (virgo) and 

announc her concept by the holi ghost or third 

person in the triniti was assign to the genius of spring. 

in the chaldean version of the gospel stori the name of 

gabriel was given to this personification, and in the christian 

version of that stori he is made to perform the same 

office; see luke i. 26-35. 

ascension. 

celebr the anniversari of the ascens forti 

day after easter, it was ancient observ on the 4th of 

may, and it was taught that the incarn saviour ascend 

bodili into heaven, in a golden chariot drawn by 

four hors caparison with gild trappings, all glitter 

like fire in the fervid sunlight. henc when we read 

in ii. king ii. 11, that "there appear a chariot of fire 

and hors of fire, . . . and elijah went up by a 

whirlwind into heaven," we must accept this text as descript 

of the imaginari ascens of one of the incarn 

saviour of ancient judaism. 

assumption. 

when the summer solstic was in the sign of cancer, 

the sun was in that of virgo in the month of august, and 

the anniversari of the assumpt was observ on the 

15th of that month, and is so observ at the present 

time. the fact that the anniversari of the ascens preced 

that of the assumpt explain whi jesus is made 

to say to his mother (virgo) soon after his resurrection, 

"touch me not: for i am not yet ascend to my father." 

john xx. 17. 

the lord supper. 

in the ancient solar worship the so-cal ordin 

of the lord supper was observ just befor the anniversari 

of the autumn crucifixion; and consist of bread 

and wine, in refer to the matur of the crop and 

complet of the vintage, was, like the modern festiv of 

the hardest home, a season of thank to the lord 

(god sol) as the giver of all good gifts. henc be 

observ but onc a year, it was in realiti not an ordin 

but an anniversary; and the fact that christian 

partak of these emblem so frequent dure the year 

indic that the origin signif of the lord supper 

has been lost. 

transubstantiation, 

or the convers of the bread and wine into the verit 

blood and bodi of christ, is a doctrin of the cathol 

church which was deriv from the ritual of the ancient 

solar worship. 

in the 26th chapter of matthew we have an account 

of the lord administ the last supper to his discipl 

on the eve of the autumn crucifixion, and in vers 27 

it read that "he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave 

it to them, saying, drink ye all of it." the compil of 

the modern version of the gospel stori must sure have 

inadvert copi this text as it read in the ancient 

version of that old, old story, which, when observ in 

remembr of "our lord and saviour bacchus," was 

call the bacchanalia, or feast, of bacchus. at these 

orgi the particip give thank for the wine by not 

onli drink all of one cup, but mani more; in fact they 

kept on drink until they fell under the table. 

autumn crucifixion. 

the benefic season of spring and summer come 

to an end at the autumn equinox, the 22d of septemb 

was made the anniversari of the autumn crucifixion. 

the vernal resurrect and autumn crucifixion, 

repres the altern triumph of the personifi 

principl of good and evil, as manifest in the divers 

of the seasons; we find appropri express in 

two religi pictures. in the one, the saviour, appeal 

as a vigor young man, surround by a brilliant halo, 

repres the ray of the all-conqu sun of spring, 

is rise triumphant from the tomb, befor whom the 

demon of winter, or devil, is seen retreat in the background. 

in the other, the vanquish saviour, repres 

by the figur of a lean and haggard man, with a crown of 

thorn upon his head, around which appear a faint halo 

of the sun declin rays, and abov which is placard 

the letter i. n. r. i., the initi letter of latin words, 

signifi the life to come, or the etern life, is suspend 

upon the cross, at the foot of which his mother mari 

(virgo) is repres as kneel in a mourn attitude, 

and by her side is seen a serpent and a skull, the emblem 

of evil and of death. 

michaelmas. 

in the calendar of the ancient astral worship, the 

fourth day after the autumn equinox was dedic to 

the genius of autumn. in the chaldean allegori the 

name of michael was given to this personification, and 

call michaelmas, or feast of michael. in the cathol 

calendar this anniversari is place an the 29th of september, 

instead of the 26th of that month, while that 

of st. matthew, the christian genius of autumn, which 

should be place on the 26th of that month, is observ 

on the 21st. 

thus we have shown that the anniversari of the 

ancient astral worship were all fixed, and from church 

histori we learn that they were so observ by the christian 

until the council of nice in the year 325, when the 

bishop assembl at that celebr convocation, desir 

to have the festiv of easter celebr on sunday, 

which had been made the sabbath by the edict of constantine, 

in the year 321, order that it should be observ 

on the sunday of the full moon, which come on or next 

after the vernal equinox. hence, convert it into a 

movabl festival, it alli feast and fast day were also 

made movable. 

