personif of the divis of time. 

in the ancient solar fabl the sever divis of 

time were personifi and made to pay homag to the 

triun deity, suppos to be enthron abov the firmament. 

the hours. 

the genii of the hour were design as elders, and 

we find them describ in the 4th chapter of revel 

as sit round about the throne upon four and twenti 

seats, cloth in white raiment, and crown of gold upon 

their heads. 

the days. 

each day of the year was appropri personified, 

and these genii of the day constitut the saint of the 

christian calendar. of these we will refer to but one. 

accord to the ancient belief that the sun stood still 

for the space of three day at each of the cardin points, 

the 24th of june was made the first of the decreas days; 

and dedic it to st. john the baptist, he is made to say 

in refer to his opposite, (the genius of the 25th of 

december, and first of the increas days,) "he must increase, 

but i must decrease." this text, found in john 

iii. 30, simpli mean that the day of the one must increas 

in length, while the day of the other must decrease. 

the months. 

the fabl of the twelv labor have been supersed 

by others, in which the genii of the twelv sign of the 

zodiac, correspond to the months, were design 

as angels, and made to minist to god sol while make 

his appar annual revolution; but, when constitut the 

attend of the incarn saviour dure their imaginari 

earth life, they were personifi as men and call 

disciples. of these genii of the month we will refer onli 

to the first and the last. the first month, dedic to the 

genius known in the mytholog as janus, and from which 

was deriv the name january, was portray with two 

faces, the one of an old man look mourn backward 

over the old year, and the other of a young man look 

joy forward to the new year. this personification, 

made the open of the year, and repres as hold 

a pair of cross-keys, was call "the carrier of the key 

of the kingdom of heaven." hence, the pope of rome, 

claim apostol success from peter, the janus of the 

christian twelve, wear cross-key as the insignia of their 

office. sometim a crosier, or shepherd crook, is substitut 

for one of the keys, in refer to his arrog 

offic of the leader of the sheep! the author for the 

assumpt that the pope are peter successor is found 

in matthew xvi. 18, 19; but it fallaci becom appar 

when we bear in mind that the scriptur are but collect 

of astronom allegories, and that the peter 

refer to in the text was not a man, but the mythic 

genius of the month of january. 

in refer to the last month, we find that the 

author of the ancient solar fables, ever doubt whether 

god sol, after inaugur winter by his suppos retreat 

from the earth, would return to revivifi natur with 

his life-giv rays, gave to the genius of the twelfth 

month the titl of the doubter. in the christian calendar 

this personif is known as thomas, and a more 

specif dedic of the shortest day of the year have 

been made to him, the 21st day of decemb is call st. 

thoma day. 

the seasons. 

when the cardin point were in the constel 

leo, taurus, aquarius and scorpio, the astrologers, object 

to the signif of the latter, substitut the 

constel in conjunct therewith, which is known 

as aquila (ak-we-la) or fli eagle. in the allegor 

astronomi of that remot period these genii of the season 

were design as beasts, and as such we find them 

refer to in revel iv. 7, which read as follows: 

"and the first beast was like a lion (leo), and the second 

beast like a calf (taurus, the bull calf), and the third 

beast had a face as a man, (aquarius, the waterman) and 

the fourth beast was like a fli eagl (aquila)." in the 

first chapter of ezekiel, the prophet, the genii of the season 

are refer to in the same manner. 

these genii of the seasons, standing, imaginarily, at 

the four corner of the heavens, were call corner-keepers, 

and make them wit to god sol in his appar 

annual revolution, the founder of the astral worship 

design them as archangels, evangelists, god-spel 

or gospel-bearers, and claim inspir from 

them, compos four differ histori of the birth and 

earth-lif of the incarn saviour, to each of which they 

attach a name, and call these record the gospel 

story. in it chaldean version, the name of gabriel, 

michael, raphael and uriel were given them; but while 

the first two of these are mention in the christian gospel 

story, it author gave to the evangelist the name 

of matthew, mark, luke and john. thus know the 

true signif of the discipl and evangelists, the 

veri pertin question present itself: if they are not 

the genii of the month and the seasons, whi are there 

just twelv of the one and four of the other? 

half year of increas days. 

in the ancient astrolatry, the half year of increas 

days, extend from the winter to the summer solstice, 

was personifi by the composit figur repres the 

constel of taurus and aquarius, which, constitut 

of the wing bodi of a bull and the head and beard 

of a man, was call the cherubim. this personif 

we find portray upon the assyrian marbl on exhibit 

in the british museum. 

half year of decreas days. 

the half year of decreas days, extend from the 

summer to the winter solstice, was personifi by the 

figure, which, repres the constel of leo and 

aquila, and compos of the wing bodi and limb of a 

lion, with the head of an eagle, was call the seraphim. 

these last two personif constitut the archangel 

of the ancient astral worship. 

last quarter of the year. 

the last quarter of the year was personifi in the 

ancient allegori as a decrepit old man, who, stung by 

a scorpion (scorpio), and fatal wound by an arrow 

from the quiver of an archer (saggitarius) die at the 

winter solstice; and, after lie in the grave for the space 

of three days, is brought to life again. such was the personif 

refer to in the christian gospel-stori as 

have been rais from the grave by the mandate, "come 

forth, lazarus." thus have we shown that the elder 

and the saints; the angels, and the archangels; the cherubim 

and seraphim; and also poor old lazarus, are but 

personif of the sever divis of time. 
