

chapter vi 

next, the justice, 

in fair round belli with good capon lined, 

with eye sever and beard of formal cut, 

full of wise saw and modern instances-- 

and so he play his part 

--as you like it 

when mrs. bertram of ellangowan was abl to hear the news of what had 

pass dure her confinement, her apart rung with all manner of 

gossip respect the handsom young student from oxford who had told 

such a fortun by the star to the young laird, bless on his dainti 

face. the form, accent, and manner of the stranger were expati upon. 

his horse, bridle, saddle, and stirrup did not remain unnoticed. all this 

made a great impress upon the mind of mrs. bertram, for the good ladi 

had no small store of superstition. 

her first employment, when she becam capabl of a littl work, was to 

make a small velvet bag for the scheme of nativ which she had obtain 

from her husband. her finger itch to break the seal, but credul 

prove stronger than curiosity; and she had the firm to inclos it, in 

all it integrity, within two slip of parchment, which she sew round it 

to prevent it be chafed. the whole was then put into the velvet bag 

aforesaid, and hung as a charm round the neck of the infant, where his 

mother resolv it should remain until the period for the legitim 

satisfact of her curios should arrive. 

the father also resolv to do his part by the child in secur him a 

good education; and, with the view that it should commenc with the first 

dawn of reason, domini sampson was easili induc to renounc his 

public profess of parish schoolmaster, make his constant resid at 

the place, and, in consider of a sum not quit equal to the wage of 

a footman even at that time, to undertak to communic to the futur 

laird of ellangowan all the erudit which he had, and all the grace and 

accomplish which--h had not indeed, but which he had never 

discov that he wanted. in this arrang the laird found also his 

privat advantage, secur the constant benefit of a patient auditor, to 

whom he told his stori when they were alone, and at whose expens he 

could break a sli jest when he had company. 

about four year after this time a great commot took place in the 

counti where ellangowan is situated. 

those who watch the sign of the time had long been of opinion that a 

chang of ministri was about to take place; and at length, after a due 

proport of hopes, fears, and delays, rumour from good author and 

bad authority, and no author at all; after some club had drank up with 

this statesman and other down with him; after riding, and running, and 

posting, and addressing, and counter-addressing, and proffer of live and 

fortunes, the blow was at length struck, the administr of the day was 

dissolved, and parliament, as a natur consequence, was dissolv also. 

sir thoma kittlecourt, like other member in the same situation, post 

down to his county, and met but an indiffer reception. he was a 

partizan of the old administration; and the friend of the new had alreadi 

set about an activ canvass in behalf of john featherhead, esq., who kept 

the best hound and hunter in the shire. among other who join the 

standard of revolt was gilbert glossin, writer in--, agent for the laird 

of ellangowan. this honest gentleman had either been refus some favour 

by the old member, or, what is as probable, he had got all that he had the 

most distant pretens to ask, and could onli look to the other side for 

fresh advancement. mr. glossin had a vote upon ellangowan property; and 

he was now determin that his patron should have one also, there be no 

doubt which side mr. bertram would embrac in the contest. he easili 

persuad ellangowan that it would be credit to him to take the field 

at the head of as strong a parti as possible; and immedi went to 

work, make votes, as everi scotch lawyer know how, by split and 

subdivid the superior upon this ancient and onc power barony. 

these were so extens that, by dint of clip and pare here, ad 

and eke there, and creat over-lord upon all the estat which bertram 

held of the crown, they advanc at the day of contest at the head of ten 

as good men of parchment as ever took the oath of trust and possession. 

this strong reinforc turn the dubious day of battle. the princip 

and his agent divid the honour; the reward fell to the latter 

exclusively. mr. gilbert glossin was made clerk of the peace, and godfrey 

bertram had his name insert in a new commiss of justices, issu 

immedi upon the sit of the parliament. 

this had been the summit of mr. bertram ambition; not that he like 

either the troubl or the respons of the office, but he thought it 

was a digniti to which he was well entitled, and that it had been withheld 

from him by malic prepense. but there is an old and true scotch proverb, 

fool should not have chap sticks'; that is, weapon of offence. mr. 

bertram was no sooner possess of the judici author which he had so 

much long for than he began to exercis it with more sever than 

mercy, and total beli all the opinion which had hitherto been form 

of his inert good-nature. we have read somewher of a justic of peac 

who, on be nomin in the commission, wrote a letter to a booksel 

for the statut respect his offici duti in the follow 

orthography--'pleas send the ax relat to a gustus pease. no doubt, 

when this learn gentleman had possess himself of the axe, he hew the 

law with it to some purpose. mr. bertram was not quit so ignor of 

english grammar as his worship predecessor; but augustus peas himself 

could not have use more indiscrimin the weapon unwarili put into his 

hand. 

in good earnest, he consid the commiss with which he had been 

entrust as a person mark of favour from his sovereign; forget that 

he had former thought his be depriv of a privilege, or honour, 

common to those of his rank was the result of mere parti cabal. he 

command his trusti aid-de-camp, domini sampson, to read aloud the 

commission; and at the first words, the king has been pleas to 

appoint'--'pleased! he exclaim in a transport of gratitude; honest 

gentleman! i'm sure he cannot be better pleas than i am. 

accordingly, unwil to confin his gratitud to mere feel or verbal 

expressions, he gave full current to the new-born zeal of office, and 

endeavour to express his sens of the honour confer upon him by an 

unmitig activ in the discharg of his duty. new brooms, it is said, 

sweep clean; and i myself can bear wit that, on the arriv of a new 

housemaid, the ancient, hereditary, and domest spider who have spun 

their web over the lower divis of my bookshelv (consist chiefli 

of law and divinity) dure the peac reign of her predecessor, fli at 

full speed befor the probationari inroad of the new mercenary. even so 

the laird of ellangowan ruthless commenc his magisteri reform, at 

the expens of various establish and superannu picker and stealer 

who had been his neighbour for half a century. he wrought his miracl 

like a second duke humphrey; and by the influenc of the beadl rod 

caus the lame to walk, the blind to see, and the palsi to labour. he 

detect poachers, black-fishers, orchard-breakers, and pigeon-shooters; 

had the applaus of the bench for his reward, and the public credit of an 

activ magistrate. 

all this good had it rateabl proport of evil. even an admit 

nuisanc of ancient stand should not be abat without some caution. 

the zeal of our worthi friend now involv in great distress sundri 

personag whose idl and mendic habit his own lachess had 

contribut to foster, until these habit had becom irreclaimable, or 

whose real incapac for exert render them fit objects, in their own 

phrase, for the chariti of all well-dispos christians. the 

long-rememb beggar, who for twenti year had made his regular round 

within the neighbourhood, receiv rather as an humbl friend than as an 

object of charity, was sent to the neighbour workhouse. the decrepit 

dame, who travel round the parish upon a hand-barrow, circul from 

hous to hous like a bad shilling, which everi one is in hast to pass to 

his neighbour,--she, who use to call for her bearer as loud, or louder, 

than a travel demand post-horses,--even she share the same disastr 

fate. the daft jock, who, half knave, half idiot, had been the sport of 

each succeed race of villag children for a good part of a century, was 

remit to the counti bridewell, where, seclud from free air and 

sunshine, the onli advantag he was capabl of enjoying, he pine and 

die in the cours of six months. the old sailor, who had so long rejoic 

the smoki rafter of everi kitchen in the countri by sing captain 

ward and bold admir benbow, was banish from the counti for no 

better reason than that he was suppos to speak with a strong irish 

accent. even the annual round of the pedlar were abolish by the 

justice, in his hasti zeal for the administr of rural police. 

these thing did not pass without notic and censure. we are not made of 

wood or stone, and the thing which connect themselv with our heart and 

habit cannot, like bark or lichen, be rent away without our miss them. 

the farmer dame lack her usual share of intelligence, perhap also the 

self-applaus which she had felt while distribut the awmous (alms), in 

shape of a gowpen (handful) of oatmeal, to the mendic who brought the 

news. the cottag felt inconveni from interrupt of the petti trade 

carri on by the itiner dealers. the children lack their suppli of 

sugarplum and toys; the young women want pins, ribbons, combs, and 

ballads; and the old could no longer barter their egg for salt, snuff, 

and tobacco. all these circumst brought the busi laird of ellangowan 

into discredit, which was the more general on account of his former 

popularity. even his lineag was brought up in judgment against him. they 

thought naeth of what the like of greenside, or burnville, or 

viewforth might do, that were stranger in the country; but ellangowan! 

that had been a name amang them sinc the mirk monanday, and lang 

before--him to be grind the puir at that rate! they ca'd his 

grandfath the wick laird; but, though he was while fractious aneuch, 

when he got into rove compani and had ta'en the drap drink, he would 

have scorn to gang on at this gate. na, na, the muckl chumlay in the 

auld place reek like a killogi in his time, and there were as moni puir 

folk rive at the bane in the court, and about the door, as there were 

gentl in the ha'. and the leddy, on ilka christma night as it came 

round, gae twelv siller penni to ilka puir bodi about, in honour of the 

twelv apostl like. they were fond to ca it papistrie; but i think our 

great folk might take a lesson frae the papist whiles. they gie anoth 

sort o’ help to puir folk than just ding down a saxpenc in the brod on 

the sabbath, and kilting, and scourging, and drum them a’ the sax day 

o’ the week besides. 

such was the gossip over the good twopenni in everi ale-hous within three 

or four mile of ellangowan, that be about the diamet of the orbit in 

which our friend godfrey bertram, esq., j. p., must be consid as the 

princip luminary. still greater scope was given to evil tongu by the 

remov of a coloni of gipsies, with one of whom our reader is somewhat 

acquainted, and who had for a great mani year enjoy their chief 

settlement upon the estat of ellangowan. 
