

chapter viii 

so the red indian, by ontario side, 

nurs hardi on the brindl panther hide, 

as fade his swarthi race, with anguish see 

the white man cottag rise beneath the trees; 

he leav the shelter of his nativ wood, 

he leav the murmur of ohio flood, 

and forward rush in indign grief, 

where never foot has trod the fallen leaf, 

he bend his cours where twilight reign sublime. 

o'er forest silent sinc the birth of time. 

scene of infancy. 

in trace the rise and progress of the scottish maroon war, we must not 

omit to mention that year had roll on, and that littl harri bertram, 

one of the hardiest and most live children that ever made a sword and 

grenadi cap of rushes, now approach his fifth revolv birthday. a 

hardihood of disposition, which earli develop itself, made him alreadi a 

littl wanderer; he was well acquaint with everi patch of lea ground and 

dingl around ellangowan, and could tell in his broken languag upon what 

baulk grew the bonniest flowers, and what cops had the ripest nuts. he 

repeat terrifi his attend by clamber about the ruin of the 

old castle, and had more than onc made a stolen excurs as far as the 

gipsi hamlet. 

on these occas he was general brought back by meg merrilies, who, 

though she could not be prevail upon to enter the place of ellangowan 

after her nephew had been given up to the press-gang, did not appar 

extend her resent to the child. on the contrary, she often contriv 

to waylay him in his walks, sing him a gipsi song, give him a ride upon 

her jackass, and thrust into his pocket a piec of gingerbread or a 

red-cheek apple. this woman ancient attach to the family, repel 

and check in everi other direction, seem to rejoic in have some 

object on which it could yet repos and expand itself. she prophesi a 

hundr times, that young mr. harri would be the pride o’ the family, and 

there hadna been sic a sprout frae the auld aik sinc the death of arthur 

mac-dingawaie, that was kill in the battl o’ the bloodi bay; as for the 

present stick, it was good for noth but fire-wood. on one occasion, 

when the child was ill, she lay all night below the window, chant a 

rhyme which she believ sovereign as a febrifuge, and could neither be 

prevail upon to enter the hous nor to leav the station she had chosen 

till she was inform that the crisi was over. 

the affect of this woman becam matter of suspicion, not inde to the 

laird, who was never hasti in suspect evil, but to his wife, who had 

indiffer health and poor spirits. she was now far advanc in a second 

pregnancy, and, as she could not walk abroad herself, and the woman who 

attend upon harri was young and thoughtless, she pray domini sampson 

to undertak the task of watch the boy in his rambles, when he should 

not be otherwis accompanied. the domini love his young charge, and was 

enraptur with his own success in have alreadi brought him so far in 

his learn as to spell word of three syllables. the idea of this earli 

prodigi of erudit be carri off by the gipsies, like a second adam 

smith,[footnote: the father of econom philosophi was, when a child, 

actual carri off by gipsies, and remain some hour in their 

possession.] was not to be tolerated; and accordingly, though the charg 

was contrari to all his habit of life, he readili undertook it, and might 

be seen stalk about with a mathemat problem in his head, and his 

eye upon a child of five year old, whose rambl led him into a hundr 

awkward situations. twice was the domini chase by a cross-grain cow, 

onc he fell into the brook cross at the stepping-stones, and anoth 

time was bog up to the middl in the slough of lochend, in attempt 

to gather a water-lili for the young laird. it was the opinion of the 

villag matron who reliev sampson on the latter occasion, that the 

laird might as weel trust the care o’ his bairn to a potato bogle'; but 

the good domini bore all his disast with graviti and seren equal 

imperturbable. pro-di-gi-ous! was the onli ejacul they ever 

extort from the much-endur man. 

enlarg 

the laird had by this time determin to make root-and-branch work with 

the maroon of derncleugh. the old servant shook their head at his 

proposal, and even domini sampson ventur upon an indirect remonstrance. 

as, however, it was couch in the oracular phrase, ne movea camerinam, 

neither the allusion, nor the languag in which it was expressed, were 

calcul for mr. bertram edification, and matter proceed against 

the gipsi in form of law. everi door in the hamlet was chalk by the 

ground-officer, in token of a formal warn to remov at next term. 

still, however, they show no symptom either of submiss or of 

compliance. at length the term-day, the fatal martinmas, arrived, and 

violent measur of eject were resort to. a strong poss of 

peace-officers, suffici to render all resist vain, charg the 

inhabit to depart by noon; and, as they did not obey, the officers, in 

term of their warrant, proceed to unroof the cottages, and pull down 

the wretch door and windows--a summari and effectu mode of eject 

still practis in some remot part of scotland when a tenant prove 

refractory. the gipsi for a time beheld the work of destruct in 

sullen silenc and inactivity; then set about saddl and load their 

asses, and make prepar for their departure. these were soon 

accomplished, where all had the habit of wander tartars; and they set 

forth on their journey to seek new settlements, where their patron should 

neither be of the quorum nor custo rotulorum. 

certain qualm of feel had deter ellangowan from attend in person 

to see his tenant expelled. he left the execut part of the busi to 

the offic of the law, under the immedi direct of frank kennedy, a 

supervisor, or riding-officer, belong to the excise, who had of late 

becom intim at the place, and of whom we shall have more to say in the 

next chapter. mr. bertram himself chose that day to make a visit to a 

friend at some distance. but it so happened, notwithstand his 

precautions, that he could not avoid meet his late tenant dure their 

retreat from his property. 

it was in a hollow way, near the top of a steep ascent, upon the verg of 

the ellangowan estate, that mr. bertram met the gipsi procession. four or 

five men form the advanc guard, wrap in long loos great-coat that 

hid their tall slender figures, as the larg slouch hats, drawn over 

their brows, conceal their wild features, dark eyes, and swarthi faces. 

two of them carri long fowling-pieces, one wore a broadsword without a 

sheath, and all had the highland dirk, though they did not wear that 

weapon open or ostentatiously. behind them follow the train of laden 

asses, and small cart or tumblers, as they were call in that country, 

on which were laid the decrepit and the helpless, the age and infant part 

of the exil community. the women in their red cloak and straw hats, the 

elder children with bare head and bare feet, and almost nake bodies, had 

the immedi care of the littl caravan. the road was narrow, run 

between two broken bank of sand, and mr. bertram servant rode forward, 

smack his whip with an air of authority, and motion to the driver 

to allow free passag to their betters. his signal was unattend to. he 

then call to the men who loung idl on before, stand to your beast 

heads, and make room for the laird to pass. 

he shall have his share of the road, answer a male gipsi from under 

his slouch and large-brim hat, and without rais his face, and he 

shall have nae mair; the highway is as free to our cuddi as to his 

gelding. 

the tone of the man be sulky, and even menacing, mr. bertram thought it 

best to put his digniti in his pocket, and pass by the process quietly, 

on such space as they chose to leav for his accommodation, which was 

narrow enough. to cover with an appear of indiffer his feel of 

the want of respect with which he was treated, he address one of the 

men, as he pass him without ani show of greeting, salute, or 

recognition--'gil baillie, he said, have you heard that your son 

gabriel is well? (the question respect the young man who had been 

pressed.) 

if i had heard otherwise, said the old man, look up with a stern and 

menac countenance, you should have heard of it too. and he plod on 

his way, tarri no further question. [footnote: this anecdot is a 

liter fact.] when the laird had press on with difficulti among a crowd 

of familiar faces, which had on all former occas mark his approach 

with the rever due to that of a superior being, but in which he now 

onli read hatr and contempt, and had got clear of the throng, he could 

not help turn his horse, and look back to mark the progress of their 

march. the group would have been an excel subject for the pencil of 

calotte. the van had alreadi reach a small and stunt thicket, which 

was at the bottom of the hill, and which gradual hid the line of march 

until the last straggler disappeared. 

his sensat were bitter enough. the race, it is true, which he had thus 

summarili dismiss from their ancient place of refuge, was idl and 

vicious; but had he endeavour to render them otherwise? they were not 

more irregular charact now than they had been while they were admit 

to consid themselv as a sort of subordin depend of his family; 

and ought the mere circumst of his becom a magistr to have made 

at onc such a chang in his conduct toward them? some mean of 

reform ought at least to have been tri befor send seven 

famili at onc upon the wide world, and depriv them of a degre of 

counten which withheld them at least from atroci guilt. there was 

also a natur yearn of heart on part with so mani known and 

familiar faces; and to this feel godfrey bertram was peculiar 

accessible, from the limit qualiti of his mind, which sought it 

princip amus among the petti object around him. as he was about 

to turn his hors head to pursu his journey, meg merrilies, who had 

lag behind the troop, unexpect present herself. 

she was stand upon one of those high precipit bank which, as we 

befor noticed, overhung the road, so that she was place consider 

higher than ellangowan, even though he was on horseback; and her tall 

figure, reliev against the clear blue sky, seem almost of supernatur 

stature. we have notic that there was in her general attire, or rather 

in her mode of adjust it, somewhat of a foreign costume, art 

adopt perhap for the purpos of ad to the effect of her spell and 

predictions, or perhap from some tradit notion respect the dress 

of her ancestors. on this occas she had a larg piec of red cotton 

cloth roll about her head in the form of a turban, from beneath which 

her dark eye flash with uncommon lustre. her long and tangl black 

hair fell in elf-lock from the fold of this singular head-gear. her 

attitud was that of a sibyl in frenzy, and she stretch out in her right 

hand a sapl bough which seem just pulled. 

i'll be d--d, said the groom, if she has not been cut the young 

ash in the dukit park! the laird made no answer, but continu to look 

at the figur which was thus perch abov his path. 

ride your ways, said the gipsy, ride your ways, laird of ellangowan; 

ride your ways, godfrey bertram! this day have ye quench seven smoke 

hearths; see if the fire in your ain parlour burn the blyther for that. ye 

have riven the thack off seven cottar houses; look if your ain roof-tre 

stand the faster. ye may stabl your stirk in the sheal at 

derncleugh; see that the hare doe not couch on the hearthstan at 

ellangowan. ride your ways, godfrey bertram; what do ye glower after our 

folk for? there thirti heart there that wad hae want bread ere ye had 

want sunkets, and spent their life-blood ere ye had scratch your 

finger. yes; there thirti yonder, from the auld wife of an hundr to 

the babe that was born last week, that ye have turn out o’ their bit o’ 

bields, to sleep with the tod and the blackcock in the muirs! ride your 

ways, ellangowan. our bairn are hing at our weari backs; look that 

your braw cradl at hame be the fairer spread up; not that i am wish 

ill to littl harry, or to the babe that yet to be born--god forbid--and 

make them kind to the poor, and better folk than their father! and now, 

ride e'en your ways; for these are the last word ye'll ever hear meg 

merrili speak, and this is the last reis that i'll ever cut in the 

bonni wood of ellangowan. 

so saying, she broke the sapl she held in her hand, and flung it into 

the road. margaret of anjou, bestow on her triumphant foe her 

keen-edg malediction, could not have turn from them with a gestur 

more proud contemptuous. the laird was clear his voic to speak, and 

thrust his hand in his pocket to find a half-crown; the gipsi wait 

neither for his repli nor his donation, but strode down the hill to 

overtak the caravan. 

ellangowan rode pensiv home; and it was remark that he did not 

mention this interview to ani of his family. the groom was not so 

reserved; he told the stori at great length to a full audienc in the 

kitchen, and conclud by swearing, that if ever the devil spoke by the 

mouth of a woman, he had spoken by that of meg merrili that bless 

day. 
