

chapter ix 

paint scotland greet ower her thrissle, 

her mutchkin stoup as toom a whistle, 

and d--n'd excisemen in a bustle, 

seiz a stell, 

triumphant crushin't like a mussel, 

or lampit shell 

burns. 

dure the period of mr. bertram activ magistracy, he did not forget 

the affair of the revenue. smuggling, for which the isl of man then 

afford peculiar facilities, was general, or rather universal, all along 

the southwestern coast of scotland. almost all the common peopl were 

engag in these practices; the gentri conniv at them, and the offic 

of the revenu were frequent discountenanc in the exercis of their 

duti by those who should have protect them. 

there was at this period, employ as a riding-offic or supervisor, in 

that part of the countri a certain franci kennedy, alreadi name in our 

narrative--a stout, resolute, and activ man, who had made seizur to a 

great amount, and was proport hate by those who had an interest in 

the fair trade, as they call the pursuit of these contraband 

adventurers. this person was natur son to a gentleman of good family, 

owe to which circumstance, and to his be of a jolly, convivi 

disposition, and sing a good song, he was admit to the occasion 

societi of the gentlemen of the country, and was a member of sever of 

their club for practis athlet games, at which he was particular 

expert. 

at ellangowan kennedi was a frequent and alway an accept guest. his 

vivac reliev mr. bertram of the troubl of thought, and the labour 

which it cost him to support a detail communic of ideas; while the 

dare and danger exploit which he had undertaken in the discharg of 

his offic form excel conversation. to all these revenu adventur 

did the laird of ellangowan serious incline, and the amus which he 

deriv from kennedi societi form an excel reason for 

countenanc and assist the narrat in the execut of his invidi 

and hazard duty. 

frank kennedy, he said, was a gentleman, though on the wrang side of 

the blanket; he was connect with the famili of ellangowan through the 

hous of glengubble. the last laird of glengubbl would have brought the 

estat into the ellangowan line; but, happen to go to harrigate, he 

there met with miss jean hadaway--bi the by, the green dragon at harrig 

is the best hous of the twa--but for frank kennedy, he in one sens a 

gentleman born, and it a shame not to support him against these 

blackguard smugglers. 

after this leagu had taken place between judgment and execution, it 

chanc that captain dirk hatteraick had land a cargo of spirit and 

other contraband good upon the beach not far from ellangowan, and, 

confid in the indiffer with which the laird had former regard 

similar infract of the law, he was neither veri anxious to conceal nor 

to expedit the transaction. the consequ was that mr. frank kennedy, 

arm with a warrant from ellangowan, and support by some of the laird 

peopl who knew the country, and by a parti of military, pour down upon 

the kegs, bales, and bags, and after a desper affray, in which sever 

wound were given and received, succeed in clap the broad arrow upon 

the articles, and bear them off in triumph to the next custom-house. 

dirk hatteraick vowed, in dutch, german, and english, a deep and full 

revenge, both against the gauger and his abettors; and all who knew him 

thought it like he would keep his word. 

a few day after the departur of the gipsi tribe, mr. bertram ask his 

ladi one morn at breakfast whether this was not littl harri 

birthday. 

five year auld exactly, this bless day, answer the lady; so we may 

look into the english gentleman paper. 

mr. bertram like to show his author in trifles. no, my dear, not till 

to-morrow. the last time i was at quarter-sess the sheriff told us 

that dies--that die inceptus--in short, you don't understand latin, but 

it mean that a term-day is not begun till it ended. 

that sound like nonsense, my dear. 

may be so, my dear; but it may be veri good law for all that. i am sure, 

speak of term-days, i wish, as frank kennedi says, that whitsunday 

would kill martinma and be hang for the murder; for there i have got a 

letter about that interest of jenni cairns's, and deil a tenant been at 

the place yet wi a boddl of rent, nor will not till candlemas. but, 

speak of frank kennedy, i daresay he'll be here the day, for he was 

away round to wigton to warn a king ship that lie in the bay about 

dirk hatteraick lugger be on the coast again, and he'll be back this 

day; so we'll have a bottl of claret and drink littl harri health. 

‘i wish, repli the lady, frank kennedi would let dirk hatteraick 

alane. what need he make himself mair busi than other folk? cannot he 

sing his sang, and take his drink, and draw his salary, like collector 

snail, honest man, that never fash oni body? and i wonder at you, laird, 

for meddl and making. did we ever want to send for tea or brandi frae 

the borough-town when dirk hatteraick use to come quiet into the bay? 

mrs. bertram, you know noth of these matters. do you think it becom 

a magistr to let his own hous be made a receptacl for smuggl goods? 

frank kennedi will show you the penalti in the act, and ye ken yoursel 

they use to put their run good into the auld place of ellangowan up by 

there. 

oh dear, mr. bertram, and what the waur were the wa and the vault o’ 

the auld castl for have a whin keg o’ brandi in them at an orra time? 

i am sure ye were not oblig to ken oni thing about it; and what the waur 

was the king that the laird here got a soup o’ drink and the ladi their 

drap o’ tea at a reason rate?--it a shame to them to pit such tax 

on them!--and was na i much the better of these flander head and pinner 

that dirk hatteraick sent me a’ the way from antwerp? it will be lang or 

the king send me oni thing, or frank kennedi either. and then ye would 

quarrel with these gipsi too! i expect everi day to hear the barnyard 

in a low. 

‘i tell you onc more, my dear, you don't understand these things--and 

there frank kennedi come gallop up the avenue. 

aweel! aweel! ellangowan, said the lady, rais her voic as the laird 

left the room, ‘i wish ye may understand them yoursell, that a'! 

from this nuptial dialogu the laird joy escap to meet his faith 

friend, mr. kennedy, who arriv in high spirits. for the love of life, 

ellangowan, he said, get up to the castle! you'll see that old fox dirk 

hatteraick, and his majesti hound in full cri after him. so saying, he 

flung his hors bridl to a boy, and ran up the ascent to the old 

castle, follow by the laird, and inde by sever other of the family, 

alarm by the sound of gun from the sea, now distinct heard. 

on gain that part of the ruin which command the most extens 

outlook, they saw a lugger, with all her canvass crowded, stand across 

the bay, close pursu by a sloop of war, that kept fire upon the 

chase from her bows, which the lugger return with her stern-chasers. 

they'r but at long bowl yet, cri kennedy, in great exultation, but 

they will be closer by and by. d--n him, he start his cargo! i see 

the good nantz pitch overboard, keg after keg! that a d--d ungenteel 

thing of mr. hatteraick, as i shall let him know by and by. now, now! 

they'v got the wind of him! that it, that it! hark to him! hark to 

him! now, my dogs! now, my dogs! hark to ranger, hark! 

‘i think, said the old garden to one of the maids, the ganger fie, 

by which word the common peopl express those violent spirit which they 

think a presag of death. 

meantim the chase continued. the lugger, be pilot with great 

ability, and use everi nautic shift to make her escape, had now 

reached, and was about to double, the headland which form the extrem 

point of land on the left side of the bay, when a ball have hit the yard 

in the slings, the mainsail fell upon the deck. the consequ of this 

accid appear inevitable, but could not be seen by the spectators; for 

the vessel, which had just doubl the headland, lost steerage, and fell 

out of their sight behind the promontory. the sloop of war crowd all 

sail to pursue, but she had stood too close upon the cape, so that they 

were oblig to wear the vessel for fear of go ashore, and to make a 

larg tack back into the bay, in order to recov sea-room enough to 

doubl the headland. 

they ll lose her, by--, cargo and lugger, one or both, said kennedy; ‘i 

must gallop away to the point of warroch (this was the headland so often 

mentioned), and make them a signal where she has drift to on the other 

side. good-by for an hour, ellangowan; get out the gallon punch-bowl and 

plenti of lemons. i'll stand for the french articl by the time i come 

back, and we'll drink the young laird health in a bowl that would swim 

the collector yawl. so saying, he mount his hors and gallop off. 

about a mile from the house, and upon the verg of the woods, which, as we 

have said, cover a promontori termin in the cape call the point 

of warroch, kennedi met young harri bertram, attend by his tutor, 

domini sampson. he had often promis the child a ride upon his galloway; 

and, from singing, dancing, and play punch for his amusement, was a 

particular favourite. he no sooner came scamper up the path, than the 

boy loud claim his promise; and kennedy, who saw no risk, in indulg 

him, and wish to teas the dominie, in whose visag he read a 

remonstrance, caught up harri from the ground, place him befor him, and 

continu his route; sampson peradventure, master kennedy- be lost 

in the clatter of his hors feet. the pedagogu hesit a moment 

whether he should go after them; but kennedi be a person in full 

confid of the family, and with whom he himself had no delight in 

associating, be that he was addict unto profan and scurril 

jests, he continu his own walk at his own pace, till he reach the 

place of ellangowan. 

the spectat from the ruin wall of the castl were still watch the 

sloop of war, which at length, but not without the loss of consider 

time, recov sea-room enough to weather the point of warroch, and was 

lost to their sight behind that wood promontory. some time afterward 

the discharg of sever cannon were heard at a distance, and, after an 

interval, a still louder explosion, as of a vessel blown up, and a cloud 

of smoke rose abov the tree and mingl with the blue sky. all then 

separ on their differ occasions, augur various upon the fate 

of the smuggler, but the major insist that her captur was 

inevitable, if she had not alreadi gone to the bottom. 

it is near our dinner-time, my dear, said mrs. bertram to her husband; 

will it be lang befor mr. kennedi come back? 

‘i expect him everi moment, my dear, said the laird; perhap he is 

bring some of the offic of the sloop with him. 

my stars, mr. bertram! whi did not ye tell me this before, that we might 

have had the larg round table? and then, they'r a’ tire o’ saut meat, 

and, to tell you the plain truth, a rump o’ beef is the best part of your 

dinner. and then i wad have put on anoth gown, and ye wadna have been 

the waur o’ a clean neck-cloth yoursell. but ye delight in surpris and 

hurri one. i am sure i am no to baud out for ever against this sort of 

go on; but when folk missed, then they are moaned. 

pshaw, pshaw! deuc take the beef, and the gown, and table, and the 

neck-cloth! we shall do all veri well. where the dominie, john? (to a 

servant who was busi about the table) where the domini and littl 

harry? 

mr. sampson been at hame these twa hour and mair, but i dinna think 

mr. harri cam hame wi him. 

not come hame wi him? said the lady; desir mr. sampson to step this 

way directly. 

mr. sampson, said she, upon his entrance, is it not the most 

extraordinari thing in this world wide, that you, that have free 

up-putting--bed, board, and washing--and twelv pound sterl a year, 

just to look after that boy, should let him out of your sight for twa or 

three hours? 

sampson made a bow of humbl acknowledg at each paus which the angri 

ladi made in her enumer of the advantag of his situation, in order 

to give more weight to her remonstrance, and then, in word which we will 

not do him the injustic to imitate, told how mr. franci kennedi had 

assum spontan the charg of master harry, in despit of his 

remonstr in the contrary. 

‘i am veri littl oblig to mr. franci kennedi for his pains, said the 

lady, peevishly; suppos he let the boy drop from his horse, and lame 

him? or suppos one of the cannon come ashor and kill him? or 

suppose-- 

or suppose, my dear, said ellangowan, what is much more like than 

anyth else, that they have gone aboard the sloop or the prize, and are 

to come round the point with the tide? 

and then they may be drowned, said the lady. 

verily, said sampson, ‘i thought mr. kennedi had return an hour since. 

of a sureti i deem i heard his hors feet. 

that, said john, with a broad grin, was grizzel chase the humble-cow 

out of the close. 

sampson colour up to the eyes, not at the impli taunt, which he would 

never have discovered, or resent if he had, but at some idea which 

cross his own mind. ‘i have been in an error, he said; of a sureti i 

should have tarri for the babe. so saying, he snatch his bone-head 

cane and hat, and hurri away toward warroch wood faster than he was 

ever known to walk befor or after. 

the laird linger some time, debat the point with the lady. at length 

he saw the sloop of war again make her appearance; but, without 

approach the shore, she stood away to the westward with all her sail 

set, and was soon out of sight. the ladi state of timor and fret 

apprehens was so habitu that her fear went for noth with her lord 

and master; but an appear of disturb and anxieti among the 

servant now excit his alarm, especi when he was call out of the 

room, and told in privat that mr. kennedi hors had come to the stabl 

door alone, with the saddl turn round below it belli and the rein of 

the bridl broken; and that a farmer had inform them in pass that 

there was a smuggl lugger burn like a furnac on the other side of 

the point of warroch, and that, though he had come through the wood, he 

had seen or heard noth of kennedi or the young laird, on there was 

domini sampson gaun rampaug about like mad, seek for them. 

all was now bustl at ellangowan. the laird and his servants, male and 

female, hasten to the wood of warroch. the tenant and cottag in the 

neighbourhood lent their assistance, part out of zeal, part from 

curiosity. boat were man to search the sea-shore, which, on the other 

side of the point, rose into high and indent rocks. a vagu suspicion 

was entertained, though too horribl to be expressed, that the child might 

have fallen from one of these cliffs. 

the even had begun to close when the parti enter the wood, and 

dispers differ way in quest of the boy and his companion. the 

darken of the atmosphere, and the hoars sigh of the novemb wind 

through the nake trees, the rustl of the wither leav which strew 

the glades, the repeat halloo of the differ parties, which often 

drew them togeth in expect of meet the object of their search, 

gave a cast of dismal sublim to the scene. 

at length, after a minut and fruitless investig through the wood, 

the searcher began to draw togeth into one body, and to compar notes. 

the agoni of the father grew beyond concealment, yet it scarc equal 

the anguish of the tutor. would to god i had die for him! the 

affection creatur repeated, in note of the deepest distress. those 

who were less interest rush into a tumultuari discuss of chanc 

and possibilities. each gave his opinion, and each was altern sway 

by that of the others. some thought the object of their search had gone 

aboard the sloop; some that they had gone to a villag at three mile 

distance; some whisper they might have been on board the lugger, a few 

plank and beam of which the tide now drift ashore. 

at this instant a shout was heard from the beach, so loud, so shrill, so 

piercing, so differ from everi sound which the wood that day had rung 

to, that nobodi hesit a moment to believ that it convey tidings, 

and tide of dread import. all hurri to the place, and, ventur 

without scrupl upon path which at anoth time they would have shudder 

to look at, descend toward a cleft of the rock, where one boat crew 

was alreadi landed. here, sirs, here! this way, for god sake! this way! 

this way! was the reiter cry. ellangowan broke through the throng 

which had alreadi assembl at the fatal spot, and beheld the object of 

their terror. it was the dead bodi of kennedy. at first sight he seem to 

have perish by a fall from the rocks, which rose abov the spot on which 

he lay in a perpendicular precipic of a hundr feet abov the beach. the 

corps was lie half in, half out of the water; the advanc tide, 

rais the arm and stir the clothes, had given it at some distanc 

the appear of motion, so that those who first discov the bodi 

thought that life remained. but everi spark had been long extinguished. 

my bairn! my bairn! cri the distract father, where can he be? a 

dozen mouth were open to communic hope which no one felt. some one 

at length mentioned--th gipsies! in a moment ellangowan had reascend 

the cliffs, flung himself upon the first hors he met, and rode furious 

to the hut at derncleugh. all was there dark and desolate; and, as he 

dismount to make more minut search, he stumbl over fragment of 

furnitur which had been thrown out of the cottages, and the broken wood 

and thatch which had been pull down by his orders. at that moment the 

prophecy, or anathema, of meg merrili fell heavi on his mind. you have 

strip the thatch from seven cottages; see that the roof-tre of your 

own hous stand the surer! 







