

chapter x 

but see, his face is black and full of blood; 

his eye-bal farther out than when he lived, 

stare full ghast like a strangl man, 

his hair uprear'd, his nostril stretch d with struggling, 

his hand abroad display'd, as one that grasp'd 

and tugg'd for life, and was by strength subdu 

henri vi, part ii 

the sheriff-deput of the counti arriv at ellangowan next morn by 

daybreak. to this provinci magistr the law of scotland assign 

judici power of consider extent, and the task of inquir into all 

crime commit within his jurisdiction, the apprehens and commit 

of suspect persons, and so forth. [footnote: the scottish sheriff 

discharges, on such occas as that now mentioned, pretti much the same 

duti as a coroner.] 

the gentleman who held the offic in the shire of---at the time of this 

catastroph was well born and well educated; and, though somewhat pedant 

and profession in his habits, he enjoy general respect as an activ 

and intellig magistrate. his first employ was to examin all 

wit whose evid could throw light upon this mysteri event, and 

make up the written report, proce verbal, or precognition, as it is 

technic called, which the practic of scotland has substitut for a 

coron inquest. under the sheriff minut and skil inquiry, mani 

circumst appear which seem incompat with the origin opinion 

that kennedi had accident fallen from the cliffs. we shall briefli 

detail some of these. 

the bodi had been deposit in a neighbour fisher-hut, but without 

alter the condit in which it was found. this was the first object of 

the sheriff examination. though fear crush and mangl by the 

fall from such a height, the corps was found to exhibit a deep cut in the 

head, which, in the opinion of a skil surgeon, must have been inflict 

by a broadsword or cutlass. the experi of this gentleman discov 

other suspici indications. the face was much blackened, the eye 

distorted, and the vein of the neck swelled. a colour handkerchief, 

which the unfortun man had worn round his neck, did not present the 

usual appearance, but was much loosened, and the knot displac and 

drag extrem tight; the fold were also compressed, as if it had been 

use as a mean of grappl the deceased, and drag him perhap to the 

precipice. 

on the other hand, poor kennedi purs was found untouched; and, what 

seem yet more extraordinary, the pistol which he usual carri when 

about to encount ani hazard adventur were found in his pocket 

loaded. this appear particular strange, for he was known and dread 

by the contraband trader as a man equal fearless and dexter in the 

use of his weapons, of which he had given mani signal proofs. the sheriff 

inquir whether kennedi was not in the practic of carri ani other 

arms? most of mr. bertram servant recollect that he general had a 

couteau de chasse, or short hanger, but none such was found upon the dead 

body; nor could those who had seen him on the morn of the fatal day 

take it upon them to assert whether he then carri that weapon or not. 

the corps afford no other indicia respect the fate of kennedy; for, 

though the cloth were much displac and the limb dread fractured, 

the one seem the probable, the other the certain, consequ of such a 

fall. the hand of the deceas were clench fast, and full of turf and 

earth; but this also seem equivocal. 

the magistr then proceed to the place where the corps was first 

discovered, and made those who had found it give, upon the spot, a 

particular and detail account of the manner in which it was lying. a 

larg fragment of the rock appear to have accompanied, or followed, the 

fall of the victim from the cliff above. it was of so solid and compact a 

substanc that it had fallen without ani great diminut by splintering; 

so that the sheriff was enabled, first, to estim the weight by 

measurement, and then to calculate, from the appear of the fragment, 

what portion of it had been bed into the cliff from which it had 

descended. this was easili detect by the raw appear of the stone 

where it had not been expos to the atmosphere. they then ascend the 

cliff, and survey the place from whenc the stoni fragment had fallen. 

it seem plain, from the appear of the bed, that the mere weight of 

one man stand upon the project part of the fragment, suppos it in 

it origin situation, could not have destroy it balanc and 

precipit it, with himself, from the cliff. at the same time, it 

appear to have lain so loos that the use of a lever, or the combin 

strength of three or four men, might easili have hurl it from it 

position. the short turf about the brink of the precipic was much 

trampled, as if stamp by the heel of men in a mortal struggle, or in 

the act of some violent exertion. trace of the same kind, less visibl 

marked, guid the sagaci investig to the verg of the copsewood, 

which in that place crept high up the bank toward the top of the 

precipice. 

with patienc and persever they trace these mark into the thickest 

part of the copse, a rout which no person would have voluntarili adopted, 

unless for the purpos of concealment. here they found plain vestig of 

violenc and struggling, from space to space. small bough were torn down, 

as if grasp by some resist wretch who was drag forcibl along; the 

ground, where in the least degre soft or marshy, show the print of mani 

feet; there were vestig also which might be those of human blood. at ani 

rate it was certain that sever person must have forc their passag 

among the oaks, hazels, and underwood with which they were mingled; and in 

some place appear trace as if a sack full of grain, a dead body, or 

someth of that heavi and solid description, had been drag along the 

ground. in one part of the thicket there was a small swamp, the clay of 

which was whitish, be probabl mix with marl. the back of kennedi 

coat appear besmear with stain of the same colour. 

at length, about a quarter of a mile from the brink of the fatal 

precipice, the trace conduct them to a small open space of ground, veri 

much trampled, and plain stain with blood, although wither leav 

had been strew upon the spot, and other mean hastili taken to effac 

the marks, which seem obvious to have been deriv from a desper 

affray. on one side of this patch of open ground was found the suffer 

nake hanger, which seem to have been thrown into the thicket; on the 

other, the belt and sheath, which appear to have been hidden with more 

leisur care and precaution. 

the magistr caus the footprint which mark this spot to be 

care measur and examined. some correspond to the foot of the 

unhappi victim; some were larger, some less; indic that at least four 

or five men had been busi around him. abov all, here, and here only, were 

observ the vestig of a child foot; and as it could be seen nowher 

else, and the hard horse-track which travers the wood of warroch was 

contigu to the spot, it was natur to think that the boy might have 

escap in that direct dure the confusion. but, as he was never heard 

of, the sheriff, who made a care entri of all these memoranda, did not 

suppress his opinion, that the deceas had met with foul play, and that 

the murderers, whoever they were, had possess themselv of the person 

of the child harri bertram. 

everi exert was now made to discov the criminals. suspicion hesit 

between the smuggler and the gipsies. the fate of dirk hatteraick 

vessel was certain. two men from the opposit side of warroch bay (so the 

inlet on the southern side of the point of warroch is called) had seen, 

though at a great distance, the lugger drive eastward, after doubl the 

headland, and, as they judg from her manoeuvres, in a disabl state. 

short after, they perceiv that she grounded, smoked, and final took 

fire. she was, as one of them express himself, in a light low (bright 

flame) when they observ a king ship, with her colour up, heav in 

sight from behind the cape. the gun of the burn vessel discharg 

themselv as the fire reach them; and they saw her at length blow up 

with a great explosion. the sloop of war kept aloof for her own safety; 

and, after hover till the other exploded, stood away southward under a 

press of sail. the sheriff anxious interrog these men whether ani 

boat had left the vessel. they could not say, they had seen none; but 

they might have put off in such a direct as place the burn vessel, 

and the thick smoke which float landward from it, between their cours 

and the wit observation. 

that the ship destroy was dirk hatteraick no one doubted. his lugger 

was well known on the coast, and had been expect just at this time. a 

letter from the command of the king sloop, to whom the sheriff made 

application, put the matter beyond doubt; he sent also an extract from his 

log-book of the transact of the day, which intim their be on 

the outlook for a smuggl lugger, dirk hatteraick master, upon the 

inform and requisit of franci kennedy, of his majesti excis 

service; and that kennedi was to be upon the outlook on the shore, in case 

hatteraick, who was known to be a desper fellow, and had been 

repeat outlawed, should attempt to run his sloop aground. about nine 

o'clock a.m. they discov a sail which answer the descript of 

hatteraick vessel, chase her, and, after repeat signal to her to 

show colour and bring-to, fire upon her. the chase then show hamburgh 

colour and return the fire; and a run fight was maintain for 

three hours, when, just as the lugger was doubl the point of warroch, 

they observ that the main-yard was shot in the slings, and that the 

vessel was disabled. it was not in the power of the man-of-war men for 

some time to profit by this circumstance, owe to their have kept too 

much in shore for doubl the headland. after two tacks, they 

accomplish this, and observ the chase on fire and appar deserted. 

the fire have reach some cask of spirits, which were place on the 

deck, with other combustibles, probabl on purpose, burnt with such furi 

that no boat durst approach the vessel, especi as her shot gun 

were discharg one after anoth by the heat. the captain had no doubt 

whatev that the crew had set the vessel on fire and escap in their 

boats. after watch the conflagr till the ship blew up, his 

majesti sloop, the shark, stood toward the isl of man, with the 

purpos of intercept the retreat of the smugglers, who, though they 

might conceal themselv in the wood for a day or two, would probabl 

take the first opportun of endeavour to make for this asylum. but 

they never saw more of them than is abov narrated. 

such was the account given by william pritchard, master and command of 

his majesti sloop of war, shark, who conclud by regret deepli that 

he had not had the happi to fall in with the scoundrel who had had 

the impud to fire on his majesti flag, and with an assur that, 

should he meet mr. dirk hatteraick in ani futur cruise, he would not fail 

to bring him into port under his stern, to answer whatev might be 

alleg against him. 

