

chapter xii 

reputation! that man idol 

set up against god, the maker of all laws, 

who hath command us we should not kill, 

and yet we say we must, for reputation! 

what honest man can either fear his own, 

or els will hurt anoth reputation? 

fear to do base unworthi thing is valour; 

if they be done to us, to suffer them 

is valour too. 

ben jonson. 

the colonel was walk pensiv up and down the parlour when the 

offici landladi reenter to take his commands. have given them in 

the manner he thought would be most accept for the good of the 

house, he beg to detain her a moment. 

‘i think, he said, madam, if i understood the good peopl right, mr. 

bertram lost his son in his fifth year? 

‘o ay, sir, there nae doubt o’ that, though there are moni idl clash 

about the way and manner, for it an auld stori now, and everybodi tell 

it, as we were doing, their ain way by the ingleside. but lost the bairn 

was in his fifth year, as your honour says, colonel; and the news be 

rash tell'd to the leddy, then great with child, cost her her life that 

samyn night; and the laird never throve after that day, but was just 

careless of everything, though, when his daughter miss luci grew up, she 

tri to keep order within doors; but what could she do, poor thing? so 

now they'r out of hous and hauld. 

can you recollect, madam, about what time of the year the child was 

lost? the landlady, after a paus and some recollection, answered, she 

was posit it was about this season'; and ad some local recollect 

that fix the date in her memori as occur about the begin of 

novemb 17--. 

the stranger took two or three turn round the room in silence, but sign 

to mrs. mac-candlish not to leav it. 

did i right apprehend, he said, that the estat of ellangowan is in 

the market? 

in the market? it will be sell'd the morn to the highest bidder--that 

no the morn, lord help me! which is the sabbath, but on monday, the first 

free day; and the furnitur and stock is to be roupit at the same time 

on the ground. it the opinion of the haill countri that the sale has 

been shame forc on at this time, when there sae littl money 

stir in scotland wi this weari american war, that somebodi may get 

the land a bargain. deil be in them, that i should say sae!'--th good 

ladi wrath rise at the suppos injustice. 

and where will the sale take place? 

on the premises, as the advertis says; that at the hous of 

ellangowan, your honour, as i understand it. 

and who exhibit the title-deeds, rent-roll, and plan? 

‘a veri decent man, sir; the sheriff-substitut of the county, who has 

author from the court of session. he in the town just now, if your 

honour would like to see him; and he can tell you mair about the loss of 

the bairn than oni body, for the sheriff-deput (that his principal, 

like) took much pain to come at the truth o’ that matter, as i have 

heard. 

and this gentleman name is-- 

mac-morlan, sir; he a man o’ character, and weel spoken o'. 

send my compliments--colonel manner compliment to him, and i would 

be glad he would do me the pleasur of sup with me, and bring these 

paper with him; and i beg, good madam, you will say noth of this to 

ani one else. 

me, sir? ne'er a word shall i say. i wish your honour (a courtesy), or 

oni honour gentleman that fought for his countri (anoth courtesy), 

had the land, sinc the auld famili maun quit (a sigh), rather than that 

wili scoundrel glossin, that risen on the ruin of the best friend he 

ever had. and now i think on't, i'll slip on my hood and pattens, and gang 

to mr. mac-morlan mysell, he at hame e'en now; it hard a step. 

do so, my good landlady, and mani thanks; and bid my servant step here 

with my portfolio in the meantime. 

in a minut or two colonel manner was quiet seat with his write 

materi befor him. we have the privileg of look over his shoulder 

as he writes, and we will communic it substanc to our readers. 

the letter was address to arthur mervyn, esq., of mervyn hall, 

llanbraithwaite, westmoreland. it contain some account of the writer 

previous journey sinc part with him, and then proceed as follows:-- 

and now, whi will you still upbraid me with my melancholy, mervyn? do you 

think, after the laps of twenty-f years, battles, wounds, 

imprisonment, misfortun of everi description, i can be still the same 

lively, unbroken guy manner who climb skiddaw with you, or shot 

grous upon crossfell? that you, who have remain in the bosom of 

domest happiness, experi littl change, that your step is as light 

and your fanci as full of sunshine, is a bless effect of health and 

temperament, cooper with content and a smooth current down the cours 

of life. but my career has been one of difficulti and doubt and errors. 

from my infanc i have been the sport of accident, and, though the wind 

has often born me into harbour, it has seldom been into that which the 

pilot destined. let me recal to you--but the task must be brief--th odd 

and wayward fate of my youth, and the misfortun of my manhood. 

the former, you will say, had noth veri appalling. all was not for the 

best; but all was tolerable. my father, the eldest son of an ancient but 

reduc family, left me with little, save the name of the head of the 

house, to the protect of his more fortun brothers. they were so fond 

of me that they almost quarrel about me. my uncle, the bishop, would 

have had me in orders, and offer me a living; my uncle, the merchant, 

would have put me into a counting-house, and propos to give me a share 

in the thrive concern of manner and marshall, in lombard street. so, 

between these two stools, or rather these two soft, easy, well-stuf 

chair of divin and commerce, my unfortun person slip down, and 

pitch upon a dragoon saddle. again, the bishop wish me to marri the 

niec and heiress of the dean of lincoln; and my uncle, the alderman, 

propos to me the onli daughter of old sloethorn, the great 

wine-merchant, rich enough to play at span-count with moidor and make 

thread-pap of bank-notes; and somehow i slip my neck out of both 

nooses, and married--poor, poor sophia wellwood. 

you will say, my militari career in india, when i follow my regiment 

there, should have given me some satisfaction; and so it assur has. 

you will remind me also, that if i disappoint the hope of my guardians, 

i did not incur their displeasure; that the bishop, at his death, 

bequeath me his blessing, his manuscript sermons, and a curious 

portfolio contain the head of emin divin of the church of 

england; and that my uncle, sir paul mannering, left me sole heir and 

executor to his larg fortune. yet this availeth me nothing; i told you i 

had that upon my mind which i should carri to my grave with me, a 

perpetu alo in the draught of existence. i will tell you the caus 

more in detail than i had the heart to do while under your hospit 

roof. you will often hear it mentioned, and perhap with differ and 

unfound circumstances. i will therefor speak it out; and then let the 

event itself, and the sentiment of melancholi with which it has impress 

me, never again be subject of discuss between us. 

sophia, as you well know, follow me to india. she was as innoc as 

gay; but, unfortun for us both, as gay as innocent. my own manner 

were part form by studi i had forsaken, and habit of seclus not 

quit consist with my situat as command of a regiment in a 

countri where univers hospit is offer and expect by everi 

settler claim the rank of a gentleman. in a moment of peculiar pressur 

(you know how hard we were sometim run to obtain white face to 

counten our line-of-battle), a young man name brown join our 

regiment as a volunteer, and, find the militari duti more to his fanci 

than commerce, in which he had been engaged, remain with us as a cadet. 

let me do my unhappi victim justice: he behav with such gallantri on 

everi occas that offer that the first vacant commiss was 

consid as his due. i was absent for some week upon a distant 

expedition; when i return i found this young fellow establish quit as 

the friend of the house, and habitu attend of my wife and daughter. 

it was an arrang which displeas me in mani particulars, though no 

object could be made to his manner or character. yet i might have been 

reconcil to his familiar in my family, but for the suggest of 

another. if you read over--what i never dare open--th play of “othello,” 

you will have some idea of what followed--i mean of my motives; my 

actions, thank god! were less reprehensible. there was anoth cadet 

ambiti of the vacant situation. he call my attent to what he led 

me to term coquetri between my wife and this young man. sophia was 

virtuous, but proud of her virtue; and, irrit by my jealousy, she was 

so imprud as to press and encourag an intimaci which she saw i 

disapprov and regard with suspicion. between brown and me there 

exist a sort of intern dislike. he made an effort or two to overcom 

my prejudice; but, prepossess as i was, i place them to a wrong motive. 

feel himself repulsed, and with scorn, he desisted; and as he was 

without famili and friends, he was natur more watch of the 

deport of one who had both. 

it is odd with what tortur i write this letter. i feel inclined, 

nevertheless, to protract the operation, just as if my do so could put 

off the catastroph which has so long embitt my life. but--it must be 

told, and it shall be told briefly. 
