

chapter xiii 

they told me, by the sentenc of the law, 

they had commiss to seiz all thi fortune. 

here stood a ruffian with a horrid face, 

lord it o'er a pile of massi plate, 

tumbl into a heap for public sale; 

there was another, make villain jest 

at thi undoing; he had ta'en possess 

of all thi ancient most domest ornaments. 

otway. 

earli next morn manner mount his hors and, accompani by his 

servant, took the road to ellangowan. he had no need to inquir the way. a 

sale in the countri is a place of public resort and amusement, and peopl 

of various descript stream to it from all quarters. 

after a pleasant ride of about an hour, the old tower of the ruin 

present themselv in the landscape. the thoughts, with what differ 

feel he had lost sight of them so mani year before, throng upon the 

mind of the traveller. the landscap was the same; but how chang the 

feelings, hopes, and view of the spectator! then life and love were new, 

and all the prospect was gild by their rays. and now, disappoint in 

affection, sate with fame and what the world call success, his mind, 

goad by bitter and repent recollection, his best hope was to find a 

retir in which he might nurs the melancholi that was to accompani 

him to his grave. yet whi should an individu mourn over the instabl 

of his hope and the vaniti of his prospects? the ancient chief who 

erect these enorm and massiv tower to be the fortress of their race 

and the seat of their power,--could they have dream the day was to come 

when the last of their descend should be expelled, a ruin wanderer, 

from his possessions! but natur bounti are unaltered. the sun will 

shine as fair on these ruins, whether the properti of a stranger or of a 

sordid and obscur trickster of the abus law, as when the banner of the 

founder first wave upon their battlements. 

these reflect brought manner to the door of the house, which was 

that day open to all. he enter among others, who travers the 

apartments, some to select articl for purchase, other to gratifi their 

curiosity. there is someth melancholi in such a scene, even under the 

most favour circumstances. the confus state of the furniture, 

displac for the conveni of be easili view and carri off by 

the purchasers, is disagre to the eye. those articl which, proper 

and decent arranged, look credit and handsome, have then a paltri 

and wretch appearance; and the apartments, strip of all that render 

them commodi and comfortable, have an aspect of ruin and dilapidation. 

it is disgust also to see the scene of domest societi and seclus 

thrown open to the gaze of the curious and the vulgar, to hear their 

coars specul and brutal jest upon the fashion and furnitur to 

which they are unaccustomed,--a frolicsom humour much cherish by the 

whiski which in scotland is alway put in circul on such occasions. 

all these are ordinari effect of such a scene as ellangowan now 

presented; but the moral feeling, that in this case they indic the 

total ruin of an ancient and honour family, gave them trebl weight 

and poignancy. 

it was some time befor colonel manner could find ani one dispos to 

answer his reiter question concern ellangowan himself. at length 

an old maidservant, who held her apron to her eye as she spoke, told him 

the laird was someth better, and they hope he would be abl to leav 

the hous that day. miss luci expect the chais everi moment, and, as 

the day was fine for the time o'year, they had carri him in his 

easychair up to the green befor the auld castle, to be out of the way of 

this unco spectacle. thither colonel manner went in quest of him, and 

soon came in sight of the littl group, which consist of four persons. 

the ascent was steep, so that he had time to reconnoitr them as he 

advanced, and to consid in what mode he should make his address. 

mr. bertram, paralyt and almost incap of moving, occupi his 

easy-chair, attir in his nightcap and a loos camlet coat, his feet 

wrap in blankets. behind him, with his hand cross on the cane upon 

which he rested, stood domini sampson, whom manner recognis at once. 

time had made no chang upon him, unless that his black coat seem more 

brown, and his gaunt cheek more lank, than when manner last saw him. 

on one side of the old man was a sylph-lik form--a young woman of about 

seventeen, whom the colonel account to be his daughter. she was look 

from time to time anxious toward the avenue, as if expect the 

post-chaise; and between while busi herself in adjust the blanket 

so as to protect her father from the cold, and in answer inquiries, 

which he seem to make with a captious and querul manner. she did not 

trust herself to look toward the place, although the hum of the assembl 

crowd must have drawn her attent in that direction. the fourth person 

of the group was a handsom and genteel young man, who seem to share 

miss bertram anxiety, and her solicitud to sooth and accommod her 

parent. 

this young man was the first who observ colonel mannering, and 

immedi step forward to meet him, as if polit to prevent his 

draw nearer to the distress group. manner instant paus and 

explained. he was, he said, ‘a stranger to whom mr. bertram had former 

shown kind and hospitality; he would not have intrud himself upon 

him at a period of distress, did it not seem to be in some degre a moment 

also of desertion; he wish mere to offer such servic as might be in 

his power to mr. bertram and the young lady. 

he then paus at a littl distanc from the chair. his old acquaint 

gaze at him with lack-lustr eye, that intim no token of 

recognition; the domini seem too deepli sunk in distress even to 

observ his presence. the young man spoke asid with miss bertram, who 

advanc timidly, and thank colonel manner for his goodness; but, 

she said, the tear gush fast into her eyes, her father, she feared, 

was not so much himself as to be abl to rememb him. 

she then retreat toward the chair, accompani by the colonel. 

father, she said, this is mr. mannering, an old friend, come to inquir 

after you. 

he veri heartili welcome, said the old man, rais himself in his 

chair, and attempt a gestur of courtesy, while a gleam of hospit 

satisfact seem to pass over his fade features; but, lucy, my dear, 

let us go down to the house; you should not keep the gentleman here in the 

cold. dominie, take the key of the wine-cooler. mr. a--a--th gentleman 

will sure take someth after his ride. 

manner was unspeak affect by the contrast which his recollect 

made between this recept and that with which he had been greet by the 

same individu when they last met. he could not restrain his tears, and 

his evid emot at onc attain him the confid of the friendless 

young lady. 

alas! she said, this is distress even to a stranger; but it may be 

better for my poor father to be in this way than if he knew and could feel 

all. 

a servant in liveri now came up the path, and spoke in an underton to the 

young gentleman--'mr. charles, my ladi want you yonder sadly, to bid 

for her for the black eboni cabinet; and ladi jean devorgoil is wi her 

an a'; ye maun come away directly. 

tell them you could not find me, tom, or, stay,--say i am look at the 

horses. 

no, no, no, said luci bertram, earnestly; if you would not add to the 

miseri of this miser moment, go to the compani directly. this 

gentleman, i am sure, will see us to the carriage. 

unquestionably, madam, said mannering, your young friend may reli on my 

attention. 

farewell, then, said young hazlewood, and whisper a word in her ear; 

then ran down the steep hastily, as if not trust his resolut at a 

slower pace. 

where charl hazlewood running? said the invalid, who appar was 

accustom to his presenc and attentions; where charl hazlewood 

running? what take him away now? 

he'll return in a littl while, said lucy, gently. 

the sound of voic was now heard from the ruins. the reader may rememb 

there was a communic between the castl and the beach, up which the 

speaker had ascended. 

yes, there a plenti of shell and seawar for manure, as you observe; 

and if one inclin to build a new house, which might inde be necessary, 

there a great deal of good hewn stone about this old dungeon, for the 

devil here-- 

good god! said miss bertram hastili to sampson, 't is that wretch 

glossin voice! if my father see him, it will kill him outright! 

sampson wheel perpendicular round, and move with long stride to 

confront the attorney as he issu from beneath the portal arch of the 

ruin. avoid ye! he said, avoid ye! wouldst thou kill and take 

possession? 

come, come, master domini sampson, answer glossin insolently, if ye 

cannot preach in the pulpit, we'll have no preach here. we go by the 

law, my good friend; we leav the gospel to you. 

the veri mention of this man name had been of late a subject of the most 

violent irrit to the unfortun patient. the sound of his voic now 

produc an instantan effect. mr. bertram start up without 

assist and turn round toward him; the ghastli of his featur 

form a strang contrast with the violenc of his exclamations.--'out of 

my sight, ye viper! ye frozen viper, that i warmed, till ye stung me! art 

thou not afraid that the wall of my father dwell should fall and 

crush thee limb and bone? are ye not afraid the veri lintel of the door 

of ellangowan castl should break open and swallow you up? were ye not 

friendless, houseless, penniless, when i took ye by the hand; and are ye 

not expel me--m and that innoc girl--friendless, houseless, and 

penniless, from the hous that has shelter us and our for a thousand 

years? 

had glossin been alone, he would probabl have slunk off; but the 

conscious that a stranger was present, besid the person who came 

with him (a sort of land-surveyor), determin him to resort to impudence. 

the task, however, was almost too hard even for his 

effrontery--'sir--sir--mr. bertram, sir, you should not blame me, but your 

own imprudence, sir-- 


