

chapter xvi 

our polli is a sad slut, nor heed what we have taught her, 

i wonder ani man aliv will ever rear a daughter, 

for when she drest with care and cost, all tempting, fine, 

and gay, 

as men should serv a cucumber, she fling herself away. 

beggar opera. 

after the death of mr. bertram, manner had set out upon a short tour, 

propos to return to the neighbourhood of ellangowan befor the sale of 

that properti should take place. he went, accordingly, to edinburgh and 

elsewhere, and it was in his return toward the south-western district of 

scotland, in which our scene lies, that, at a post-town about a hundr 

mile from kippletringan, to which he had request his friend, mr. 

mervyn, to address his letters, he receiv one from that gentleman which 

contain rather unpleas intelligence. we have assum alreadi the 

privileg of act a secreti to this gentleman, and therefor shall 

present the reader with an extract from this epistle. 

‘i beg your pardon, my dearest friend, for the pain i have given you in 

forc you to open wound so fester as those your letter refer to. 

i have alway heard, though erron perhaps, that the attent of 

mr. brown were intend for miss mannering. but, howev that were, it 

could not be suppos that in your situat his bold should escap 

notic and chastisement. wise men say that we resign to civil societi our 

natur right of self-def onli on condit that the ordin of 

law should protect us. where the price cannot be paid, the resign 

becom void. for instance, no one suppos that i am not entitl to 

defend my purs and person against a highwayman, as much as if i were a 

wild indian, who own neither law nor magistracy. the question of 

resist or submiss must be determin by my mean and situation. but 

if, arm and equal in force, i submit to injustic and violenc from ani 

man, high or low, i presum it will hard be attribut to religi or 

moral feel in me, or in ani one but a quaker. an aggress on my 

honour seem to me much the same. the insult, howev trifl in itself, 

is one of much deeper consequ to all view in life than ani wrong 

which can be inflict by a depred on the highway, and to redress the 

injur parti is much less in the power of public jurisprudence, or rather 

it is entir beyond it reach. if ani man choos to rob arthur mervyn 

of the content of his purse, suppos the said arthur has not mean of 

defence, or the skill and courag to use them, the assiz at lancast or 

carlisl will do him justic by tuck up the robber; yet who will say i 

am bound to wait for this justice, and submit to be plunder in the 

first instance, if i have myself the mean and spirit to protect my own 

property? but if an affront is offer to me, submiss under which is to 

tarnish my charact for ever with men of honour, and for which the twelv 

judg of england, with the chancellor to boot, can afford me no redress, 

by what rule of law or reason am i to be deter from protect what 

ought to be, and is, so infinit dearer to everi man of honour than his 

whole fortune? of the religi view of the matter i shall say nothing, 

until i find a reverend divin who shall condemn self-def in the 

articl of life and property. if it proprieti in that case be general 

admitted, i suppos littl distinct can be drawn between defenc of 

person and good and protect of reputation. that the latter is liabl 

to be assail by person of a differ rank in life, untaint perhap 

in morals, and fair in character, cannot affect my legal right of 

self-defence. i may be sorri that circumst have engag me in 

person strife with such an individual; but i should feel the same sorrow 

for a generous enemi who fell under my sword in a nation quarrel. i 

shall leav the question with the casuists, however; onli observing, that 

what i have written will not avail either the profess duellist or him 

who is the aggressor in a disput of honour. i onli presum to exculp 

him who is drag into the field by such an offenc as, submit to in 

patience, would forfeit for ever his rank and estim in society. 

‘i am sorri you have thought of settl in scotland, and yet glad that 

you will still be at no immeasur distance, and that the latitud is 

all in our favour. to move to westmoreland from devonshir might make an 

east-indian shudder; but to come to us from galloway or dumfries-shir is 

a step, though a short one, nearer the sun. besides, if, as i suspect, the 

estat in view be connect with the old haunt castl in which you 

play the astrolog in your northern tour some twenti year since, i 

have heard you too often describ the scene with comic unction to hope you 

will be deter from make the purchase. i trust, however, the 

hospit gossip laird has not run himself upon the shallows, and that 

his chaplain, whom you so often made us laugh at, is still in rerum 

natura. 

and here, dear mannering, i wish i could stop, for i have incred pain 

in tell the rest of my story; although i am sure i can warn you against 

ani intent improprieti on the part of my temporari ward, julia 

mannering. but i must still earn my colleg nicknam of downright 

dunstable. in one word, then, here is the matter. 

your daughter has much of the romant turn of your disposition, with a 

littl of that love of admir which all pretti women share less or 

more. she will besides, apparently, be your heiress; a trifl 

circumst to those who view julia with my eyes, but a prevail bait 

to the specious, artful, and worthless. you know how i have jest with 

her about her soft melancholy, and lone walk at morn befor ani one 

is up, and in the moonlight when all should be gone to bed, or set down to 

cards, which is the same thing. the incid which follow may not be 

beyond the bound of a joke, but i had rather the jest upon it came from 

you than me. 

two or three time dure the last fortnight i heard, at a late hour in 

the night or veri earli in the morning, a flageolet play the littl hindu 

tune to which your daughter is so partial. i thought for some time that 

some tune domestic, whose tast for music was laid under constraint 

dure the day, chose that silent hour to imit the strain which he had 

caught up by the ear dure his attend in the drawing-room. but last 

night i sat late in my study, which is immedi under miss manner 

apartment, and to my surpris i not onli heard the flageolet distinctly, 

but satisfi myself that it came from the lake under the window. curious 

to know who serenad us at that unusu hour, i stole soft to the 

window of my apartment. but there were other watcher than me. you may 

remember, miss manner prefer that apart on account of a balconi 

which open from her window upon the lake. well, sir, i heard the sash of 

her window thrown up, the shutter opened, and her own voic in 

convers with some person who answer from below. this is not “much 

ado about nothing”; i could not be mistaken in her voice, and such tones, 

so soft, so insinuating; and, to say the truth, the accent from below 

were in passion tenderest cadenc too,--but of the sens i can say 

nothing. i rais the sash of my own window that i might hear someth 

more than the mere murmur of this spanish rendezvous; but, though i use 

everi precaution, the nois alarm the speakers; down slid the young 

ladi casement, and the shutter were bar in an instant. the dash of a 

pair of oar in the water announc the retreat of the male person of the 

dialogue. indeed, i saw his boat, which he row with great swift and 

dexterity, fli across the lake like a twelve-oar barge. next morn i 

examin some of my domestics, as if by accident, and i found the 

gamekeeper, when make his rounds, had twice seen that boat beneath the 

house, with a singl person, and had heard the flageolet. i did not care 

to press ani farther questions, for fear of implic julia in the 

opinion of those of whom they might be asked. next morning, at breakfast, 

i drop a casual hint about the serenad of the even before, and i 

promis you miss manner look red and pale alternately. i immedi 

gave the circumst such a turn as might lead her to suppos that my 

observ was mere casual. i have sinc caus a watch-light to be 

burnt in my library, and have left the shutter open, to deter the 

approach of our nocturn guest; and i have state the sever of 

approach winter, and the raw of the fogs, as an object to 

solitari walks. miss manner acquiesc with a passiv which is no 

part of her character, and which, to tell you the plain truth, is a 

featur about the busi which i like least of all. julia has too much 

of her own dear papa disposit to be curb in ani of her humours, 

were there not some littl lurk conscious that it may be as prudent 

to avoid debate. 

now my stori is told, and you will judg what you ought to do. i have not 

mention the matter to my good woman, who, a faith secretari to her 

sex foibles, would certain remonstr against your be made 

acquaint with these particulars, and might, instead, take it into her 

head to exercis her own eloqu on miss mannering; a faculti which, 

howev power when direct against me, it legitim object, might, i 

fear, do more harm than good in the case supposed. perhap even you 

yourself will find it most prudent to act without remonstrating, or 

appear to be awar of this littl anecdote. julia is veri like a 

certain friend of mine; she has a quick and live imagination, and keen 

feelings, which are apt to exagger both the good and evil they find in 

life. she is a charm girl, however, as generous and spirit as she is 

lovely. i paid her the kiss you sent her with all my heart, and she rap 

my ringer for my reward with all hers. pray return as soon as you can. 

meantim reli upon the care of, your faithfully, arthur mervyn. 

p.s.--you will natur wish to know if i have the least guess 

concern the person of the serenader. in truth, i have none. there is no 

young gentleman of these parts, who might be in rank or fortun a match 

for miss julia, that i think at all like to play such a character. but 

on the other side of the lake, near opposit to mervyn hall, is a d--d 

cake-house, the resort of walk gentlemen of all descriptions--poets, 

players, painters, musicians--who come to rave, and recite, and madden 

about this picturesqu land of ours. it is pay some penalti for it 

beauties, that they are the mean of draw this swarm of coxcomb 

together. but were julia my daughter, it is one of those sort of fellow 

that i should fear on her account. she is generous and romantic, and 

write six sheet a week to a femal correspondent; and it a sad thing 

to lack a subject in such a case, either for exercis of the feel or 

of the pen. adieu, onc more. were i to treat this matter more serious 

than i have done, i should do injustic to your feelings; were i 

altogeth to overlook it, i should discredit my own. 

the consequ of this letter was, that, have first despatch the 

faithless messeng with the necessari power to mr. mac-morlan for 

purchas the estat of ellangowan, colonel manner turn his hors 

head in a more souther direction, and neither stint nor staid until 

he arriv at the mansion of his friend mr. mervyn, upon the bank of one 

of the lake of westmoreland. 
