

chapter xvii 

heaven first, in it mercy, taught mortal their letters, 

for ladi in limbo, and lover in fetters, 

or some author, who, place his person befor ye, 

ungal leav them to write their own story. 

pope, imitated. 

when manner return to england, his first object had been to place his 

daughter in a seminari for femal education, of establish character. 

not, however, find her progress in the accomplish which he wish 

her to acquir so rapid as his impati expected, he had withdrawn miss 

manner from the school at the end of the first quarter. so she had onli 

time to form an etern friendship with miss matilda marchmont, a young 

ladi about her own age, which was near eighteen. to her faith eye 

were address those formid quir which issu forth from mervyn hall 

on the wing of the post while miss manner was a guest there. the 

perus of a few short extract from these may be necessari to render our 

stori intelligible. 

first extract 

alas! my dearest matilda, what a tale is mine to tell! misfortun from 

the cradl has set her seal upon your unhappi friend. that we should be 

sever for so slight a cause--an ungrammat phrase in my italian 

exercise, and three fals note in one of paisiello sonatas! but it is a 

part of my father character, of whom it is imposs to say whether i 

love, admire, or fear him the most. his success in life and in war, his 

habit of make everi obstacl yield befor the energi of his exertions, 

even where they seem insurmountable--al these have given a hasti and 

peremptori cast to his character, which can neither endur contradict 

nor make allow for deficiencies. then he is himself so veri 

accomplished. do you know, there was a murmur, half confirm too by some 

mysteri word which drop from my poor mother, that he possess 

other sciences, now lost to the world, which enabl the possessor to 

summon up befor him the dark and shadowi form of futur events! doe not 

the veri idea of such a power, or even of the high talent and command 

intellect which the world may mistak for it,--do it not, dear matilda, 

throw a mysteri grandeur about it possessor? you will call this 

romantic; but consid i was born in the land of talisman and spell, and 

my childhood lull by tale which you can onli enjoy through the gauzi 

fripperi of a french translation. o, matilda, i wish you could have seen 

the duski visag of my indian attendants, bend in earnest devot 

round the magic narrative, that flowed, half poetry, half prose, from the 

lip of the tale-teller! no wonder that european fiction sound cold and 

meagre, after the wonder effect which i have seen the romanc of the 

east produc upon their hearers. 

second extract 

you are possessed, my dear matilda, of my bosom-secret, in those 

sentiment with which i regard brown. i will not say his memory; i am 

convinc he lives, and is faithful. his address to me were countenanc 

by my deceas parent, imprud countenanc perhaps, consid the 

prejudic of my father in favour of birth and rank. but i, then almost a 

girl, could not be expect sure to be wiser than her under whose charg 

natur had place me. my father, constant engag in militari duty, i 

saw but at rare intervals, and was taught to look up to him with more awe 

than confidence. would to heaven it had been otherwise! it might have been 

better for us all at this day! 

third extract 

you ask me whi i do not make known to my father that brown yet lives, at 

least that he surviv the wound he receiv in that unhappi duel, and had 

written to my mother express his entir convalescence, and his hope of 

speedili escap from captivity. a soldier, that “in the trade of war has 

oft slain men,” feel probabl no uneasi at reflect upon the 

suppos catastroph which almost turn me into stone. and should i show 

him that letter, doe it not follow that brown, aliv and maintain with 

pertinac the pretens to the affect of your poor friend for 

which my father former sought his life, would be a more formid 

disturb of colonel manner peac of mind than in his suppos grave? 

if he escap from the hand of these marauders, i am convinc he will 

soon be in england, and it will be then time to consid how his exist 

is to be disclos to my father. but if, alas! my earnest and confid 

hope should betray me, what would it avail to tear open a mysteri fraught 

with so mani pain recollections? my dear mother had such dread of it 

be known, that i think she even suffer my father to suspect that 

brown attent were direct toward herself, rather than permit him 

to discov their real object; and o, matilda, whatev respect i owe to 

the memori of a deceas parent, let me do justic to a live one. i 

cannot but condemn the dubious polici which she adopted, as unjust to my 

father, and high peril to herself and me. but peac be with her 

ashes! her action were guid by the heart rather than the head; and 

shall her daughter, who inherit all her weakness, be the first to 

withdraw the veil from her defects? 

fourth extract mervyn hall. 

if india be the land of magic, this, my dearest matilda, is the countri 

of romance. the sceneri is such as natur bring togeth in her sublimest 

moods-sound cataracts--hil which rear their scath head to the 

sky--lak that, wind up the shadowi valleys, lead at everi turn to yet 

more romant recesses--rock which catch the cloud of heaven. all the 

wild of salvat here, and there the fairi scene of claude. i am 

happi too in find at least one object upon which my father can share my 

enthusiasm. an admir of nature, both as an artist and a poet, i have 

experienc the utmost pleasur from the observ by which he explain 

the charact and the effect of these brilliant specimen of her power. i 

wish he would settl in this enchant land. but his view lie still 

farther north, and he is at present absent on a tour in scotland, looking, 

i believe, for some purchas of land which may suit him as a residence. he 

is partial, from earli recollections, to that country. so, my dearest 

matilda, i must be yet farther remov from you befor i am establish in 

a home. and o how delight shall i be when i can say, come, matilda, and 

be the guest of your faith julia! 

‘i am at present the inmat of mr. and mrs. mervyn, old friend of my 

father. the latter is precis a good sort of woman, ladylik and 

housewifely; but for accomplish or fancy--good lack, my dearest 

matilda, your friend might as well seek sympathi from mrs. teach'em;--you 

see i have not forgot school nicknames. mervyn is a different--quit a 

differ be from my father, yet he amus and endur me. he is fat 

and good-natured, gift with strong shrewd sens and some power of 

humour; but have been handsome, i suppose, in his youth, has still some 

pretens to be a beau garcon, as well as an enthusiast agriculturist. 

i delight to make him scrambl to the top of emin and to the foot of 

waterfalls, and am oblig in turn to admir his turnips, his lucerne, and 

his timothi grass. he think me, i fancy, a simpl romant miss, with 

some--th word will be out--beauti and some good-nature; and i hold that 

the gentleman has good tast for the femal outside, and do not expect he 

should comprehend my sentiment farther. so he rallies, hands, and hobbl 

(for the dear creatur has got the gout too), and tell old stori of 

high life, of which he has seen a great deal; and i listen, and smile, and 

look as pretty, as pleasant, and as simpl as i can, and we do veri well. 

but, alas! my dearest matilda, how would time pass away, even in this 

paradis of romance, tenant as it is by a pair assort so ill with the 

scene around them, were it not for your fidel in repli to my 

uninterest details? pray do not fail to write three time a week at 

least; you can be at no loss what to say. 

fifth extract 

how shall i communic what i have now to tell! my hand and heart still 

flutter so much, that the task of write is almost impossible! did i not 

say that he lived? did i not say i would not despair? how could you 

suggest, my dear matilda, that my feelings, consid i had part from 

him so young, rather aros from the warmth of my imagin than of my 

heart? o i was sure that they were genuine, deceit as the dictat of 

our bosom so frequent are. but to my tale--let it be, my friend, the 

most sacred, as it is the most sincere, pledg of our friendship. 

our hour here are early--earli than my heart, with it load of care, 

can compos itself to rest. i therefor usual take a book for an hour or 

two after retir to my own room, which i think i have told you open to 

a small balcony, look down upon that beauti lake of which i 

attempt to give you a slight sketch. mervyn hall, be part an 

ancient building, and construct with a view to defence, is situat on 

the verg of the lake. a stone drop from the project balconi plung 

into water deep enough to float a skiff. i had left my window part 

unbarred, that, befor i went to bed, i might, accord to my custom, 

look out and see the moonlight shine upon the lake. i was deepli engag 

with that beauti scene in the “merchant of venice” where two lovers, 

describ the still of a summer night, enhanc on each other it 

charms, and was lost in the associ of stori and of feel which it 

awakens, when i heard upon the lake the sound of a flageolet. i have told 

you it was brown favourit instrument. who could touch it in a night 

which, though still and serene, was too cold, and too late in the year, to 

invit forth ani wander for mere pleasure? i drew yet nearer the window, 

and hearken with breathless attention; the sound paus a space, were 

then resumed, paus again, and again reach my ear, ever come nearer 

and nearer. at length i distinguish plain that littl hindu air which 

you call my favourite. i have told you by whom it was taught me; the 

instrument, the tones, were his own! was it earth music, or note 

pass on the wind, to warn me of his death? 

it was some time ere i could summon courag to step on the balcony; 

noth could have embolden me to do so but the strong convict of my 

mind that he was still alive, and that we should again meet; but that 

convict did embolden me, and i ventured, though with a throb heart. 

there was a small skiff with a singl person. o, matilda, it was himself! 

i knew his appear after so long an absence, and through the shadow of 

the night, as perfect as if we had part yesterday, and met again in 

the broad sunshine! he guid his boat under the balcony, and spoke to me; 

i hard knew what he said, or what i replied. indeed, i could scarc 

speak for weeping, but they were joy tears. we were disturb by the 

bark of a dog at some distance, and parted, but not befor he had 

conjur me to prepar to meet him at the same place and hour this 

evening. 

but where and to what is all this tending? can i answer this question? i 

cannot. heaven, that save him from death and deliv him from 

captivity, that save my father, too, from shed the blood of one who 

would not have blemish a hair of his head, that heaven must guid me out 

of this labyrinth. enough for me the firm resolut that matilda shall 

not blush for her friend, my father for his daughter, nor my lover for her 

on whom he has fix his affection. 
