

chapter xix 

which slope hill around inclose, 

where mani a beech and brown oak grow 

beneath whose dark and branch bower 

it tide a far-fam'd river pours, 

by natur beauti taught to please, 

sweet tusculan of rural easel 

warton. 

woodbourne, the habit which mannering, by mr. mac-morlan mediation, 

had hire for a season, was a larg comfort mansion, snug situat 

beneath a hill cover with wood, which shroud the hous upon the north 

and east; the front look upon a littl lawn border by a grove of old 

trees; beyond were some arabl fields, extend down to the river, which 

was seen from the window of the house. a tolerable, though old-fashion 

garden, a well-stock dove-cot, and the possess of ani quantiti of 

ground which the conveni of the famili might require, render the 

place in everi respect suitable, as the advertis have it, for the 

accommod of a genteel family. 

here, then, manner resolved, for some time at least, to set up the 

staff of his rest. though an east-indian, he was not partial to an 

ostentati display of wealth. in fact, he was too proud a man to be a 

vain one. he resolved, therefore, to place himself upon the foot of a 

countri gentleman of easi fortune, without assuming, or permit his 

household to assume, ani of the fast which then was consid as 

characterist of a nabob. 

he had still his eye upon the purchas of ellangowan, which mac-morlan 

conceiv mr. glossin would be compel to part with, as some of the 

creditor disput his titl to retain so larg a part of the 

purchase-money in his own hands, and his power to pay it was much 

questioned. in that case mac-morlan was assur he would readili give up 

his bargain, if tempt with someth abov the price which he had 

stipul to pay. it may seem strang that manner was so much attach 

to a spot which he had onli seen once, and that for a short time, in earli 

life. but the circumst which pass there had laid a strong hold on 

his imagination. there seem to be a fate which conjoin the remark 

passag of his own famili histori with those of the inhabit of 

ellangowan, and he felt a mysteri desir to call the terrac his own 

from which he had read in the book of heaven a fortun strang 

accomplish in the person of the infant heir of that family, and 

correspond so close with one which had been strike fulfil in 

his own. besides, when onc this thought had got possess of his 

imagination, he could not, without great reluctance, brook the idea of his 

plan be defeated, and by a fellow like glossin. so pride came to the 

aid of fancy, and both combin to fortifi his resolut to buy the 

estat if possible. 

let us do manner justice. a desir to serv the distress had also it 

share in determin him. he had consid the advantag which julia 

might receiv from the compani of luci bertram, whose genuin prudenc and 

good sens could so sure be reli upon. this idea had becom much 

stronger sinc mac-morlan had confid to him, under the solemn seal of 

secrecy, the whole of her conduct toward young hazlewood. to propos to 

her to becom an inmat in his family, if distant from the scene of her 

youth and the few whom she call friends, would have been less delicate; 

but at woodbourn she might without difficulti be induc to becom the 

visitor of a season, without be depress into the situat of an 

humbl companion. luci bertram, with some hesitation, accept the 

invit to resid a few week with miss mannering. she felt too well 

that, howev the colonel delicaci might disguis the truth, his 

princip motiv was a generous desir to afford her his counten and 

protection, which his high connexions, and higher character, were like 

to render influenti in the neighbourhood. 

about the same time the orphan girl receiv a letter from mrs. bertram, 

the relat to whom she had written, as cold and comfortless as could 

well be imagined. it inclosed, indeed, a small sum of money, but strong 

recommend economy, and that miss bertram should board herself in some 

quiet family, either at kippletringan or in the neighbourhood, assur 

her that, though her own incom was veri scanty, she would not see her 

kinswoman want. miss bertram shed some natur tear over this 

cold-heart epistle; for in her mother time this good ladi had been a 

guest at ellangowan for near three years, and it was onli upon 

succeed to a properti of about l400 a year that she had taken farewel 

of that hospit mansion, which otherwis might have had the honour of 

shelter her until the death of it owner. luci was strong inclin to 

return the paltri donation, which, after some struggl with avarice, 

pride had extort from the old lady. but on consider she content 

herself with write that she accept it as a loan, which, she hope in a 

short time to repay, and consult her relat upon the invit she 

had receiv from colonel and miss mannering. this time the answer came in 

cours of post, so fear was mrs. bertram that some frivol delicacy, 

or nonsense, as she term it, might induc her cousin to reject such a 

promis offer, and therebi at the same time to leav herself still a 

burden upon her relations. lucy, therefore, had no alternative, unless she 

prefer continu a burden upon the worthi mac-morlans, who were too 

liber to be rich. those kinsfolk who former request the favour of 

her compani had of late either silently, or with express of resent 

that she should have prefer mac-morlan invit to theirs, 

gradual withdrawn their notice. 

the fate of domini sampson would have been deplor had it depend 

upon ani one except mannering, who was an admir of originality, for a 

separ from luci bertram would have certain broken his heart. 

mac-morlan had given a full account of his proceed toward the 

daughter of his patron. the answer was a request from manner to know 

whether the domini still possess that admir virtu of taciturn 

by which he was so notabl distinguish at ellangowan. mac-morlan repli 

in the affirmative. let mr. sampson know, said the colonel next 

letter, that i shall want his assist to catalogu and put in order 

the librari of my uncle, the bishop, which i have order to be sent down 

by sea. i shall also want him to copi and arrang some papers. fix his 

salari at what you think befitting. let the poor man be proper dressed, 

and accompani his young ladi to woodbourne. 

honest mac-morlan receiv this mandat with great joy, but ponder much 

upon execut that part of it which relat to newli attir the worthi 

dominie. he look at him with a scrutinis eye, and it was but too 

plain that his present garment were daili wax more deplorable. to give 

him money, and bid him go and furnish himself, would be onli give him 

the mean of make himself ridiculous; for when such a rare event arriv 

to mr. sampson as the purchas of new garments, the addit which he 

made to his wardrob by the guidanc of his own tast usual brought all 

the boy of the villag after him for mani days. on the other hand, to 

bring a tailor to measur him, and send home his clothes, as for a 

school-boy, would probabl give offence. at length mac-morlan resolv to 

consult miss bertram, and request her interference. she assur him that, 

though she could not pretend to superintend a gentleman wardrobe, 

noth was more easi than to arrang the dominie's. 

at ellangowan, she said, whenev my poor father thought ani part of 

the domini dress want renewal, a servant was direct to enter his 

room by night, for he sleep as fast as a dormouse, carri off the old 

vestment, and leav the new one; nor could ani one observ that the 

domini exhibit the least conscious of the chang put upon him on 

such occasions. 

mac-morlan, in conform with miss bertram advice, procur a skil 

artist, who, on look at the domini attentively, undertook to make for 

him two suit of clothes, one black and one raven-grey, and even engag 

that they should fit him--a well at least (so the tailor qualifi his 

enterprise) as a man of such an out-of-the-way build could be fit by 

mere human needl and shears. when this fashion had accomplish his 

task, and the dress were brought home, mac-morlan, judici resolv 

to accomplish his purpos by degrees, withdrew that even an import 

part of his dress, and substitut the new articl of raiment in it 

stead. perceiv that this pass total without notice, he next 

ventur on the waistcoat, and last on the coat. when fulli 

metamorphosed, and array for the first time in his life in a decent 

dress, they did observ that the domini seem to have some indistinct 

and embarrass conscious that a chang had taken place on his 

outward man. whenev they observ this dubious express gather upon 

his countenance, accompani with a glanc that fix now upon the sleev 

of his coat, now upon the knee of his breeches, where he probabl miss 

some antiqu patch and darning, which, be execut with blue thread 

upon a black ground, had somewhat the effect of embroidery, they alway 

took care to turn his attent into some other channel, until his 

garments, by the aid of use, cleav to their mould. the onli remark he 

was ever known to make on the subject was, that the air of a town like 

kippletringan seem favour unto wear apparel, for he thought his 

coat look almost as new as the first day he put it on, which was when he 

went to stand trial for his licens as a preacher. 

when the domini first heard the liber propos of colonel mannering, he 

turn a jealous and doubt glanc toward miss bertram, as if he 

suspect that the project involv their separation; but when mr. 

mac-morlan hasten to explain that she would be a guest at woodbourn for 

some time, he rub his huge hand together, and burst into a portent 

sort of chuckle, like that of the afrit in the tale of the caliph 

vathek. after this unusu explos of satisfaction, he remain quit 

passiv in all the rest of the transaction. 
