the project gutenberg ebook of everybodi book of luck, by anonym 

this ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and most 

other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 

whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term of 

the project gutenberg licens includ with this ebook or onlin at 

www.gutenberg.org. if you are not locat in the unit states, you'll have 

to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use this ebook. 

title: everybodi book of luck 

author: anonym 

releas date: juli 10, 2017 [ebook #55082] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: ascii 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook everybodi book of luck *** 

produc by chris curnow, christoph wright, and the 

onlin distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 

(this file was produc from imag generous made 

avail by the internet archive) 

everybodi 

bookof 

luck 

whitman publish compani 

racine, wis. poughkeepsie, n. y. 

print in u.s.a. 

content 

chap. 



page. 

i. 

thing that bring you good luck and bad luck 

3 

ii. 

have you a talisman? 

6 

iii. 

hint on fortunetel 

12 

iv. 

palmistry—what may be learn from hand 

13 

v. 

your handwrit reveal your charact 

32 

vi. 

your face is your fortun 

40 

vii. 

what do your bump mean? 

46 

viii. 

how astrolog decid your destini 

49 

ix. 

your child occup decid by the star 

55 

x. 

what are your hobbies? 

59 

xi. 

what is your lucki number? 

60 

xii. 

your lucki color 

65 

xiii. 

which is your lucki stone? 

67 

xiv. 

dreams—what they mean 

72 

xv. 

teacup fortunetel 

83 

xvi. 

lucki and unlucki day 

91 

xvii. 

the luck of flower 

99 

xviii. 

superstit regard anim 

104 

xix. 

crystal gaze 

107 

xx. 

the moon and the luck it bring 

111 

xxi. 

fortunetel by mean of play card 

113 

xxii. 

fortunetel game 

137 

xxiii. 

the luck of wed and marriag 

151 

xxiv. 

folklor and superstit of the month 

159 

xxv. 

a calendar for lover 

173 

xxvi. 

make use mascot 

191 

[3] 

thing that bring you good luck 

and bad luck 

ask a dozen peopl whether they have ani superstitions, and the major 

will tell you, without hesitation, that they have not the slightest 

belief in such things. if the truth is told there are veri few of us who do not 

cherish some littl weak in this direction. one person may believ in 

a number of superstitions; anoth has, perhaps, onli a few that are observed; 

but he or she that has none at all is a remark rare individual. 

as a matter of fact, most superstit are base on reason and sound 

common sense, and the man or woman who pay heed to them is act 

intelligently, whether he or she know it or not. take, for instance, the 

belief that it is unlucki to walk under a ladder. true, the old assert is 

that it is unlucki to do so becaus jesus christ was taken down from the 

cross by mean of a ladder. but the more practic reason is that painter 

and other men on ladder are veri like to drop thing and, if you happen 

to be pass at the time, the paintpot or the tool will fall on you. 

of course, the reason for all superstit are not so evid as this one 

about walk under a ladder: nevertheless, there is a germ of reason in them 

all, whether or not we know the reason. thus, the man or woman who 

observ the common superstit of everyday life is act wisely. not 

onli will he or she avoid a good deal of trouble, but his action will 

provid him with a sens of well-being, and the effect it will have on his 

mind, the psycholog effect as it is called, is all to the good. 

it is not propos to explain whi this or that superstit is worthi of 

be observed; in mani cases, the reason is obscure; but here we will give 

some of the belief which are current at the present time. 

first of all, you should never pass anybodi on the stair of a privat house, 

and, while talk of stairs, it may be said that mani peopl believ that, 

for someon to fall up a step, is a sign of an approach wedding. 

never light three cigarett with the same match unless you are prepar 

for a spell of ill-fortune. this superstit gain currenc dure the war, 

probabl becaus a match held long enough to light three cigarett would 

give the enemi a clue to your position, especi at night-time. 

if the cord of a pictur frame snap and the pictur fall to the ground, 

it is an omen that somebodi is go to die. if the pictur is a portrait 

of a live person, then that person life is the one like to be terminated. 

this omen may be consid a remark silli one, with not a shred of 

sens to recommend it. yet how mani peopl can point to instanc when 

the propheci has come true! 

of salt, there are sever omens. the chief one tell you not to help anybodi 

to salt; in other words, it is unwis to put some on a person plate. 

help them to salt is help them to sorrow. anoth superstit says[4] 

that if you spill salt you will be unlucki unless you throw a pinch of it 

over your left shoulder. 

to break a mirror is known by all as a serious matter. the reason whi 

it is unlucky, we are told, doubtless find it origin in a mere associ 

of ideas. the mirror be broken, the imag of the person look into 

it is destroyed: therefore, bad luck in some form must be the fate of the 

careless one. what exact is the penalti one must pay for break a 

mirror is not definite. some peopl speak of seven year of misfortune, 

while other claim that it mean seven year of celibacy. 

to take certain thing into the hous is the height of folly, if you believ 

in superstitions. may or hawthorn blossom is one, though the berri of 

this flower seem to have no ill-potency. peacock feather are another. 

somewhat similar is the content that it is veri unlucki to open an 

umbrella indoors. 

while sit at the meal-table, there are sever thing that must not be 

done. help a friend to salt has been alreadi mentioned, but you must not 

allow the knive or fork to becom crossed. quarrel with your friend will 

result if you do. of course, you must not sit down, thirteen of you, around 

the table. as is well known, this belief has it origin in the last supper, 

when our lord sat at meat with his twelv apostles. on the other hand, 

should you tast a fruit for the first time in that season, you have onli to 

frame a wish and it will be granted. much the same appli to mince-pies. 

you will be award with a whole happi month for each pie that you eat at 

christmas-tim which is made in a differ house. of course, it is high 

unwis for two peopl to pour tea out of the same pot at the same meal. 

to give a friend an edg tool is sure to cut the friendship, whether it be 

a knife, a pair of scissors, a razor or a chisel. when such a gift is to be 

made, the usual plan is to sell it to your friend for a penny. 

you should never put a shoe on a table, and, to see a pin lie on the 

floor and leav it there, is an omen that you will want befor you die. as 

the jingl runs: 

see a pin and let it lie, you'r sure to want befor you die. 

see a pin and pick it up, then you'r sure to have good luck. 

elsewhere, a good deal is said about dreams. here it will be suffici 

to mention one or two item of interest. it is decid unlucki to dream 

of a baby, yet to dream of a funer is lucky. the follow is worth bear 

in mind: 

friday dream and saturday told; 

sure to come true, if ever so old. 

and here it will be appropri to recal the fact that it is an unwis 

thing to get out of bed on the wrong side. the devil will be with you all the 

day, if you do. 

you should avoid look at the new moon through glass; but if you have 

a wish that you want fulfilled, you have onli to count seven star on seven 

night in succession. let it be said, however, that to count seven star for 

this space of time is not as simpl as it appears. 

[5] 

it is unlucki to treasur lock of peopl hair, and, should you drop a 

glove, it is to your advantag if someon els pick it up for you. if the 

fire refus to light proper in the morning, anticip a whole day with 

the devil. 

everybodi know that one of the luckiest thing that can be done is to 

pick up a horse-shoe. but it is not general known that the more nail left 

in it, the better. nor is it suffici well recogn that a shoe, hung up, 

should have the tip point upwards. if they are turn down, the luck 

will run out of them. 

naturally, you will never start anyth fresh on a friday, and you 

will not cut your fingernail on a sunday. regard fingernails, a poet, 

of sorts, has said: 

cut them on monday, you cut them for news. 

cut them on tuesday, a new pair of shoes. 

cut them on wednesday, you cut them for health. 

cut them on thursday, you cut them for wealth. 

cut them on friday, a sweetheart you'll know. 

cut them on saturday, a journey you'll go. 

cut them on sunday, you cut them for evil: 

for all the next week, you'll be rule by the devil. 

of course, bad luck has not a monopoli on your superstitions, for good 

luck has someth to say also. to see a piebald hors is fortunate; to find 

white heather, four-leav clover or four-leav shamrock is even more fortunate. 

to open a pea-pod and find ten pea in it is particular lucky. 

for a black cat to come into your hous is worth much. to come across a 

nickel with a hole in it is not without it merits, but the best thing of 

all is to put on some articl of cloth insid out, and to wear it all day 

long, without be awar of it until bed-time. 

[6] 
