

have you a talisman? 

"a person who find a four-leav clover, and believ it is a harbing 

of someth good, has adopt the right attitude, for he keep a keen 

look-out for that particular good and hold out both hand for it. seldom 

is he disappointed, for he has unconsci set go the mental machineri 

which bring his wish within reach. had he not found the clover and 

had gone along life highway unexpect of anyth good, he would never 

have discov this pleasant happening. and therein lie the true psycholog 

of luck, which seem too simpl to be true, but then it simplic 

is realli the sign-manu of it verity." 

this quotat from the write of a well-known author goe direct to 

the point about talismans. if you adopt a talisman and put your faith in 

it, you immedi prepar your mind for receiv an abund of good 

fortune. reject all talisman and argu that there is no such thing as luck, 

and you straightway set go the mental machineri which look on the 

dark side of thing and which miss everi slice of luck that come along. 

therefore, we say, with emphasis, take to yourself a talisman, a mascot, a 

charm—cal it what you will—and you will never regret it. 

of talismans, there are countless varieties; some are known the world 

over, other are the particular choic of individuals. they rang from the[7] 

amulet and scarab of the ancient to the golliwog and cruditi of the 

ultra-moderns. your choic may roam between these two extremes, but 

whatev your choice, it must be set with the seal of your faith. 

in order to assist you in pick out a talisman for yourself, we append 

the follow account of those exampl which are favor most:— 

the horse-shoe.—no symbol is a greater favorit than the horse-shoe. 

there are mani legend regard it origin, but the most common 

accept concern the well-known visit of his satan majesti to the shoe-smith. 

as a consequence, the devil evinc a wholesom dread of horseshoes, 

and would not go near a hous or person possess one. it is more 

likely, however, that the horse-sho was accept as a symbol of luck becaus 

it was a commonplac object veri near the same shape as the metal crescent 

worn by the roman when they want to be fortunate. these crescent 

were alway carri with the horn turn up, and, if a horse-sho is to bring 

good luck, it, too, must be place with the prong uppermost. the reason 

for the prong be so turn depend on a belief that misfortun alway 

travel in circles, but when it reach the tip of a horse-shoe, it is baffled, 

unless all the luck has alreadi run out of the tip through them be turn 

downwards. 

of course, an old, worn shoe is more lucki than a new one, and it is 

a recogn fact that the more nail found in it the luckier will be the 

finder. 

the scarab.—thi devic is account veri lucki or veri unlucky, 

accord to the disposit of the wearer. the symbol repres the[8] 

scarab beetl with it wing outspread or with them closed. such charm 

are made to-day in larg number for sale in egypt, but those who trade in 

them usual claim that each particular specimen has been in the famili 

sinc biblic times. as a rule, the devic is made in a rough kind of bluish 

porcelain and is carved, in intaglio, with divin figures. the egyptian use 

to make up the scarab as a neck pendant or as a littl ornament for 

place in the coffin of the dead. it mission was to scare away the evil one. 

no. 2.—an egyptian scarab, such as were use as talismen. two form are shown, 

one with the pector wing outspread; the other, with wing closed. 

the tet.—thi symbol was shape somewhat like a mallet, and was 

alway worn with the head uppermost and the handl hang down. it 

was made in porcelain or stone, and was often color gaudily. the egyptian 

were the first to find efficaci in this charm, and they wore it suspend 

around the neck to ward off attack from visibl and invis enemies. 

thus, it was a protect against evil in ani form; it was also suppos to 

provid the wearer with strength and endurance. the tet has been much 

forgotten of late years, but there are adher who valu it abov the horsesho 

and almost ani other charm. 

no. 3.—the talisman on the left is the tet; on the right, the arrow-head. 

the arrow-head.—th earli briton spent a great deal of their 

time in take suitabl flint and shape them into the form of triangles. 

these were call arrow-heads, and when the two side edg had been 

sharpen they were fix into stick and use as weapon or tools. out 

of this use grew the idea that arrow-head were potent charm in provid 

bodili protect against enemi forc or the usual illnesses. accordingly, 

peopl began to wear them as neck ornament and, for this purpose, decor 

arrow-head were made. ever sinc then, they have been cherish 

for their power in ward off attacks, and a superstit still exist which 

claim that if one of these arrow-head is dip in water, the water will be 

more potent than ani doctor medicine. 

the caduceus.—thi device, which figur as part of the design of[9] 

some postag stamps, has been consid a bringer of good fortun ever sinc 

the time of the ancient greeks. it consist of two snake entwin a rod, 

surmount by a pine cone. by the side of the cone is a pair of wings. it 

was the symbol of mercury. the rod had the supernatur power of 

quell disput and let peopl dwell in harmony. the snake possess 

the properti of healing; the pine cone preserv good health; and the wing 

stood for speed and progress. thus peopl wear the caduceus today in order 

to ensur a life free from quarrel and illness, and to enabl them to be 

healthi and "go ahead." 

no. 4.—the caduceus or staff of mercury. 

the eye agate.—a is general appreciated, the "evil eye" is the 

sourc of all troubl and misfortunes, and the earli eastern race thought 

that, if the "evil eye" could be avoid or frighten away, all would be well. 

search for a charm to effect their purpose, they alight upon the eye agate, 

and this they believ would give no quarter to the "evil eye." accordingly, 

agat were cut to resembl an eye which would be power enough to 

neutral the effect of the evil one, and these were worn as brooches, ring 

and necklaces. the agat chosen for the purpos consist of thin layer 

of stone of various colors. thus, by cut the stone oval and removing[10] 

part of the top layers, it was possibl to produc a charm close resembl 

a human eye, both in shape and color. 

such eye are still sold today, and mani peopl treasur them in the hope 

that they will ward off evil in ani form. 

the jade axe-head.—mani jewel still sell littl axe-head carv 

out of jade, for wear around the neck. the axe-head has been consid 

a symbol of strength and vigor ever sinc primit times, and jade has a 

world-wid reput as a charm against diseas and accidents. 

the seal of solomon.—thi devic is now regard as a symbol 

of the jewish religion, but it can be trace to sever other religions, and, 

no doubt, it date even farther back than the commenc of the jewish 

era. the triangl with the upward point stood for goodness; the triangl 

with the downward point for wickedness; while the two intertwin symbol 

the triumph of good over bad. those who wear the devic contend 

that it preserv them from all that is ill, and, at the same time, it give 

them a share of the world blessings. 

no. 5.—the seal of solomon, one of the oldest lucki charm in existence. 

the abracadabra.—thi charm date from the second century, 

and was a symbol of the gnostic worship. it often took the form of a littl 

piec of parchment, fold into the shape of a cross, but it can, also, be seen 

as a tablet, made of stone or metal, shape like an invert triangle. on 

the charm, of whatev shape, was inscrib the following: 

a b r a c a d a b r a 

b r a c a d a b r 

r a c a d a b 

a c a d a 

c a d 

a 

[11] 

it will be seen that the word "abracadabra" can be read along the upper 

line and also down and up the two sides. this word is said to conceal the 

name of god and the charm has the power of ward off danger and 

sickness. 

the four-leaf clover or shamrock.—everyon know that 

a four-leaf clover or shamrock is suppos to be a bringer of luck and good 

fortune. as these are not readili found and, moreover, they soon perish, the 

opportun has been seiz by jewel to produc artifici one in various 

precious and semi-preci metals. to wear either is suppos to avoid 

misfortune. it may be mention that the four-leaf shamrock as a charm 

has prove immens popular by those who are interest in the irish sweepstakes. 

black cats.—of course, it is lucki for a black cat to walk into your 

house, but fail an actual cat, a counterfeit one serv the same purpose. 

thus, peopl who pin their faith to black cat often make stuf ones, or 

draw pictur of them, and look to the creatur of their own handiwork to 

serv the role of mascot. 

your own talisman.—so far, the talisman that have receiv univers 

accept have alon been mentioned, but the tendenc today is for 

enthusiast to origin a mascot of their veri own. it may take ani or 

everi form, accord to the whim or fanci of the individual. mayb you will 

prefer to find your own mascot or talisman in this direction. if you have no 

preferences, whi not constitut a devic which embrac your lucki number, 

your lucki flower, your lucki color, and so on? it is a suggest bristl 

with opportunities. 

just to show that peopl are tend toward the idea of choos a talisman 

of their veri own, we will conclud with a stori that was recent 

published. 

"there is a precious stone to which the board of director of a firm of 

diamond dealer annual pass a vote of thanks. the stone is a sapphir 

and it has been name shani, mean bringer of luck. 

"shani was bought by the firm about seventi year ago, and it onli 

leav the safe on new year day. a special meeting, attend by everi 

member of the firm, is then held in the board room. shani is place in 

the middl of the tabl and, with hand clasp in prayer, the member 

offer thank for the good luck the sapphir has brought the firm dure the 

preced year. 

"one of the director said, my grandfath onc receiv a tempt offer 

for shani and yielded, but a few hour after the sapphir had been sent 

away he was taken violent ill with fever. the sapphir was brought back 

from a distant part of india, and my grandfath becam well at once.'" 

should not we all have a shani? 

[12] 
