

hint on fortunetel 

hundr of dollar are paid each week to profession fortunetel 

by peopl in all walk of life, in order that they may gain a peep into 

the future. these peopl belong to everi class of society; they are of all age 

and they consult the medium on almost everi matter connect with human 

existence. there is the industri magnate, the societi girl, and the hard-work 

shop assistant, all anxious to peer into the come months. 

accordingly, the teller of fortun and the writer of horoscop is do 

an excel business. the dollar and the cent are pour in at a remark 

rate, and those who read the future, as a profession, are have the 

time of their lives. 

this state of thing is one calcul to make you stop and think for a 

moment. whi should not you learn the rudiment of fortunetel yourself? 

whi should not you find out how to read the sign of your own 

futur and the futur of your friends? the subject is interesting; it is not 

a difficult one and all you need to know is set out in this book. 

your cours of studi may well begin with the chapter on palmistry. 

have master that, turn to the one on handwriting, and follow with 

"what do your bump mean?" these three section will give you a veri 

use start and then you might continu with "how astrolog decid your 

destiny" and "your face is your fortune." 

the five chapter name will enabl you to read peopl with a great 

deal of success, and it should not be long befor your friend compliment you 

on your accuracy. probabl this will spur you to further efforts, and you 

will studi the passag on lucki numbers, dreams, tea-cup readings, lucki 

colors, etc. these will add a polish to your preliminari knowledge. 

veri soon you will gain a reput as a seer and it will add not a littl to 

your vaniti when peopl come to you and ask you to read their futures. 

in do so, you will be advis to follow a few rules. never jump to hasti 

conclusions. weigh all the fact and strike a balance. if the hand say 

"yes" and the face say "no," the conclus is that "it may be." when 

disappoint thing are noted, be charit and let the applic off lightly. 

in case where dire ill are portended, suppress the fact or state them 

in such a way that the applic has a chanc of avoid the trouble, if he 

or she take suitabl measures. but, whatev happens, never make a statement 

for which you have not "chapter and verse." 

and this bring me to my last point. hands, faces, head and other 

characterist give their readings, but none of these read should be taken 

as absolut final. the power is within us to fight against our fail and 

to better our good qualities. we may even allow our best one to deteriorate. 

that is whi two peopl born at the same time and in the same town need 

not grow up exact alike. and it is also whi a small percentag of horoscop 

and fortun are bound to miss the mark. 

[13] 

palmistry—what may be learn 

from hand 

"there are more thing in heaven and earth...." 

peopl who can see as far as the end of their nose and then onli 

through a fog, declar (with a superior sniff) that palmistri is noth but 

a trap to catch fools; they call it quackery, or declar perhap that it is 

mere a fake or blind guesswork. 

now, while we would be the first to deni that palmistri is an exact and 

infal science, yet we just as strong affirm that it is undoubt a most 

fascin and interest recreation; as to it truth, each one must decid 

that question for himself. 

for the few who have a wish to take up this studi seriously, there are 

mani now who will natur wish to know just suffici to be abl to 

"tell fortunes." fortunetel are alway popular at some jolli parti or 

quiet friend gather of an evening. 

in this book they will find all the simpl inform required; on the 

other hand the student will find a sincer delight in read and sift 

thorough the numer book that probe the depth of the subject. 

quit apart from ani mark which may be upon the hand, a general 

indic of the habit and tempera of the individu in question can 

readili be gain by a care examin of the textur or qualiti of 

the skin. 

it were as well to note here that the impress gain must never be 

taken by themselves, but onli in conjunct with other confirm signs. 

especi is this so when judg the charact of a friend or acquaintance. 

textur of skin.—th skin may, of course, be smooth or rough. 

to judg this you should turn the hand in question back upwards; now get 

the feel of the skin by actual touch; a smooth, fine-textur skin denot 

a refin nature, and vice versa. this is a veri strong indic indeed, 

insomuch that should there be other tendenc point to coars of 

nature, this textur of the hand would have a refin effect upon the whole. 

elast of the hand.—thi is best test by actual grip (as 

in shake hands). all hand natur present some feel of elasticity; 

this is a matter of comparison, but it is veri easi to tell the quick, viril 

grip of an elast hand to the dead fish feel which a flabbi hand give 

us when we grasp it. 

a flexibl hand denot an activ and energet person, one who 

will be readili adapt to new conditions. he will alway rise to the 

occasion, and man withstand the buffet of ill-fortune. this type is 

alway trustworthi and a good friend. 

[14] 

no. 6.—bewar of these hands.—a show a weak, flatten thumb; b a curv littl 

finger and c a coarse, short thumb. each has other defect as well. 

[15] 

a flabbi hand—on that doe not respond to your grip or respond 

but sluggishly—i the hand of an idl man, untrustworthi and inconsistent, 

a man of weak and negat character; but be sure to search well for other 

confirm sign of this weakness. 

the shape of the hand 

a fair accur guid to charact is certain contain in the shape 

of the hand. hand may be rough divid into two classes—broad and 

long. a person have a long hand you may judg to have great capac 

for mental effort and matter of detail. 

the broad-hand person you may expect to be a strong man physically; 

his cultur will be bodili rather than mental. he could with advantag 

improv his cultur by reading, and by enjoy the best music. 

the shape of the finger 

when an individu is found with squar finger-tips, he should make 

a good marriag partner; he will be practical—a man of method and 

reason. he is punctual, but should cultiv imagination. 

point finger tip will be found on the hand of the musician, 

the painter, and, in fact, anyon who is of artist temperament. 

person with these finger should curb their imagin with reason, 

and cultiv the power of do things, not onli dream them, though 

dream is well enough in it way. 

taper finger indic peopl of extremes. "ice and fire" are these 

people—impuls and generous to a fault. they should guard against 

undu and morbid sensitiveness, and should cultiv a sane philosoph 

outlook upon life. they are capabl of the highest, but are frequent their 

own worst enemies. 

spatul fingers.—thes are the sportsmen of the world. they 

are not worri much by the opinion of others, while they love a busy, 

healthi life; a sound mind in a sound body. 

general shape and format of the hand 

if the hand are knot with the joint swollen, power of analysis, 

calcul and reflect are shown; philosoph have this type of hand. 

smooth finger and hand indic the artist temperament. these 

peopl are frequent inspired, and have curious intuit concern come 

events. musicians, spiritualists, and martyr are of this type, togeth 

with mani folk who are squar peg in round holes; mayb do work 

which is uncongeni to them. 

[16] 

the thumb has also in it certain veri mark indic of character. 

the three bone (or phalanges) in the thumb each have their interpretation. 

begin at the top these should be judg by length as follows:— 

1. will. (the push type of man.) 

2. reason power. (the thinker or philosopher.) 

3. love. 

thus a long first or top phalang indic great will power; or if it is 

not a certain indication, it point to a definit likelihood of the will be 

strong. 

the mount 

take your subject hand and examin it closely; a strong magnifi 

glass should form part of the equip of everi wise palmist. it will be 

seen that there are certain portion of the hand which are rais abov 

the surface. these are known as "mounts." as will be notic in the 

accompani picture, we call these mount by astrolog names, a method 

adopt from the veri earliest times. they are eight in number, named: 

jupiter, mercury, venus, saturn, apollo, luna and mar (of which there 

are two). 

