

your face is your fortun 

everybodi sum up the face of his friend and of the peopl he meets. 

it is a habit we all have. but most of us are apt to classifi these face into 

group accord to whether the possessor are good-looking, ordinari or 

suprem ugly. we say to ourselves, "isn't so-and-so charming," or alternatively, 

"how posit plain is so-and-so." 

as a matter of fact, the degre of beauti express in an individu face 

ought to count for veri little. what ought to count is the charact which 

his or her featur reveal. let it be said quit definit that face indic 

charact more accur than ani other physic properti of an individual. 

a person can chang his voic and he can check his actions, but he cannot 

alter his featur for more than a second at a time, and then onli superficially. 

thus it come about that face are definit indic of character, and 

these indic are fair easi to read, onc the rule are learned. of 

course, all such thing as accident blemishes, such as scar and broken 

noses, must be ignor at the outset. 

first, let us take the general shape of the face. 

no. 12. 

the shape of the face.—ther can be thousand of differ 

shapes, but the normal is shown by fig. 1, where the width across 

the forehead is more than across the chin. the forehead, the nose and the 

rest of the face should be about equal in length. 

add to the width across the forehead and you have a braini person, a 

clear thinker, a person whose opinion are worth considering. of course, 

an excess of width in this place suggest some mental instability. 

fig. 2 show an entir differ type. it may belong to a jolli person[41] 

who is excel company; but do not go to him for sound advice. there 

is not enough length of forehead, nor width of forehead, to hous a superabund 

of brains. 

fig. 3 introduc us to a ponder type, slow-thinking, fond of food, and 

with anim instinct lurk in the background of his make-up. 

fig. 4 reveal a long face, narrow for it width. this belong to a person 

who is limit in vision, and who can be veri awkward at times. such an 

individu will find it veri hard to agre with others, especi in busi 

matters. he may be deep and more often than not, he is a rather sad 

companion. 

no. 13. 

the nose.—fig. 1 show the normal nose, betoken an averag 

character. 

fig. 2 is too round at the tip. forc of charact is lacking. 

fig. 3 reveal a droop line between the tip of the nose and the upper 

lip. this stand for a charact that love amus and is apt to neglect 

the real thing of life. 

fig. 4 give a pronounced, fleshi curl where the nose join the face. this 

is a sign that the possessor is a clear thinker, a leader of others, an intellig 

person. 

fig. 5 show a thin, point nose. the possessor is, probably, of a refin 

nature, but he or she is apt to be lack in sympathy, even cruel. 

fig. 6 depict a curv ridge. this is the nose of a person who lack a 

refin nature. he may be jolli and humorous, but certain not actuat 

by the highest ideals. mani nose of this shape are the result of an accident, 

which, of course, doe not count. 

a long nose indic cautiousness, watchfulness, and often timidity. 

a promin nose that stand well out from the face show a desir to 

observ and examin things, without the interfer of others. 

a fleshi tip to the nose display a kind nature, and a love of ease. 

a short, small nose tell of conceit and a lack of sympathi for others. 

[42] 

a turned-up nose mean that the possessor is a busybody, one who cannot 

keep a secret, but may be kind and generous. 

the eyes.—larg eye denot love of talk and the abil to learn 

languages. 

small eye denot secreci and close-mindedness. 

full, dark eye denot love of the opposit sex. 

truth eye are set straight in the head. 

untruth eye slope toward the nose. 

eye that slope downward from the nose are cruel and deceitful. 

eye set wide apart denot breadth of mind. 

eye set close togeth denot narrow-mindedness. 

the cheeks.—full, round cheek denot sociabl and a love of 

friends. 

thin cheek denot those who prefer their own company. 

full in lower part of cheek denot love of eat and drinking. 

a moder full denot hospitality. 

high cheekbon show that the possessor is veri methodical. he or she 

is like to interfer in other peopl business. 

the forehead.—promin brow denot a practic disposition. 

full in center of forehead denot a good memori for date and events. 

a broad forehead denot a humor disposition. 

a round forehead denot music ability; this is usual accompani 

by curv eyebrow and wavi hair. 

the mouth and lips.—when upper lip is deepli groov down 

the center, it denot modesti and refinement. 

a plain upper lip, bold and forwardness. 

a long upper lip denot self-esteem and self-control. 

red and full in center of lip, love and passion for opposit sex. 

full at either side show love of children and animals. 

a mouth that display the teeth when smile denot love of approb 

and attention. 

a full, red, well-develop lower lip denot a kindly, sympathet disposition. 

thin lip denot a hard, selfish, and unsympathet nature. the same 

with straight lips. 

no. 14. 

the chin.—a reced chin, as shown in fig. 1, p. 43, denot a lack 

of firmness. it belong to a person who has insuffici will of his own. 

a chin shape as fig. 2 or 3, or midway between these, provid a veri 

accept character. there is determin and grit, without an excess of 

these qualities. fig. 2 may be taken as the normal type. 

[43] 

broad, boni structur of the chin denot conscienti and straightforwardness. 

length and project of chin denot firmness, stability, and perseverance. 

an extrem long and project chin denot stubborn and obstinacy. 

(fig. 4.) 

a full ridg of fat under the chin denot economy. 

wrinkles.—a wrinkl commenc in the lower cheek and extend 

right under the chin, from side to side, is caus from constant talking. 

a wrinkl run from the side of the nose, downward upon the lower 

cheek, to the outer corner of the mouth, is a sign of love of approbation. 

whenev in laughter three parallel circular line are form in the cheek 

there is a fund of folli in the character. 

wrinkl lie horizont across the root of the nose denot abil to 

command. 

sever perpendicular wrinkl between the eyebrow denot a plodding, 

persev disposition. 

dimples.—a round dimpl in the chin denot love of the beauti in 

the opposit sex. 

dimpl at the outer corner of the mouth are anoth sign of mirthfulness. 

dimpl in the center of cheek are anoth sign of approbation. 

when a littl cleft is seen at the tip of the nose it denot the natur 

critic. 

close attent should alway be given to textur and qualiti of the hair, 

eyes, and skin; this is most important, as the coars or refin of 

charact is shown veri plain to those who take the troubl to notic these 

things. 

color of hair, eyes, and skin is also veri important; the depth of the feel 

and passion is shown here; poor color peopl are much less passion 

than their deeper color fellow-creatures. 

thus from dark individu of coars qualiti we expect coars passions, 

and from dark fine-qu individu deep, refin emotions. 

no. 15. 

the eyebrows.—fig. 2 is intend for the eyebrow of a normal 

individual. such a person goe about his duti in an ordinary, intellig 

manner and doe his best to make the world a littl better place for have 

him in it. 

[44] 

in fig. 1, the eyebrow have insuffici shape. they belong to an 

individu of extremes; he or she is either too determin or devoid of 

kindness. 

in fig. 3, the eyebrow are too curved, form a full semi-circle. this is 

a sign of shallowness; they belong to a person who is not go to put himself 

out for somebodi else. 

in fig. 4, the eyebrow are higher at the outer than at the inner ends. 

such are difficult to diagnose. they may belong to a veri jolly, funni person; 

but they may also belong to someon absolut untrustworthy, a foxi 

individual, in fact. they should be read in compani with other facial signs. 

in fig. 5, the eyebrow meet on the nose. hesit befor trust a 

person so provided. he may be perfect reliable, but make sure first. 

nos. 1 to 5 show eyebrow of fine or medium thickness, but figs. 6 and 

7 are coarser and heavier. those that are neither too fine or too thick are 

best, sinc they are more like to belong to a well-balanc person. fine 

pencil streak show a finniky, perhap unkind nature. heavy, bushi eyebrow 

point to an austere, querul nature. 

in fig. 7, the upstand hair suggest a natur that may deriv pleasur 

from posing. 

a final hint.—in check the "points" of a face, it is often found 

that one featur may contradict another. this doe not prove that the explan 

given abov are incorrect. it goe to show that the charact of 

the individu is not definit set in one direction. he may vari at time or 

he may have the aptitud for fight against one characterist in favor 

of another. the onli sound plan is to assess the charact by strike a 

balanc of all the "points" at issue. 

[45] 

have you a mole? 

mani peopl do not like these littl marks, but let them be comforted, 

for in olden times, accord to the wise men of the day, 

great relianc was place on them. just what a mole mean depend 

on where it is to be found. the follow may describ a 

mole of your own:— 

right eye (above).—wealth and a happi marriage. 

left eye (above).—you have a great like for the opposit 

sex and you will, thereby, gain much happiness. 

temple.—a above. 

nose.—you will succeed in business. 

cheek.—you will be happy, but not be bless with fame and 

fortune. 

chin.—fortun in your choic of friends. 

ear (either).—a content nature. 

arms.—a happi nature, but with someth of the "don't care" 

spirit. 

shoulders.—wil face difficulti with fortitude. 

hands.—a practic nature. abl to take care of yourself. 

legs.—strong willed. 

neck.—you have a great deal of patience. 

[46] 
