

what do your bump mean? 

just feel the shape of your own head, and then ask a friend to let you do 

the same thing to him or her. most like you will be veri surpris at the 

differ between the two. you may have bump in certain place while 

your friend has them in total differ parts. 

the scienc of phrenology, which is the read of bumps, has discov 

that bump in certain place point to certain characteristics; if you have them, 

you must have the characteristics, and, if you have not them, you cannot have 

those qualities. in fact, the read of charact through the medium of 

bump is a veri definit science, and it is a scienc that can be easili learn 

and appli by almost anyone. of course, there is much to learn, but there 

is no need to know a great deal if you mere want to assess a person 

charact in general terms. 

a chart is suppli on p. 47, and on it is mark out just enough to 

enabl you to read a head with ease. onli certain area are map out; the 

rest of the head may be the locat of bumps, but it doe not present the 

bump which are like to interest us just now. 

the area are as follows:— 

1.—li at the top of the head, in the center and come a littl way 

toward the forehead. if this area is well developed, it show that the individu 

has a benevol nature. he is generous and kind; he will work 

for the good of other and not think onli of himself. 

if the area is over-developed, the individu will be inclin to favor other 

at the expens of his own safety; if it is under-developed, he will be cruel 

and selfish. 

2.—situat abov but a littl behind the eye; usual the place is just 

cover by hair. when this area is well developed, it show that the individu 

possess plenti of happi and a store of wit and mirth. he is a 

pleasant person, smile on advers and is excel company. 

if the area is over-developed, the individu is one who can never be 

taken seriously, who poke fun at everything; if it is under-developed, he is the 

type of person who is never known to smile. 

3.—in the middl of the head, where it curv down toward the back of 

the neck. in case where this area is well developed, the person is one who 

has strength of mind; he is firm in his actions; he cannot be persuad against 

his own judgment; and he like his own way. 

if this area is over-developed, the person is obstin and stubborn; if it 

is under-developed, he is easili led, apt to waver and has not a mind of his 

own. 

[47] 

no. 16.—chart of phrenology. 

1—benevolence, generosity, kindness. 

2—happiness, wit, mirth. 

3—firmness, strength of mind. 

4—self-esteem, dignity, pride. 

5—conscientiousness, sens of duty. 

6—love. 

7—courage. 

8—desir for marriage. 

9—love of children. 

[48] 

4.—in the middl of the head, lower down at the back than no. 3. when 

this area is found in a well-develop condition, the possessor is a person 

who has dignity, self-esteem and proper pride. he is one who live an 

upright life becaus he put a high price on these qualities. 

if this area is over-developed, the individu is over-confident, he think 

too much of himself and is haughty; if it lack development, he is too humbl 

and suffer from an inferior complex. 

5.—li besid nos. 3 and 4. to find this area well develop is a sure 

sign that the possessor is a conscienti individual; it show that he has a 

high sens of duty, and his life will center around action that are base on 

what he think is right. 

if this area is over-developed, the possessor will never progress far becaus 

he will be alway stop and wonder whether what he propos to 

do is right; if under-developed, the possessor is one who doe not care 

whether what he doe is wrong or right, so long as it bring him pleasur 

and gain. 

6.—at the base of the skull, at the back, where it join the backbone. if 

this area is well developed, it show that the individu has the power of love 

somebodi of the opposit sex in a proper manner. he or she will fall 

in love when a suitabl occas aris and will make an excel partner. 

if this area is over-developed, the individu will be too passionate, will fall 

in love with littl or slight provocation, and will give himself or herself a 

great deal of unhappiness; if under-developed, he or she will be too cold to 

be move by the thought of love. 

7.—a slight distanc away from the back of the ear. when this area is 

well developed, the individu may be count on to be courag inclined. 

he will not know the mean of fear, and will not hold back becaus 

troubl may be brewing. 

if this area is over-developed, we have a quarrelsom person and if under-developed, 

one who is afraid of his skin. 

8.—besid no. 7, but more in the center of the back of the head. whenev 

this area is proper developed, it show that the possessor would make 

an admir husband or wife. he or she would be devoted, loyal and 

attentive. 

if the area is over-developed, the possessor has a jealous disposition; if 

under-developed, he or she is fickl and apt to flirt with others. 

9.—besid no. 8, in the center of the back of the head, low down. should 

this area be well developed, it show that the possessor has a proper love and 

regard for children and that he think no person has experienc the fullest 

joy of life who has not becom a parent. 

if this area is over-developed, the possessor think so much of children 

that he spoil them; if it is under-developed, he is of the type that "cannot 

stand them at ani price." 

[49] 
