

how astrolog decid your destini 

astrolog is one of the oldest scienc in the world. it is said to have 

origin with the egyptians, almost at the veri begin of time. indeed, 

it is almost imposs to trace a period when this scienc was not practiced. 

there is noth new under the sun, and it close follow will scarc 

allow ani error in it deductions. they go so far as to declar it to be an 

exact science, a term which mean that everyth can be reason out and 

proved; noth is left to guesswork. 

such scienc are mathematics, algebra, and geometry. we need not 

believ that astrolog is all this, but certain some veri startl and accur 

predict have been made by astrologers. 

however, as in all other method of fortunetel attempt by us mortals, 

it is far from infallible. so long as we do not take it to be exact and sure, 

we shall get plenti of amus and interest from it study, with the excit 

feel all the time at the back of our mind that "it might come true." 

here is a list give you the name and mean given to planet by 

astrologers. 

name. 

approxim mean given by astrologers. 

mars. 

strength. 

venus. 

beauty. 

mercury. 

capac for adapt oneself. 

uranus. 

improvement. 

sun. 

life. 

jupiter. 

freedom and growth. 

saturn. 

diminished—shrinking—lack of growth. 

neptune. 

abl to receive—receptive. 

earth. 

physical—not spiritual. 

the moon. 

feeling. 

the main idea at the back of astrolog is that the planet (or starri 

bodi which revolv round the sun) each have a strong and vari influenc 

upon the mind of human beings. 

the zodiac.—of cours when the planet revolv round the sun they 

travel through a cours or path. the zodiac is the name given by astronom 

to the boundari which enclos this cours or path in the sky. 

the sign of the zodiac are the space into which the zodiac is divided. 

[50] 

here are the sign of the zodiac arrang in order to show which sign are 

opposit to each other. 

aries. 

face 

libra. 

taurus. 



scorpio. 

gemini. 



sagittarius. 

cancer. 



capricorn. 

leo. 



aquarius. 

virgo. 



pisces. 

now each sign has a planet which is said to rule it; this is call the rule 

planet. it is from the natur of this planet that the probabl charact 

and fate of the individu are told. it is not necessari to know the whys and 

wherefor of this, if you have not studi astronomi it will onli serv to 

muddl you, and if, on the other hand, you do understand astronomi you will 

not need ani explanation. we will just say what doe happen, and that 

will tell you all you need in these first steps. 

well, we all know that the earth revolv upon it axi onc in everi 24 

hours. now, accord to astronomers, this caus one of the zodiac sign 

to appear in the eastern sky, where it remain for two hours. we have said 

that each sign has a planet rule it, so the sign that appear on the sky at 

the time of birth decid what planet that person is born under or is influenc 

by. 

let us suppos for a moment that you were born when the sign libra 

was rising, as the say is. the planet which rule libra is venus, so the 

person born at that time would be a venus type, i.e., a person have the 

influenc of venus upon him. 

in addit to the main rule planet, astrolog will tell you that there 

are other "neighboring" planets—w will call them neighbor becaus it is 

a simpl term—which also have their effect upon us. astrolog call this one 

planet be "in aspect" with another. for instance, you might have the 

planet mar in aspect with (or influenc by) the planet saturn; you would 

then be deal with a veri strong character. 

the qualiti of mar which give the fighter and the push type, or in 

excess the bully, will be well steadi by the qualiti of saturn, which by 

themselv give cold and, in excess, lack of feeling. the two togeth 

result in a charact remark for it steadi combin with it never-weari 

energi and good balance. 

so you see, we seldom find pure type (i.e., qualiti of mars, or other 

planet by themselves), and it is veri fortun that this is so; we should get 

a veri one-sid world if we did. 

now we come to that part of astrolog which realli interest most people; 

here will be shown the birth-dat for each month in the year and the 

probabl charact of person born at that special time. you may ask whi 

the charact are given and whi not the fate or futur of the person concerned. 

the reason is this: you can be pretti sure that what you read of an 

individu charact will give you a sound idea of what in all probabl 

his futur will be. 

[51] 

after all, the carv out of our live is in our own hands. we are the 

master of our fate, or as the song has it, "captain of our soul." 

however, if we believ astrologers, there is a way to tell the time of our 

live when matter should go smooth or the reverse. the most favor 

time for specul with money, start in business, in fact, the most 

and least favor period of our live can, accord to astrology, be 

work out by what is known as the horoscope. 

now this horoscop is in realiti a chart of your life. the rocki water 

are shown, and the barrier reef which each of us must avoid through our 

life, so you will see a use in the studi of astrology. it would seem to be 

natur warn to us all of the necess for effort, effort and again effort. 

here are the birth date and characterist of person born between the 

date mentioned. sinc astrolog is not infallible, do not take all these 

characterist too seriously. 

you will notic that each date is taken from about the 20th of one month 

to the 20th of the next month. 

when were you born? 

dec. 22nd to jan. 20th. 

peopl born dure this period have consider mental abil and a keen 

busi instinct. they are fond of the imagin arts. they are proud; 

they like their own way and they see that they get it. general speaking, 

they are better fit to lead than to follow others. 

however, they do not take kind to chang of ani kind, and are 

annoy by newfangl ideas. they do not want the advic of other 

peopl and often resent it. they do not strike out in new direct and 

they avoid take risks. they lack "push." 

to these people, we say: 

don't wait for opportunities—mak them. 

don't let your pride persuad you to keep on the wrong road rather than 

turn back. 

don't be afraid of admit and correct a mistake. 

don't run away from trouble; meet it with a bold front. 

jan. 21st to feb. 19th. 

peopl born dure this period have a strong sens of duty. they have a 

kind disposit and are inclin to be affectionate. they refus to think 

ill of anyon until the bad qualiti are proved. be straightforward themselves, 

they imagin everyon els is the same and, on this account, they 

are like to suffer some bitter experiences. 

however, they lack a proper regard for their own welfare. they are a 

littl too confid and they are not adaptable. onc they make up their 

mind on a matter, it is almost imposs to persuad them to chang it. 

to these peopl we say: 

don't brood over troubles. face the facts, fight them out, and then, forget 

all about them. 

[52] 
