

your child occup decid 

by the star 

it is a well-known fact that everi human be is consider influenced, 

as far as charact and capabl are concerned, by the time of the year in 

which he or she was born. that be so, it follow that the occup best 

suit to ani particular individu is, in a measure, relat to his or her 

birth-date. 

parent who are anxious to do the best for their children should take note 

of these conditions; they may be help in keep round peg out of squar 

holes. below, we offer suggest which have prove of use in thousand 

of cases, where doubt had previous existed. the inform may be use 

in this way: suppos a child is about to leav school and is readi to make his 

or her entri into the world of work. in a number of cases, the child has 

a veri definit idea of what he or she want to do. if the work is reason 

suit to the child temperament, station in life, and so on, it is much the 

best plan to allow him or her to follow the particular bent. it is just as 

well to note whether the chosen occup fit in with the work which we 

list below for his or her individu birth-date. if it approxim to some 

occup which we mention, well and good. let the child go ahead, 

there is everi chanc of success. but, if it is quit alien to anyth which 

is given in the list, caution is needed. we do not say that the child ambit 

should be check and that he or she should be put to a job of our selection, 

but we do say that caution ought to be exercised. we are perfect readi to 

admit that the star and the birth-dat are not the onli factor which count. 

environment, upbringing, the father occupation, and other thing must influenc 

the child. all these influenc should be weigh and care 

considered. 

but where astrolog and the star can give most help is in the case of a 

boy or girl who has no formul idea as to what he or she want to 

become. thousand of children reach the school-leav age without show 

the slightest inkl for ani particular job. to the parent of such children, 

we say, consult the list set out below, see that they are base on astrolog 

teachings. go over the select occup carefully, discuss them with the 

child, explain what they offer in term of money, work, hours, etc., and watch 

the effect they have on the child. in this way, it will soon be possibl to 

gain an idea as to what occup should be eventu decid on. 

here are the occup suitabl for each person: 

capricorn born (dec. 22nd to jan. 20th).—sinc peopl born in 

this period have consider mental ability, it follow that they do well in 

most of the professions, sinc they can pass the necessari examin and 

becom well qualified. thus, they ought to do satisfactorili in medicine,[56] 

the law, dentistry, the scholast profess and similar occupations. the 

fact that they do not care to take risk unfit them for mani busi openings, 

but where aspir are not high, they do well as clerk and in fill 

post which consist of routin work. girls, especially, should seek work which 

is connect with the imagin arts. 

aquarian born (jan. 21st to feb. 19th).—boy display a good deal 

of interest in occup which requir the use of their hands. this make 

them capabl in mani engin posts, in wireless, in cabinet-mak and 

similar jobs. they are not good at creat or invent in connect with 

these industries, however. there is the rove disposit implant in 

these boy and mani of them think that the pilot job on an air liner could 

not be equalled. 

girl are, also, interest in work with their hands: thus they are fit 

for dressmaking, the millineri trade, for deal with art and craft supplies, 

etc. a certain number are emin suit to secretari work. 

piscean born (feb. 20th to march 20th).—children born in this 

period have a love for the sea and, therefore, the boy find congeni work as 

ship mates, stewards, marin engineers, etc., while girl are suitabl for 

stewardess and other job fill by women on ocean-go vessels. 

in addit boy and girl are both fit to all kind of work in shops, 

chain stores, etc., but they are not at their best when manag their 

own businesses. they requir author behind them. 

a few piscean have artist abil which should lead them to do splendid 

as authors, painters, musicians, etc. 

ari born (march 21st to april 19th).—the ari child is often a 

problem, for certain of them have a root object to anyth in the 

natur of routin work. they chafe at go and come at the same hour 

each day, and of do the same work year after year. it is not that they 

are lazy, but that their natur refus to be driven by set rules. with such 

children, it is wisest to interest them in whatev they fancy, until the time 

come when they launch out on some brilliant scheme of their own. ari 

men are the one that fill unusual, out-of-the-way posts. 

where this root object doe not exist, the children are good in almost 

ani posit which permit of movement, as travellers, for instance. 

taurian born (april 20th to may 20th).—as a rule, children who 

are taurian are veri successful. they do not mind hard work and they 

have a "flair" for do the right thing, without know why. they have 

a head for figur and money, and thus do well in bank and stockbrok 

offices. they take kind to long training, which enabl them to succeed 

in law and medicine. 

both boy and girl are good with their hands. this make them success 

in a larg number of occupations, as wide divers as engin and 

tailoring, or hairdress and piano playing. 

[57] 

gemini born (may 21st to june 21st).—gemini children show a 

good deal of ambition, and their chief fault is that they object to begin 

at the bottom of the ladder. perhap this is useful, in a way, as it goad 

them on to climb upwards. they have a good deal of vision. thus 

they make excel newspap men and women. they do well in new 

trades, notabl in radio and the motor world. also, they ought to make a 

success in certain branch of aviation. their eloqu fit them admir 

for travellers, and they would make their mark in ani busi which, 

eventually, gave them work of an imagin nature. in a general way, 

they find interest in theatric work, in literari activ and in architecture. 

all gemini peopl have a streak in their natur which caus them to 

seek unnecessari changes. 

cancer born (june 22nd to juli 22nd).—children born dure this 

period are usual "workers." they will plod, they do not mind long hours, 

and they will set themselv to difficult jobs, if told to get on with them. 

as a rule, they should be set to someth which enabl them to work 

"on their own." they much prefer this to be a small peg in a larg 

machine. they are suit to small busi and agencies. a mail-ord 

busi might fit in with their requirements. girl would do well as privat 

teachers, run small school of their own. they are, also, suit to the 

draperi trade. 

leo born (juli 23rd to august 21st).—those who are born dure 

this period succeed best in what might be call "clean" occupations. the 

boy do not want to put on overal and becom grimy, and the girl prefer 

work that enabl them to be alway neat and tidy. both of them show 

aptitud in market such thing as jewelry, drugs, book and clothes, 

but they do not want to be concern with make them. they are not so 

much interest in vend the necessari of life as the luxuries. thus, 

motor cars, victrolas, cameras, sport requisites, etc., attract them. 

they are not much suit to cleric work, but a good number find an 

outlet for their ambit in the theatric and literari world, while a few 

make good dentists, radiologist and medic practitioners. 

virgo born (aug. 22nd to sept. 22nd).—these children are capable, 

but their great fail is that, onc they find a fair suitabl post, they will 

not look for anyth better. they prefer to hold on to a moder certainti 

than to risk a littl for a great success. consequently, virgo-born are found 

live on salari just suffici to keep them from want. 

they are emin suit to cleric work of the higher types, such as 

in banks, insur companies, stockbrok offices, etc. they make good 

compani secretaries, excel journalists, fair good actor and actresses, 

and the girl do well as teachers. 

libra born (sept. 23rd to octob 23rd).—children of this period 

do not mind hard work, but they hate monotony, especi if it is at all 

sordid. they have good judgment, a qualiti which fit them for such[58] 

divers occup as medicin and the drama, the law and dressmaking. 

no special trade or profess can be singl out for them; but, as long as 

they are set to work in a direct which provid them with an outlet for 

a nice balanc judgment and a capac for what might be term the 

detect instinct, they should succeed admirably. 

scorpio born (oct. 24th to nov. 22nd).—there is an abund of 

ambit in these children, and they seek posit rather than money. thus, 

the boy do well in the navi and the army, and, in a less degree, in the 

air force. the church hold out good open for mani of them, and 

the mercantil marin interest not a few. medicin attract both boy and 

girls, and so doe the stage. anyth to do with chemic seem to influenc 

mani of the boys. scorpio-born children are often heard to say that they 

want to make a name for themselves. 

sagittarian born (nov. 23rd to dec. 21st).—children of this 

period are fond of animals; thus they are suit to becom veterinari surgeons, 

horse-dealers, farmer and even jockeys. one section of them, have excess 

will power and plenti of self-reliance, make a type of individu who 

seek public in the polit world. all are capabl in business, especi 

in the execut branches. not a few men becom compani promoters, 

chairmen and directors. the girl make excel teacher and welfar 

workers. 

[59] 
