

what are your hobbies? 

accord to your zodiac sign you have a disposit for certain hobbies. 

you may not necessarili have these hobbi but your inclin lie toward 

them. 

capricorn born.—gardening. natur study. rambl in the 

countryside. make thing of almost ani kind. chemistry. physics. 

aquarian born.—aviation, rang from actual fli to make 

aeroplan models. gliding. construct all kind of articles. paint 

pictures. drawing. needlework. 

pisc born.—traveling, especi by sea. photography. construct 

and use wireless apparatus. make electr apparatus. theater-go 

and amateur theatricals. art and craft (girls). 

ari born.—traveling, touring. anyth connect with motor 

cars. sight-seeing. make things. reading. art and craft (girls). 

taurus born.—construct hobbies, from wireless to the build 

of houses. walking. golf. swimming. collect antiques. 

gemini born.—lik to be interest in inventions. good at solv 

puzzles. football. tennis. natur rambling. girl have a bent for 

household duties, such as cooking, needlework, etc. 

cancer born.—interest in the wonder of the world. anxious to 

see thing and people. music. reading. collect antiques. almost ani 

outdoor game. girl are fond of needlework of the finer kinds. 

leo born.—hobbi alli to the daili work. intellectu reading, 

especi anyth bear on histor matters. go about. golf. 

swimming. make thing of an artist nature. 

virgo born.—indoor games. make and repair household articles. 

good at manual activities, from play the piano to construct toys. prefer 

to be amus indoor than out in the open. 

libra born.—do thing to keep the home ship-shape. football. 

cricket. photography. reading. wireless. needlework and knit (girls). 

scorpio born.—scientif recreat of all kinds. keep pets. 

natur rambling. girl take a keen interest in household duties. card 

playing. see people. dabbl in mysteri matters, such as thought-reading, 

table-rapping, seances, etc. 

sagittarian born.—hobbi of an intellectu character. walking. 

outdoor sports. boxing. natur study. keep pets. reading. 

[60] 

what is your lucki number? 

onc more from the rise sun of the east further marvel theori 

have reach us through the path of the ages. to mani of our prosaic 

western minds, mayb not unnaturally, these idea will at first sight appear 

almost ridiculous. however, do not condemn numer mysteri unheard, 

for no manual of fortunetel would be complet should it not includ 

a talk on this most arrest subject. 

student of numbers, as do astrolog and student of palmistry, declar 

that there is no such thing as luck or chanc in the world. they also state 

that we are strong but not inevit influenc by certain power law 

of nature. 

number scienc is certain unknown to the great major of us, but 

there are some superstit which are base on evil numbers; these superstit 

we treat with great respect. veri few of us realli care to sit down 

thirteen at table, while i have known a man go sad and smokeless rather 

than be the third to light his cigarett off one match! 

fortunetel by number is alli to astrolog veri close indeed. let 

us now take each day of the week individu and see what inform 

we can get from it. you will find that veri use as a check upon your 

other form of fortunetelling. 

on what day were you born? 

if, as i suggested, we take the day of the week we shall find that they 

in turn are influenc by the order in which they are found, or by the 

number which is theirs. for instance, sunday be the first day, is 

influenc by no. 1, and friday, be the sixth day take no. 6 as it rule 

number. 

accord to the ancient each number has it correspond planet; here is 

a littl tabl show the planet repres and rule over each number. 

no. 0. 

repres by space. 

no. 1. 

repres by the sun. 

no. 2. 

repres by the moon 

no. 3. 

repres by mars. 

no. 4. 

repres by mercury. 

no. 5. 

repres by jupiter. 

no. 6. 

repres by venus. 

no. 7. 

repres by saturn. 

no. 8. 

repres by uranus. 

no. 9. 

repres by neptune. 

take each day of the week in order, we find the follow characteristics. 

tabl of day in week 

no. 1 (sunday).—you will see by your tabl that this day take the sun 

for it ruler—sun-day. it is a fortun day; person born on a sunday have 

a brave and honest influenc on them. they will be optimistic, but not[61] 

foolish so, while at the same time they have great pride in the reput 

of themselv and their families. if they have ani fault it is, maybe, that this 

pride is felt, a littl too strongly; they may be inclin to take themselv 

rather too seriously. however, i repeat, this is an excel day. 

no. 2 (monday).—thi day is the moon-day. the lesson for monday 

men to learn is steadiness. they are too easili influenc and are blown 

hither and thither upon life winds. they adapt themselv well to chang 

of place, circumstances, scene, and frequent follow the sea. they have 

plenti of imagin in their natures, and should cultiv common sense. 

no. 3 (tuesday).—th day of mar (french—mardi). frequent the 

engin of the world. an ambiti go-ahead day is tuesday. these 

tuesday folk are the explorers, the men who emigrate, and the earnest 

patriot of life. soldiers, worker at the furnac among other workers, are 

found among those born on tuesday. their womenfolk are inclin to be 

rather shrewish and domineering. they are not natur good managers, 

and should cultiv this qualiti becaus they are alway rare workers. 

no. 4 (wednesday).—th tabl tell us that these are the mercurians. 

the men are quick at calcul figures, and alway capabl and thought 

workers. mercury, as it name implies, give quickness, with busi trade 

capacity. the women appear not to be so favor influenced, they 

must guard against grumbl and gossip; then they may do well enough. 

no. 5 (thursday).—und the planet of jupiter, these thursday peopl 

have mani good qualities. they are liber and good natured, but have one 

vice—th outcom of their virtue. they are inclin to be too liber with 

themselves, which is extravagance. given an idea they can turn it to good 

account, but do not, as a rule, origin ideas. statesmen are here found; 

let these jupiterian bewar of a love of display and what is common 

known as side. then they are veri excel peopl indeed. 

no. 6 (friday).—look at the table—se venus is the planet of friday. 

this account for mani things. here we see the typic venus type. gay, 

light-hearted, with no thought of the morrow, they flit happili through life 

like a gild butterfli upon the wing. if they lack tast they over-dress. 

their good qualiti are their charm personalities, pleas manners, and 

a quick command of music and art. they should bewar of be onli 

butterflies, and should cultiv strength of character. they should also 

obtain by hook or by crook a like for hard work; it will serv them in 

good stead. 

no. 7 (saturday).—saturday, as it name tell us, has sad saturn for it 

planet. here we have the exact opposit to the person mention who were 

born on a friday. saturday peopl miss half the joy of live by their cold 

and calcul natures. care with money, they are patient workers, 

they must bewar of be miserly, and should certain cultiv their 

miss sens of humor. the good qualiti in these peopl are their 

sincer earnest outlook and their capac for an almost endless grind of[62] 

hard work. their womenfolk frequent make old maid and should practic 

sweet temper and a kind feel toward the rest of the household. 

your own number 

but there is much more in the scienc of number than that which can 

be glean from the day of the week. there is your own person number, 

the number which influenc you and your action more than ani other. 

if you know your number, think how you can use it for good and avoid 

other for ill! the find of your number is a simpl matter when you 

have master the element of numerology, which is the scienc of numbers. 

let us explain how your own number is found. first, write down your 

birth-date, the day of the month, the month itself and the year. thus, three 

item are required. take first the day of the month. if it consist of one 

figure, leav it. if it consist of two, add them together, and, if the answer 

come to two figures, add them together. all this may appear a littl involved, 

but it is not, as one or two exampl will show. 

suppos you were born on the 9th of the month, then 9 is the number 

you want. 

but, suppos it was the 16th, then six and one make seven. therefor 

7 is the requir number. 

again, if you were born on the 29th, then nine and two make eleven, but 

as eleven consist of two figures, you must add them together, and they 

make 2. 

so much for the day of the month, now for the month itself. januari 

stand for one, februari for 2, and so on, to decemb for 12. the number 

of the month from januari to septemb can stand as they are, but octob 

novemb and december, be 10, 11 and 12, must be ad up, as alreadi 

described. thus octob is one, novemb is two and decemb three. 

thirdly, the number of the year must be considered. say you were born 

in 1910. these figur add up to eleven, and eleven, be doubl figures, 

add up to 2. therefor 1910 is equival to 2. 

work out your figur here. 

you have now obtain three separ figures, add them togeth and if 

they come to a one-figur number, that is the number which you require. 

on the other hand, if it is a double-figur amount, add the two figur 

as before, until you arriv at a single-figur amount. then that is the 

number you require. 

so as to make the whole thing perfect clear, we will take a complet 

exampl and work it out, exact as you must work out your own birth-date. 

example.—12th september, 1913. 

12 = 1 + 2 = 3 

septemb is the 9th month = 9 

1913 = 1 + 9 + 1 + 3 = 14 = 1 + 4 = 5 

3 + 9 + 5 = 17 = 1 + 7 = 8 

[63] 

therefore, the person number of anyon born on 12th september, 1913, 

is 8. eight should guid and influenc all his or her actions. we are not 

go to pretend that benefit will accru on everi occas that the person 

number is observed, but we are go to say that we have note some 

marvel piec of good fortun when it has. 

when you have found your person number, there are sever way in 

which you can use it. suppos your number is the one just found, eight; 

then you can conclud that the eighth day of ani month will be a propiti 

one for you. but that is not the onli one. the 17th is equal good, 

becaus one plus seven give eight. moreover, the 26th is in a similar 

position. two and six make eight. 

yet anoth way to use your person number aris when you want to 

know whether some import step should be taken on a definit day. what 

is the particular day? add up it numerolog values, exact as you did 

with your birthday, and if it resolv itself into the same number as your 

person number, you may go ahead with cheerfulness. put forth your 

best effort, and, on the day, you will have ampl chanc of success. 

the number of your name 

numerolog permit of still anoth step. take your own name and see 

what number it is equal to. you will be abl to do this in the follow 

way: a stand for one, b for two, c for three, and so on. when you reach 

i, which is 9, commenc again and give j the valu of one, then continue. 

to make all this clear, we will set out the valu of the complet alphabet: 

1 = a j s 

2 = b k t 

3 = c l u 

4 = d m v 

5 = e n w 

6 = f o x 

7 = g p y 

8 = h q z 

9 = i r — 

thus, suppos your name is joan shirley, the letter resolv themselv 

into the follow numbers:— 

j o a n s h i r l e y 

1 + 6 + 1 + 5 + 1 + 8 + 9 + 9 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 55 

55 = 5 + 5 = 10 = 1 + 0 = 1 

from all that we have said, it will be clear that the birthdat may be use 

for find the person number, or the letter of the name may be used. on 

rare occasions, the two way will provid the same number. when this is 

the case, great faith should be place in that number. but, when the two 

way give differ numbers, what? doe one disprov the other? no. you[64] 

simpli have two number favor to you. the birthdat number is the 

more definit and reliabl becaus your veri exist is base on it. 

a word at the end. marri ladi must use their maiden name for 

find the name number. 


