
your lucki color 

the old saying, "green for grief," is a well-known one, and the writer 

would rather wear ani color on earth than green, not even a green scarf or 

belt. moreover, she see to it that the other member of the famili do not 

indulg in the unlucki color. but mind you, green onli bring her ill-fortun 

when use for wear apparel. there is no objection, of course, to a green 

front-door nor to wallpap of the same color. for such uses, green play 

it part harmless enough. 

though green dress are more distress to the writer than a red rag 

to a bull, she is quit prepar to admit that mani peopl find it a veri 

lucki color. this bring us to the point. there is no color that is univers 

unlucky; it is onli so in the hand of certain individuals. with 

others, it may be an absolut harbing of all that is lucky. even green may 

do this. 

now the question is, "which is your lucki color?" if you know it, well 

and good. make use of it in everi possibl way. when wear dress 

made of it, you will feel more confid of yourself than when array in 

someth else. you will get more work done, and it will be better work. 

the onli thing is that you must be sure that it is your lucki color. if you 

are not quit sure, the tonic effect is absolut lost. 

not onli should you wear your fortun color, but it is a good plan 

to surround yourself with it. we know a woman who pin her faith to 

purple. her dress are most purple; the wallpap in her bedroom is 

purple; purpl casement curtain adorn the windows; there are purpl rug 

in various part of the house; even the back of the hair-brush on her dress 

tabl is purple. and, sinc she decid that purpl was her lucki color and 

use it in everi reason way, she has had sever stroke of marvel 

good fortune. 

but, of course, you may say in repli to all this that you do not know 

your lucki color. what then? this is where we can give you a littl help. 

most peopl lucki color depend on the time of their birth and the follow 

list set out the birth colors. we know full well that everybodi doe not 

deriv good fortun from his birth color, but that they find it in some other 

hue. therefore, the proper cours is to make trial with the appropri 

color list below and, if that doe not answer satisfactorily, to choos anoth 

of your own like and tri that. onli by person experi can you 

final decid the point. 

these are the birth-colors. the first given for ani period is the one almost 

univers accepted. those follow after the first are, however, favor 

by a certain number of people. 

[66] 

birth date 

color 

dec. 22nd to jan. 20th 

emerald green 

sapphir blue 

black 

jan. 21st to feb. 19th 

various blue 

dark green 

feb. 20th to march 20th 

purpl 

white 

silver 

march 21st to april 19th 

rose red 

april 20th to may 20th 

turquois blue 

other shade of blue 

may 21st to june 21st 

light shade of yellow 

orang 

gold 

june 22nd to juli 22nd 

mauv 

white 

silver 

juli 23rd to august 21st 

gold 

brown 

yellow 

aug. 22nd to sept. 22nd 

yellow 

orang 

light blue 

sept. 23rd to oct. 23rd 

rose pink 

yellow 

oct. 24th to nov. 22nd 

dark green 

red 

brown 

nov. 23rd to dec. 21st 

purpl 

blue 

colors, of course, have certain valu attach to them: 

white is a symbol of purity. 

red is typic of fire, blood and anger. 

orang stand for marriage. 

green recal spring and suggest youth and hope. 

purpl mean royalti and everyth regal. 

yellow is associ with great success. 

black is a symbol of sad and mourning. 

[67] 

which is your lucki stone? 

ever sinc time began, it has been a common belief that peopl deriv 

luck and good fortun by wear precious stones. a stone, however, that 

brought luck to one person might be ineffect when worn by someon else. 

thus everybodi is requir to find out which stone he or she must wear in 

order to enjoy the utmost good fortune. 

as a rule, the stone which ani particular person must choos is decid 

by the month in which that individu was born. but this it not invari 

the case. mani peopl have notic that luck has come to them when they 

have been wear some other stone than that decre by their birth-month. 

and, of course, the opposit has often happened. histori record a well-known 

case in point. the hope diamond, for instance, wreck the live 

of sever royal personages, even includ some that were born in april; 

while an opal, possess by member of the spanish royal family, brought 

disast to mani people, one after the other, although certain of them were 

born in october. 

clearly, then, the proper thing is for all of us to choos our lucki stone 

accord to our own preferences; but fail ani definit prefer to 

select it accord to the month of our birth. 

stone of the month 

twelv vers of poetri have been written which set down in rhyme 

the stone for all the month of the year. here they are:— 

januari 

by her, who in this month was born, 

no gem save garnet should be worn. 

they will ensur her constancy, 

true friendship and fidelity. 

februari 

the februari born shall find 

sincer and peac of mind, 

freedom from passion and from care, 

if they the amethyst will wear. 

march 

who in this world of ours, their eye 

in march first open, shall be wise, 

in day of peril, strong and brave, 

and wear a bloodston to their grave. 

[68] 

april 

those who from april date their years, 

should diamond wear lest bitter tear 

for vain repent flow: this stone, 

emblem of innoc is known. 

may 

who first behold the light of day, 

in spring sweet, floweri month of may, 

and wear an emerald all her life, 

shall be a love and love wife. 

june 

who come in summer to this earth 

and owe to june her time of birth, 

with ring of agat on her hand 

can health, wealth and lengthi life command. 

juli 
