

dreams—what they mean 

a 

abroad.—(dream go or gone) an earli journey. 

accident.—(b the victim of one) busi deal impend requir 

great caution. 

accident.—(to a friend or relative) a letter from him or her convey 

good news. 

anchor.—a voyag across the sea: (in water) a disappointment: (if a 

girl dreams) a sailor will fall in love with her. 

anger.—to dream of be angri with anyon mean that that person 

is a true friend. 

animals.—a a rule, luck; (domest animals) speedi return of absent 

friends, famili reconciliation: (wild animals) secret enemies. 

apples.—long life: (to a woman) mani year and mani children. 

arrow.—a letter has been written which will caus regret. 

axe.—a way will present itself soon to attain a much desir end. 

b 

ball.—(game) money come soon. (roll ball) an unexpect gift 

of money which will be soon spent. 

ballroom.—(danc with a dear friend) marriag to him or her. 

bananas.—a piec of good luck coming. 

band.—(musical) a lucki specul or busi deal. 

barefoot.—a success specul or bargain. 

barrel.—(full) money come quickly. 

bath.—health and long life: (if dreamer is a young girl) earli marriag 

to present lover. 

battle.—(bi girl) will short fall in love; (bi a soldier) promotion. 

bear.—(chas the dreamer) victori of an enemy: (bear run from 

dreamer) victori over an enemy. 

bees.—steadi pursuit of object in view will bring success. 

beggars.—to dream of beggar is a fortun sign to lover and busi 

people. 

blind.—to dream of be blind is a veri lucki sign; to see a blind 

person is a warn of danger. 

[73] 

blood.—to see blood mean great riches, an inheritance. 

boat.—th arriv of a dear friend. 

bouquet.—to receiv one mean much pleasure; to give one, constanc 

of a lover or friend. 

bracelet.—good luck and fortun coming. 

brother.—se dead brother or sister in a dream is a sign of long 

life. 

bulldog.—a good omen in love or business. 

burial.—to dream of be buri mean that wealth is coming—"a 

much wealth as earth laid over you." 

burning.—(houses, etc.) rich and prosperity. 

buying.—happi and contentment, a legacy. 

c 

cage.—(bird in) earli fortun marriage; (empty) friend or lover 

will go away. 

cakes.—to dream of ani kind of cake is a good omen. 

canary.—(singing) marriag and a charm house. 

cards.—(play at) speedi marriage. 

cathedral.—prosper and fortune. 

cemetery.—an omen of prosperity. 

chair.—an increas in the family. 

cherries.—good news, pleasur and enjoyment. 

children.—lucki omen: increas in wealth. 

chimney.—good luck, the higher the better. 

christening.—good fortun approaching. 

cock crowing.—great prosperity. 

coins.—(copper) good fortune; (silver) worry; (gold) commerci 

troubles. 

cold.—friend will be kind to you. 

cornfield.—health, wealth and pleasant times. 

cows.—prosperity, the more the better. 

d 

daffodils.—pleasur and amus in abundance. 

dagger.—a friend will confer a favor. 

[74] 

dead.—to dream of oneself as dead is a good and auspici sign of 

long life and success. 

death of a friend.—arriv of good news. 

digging.—good luck with perseverance. 

docks.—good news from abroad. 

dog.—a a rule, a favor sign; (dog barking) somebodi is tri to 

do you an ill turn; (dog fighting) serious quarrel between two friend of 

the dreamer. 

donkey.—lucki omen, usual a legacy. 

doves.—success, especi to lovers. to the married, they denot a 

pleasur in store. 

drowning.—(eith the dreamer or anoth person.) success, joy, 

prosperity. 

ducks.—increas prosper and happiness. 

e 

eagle.—success in a new place. 

ears.—a pleasant letter from a friend. 

eating.—(dream eating) ill luck; (see other eat) good luck. 

echo.—sick either of dreamer or relations. 

eggs.—good luck, money, success; (egg broken) failur and loss. 

elm tree.—a good turn offer by a male relative. 

elopement.—sign of a speedi marriage. 

emerald.—a sign of good luck and happiness. 

emptiness.—alway a bad sign in a dream. 

engagement.—(to dream of be engag to a handsom person) 

great pleasur in store; (to a plain person) worri and trouble. 

eyes.—in general a sign of good luck, and the prettier the eye the better. 

to dream of someon with a defect of the eye signifi minor misfortunes. 

f 

faces.—(smiling) happi time with friends; (pale and gloomy) troubl 

and poverty; (chang faces) a removal; (wash own face) repent 

for sin; (own face in glass) long-cherish secret plan will fail. 

fairy.—al dream of fairi are good omens—success and riches. 

falling.—ind some misfortune. 

fan.—quarrels, a rival in love. 

[75] 

farmyard.—good fortun coming; comfort and happiness. 

feathers.—(white) success and riches; (black) loss and failure. 

fence.—(climbing) a sudden rise in life. 

fields.—(green) prosperity, a happi marriage, handsom children; 

(clover, barley, wheat, etc.) great prosper and happiness. 

figs.—a good dream, joy and pleasure; (if a woman dreams) happi 

marriag and mani children. 

fleet.—(at sea) realize of cherish hopes. 

floating.—to dream of float on water is a good and lucki sign. 

floods.—success after triumph over difficulties. 

flour.—death of a relat bring a legacy. 

flowers.—prosperity. 

fly.—(swarm of flies) rival and jealous person are spread scandal. 

flying.—(without wings) success in love and business; (if end by 

a fall) failur in attain object; (with wings) bad omen—frustr ambition. 

fog.—bad dream—busi losses. 

foreign.—(country) success and prosper at home. 

forest.—troubl and loss through rivals. 

fork.—a warn of immin danger. 

fountain.—(playing) good luck, happi time and laughter. 

fox.—troubl through secret enemy; (kill one) good luck. 

friends.—(abs of) speedi return; (death of) good news; (illness) 

bad news; (in good health) their prosperity. 

frogs.—bewar of flatter and pessimists. 

frost.—success through aid of friends. 

fruit.—usu a good dream, accord to kind of fruit; (dreamer 

eat or throw away fruit) bad sign. 

funeral.—a legaci or a rich marriage. 

g 

gas.—minor discomfort and annoyances. 

gate.—an obstacl to success will sudden disappear. 

geese.—happiness, success; (to hear gees cackling) a profit busi 

deal will be quick concluded. 

gems.—usu an unfortun omen. 

[76] 

ghosts.—to dream of ghost is invari the presag of misfortune. 

giant.—good fortune, success in busi or love. 

gifts.—(receiving) good fortun coming. 

gypsies.—a profitless voyag to mani strang countries. 

glass.—to dream of anyth made of glass refer to women; (receiv 

glass of water) birth in the family. 

gloves.—usu bad luck; (glove on hands) honor and safety; (lose 

gloves) loss in business. 

goat.—bad luck, some misfortune, especi unlucki to sailors; (white 

goat) a profit venture; (mani goats) an inheritance. 

god.—a good dream—health and happiness. 

gold.—omen of loss and bad luck: (dreamer find gold) a sign that 

he will be robbed; (dreamer pay out gold) a sign that he will increas 

the number of his friends. 

gooseberries.—tim and troubl spent onli for the benefit of others. 

h 

hair.—rich and fine clothes; (hair fall over face) a come event 

will caus displeasure; (have hair cut) loss in business; (becom bald) 

great danger. 

hammer.—triumph over difficulties. 

hammock.—loss of someth that is prized. 

happiness.—a presag of doubt and difficulty. 

hare.—(alive) friendship: (dead) good luck: (hare running) a lengthi 

journey. 

harvest.—hop will not come to fruition. 

hat.—(new) a small success: (blown off or damaged) losses. 

hatchet.—a solut near to exist difficulties. 

hawk.—a happi omen—success in life. 

hay.—good luck: (dreamer cut hay) troubl and sorrow. 

hazel nut.—(eating) troubl and discord. 

head.—good omen—health and money. 

horseshoe.—(se one) a journey: (find one) great good lock. 

hospital.—misery, poverty, wounds. 

house.—good luck: (dreamer build house) unlucki dream, signifi 

loss and sickness. 

hunchback.—a troubl life, with mani up and downs. 

[83] 
