[pg 24] 
chapter ii 
the sign of the zodiac 


the zodiac is an imaginari belt of the heaven through which the sun and planet move in their appar 
revolut round the earth. it extend from 23° 27′ abov the plane of the equat to the same distanc below 
it, be bound by the tropic of cancer on the north and by that of capricorn on the south. the eclipt is a 
circl transect this belt at an angl of 23° 27′ to the plane of the equator. the point where it cut the 
equat are call the equinoxes. 
the eclipt is divid into twelv equal sections, count from the vernal equinox. these are call the sign 
of the zodiac. each sign occupi 30 degre of the circle. 
their name and symbol are as follows:— 
1. aries, the ram ♈ 7. libra, the balanc ♎ 
2. taurus, the bull ♉ 8. scorpio, the scorpion ♏ 
3. gemini, the twin 
9. sagittarius, the hunter ♐ 
♊ 
4. cancer, the crab ♋ 10. capricornus, the goat ♑ 
11. aquarius, the waterman 
5. leo, the lion ♌ 
♒ 
6. virgo, the virgin ♍ 12. pisces, the fish ♓ 


for astrolog purpos they are group accord to the element and the constitut which they represent, [pg 25] 

thus:— 
elements. 
fire—aries, leo, sagittarius. 
earth—taurus, virgo, capricornus. 
air—gemini, libra, aquarius. 
water—cancer, scorpio, pisces. 


c onstitutions. 
movable—aries, cancer, libra, capricornus. 
fixed—taurus, leo, scorpio, aquarius. 
flexed—gemini, virgo, sagittarius, pisces. 


everi altern sign, begin with aries, is male and the rest are female. aries, male; taurus, female; gemini, 
male; cancer, female, &c. the sign aries, leo, capricornus are call barren, while taurus, cancer, scorpio, 
and pisc are fruitful. ari govern the east, cancer the north, libra the west, and capricornus the south. 
the double-bodi sign are gemini, sagittarius, and pisces. it is import that all these classiﬁc should 
be learned, as they form an essenti part of the doctrin of astrology, and are frequent employ in the 
read of a horoscope. 
the type of peopl under the various sign should also be known as intim as possible. a person is said to 
be “under” a sign—that is to say, under it inﬂuence, when that sign is rise in the east at the moment of birth. [pg 26] 

you will recognis these type among your friend and associates:— 
ari produc a person of lean body, long neck, high cheek-bones, grey eyes, sandi or sad brown hair, which 
is either wiri and straight or crisp and curling. the front teeth are usual larg and prominent. 
taurus give a full, thick-set body, strong neck and shoulders, full brown eyes, dark curl hair, full lips, rather 
wide mouth, and round, bullet-shap head. the hand and feet are short and fleshy. 
gemini produc a tall, active, and upright body, long arm and legs, wide, thin lips, straight and oftenretroussé 
nose, lank, straight black hair, rather wide shoulders, and thin body. 
cancer denot a rather short, squat ﬁgure, full lymphat body, pale complexion, round face, broad forehead, 
sad brown hair, larg aqueous eyes, full chest, short, fleshi hand and feet. 
leo render it subject tall, broad shouldered, ﬁne and man ﬁgures, small round head, fair complexion, blue 
or grey eyes, flaxen or fair brown hair, upright and fearless carriage. 
virgo render the bodi thin and active, the head well developed, the forehead broad, hair light brown and 
wave off the forehead, eye blue, shoulder broad, the type be of an intellectu or artist form. 
libra give an eleg body, well-develop limbs, ﬁne oval face, straight nose, ﬁne blue eye (sometim deep 
brown), ﬂaxen or chestnut hair, beauti complexion. the highest type of beauti are to be found under this 
sign. 
scorpio give a short, thick-set, and power ﬁgure, broad, deep chest, duski or sallow complexion, dark [pg 27] 

curl or crisp hair, strong and rather bow legs. this is a veri viril and robust type. 
sagittarius give a tall person, well-mad ﬁgure, eleg limbs, oval and rather long face, brown or chestnut hair 
grow oﬀ the forehead, ﬁne express eyes, rather promin and of a dark brown or blue colour, long nose, 
slight aquiline. 
capricornus produc a slight and rather ill-form person, long and scraggi neck, promin features, narrow 
chin, weak and frequent decrepit limbs, weak chest and slope shoulders. frequent the ﬁgure is wiri and 
suggest of consider power of endurance. the brow are prominent, the nose long, and the face thin and 
hard-set. 
aquarius contribut the ﬁnest type of beauti next to libra. the saxon type is dominant. a tall ﬁgure, well 
form and rounded, fair complexion and blue eyes, ﬂaxen hair, straight features, well-develop chin, and ﬁne, 
clear forehead. 
pisc produc one of rather short stature, short limbs, lymphat body, pale complexion, limpid blue eyes, 
black or brown eyes, short nose, full lips, round face, small hand and feet. 
the short sign are taurus, cancer, capricornus, and pisces. the tall sign are gemini, leo, sagittarius, and 
aquarius. the other are of medium height. 
the planet rise in each sign will alway alter the type by impress their own characterist on the subject. 
each sign has a ruler, and the posit of the ruler of the rise sign has much to do with the physic 
conformation, as if taurus be rise and venus, it ruler, be in leo, the person will be taller and fairer than [pg 28] 

indic by taurus alone. pure type are veri uncommon. 
the rulership of the planet in the sign is as follows:— 

saturn govern aquarius and capricornus. 
jupit govern pisc and sagittarius. 
mar govern ari and scorpio. 
venus govern taurus and libra. 
mercuri govern gemini and virgo. 
the moon govern cancer, and leo is govern by the sun. 

when a planet is found in a sign over which it is said to govern it act more strong than usual, and when in the 
opposit sign to those it govern it is said to be in it “fall,” when it is weaker than usual. 
planet govern opposit sign to one anoth are said to be “enemies.” such do not produc harmoni 
and favour result when act in conjunction. 





