[pg 29] 
chapter iii 
the celesti hous 


the imaginari circl which pass immedi over your head as you face the south is call the prime 
vertical. this is divid for astrolog purpos into twelv equal divis call houses, six of which are 
abov the horizon and six below it. they are count from the east horizon under the earth to the west, and 
thenc through the zenith to the east again. the ﬁgure in section iv., chapter v., will make the idea easi of 
comprehension. 
each such divis or hous carri it own signiﬁcation, and it has been ascertain beyond all doubt or cavil 
that the rule of the ancient in this matter is altogeth reliable, howev empir it may appear. 
the first hous govern the person appearance, but chieﬂi the face and head. the second hous rule over 
ﬁnance, movabl eﬀects, commerce. in the bodi it govern the neck and throat. the third hous govern short 
journeys, letters, and other mean of communication, near relat or neighbours. in the bodi it govern the 
arm and lungs. the fourth hous govern real estate, the residence, the produc of the earth, the mother of [pg 30] 

the subject, and the end of life. in the body, the breast and thorax. the fifth hous govern progeny, the sex 
instincts, domest relations, and social pleasures. in the body, the back and heart. the sixth hous govern 
the health, servants, and person comfort of the subject, clothes, food, and other physic requisites, 
sanitation, hygiene. in the bodi it rule over the abdomen and lower viscera. the seventh hous has dominion 
over marriage, contracts, agreements, partners, and matter of exchange. in the bodi it has relat to the loin 
and kidneys. the eighth hous rule death, loss, legaci and dowries, and matter appertain to the 
deceased. in the bodi it is relat to the excretori system. the ninth hous is said to govern long journeys, 
publications, religi beliefs, foreign lands, and legal aﬀairs. in the bodi it rule the thighs. the tenth hous 
rule over position, honour and fame of the subject, the father, superior of all orders. in the bodi it rule over 
the knees. the eleventh hous govern friends, social relations, societi and compani with which the 
subject is concerned. in the bodi it has relat to the leg from calf to ankle. the twelfth hous rule 
ambushes, restraints, privations, imprisonments, conﬁnements, and all limit of the person freedom. in 
the bodi it rule the ankl and feet. 
appli these signiﬁc to the interpret of a horoscop it will be seen that if mar should be rise at 
the moment of birth there will be a scar or mark on the face. observ of this sort will frequent assist to 
determin the time of birth when it is not known. similar with other planet in the same or other houses; but of 
this more anon. 




[pg 31] 
chapter iv 
the astronom aspect 


aspect are certain angular distanc measur on the ecliptic, and they form a fundament part of 
astrolog science. ani planet may be good or bad in it eﬀect on the charact and destiny, accord to the 
aspect that it throw to the chief point of the horoscope. the aspect are: the semisquar aspect of 45 
degrees, sextil of 60 degrees, squar of 90 degrees, trine of 120 degrees, sesquiquadr of 135 degrees, and 
the opposit of 180 degrees. there is also the conjunction, when bodi are in the same degre or part of a 
sign. 
the good aspect are the trine and sextile; the evil be the semisquare, square, sesquiquadrate, and 
opposition. the aspect of a planet determin it eﬀects, whether for good or evil. the conjunct is good with 
good planets, such as jupit and venus, and evil with malef planet such as mar and saturn. 
when planet are the same distanc north or south of the equat they are in parallel declin (p.d.), and 
they then act as if in conjunction. also when planet are in mutual disposition, that is to say, occupi one 
anoth signs, they act as if they were in conjunction. 
planet in conjunct act accord to their simpl natures, but when in aspect, accord to the natur of that [pg 32] 

aspect. the beneﬁc planet jupiter, venus, sun, moon, and also mercuri when in good disposit with anoth 
planet or in a congeni sign, produc good eﬀect by their conjunct and by their trine and sextil aspects; 
but when in square, semisquare, or sesquisquar aspect they are uniform evil in eﬀect. on the other hand, the 
maleﬁc planet neptune, uranus, saturn, and mars, togeth with mercuri when ill-dispos or in uncongeni 
signs, are evil in their eﬀect when in conjunct with the signiﬁc point of the horoscope; also when in evil 
aspect; but they nevertheless produc good effect when in good aspect. 

the significators. 
the more import point of the horoscop to which aspect can be thrown are call “signiﬁcators.” the 
general signiﬁc in ani horoscop are the sun, the moon, the midheaven (the degre which hold the 
meridian of the horoscope), and the ascend (the degre which is rising). but everi planet can be a particular 
signif in it own province, namely, in the sign which it rules, and the hous in which it is found at birth. 
in a general sens the moon is signiﬁc of the mother, femal relations, the person health and fortun and 
the chang incid to these. the sun in the same way indic the father, male relations, the vital principle, 
and position. mercuri is the signiﬁc of the mind and intellect, the faculti generally. venus is signiﬁcatrix of 
love aﬀairs, domest relations, pleasures, and of young femal relations, sisters, &c. mar is signiﬁc of [pg 33] 

enterprises, strifes, and young male relations. jupit is signiﬁc of increas and emoluments; saturn of 
legacies, inheritance, and age persons; uranus of civic and government bodies; neptun of voyag and 
psychic experiences. the chief point to be regarded, however, are the midheaven, the ascendant, and the 
place of the sun and moon. 



[pg 34] 
