
section iii 
how to read the horoscop 
chapter i 
the planet in the hous 


it is imposs to categor state the eﬀect which are due to the posit of the planet in the sever 
houses, becaus veri much depend upon the sign they are in and the aspect they have from other planets. 
the mean of judg the eﬀect is veri simple, when onc the natur of the planet and the dominion of the 
sever hous have been thorough digested. thus, it is ﬁrst necessari to see in what hous a planet is 
situated. then consid the natur of the planet in the follow concret manner: 
neptun mean chaos, confusion, deception. 
uranus, eccentricity, originality, estrangement. 
saturn, privation, hindrance, denial. 
jupiter, affluence, fruitfulness, increase. 
sun, dignities, honours. 
mars, excess, impulse, quarrels. 
venus, peace, happiness, agreement mercury, commerce, versatility, adaptability. [pg 52] 

moon, changes, publicity. 
now look to the thing that are govern by the hous in which ani particular planet is situat at the moment 
of birth (sect. i., chap. iii.). 
suppos saturn to be found in the 11th house. saturn is “privation” and the 11th hous is the domain of 
“friends.” henc a pauciti of friends, or such as there may be are evil or unfortun to the subject. jupit in 
the 2nd house, in the same manner, would signifi “increase” of “money and possessions.” mar in the 7th 
would indic “quarrels” with “partners”; and so on. each planet reﬂect it own natur upon the aﬀair 
govern by the hous in which it is found at the moment of birth. 
it will not infrequ happen, however, that there are more than one planet in the same house. suppos two 
planet to occupi the same house. in such case one may be good (jupiter), and the other evil (mars). it is then 
necessari to take ﬁrst that which ﬁrst come to the horizon or midheaven, that is to say, the one which is in the 
earlier part of the house, and next that which follows. thus saturn follow by jupit in the 11th house, would 
signifi misfortun by mean of advis and friends, follow at a later period in the life by some great good 
through the same source. the degre which separ the planet will indic the year which elaps between 
these chang of fortune. similar if there be more than two planet in the same house; in such case you may 
safe predict mani chang in that depart of life which the hous is said to rule. 
but the fact of a planet be in a hous is not of itself suﬃcient evid from which to make a judgment. the [pg 53] 

aspect which that planet has must also be considered, for in this matter saturn when throw a good aspect to 
ani of the signiﬁcators—th sun, moon, ascend or midheaven, and well aspect by other planets, is to be 
prefer to jupit when the latter is bad place and aspected; for jupit has his own ill eﬀects, and saturn 
has his good inﬂuences. jupit is onli a beneﬁc when act by conjunct or good aspect with anoth 
planet, and saturn is onli a malef when act by conjunct or evil aspect. 
these thing be duli considered, it is possibl to arrive, with even brief experience, at the result that are 
signifi by the planet in the sever houses. 




[pg 54] 
chapter ii 
the constitut 


the sun is the chief signiﬁc of the constitution, and the aspect he hold to the other planet are to be 
considered. thus if he be found in good aspect, or at least not in evil aspect, to the other planets, the 
constitut may be judg as sound. 
when, however, the sun is aﬄict by some planet and assist by others, there will be onli a moder 
constitution, and judgment has to be made as to which inﬂuenc predominates, the good or evil. when the 
aﬄict planet are angular—that is to say, in the 1st, 4th, 7th, or 10th houses—th congenit or hereditari 
tendenc to organ diseas is by that circumst so much the stronger. but when the assist planet are 
angular, the predisposit to diseas is consider mitigated, and in most case entir overcome. 
the predisposit of the bodi to aﬀect of a constitut natur is to be judg from the preval of evil 
aspect to the sun, and the part of the bodi liabl to be aﬀect are judg from the sign which are occupi 
by the afflict bodies. 
the various aﬀect due to the sever planet have alreadi been cite (sect. i., chap. i.). the sign are 
group for purpos of patholog studi as follows:— 
the movabl signs—aries, cancer, libra, and capricornus—hav relat to the head, stomach, skin, kidneys, [pg 55] 

liver, and spine. 
the fix signs—taurus, leo, scorpio, and aquarius—ar relat to the throat, heart, blood, and excretori 
system. 
the common signs—gemini, virgo, sagittarius, and pisces—ar relat to the lungs, bowels, and nervous 
system. 
it will also be advis to read sect. i., chap. ii., in order to determin the special point liabl to aﬀections, the 
natur of the affect be judg sole by the planet which cast the malef aspect to the sun. 
when the sun is found to be aﬄict by sever planets, and at the same time there is no assist from the 
good aspect or conjunct of other bodies, then the constitut is deem faulti and liabl to earli 
disruption. but when there are sever planet aﬄict and at the same time some beneﬁc inﬂuenc from 
others, it is probabl that there will be prolong diseas and physic weakness, though life will continue. 
death in infanc occur when the maleﬁc planet are immedi rise or culmin at the birth in evil aspect 
to the luminari which at the time may be abov the horizon. also when there are maleﬁc planet immedi 
set or pass the nadir, in evil aspect to the luminari below the horizon. but when there are mitig 
inﬂuenc from the good aspect of the beneﬁc planets, or the luminaries, the maleﬁc planet will not induc 
death, but there will be great difficulti in rearing. 




[pg 56] 
chapter iii 
health and sick 


the aspect of the moon are the chief consider in the matter of sickness. if the moon be found to be 
aﬄict by the evil aspect of sever planets, and no assist be given by the good aspect of others, then 
the health will be precari and frequent spell of ill will result. the moon be well aspect and not in 
ani way aﬄicted, show that the health will be well established, and that there will be immun from sick of 
all sorts. 
the consider necessari to be made in this matter are similar to those which have been cite in regard to 
the sun and the constitution, except that we substitut the moon for the sun. for, wherea the sun govern the 
vital power in man, the moon govern the function powers, and wherea the sun denot those aﬀect 
which are congenit or hereditary, the moon denot such as are brought about by caus after birth. similarly, 
the sun denot aﬀect which are incident to the body, while the moon denot such as are accident 
thereto. 
these point be born in mind, they may be memoris at sight:— [pg 57] 


sun. moon. 
organic. functional. 
hereditary. acquired. 
incidental. accidental. 


but it should be observ that the constitut may be strong and the health may be at the same time veri bad, 
or, on the other hand, the health may be good and the constitut may be weak. in the ﬁrst case, there would 
be a long life of consider suﬀer from ill-health; and in the second case, there would be littl or no ill- 
health for some consider time, but the constitut would give way and the vital power becom deplet by 
the first serious ill that occurred. 
onli when the sun and moon are both unaﬄict by evil aspect or conjunctions, the health and constitut 
are both good, and there is everi indic of a robust and vigor life reach to a ripe old age. 
when the sun and moon are both heavili aﬄicted, and there is no assist given by good aspects, there is 
everi probabl of death in infancy, or befor reach maturity. 
for reason which are alli to the connect exist between the constitut and the health, the good aspect 
of the moon to the sun at birth is an excel augury, for it indic co-ordin between the organ and 
functional. where this co-ordin exist there is alway consider power of recuperation, so that ill is 
easili overcom and the balanc of power restor in the system. 
maleﬁc planet rise and aﬄict either the sun or moon indic prolong ill-health, and most frequent [pg 58] 

some perman hurt to the body. 
when predisposit to ill is shown in the horoscope, the particular aﬀect can be determin by the sign 
which the aﬄict planet hold. thus if saturn aﬄict the moon from aries, you will judg some hurt and 
obstruct in the head, chill and colds, inﬂuenza, coryza, &c. similar mar in leo would indic function 
defect of the heart due to acceler action and overstrain, such as result from fevers. 
a good aspect of the planet jupit and venus is of materi help in counteract the inﬂuenc of maleﬁc 
aspect or evil positions. 
thus it will be seen that the health may be judg entir apart from the constitution, the planet which are in 
aspect to the moon be of first consideration, and next those which may be rise at the time of birth. 




[pg 59] 
chapter iv 
how to read charact and disposit 


ptolemi says: “mercuri is the ruler of the ration soul, the moon of the anim soul.” by this he would mean, no 
doubt, that mercuri has relat to the faculti of the mind, while the moon is relat to brain function. there are 
certain attribut of the mind which are distinct of the human being, and certain other qualiti which are 
common to man and the lower animals. these latter are under the dominion of the moon, while mercuri has 
chief signif of the ration faculties. 
the posit and aspect of the moon and mercuri are therefor to be consid in make judgment of the 
mental endow and disposit of the subject. 
planet that are in conjunct or aspect to either the moon or mercuri will impress their natur strong on the 
charact and disposition. the natur of the planet have alreadi been recit (sect. i., chap. i.), and it is 
therefor onli necessari to consid further, in this connection, the natur of the aspect that is thrown to the 
mental signiﬁc by the other bodies. thus the sun be in trine to the moon will give a proper degre of [pg 60] 

independ and dignity, while the squar aspect or opposit of the sun would indic an excess of pride, 
harm to the subject in his ordinari relationships. in the same manner, the good aspect of jupit would show 
benevol and regul philanthropy, while the opposit or other evil aspect of the same bodi would 
indic extravag and ostentati display of charity. 
the good and bad aspect of the planet may be sum up in a few line as follows:— 

in good aspect. in evil aspect. 
neptune—genius, inspiration. insanity, obsession. 
uranus—originality, invention. obstinacy, eccentricity. 
saturn—steadfastness, fidelity. deceitfulness, suspicion. 
jupiter—benevolence, joviality. ostentation, profligacy. 
mars—energy, executiveness. impulse, destructiveness. 
sun—dignity, independence. vanity, egotism. 
venus—affability, art. self-indulgence, disorderliness. 
mercury—alertness, ingenuity. inquisitiveness, meddling. 
moon—grace, idealism. inconstancy, awkwardness. 


the general trend of the disposit and habit of mind is judg by the posit of the major of the planets, 
accord to the “constitution” of the sign they occupy. thus, the major of the planet be in— 
cardin or movabl sign indic execut ability, busi aptitude, pioneer spirit, ambition, capabl to 
cut out a line in life for oneself, and to make headway against diﬃculties. such person are usual the foremost 
in their particular sphere of life, and are alway found in the most progress movements, reforms, &c. 
fix signs—stability, patience, endurance, method, caution, and diplomacy. such person are apt to becom [pg 61] 

the origin of school of thought, policies, and schemes. they have ﬁxiti of purpose, determination, 
independence, and pivot stability. they sit still and the world revolv around them. 
flex or common signs—versatility, flexibility, suavity, adaptability, and lack of originality. such peopl usual 
have too mani iron in the ﬁre, and take in hand more than they can bring to satisfactori conclusion. this is 
due to their versatility. they have a superﬁci knowledg of mani things, but lack the persist to bring that 
knowledg to practic eﬀect. at the same time their adapt is the occas of mani success in life, and 
their agreeableness, sympathy, and suaviti creat mani friend for them. 
in the wheel of life the cardin sign denot the rim or tyre which is ever on the move, have the greatest 
acceleration. the common sign repres the spoke of the wheel, unit the tyre to the nave, and in that 
sens repres the power of adaptability. the fix sign repres the nave, which remain quiescent and 
still, be use by that pivot stabil and appar non-entity. 
thus, while the sign-group of the planet are use in give the keynot of the natur and disposition, the 
particular faculti and characterist are to be judg onli from the aspect of the planet to the moon and 
mercury. further, it will be note that those planet which occupi the 3rd and 9th houses, and those also which 
are just rise at the moment of birth, will strong impress themselv on the nature, apart from ani aspect 
they may hold to the mental rulers. this is on account of the natur relationship of those hous to the mind 
and it mean of expression. 
due attent must be paid to the posit and aspect of those planet which are in aspect to the mental [pg 62] 

rulers, for if they be bad placed, in uncongeni signs, and themselv bad aspect by other planets, they 
will not act with the same direct and forc as they otherwis would do. 
it is of cours admitted, in all astrolog inquiries, that the eﬀect of heredity, train and associ count for 
something. a man who is generat from a vitiat parentage, bad nourish and imperfect trained, cannot 
be expected, even with the best aspects, to manifest the highest faculti in their fullest or most perfect 
expressions. i have not the slightest doubt that mani a clodpol was born under similar aspect to those which 
obtain at the birth of shakespeare, raphael, newton, or cæsar. i am not dismayed. non gli astri muovono 
solament per roma! who shall tell the tale of the world starved, neglected, and submerg genius? we are 
do the right thing, at all events, in keep the school-door wide open. 
but to continue. the inspir and ardent tempera is indic by the major of planet be in fieri 
signs. the mental or intellectu tempera is shown by the major in aerial signs. the psychic or emot 
tempera by the major in wateri signs, and the practic or sordid tempera by the major be in 
earthi signs. 
the rise sign at birth often impress itself strong on the mind of the subject, and it characterist are 
those which belong to the planet which govern it, and the “elemental” natur of the sign itself. 
thus you have the chief key to the estim of charact in the individual, and when onc the student is [pg 63] 

convinc by experi of the paramount reliabl of this method of character-delineation, it use will need 
no special pointing. 

mental and brain disorders. 
when either the moon or mercuri is aﬄict by the maleﬁc planets, that is to say, when neptune, uranus, 
saturn, or mar are in conjunct or evil aspect with the mental signiﬁcators, and there be no reliev aspect 
from the beneﬁc planets, jupiter, venus, or the sun, then there is everi predisposit to aﬀect of the brain 
and nervous system. this is the more to be fear when the moon or mercuri is aﬄict in the ﬂex or 
common signs. this observ has been scientiﬁc establish by mr. a. g. trent, in his littl work entitl 
“the soul and the stars,” to which the student is refer for a mass of statist evidence. 




[pg 64] 

