chapter v 
financi prospect 


look to the planet which are in the 2nd house, and the aspect to them. if ani planet be therein, and well 
aspect by others, the ﬁnancial condit will be competent. if a beneﬁc (jupit or venus) be therein, and free 
from evil aspects, the same eﬀect will accrue. but if the beneﬁc in the 2nd should have good aspect from other 
planets, then there will be consider wealth. 
ani planet in the 2nd house, bad aspected, will produc diﬃculti in acquir money, and if it be a maleﬁc 
planet which occupi the 2nd hous under these conditions, there will be time of stress and even poverty. 
continu hardship and poverti is shown by maleﬁc planet in the 2nd house, in evil aspect to the moon or sun; 
while at the same time the planet in the 2nd hous will be sever afflict by others. 
saturn in the midheaven aﬄict the sun or moon is an indic of revers of fortune, and such person 
usual attain consider posit in the world and are then deplet of everything. 
jupit or venus in the 10th house, and near the meridian, are sign of good fortun and success in life, and [pg 65] 

the same result are due to their rise at birth. 
in a general manner the aspect to the moon in a male horoscop or the sun in a femal horoscop should be 
consulted, and the planet in good aspect thereto will show the mean of good fortune, while those in evil 
aspect will indic the sourc of loss and hurt, accord to the hous the aﬄict or assist planet 
occupy. thus jupit in good aspect to the moon from the 11th hous show gain by friends, advisers, and co- 
oper measures, becaus the 11th hous rule these relationship and jupit is the index of increase. 
similarly, uranus in the 7th hous would show gain by the marriag partner if in good aspect to the moon, or 
loss therebi if in evil aspect. 
mar in the 2nd hous show good earn capacity, becaus mar is an ambiti and industri planet i(.e., 
it produc such eﬀect in the person), and the 2nd hous is the domain of ﬁnance. but at the same time it 
show extravag and inabl to save money, for mar is impuls and lack thrift. 
the 6th hous well occupi show faith and advantag servant and employés, such as will augment 
the fortun and do good work for the subject. 
neptun in the 2nd show complic and an involv state of ﬁnance, and frequent it show loss by fraud 
and imposition; though in good aspect to other planet it show gain by such nefari means. uranus indic 
mani up and down of fortune, sudden and unexpect rise and falls. 
thus each planet is judg accord to it natur and the aspect it throw to the moon or sun, while the [pg 66] 

planet in the 2nd hous are judg by their own natur and the aspect which they receive. 
inherit is shown by a beneﬁc planet in the 5th or 11th hous in good aspect to saturn; but indirect 
inherit can be the result of saturn in good aspect to jupit from ani part of the figure. 
legaci are shown by good planets, or planet well aspected, in the 8th house; or by jupit in good aspect to 
uranus from ani part of the heavens. 
gain by marriag is shown by beneﬁc planet in the 8th house, becaus the 8th is 2nd from the 7th, and the 7th 
hous rule over the partner. 
the potenti of each horoscop is capabl of be increas by due attent to the sourc of gain, as shown 
by the posit and aspect of the planet in various part of the heavens; but chieﬂi by associ oneself 
with person whose horoscop are in harmoni with one own. thus it happen that individu are lift to 
posit and aﬄuenc through their associ with person whose horoscop are in sympathi with theirs. 
(see chap. xi. of this section.) 
the sun and moon be in good aspect to one anoth will prevent disaster, or will alway provid a mean of 
restor of fortunes, becaus it is an index of general good fortun and continu support. such person as 
have this aspect in their horoscop need never fear misfortune, for if they should fall into disast in one 
place, they will alway turn up in anoth with a complet adjust of their position. but when the sun and 
moon are in evil aspect, and particular when the maleﬁc planet are in elev in the heavens, continu 
misfortun dog the footsteps, and though there be spell of good fortune, they are brief and attend with [pg 67] 

troubles. 
the beneﬁc planets, jupiter, venus, and sun, be well elev in the heavens, that is to say, in the 10th or 
11th houses, it is a sign of preponder good fortune. but when the maleﬁc are in elev the revers 
result happen. 

the line of least resistance. 
it is a law in natur that the line of least resist is that of greatest progress. the lightn ﬂash doe not 
come straight to earth, but zigzag by the line of least resistance. the great river do not come by a direct cours 
to the ocean, but by mani turn and backward reaches, becaus they follow the path of least resistance. when 
one come to take account of the year of human life that are spent in the vain endeavour to achiev the 
impossible, the lesson of natur are worth reciting. but what is imposs to one man is facil to another, and 
the greatest economi of eﬀort is therefor to be secur by proper regard to suitabl of occup and 
direct of effort. 
the principl of astrolog enabl us to determin the line of action which at all time will be the most fruit of 
results, and in the matter of money-mak the matter is decid in the follow manner: that planet which has 
a trine or sextil aspect of the moon, and is at the same time elev abov the maleﬁc planets, especi if it 
be itself assist by the good aspect of other planets, receiv ﬁrst consideration. the hous it is in will 
indic the sourc of beneﬁt, but the sign it is in will show the mean through which it will come. thus if uranus [pg 68] 

should be in the midheaven, in trine aspect to the moon, and itself receiv a good aspect from either the sun, 
jupiter, or venus, it will indic gain through government bodies, authorities, and person of high rank. if 
uranus should be in the sign cancer, it would point to matter associ with the ocean, marin aﬀairs, or 
those in which water is the element in chief employ; as in marin engineering, shipping, dock building, &c. but if 
uranus had been in the 11th house, and in the sign scorpio, then the sourc of gain would be by mean of 
companies, syndicates, and associ of a collect nature, and the sign scorpio would show it to be 
connect with naval defenc (becaus scorpio is a martial and wateri sign) or the utilis of wast 
materials, inﬂamm oils, &c., or by system of drainage, which repres the excretori system of a town. by 
look chieﬂi to the natur of the planet concerned, and that of the sign it occupies, a good artist will readili 
describ the particular line which is to be pursued. 
but here, as in everi other matter upon which judgment is made, attent must be paid to the charact and 
disposit of the subject, his aptitud and qualiﬁcations, for it is obvious of littl use recommend literatur 
or the law to one whose sole capabl lie in unintellectu directions. natur aptitude, supplement by the 
necessari training, are the first considerations, for without these success in ani direct is but ill assured. 




[pg 69] 
chapter vi 
the posit in life 


this is to be judg from the posit of the major of the planets, but princip from the midheaven, the 
planet therein and it aspects. thus, if you ﬁnd the major of the planet rising, that is to say, in the 10th, 
11th, 12th, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd hous the subject will be a candid for responsibility, ambiti of honour and 
position, and general independent. if these or the major of them be well aspect he will becom a man of 
position, employ others; or, if a woman, will hold an import posit in her sphere of life, and be esteem 
in the social world. 
if the degre on the midheaven receiv good aspect from the major planets, the posit will be honour 
and secure. 
venus or jupiter, or the sun well aspected, in the midheaven, denot a superior position, honours, and 
distinction. the same will result if these be rising. 
when the major of the planet are abov the horizon, even though they be not rising, the subject will have 
respons thrust upon him, even though he should not desir them. if the major of these planet be well [pg 70] 

aspected, he will acquit himself credit and attain to honours. 
it is alway fortun for the posit that there should be planet exact on the cusp of either the 2nd, 3rd, 
6th, 8th, or 12th houses, for then there will be everi opportun of secur fame and advanc in life. 
but when ani of the maleﬁc planet are found exact on or nearest to the meridian, whether abov or below 
the horizon, there will be loss of position, reversal, a sinist fame, or disgrace. 
the 10th hous repres the fame and honour of a person, and the 4th hous repres the end of life and 
that which milit against the fame and honour. therefor when there are good planet in these places, the 
subject will meet with reward and honour commensur with his eﬀorts; but when evil planet occupi the 
meridian, he will at best sustain his posit in life with great difficulty. 
it is futil for ani one to suppos that the posit of a beneﬁc planet in the meridian of the horoscop will bring 
him to fame and elev him in the world irrespect of his own endeavours. the planet oper on human 
aﬀair in term of human thought and action, and that by ﬁxed laws; never adventitiously. that “the god help 
those who help themselves” to the extent that natur law permit, is a truth which astrolog fulli provid for. 
fit and fortun are as caus and effect to one anoth in respect of planetari action in human life. 
mani planet in cardin sign will dispos a man to seek fame, and when the midheaven of the horoscop is 
well aspect or there be fortun planet therein, he will attain it. cardin sign on the angl of the [pg 71] 

horoscop (the meridian and horizon), produc fame outlast death. the same if either of the luminari be 
exact on the equinoxes. 
venus in the midheaven give social elev and lift a person abov the sphere of birth. good planet in the 
11th show patronage. 
but when the luminari are heavili aﬄict there will be an inconst fortun and mani reverses, so that 
posit gain will be lost again. 
most of the planet under the horizon show success and posit in the latter part of life, while if they be 
between the 4th and 7th cusps, there will be advantag after marriage, or by mean of partnerships. 
in judg of the mean by which the posit will be sustained, respect must be had to the posit of those 
planet which are in good aspect to the midheaven, or to beneﬁc planet in the midheaven, and if none be so 
situated, then those which hold beneﬁc aspect to either the sun or moon at birth must be taken, and judgment 
made accord to the natur of the planet and the sign it occupies. prefer should alway be given to that 
planet which has the strongest aspect for good. thus if two planet were in trine, that which is in elev 
should be preferred, especi if it be strengthen by the good aspect of other planets. 




[pg 72] 
chapter vii 
the choic of occup 


the enorm wast of forc and time entail by the experiment trip upon which most young men embark at 
the outset of their career in life, might be great reduc by a proper knowledg of individu aptitud in relat 
to circumstances. the averag boy cannot readili make up his mind as to what occup he will follow, 
becaus he doe not know either enough of his own power or of the world in which he is call upon to use 
them. parent are in the same diﬃculty. they must need wait to see how a boy will shape out. they studi his 
inclin to the best of their ability, but without come to a deﬁnit conclus ani sooner than the boy 
himself. given a fair education, such as may ﬁt him for almost anything, but which specialis him for noth in 
particular, he is put to some desk or bench and there left to his own resources. by a fortun chance, he may 
ﬁnd himself suit to his post. more frequent he is sever year in ﬁnding out that he has miss his vocation, 
that his inclin and his work are not in accord, that he has misappli his energi for some time, and that 
he has made a fals start. fortun circumstanc at birth he may have been equip by higher educ [pg 73] 

for some distinct profession, to which he gain access after the payment of larg fee or premiums. the man 
has a strong dramat faculti and the stage claim him after all. here is both wast of time and money. 
astrology, as a reliabl key to charact and inclination, deserv some recognit on the ground of social 
economy. 
the inclin of the subject are judg from the posit of the major of the planets, for if they should be 
found in the aerial signs, gemini, libra, or aquarius, the inclin will be toward mental occupations, 
especi scienc and literature. in ﬁeri sign there is a predisposit to a more robust and activ life, such as 
is aﬀord by militari service, travelling, prospecting, exploring, &c. in earthi sign the aptitud lie in the 
direct of agriculture, experiment science, surveying, deal in real estate, broking, &c. in wateri sign 
there is special inclin to pursuit connect with the water, such as sailors, watermen, and others; but 
frequent to other occup in which ﬂuid are predominant, such as publicans, wine and spirit merchants, 
chemists, and oil merchants. 
each sign has it special tendency, and the exact occup can often be decid thereby, when regard is had 
to the planet in closest aspect to the sun or moon and the sign it occupies. thus ari denot soldier and 
pioneer of movements; taurus show dealer in real estate, hous agent and brokers; gemini, literari men 
and writer of all sorts; cancer, sailor and publicans; leo, actor and artists; virgo, cloth dealer and seller 
of confectioneri and bread; libra, valuers, assayers, money-changers, and pawnbrokers; scorpio, naval sailors, [pg 74] 

chemists, dealer in oil and spirits; sagittarius, explorers, divines, lawyers; capricornus, polit agent and 
minist of the state; aquarius, electricians, compani promoters, syndics, and scientiﬁc researchers; pisces, 
dealer in ﬁsh and sea produce, warders, and those connect with place of conﬁnement, such as prison and 
hospitals. 
taking, therefore, the domin planet and the sign that hold the major of the planets, the line along which 
the subject will make the most progress in the world and acquit himself most successfully, may be readili 
determined. 
no person will make a good soldier who has not mar as a domin planet, nor will he succeed with the public 
if the moon be not elev and well aspected, nor becom a success artist, musician, or poet if venus be not 
conspicu in the horoscope. 
general the inclin is deriv from a consider of the domin planet, and the degre of success 
attend upon the occup is judg from the aspect which that planet throw to the sun or moon, and there 
can be no great advantag from follow an inclin which doe not promis some measur of success, as 
is the case when the domin planet is in evil aspect to the luminaries. thus it happen that some men follow 
unproﬁt callings, their judgment be domin by an inclin advers to their natur welfare. yet 
never was good work done in the world without a strong inclin and consider enthusiasm, and heaven 
make it own slaves, it martyrs, and it scapegoats. and always, the follow of an inclin mean the [pg 75] 

sacriﬁc of some of the beneﬁt of life. “take what thou wilt, but pay the price!” is the divin mandate, 
accord to emerson. 
but unquestionably, the scienc which enabl a man to choos the line of least resistance, which prevent a 
youth of intellectu tendenc from wast the best year of his life in drudgeri at the desk or bench, is worth 
a littl study. “hitch your waggon to a star,” is good advic if onli we hitch it to the right one. 





