[pg 76] 
chapter viii 
marriag circumst 


the question as to how, when, and where marriag will take place is an all-absorb one to the major of men 
and women, and no less import than interesting. astrolog has made it possibl to answer these question 
categor and with particular precis and verity. 
the condit of connubi life are judg (in a male horoscope) from the condit of the moon and venus, 
and (in a femal horoscope) from that of the sun and mars. the planet to which the luminari ﬁrst form an 
aspect after birth (that which it “applies” to) denot the marriag partner. if the aspect be good there will be 
agreement and the choic of a partner will be fortunate. but if the aspect be evil, there will be troubl after 
marriage. the natur of the planet to which the luminari form it aspect after birth ought also to be considered, 
for if it be that the luminari appli by a good aspect to a beneﬁc planet, or to one that is well-plac and 
aspected, then there will be consider happi and fortun in marriage. on the other hand, if both the 
aspect and the planet be evil—a if the moon were appli to the opposit of saturn or uranus or mars— [pg 77] 

then the fate in marriag will be extrem unhappi and disagr will be frequent and even permanent. 
when the aspect and the natur of the planet are at variance, as when the moon has a good aspect to saturn, 
or a bad aspect to jupiter, there will be a mingl fortun of good and ill in marriage. there is no better sign of 
happi and harmoni in marriag than a good aspect between the sun and moon. 
moreover, it may happen that the moon appli by good aspect to a planet after birth, and that there is at the 
same time a maleﬁc bodi in the 7th house. this indic that there will be agreement in the connubi life, but 
that bereav will soon follow. 
when the moon appli to neptun there will be some peculiar or touch of genius in the partner, accord as 
neptun may be aspected. uranus show eccentr and sometim wilfulness. saturn show steadiness, 
industry; or jealousi and coldness. jupit indic a good nature, bounti and honest, but may be given to 
excess and extravagance. mar induc industri and practicality, but it give a strong temper and consider 
independence. the sun show digniti and loyalty, but may indic ostent and foolish pride. venus 
denot peac and a genial, reﬁn nature, but it pervers bring indiﬀerence, neglect and 
disorderliness. mercuri denot an activ and energet nature, but may produc a busybodi and meddler. 
everyth depend on the aspect which the signiﬁc luminari throw to the planet it appli to, for if the 
aspect be good it will indic the better qualiti of that planet; but if evil, then there is frequent the 
unfortun consequ of choos a partner in whom the pervert qualiti of the planet are predominant. [pg 78] 

good planet in the 7th hous indic a good partner, but when at the same time the aspect of the luminari is 
evil, it will denot a good marriage, follow by bereavement. 
marriag to a widow (or widower) occur when mar and saturn are the planet concern in the indications, as 
if mar be in the 7th hous and in aspect to saturn, or if the moon appli to mar when aspect by saturn, or 
when one of them is in the 5th hous and the other in the 7th. 
love aﬀair befor marriag are indic by the 5th house, the planet therein and their aspects, and in a 
general sens by venus in a male horoscop and mar in a femal horoscope. 
thus if venus (or mars) be aﬄict by saturn or uranus there will be disappoint in the earli aﬀections. 
uranus in aspect to venus give romant attach and much inﬂuenc over the other sex. neptun in 
aspect show idealism, and when aﬄict venus it produc chao and entanglement, danger of seduction. 
mar afflict venus give ardour and impulse. 

more than one marriag 
is indic when the luminari is in aspect to more than one planet in a double-bodi sign,e.g., gemini, 
sagittarius, or pisces. or, if the luminari itself be in a doubl sign and in aspect to ani planet other than one 
which may be in the 7th house. also a doubl sign be on the cusp of the 7th house, and the luminari in a 
fruit sign, cancer, scorpio, or pisces, or in aspect to planet in those signs. all these are sign of more than [pg 79] 

one marriag dure life. 
sign of separ or divorc are as follows: the luminari appli to the ill aspect of a maleﬁc planet, venus 
aﬄicted, and uranus in the 7th hous or aﬄict the moon or venus. in femal horoscop chang the 
significators, take the sun and mar instead of the moon and venus, and judg the same. 
where more than one marriag is shown, the ruler of the 7th hous denot the ﬁrst partner, and the planet 
rule the sign it occupi is call it “dispositor” or “displacer.” this dispositor repres the second partner. 
the planet to which the signiﬁc luminari appli is that which is taken to describ the partner, accord to 
the sign it is in. but if this planet be retrograde, i.e., go backward in the zodiac by appar motion, then it 
onli repres an attach which will be broken oﬀ. it dispositor then becom the signiﬁc of the 
partner. but the ruler of the 7th hous is taken for the condit and fortun of the partner, and if it be aﬄict 
or bad place and weak in the horoscope, then the marriag will be ill-assorted, unfortunate, and full of 
dissatisfaction. the contrari is the case when the signific planet is well place and aspected. 
the place or circumst under which the partner will be met may be known from the sign and hous 
occupi by the planet to which the luminari ﬁrst appli after birth. thus if it be in the 11th house, the partner 
will be met among friends, at the hous of a friend, or introduc by a friend. if in the 3rd house, then on a short [pg 80] 

journey or in correspondence; in the 5th, at a place of amusement; in the 10th, in the cours of business; and so 
on, judgment be made accord to the place and circumst rule by the hous occupi by the 
planet. 




[pg 81] 
chapter ix 
indic of progeni 


the 5th house, the planet therein and the posit and aspect of the moon, have to be consid in this 
matter. 
if the 5th hous be occupi by beneﬁc planets, or planet well aspect by others, then the progeni will be a 
sourc of satisfact and credit to the subject, and will be rear to maturity. but the contrari is the case when 
the 5th hous is occupi by malef planet and such as may be heavili afflicted. 
the moon repres the tendenc in the male and the capac in the female, and when well aspected, or free 
from evil aspect and well placed, then there will be good fortun in connect with the progeny. 
when uranus aﬄict a planet in the 5th house, there will be some prematur births, and general it will be 
observ that when planet are oppos from the 11th and 5th houses, or maleﬁc planet occupi those 
houses, there is troubl through the progeny, and usual the loss of one or more dure infanc is to be feared. 
as to the number of children, no empir rule exist for the judgment of this matter, which necessarili is a [pg 82] 

diﬃcult one owe to the fact that we have no mean of compar the horoscop of man and wife, but the 
natur of the sign on the cusp of the 5th hous is usual to be depend upon for an approximation. thus 
aries, leo, and capricornus give small families. taurus, cancer, virgo, scorpio, and pisc give larg families, 
and the other sign yield a moder family. when the moon is strong, angular, and not aﬄicted, the number is 
increased. twin are born from double-bodi sign occupi the cusp of the 5th house, or planet in the 5th 
in a double-bodi sign. 
the condit of each child is known in a general manner from the altern houses, commenc with the 5th. 
thus the ﬁrst child is (in a male horoscope) rule by the 5th house, and planet therein; the second child by the 
7th house; the third by the 9th house, and so on. in a femal horoscop the ﬁrst child is rule by the 4th house; 
the second by the 6th house, and so on. 
thus if it be found that there is probabl of loss of some of the progeny, the children most liabl to aﬄict 
may be known by this method; for the hous which contain the maleﬁc planets, or the aﬄict planets, 
correspond to the afflict progeny. 
illustri children are born to the subject when the ruler of the 5th hous is in elev and well aspected, and 
in a congeni sign. but if the ruler of the 5th hous be bad place and aspect and in a sign of debility, i.e., 
opposit to one over which it rules, then the progeni are ill-equip for the battl of life, either mental or 
morally. the particular qualiti and fortun of the progeni can onli be known from their individu horoscopes. [pg 83] 

when maleﬁc planet hold the 12th hous in a femal horoscope, there will be danger in conﬁnement; and the 
same happen if either of the luminaries, but particular the moon, be afflict in the 5th house. 




[pg 84] 
chapter x 
voyag and journey 


the indic of short journeys, inland and around the coast, are to be judg from the 3rd hous and the 
planet therein. if a movabl sign be on the cusp of the 3rd house, or planet in a movabl sign occupi the 3rd 
house, then there will be much travel and mani short journey to and fro. the aspect to these planet in 
the 3rd will indic whether such journey will be main success or not. when there are no aspect to the 
planet or planet in the 3rd hous the fortun of short journey is to be judg from the natur of the planet in 
the 3rd, as if jupiter, they will be fortun and lucrative; but if saturn, unfortun and subject to mani 
hindranc and delays. when maleﬁc planet are aﬄict in the 3rd house, or maleﬁc planet in the 3rd throw 
evil aspect to the sun or moon, then there will be danger and accidents. 
wateri sign on the cusp of the 3rd house, or planet in wateri sign in the 3rd, indic cruis and yachting, 
short journey by water around the coast. if the moon be in good aspect to these planets, then there will be 
safeti in passage; but if aﬄict by the planet in the 3rd there will be danger of collision, capsizing, &c., [pg 85] 

accord to the natur of the planet in the 3rd house. 
long voyag are to be judg in exact similar manner from the 9th house, the planet therein and their 
aspects. 
the 4th hous indic the place of birth, and if this hous hold a beneﬁc planet, or either the sun or moon, 
well aspected, then there is fortun in the place of birth, and journey should onli be undertaken when they are 
without doubt fortun in their issu and admit of a return to the nativ place. when, however, the 4th hous 
is occupi by evil planet or planet heavili aﬄicted, it will be advis to remov from the place of birth and 
seek fortun in more propiti localities. 
in this matter the choic is made by refer to that planet which hold the greatest power for good in the 
horoscop of birth, and the quarter of the heaven which it occupi will indic the direction, as from the 
place of birth, to which the subject should repair. 
thus, if between the east horizon and the meridian, south-east; between the meridian and the west horizon, 
south-west; and so of the rest. the point of the compass follow the cardin point of the heavens, the 
midheaven be south; the nadir, north; the ascendant, east; and the descendant, west. if a maleﬁc planet is 
rise or set at birth it is advis to ﬁx the place of resid so much to the eastward of the birthplac as 
will suﬃc to bring the maleﬁc planet out of the angl of the horoscope. the same if maleﬁc planet occupi 
the 10th or 4th houses. on the contrary, if beneﬁc planet are in the 3rd and 9th hous the subject should [pg 86] 

move westward so as to bring the benef influenc into the 10th and 4th houses. 
when beneﬁc planet or planet well aspect occupi the angl of the ﬁgure at birth the subject should not 
travel far, nor resid long away from the place of birth. 
indic of mani voyag are as follows: mani planet in wateri signs, cancer, scorpio, and pisces, and 
also in the sign virgo. when the major of the planet are in cardin and ﬂex signs, aries, gemini, cancer, 
virgo, libra, sagittarius, capricornus, and pisces, there will be mani chang and journeys. also if the sun, 
moon, mars, and mercuri are in either the 3rd, 9th, 12th, or 6th houses, there will be mani journey and long 
explor in foreign countries. 
when planet are aﬄict in wateri sign there will be danger in voyages, and if the moon or sun be aﬄict in 
virgo there will be submers due to wreck. 
also, when there are planets, especi maleﬁcs, in scorpio, leo, taurus, and aquarius, aﬄict by the 
aspect of other planets, or themselv afflict the sun or moon, then there is danger of drowning. 
when the sign of voyag are propitious, and especi when the indic in the 4th hous are not so, 
then remov from the place of birth to some other perman centr of activ will be advisable. but when good 
planet or planet well aspect are either rise or in the 4th house, the subject should remain in his nativ 
place, and in the end his patienc will be justified. 




[pg 87] 
chapter xi 
of friend and enemi 


the general harmoni of the horoscop consist in the posit and aspect of the planet and their relat 
with the luminaries. when this is conspicu there will be mani friend and supporters, and the associ of 
the subject will be pleasant and proﬁtable. but when the horoscop is fraught with evil aspect and angular 
posit of the malef there will be much strife and mani enmities. 
in a particular sens the friend and associ of the subject are to be known from the 11th hous and the 
planet therein. for if there be a beneﬁc planet in the 11th, especi if in good aspect to either of the 
luminaries, there will be mani friend and adherents. 
similarly, the enemi of the subject are known from the 7th house, and secret enemi from the 12th. maleﬁc 
planet therein, especi in evil aspect to the sun or moon, show mani opponents. 
neptun in ani maleﬁc aspect to the sun or moon show danger of deceit and treacheri be practisedupon [pg 88] 

the subject, and if violent testimoni concur from the ill aspect of mar or uranus he will be in danger of an 
ambush. saturn in the 7th or 12th show long feud and implac enmities. uranus therein show litig 
and heckl of creditors. mar therein is an index of violenc and passion hatred. mercuri therein show 
much scandal and mani petti annoyances. 
now observ the place of the maleﬁc planet and the hous wherein they are situated. take the date when 
the sun is in the same longitud as ani of these maleﬁc planets, which will be the same in ani year, and this 
will be the birthday of person who are to be avoid as like to bring mischief into the life. supposing, for 
instance, that saturn is found at birth in the 10th house, in the 13th degre of the sign aquarius. refer to 
the ephemeri (sect. ii., chap. i.) will show that the sun is in aquarius 13 on the 1st and 2nd february. henc it 
would be unfortun for the subject to serv ani man who was born between the 28th januari and the 3rd 
februari in ani year. also, if uranus were in leo 23 in the 7th hous he should not go into partnership or 
marriag with anybodi born on or near the 15th august in ani year. 
take now the place of the beneﬁc planets, and also the place of the moon, and ﬁnd the correspond solar 
dates, for these will be the birth date of such person as should be cultiv and drawn into close associ 
for mutual benefit. 
observ also the trine and sextil of the beneﬁc planet and of the moon, and the squar and opposi 
tion of [pg 89] 

the malefics, for these will oper in a minor degre in a similar manner as alreadi indicated. 
a comparison of the horoscop of persons, whether king or plebeians, with those of other who have wrought 
great good or evil in their lives, will immedi establish this observation. inde there is noth more 
depend in the whole rang of scientiﬁc observ than this sympathi and antipathi of horoscop and 
their correspond results. it is an argument for the claim of it advoc that astrolog should be regard in 
the light of a science, for if the planet act not at all upon the disposit and tendenc of men their squar 
and opposit in two separ horoscop would have no signiﬁcation. let those who are unhappili mate 
compar their horoscop and they will ﬁnd the sign of discord to which refer has been made above. on 
the other hand, let ani man who has been lift to wealth, fame, or posit by the patronag of anoth 
compar his horoscop with that of his benefactor, and it will be found that the beneﬁc planet in the latter hold 
the place of the sun, moon, midheaven, or ascend in his own. this frequent account for the fact that 
men with compar unfortun horoscop are sometim found in posit of inﬂuenc and in the 
enjoy of consider fortune. the complex fabric of life has it warp and woof wherein mani colour 
thread are woven togeth for the complet of the grand design, and the great loom of life has it wheel 
within wheel which onli the great artiﬁc can understand and regulate. we here below, subject all of 
interplanetari action, must content ourselv with the design as reveal to us in the histori of mankind, or we [pg 90] 

must seek to understand the purpos of life, it motif, the complex law which oper to bring about the 
unfold of the great plan, and thenc to prognost that which hereaft shall be reveal to the 
commonplac observer. 




[pg 91] 
chapter xii 
the end of life 


the end of life is judg from the planet occupi the 8th and 4th houses, for the 8th denot death, and the 
4th denot the ﬁnal resting-plac of man. when beneﬁc planets, or the luminari well aspected, occupi 
these houses, you may judg that the end will be peaceful, normal, and that death will take place in the midst of 
congeni and even except agreeabl surroundings. 
when, however, the maleﬁc planet hold these houses, or aﬄict the luminari therein, you may judg greater 
stress and privation. 
uranus in the 8th hous denot a sudden death, and the same result is observ when the luminari therein 
are aﬄict by uranus. neptun in the 8th denot danger of trance, coma, and simul death, and when this 
posit is observ it is necessari that all the sign of mortiﬁc should be present befor inter is 
eﬀected. saturn produc death by privat and obstructions, by chill and colds. mar induc death by fever 
and inflammatori action, and frequent by hæmorrhage. 
planet in fix sign in the 8th hous show death from heart or throat aﬀections, aﬀect of the excretori [pg 92] 


