

[pg 94] 

section iv 
the star in their cours 
chapter i 
the time-measur 


the planets, in their motion after birth, come into certain relat with the planet in the horoscop of birth, 
and also form aspect among themselv owe to the divers of their motion in the zodiac. in astrolog 
scienc there are two separ mean of calcul the time of events, but both method consist of bring 
the bodi of one planet to the bodi or aspect of another, which process is call “directing,” and the arc 
describ by the move bodi is call an “arc of direction.” 
the ﬁrst of these method is the discoveri of claudius ptolemy, the famous mathematician and geographer, 
the author of the syntaxis, as set forth in his work the tetrabiblos, or four book on the inﬂuenc of the stars. 
this method had the support and conﬁrmat of the great kepler. it has respect to the rising, setting, and [pg 95] 

meridian passag of the planet after birth, wherebi they are brought to the place or aspect of the planet in 
the radix (the root), which is the horoscop of birth. 
the limit and natur of this work do not permit of a thorough exposit of this method, which entail some littl 
knowledg of spheric trigonometry, but the reader who desir to perfect himself therein is refer to the 
author work, entitl “prognost astronomy.” a facil applic of the method is here given, by which ani 
one may, by the aid of the tabl of houses, make certain of the more import calcul by rule of thumb, 
and predict thenc the time of remark events. 
the principl involv is this: the number of degre which pass over the meridian between the moment of 
birth and the rise or culmin of a planet, will equal the number of year which must elaps from birth until 
the influenc of that planet becom dominant. 
thus, if jupit at birth is come to the meridian, that is to say, if it be in the 10th, 11th, or 12th house, count 
the number of degre between the meridian and jupiter, and in so mani year from the time of birth there will 
be an access of good fortune. similarly, if saturn or other of the maleﬁc planet be come to the meridian, the 
number of degre between it and the midheaven will indic the age at which troubl will abound. 
also, when the planet have pass the meridian, the measur is made in the same way, by bring the 
midheaven to the place of the planet, count the degre between the planet and midheaven for the number 
of year at which it will operate. 
but the same and other planet may be direct to the horizon, by take the tabl of hous for the latitud of [pg 96] 

the birthplac (sect. i., chap. iii.) and ﬁnding therein under the column mark “ascen.” (ascendant) the 
longitud held by ani of the planets. observ then what degre is on the midheaven in the column mark 10 
(10th house), and count the number of degre between this midheaven and the midheaven at birth. the result 
will give the age at which the effect of such planet will be experienced. 
thus, for a person born in or near liverpool or in the same latitude, suppos the midheaven at birth to be in 
scorpio 0, and saturn to be in the 2nd hous in aquarius 8 degrees. i wish to bring saturn to the horizon. in the 
tabl of hous i ﬁnd that aquarius 8 is on the ascend when sagittarius 9 is on the midheaven, and i 
therefor count from scorpio 0 to sagittarius 9. this give the age of 39 years, and as saturn is in the 2nd 
hous at birth, i say that at 39 year of age the subject would experi ﬁnancial disaster, and becaus 
saturn come then to the ascendant, i also say there would be serious ill and depress of spirits. 
when planet are set at birth they are brought to the opposit of the ascend in a similar manner, onli 
the opposit point of the zodiac must be found in the tabl under the ascendant. thus, if mar were in the 7th 
hous at birth in the 11th degre of cancer, i ﬁnd the opposit point (capricornus 11) under the column of the 
ascendant, and i note that scorpio 19 is then on the midheaven, so that from scorpio 0 to scorpio 19 give 19 
years, at which age the subject would have a serious ill due to inﬂammatori action in the stomach and [pg 97] 

probabl produc by overwork and worry, as indic by the sign cancer and the planet mars, or if there be 
indic of an accident, then an accid by scald with hot water or acid would be predicted. 
planet are brought to the opposit of the midheaven by count the degre which interven between the 
longitud on the lower meridian at birth and that held by the planet. 
in all such direct the conjunct of beneﬁc planet are advantag when direct to the midheaven or 
ascendant, and the conjunct of the maleﬁc are indic of period of bad fortune. the opposit are 
uniform evil, whether the planet involv in the direct be a benef or malefic. (sect. i., chap. iv.) 
these are the direct of the planet to the two signiﬁcators, the midheaven and ascendant. the midheaven 
appertain to honour and credit, while the ascend has relat to the person and bodili welfar and the 
general fortunes. 
to direct the midheaven or ascend to the other aspect of the planets, such as the sextile, trine, semisquar 
or square, it is onli necessari to note the degre in which these aspect fall and bring them to the midheaven 
or ascend as if the bodi of the planet were itself there, and in the manner alreadi indicated. 
the sun is direct after birth by it motion in the zodiac, which can be found in the ephemeri for the year of 
birth, and the aspect it form to the planet in the horoscop and in the daili progress should be tabulated. in 
most ephemerid they are alreadi calculated, so that the labour is consider lightened. each day after birth [pg 98] 

will repres one year of life, the mean motion of the sun be about 1 degre per day. all that is necessary, 
therefore, is to count the number of day from birth to the date when the sun form an aspect, and that will give 
the age at which the planet aspect will produc it effects. 
as the sun goe through the zodiac the other bodi make progress along with it, in which cours they form 
aspect to the midheaven, ascendant, the sun and moon in the horoscop of birth. these are call 
“secondary” directions, and in connect with the sun aspect after birth, constitut the system in use 
among the arabian astrologers. 
minor period of good and bad fortune, subsidiari to the abov period inﬂuences, are taken from the moon 
progress after birth, in which one day equal one year of life, and two hour equal one month. these direct 
of the moon aﬀord a month prognosi of the cours of events, and are use in the conduct of minor aﬀair in 
life. when they are contrari to the general trend and import of the period direct made to the midheaven, 
ascend and sun, they act indiﬀerently, and frequent produc onli pass beneﬁt or annoyances; but 
when they are in agreement with the primari direct cite above, then they accentu and deﬁn the 
natur and time of events. as if the primari be good and the lunar direct evil, then there will be a 
predomin of good fortun with some current disturbances; but both be good there will be abund 
success and satisfaction; while if the primari be evil and the lunar direct good, the latter will serv onli to [pg 99] 

moder the effect for the time be of the primari evil indications. 
an intellig apercu of the principl of direct will great enhanc the valu of ani prognost made 
from the horoscop of birth, as it will enabl the student to select those period in the life when the eﬀect due 
to ani planet are most like to eventuate. thus, if saturn be in the 2nd hous at birth, it may be said that there 
would follow some period of great ﬁnancial stress, and the rise of saturn by direct after birth would show 
the time when one, at all events, of such period would be experienced. 
and here is the great fact upon which astrolog the world over are prepar to stand or fall. if the planet 
have no eﬀect in the live of men, their direct to the angl of the horoscop can have no eﬀect; but never 
was it found that a man had evil fortun at the period when the planet jupit was direct to the midheaven or 
ascendant, or anyth but bad fortun when saturn was similar directed. the fact is there, and we cannot get 
away from it. the onli question is as to how far we can intellig carri our investig beyond that point, 
and intellig convey our discoveri to the world by their applic to the aﬀair of daili life. the reader may 
judg for himself from a perus of these pages. 
the direct be calcul and tabul in order of their occurrence, the time and general natur of the 
inﬂuenc oper in success period of the life will stand revealed. the particular natur of the event 
indic by the sever direct may be known from (a) the hous in which the direct planet is situated; (b) [pg 100] 

the sign it occupies; and (c) the aspect it forms, consid in relat to the natur of the planet. for example: 
if uranus at birth were in the 9th hous and the sign gemini, it direct to the midheaven would be the index 
of litig in connect with writings, publications, or mean of transit; becaus the 9th house, among other 
things, has relat to litig and legal aﬀairs, and gemini (the 3rd hous sign) to communications, writings, 
&c., while uranus denot sudden and unexpect events, ruptures, alienations, and complexities. 
so if saturn were in the 6th hous in the sign aquarius, it direct to the opposit of the ascend would 
indic chill to the blood, anemia, &c., constitut a serious ill with probabl of low fever; becaus the 
6th hous rule sickness, and aquarius rule the blood, while saturn is the caus of chills, paucity, and 
impediments. 
thus the time and natur of event may be known with great certainty. 




[pg 101] 
chapter ii 
the effect of transit 


among the number of import indic to which astrolog refer in make a forecast of concurr events, 
there are the transit of the planet over the place of the signiﬁc at birth, the posit of eclipses, and 
those of the lunations. 
the ﬁrst of these chronocr depend upon the revolut of the planet in their orbits. each planet has a 
period in which it complet it revolut in the heavens, in the cours of which it pass the place of the sun, 
moon, midheaven, and ascend of the horoscope. this passag over the radic signiﬁc is technic 
term it “transit,” and it will be found that such transit aﬀord a veri precis and reliabl sourc of 
prognostication, for the time of a planet transit is known in advanc of it occurr (see sect. ii., chap. iv.), 
and the eﬀect of such transit are in exact term of the natur of the planet concerned. it is onli necessari to 
add that the midheaven and the sun have relat to the posit and honour of the subject, while the moon 
and ascend have relat to the person health and general fortunes. the sun and midheaven also signifi [pg 102] 

the father, and the moon has general signiﬁc of the mother. venus signiﬁ domest and love aﬀairs, the 
aﬀect and sentiments; while mercuri signiﬁ the mental disposition. so uranus in transit over the place of 
venus will give a love aﬀair, a romant attachment. mar over the place of venus will engend passion 
love. saturn over venus will give disappoint or bereavement; and neptun thereov will bring 
entangl and complications, with danger of be led astray. saturn over mercuri will produc melancholi 
and mani error of judgment. mar over the same planet will excit the mind and dispos to impuls and 
unreason anger, quarrel and disputation. uranus over mercuri will render the mind wayward and 
headstrong, dispos to errat cours and egotist methods. neptun pass the place of mercuri produc 
deceits, treacheries, and apprehens of impend evil, a sens of espionag and ambush. it involv the 
mind in tortuous and complic schemes, and dispos to secreci and wariness. 
the transit of the major planet are of chief signiﬁcance, and their eﬀect are render more weighti and 
last when at the time of transit they are retrograd in the zodiac; while their stationari posit on the 
place of the signif have almost the same power as primari directions. 

of eclipses. 
an eclips of the sun or moon fall on the place of ani signiﬁc in the horoscop of birth is of a sinist 
import, and cannot be too serious considered. fall on the ascend or the moon they aﬀect the health and [pg 103] 

general fortun veri seriously, and onli a seri of subsequ good direct can avail to restor the subject 
to his normal condition. on the midheaven or the sun, the honour and fortun may both be aﬀected, and in the 
same serious degree. the eclips fall on the place of the other planet will produc eﬀect in accord with 
the natur of those planet and the hous they occupy. to have ani appreci eﬀect, the eclips must be 
within two degre of ani of the radic positions, or of their opposit aspects. 

of lunations. 
the lunat recur in the same part of the eclipt everi nineteen years. consid in relat to the current 
indic they aﬀord the mean of a month forecast of events. thus, if the lunat for the month fall on the 
place of jupit in the horoscop of birth, it will produc good eﬀect in that depart of life which is govern 
by the hous in which jupit is situated; as if in the 11th, through friends; in the 4th, through properti or rental; 
in the 6th, through servant and health; in the 8th, through a financi colleague, &c. 
the eﬀect of lunat are subsidiari to the current lunar directions, and these in turn are subsidiari to the 
transits, and the transit to the primari directions. by this it is not meant that they are inoperative, nor that they 
fail to indic the event of the month, but their power and degre of inﬂuenc is subject to the greater 
inﬂuenc of superior causes. and as a general observ it may be aﬃrm that the less frequent ani 
celesti posit occur in a horoscope, the greater is it inﬂuence. this fact give to primari direct their [pg 104] 

great inﬂuenc in the life, for they can onli occur onc in a lifetime; and for the same reason eclips have a 
major signiﬁcance, for the same eclips onli recur after an interv of 649 years. the transit of neptune, of 
uranus, of saturn and jupit and mar follow in their order of frequency. neptun has a revolut of about 165 
years, uranus 84 years, saturn 30 years, jupit 12 years, and mar 1¼ years. 
major eﬀect must not therefor be refer to inferior causes, and minor eﬀect must not be refer to 
superior causes. in univers or even nation cataclysms, individu fortun are submerged. 




[pg 105] 
chapter iii 
how to summaris a horoscop 


befor leav the exposit of this subject, it may be of advantag to the reader if i give some idea of the 
method to be pursu in the complet handl of a horoscope. 
first, then, erect the ﬁgure of birth, take care to use the ephemeri of the year of birth, and also the correct 
tabl of hous for the latitud of the place of birth. 
next proceed to attempt a descript of the chief person trait of the subject, follow in success with a 
well-consid judgment on the constitution, hereditari tendencies, the health and patholog 
predispositions, the mental trait and disposition, consid these latter in relat to the state of health 
indicated. then pass to a consider of the environ condit of life; the ﬁnancial condit and outlook; 
the posit in life; the occupation; prospect and condit of marriage; of progeny. judg next concern 
voyag and journeys. finish with a statement regard the predomin of friend or enemies, and select 
date by solar positions, as alreadi instructed. in case where it is not object to, an approxim may be [pg 106] 

made to the time and natur of death. 
throughout the whole of this judgment, the period when these predict eﬀect will come into forc should be 
made by refer to the rising, setting, and meridian passag of the planets, the solar aspects, and transits. 
care should be taken to weigh just and imparti the evid set befor you in the ﬁgure of the heaven for 
birth. major import should be given to those planet which are in angles, and those which are in elevation, 
for the nearer a planet may be to the midheaven, the greater is it inﬂuenc for good or ill, accord to it 
natur and aspect. 
read what you see, not what you imagin should be the destini of an individual. if you are in complet 
ignor of his person, position, and environment, so much the better. if you follow care the various rule 
which are contain in this book, you may at ﬁrst make some error of judgment, but as you becom familiar 
with the task, even these error will becom few and far between, and in the end the languag of the horoscop 
will becom so intellig and clear that it will interpret itself, and the whole trend and potenti for good or ill 
of ani birth-ﬁgur will forc itself upon you in just the same way as when a man walk into your presenc with 
his charact clear stamp upon his face, so that you have onli to look and know. 
have becom proﬁcient in the judgment of birth-ﬁgures, you will do well to proceed to a closer studi of the 
mathemat of astrology, make yourself proﬁcient in the various method of directing, so that you may at ani [pg 107] 

time refin upon your general prognostics, and make predict which are clear, sharp, and to the point. 
undoubt there is a modicum of intuit percept at work in the judgment of ani horoscope, which will 
enabl you to seiz upon the small detail and exact point of ani matter, and this perhap constitut the 
whole diﬀer between the rule of thumb worker and the inspir reason of the intuit worker. the 
one exhaust the book and the other embellish them. it is so with scienc in everi department. the book 
will take you up to a certain point of proﬁciency, and a strict regard for the formulæ will keep you within the 
bound of safety. but if you are ever to make a discoveri or becom a recognis expon of ani science, you 
must be natur gift with what is call the “scientiﬁc imagination,” anoth name for intuition. but at no point 
doe true intuit part compani with exact reasoning. there is no lesion. the one is an extens of the other. 
it is the higher reason, which argu from the known to the unknown. and the astrolog is in this respect as the 
poet, “born, not made.” but a moment reﬂect will suﬃc to convinc you that the more facil you may 
becom with the book-learn and techniqu of astrology, the more you will leav the intuit free to act. 
when a lad is struggl with his multipl tables, his appreci of the binomi theorem or the diﬀerenti 
calculus cannot be said to amount to much. and, in the same way, a person who is stuﬃng down the alphabet 
of astrolog cannot be expect to intuit anyth concern the potenti of the sun direct to the 
quadratur of saturn. 





