the project gutenberg ebook of astrology, by sephari 

this ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and most 
other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 
whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term of 
the project gutenberg licens includ with this ebook or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not locat in the unit states, you'll have 
to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use this ebook. 


title: astrolog 
how to make and read your own horoscop 

author: sephari 

releas date: septemb 25, 2014 [ebook #46963] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: iso-8859-1 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook astrolog *** 




produc by charlen taylor, peter vachuska, donovan, 
reiner ruf, and the onlin distribut proofread team 
at http://www.pgdp.net 
astrology: 
how to make and read 
your own horoscop 


by 
sephari 
editor of “moore's” and “old moore's” almanac author of “the 
manual of astrology,” “prognost astronomy,” “the birthday 
book of destiny,” “the crystal and the seer,” etc. 



illustr 

advanc thought pub. co. 


216 west austin ave. 
chicago, ill. 



copyright, 1920 
chicago, ill. 



[pg 5] 

prefac to the revis and enlarg edit 

sinc the public of this small manual of practic astrology, two edit of which have been exhausted, the 
attent given to the subject has so far extend as to creat an increas demand for a concis work of this 
nature, design for the initi use of student and oﬀer at a price that is within the mean of all. it is believ 
that the revis and enlarg of the present work will render it even more popular than hitherto with 
beginners. 
the practic use of astrolog are daili more and more recogn and appreciated, and although some of the 
higher and later develop of astrolog in it relat to every-day problem have necessarili been withheld 
from these pages, yet it is to be hope that so much as is here present of an abstrus and recondit scienc 
will enabl the student to pursu the subject with increas assur and satisfaction, in which case doubtless 
he will readili discov for himself, and without ani special point on my part, that astrolog is primarili and 
final a practic and use study. 
there are, of course, mani aspect of this fascin subject which ﬁnd no place in this small work, which 
deal sole with genethliac astrology, or the doctrin of nativities. yet if it be true, as i think to be the case, 
that “the proper studi for mankind is man,” then undoubt we are right in select this phase of astrolog 
scienc as that to which the student should first devot himself. 
when we have thorough arriv at an understand of the complex natur of human charact and the 
primari caus of varieti in expression, when we have seen for ourselv how the many-colour dome of life [pg 6] 

overarch us of this sublunari world with it kaleidoscop interplay of forces, we shall be to some extent better 
equip not onli to deal with charact as we ﬁnd it, but also to direct the forc of the human mind along 
channel which lead to the preserv of our social economy, and that not by ani restrict measur or 
harm suppress of natur passion and powers, but by convers of them into form that are conserv 
and useful. 
to appli oneself to the special of inher faculty, to ﬁnd the line of least resistance, and to discov the 
measur of one own soul in the univers and the limit to which ambit can safe aspire, these are thing 
necessari to be known and thing that astrolog make clear to the mind in the veri earliest stage of our 
study. 
and apart from the scientiﬁc veriti to which the scienc of planetari inﬂuenc direct us, there are other not 
less import and fascin truth of a pure philosoph natur to which it inevit impel the mind and 
which cannot fail to exercis a tremend inﬂuenc in the shape of our thought in regard to the purpos of 
life. it place the thought student in an entir new posit with regard to mani of the deeper problem of 
existence, and it is certain the fact that to those who newli come to it study, astrolog is a revelation, an 
enlightenment, and a convict from which there is no possibl or desir escape. 
sepharial. 
[pg 7] 

astrolog 

[pg 9] 

introduct 

from the earliest age of the world histori the subject of astrolog has excit the interest of, and exercis a 
great inﬂuenc over, the mind of a certain order of think men. the scienc has never been univers in it 
acceptance, though it is safe to say that, with it countless adher in the east and the ever-increas 
number of it advoc in the west, there is no faith which has a more univers applic than the belief in 
the inﬂuenc of the heaven bodi over the destini of human beings. it is not possibl within the limit of a 
small handbook such as this to adequ consid the philosoph paradox which make of freewil in man a 
“necess in play”; but it is obvious that the concept is not altogeth unscientiﬁc, see that it is customari to 
speak of the “free path of vibration” in chemic atom while at the same time it is known that these atom have 
their restrict characteristics, mode of motion, &c., and are all subject to the general law control the 
bodi of which they form integr parts. let it suﬃc that if we can trace an actual connected between the 
disposit of the heaven bodi at the moment of a birth and the known life and charact of the individu [pg 10] 

then born, and an exact correspond between the cours of event in that life with the chang occur in 
the heaven subsequ to the moment of birth, we shall do well to accept the fact for what it is worth, and 
arrang our philosoph notion accordingly. 
as far back as the year b.c. 2154, we ﬁnd mention of the great import attach to the celesti phenomena 
in the mind of chines rulers. it is record in the histor classic of china that at that time the astrolog hi 
and ho neglect their duti so that when, on the 10th of october, there was a great eclips of the sun at 
peke between seven and nine o'clock in the morning, the peopl were wholli unprepar for it, and “ran about 
here and there in the utmost consternation.” for this oﬀenc hi and ho were depriv of their oﬃces, their 
estat were conﬁscat and they were driven from the kingdom. among the hindus we have the classic 
writer garga, parashara, and mihira, togeth with their legion of commentators. the assyrian record are full 
of astrolog allus regard the inﬂuenc of planetari conjunct and stellar positions. the greek 
mytholog is noth but a vast system of cosmograph astrology, and there is no other histori in it than what 
you may read in the constel of the heaven and the correspond evolut of the human race. aristotl 
made it a part of his philosophy. hipparchus, hippocrates, thales, galenius, and other subscrib an 
intellig belief in it principles. to claudius ptolemy, however, we are indebt for the ﬁrst concis and 
scientiﬁc statement of it principl and practice, so far as europ is concerned. he wrote the tetrabiblos, or [pg 11] 

four books, and laid the foundat of a true astrolog science. julius firmicus conﬁrm ptolemi and 
enlarg upon his observations. the subsequ discoveri of the planet uranus and neptun by herschel and 
adams, widen the ﬁeld of research and gave to later astrolog the clue to much that hitherto had been 
imperfect understood. not that these discoveri overturn the whole system of astrology, as some have 
imagin and foolish stated, or that they negativ the conclus drawn from the observ eﬀect of the 
seven ancient known bodi of the solar system, but it becam possibl after a laps of time to ﬁll in the blank 
space and to account for certain event which had not been trace to the action of ani of the alreadi known 
planets. the discoveri of argon did not destroy our conclus regard the natur and characterist of 
oxygen or hydrogen or nitrogen, nor give an entir new mean to the word “atmosphere.” if even so mani 
as seven new planet should be discovered, there would yet not be a singl paragraph of this book which would 
need revising. what is known regard planetari action in human life is known with great certainty, and the 
eﬀect of one planet can never be confound with those of another. incomplet as it must need be, it is yet a 
verit scienc both as to it principl and practice. it claim for itself a place among the scienc for the sole 
reason that it is capabl of mathemat demonstration, and deal onli with the observ posit and motion 
of the heaven bodies; and the man who hold to the principia of newton, the solidar of the solar system, the 
interact of the planetari bodi and their consequ electrostat eﬀect upon the earth, cannot, while [pg 12] 

subject to the air he breathes, deni the foundat principl of astrology. the applic of these principl to 
the fact of everyday life is sole a matter of prolong research and tabul upon an elabor scale which 
has been go on for thousand of year in all part of the world, so that all the reader has to do is to make his 
own horoscop and put the scienc to the test of true or false. the present writer is in a posit to know that 
the studi of astrolog at the present day is no less sincer than wide spread, but few care to let their studi 
be known, for, as prof. f. max müller recent said, “so great is the ignor which confound a scienc 
requir the highest education, with that of the ordinari gipsi fortune-teller.” that to which the great kepler was 
compel “bi his unfail experi of the cours of event in harmoni with the chang take place in the 
heavens,” to subscrib “an unwil belief,” the scienc which was practis and advoc by tycho brahe 
under all assault of fortun and advers opinion, the art that arrest the attent of the young newton and 
set him ponder upon the problem of forc and matter, which fascin the mind of such men as franci 
bacon, archbishop usher, haley, sir georg witchell, flamstead, and a host of others, is to-day the favourit 
theme of thousand of intellig mind and bid fair to becom a subject of popular inquiry. 
it is believ that the present work will be of consider assist to those who serious contempl an 
initi studi of the scienc of horoscopy, and although it by no mean exhaust what is known on the subject, 
yet it will be found accur and reliabl as far as it goes, and will enabl ani one of ordinari intellig to test [pg 13] 

the claim of astrolog for himself. this is as much as can be expect in the limit of a small handbook. the 
literatur of the subject is considerable, and the present writer onli take credit to himself so far as his own wide 
experi and practic have enabl him to present the subject in a simpl and brief manner. 





[pg 15] 

content 

section i 
the alphabet of the heaven 
chap. page 
i. the planets, their natur and type 17 
ii. the sign of the zodiac 24 
iii. the celesti hous 29 
iv. the astronom aspect 31 

section ii 
the construct of a horoscop 
i. the ephemeri and it use 34 
ii. to erect a figur of the heaven 36 
iii. the tabl of hous 39 
iv. planetari transit 43 
v. tabl of eclips 47 

section iii 
how to read the horoscop 
i. the planet in the hous 51 
ii. the constitut 54 
iii. health and sick 56 
iv. how to read charact and disposit 59 
v. financi prospect 64 
vi. the posit in life 69 
vii. the choic of occup 72 
viii. marriag circumst 76 
ix. indic of progeni 81 
x. voyag and journey 84 
xi. of friend and enemi 87 
xii. the end of life 91 

section iv 
the star in their cours 
i. the time-measur 94 
ii. the effect of transit 101 
iii. how to summaris a horoscop 105 
how to becom a success 
iv. 108 
astrolog 
v. a popular illustr 114 
vi. planetari periods, etc. 127 
vii. revolutions, eclipses, ingresses, etc. 137 




[pg 17] 
