[pg 108] 
chapter iv 
how to becom a success astrolog 


i take it that nobodi nowaday can aﬀord to fritter away time in the studi of subject which are not like to 
becom a sourc of beneﬁt to himself and others. if there be such peopl among my readers, which i consid 
unlikely, i may dismiss them oﬀhand with the remark that they will never becom success astrologers, for the 
ﬁrst word of practic astrolog is utility. if the scienc had not it practic applic to the aﬀair of everyday 
life, if it principl contain no word of assur and hope for the myriad toiler of this world, no word of 
admonit for the self-indulg parasit of modern social life, if, in short, it did not make for the better of 
human life and thought, it would never have attract the attent of aristotle, cicero, galen, claudius 
ptolemy, thales, and other of the old world, and such men as bacon, cardan, archbishop usher, naibod, 
mercator, ashmole, kenelm digby, sir christoph heydon, dryden, dr. john butler, sir georg wharton, 
vincent wing, georg witchel, tycho brahe, kepler, and flamstead of more recent biography. indeed, in 
whatev age or countri we may elect to make our inquiri concern astrology, there are to be found a host [pg 109] 

of intellig and even illustri advoc in everi depart of life and learning. suﬃc it to say that the 
modern student of this most ancient of all scienc is at all time in veri good company. 
let it ﬁrst be understood that there is an object to be attain in the studi of astrology, and that the pursuit of it 
in the gratiﬁc of an idl curios alon will inevit entail the wast of time which invari attach to 
idl of all descriptions, and we may then proﬁtabl consid whether or not the subject is worth the labour 
which it will demand from the man who has someth to do in the world and littl enough time in which to do it. 
these are stress times, and we have to be econom in our eﬀorts. we have strength enough to carri us 
through, but neither strength enough to thresh the wind nor time enough to fish in puddles. 
what, then, doe astrolog offer to the patient worker, the man who would becom a success astrologer? 
first and foremost it will enabl him to gain an insight into individu motiv and charact which no other 
scienc can possibl aﬀord. it will enabl him to know himself, his own strength and weakness, and so ﬁt him to 
deal harmoni and just with others. it will enhanc his opportun to the extent that he is abl to forese 
and make use of all beneﬁc inﬂuenc oper through his own environment. it will give him time warn of 
his approach to the quicksand and pitfal which occur in his passag through life. he will discern his special [pg 110] 

physic weaknesses, and the time of his predisposit to sickness, the natur thereof, and the precaut 
which are necessary. he will know whom to cultiv and whom to avoid, and in select a partner in busi 
or a wife for his home, he will be guid by a foreknowledg of evil to be avoid and of good thing to be 
gained. he will choos his path in life with the conﬁdenc that it is for him the line of least resist and 
therefor that of greatest progress. he will not becom obsess by ambit beyond his power to achieve. he 
will learn the power of adapt to environment, and therebi eﬀect his work in the world with the least possibl 
friction and wast of force. he will know when to make provis against sickness, accident, and death. he will 
not invest capit where interest is not to be gained. he will see the end from the beginning. it may not make 
him a brilliant success in the world, but it will assur save him from be a failure. he will ﬁnd caus for 
inexplic things, and his mind will rest content in the knowledg hat while he is work out the highest 
potenti of his own horoscope, the major problem and intricaci of life are not of his make or need of 
his solving. and ﬁnally, when his time come to “shuﬄe oﬀ this mortal coil,” he will be prepared, and will know 
that it is the will of heaven, express and determin from the moment of his birth. right employed, 
astrolog cannot fail to improv the man who make of it a serious study, ﬁtting him to be of greater use to 
other and of higher servic to the race at large. 
but to becom a success astrolog he must studi patient for sever years, test each statement that is [pg 111] 

made in the book by refer to his own and sever other horoscopes. he must be abl to erect a ﬁgure of 
the heaven with mathemat accuraci for ani given time and place, work out direct by the use of the 
sphere or trigonometr tables, and have a compet knowledg of the motion and period of the various 
planetari bodies. when thus satisﬁ in his own mind that astrolog is a depend science, and that he is 
capabl of demonstr it under test conditions, he must be generous in the use of it. here and there he will 
ﬁnd one who is oppos to the belief that the star have ani inﬂuenc in human aﬀairs. let him not wast logic 
with such a man, but go straight to the task of convinc him by an appeal to facts. 
for preference, select a period when the direct inﬂuenc are such as seem like to hit the sceptic with 
consider force, deﬁn the event, make a care calcul of the time of it fulﬁlment, and put them on 
paper, which, be yet unread by the man of common-sense, should be place under cover, sealed, and 
endors to be open onli after a certain date. 
now a man who has been hammer rather sever and in quit an unexpect manner, is usual open to 
convict of truth when he ﬁnds that the natur and date of his disast have been accur foretold. be a 
man of “common-sense” and not of intuition, he will probabl think that the astrolog might even have save 
him from the consequ of his own lack of foresight. so inde might the astrolog have done had he 
taken the manag of aﬀair from the beginning; but to step in half-way to arrest caus which are alreadi 
in oper and charg with inevit effects, is requir too much of ani man short of a prime minister! [pg 112] 

there are certain thing which even the most astut deduct reason cannot foresee, and these are the 
point that should be utilis by the astrolog who seek to convinc other of the truth of his science. a man 
cannot reason from his doorstep to a street accident. if he could he would avoid it. all men are not subject to 
accidents, however. but almost all are subject to bereavements, losses, sicknesses, and chang of fortune. 
those are the point which the astrolog intent on proselytising, usual make use of. but event need not be 
in futur to carri conviction. if it can be shown that by mathemat calcul the event of the past can be 
recit with precis and exactness, it is evid to the meanest intellect that noth hinder from an extens 
of such calcul into the future. and onc convinc of the reliabl of such claim to foreknowledge, the 
practic man of the world is not slow to avail himself of it uses. 
but astrolog is not exhaust in the studi of individu horoscopes, for there are other depart of this 
extens science. the inﬂuenc of the planet upon the weather, as embodi in astro-meteorology; the rise 
and fall of empires, polit changes, the outbreak of wars, of revolutions, of epidemics, as deﬁn by state 
astrolog so much in reput among the orient rulers; the occurr of tidal waves, earthquakes, and other 
seismic phenomena, all form a part of the complet equip of the practic astrologer. 
it would be superﬂu to recit here the numer and strike accur forecast which have been madebi [pg 113] 

modern expon of the science, but it is onli right to say that they reﬂect consider credit upon their 
authors, for the above-ment depart of astrolog learn are by no mean in the same eﬃcient 
state as genethliac astrology, to an outlin of which this work is devoted. ancient it was otherwise, and even 
in the east at this day they hold some secret of tradit knowledge, concern which they are unduli 
mysteri and of which we have onli the evid afford by more exact predict upon certain points. 
prejudic and ignor are the twin giant which bar the path of the world progress to-day, even as they 
have ever done. step by step they have been beaten back, baﬄe by the light of reason, harass by the 
arrow of truth. the world is redeem it ancient heritage. all that is now requir to establish the paramount 
truth of astrolog as a scienc is an imparti and thorough investigation, prefer at the hand of scientiﬁc 
men, of it method and principles. not that the truth is to be ratiﬁ at the hand of modern scientists, see 
that their own teach constitut a mere shift orthodoxy, liabl at ani moment to undergo a fundament 
chang in theori by the discoveri of a singl new fact—but that to such men right belong the duti of 
disprov the claim of astrolog to be consid as a science, for it is a fact to be regret that certain 
member of their bodi have written against the subject in a spirit of prejudic and without adduc ani data in 
support of their contention, which ill becom ani man of scientiﬁc pretens and is abov all thing 
detriment to the caus of truth. 




[pg 114] 
chapter v 
a popular illustr 


in order to summaris and illustr the principl which have been enunci in the cours of this work, i shall 
avail myself of the horoscop of mr. joseph chamberlain, who was born on the 8th of july, 1836, at highbury, 
the time of birth be state to have been at about 2.30 in the morning. calcul have sinc enabl us to 
ﬁx the exact time of birth as at 2 h. 36 m. a.m. i subjoin the horoscop ﬁgure for that time, the calcul of 
which is as follows:— 

h. m. s. 
midheaven in r.a. at 
7th july, 1836… 7 1 58 
noon 
add time elaps sinc … … … 14 36 0 
equat for 14h. 33m. at 10 secs. 2 25 
midheaven in right ascens at birth … 21 40 23 


the constitution. 
born under the sign gemini, with mercuri rise in the sign cancer, the sun near the conjunct with jupit 
and in close sextil to the moon, there is littl doubt that the late coloni secretari is by natur gift with an [pg 115] 
[pg 116] 
excel constitution. the sextil of the luminari is a power co-ordinator, and whenev sick 
superven there will be a speedi recovery. the semisquar aspect of mars, while dispos to gouti aﬀect 
of the hand and feet, will contribut vital energi and power to throw oﬀ diseases, while at the same time 
predispos to accid and wound to the right shoulder or clavicle. 




the rise sign give nervous energi and enorm capac for work, which is due to high nervous tension 
support by a sound vitality. the onli hereditari predisposit is that indic by mars, which induc to 
fevers, and gouti affect due to acidity. 

the health. 
the moon is strong in the sign taurus, but not particular well place in the 12th house. it has, moreover, the 
squar aspect of neptun and venus from ﬁxed signs. these indic point to function disord of the 
heart, throat and excretori system. on the other hand, there are the good aspect of the sun, jupit and 
uranus to counteract these advers tendencies, and it is certain that strong recup power togeth with a 
normal good co-ordin of function would induc a speedi recoveri from ani ill to which he may be 
liable. consider immun from sick of all sort may therefor be predicated. 

charact and disposition. 
the major of the planet be in cardin signs, with three planet (includ the moon) in fix signs, [pg 117] 

indic a charact that is energetic, ambitious, active, sharp, ingenious, lively, and persevering; capabl of 
cut out a line in life for himself and make headway against obstacles; dispos to ride roughshod over the 
weak and prejudic of those who oppos him; gift with a pioneer spirit, incis manner, and 
dispos at time to eﬀect his end regardless of the feel and opinion of others. at the same time there is 
suﬃcient patience, method, caution, and watch to make this extrem deﬁnit of purpos veri eﬀective. 
laborious, ﬁrm (at time obstinate), systematic, and self-reliant, he is capabl of wait for opportunities. but 
final he carri his purpos with a tour de force. 
that which he lack is adaptability, suavity, and abil to enter into the feel of others. he is too ambiti to 
be self-centred, but yet too intent to be sympathetic. 
the rise of mercuri in trine aspect to saturn and uranus give consider mental capacity, a wide grasp of 
facts, a well-informed, apt and business-lik mind; some originality, constructiveness, and power of marshal 
fact and ﬁgures; patience, caution, and secrecy. there is not much imagination, and the sympathi are not 
wide. his method and action are govern by liter fact and mathemat certainty. he is an omnivor 
devour of the accessible. he take the small ﬁsh by the hand and make a meal of them; but he leav the 
ponder whale for those of greater imagin and more leisur habit. 
the quadratur of mar to uranus will induc momentari outburst of temper and some irrit of nature, but 
the charact i am delin is not such as can easili be play upon, for it is remark lack in emot [pg 118] 

susceptibility. nevertheless, the inspir faculti is by no mean absent, and the presenc of neptun in the 
9th hous in trine to the rise mercury, is an index of consider invent genius, extrem rang of mental 
perception, and telescop discern of futur events. venus in the 3rd hous show some artist tast and 
fancies, consider appreci of art and culture, a fond for ﬂowers, bright lights, &c. but domin 
abov all are the two angular inﬂuenc of uranus and mercury, which render the mind mathemat and 
precise, commercial, apt, business-like, energetic, and emin magnetic. 

finance. 
the posit of the sun in conjunct with jupit in the sign cancer, in sextil to the moon, is the index of a 
high fortun and mean exceed a competence. it is here worthi of note that cancer, which in this horoscop 
hold the sun, jupiter, and mercury, is the rule sign of south africa, with which coloni mr. chamberlain 
fortun have been for a long time so intim associated. it is also worthi of note that both cecil rhode and 
barney barnato were born on the same day of the year, the 5th of july, with the sun in the 14th degre of 
cancer. in the former case the sun was conjoin with moon and venus, in sextil to uranus and trine to 
neptune, while in the latter case the sun was in trine to jupiter. in regard to mr. chamberlain horoscope, it 
will be observ that jupiter, which hold such eﬀect power for increas in the 2nd house, is also the ruler of 
the 7th, and it is to be rememb that all partnerships, commerci or social, which he has contract have so [pg 119] 

far prove high satisfactori from a mere monetari point of view. further, the moon is aﬀect with the good 
aspect of the sun in the 2nd house, which is a further indic that on a pure ﬁnancial basi mr. 
chamberlain is a man worth go into partnership with. 







