

chapter ii. 

the alphabet of astrolog 

the scienc of astrolog consist of four branches, namely, mundan 

astrology, which is the art of foreseeing, by the aspect of the 

stars, at certain periods, the event like to happen to nations, such 

as pestilences, wars, inund and earthquakes; atmospher 

astrology, which is the art of foreseeing, by the posit of the 

heaven bodies, the qualiti of the weather at ani particular time or 

place; the cast of nativities, or the art of foretelling, 

from the posit of the star at the moment of birth, the fate and 

charact of the native; and horari astrology, or the art of 

foreseeing, by the posit of the heaven at the moment, the result 

of ani busi or circumstance. 

as the two former branch are treat in the astrolog almanack 

issu everi year by zadkiel, raphael, orion, and others, it is 

needless to go into them; but as the cast of nativ and the 

answer of horari question requir individu treatment, the work 

of these two branch of astrolog (after the ancient methods) 

shall be describ as clear as possible. 

befor the student can do anyth in astrolog he must master it 

alphabet—that is, he must make himself thorough acquaint with the 

symbol use to repres the planets, the sign of the zodiac and the 

aspects. 

the planet recognis by the ancient astrolog are, as we have seen, 

seven in number, and are as follows, with their symbols:—saturn, 

; jupiter, ; mars, ; sol, ; venus, 

; mercury, ; luna, . 

there are also the dragon head, thus symbolised, ; and the 

dragon tail, . these are neither planet nor sign of the 

zodiac, nor constellations, but are onli the node or point where the 

eclipt is cross by the moon. one of these point look northward, 

where the moon begin her northern latitude, and the other point 

southward, where she commenc her south latitude. the head of the 

dragon is consid of a benevol nature; the tail of the dragon is 

of evil tendency. 

there are also the twelv sign of the zodiac, which are as follows, 

with their symbols:— 

northern. 



southern. 

ari 



libra 

taurus 



scorpio 

gemini 



sagittarius 

cancer 



capricorn 

leo 



aquarius 

virgo 



pisc 

through these twelv sign the planet continu move, and are ever 

in one or other of them. 

they are divid into north and south. the first six, 

from ari to virgo, are northern; the latter six, from libra to 

pisces, are southern; this is becaus the sun and planet when 

in the first six are north of the equator, and when in the last six 

they are south of that line. 

each point of the zodiac rise and set onc everi twenty-four hours, 

occas by the earth revolut on it axi onc everi day; 

therefore, when ani given point is rising, the opposit point 

must be setting. 

[3] 

as the zodiac consist of 360 degre from the first point of ari 

until we come to that point again, and as these are divid into twelv 

portion or signs, they must consist of 30 degre each. 

the aspect are five in number; they repres certain posit which 

the planet bear to each other as they move through the sign of the 

zodiac; they are as follows, with their symbols:— 

conjunction, when two planet are in the same place, viz., in same 

degre of the same sign. 

sextile, when they are 60 degre or two sign apart. 

square, when they are 90 degre or three sign apart. 

trine, when they are 120 degre or four sign apart. 

opposition, when they are 180 degre or six sign asunder. 

the conjunct () is rather a posit than an aspect, as 

planet can hard be said to aspect each other when they are in the 

same place. when saturn is in the first degre of aries, and ani planet 

in the same degre of that sign, they are said to be in conjunction; 

this is good or evil, accord to the natur of the planet thus 

posited. 

the trine () is the most power of all the good aspects. 

the sextil () is favourable. 

the squar () is evil. 

the opposit () is also veri evil. 

there are sever other aspect (sometim call the "modern aspects") 

invent by kepler; but as they onli appear to complic what is at 

best a veri intric study, it is best to ignor them and adher in 

this, as in the matter of the planets, to the old methods. 


