

chapter iii. 

concern the sign of the zodiac 

the zodiac is a band or belt, measur about 14 degre in breadth, 

but, as venus sometim appear to have more than her real latitude, it 

is more correct consid to be 18 degre in breadth. the 

ecliptic, or path of the sun, pass exact through the centr 

of the zodiac, longitudinally. 

the ancient divid the zodiac into ten signs—libra be 

omit altogether, virgo and scorpio be merg into one, thus: 

virgo-scorpio. this account for the similar of their symbols, 

. 

ptolemi divid the zodiac into twelv equal parts, of 30 degre each. 

he says: "the begin of the whole zodiac circl (which in it 

natur as a circl can have no other begin or end capabl of be 

determined) is, therefore, assum to be the sign aries, which 

commenc at the vernal equinox in march." 

one of the mani object urg against ptolemi system of astrolog 

is that the sign are continu move from their positions; but 

ptolemi seem to have been awar of this motion of the signs, and has 

met this object by what he say in the twenty-fifth chapter of the 

first book of the tetra-biblos, where he make it clear that the 

respect influenc he ascrib to the twelv sign were consid 

by him to belong rather to the place they occupi in the 

ambient than to the star of which they are composed; and he especi 

speak of the ambient as produc the effect attribut to the 

respect sign of the zodiac when in the ascend in a nativity; 

thus his astrolog is just as applic to modern astronomi as it was 

to his own. 

the sign have been divid into four triplicities, thus: 

fieri , , ; earthy, , , 

; airy, , , ; and watery, 

, , . 

the bicorporal, or double-bodied, sign are , , and 

the first half of . the fruit sign are , 

, ; the barren sign are , , and . 

these descript are use in show the modif brought to 

bear (bi the sign ascending) on the planet influence. but, when no 

planet are in or near the ascend at birth, the follow 

descript of the tempera and form of bodi produc by each sign 

ascend at birth should be used. 

ari () is a hot and fieri sign and produc a lean body, 

spare and strong, larg bones, grey eyes, with a quick glanc and sandi 

or red-colour hair. the temper is violent. it govern the head and 

face; it colour is white. 

taurus () differ greatly, in it effects, from the preced 

sign; it is cold and dry, and give a broad brow and thick lips. a 

person born under it is melancholi and slow to anger but, when roused, 

furious and difficult to be appeased. it govern the neck and throat; 

it colour is red. 

gemini () is in natur hot and moist and produc a person of 

straight, tall body, sanguin complexion, brilliant eye and light 

brown hair. the tempera of those born under gemini is live and 

the understand good. this sign govern the arm and shoulders; it 

colour are red and white. 

cancer () is by natur cold and moist; it produc a nativ 

fair and pale, short in stature, with a round face, sand-colour brown 

hair and grey eyes. those born under it are phlegmatic, indol and 

gentl tempered. women born under this sign general have mani 

children. it govern the breast and stomach; it colour are green and 

russet-brown. 

leo () is a fiery, hot and dri sign. when it rise at birth 

without ani planet be near the ascendant, the nativ will be of tall 

stature, with yellow hair, ruddi complexion and oval face, and he will 

have a quick glanc and a strong voice. it govern the heart, the back 

and the neck; it colour are red and green. 

virgo () is an earthy, cold, barren, feminin sign. when it 

ascends, it show a well-form body, slender and tall, straight, 

dark-brown hair and a round face. the mind of the nativ is ingenious, 

but rather inconstant. it govern the belly; it colour is black 

speckl with blue. 

libra () is an aërial, sanguine, masculine, hot and moist sign. 

rise at birth it produc a well-mad body, with long limbs, an oval 

and beauti face, sanguin complexion, straight flaxen hair and grey 

eyes. those born under it are courteous, just and honourable. it 

govern the loins; and the colour under it rule are black, crimson 

and tawny. 

scorpio () is a moist, phlegmatic, feminin sign. it give a 

strong, corpul body, low stature, thick legs, hair grow low on 

the forehead and heavi eyebrows. those born under this sign are 

reserved, thoughtful, subtl and malicious. it govern the lower part 

of the body; the colour under it rule is brown. 

sagittarius () is a fiery, masculin sign. the person born 

under it rule is handsome, with a rather long face and features, 

chestnut hair, inclin to bald and ruddi complexion; the bodi 

strong and active. those born under this sign are fond of field sports, 

are good riders, and are lover of animals. they are kindly, generous 

and careless of danger. this sign govern the thigh and hips, and 

rule yellow and green. 

capricorn () is an earthy, cold, dry, feminin sign. it 

produc a person of slender stature, with a long neck, narrow chest 

and dark hair. the mind is quick, witti and subtle. it govern the 

knee and ham and, in colours, it rule black or dark brown. 

aquarius () is an airy, moist, masculin sign. in a nativ 

where no planet are in or near the ascendant, it would produc a 

person of a well-set, strong body, long face and delic complexion, 

with brown hair. it govern the leg and ankl and rule the 

sky-colour or blue. 

pisc () is a watery, cold and feminin sign. it produc a 

person of short statur and fleshi body, with a rather stoop gait. 

those born under it influenc are indol and phlegmatic. it govern 

the feet and toe and presid over the pure white colour. it is 

need to rememb the colour belong to the signs, as they are 

especi use in horari questions. 


