

chapter v. 

of the influenc of the seven planet 

the planet saturn is the most remot of the seven planetari orb 

recognis by the ancient writer on astrology. he is of a pale ash 

colour, slow in motion, onli finish his cours through the twelv 

sign of the zodiac in 29 year and about 157 days. his greatest north 

latitud from the eclipt is 2 degre 48 minutes; his south latitud 

is 2 degre 49 minutes. 

those born with this planet well-dignifi 

[4] are studious, grave, 

economical, prudent, patient and in all their action sober and 

somewhat austere. they are not much given to the love of women, but 

they are person of much depth of feeling, and, when they do love, they 

are veri constant. they are given to the studi of occult matters, 

[5] 

and are of a melancholic, suspici and jealous temperament. in person 

when well-dignifi saturn give a rather tall statur and long 

limbs. the hair is dark, the eyebrow much mark and general meet 

between the eyes, which are dark brown, deep set and close together. 

the nose is long and general somewhat bent over the lip and the 

under jaw slight protrudes. the complexion is sallow, the ear larg 

and the hand and feet are general long, but not fleshy. 

those born under the potent aspect of saturn are general slow of 

speech and their voic are harsh; when saturn rise in a horoscop 

devoid of dignities, the nativ is envious, covetous, malicious, 

subtle, untruth and of a discont disposition. in person 

frequent deformed, with long and irregular features, the eye and 

hair dark and the skin yellow and harsh. 

in man bodi this planet rule the spleen, the right ear, the lip and 

the teeth. in ill he give ague, palsy, ruptur (especi should 

he rule in the sign of scorpio), jaundice, toothach and all affect 

of the sight, of the ear, of the teeth and jaw and of the legs. 

the herb he govern are the hemlock, hellebore, burdock, sage, 

henbane, rue, nightshad and mandrake. 

the tree under his rule are the willow, the yew, the cypress, the 

box-tre and the pine. 

the beast he govern are the elephant, the wolf, the bear, the dog,[6] 

the basilisk, the crocodile, the scorpion, the serpent, the rat, the 

mous and all manner of creep things; among birds, the crow, the 

cuckoo, the raven, the owl and the bat. 

of fish he rule the eel, the tortois and all shell fish. 

the miner he govern are lead and the dross of all metals. 

his stone are jet, onyx and all dark stone which are incap of 

polish. the colour he rule is black. 

he rule saturday—th first hour after sunrise, and the eighth hour of 

the same day. his number is 55. in gather the herb under his rule 

the ancient were particular to do so in his hours, as this render 

the medica more powerful. this is to be observ regard the 

herb rule by all the planets. 

saturn orb is nine degre befor and after ani aspect; that is, his 

influenc begin to oper when either he appli to ani planet or it 

appli to him within nine degre of his perfect aspect, and his 

influenc continu in forc until he is separ nine degre from 

the aspect. his angel is cassiel. his friend are jupiter, venus, 

mercuri and the moon; his enemi are mar and the sun. 

jupit is the next planet below saturn and is of a bright, clear, 

azur colour. he much exceed saturn in motion, as he finish his 

cours through the twelv sign in twelv years. his greatest north 

latitud is 1 degre 38 minutes, and his greatest south latitud 1 

degre 40 minutes. when he rise at birth well-dignifi he give an 

erect, tall stature, sanguin complexion, oval face, larg grey eyes, 

thick brown hair, full lip and good teeth. in tempera those born 

under the good influenc of this planet are honourable, generous and 

hospitable, but love materi pleasures, kind and affection to 

wife and family, charitable, desir to be well thought of and hate 

all mean and sordid actions. the voic of those born under jupit are 

clear and sonorous. when this planet rise devoid of digniti 

the nativ will be gluttonous, profligate, vain, and boastful, of mean 

abil and shallow understanding, easili seduc to extravag and 

a tyrant to those of his famili and household. 

in man bodi he rule the lung and the blood, and of diseas he 

give apoplexy, gout, inflamm of the lungs, pleurisi and all 

ill proceed from corrupt of the blood. 

the herb he govern are cloves, mace, nutmeg, gilliflower, marjoram, 

mint, borag and saffron. 

of trees, he rule the mulberry, the olive, the vine, the fig, the 

beech and the pear-tree. 

of beasts, the sheep, the hart, the ox and all those anim that are 

use to man. 

of birds, the stork, the snipe, the lark, the eagle, the pheasant, the 

partridg and the peacock. 

of fishes, the whale, the dolphin and the sword-fish. 

his metal is tin. 

his stone are the sapphire, the amethyst and the emerald. 

of colour he rule red mix with green. 

his day is thursday and he rule the first hour after sunris and the 

eighth hour. his number is 78. 

his orb is 9 degre befor and after ani aspect. 

all the planet except mar are his friends. 

his angel is zadkiel. 

mar in order succeed jupiter. he appear of a red colour, and 

finish his cours through the zodiac in 1 year 321 days. his greatest 

north latitud is 4 degre 31 minutes. his south latitud is 6 degre 

47 minutes. when he is well-dignifi in a horoscope, the nativ is 

courageous, confident, love war and all that belong to it, jealous 

of honour, hot-temp and a great lover of field-sports. in person he 

will be of middl stature, broad-should and with big bones; the 

complexion of a red fairness; the hair is crisp or cur and also red, 

but this vari slight accord to the sign rise at birth; in 

wateri sign the hair is not so red, and in earthi sign it is more 

chestnut; the eye are grey and have a bold, fix glanc like that of 

a hawk. 

when he is ill-dignifi at birth, the nativ is turbulent, cruel, 

boastful, a promot of sedition, ungraci in manner and 

unscrupul in his actions, with no fear of either god or man. he 

rule the head and face, the gall, the throat and intestines; and the 

diseas he give are fevers, carbuncles, smallpox, all throat 

affections, all hurt to the head and face (especi by iron), and 

all diseas which aris from too much heat of blood; also accid 

from four-foot beasts. 

the herb over which he rule are the nettle, the thistle, onions, 

scammony, garlic, horehound, cardamons, mustard and all herb give 

heat. 

of trees, all those which are of a prick nature, such as the holly, 

the thorn and the chestnut. 

of beasts, all fierc animals—th tiger, the panther, the wolf, the 

horse, the leopard, the wild ass and the bear. 

the dog is sometim assign to mar on account of it courag and 

combativeness. this delight anim is probabl rule by both saturn 

and mars; the former give it the qualiti of fidel which it 

possess in a degre beyond all other creatures. 

of fish, the pike, the barbel and the sword-fish. 

of birds, the hawk, the vulture, the kite, the eagle, the magpi and 

the cock, all of which are combative. 

the metal he rule is iron. the colour he rule is red. 

the stones, the carbuncle, the rubi and the blood-stone. 

his orb is 7 degre befor and after ani aspect. 

he govern tuesday—th first hour after sunrise, and the eighth. his 

number is 39. 

his friend among the planet is venus, all the other are his enemies. 

his angel is samael. 

the sun pass through all the twelv sign of the zodiac in one year 

and a few hour over the 365 day which constitut the year. he has no 

latitude. 

when the sun rise at a birth well-dignified, the nativ is of an 

honour disposition, but alway desir to rule, love pomp, yet 

affable, speak with graviti and without too mani word and 

possess much self-reli and digniti of manner. in person he will 

be tall, well made, with golden hair, yellowish skin, larg and 

pierc eye and long, straight and well-form features. 

when ill-aspect the nativ is arrogant, boastful, a spendthrift, 

proud, yet in poverti hang on other men charity, veri loquacious, 

restless and without judgment. 

he govern the heart, the brain, the right eye and the arms; and the 

diseas he caus are all ill of the heart, such as swoons, 

palpitations, cramps, also diseas of the mouth, the brain, and the 

eyes. 

of colour he rule the yellow and orang colour. 


