

chapter vi. 

concern the twelv hous of heaven and their power 

the ancient astrolog divid the heaven into twelv houses. 

the first house.—thi is call the ascendant, and the 

planet rise therein—wheth well or ill-dignified—wil materi 

affect the mind, bodili appear and fate of the nativ through his 

whole existence. this hous is masculine, and govern the head and face 

of man and, if the planet mar be in this hous at the time of birth, 

there will alway be some blemish or mole in the face of the native; if 

a few out of the degre have ascend the scar or blemish is, without 

fail, on the upper part of the head; if the middl part of the sign 

ascend the mark is in the middl of the face; if the latter part of 

the sign is ascend the mark is near the chin. this hous repres 

the head, the tongu and the memory, and it govern in colour white. 

the second house.—thi hous has signif of the nativ 

wealth and world goods. the hous is feminine, rule the neck, and 

the colour is green. 

the third house.—thi govern brother and sisters, short 

journeys, neighbours, letter and writings. it is masculin and govern 

the hands, arm and shoulders; it colour are red and yellow mixed. 

the fourth house.—thi rule the father, inherit or 

properti of the native, and show his condit at the close of life. 

it is feminine, and rule the stomach, breast and lungs; it colour is 

red. 

the fifth house.—thi signifi the children of the native, 

also his success in specul and hazard games, the pleasur he 

enjoy and the wealth of the father. it rule the heart, back and 

liver, is masculine, and repres in colour black and white mixed. 

the sixth house.—thi concern the nativ servants, sheep, 

goat and small cattle. it also signifi the father kindred. this 

hous is feminine. it rule the belli and intestin and it colour is 

black. 

the seventh hous give judgment of marriag and describ the 

man or woman in all love questions. it is masculine, it rule the 

haunches, and it colour is black. 

the eighth hous argu of death, of legaci and wills, also of 

the kind of death a man shall die; it is a feminin house. it rule the 

lower part of the trunk of the body; it colour are green and black. 

the ninth hous give judgment on voyag and long journeys, and 

also on event happen to the wife kindred. it rule the hip and 

thighs. it is a masculin house; it colour are green and white. 

the tenth hous is call the mid-heaven, and is 

feminine. this concern the nativ mother, and also his calling. it 

rule the knee and hams, and it colour are red and white. 

the eleventh hous repres friend and friendship. it is 

masculin and rule the legs. 

the twelfth house.—thi hous is often call the evil 

dæmon, for it is the hous of sorrow, self-undoing, enemi and 

imprisonment. it govern great cattle. it is feminine, and rule the 

feet and toes, and in colour it govern green. 

the strongest hous are the first (the ascendant) and the tenth 

(the mid-heaven). the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth are 

call angular houses, and repres the four cardin point of the 

compass; thus the first is east, the seventh west, the fourth is north, 

and the tenth south. the second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh hous are 

call succed houses; the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth hous 

are term cadent hous (see plate 1). ani planet posit in a cadent 

hous is regard as weak in it effect on the native. it is necessari 

to have thorough master the influenc of the twelv houses, as 

well as those of the seven planets, and of the sign of the zodiac, 

befor attempt to cast a nativ or to work a horari question. 



chapter vii. 

an explan of various term use in astrolog 

ascension, right.—th distanc ani bodi or point in the heaven 

is from the begin of the eclipt or first point of aries. it is 

measur in degre and minut of a degree. it is thus abbreviated, a. 

r. 

ascension, oblique.—if a star be not on the equator, it will, 

when it rises, form an angl with that part of the equat which is 

rise at the same time, and this is call it 

ascension difference.—this, ad to it right ascens (a. 

r.) if it have south declination, but subtract from it if it 

have north declination, give it obliqu ascension. 

applic signifi the approach of two planet and is of 

three kinds: first, when a planet, swift of motion, appli to one of 

slower progress: for example, we will suppos mercuri posit in 16 

degre of the sign gemini, and mar in 21 degre of the same sign 

(both be in direct motion), mercuri be swifter would 

overtak and form a conjunct with mars, which is term a direct 

application. the second kind of applic is form by two 

retrograd planets: thus we will suppos mercuri in 16 degre of 

gemini and saturn in 15 degre of the same sign, both retrograde. 

mercuri be the swiftest planet, appli to saturn, a more ponder 

planet, by retrogradation, and this is call a retrograd 

application. the third kind of applic is when one planet, 

be direct in motion, meet anoth which is retrograde: for 

instance, we will suppos mercuri retrograd in 16 degre of gemini, 

and saturn direct in motion in 12 degre of the same sign; here 

mercury, be the higher planet, appli to a conjunct of 

saturn by a retrograd motion. these two last are consid 

evil applications. it should also be rememb that the 

superior planets, saturn, jupit and mars, never appli to the inferior 

planets, venus, mercuri and the moon, except by retrograd motion; but 

the inferior planet appli in both ways. 

besieg signifi a planet situat between the two malevol 

planets, saturn and mars: thus, if saturn were in the 12th degre of 

aries, jupit in the 14th, and mar in the 16th, jupit would then be 

besieg by the two malef planets, saturn and mars. this is, 

of course, an evil position. 

cazimi.—a planet is said to be in cazimi when it is in 

the heart of the sun: that is, onli 17 minut befor or after the sun. 

all astrolog agre that a planet is fortifi by this position, but 

a planet when combust is veri evil in it influences. 

direct motion signifi that a planet is move on it natur 

course, accord to the success of the sign of the zodiac: thus a 

planet is direct in motion when it move from ari to taurus, 

or from taurus to gemini. 

frustrat mean the approach of a swift planet to an aspect 

with one of slower motion; but befor it can approach near enough to 

join that aspect the more weighti planet is join to some other, by 

which the first aspect is frustrated. 

hayz is when a masculin diurnal planet is situat abov the 

horizon in the daytime, or when a feminin nocturn planet is place 

below the horizon in the night-time; this is fortun in it 

influence. 

node.—that part of the eclipt where a planet pass out of 

north into south latitud is it south node; that where it goe into 

north latitud is it north node. 

orient and occidental.—a planet, when oriental, rise befor 

the sun; when occident set after him and is seen abov the horizon 

when the sun is down; consequently, when a planet is orient it is 

posit in the east, and when occidental, in the west. 

from the fourth hous eastward to the tenth is orient and from the 

tenth westward to the fourth is occidental. but or 

are orient between the first and tenth and it 

opposit quarter and are occident between the tenth and 

seventh and it opposit quarter. 

void of cours is when a planet is separ from anoth 

planet, and doe not, dure it continu in the same sign, form ani 

aspect with ani other planet. this most usual happen with the moon. 

the effect of this is 

to face chapter viii. 


