

chapter x. 

of the effect of each planet in each of the twelv hous 

saturn in the first house, or ascendant, show melancholi and mani 

sorrows, and if near the ascend probabl of earli death; in the 

second hous pecuniari troubles; in the third quarrel with brother 

and sisters, and danger and loss in travelling; in the fourth hous 

death of father or mother, and loss of friends; in the fifth barren 

or death of children; in the sixth illness, worri with servant and 

loss from cattle; in the seventh an ungovern wife and unhappi 

marriage; in the eighth violent death and loss of legacies; in the 

ninth loss by sea; in the tenth dishonour and imprisonment; in the 

eleventh deep depress and fals friends; in the twelfth sorrow, 

troubl and persecut from secret enemies. if the planet is 

strong—that is, well-dignified—thes evil are much lessened. 

jupit in the first hous give a good, happi and long life; in the 

second riches; in the third famili affect and fortun short 

journeys; in the fourth land and inherit with an honour life 

and end; in the fifth mani children who are good and affectionate; in 

the sixth faith servant and fortun deal respect cattle; 

in the seventh honour marriage; in the eighth long life and natur 

death; in the ninth profit sea voyages; in the tenth prefer and 

honours; in the eleventh faith friends; in the twelfth victori over 

secret enemies. this, of course, mean when the planet is strong in 

dignities; if weak the good will be somewhat abated. 

mar in the first hous show short of life and scar on the head 

or face; in the second poverti and troubles; in the third quarrel with 

kindr and danger in travelling; in the fourth short life to the 

fathers; in the fifth disobedi children; in the sixth fevers, bad 

servants, and loss of cattle; in the seventh sensual and unhappi 

in marriage; in the eighth a violent death; in the ninth irreligion and 

loss at sea; in the tenth militari preferment, but troubl from 

great dignitaries; in the eleventh fals friend and loss of money; in 

the twelfth imprisonment. this is when mar is afflicted, but if 

well-aspect these evil are somewhat abated. 

the sun in the first hous give honour, glory, and long life; in the 

second much riches, but great extravagance; in the third good brethren 

and fortun journeys; in the fourth a nobl inherit and honour 

in old age; in the fifth few children, yet such as will be a comfort; 

in the sixth diseas of the mind; in the seventh a good wife, 

honour adversaries, and sickness; in the eighth good dowri with the 

wife, but danger of a violent death; in the ninth gain by the sea, and 

ecclesiast dignities; in the tenth gain from princ and nobl 

women; in the eleventh distinguish friendships; in the twelfth 

power adversaries. this is if the sun is well-dignified; if weak the 

good fortun is not so pronounced. 

venus in the first hous give good health, but sensual as regard 

the opposit sex; in the second rich by mean of women; in the third, 

in a woman horoscope, by mean of lover abov her in rank; in the 

fourth inheritance; in the fifth mani children; in the sixth ill 

from excesses; in the seventh a good and beauti wife and veri few 

enemies; in the eighth a good dowri with the wife and a natur death; 

in the ninth good fortun by sea; in the tenth honour and prefer 

through the mean of some one of the opposit sex; in the eleventh 

sympathet friends; in the twelfth freedom from the power of privat 

enemies. this if venus be strong; if weak the good fortun is less 

pronounced. 

mercuri in the first hous give nobl thoughts, grace elocution, 

and love of art and science; in the second profit by intellectu work; 

in the third mathemat skill, swift and prosper journeys; in the 

fourth the gain of an inherit by craftiness; in the fifth clever 

children; in the sixth thiev servant and diseas of the brain; in 

the seventh a foment of quarrels, but a discreet wife; in the eighth 

death by consumption; in the ninth wonder ability, especi in 

occult matters; in the tenth much prefer for ability; in the 

eleventh inconst friends; in the twelfth secret enemies, but they 

will not much affect the destiny. this is when mercuri is 

well-dignified. if weak the good fortun is much lessened. 

the moon in the ascendant, or first house, show the nativ will travel 

and will gain the favour of nobl persons; in the second she sometim 

give unstabl fortune, riches, and poverti alternately; in the third 

long journeys; in the fourth profit by travelling; in the fifth mani 

children; in the sixth diseas of the brain, but good servants; in the 

seventh honour marriage; in the eighth danger by drowning, but 

otherwis a long and healthi life; in the ninth mani long sea voyages, 

inconst in religion, and love of art; in the tenth great honours; 

in the eleventh the friendship of nobl personages; in the twelfth the 

common peopl will be the nativ enemi and do him much wrong. 

the dragon head when posit in the first hous show poverty; in the 

second a good estate; in the third honest kindr and fortun 

journeys; in the fourth gain by travels; in the fifth long life and 

good children; in the sixth health and good servants; in the seventh a 

virtuous wife; in the eighth mani legaci and a natur death; in the 

ninth prosper at sea; in the tenth honour; in the eleventh faith 

friends; in the twelfth open enemies. 

the dragon tail in the same place signifi the contrari in all 

things. 


