


chapter xii. 

concern direct and horari question 

we have seen in the chapter on the judgment of a nativ that by the 

consider of the posit of the planet and of the sun and moon in 

the twelv houses, what the general fortun of the nativ will 

be in the whole cours of his life; but the art of direct measur 

out the time into years, months, week and day and thus inform us 

when we may expect in particular what is general 

promis us in the nativity. 

direct are of two kinds, primari and secondary, and 

are base upon arithmet calcul of the time of the event 

caus by the aspect of the signif (that is, of the sun or the 

moon), with the place of the planets. they are found upon the 

familiar of the star amongst each other in the zodiac (after 

the nativity), and show, by calculations, the distanc of the place 

of a signif at the moment of the nativ from the place it must 

reach befor it can join the aspect, which distanc is call the 

arc of direction. some astrolog consid what are call 

"mundan directions," which are distanc in the world measur 

by the semi-arc, and are wholli independ of the zodiac. these were 

invent by placidus, but as ptolemi doe not treat of them they will 

not be consid here. 

it must alway be rememb that—in directions—th place of a 

planet, at the time of the nativity, is call the planet itself, 

although it may not be there when the signif arrives; thus, if we 

wish to direct the sun to the conjunct of jupiter, we must do so to 

the posit which that planet occupi at the moment of the 

nativity. when the arc of direct is found the sun right ascens 

must be ad to it, and the sun will be the right ascens (without 

latitude) of that place in the zodiac at which, when the sun arrives, 

the direct will be completed. for everi day of the sun approach to 

this point a year must be added, and thus the time when the event is 

like to happen is point out: these primari directions, however, 

cannot be depend upon to produc an event of great import unless 

the secondari direct agree; but where the nativ is weak the 

primari direct alon is power enough to kill (especi if it 

should be oppos to the hyleg), and misfortun will alway happen if 

the posit of the planets, at the moment of birth, are unfortunate, 

without the coincid of ani secondari direction. 

secondari direct are those daili aspect to the luminari 

which happen after birth, everi day of which is reckon for a year, 

two hour for a month, thirti minut for a week, and four minut for 

a day.[13] thus, whatev aspect take place in the first day of 

the nativ life will develop their effect in the first year and 

those of the second day in the second year, so that, should the nativ 

live fifti years, his secondari direct for his fiftieth year will 

aris from the aspect which took place on the fiftieth day after his 

birth. the ancient astrologers—particular the egyptians—us to 

predict the event of a nativ wholli from these secondari 

directions,[14] in which the moon should be chiefli considered; for in 

those day on which she come to an evil aspect with the malefics, 

saturn or mars, the year correspond to those day will be 

peculiar unfortun and danger to the native; and where, on the 

contrary, the moon is well-aspect to the benefics, the year 

correspond to those day will be veri fortunate: a good direct 

give prosper in that matter which the signif indicates; thus 

we direct the sun to signifi the nativ prefer or disgrace, his 

good or bad health, and the favour or disesteem of great personages. 

the direct of the moon refer to the natur of the nativ 

journeys, whether prosper or the reverse, his marriage, his wife, 

his women friend and kinsfolk. 

the direct of saturn signifi the nativ inheritance, buildings, 

possessions, and also his fears, jealousi and mistrusts. 

jupit is direct as regard glory, renown, riches, children and 

religion. 

mar is direct for the nativ law-suits, animos and victories; 

he also show the estat of brethren. 

venus is direct for marriage, love and pleasur and all matter in 

connect with women. 

mercuri is direct for a knowledg of the amount of wit, 

understanding, trade, industry, and journey of the native; also for 

distinct in scholarship and all intellectu pursuits. 

the horoscop or ascend is direct to signifi the life, affect 

and manner of the native. 

the mid-heaven direct affect the posit and career of the 

native. 

if the direct are to good aspect of benevol planets, they 

signifi prosper both of mind and body, cheer and all manner 

of earth happiness; but if the horoscop should have direct to 

the ill aspect of the malefics, mar or saturn, then evil is to be 

expect of the natur given by the malevol star. if direct to the 

good aspects, such as the trine or sextil of these evil planets, the 

misfortun is not so great, and even in some instanc good may be 

predicted. as, for example, the horoscop direct to the trine or 

sextil of mar give prefer by arms; the same aspect toward 

saturn would indic success in build or in mines, or some call 

connect with metals. 

the occasion differ in the life, tastes, health, marriag and 

pecuniari affair of twins, born within ten or twenti minut of each 

other, are account for by the fact that at the birth of the first 

child the last degre of a sign may ascend with planet therein, or a 

planet in the 2nd hous at 5 p.m. may be in the 1st at 5.15 p.m. and 

the earli degre of anoth sign may be exact on the ascend at 

the birth of the second child. 

a planet may reach the m.c., or ani other of the four cardin point 

at, say, 10 p.m. and ten minut later have pass off, when it power 

would have great diminished. though the sign rise and set at the 

rate of 15° per hour, in our latitud from 50° to 60° north, it often happen that 30° will ascend in fifty-two minutes. 

horari question are question ask at a certain time when a person 

feel anxious concern ani undertak or impend event. a figur 

or map of the heavens, like that erect for a nativity, is drawn out 

for the minut in which the question is asked; and, if the astrolog 

be skilful, and the querist sincere—that is, not put the question 

from frivol motives—th answer will, in general, be true, for the 

whole is the effect of that sympathi which pervad all natur and 

which is the keynot of all divin under whatsoev form it is 

practised. 

in horari question the sign ascend and it lord repres the 

querent, and to these the moon is ad and must be consid with the 

lord of the ascendant. 

the hous to which the thing belongs—about which enquiri is made—i 

the signif of that person and thing, and everi other hous and 

it lord are to be consid accord to their respect 

significations, so as to indic the mean and person by which the 

event, about which the enquiri are made, will be acceler or 

retarded. 

the date of event are regul by the sign and angles. for example, 

should the signif of the event be in a movabl sign and an angl 

the event will come to pass in the same number of day as there are 

degre between the signif aspect and the star to which it is 

direct if the aspect be by application; if by 

separation, the thing will not take place at all. in one 

of the succed hous movabl sign give months, common sign year 

and fix sign bring about the event, after much delay, and when all 

hope of it are past. 

signif in ani of the cadent hous seldom do anyth and, 

should they bring about an event at all, they do so after much wait 

and with much troubl and vexation. 

the matter of horari question is veri well treat in lilli 

grammar of astrology, publish in 1647, and, by way of 

explain the manner in which this branch of astrolog is worked, we 

give a fac-simil of a map of a horari question to be found in 

this book, with (verbatim) lilli method of deal with that 

particular question. 

judgment of the figur given in plate.—"liv in london, where 

we have few or no small cattl as in the country, i cannot give exampl 

of such creatures, but i onc set the figur preced concern a 

dogg (which is in the natur of small beasts), which dogg was 

missing. the question to me was what part of the citi they should 

search and if he should ever be recovered. 

"the querent was signifi by the sign ascend and the lord thereof, 

for, in his person, he was saturnin and vitiat (accord to the 

dragon tail in the ascendant) in his nature, mind and 

understanding—that is, he was deform in bodi and of a covet 

disposition. the sign of the sixth hous and his lord signifi the 

dogge, for that sign stand for sheep, hog and small cattle. 

"the sign of gemini is west, and by south the quarter of the heaven is 

west; mercuri (the signif of the dogge) is in libra, a western 

sign, but southern quarter of heaven, tend toward the west; the 

moon is in virgo, a south-west sign, and verg toward the western 

angle. the strength of the testimoni be thus examin i found the 

plural to signifi the west, and therefor i judg that the dogg 

ought to be westward from the place where the owner lived, which was at 

templ bar, wherefor i judg that the dogg was about long acre, or 

the upper part of druri lane. in regard that mercuri (the signif 

of the beast) was in a sign of the same triplic as gemini the 

ascendant, which signifi london, and appli to a trine aspect of the 

cusp of the sixth house, i judg that the dogg was not out of the 

line of communication, but was in the same quarter, of which i was 

more confirm by the trine of the sun and saturn. the sign in which 

mercuri appear was libra—an airi sign; therefor i judg that the 

dogg was in some chamber or upper room, and kept privately, or in 

great secrecy, becaus the moon was under the beam of the sun; and 

mercury, the moon and the sun were in the eighth house: and becaus the 

sun on the monday follow would appli by trine to saturn, the lord of 

the ascendant, and the moon to trine of mar have exalt in the 

ascendant, i intim to the owner of the beast that, in my opinion, 

he should have his dogg again, or news of his dogg or small beast, 

upon the monday following, or near that time, which was true; for a 

gentleman of the querent acquaint sent home the dogg the veri 

same day, about ten in the morning, who, by accident, come to see a 

friend in long acre, found the dogg chain up under a table, and, 

know the dogg to be the querent's, sent him home as abov said, to 

my veri great credit," and no doubt also to the great satisfact of 

"the dogge" himself. 


