

chapter xiii. 

solar horoscopes[15] 

january.—aquarius 

the influenc of this sign last from the twenty-second of januari 

to the twenty-first of february. 

the man born under this influenc will be of medium stature, good 

genius and a great speaker. he will achiev what he desir and will 

becom famous in his own country. 

he will be subject to melancholy, veri religi and of a high 

conscienti nature. the stars, however, destin him to pass through 

much poverti in his youth and he will have other troubl in the matter 

of death of relat and friend befor he is thirty. he will travel 

much and, in his earli youth, he will suffer from illness. he will be 

much influenc by women to his own detriment. he will lose his first 

wife and will marri twice, but the second marriag will not be veri 

fortunate. at thirti he will be veri serious ill, but will recov 

and live on to about sixty-four years. 

the woman who is born at the above-ment date will have a charm 

and express face; her eye will be soft and beauti in shape and 

her hair of a medium brown colour, neither veri dark nor veri fair. in 

charact she will be slight melancholi and of a romant turn of 

mind. she will be happi in her marriage. she will have a serious 

ill at fifty, but will recov from it through the affection 

care of her husband, and will live to a good old age, surround by her 

children children. 

february.—pisc 

the influenc of this sign last from the twenty-second of februari 

to the twentieth of march. 

the man who is born under the influenc of this sign will be abov 

middl height, his chin will be fleshy, his eye blue and his 

complexion rather colourless. his forehead will be low and broad and 

his eye will express much kind and good of disposition. he 

will be veri fond of aquat pursuit and take great delight in 

angling. he will not be studious, for he has not much perseverance, but 

he will take delight in convers of an instruct order. he will 

not be much of a talker and will be slow to give his opinion on ani 

subject. he will be of a luxuri tempera and will be much 

influenc by women. he will be econom in his household expenses, 

but will spend money freeli on his own pleasur out of his famili 

circle. he will be fond of travel and will be more fortun in 

other place than in his own country. he will be ingeni and of good 

counsel, yet wiser for other than for himself. he will lose his wife 

earli in life, but will not marri again, yet this more from indol 

than constanc of feeling. 

the woman born at this time will be fair good looking; her eye will 

be light blue and she will have a fair complexion and a dimpl in the 

right cheek. she will be of a good disposit and kind to the poor; 

but yet she will be self-indulg and much given to luxuri of all 

sorts. she will marri twice and have mani children, but the star do 

not promis her much happiness. she will die at sixty-eight. 

march.—ari 

the qualiti given by this sign of the zodiac last from the 

twentieth of march to the twentieth of april. 

the man born under this sign will be of medium stature, of fierc 

countenance, with an aquilin nose, quick move eye and a strong 

mark dimpl in the chin. his hair will be of a reddish tint, his 

forehead broad and his complexion florid. he will be a loud talker and 

have much inclin for women and also for the pleasur of the 

table. he will be fond of field sport and veri courageous. he will be 

subject to accidents, both from fire and from four-foot beasts. he 

will be caprici in his affect and will suffer much from his 

affair with women in his youth, but will grow wiser toward middl 

age. he will not marry. at fifti he will lose much money and will fall 

into poverty, and thus becom alien from the friend of his youth. 

his life will not be prolong much beyond fifty-f years. 

the woman born at this time will have a florid complexion, larg 

round-shap eye and a squar chin. she will be of middl height and 

rather strong made. she will be quick-tempered, strong-willed, veri 

courag and rather selfish. she will marri at twenty-three, but will 

not have mani children. she will be a widow in middl life and will 

marri again within a year of her first husband death. she will die 

sudden by an accid in her fifty-sixth year. 

april.—taurus 

the influenc of this sign last from the twenty-first of april to 

the twenty-first of may. 

the man born under this sign will have full lips, a short throat, and a 

mole at the back of his neck. he will be subject to sudden fit of 

anger and will be fierc and cruel. he will be fond of women, but will 

not be much like by them and will suffer much in consequence. he will 

be ambitious, fortun in busi and energetic. he will not be veri 

prudent in speech and will often get himself in troubl by 

over-communicativeness. he will marri a rich wife and will acquir much 

money by legaci from her relations. he will be veri ill at forty, but 

he will surviv it and come into much rich soon after it. his life 

will go on to about sixty-two, when he will die of much the same 

ill which he had at forty. 

the woman born at this time will be grace and well formed, with 

luxuri hair and a full and well-form mouth. she will have a good 

complexion and will have fascin manners, so that she will much 

attract men. she will run great risk both from fire and water, and she 

will be subject to weak of the eye to such excess that toward the 

end of her life she will have reason to fear blindness, but she will 

escap this calamity. although she will have mani lover she will onli 

marri once, for her husband will surviv her. she will have mani 

children and they will all live. she herself will die befor sixty. 

may.—gemini 

the influenc of this sign will last from the twenty-second of may 

till the twenty-first of june. 

the man born under the influenc of this sign will be subject to ulcer 

and all skin diseases. he will be tall, well form and of florid 

complexion. he will be much like for his amiabl qualiti and will 

govern his famili well. he will travel much in foreign countri and 

will acquir mani beauti thing in the cours of his travels. he 

will be attent to women, veri conscientious, gracious and valiant. 

he will not be at all given up to luxury, but will be of a pious and 

self-deni temperament. he will be bitten by some venom reptile, 

yet will not die of the wound, but will recov entir from it in a 

short time. he will be fals accus of some sin and will be 

imprison for it; but he will come out victori and his innoc 

will be acknowledg by all. his marriag is uncertain. 

the woman who is born at this time will be fluent of speech, gracious 

in manners, witti and intelligent, but rather sensit in temper. she 

will be small of stature, slight in figur and of a fair complexion. 

she will have well mark yet delic eyebrows, brilliant eye and 

small white teeth; her hand will be slender, with point fingers. by 

reason of her grace and wit she will be much loved, but she will not 

marri until she is twenty-five. she will be passion love by her 

husband, but she will not return his affection. she will have veri few 

children who will not live beyond childhood. she herself will die at 

sixty-seven. 

june.—canc 

the influenc of this sign last from the twenty-first of june to 

the twenty-first of july. 

the man born under this sign will be of medium height and will have 

light hair and eyebrows. he will be given to deceit in his manner with 

women and will be veri inconsistent, yet alway with such gracious 

manner toward them that he will be much belov by them. he will 

travel much, and will suffer mani misfortun in the way of accidents. 

he will in middl age lose much money through the misconduct of his 

brothers, who will, by their extravagance, spend all the father money 

and thus leav onli a poor inheritance. he will occupi himself with 

agricultur and be success with it. at forti he will suffer from a 

veri serious ill and his life will probabl end at forty-eight. 

the woman born at this time will have larg grey eyes, full lip and an 

abund of soft, rather colourless hair. she will be fond of luxuri 

and ease, and will be much given to the pleasur of the table, and 

will eat much and drink more. she will marri early, but will not agre 

with her husband by reason of her own inconstancy. she will be marri 

three times, and will get on better with her last husband than with the 

two others. she will have sever children, but they will all be of a 

sick constitution. she herself will have a veri serious ill at 

seventi which will cure her of all her troubles. 

july.—leo 

the influenc of this sign extend from the twenty-first of juli to 

the twenty-first of august. 

the man born under this sign will be of middl height, but more 

inclin to be tall than short; his hair will be of a red colour, and 

his eyebrow will be well mark and much arch in their form. he will 

be valiant, hot tempered, veri talkative, somewhat boastful, but 

pleasant and jovial in his manners. he will be a great admir of 

women, but not constant in his affection. he will marri once, but not 

the woman he so much loves. 

the woman born at this time will be tall, with bright hair of a reddish 

gold colour, grey eyes, with a bold fierc glance, and long features. 

her nose will be aquilin and the face a long oval. the lip will be 

full but firm close and the teeth good and large. she will be quick 

of temper and difficult to please, fond of pleasur and veri ambiti 

of shine in society. her great desir for admir will caus her 

to be much talk about—not alway in a manner pleas to her 

husband. she will marri early. she will lose her husband in earli youth 

and will marri again soon after her widowhood. she will be much subject 

to ill through the blood, and at forty-eight she will have a veri 

serious illness; but she will recov and live anoth fifteen years, 

but her life will alway be full of anxieti and troubles. 

august.—virgo 

the influenc of this sign last from the twenty-second of august to 

the twenty-third of september. 

the man born under this influenc will have an abund of hair and 

will have a larg chin and a good complexion. he will be ambitious, 

enterprising, and veri valiant, but a littl capricious. he will suffer 

much ill and, when he is about thirti year of age, he will be 

menac by death or imprisonment, yet he shall escap both evils. he 

will be of a sympathet and benevol disposit and will give good 

counsel to his friends. he will have a beauti wife whom he will 

tender love, although she will not return his affections. 

a woman born at this time will be grace and charming, with a 

well-form face, an agreeabl expression, small mouth and 

well-proport figure. her voic will be one of her charms, and will 

be clear and soft and singular harmonious. she will be much love and 

admir for her wit, and will show much tast for music and dancing. 

she will have fair good health, and her beauti and charm of manner 

will make her much sought after in marriage, but she will not accept 

ani of her numer lover until after her twenty-second birthday. she 

will be much love by her husband, and be inclin to be devout, she 

will educ her children in the fear of god. she will die at 

sixty-nine. 

september.—libra 

the influenc of this sign last from the twenty-third of septemb 

to the twenty-third of october. 

the man born under this sign will be fluent of speech and his voic 

will be sonor and will sound angri even when he is not so. he will 

be wise and prudent and will be much esteem by good men. he will be 

just and honour in all his deal and will acquir the respect of 

all who know him for his conscienti deal with his fellow-men. he 

will marri twice. his second wife, whom he will marri when he is turn 

forty, will be extravagant, and will so worri him by spend all his 

substance, that she will bring on his death befor he is fifty. 

the woman born at this period will be, say the astrologers, cheer 

and of a kind disposition. she will be of a live tempera and 

will easili learn both music and danc and will excel in both. she 

will be amiable, veri caress in manner and much love by all who 

know her. she will marri twice. her first husband will be rich and of 

matur age and veri prudent. the second will be young and will soon 

spend the greater part of the money left her by her first husband. she 

will be gay, fond of pleasur and rather a coquette, which will much 

displeas the second husband. she will be rather given to gambl and 

will lose money in this way, which will caus her much discomfort and 

anxieti in her latter years. 

october.—scorpio 

the influenc of this sign will last from the twenty-second of 

octob to the twenty-first of november. 

a man born under this sign will be short and broad in figur and 

ungrac in his movements. he will be dark in complexion; but the 

hair will be of a red-brown colour, the eyebrow thick and meet over 

the nose. he will be prompt in judgment, but veri wili and inconstant, 

promis one thing and do another, so much so, that those who have 

onc had deal with him will never again have confid in him, 

know how like he is to deceiv them. he will be of a pervers and 

irrit temper, which will caus him to have mani enemies; and 

notwithstand all his acuteness, he will alway be poor. he will 

travel much and will lead a somewhat vagabond life. he is veri unlik 

to marry, and he will probabl die a violent death. 

the woman who is born under the influenc of the scorpion will be of a 

reddish colour and of middl height and strong built. as regard 

her character, she will be affable, much belov by her relations, fond 

of pleasure, yet veri energet in the discharg of her household 

duties, sensit in temper, a littl reveng and veri ingeni and 

of quick judgment. in her youth she will have much troubl from 

lawsuits, but she need not fear the result, for as she is pious god 

will alway protect her. she will onli marri once, at about her 

twenty-sixth year, and will die at sixty-eight. she will have no 

children. 

november.—sagittarius 

the influenc of this sign continu from the twenty-second of 

novemb till the twenty-first of december. 

the man born under this sign will be of pale complexion and he will 

have long featur and dark hair and eyes. he will be prudent, studious 

and economical. he will see mani foreign countri and will gain much 

money in his youth, by reason of which he will excit the envi of his 

friends. he will receiv much injuri from a relative, who will 

endeavour to prejudic peopl against him, but he will alway be well 

receiv and much like in society. he will be generous to his friends, 

but he will be bad recompens for his kindness. he will be 

persev in his profess and will attain a good posit in it. he 

will be subject to intern complaints, but will live long. he will be 

untru to his wife, but he will be care that she doe not know it. 

he will have sever children, but they will be no comfort to him, as 

they will be alway ungrat to him. 

the woman who is born at this time will be well formed, with luxuri 

hair and well-mark and rather arch eyebrows; her forehead will be 

broad and her intellect good, but her temper easili irrit and over 

sensitive, especi where her affect are concerned. she will be 

timid, veri constant both in love and friendship, generous in her 

affections, yet veri ill-requit in this respect. she will marri at 

twenty-six and will have mani children. she will suffer much from the 

evil tongu of fals friends, who will malign her to her husband, but 

her innoc will be made known and in the end she will be fulli 

justified. she will live to sixty-eight. 

december.—capricornus 

