

chapter xiv. 

aphor cull from the work of ptolemi and other ancient 

astrolog 

whosoev may be adapt to ani particular event or pursuit will 

assur have the star indic thereof veri potent in his nativity. 

if virgo or pisc be on the ascend the nativ will creat his own 

dignity; but if ari or libra be there he will caus his own death. 

venus give pleasur to the nativ in that part of the bodi which may 

be rule by the sign she occupies. it is the same with other stars. 

should a diseas begin when the moon may be in a sign occupi at the 

birth by some malefic, or in quartil or opposit to ani such sign, 

such diseas will be most severe; and if the malef also behold the 

said sign, it will be dangerous. on the other hand, there will be no 

danger if the moon be in a place held at the time of birth by some 

benefic. 

in all horari question rememb that there is no afflict to the 

moon so great as when she is in conjunct with the sun; the ill 

aspect for the malef must affect her, but no evil aspect is so 

power as her conjunction. 

mercuri in trine or sextil to the moon give the capac for 

acquir foreign languages. in bad aspect to the moon make the nativ 

envious, sarcastic, ill-natured, given to lie and thieving. 

saturn in trine or sextil to venus show much power of attach to 

wife and family. in a woman nativ this is veri good, as it 

indic purity. 

those born near noon are general success in life, owe to the 

sun influenc be then most powerful. those born near midnight are 

by no mean so fortun as those born at midday, and it is a singular 

peculiar in such nativ that the most remark event of their 

live take place after their thirtieth year, and they are also 

certain of some kind of a name after death, meritori or otherwise, 

accord to what their horoscop declares. person born near midnight 

are veri imaginative, and subject to see visions, dream dreams, and to 

be believ in the unseen world. 

in all travel the moon is to be considered, for she is a general 

signifi of journeys, whether by sea or land. 

when the moon is besieg between mar and the sun in a nativity, it 

argu a short life to the native. 

mercury, if posit in one of the hous of saturn, in trine or sextil 

to that planet, give excel understanding; and if the moon be also 

well-dignified, the nativ is much given to the studi of occult 

science, and will have much renown in that particular. 

those born with the moon power in their horoscop would do well to 

be guid by her aspect in their daili avocations. if she should be in 

trine or sextil to jupiter, it is a good day to seek favour of the 

great, or to make arrang with employers. when she is in trine or 

sextil to mercury, all intellectu matter taken in hand will be 

like to prosper. when she is so aspect to venus, matter undertaken 

with refer to love, marriage, or friendship will have a happi 

issue. when she is in squar or opposit she would have, of course, 

the contrari effects. 

the sun and moon in conjunct with mercuri give to the nativ great 

intellectu abilities. 

those who have the benevol planets, jupit and venus, well posit 

in either the ascend or the mid-heaven at birth will alway be much 

belov dure the whole cours of their lives. 

he who is born with the sun in trine to jupit is fond of rule, and 

veri famous in his generation. 

venus in squar to saturn at a birth caus the nativ to be sensual 

and given to unnatur vices. 

all the planets, or most of them abov the earth, make the nativ 

emin and famous, and if all should be well-dignified, he will—lik 

a comet—outshin all other in the world esteem. if, on the 

contrary, all the planet are under the earth at a birth, the nativ 

will be of a fall fame and fortune, or if they promis by their 

natur honour, digniti and fortun (that is, if they appear 

essenti dignifi in nocturn genitures), these good thing will 

onli come in the latter part of the nativ life. 

jupit in conjunct with the moon in a wateri sign give 

drunkenness. 

venus in conjunction, trine or sextil to the moon, give happi 

marriage, but in squar to the moon, prodigality, indol and 

drunkenness. 

saturn in squar to mar mean a malici and murder temperament, 

and liabil to imprisonment. 

it is advantag to make choic of day and hour at a time well 

constitut by the nativity. should the time be adverse, the choic 

will in no respect avail, howev favour an issu it may chanc to 

promise. 

a sagaci mind improv the oper of the heavens, as a skil 

farmer by cultiv improv nature. 

part ii. 

chirom 

"god has place sign in the hand of all men, that everi man may 

know his work."—job xxxvii. 7 (st. hierom translation). 


