

someproblem o f modern astrolog idea 
(3) astrolog predict changer in conscious not behavio~or events. 
it is here that the new psycholog astrolog depart from tradition. 
here the relationship between celesti pattern and human be is not 
with outward, observ pattern of behavior and tendenc but rather 
with the unobservable, inner me of a person, or what perri call the "psy- 
chic structur which under personality" (perry, 1995b, p. 123; see also, 
perry, 1988). he said 
a horoscop symbol the complex, evolv narur of consciousness.. . the depth of per- 
sonality.. . the dynam relat between psycholog drives. for example, sun squar saturn 
symbol a conflict between the need for self-express and the need for self-control.. . 
(perry, 1995b, p. 124). 

zodiac sign symbol general, ". . . fundament human needs, or motiva- 
tional drives, inher in the human condition" (perry, 1988, p. i), wherea 
the hous posit and planetari aspect symbol a particular inlvidu 
"map of consciousness" or "inborn person structure" (perry, 1988, p. 2, 
3 ) . the extrem problem of account for the relat between celesti 
factor and observable, relat specif outcom postul by the trad- 
tional astrolog are further exacerb by the psycholog astrolog ad- 
dtional conjectures. how do we know such invis psycholog process 
underli the astrolog symbolism? perri state such cognit process 
and structur are distd from the composit descript associ with 
tradit astrolog symbolism. for example, 
". . . the need of a [zodiac] sign can be infer from the behavior which is characterist of 
that sign, e.g., leonian pride, creativity, and a~niabilityevid the univers human need for 
vabdat of perceiv identity" (perry. 1988, p. 2). 

it is ddficult to see how it follow in the f i s t place from the character- 
istic behavior of a sign that one intrins motiv factor tie them all 
together, and even if the case could be made, a further case would need to 
be independ made for the particular human drive postul by perry. 
h e never clear set out how he arriv at these conclusions. no set of 
studl of a quantit or qualit natur are discussed, nor is there ani 
kind of an appeal to ani care examin of the astrolog symbol 
behavior by independ astrolog or psychologist to determin what 


t w o harbing and precursor of modern astrop cholog are dane and rudhyar and alan 
leo. in the earl rwentiech century, the british astrofog leo in.ect theosophist and mystic 
idea into astrolgy. the move away from tradit idea in d e unit state was begun by 
rudhyar and his humanist astrolog orient dure the third decad of the century. in 
their "inner" orientation, rudhyar and perri overlap, the main differ be that rudhyar is 
more i n c h e d to eastern mystic and rehgion. a critic examin of rudhyar idea can 
be found in kelli and krutzen (1983). 
1052 i. w. kelli 

one might infer from them. furthermore, if onli the whole chart will do, in- 
ferenc base on part are by definit meaningless. 
perri elev psycholog astrolog to miracl status by further in- 
form us that the dynam relat between various psycholog drive 
symbol by the horoscop are "fluid and changing, vari in accord 
with situat specificity, development age, emot maturity, and level 
of psycholog integration" (1995b, p. 123; 1994, p. 34). further, ". . . un- 
like the boundari of physic objects, the content and process of con- 
scious involv mean whose boundari region are fuzzy. . . . [mlean- 
ing are indefinite, arbitrary, relat and cultur embedded" (perry, 
1995a, p. 34). the psycholog astrolog claim these incredbl complex, 
changing, amorphous, inner complex (which may not even be conscious) 
have been infer from cluster of behavior associ with astrolog 
symbolism. 
it is clear that no theori of conscious base on physic process 
can perform the role demanded, so perri opt for dualism, the exist of 
a nonphysical, immateri mind. while psycholog astrolog was describ 
as a theori of "extraordinari complex and a model of consciousness" 
(perry, 1995a, p. 32; 1994, p. 33), epistemolog question regard this 
dualist view of conscious were never addressed; we are mere offer 
tidbit such as, conscious is a "nonphys system" (1995a, p. 32) and 
"a subject experi of awar that has no materi correlates.. ." 
(1995a, p. 34). nowher &d perri articul the intrins natur of his ver- 
sion of the nonphys mind. it is also far from clear how the postul of 
a soul/nonphys mind can contribut toward clarlfylng and inform our 
understand of central notion such as purpos behavior, values, intern 
self-causation, mean and creativity, over that offer by contemporari 
model consist with materi (such as those offer by flanagan, 1992; 
searle, 1992; crick, 1994; penrose, 1994; dennett, 1996). neither doe he 
offer us ani inkl as to the mediat role the nonphys mind play be- 
tween cosmos and psychic structure. 
sinc psycholog astrolog doe not have a theori of it own regard- 
ing the natur and structur of the inner psycholog process suppos 
mirror by planetari configurations, it rest m a d y on those postul by 
modern psychodynam theories. more specifically, perri relat the birth 
chart (horoscope) to "conscious and unconsci processes, area of repres- 
sion and conflict, pathway of sublimation, transfer dynamics, projec- 
tion and the lke" (perry, 1995b, p. 123; see also, perry, 1988). even if we 
contend that psycholog astrolog have refin the crude approxima- 
tion of the tradit astrolog (who do not offer plausibl scenario of 
how their correl were established), this case is veri difficult to make. 
the reason is simple. twentieth centuri theoriz was influenc by a great 
modern astrology: a critiqu 1053 

varieti of area of research, includ invest~gat~on into brain function, hu- 
manist and existenti school of psychology, artifici intelligence, physical- 
ism and functionahsm in philosophy, and so on. ancient, medieval, and re- 
naissanc theori of mind uthz by the astrolog of the past were quit 
ddferent. and, to complic the pictur further, as philosoph of scienc 
such as thoma kuhn (1970) have point out, when new paradigm come 
and go, the same or similar term often acquir new meanings. for example, 
the contemporari term motion and matter were also use by aristotl 
with ddferent interconnect and meaning. therefore, perri claim that 
"there is near uniform agreement base on centuri of observation, as to 
the mean of [astrolog symbolism]" (1993, p. 7 ) is clear problemat 
in light of the histor disagr over the natur and constitu of 
the mind. 
consid also the psycholog astrolog claim that inner mental dy- 
namic can be express in a great varieti of ways. here they reject as sim- 
plistic the tradit astrolog claim that celesti pattern are typic as- 
sociat with relat specif outcomes. but in rnakmg this rejection, they 
step from the fri pan into the volcano, becaus it further increas 
the alreadi imposs complex of possibl associations. as an exampl of 
this new complexity, the british astrolog charl harvey (1995) claimed: 
the same [planetary] combin can express itself in a whole rang of ways. for exam- 
ple, uranus in hard aspect with the midpoint of sun and ,kloon may produc a napoleon or a 
hitler, but equal it may produc a margaret thatcher, d s p ~ k em d i g a n , a martin luther or 
a particular [spiritual, caring1 astrolog [such] as dr. zip dobyn (p. 52). 

similarly, perri claim that the psycholog astrolog doe not pre- 
dtct specif behavior or life outcom but rather "predict qualttat expe- 
rienc of conscious that can be reflect in a varieti of manifestations" 
(perry, 1994, p. 34; 1995a, p. 34). h e affirm that "the mean of the 
part may be stable, [but] the emerg qualiti they ~ r o d u c ewhen com- 
bine are not [because] real peopl are changing, evolv entiti that are 
far too complex to type or tag with a few simpl key words" (perry, 1993, 
p. 7). ln other words, accord to perri and harvey, the birth chart accu- 
rate show our under subject processes, but as to their outward 
manifestation, astrolog can onli guess at a rang of possibl happenings. 
the inner psychic state is shown in the birth chart, but after that just about 
anyth goes. as perri said, "we all have the potenti to behav in ani 
way that is human possible, and we frequent do" (1995a, p. 36). 
we can see that the psycholog astrolog is worlung with a challeng- 
ing system. to start with, it involv celesti configur that can never 
be examin in isol and whose varieti when combin is immens 
larger than anyon could possibl cope with. nevertheless, the planetari 
1054 i. w. kelli 


configur suppos correl with an invisible, larg unconscious, 
psychlc structur that under personality, and that is associ with out- 
come so vari and so uncertain that the astrolog can onli make guesses. 
finally, this psychic structur is base on psychoanalyt and humanist psy- 
cholog theori that sinc the 1950s have come under veri heavi criti- 
cism. 10 if this critic is success then psycholog astrolog in it pres- 
ent form will go down with the ship (e.g., see macmdan, 1991; esterson, 
1993; grunbaum, 1993; kerr, 1993; spence, 1994; webster, 1995; crews, 
1996; dean, 1996a). after all, if the psycholog structur symbol by 
the planet and their interrelationship is problematic, the rest of the theori 
is on shaki ground. 
4. astrolog can onli be appropri evalu in a magical, animist 
world-view. 
tradit astrolog emphas the prehction of events, the associa- 
tion of relat spechc, observ outcom with astrolog factors, 
sometim with the view that planet are transmitt of physic influence. 
thus the client of the famous 17 centuri astrolog wdlam l1uy ex- 
pect predict and decis making, not psycholog and rehgion. such 
an orient is not advers to experiment investigation. a main problem 
for this approach, as perri acknowledged, is that the vast major of studi 
have not support such claim (perry, 1995a). further, there is no prospect 
that plausibl physic hkage wdl be discov that explain astrolog 
associ with human activ (perry, 1995a, pp. 26-33; culver & ianna, 


"'astrolo er are forev tri to increas the surfac plausibl of astrolog b associ it 
with theqatest theori that have caught the public imagination. so ~ l u m e n t h i ( 1 9 9 4 p. 
, 19) 
appeal to the relev of "fuzzi logic" to astrology, while perri allud to "chao theory" 
(1994, p. 34) and the "new physics" exemplifi by fritjof capra and david bohm. townley 
(1994) inform us that "the more advanc area of system mathemat [complex theory, 
inform theory] and neurosci [could] be veri friend to the type of structur think 
that the best of astrolog has to offer and to which astrolog could make import contribu- 
tions" ( p 43). tewsburi (1988) note how rupert sheldrak g c i p l e o€ format causauon 
"should remov the object that astrolog is impossible," ad g m an interest circular 
that "astrolog ~ r s d fis a further poinrer to it truth." a negat featur of these astrolog 
write 1s (llelr penchant to be crucial vagu at critic points. we are not provid specif 
of how these juxtaposit wdl take place. we are on1 given promissori notes. it is never 
made clear how the new physic and other modern disci iin can provid support for the sup- 
posit that specif planetari configur can synzbojz fundament human needs, or moti- 
vation drive (e.g., how sun squar mar symbol over-al strength and vigor in the person- 
ality) [see stengler (1995. 1996) for critic comment on misinterpret of quantum me- 
chanic by advoc of new age claims]. further, such modern approach in ysic do not 
explain whi the planetari posit of a moment in the past (birth) describ suppos 
continu natur of a person in the present. and what about the birth of a country, a com- 
pany, a resolution, a domicile, and so on, all of whch astrolog confid take as have 
their own natal charts? (jones, 1996). 
\ve have also heard it all before. in the past, the same confid was express by 
s everi promin theori of the time. the two millennia of failur provid 
a s t ~ o l o ~ e rwith 
some good induct ground for believ that the confid of present-day astrolog is as 
misplnc as that of their predecessors. such repres the triumph of hope over experience. 
modern astrology: a critiqu 1055 

1988; crowe, 1990). for example, no propos physic explan can ex- 
plain, in advance, how sun-jupit contact symbol expansive, optimist 
belief rather than someth else, how scorpio can symbol secreci rather 
than someth else, or how the 2nd hous can symbol possess rather 
than someth else, and so on. 
perri stated, even though studi relat astrolog configur 
with specif observ outcom have failed, this pose no ddficulti for 
psycholog astrolog sinc it is concern with the inner me of an indi- 
vidual, which cannot be adequ test by modem, materiahstic, scienuf 
methodology. besides, he claimed, astrolog alreadi have independ ex- 
perienti (clinical) evid that astrolog works" (perry, 1995a, pp. 14, 26). 
while astrolog seem implaus from the perspect of modern physic 
theories, if we adopt a differ set of metaphys assumpt (for exarn- 
ple, a more magical-animist framework) we are told, astrolog becom 


the seduct phrase ex erienti evid is roblematic. practition of psycholog a 
;ach perri disavowecf (e.g., skinnerian bepaviorism, freudian psychoanalysis) and ;!tt 
mani competin school of astrolo in both h e east and west, mani of whom would contest 
perri approacf, all cite tesrimoniyevid and case studi which support. but if we can all 
cite experienti evid for our r i t i o n s , that can hardly, by itreg distinguish the good from 
the bad, the better theori €ram t e worse. as meehl point out, "the scholar author of 
malleus malejironrm pursu . . . an enterpris detail symptom that diagnos witchcraft. de- 
spite their scholar efforts, we know today there are no person who have made a solemn pact 
wch satan and therebi gain preternatur powers. if ask to su port their theoret sys- 
rem m d the technic procedur warrant by it, [they] would j u b d e s s have invok the 
med~evalequival of clinic experience" (1995, p. 1021). 
a salutari lesson here is provid by other nonmainstream approach such as phrenology, 
grapholog (handwrit analysis), and palmistri which cover the same ground as psycholog~c 
astrology. phrenolog was immens popular in the nineteenth centuri and both hrenolog~st 
and their client were veri satisfi with phrenolog readings. grapholog has t e e n around 
for centuri and is still veri popular. it is instruct to compar the follow endors 
of psycholog astrolog/, renology, graphology, and palm-reading: (1) "[tlhe client char- 
acter and hfe stori inevita~fyconform to the rang o poteno symbolz by the [horo- 
scope], often in exmaordinari specif ways" (perry, 1994, 35). (2) "the phrenologist has 
shown thar he is abl to read charact wte an open book an$.to lay bare the hidden spring of 
conduct with an accuraci that the most inrim friend cannot ap roach" (alfr russel 
wallace, cite in severn, 1913, 6). (3) "your handwrit is a l l - r e v e k g . to the train eye 
it lay open your secret mind. %veri whirl or line you en ex ose your true charact and 
erson . . ." (marne. 1988, p. 2). (4) "a studi of the :and tee much a b o u t . . . he physic 
e o d y . . . health, vitality. . . the emot nature--lov potential. . . the will and individu 
. . . success in business. . . talent. . . creativity. . . fame. . . self-fu&ent-travel, life experi- 
ence, spiritu developmeni" (wilson, 1971, pp. 7-8). 
astrolog is onli one of a veri lar e number of contenders, past and present, which reli 
on ma ical dinlung and purport to yi$d knoud e unattain to materialist science. no 
plausib? reason have been provid that all of i e s e extrasci contend are intercon- 
nected, or mutual sup ort (lo tson 1996). planet or head.bump or palm or 
handwriting, at least one o? them is rezundint. astrolog is in the unenvi posit of hav- 
ing to show either that it provid enuin insight into area not cover by the social scienc 
and relat disciplines, o r to show k a t it can melior our unde~stand~ng in the same domain 
cover by contemporari psycholog and sociolog theories. astrolog have to show they 
can provid insight or benefit beyond those provid by nonastrolog theories. 
third, mani sourc of bias oper in such person experi that can lead clinician 
to claim of person knowledg that are invahd, despit their associ with high level of 
convict (dawes, 1994; grove & meehl, 1996; dean, kelly, saklofske, & furnham, 1992). 
1056 i. w. kelli 

plausible. l2 perri (1995a) state the world-view need to make sens of as- 
trolog must involv "a sacr realm that unites, orders, and anim the 
cosmos" (p. 19), or what west call "a system of magic" (1991, p. 223) 
and cornelius (1994, p. 19) call "some other element" (that is, other than 
delus and esp). the metaphys perspect propos by perri reintro- 
duce ancient notion of teleolog causation, occult power of attraction, 
psychospiritu explanation, and most importantly, the notion that psych 
and cosmos are alike, and correspond through symbol action-at-a-dist 
(1995a, pp. 15-16). 
further, perri explained, this will involv a return, at least in part, to 
belief that were common in prescientif cultur in which a world soul or 
conscious was imman in all part of the universe. the universe, so 
conceived, involv a hierarchi with part interconnect by "sympathet 
resonances." astrolog play a larg part in such world-view becaus it 
gave peopl a symbol languag "for understand the various mean 
and correspond of natur phenomena" (perry, 1995a, p. 15; also, 1993, 
p 2). 
perri and most other western astrolog tend to avoid specif 
when describ their animist world-views. lstead we are provid sprin- 
h g s of opaqu term and express such as law of resonance, spiritu 
reality, the soul, the sacred, occult cause, and inher power to attract 
other things. while most of us have some familiar with such term it is 
unlik that we could give a coher account of them. so an explic of 
astrolog theori should explain these central elements. but instead of 
clarification, we are offer evas such as "astrolog seem to belong to 
some other order of know things, bare conceiv in the modern 


"the astrolog potteng (1994) said "oppon of astrolog like to quot extraordinari 
claim requir extraordinari proof without give ani roof that as abov so below is an ex- 
traordinari c l a h . it is onli extraordinari in some ~ h ~ o s o p l u e sespeci 
. materxa[i$b frame- 
work which den meaning" (p. 37). as it stands, w at potteng state is trival true. whal- 
euer is ostulatei(bar logic im ossibilitiesl is more plausibl within some world-view(s) 
than o k r s . for example, fairi b u b b l , oblins, and guardian angel are extraordinari claim 
in materialist concept of the world ?and perhap mani ocher as well), but this alon doe 
not provid ani reason to believ in cheir existence. 
the claim that the univers has mean and provid us with sign or portent doe not 
impli that the sign are to be found up there, they might onli be found in entrails, the track 
and movement of nature, or onli in messag from angel or similar beings, or in a number of 
other forms. it doe not follow that an animistic/mag univers nust have, or even might 
have, mean reflect everywhere. w e need cogent reason to prefer the animist univers of 
astrolog to ocher possibl animist universes, and furthermor evid for a particular as- 
trolog system than other alternatives. 
there are also an incred larg number of ossibl pair between as above, so 
below. the possibl are even larger for a system eas on the symbol mean of si ns 
for example, there are probabl more possibl pair of two thing in, say, jungian sym%ol: 
ism than if we confii o u n d v e s to putat causal (material) r d a t i o n s h i ~ ~so; it is even more 
incumb on astrolog to provid a reason whi they connect two t lngs cogeth than it 
would be for a materiahsc. 
