
thed t v e r sofi ~astrolog world view 
societi that did possess what we would recogn as a form of astrol- 
ogi were associ with world-view that differ radcal in their concep- 
tion regardmg the natur of ultim reality, their basic hierarch struc- 
tures, the mode of divin activ (and whether the divin natur was per- 
sonal or nonpersonal), the natur of the self, the destini of human beings, 
and so on. likewise, the associ astrolog often differ from each oth- 
er along essenti dimensions. for example, the circumpolar stars, the pole 
star, and the quadrant &vision of the sky uthz in chines astrolog are 
use differ in western astrology. the circl of 12 anim in chines as- 
trolog bear littl resembl to the western zodiac. the ascend is irn- 
portant in western astrolog but not in chines astrology, and so on (cul- 
ver & lama, 1988, p. 25; dean, mather, & kelly, 1996, pp. 56-57). 
in lndia there are also a number of astrolog system which conhct 
both with each other and with western approach [see premanand, bhatty, 
& risbud (1993) for an overview and critiqu of i n l a n astrology]. in the 
dasha-paddhati system the name of the planet are written in a sequenc 
that is not onli arbitrari from a western astrolog perspect but is also 
not relat to ani physic characterist of the planet or their lstanc 
from the earth. each planet is alleg to have a certain period of influenc 
over the destini of people. these period vari from 6 year to 20 years. 
each planet take control over a person destini in the order specifi by 
the system and the durat assign to them. the sequenc of the planet 
is the same for all peopl provid you are follow the vinshotiari 120- 
year system. on the other hand, if an astrolog use the ashtottari dasha 
system, the last four planet appear in a revers order and togeth have a 
1058 i. w. kelli 

differ durat of 108 years. dure one life-time, the same planet can- 
not take charg of your destini again, unless you live for more than 120 
year (or 108 years). both of these mutual exclus system are satisfi 
to the astrolog themselv and to their clients. 
when we turn to the mayan of the americas, other fundament dif- 
ferenc in world-view, along with astrolog differences, emerge. in term 
of hierarch structur and ahe astrology, the mayan cosmolog was 
quit differ from the orbital-them earthbr sun-cent idea of other 
cultures. for a start, mayan astrolog assign a veri central role for venus. 
ln addtion, the posit of venus relat to the horizon was, contrari to 
western astrology, more import for the mayan than it movement. they 
also associ the morn and even appear of venus with lunar 
phase and eclips which have no counterpart in other astrolog sys- 
tems. finally, astrolog in mayan me was closer to the astrolog of in&a and 
tradit western astrolog than perri vision in that the central focus 
was divin and propheci (aveni, 1992; danien & sharer, 1992). 
astrolog symbol is magic think 
while the astronom and mathemat base of the cosmolog and 
astrolog develop by the mesopotanian, chinese, mayan, and 1ndian cul- 
ture were sophisticated, the mean or qualiti ascrib to planetari con- 
junction and movement were depend on the religi and mytholog 
belief of the particular societi in question. this explain whi mani of the 
physic characterist of the celesti bodi (size, distance, etc.) are consid- 
- ~ 




ere irrelev with regard to their effect or meaning, or even whether a 
planetari bodi actual exist (e.g., vulcan) becaus what matter is the sym- 
bolism or mytholog attach to the bodi name. the influences, effects, or 
correl attribut to the planetari configur are base on a prior1 
endem "magic correspondences," reli on superfici sidar and 
analogies. for example, the mediev astrologer-physician william of en- 
gland appeal to the magic doctrin of " k e affect k e , " as have astrolo- 
ger of all periods. hence, he argued, ". . . the sun and mar affect red bile 
(becaus all three are hot) and the moon and venus affect phlegm (becaus 
they are cold)" and "should the hot and dri mar be caus a disturb 
of the blood, then when mar move into a hous that has a dsturbanc of 
the chest, the patient d spit blood" (french, 1996, p. 478). " the modern 
astrolog davidson (1963) stated, "without the sun there would be no life. 


"venus was wide believ at the time to be a cold planet, wherea mar was character as 
hot and dry. hot(h), cold(c), wet(w), and dry(d) were the four ¶ualiti underlyin the four ele- 
ment consid by greek philosoph to be the basic constituenr of the p!ysic world, 
namely, earth=cd, air=hw, fire= hd, water=cw. element with common quahti were abl to 
chang inro each other, e.g., water= cw could chang into earth = cd becaus both includ the 
modern astrology: a critiqu 1059 

it is the drive forc behind the whole solar system. it represenr will 
power, vitality, leadership, creativ . . ." (p. 29) and "the ring of saturn 
symbol the hitat impos by saturnian action that oper as a 
harsh extern disciph until we have learnt to disciph ourselves" (p. 32). 
the practic of present day astrolog give add~tionalground for the 
independ of their symbol from ani observ or testabl theori 
base. whenev a newli discov astronom bodi is found, the attribu- 
tion of it earth connect is not base on the result of publish inves- 
tigat with extens public discuss to establish it relationship with 
world affairs. rather, if the name can be identified, e.g., by look it up 
in dictionari of mythology, and could be plausibl relat to exist plan- 
etari mytholog (not difficult), then the result will be long articl in astrol- 
ogy~journalsbi author surf the mytholog wave, where reader will be 
move to tear or to outrag by the beauti and insight of the connections. 
when pluto was discov in 1939 and chiron in 1977 (a minor planet or 
moon between the orbit of saturn and uranus), astrolog did not publish 
research to establish their relationship with human and world affairs. plu- 
to is given, as one might expect from mythology, a malef influenc on hu- 
man me. as davidson (1963) stated, "the planet name after the god of 
hade repres the underworld of man consciousness, those element in 
his natur that have not been redeem . . ." (p. 33). could it be otherwise? 
it is difficult to imagin that astrolog would ever inform us that a planet 
name "pluto" would be associ with love of me and fellow human be- 
ings, sensit and lea sure (ilk venus)! similarly, hand (1981) remark 
"(chiron) is believ by mani to have a connect with conscious-expand- 
ing teach and with initi into higher consciousness" (p. 94). in the 
case of chiron, as with pluto, these relationship are those we would expect 
astrolog to attribut to them if they were base entir on mytholog 
(cdver & ianna, 1988). 
similarly, as the astrolog press (1993) said about asteroids, ". . . the 
particular mythology, whether greek, roman, egyptian, etc., is relev to 
the express of the asteroid in the [birth] chart" (p. 178). what happen 
here is that, have determ~n the asteroid mythology, the astrolog 
look at the asteroid posit~on(e.g., by sign, by house, by aspect) in various 
peopl chart to see if there 1s anyth in the person or case histori 
that could match the interpret of that position. for example, "the as- 
teroid icarus repres fli too close to the sun. the posit (house, 


of coldness. most greek scholars, of course, consid scienc (as we know it roda ) 
ro be an insignific part of philosophy, which meant that their world view was base m a d y 
on hilosoph ideal rather than empir observations. so hot and cold, etc. do not neces- 
sarfi correspond to what we today call hor and cold, etc. 
1060 i. w. kelli 

sign, numerical) and exact aspect of icarus w d show where a person wlll 
take risks" (p. 197). whenev possible, some astrolog will add physic 
symbol to the mytholog symbolism. for example, 
the orbit of icarus is between the sun and jupiter. this contain surround icarus with the 
irradi of the sun and the expans of jupiter. icarus orbit is in and cross the orbit 
of mercury, venus, the earth and mars. be in those orbit give icarus a smatter of the 
restless of mercury, the sensuous of venus, the earthi of the earth and the self-as- 
sertiv of mars" (press, 1993, p. 1961.'" 

what happen if the new astronom bodi are name after modern indi- 
viduals? startup (1981) said, 
a popular modern astrolog doctrin maintain that newli discov planet are inevit 
given appropri name [from which the correct terrestri relationship can be inferred], even 
though the name are bestow by astronom nowadays. this is usual taken as one more 
exampl of synchron (p. 33). 

asteroid without classic name have a special lund of importance, again 
base pure on symbol considerations. here we enter the realm of 
"person name asteroids." press (1993, p. 212) conclud (after much un- 
control research), that if an asteroid has your name, or someth close to 
it, then it posit in your horoscop describ your relationship to yourself 
(whatev that means). if an asteroid has the name of anoth person (e.g., 
asteroid 3085 is call donna), then it posit in your horoscop (birth 
chart) describ your relationship to that person. this would seem to impli 
that your relationship to all the donna in the world would have much in 
common. 
along the same lines, magic or unknown influenc are appeal to 
whenev astrolog is in ddficulty. earlier in this articl (p. 1044) the prob- 
lem of includmg all the asteroid in the birth chart or horoscop was de- 
scribed. hand (1981) point out that astrolog eleanor bach solv the 
problem by use just the first four asteroid to be discovered. hand (1981) 
justifi this arbitrari choic by inform us that: 
one way of defend the use of the first four to be discov (rather than the four largest) is 
to say that the effect of celesti bodi is in some way relat to human conscious of them 
rather chan to their physic properties. as the first to be discovered, they no doubt made a 
greater impact chan the thousand later to be discov (p. 93). 




"the divers of symbol use b astrolog with ap arent no rule about be consis- 
rent is noteworthy. davidson (1963) lase his a s t r o ~ o ~ i c a mbolism 
fs various on physic at- 
tribut of the planet and on attribut of che g r e e k g d s . !he a ~ t m l o p~ yr s (1993). on the 
other hand, uthz other mytholog and add ano er d m e n s ~ o no physic characterist 
to her symbol such as a celesti bodi proxim to other celesti bodies. which particular 
magic correspond are perceiv as relev are in the eye of the beholder, and there are 
mani dfierent astrolog beholders. 
modern astrology: a critiqu 1061 

such specul have the great advantag of requir no argument 
and the disadvantag of say nothing. we are left in the dark as to what 
the "some way related" and "greater impact" are intend to mean here. 
what about peopl who have never heard of the first four asteroids? doe 
this mean the asteroid cannot be use in construct their charts, or doe 
the awar of academ of their exist cover for the rest of us? no 
doubt anoth set of "special rules" can be devis by astrolog to solv 
this problem. 
some of the grave ddficulti of magic correspond as explana- 
tion were describ by dean, loptson, and kelli (1996): 
first, magic correspond are argument from analogy, which can be express in the 
form object x has properti a and b, object y has properti a, therefor y also has b. john 
smith is tall, therefor john brown is tall.. . the infer is vivid and quick, and therefor 
(as in astrology) agreeabl seductive, but our chang of it be correct are not good. . . no 
longer do midwiv open the door to eas a pain labour. no longer do alchem idea ap- 
pear in chemistri courses. in fact, magic correspond have been so spectacular unsuc- 
cess that in western educ today the doctrin surviv onli as an exampl of fallaci 
thinlung. second, it is imposs to spec& ani nvo things, no matter how dissimilar, that do 
not show some kind of correspondence. a raven is like a write desk becaus both begin with 
the r sound, both cast shadows, both contain quds. a speck of sand is like the empir state 
build becaus h e y have the same color, both contain shca, and have the same number of 
atom as bricks.. . . the point is, how can we distinguish a magic correspond from other 
correspondences? the book do not td us. third, we have no immedi way of choos be- 
tween oppos magic correspondences. black cat were lucki ro ancient egyptian but un- 
lucki to mediev europeans. the moon was male to the babylonian but femal to the greek 
. . . . is mar unfortun becaus red=blood (war), or fortun becaus red=blood (life)? 
who can believ ani magic correspond when it is so easili deni by another? (pp. 
28-29). 

other critic of magic thlnking can be found from a philosoph view- 
point by thagard (1980) and from a psycholog perspect by zusn and 
jone (1989). 
conclus 
the argument given in this articl show that account put forward by 
astrolog for the origin and justif of postul celesti relationship 
with outward behavior or activ of human be (tradit astrology), 
or inner structur of conscious (modern psycholog astrology) are 
problemat and implaus in the extreme. 
we can conclud that astrology, as present practiced, is not a sourc 
of inform or knowledg about ourselves. anomali and problem do 
not result in construct attempt to revis the conceptu basi of astrolog 
or extend it in way that would allow astrolog to learn from failur as 
they do in orthodox disciplin (mayo, 1996). rather, they are dealt with by 
the use of metaphor that lead nowher and constant shking ad hoc hy- 
1062 i. w. kelli 

pothes that are not independ testable. confirm are readili 
attribut as support, but failur can be hidden in the complex of astrol- 
ogi and never need confront ani specif astrolog hypotheses. hence, the 
general indiffer of astrolog to negat evid (mayo, 1996, pp. 
280-282; kelly, 1997). but astrolog rhetoric, hyperbole, and bluff are not 
adequ ground for claim of knowledg (see dean & loptson, 1996 for 
other conceptu critic of astrology). 
the failur of physic model to provid an underpin for astrologi- 
cal tenet has result in a shift to more animistic, magic worldviews. 
while astrolog is more "plausible" within such worldviews, it is so onli in 
the banal sens that such framework provid fewer constraint on what may 
be postul than modern scientif formul of the world. the appeal 
to magic world-view allow astrolog postul to overrid or side- 
step ani physic law that may conbct (evans, 1994). astrolog who 
advoc such worldview do not provid articul posit capabl of 
construct evalu and improvement, but rather, couch their frame- 
work in term of a hodgepodg of spiritualloccult expressions, along with 
pass refer to modern physic and &ed disciph to appear con- 
temporari and fashionable. these occult convolutions, e.g., anim spir- 
its, sympathies, 
. - pure consciousness, reson bond of vibratori frequen- 
cies, psychic anatomy, etc., are not ascrib properti to be of ani use 
explanatori value. we are left with a &sparat set of idea taken out of con- 
text from various, often incompatible, ancient worldviews, juxtapos 
without ani coherent, interlock metaphysics. 
astrology, as current practiced, doe not have ani plausibl observa- 
tional or theoret basi for the groundmg of it particular claim (dean, 
loptson, & kelly, 1996). there is littl agreement on what astrolog fac- 
tor should be consid in a birth chart (that is, what factor can be ig- 
nored) and how they should be combined, or even consensus regard how 
to collect relev data to resolv even the most basic astrolog dlspute 
(dean & mather, 1996). astrolog consequ doe not have the concep- 
tual resourc to deal with it own anomali or to benefit from, or contrib- 
ute to, find in other field such as psycholog or biolog in ani way 
other than by arbitrari mean and sophistry. the basi and structur of as- 
trolog is entir base on cultur specif mytholog and symbol in a 
magic context. astrolog is part of our past, but astrolog have given no 
plausibl reason whi it should have a role in our future. 
