
iv 

chaucer astronomi 

chaucer treatment of astronom lore in his poetri differ much from 

his use of it in his prose writings. in poetic allus to heaven 

phenomena, much attent to detail and a pedant regard for accuraci 

would be inappropriate. refer to astronomi in chaucer poetri are, 

as a rule rather brief, specif but not technical, often pure 

convent but alway truli poetic. there are, indeed, occasion 

passag in chaucer poetri show so detail a knowledg of 

observational[50] astronomi that they would seem astonish and, to mani 

people, out of place, in modern poetry. they were not so in chaucer 

time, when the exig of practic life demand of the ordinari man a 

knowledg of astronomi far surpass that possess by most of our 

contemporaries. harri bailli in the introduct to the man of law 

tale determin the day of the month and hour of the day by make 

calcul from the observ posit of the sun in the sky, and from 

the length of shadows, although, say chaucer, “he were not depe expert in 

lore.”[51] such [pg 28]refer to technic detail of astronomi as we find 

in this passag are, however, not common in chaucer poetry; in his 

treatis on the astrolabe, on the other hand, a profess scientif 

work design to instruct his young son loui in those element of 

astronomi and astrolog that were necessari for learn the use of the 

astrolabe, we have suffici evid that he was thorough familiar 

with the technic detail of the astronom scienc of his day. 

in chaucer poetri the astronom refer employ are almost wholli 

of two kinds: refer show the time of day or season of the year at 

which the event narrat are suppos to take place; and figur 

allus for purpos of illustr or comparison. figur use of 

astronomi in chaucer vari from simpl simil as in the prologu to the 

canterburi tales, where the friar eye are compar to twinkl 

stars[52] to extend allegori like the compleynt of mar in which the 

myth of venus and mar is relat by describ the motion of the planet 

venus and mar for a certain period dure which venus overtak mars, 

they are in conjunction[53] for a short time, and then venus becaus of 

her greater appar veloc leav mar behind. one of the most 

magnific astronom figur employ by chaucer is in the hous of[pg 29] 

fame. chaucer look up into the heaven and see a great golden eagl 

near the sun, a sight so splendid that men could never have beheld it 

equal unless the heaven had won anoth sun: 

“hit was of golde, and shone so bright, 

that never saw men such a sighte, 

but-if the heven hadd y-wonn 

al new of gold anoth sonne; 

so shoon the egl fethr brighte, 

and somwhat dounward gan hit lighte.”[54] 

besid mention the heaven bodi in time refer and figur 

allusions, chaucer also employ them often in descript of day and 

night, of dawn and twilight, and of the seasons. it is with a poet joy 

in the warm spring sun that he writes: 

“bright was the day, and blew the firmament, 

phebus of gold his streme doun hath sent, 

to gladen everi flour with his warmnesse.”[55] 

and with a poet delight in the new life and vigor that natur put forth 

when spring come that he write the lines: 

“forgeten had the erth his pore estat 

of winter, that him nake made and mat, 

and with his swerd of cold so sore greved; 

now hath the atempr sonn al that relev 

that nake was, and clad hit new agayn.”[56] 

chaucer astronom allusions, then, except in the treatis on the 

astrolab and in his translat of boethius de consolation 

philosophiae, in which a philosoph interest in celesti phenomena is 

displayed, are almost [pg 30]invari employ with poetic purpose. these 

poetic allus to heaven phenomena, however, togeth with the more 

technic and detail refer in chaucer prose work give evid 

of a rather extens knowledg of astronomy. with all of the import 

observ movement of the heaven bodi he was perfect familiar and it 

is rather remark how mani of these he use in his poetri without 

give one the feel that he is air his knowledge. 



1. the sun 

of all the heaven bodi the one most often mention and employ for 

poetic purpos by chaucer is the sun. chaucer has mani epithet for the 

sun, but speak of him perhap most often in the classic manner as 

phebus or apollo. he is call the “golden tress phebus”[57] or the 

“laurer-crown phebus;”[58] and when he make mar flee from venus 

palac he is call the “candel of ielosye.”[59] in the follow passag 

chaucer use three differ epithet for the sun within two lines: 

“the day honour, and the heven ye, 

the night fo, al this clepe i the sonne, 

gan westren faste, and dounward for to wrye, 

as he that hadd his day cour y-ronne;”[60] 

sometim chaucer give the sun the various accessori with which 

classic myth had endow him—th four swift steeds, the rosi chariot 

and fieri torches: 

“and phebus with his rosi cart sone 

gan after that to dress him up to fare.”[61]“'now am i war 

that pirous and tho swift stede three, 

which that drawen forth the sonn char,[pg 31]hath goon some by-path in despyt of me;'”[62] 

“phebus, that was comen hast 

within the paleys-y sturdely, 

with torch in honde, of which the streme bright 

on venus chambr knokkeden ful lighte.”[63] 

almost alway when chaucer wish to mention the time of day at which the 

event he is relat take place, he doe so by describ the sun 

posit in the sky or the direct of his motion. we can imagin that 

chaucer often smile as he did this, for he sometim humor 

apolog for his poetic conceit and convent by express his 

idea immedi afterward in perfect plain terms. such is the case in 

the passag alreadi quot where chaucer refer to the sun by the epithet 

“day honour,” “heven ye,” and “night fo” and then explain them by 

say “al this clepe i the sonne;” and in the lines: 

“til that the bright sonn lost his hewe; 

for thorisont hath reft the sonn his light;” 

explain by the simpl words: 

“this is as much to sey as it was night.”[64] 

thus it is that chaucer poetic refer to the appar daili motion 

of the sun about the earth are near alway simpli in the form of 

allus to his rise and setting. canace in the squier tale, (f. 

384 ff.) is said to rise at dawn, look as bright and fresh as the 

spring sun risen four degre from the horizon. 

“up ryseth fressh canace hir-selve, 

as rodi and bright as dooth the yong sonne, 

that in the ram[65] is four degre up-ronne; 

noon hyer was he, whan she redi was;” 

mani of these refer to the rise and set of the sun might be 

mentioned, if space permitted, simpli for their beauti as poetry. one of 

the most beauti is the following: 

[pg 32] 

“and fyri phebus ryseth up so brighte, 

that al the orient laugheth of the lighte, 

and with his streme dryeth in the greve 

the silver dropes, hang on the leves.”[66] 

when, in the canterburi tales, the mancipl has finish his tale, 

chaucer determin the time by observ the posit of the sun and by 

make calcul from the length of his own shadow: 

“bi that the mauncipl hadd his tale al ended, 

the sonn fro the south lyne was descend 

so lowe, that he nas nat, to my sighte, 

degre nyne and twenti as in highte. 

four of the clokk it was tho, as i gesse; 

for eleven foot, or litel more or lesse, 

my shadw was at thilk tyme, as there, 

of swich feet as my length part were 

in six feet equal of porporcioun.”[67] 

we must not omit mention of the humor touch with which chaucer, in the 

mock heroic tale of chanticl and the fox told by the nun priest, 

make even the rooster determin the time of day by observ the altitud 

of the sun in the sky: 

“chauntecleer, in al his pryde, 

his seven wyve walkyng by his syde, 

cast up his eyen to the bright sonne, 

that in the sign of taurus hadd y-ronn 

twenti degre and oon, and somewhat more; 

and knew by kynde, and by noon other lore, 

that it was pryme, and crew with blis stevene. 

the sonne, he sayde, is clomben up on heven 

fourti degre and oon, and more, y-wis.'”[68] 

[pg 33]moreover, this remark rooster observ that the sun had pass the 

twenty-first degre in taurus, and we are told elsewher that he knew each 

ascens of the equinocti and crew at each; that is, he crew everi 

hour, as 15° of the equinocti correspond to an hour: 

“wel siker was his crow in his logge, 

than is a clokke, or an abbey orlogge. 

by natur knew he ech ascencioun[69] 

of th equinoxi in thilk toun; 

for whan degre fiften were ascended, 

thann crew he, that it might nat ben amended.”[70] 

chaucer announc the approach of even by describ the posit and 

appear of the sun more often than ani other time of the day. in the 

legend of good women he speak of the sun leav the south point[71] 

of his daili cours and approach the west: 

“whan that the sonn out of the south gan weste,”[72] 

and again of his westward motion in the lines: 

“and whan that hit is eve, i rene blyve, 

as sone as ever the sonn ginneth weste,”[73] 

elsewher chaucer refer to the set of the sun by say that he has 

complet his “ark divine” and may no longer remain on the horizon,[74] or 

by say that the horizon has bereft the sun of his light.'[75] 

chaucer refer to the daili motion of the sun about the earth are 

apt to sound to us like pure poetic figures, so accustom are we to 

refer to the sun, what we know to be the earth rotatori motion, by 

speak of his appar daili motion thus figur as if it were 

real. chaucer manner of describ the revolut of the heaven bodi 

about the earth and his applic of poetic epithet to them are 

figurative, but the motion itself was[pg 34] meant liter and was believ in 

by the men of his century, becaus onli the geocentr system of astronomi 

was then known. if chaucer had been in advanc of his centuri in this 

respect there would certain be some hint of the fact in his writings. 

refer in chaucer to the sun year motion are in the same sens 

literal. the appar motion of the sun along the ecliptic,[76] which we 

know to be caus by the earth year motion in an ellipt orbit 

around the sun, was then believ to be an actual movement of the sun 

carri along by his revolv sphere. like the refer to the sun 

daili movement those that mention his year motion along the eclipt 

are also usual time references. the season of the year is indic by 

defin the sun posit among the sign of the zodiac. the canterburi 

pilgrim set out on their journey in april when 

“the yong sonn 

hath in the ram his half cours y-ronne.”[77] 



