
v 

astrolog lore in chaucer 

astrology, though resembl a scienc in that it make use of observ 

and seek to establish law govern it data, is in realiti a faith or 

creed. it had it beginning, so tradit tell us, in the faith of the 

ancient babylonian in certain astral deiti who exert an influenc 

upon terrestri event and human life. the basi of this faith was not 

altogeth illog but contain a germ of truth. 

of all the heaven bodies, the sun exert the most obvious effect upon 

the earth; the sun brought day and night, summer and winter; his ray 

lure grow thing from mother earth and so gave susten to mankind. 

but to the ancient peopl of the orient the sun was also often a bane 

power; he could destroy as well as give life. therefore, the ancient came 

to look upon the sun as a great and power god to be worship and 

propiti by men. and if the sun was such a power, it was natur to 

believ that all the other bright orb of the sky were lesser [pg 52]divin 

who exercis more limit power on the earth. from this beginning, 

based, as we have seen, on a germ of fact, by the power of his imagin 

and credulity, man extend more and more the power of these sider 

divinities, attribut to their volit and influenc all the most 

insignific as well as the most import terrestri events. and if the 

heaven bodies, by revolv about the earth in ceaseless harmony, 

effect the recurr of day and night and of the seasons, and if their 

configur were respons for the minutest event in nature, was it 

not natur to suppos that, besid affect man thus indirectly, they 

also influenc him direct and were respons for his conduct and for 

the veri qualiti of his mind and soul? perhap the astonish varieti 

of the influenc that the celesti bodies, from ancient until modern 

times, were suppos to exercis over the world and the life of mankind 

can be account for by imagin some such process of thought to have 

been involv in the begin of astrology. 

it was but a step from faith in stellar influenc on our earth to the 

belief that, as the heaven movement were govern by immut laws, so 

their influenc upon the world would follow certain law and it effect 

in the futur could be determin as certain as could the come 

revolut and conjunct of the stars. out of this two-fold belief was 

evolv a complex system of divination, the origin of which was forgotten 

as men, believ in it, invent reason for believing, pretend that 

their faith was found on a long seri of observations. the chaldean 

believ that in discov the unceas regular of the celesti 

motions, they had found the veri law of life and they built upon this 

convict a mass of absolut rigid dogmas. but when experi beli 

these dogmas, unabl to realiz the falsiti of their presupposit and 

to give up their faith in the divin stars, the astrolog invent new 

dogma to explain the old ones, thus pile up a bodi of complic and 

often[pg 53] contradictori doctrin that will ever be to the student a sourc 

of perplex and astonishment. 

on it philosoph side astrolog was a system of astral theolog 

developed, not by popular thought, but through the care observ 

and specul of learn priest and scholars. it was a pure eastern 

scienc which came into be on the chaldean plain and in the nile 

valley. as far as we know, it was entir unknown to ani of the primit 

aryan races, from hindostan to scandinavia. astrolog as a system of 

divin never gain a foothold in greec dure the brightest period 

of her intellectu life. but the dogma of astral divin was zealous 

maintain by the greatest of greek philosophers. plato, the great 

idealist, whose influenc upon the theolog of the ancient and even of the 

modern world was more profound than that of ani other thinker, call the 

star “visibl gods” rank them just below the suprem etern being; 

and to plato these celesti god were infinit superior to the 

anthropomorph god of the popular religion, who resembl men in their 

passion and were superior to them onli in beauti of form and in power. 

aristotl defend with no less zeal the doctrin of the divin of the 

stars, see in them etern substances, principl of movement, and 

therefor divin beings. in the hellenist period, zeno, the stoic, and 

his follow proclaim the supremaci of the sider divin even 

more strong than the school of plato and aristotl had done. the stoic 

conceiv the world as a great organ whose “sympathetic” forc 

constant interact upon one another, govern by reason which was of 

the essenc of ether fire, the primordi substanc of the universe. to 

the stars, the purest manifest of the power of this ether 

substance, were attribut the greatest influenc and the loftiest divin 

qualities. the stoic develop the doctrin of fatalism, which is the 

inevit outcom of faith in stellar influenc on human life, to it 

consequences; yet they prove by fact that fatal is not incompat 

with [pg 54]activ and virtuous living. by the end of the roman imperi period 

astrolog had transform paganism, replac the old societi of immort 

who were scarc superior to mortals, except in be exempt from old 

age and death, by faith in the etern be who ran their cours in 

perfect harmoni throughout the ages, whose power, regul by the 

unvari celesti motions, extend over all the earth and determin 

the destini of the whole human race. 

astrology, as a scienc and a system of divination, exert a profound 

influenc over the mediaev mind. no court was without it practic 

astrolog and the univers all had their professor of astrology. the 

practic of astrolog was an essenti part of the physician profession, 

and befor prescrib for a patient it was thought quit as import to 

determin the posit of the planet as the natur of the disease.[139] 

interest evid of this fact is found in the prologu to the 

canterburi tale where chaucer speak of the doctour knowledg and use 

of astrolog as if it were his chief excel as a physician: 

“in al this world ne was ther noon him lyk 

to speke of phisik and of surgerye; 

for he was ground in astronomye. 

he kept his pacient a ful greet del 

in houres, by his magik naturel. 

wel coud he fortunen the ascend 

of his imag for his pacient.”[140] 

yet in spite of the esteem in which astrolog divin was held by 

most peopl in the middl ages, dante, the greatest expon of the 

thought and learn of that period, show practic no knowledg of the 

technic and practic side of astrology. when he refer to the specif 

effect of the planet it is onli to those most familiar known, and he 

nowher use such technic term as “houses” or “aspects” of planets. but 

dante, like the great philosoph of the earlier periods, was undoubt 

[pg 55]influenc by the philosoph doctrin of astrology, and a general 

belief in the influenc of the celesti sphere upon human life was 

deepli root in his mind. to him the ceaseless and harmoni movement 

of the celesti bodi were the manifest and instrument of god 

providence, and were ordain by the first mover to govern the destini 

of the earth and human life. 

we can see this convict of dant with perfect certainti when we read 

the divina commedia. for dant poetri is high subjective; on everi 

page his own person thought and feel are reveal quit openly. 

chaucer poetry, on the other hand, is objective; he tell us almost 

noth direct about himself and what we learn of him in his write is 

almost entir by inference. chaucer frequent use of astrolog in his 

poetri would make it hard to believ that he was not consider 

influenc by it philosoph aspects, at least in the general way that 

dant was. part and parcel of the dramat action in most of his poem is 

the idea of stellar influences. yet we cannot assert, with the same 

assur that we can say it of dante, that chaucer believed, even in a 

general way, in the influenc of the star on human life. in dant 

poetry, as we have said, the poet himself is alway befor us. chaucer, 

with socrat irony, alway make it plain to the reader that his attitud 

is pure objective, that he is onli the narrat of what he has seen or 

dreamed, onli the copyist of anoth story. even when chaucer make 

himself one of the protagonists, as in the hous of fame and the 

canterburi tales, it is onli that his narrat may be the more 

convincing. he tell a stori and make it protagonist actual live 

befor us, as individu men and women. it is possibl to imagin all of 

his use of astrolog in his poetri not as the reflect of his own faith 

in it cosmic philosophy, but the express of his genius for 

understand peopl and truth describ life and character. 

consider discuss as to chaucer attitud toward astrolog has 

been call forth by passag in which[pg 56] he speak in word of scorn with 

regard to some of the practic and magic art that were often use in 

connect with astrology. in the astrolab after describ somewhat at 

length the favor and unfavor posit of planet he says: 

“natheles, thise ben observauncez of iudici matier and ryte of 

payens, in which my spirit ne hath no feith, ne no know of hir 

horoscopum.”[141] 

again in the franklin tale he speak in a similar disdain tone of 

astrolog magic: 

“he him remembr that, upon a day, 

at orlien in studi a book he say 

of magik naturel, which his felawe, 

that was that tyme a bachel of lawe, 

al were he ther to lern anoth craft, 

had prive upon his desk y-laft; 

which book spak muchel of the operaciouns, 

touching the eight and twenti mansioun 

that longen to the mone, and swich folye, 

as in our day is not worth a flye: 

for holi chirch feith in our bilev 

ne suffreth noon illus us to greve.”[142] 

and elsewher in the same tale he writes: 

“so att last he hath his tyme y-found 

to maken his iap and his wreccedness 

of switch a superstici cursednesse.”[143] 

here follow a long descript of the clerk instrument and 

astrolog observances, end in the line 

“for swich illusioun and swich meschaunc 

as hethen folk use in thilk dayes; 

for which no lenger make he delayes, 

but thurgh his magik, for a wyke or tweye, 

it seem that all the rokk were aweye.”[144] 

[pg 57]on the strength of these passag professor t. r. lounsbury[145] hold 

that chaucer was far ahead of most of his contemporari in his attitud 

toward the superstiti practic connect with the astrolog of his 

day; that his attitud toward judici astrolog was one of total 

disbelief and scorn; and he even goe so far as to say that chaucer was 

guilti of a breach of artist workmanship in express his disbelief so 

scorn in a tale in which the veri climax of the dramat action 

depend upon a feat of astrolog magic. 


