

crystal gaze 

befor we start this chapter, will you just take a look at the follow short 

list of term use in crystal gaze and spiritualism? you will find that they 

will make what follow quit clear, and that they will be use to refer to. 

spiritualistic.—belong to the spirit world. 

second sight.—th power which all have (but few develop). the 

power to see the futur and other thing with the spirit eye. 

aura.—th circl of thought which each one of us is unconsci send 

out by our charact and personalities. 

the crystal.—ani object which help to fix our attention; i.e., a crystal, 

a bowl of water, shine metal. there is noth about the crystal that is 

magic by itself. 

psychic persons.—person possess second sight. 

look into the futur 

it is believ that this portion of the book will be found particular 

interest becaus it is here that we touch upon spiritualism, perhap one of 

the most talked-of subject of today. 

in crystal gaze we actual see mani thing happen which mayb have 

not happen as yet. in palmistri and astrolog we see the sign but not the 

actual events. anoth distinct differ is that in crystal gaze it is 

imposs to give definit instruct as to how to receiv these messag 

or vision becaus there is no "how." 

what we hope to do in this chapter is to show you that perhap you 

possess power of which you know nothing. without make the foolish 

mistak of take this subject too seriously, you will be abl to interest and 

amus your friends. 

you may say, "but i haven't got this power—i could never see anyth 

in a crystal." 

don't say that, and don't think it! we all have a littl of this power 

sleep within us. if we wish to improv it, we must use and practis it, 

but don't overdo the thing. 

to understand crystal gaze even a little, it is quit import to know 

just a few simpl fact about spiritu (the studi of the spirit world.) 

this second sight, or clairvoy (call it what you will) is mere in it 

childhood as yet. a veri short while ago we should have thought it a miracl 

for anyon to speak from new york to london along a wire. now we 

think no more of it than we should of cross a road! 

so with the crystal. at present a few of us onli are abl to see, more or[108] 

less clearly, those vision of the future. who know but that in some futur 

time we shall consid this quit an ordinari and natur thing to do, just like 

telephoning, for instance. 

the first thing to get hold of is this: we have not one bodi but two. an 

earth bodi and it exact copi in a spirit body. by this i do not mean the 

soul, but rather our earth bodi with all it featur just as before, is copi 

in a spirit of ether body. this may sound difficult, but just tri to grasp the 

idea. 

in spiritu there are two of each one of us; one an earth you, the 

other (dwell usual in your earth body) a spiritu you. but sometim 

this spirit bodi escap from it earth prison, maybe, dure sleep, sometim 

when we look into the crystal, and sometim in what is call a tranc 

or artifici sleep. it is then (when the spirit bodi is free) that vision of 

futur thing are seen, and mayb premonit (or feelings) of the futur 

are felt. 

our spirit body, with it ten thousand time more clear-sight eyes, see 

thing which are invis to the earth eyes. this bodi is abl to travel 

swift from place to place, although it alway keep a link or connect 

with it earth double. 

when a person goe off into a trance, this is what has happened. the 

earth bodi sleep while the spiritu bodi roam about the future, past and 

present, or perhap visit distant places. it is, of course, abl to speak with 

other spirit bodies, and thus get inform about other folk who have 

"pass over," as the spiritualist call death. 

now perhap you can better appreci the wonder stori which you 

hear about medium (peopl who pass into these trances), who have spoken—or 

are alleg to have spoken, for the verdict of scienc is "not proven"—with 

the voic of folk long dead, and whom they have never seen. 

while everyon doe not activ possess this power of releas his spirit 

body, we all have it. that this is true can be seen in sever ways. have you 

never had a presenti or feel of evil to come, a strong feel which 

it took all your determin and common sens to drive away? anyway, 

you will have frequent heard other peopl saying, "i had a feel that so-and-so 

would happen." 

that feel is explain by this wander of the spirit body; for a short 

time we have had our spirit eye freeli opened, and have gain a glimps 

of the unknown. as our spirit eye are as yet undevelop it is but a glimpse, 

then down fall the thick curtain, and the mysteri is onc more hidden from 

us! 

just as some children learn to walk more easili than others, so do some 

peopl learn to walk with their spirit bodi and to speak the spirit languag 

more quick than others. 

which seem veri natural, doesn't it? 

let us briefli refresh our mind with the absolut necessari fact which 

you must know to understand the first step in fortunetel by the crystal. 

what we are go to say next will then be more readili understood:— 

[109] 

firstly.—w have not one bodi but two, an earth and a spiritu 

body. 

secondly.—though normal contain in the earth body, it is possibl 

for the spirit to escap from it prison, and pass from place to place at a 

speed greater than light. this occur dure sleep, the artifici or forc 

sleep of the trance, and also when one gaze into the crystal. 

thirdly.—w have four eyes. two earth eyes, and two veri much 

keener spirit eyes. it is with these spirit eye that we see the futur and the 

past in the crystal. 

fourthly.—each one of us is send out thought-wav at this moment. 

these are known by spiritualist as our aura. it is found in differ 

colors, which depend on our charact or the thought leav us. certain red 

show rage, for instance. 

what the crystal is for 

the first thing to get hold of is that there is noth magic or in ani way 

wonder about the crystal itself. it is mere a mean of fix the attent 

of our earth eyes, so that we may see the more clear with our spirit eyes. 

now for a few hint upon actual look into the crystal. 

when you gaze into whatev object you have chosen, your earth bodi 

and earth eye pass into a more or less sleepi state, thus enabl your spirit 

bodi to escape. that give us our first point to remember. 

here it is: when you look into the crystal, whatev you do don't worri 

about whether or not you will see anything! tri to think steadili of what 

you wish to see; this will at first seem hard, but practic will help you, and 

practic make perfect. 

then rememb to keep ani glare of light from the eyes; it is wise to sit 

with one back toward the light. let your surround be quiet and peaceful; 

there must be absolut noth which may catch your attent and so 

take it off the crystal. if, for instance, a noisi bus or other vehicl were to 

pass dure the time in which you were make your attempt, it would 

probabl disturb thing veri much. 

one should never be discourag if noth whatev is seen at the first 

few attempts. a puppi cannot at first see out of it eyes, and it is the same 

with a beginn in crystal gazing; his spirit eye may take some littl time to 

open, while others, more fortunate, may find their open almost at once. 

never strain the eye in an unwink stare. let them wink and blink quit 

naturally. to do anyth els would be sure to take your attent from 

the pictur which you wish to see. 

how to begin 

the best thing to do is to tri these various methods, and then see for yourself 

which is the most success in your own individu case. 

here are a few mean you might try, in order to test this for yourself. 

[110] 

use either a (1) crystal, (2) a polish object, (3) a bright coin, (4) a 

sparkl gem, or (5) ordinari glass in the shape of a sphere or ball. there 

are others, but they are not important. 

in conclusion, it will be of interest to know just what you may expect to see 

when, and if, your spirit eye open. probabl a misty, fog appear will 

first be seen in the crystal. this will remain for some littl time, until final 

the scene or person (whatev it may be) will appear. the latter may be 

faint and dim, or it may be clear-cut like a good photograph. 

the clear or otherwis will depend among other thing upon the 

keen of sight of the spirit eye. it will also be influenc by the degre of 

quiet, and upon the absenc of anyth like to disturb the searcher in the 

realm of the future. 

[111] 

the moon and the luck it bring 

peopl of all age have look upon the moon as a provid of good and 

bad luck, and most of us have probabl notic that it has influenc our 

actions, at times. here are some of the belief that are centuri old. 

if you see a new moon over your right shoulder, it mean that you will 

experi good luck all the month. 

if you have money in your pocket and you meet the new moon face to 

face, turn the money over and you will not run short of money that month. 

it is unlucki to see the new moon through glass. if you do, go out of 

doors, curtsey three time to the moon and turn some silver in your hand. 

this will break the spell which will be cast over you if you do not do as 

directed. there is one littl point, connect with this superstition, which 

has set us thinking. what of all those individu who wear glasses? we do 

not know the answer. 

there is a strong preval idea that everyth fall to the lot of man 

when the moon is wax will increas or prosper; but thing decreas and 

do not prosper when the moon is on the wane. 

irish colleen were wont to drop on their knee when they first caught sight 

of the new moon, and say, "oh, moon, leav us as well as you have found 

us." and, long ago, yorkshir maiden "did worship the new moon on their 

bent knees, kneel upon the earth-cast stone." 

if the full moon known as the harvest moon appear watery, it is an ill 

sign for the harvest. (the harvest moon is due about the middl of september.) 

if the moon show a silver shield, be not afraid to reap your field: but if 

she rise halo round, soon we'll tread on delug ground. 

if the moon chang on a sunday there will be a flood befor the month 

is out. 

a saturday moon, if it come onc in seven years, come too soon. 

a fog and a small moon bring an easter wind soon. 

in the wane of the moon, 

cloudi morning: fair afternoon. 

pale moon doth rain; red moon doth blow, 

white moon doth neither rain nor snow. 

when the moon halo is far, the storm is n'ar (near). 

when the moon halo is n'ar, the storm is far. 

it has long been a custom for girl to go to the nearest stile, to turn their 

back on the first new moon after midsumm and to chant these verses: 

all hail, new moon, all hail to thee. 

i prithee, good moon, reveal to me, 

this night, who shall my true love be. 

who he is and what he wears, 

and what he doe all month and years. 

[112] 

if she were to be marri in the cours of the next twelv months, the 

moon answer her question dure her sleep of the same evening. 

in mani part of the countri it is suppos that, on christma eve, the 

moon will help maiden to find out when they are to be married. the plan 

is for a maiden to borrow a silk handkerchief from a male relat and to 

take it and a mirror to some sheet of water, while the night is dark. she 

must go quit alone; but the sheet of water may be an unromant pail, full 

to the brim, station at the bottom of the garden. as soon as the moon 

show itself, the maiden place the flimsi piec of silk in front of her eyes, and, 

by hold the mirror half toward the moon and half toward the water, it 

is possibl for her to see more than a pair of reflections. the number of 

reflect are the month which will ensu befor her wed bell ring out. 

we recent came across the follow inform in a document quit 

three hundr year old: 

"the first, second and third day of the moon age are lucki for buy 

and selling; the seventh, ninth and eleventh are lucki for engag and 

marriage; the sixteenth and twenty-first are not lucki for anything." 

the same document affirm that: 

"a babi born befor the new moon is twenty-four hour old is sure to be 

lucky. anyth lost dure the second twenty-four hour of the moon 

age is sure to be found. all thing begun on the fifth twenty-four hour will 

turn out successfully. a dream experienc on the eighth twenty-four hour 

must come true." 

[113] 
