

vii. her mother love 

told by the physician 

by general although unspoken assent, the eye of all the compani were 

now direct to the vener hakeem, as if to invit from him the next 

contribut to the night entertainment. medit for a moment the 

man of medicin stroke the broad white beard that descend almost to 

his girdle, and then began: 

"familiar to us all is the thought that death is but a birth into 

anoth state of existence, whether that state be the etern paradis 

which is the final goal of everi man hopes, or mere anoth stage 

thitherward. death is a birth, the truth of which will more forcibl 

appeal to our mind when we reflect also that birth is a death." 

"how can that be, except for the still-born?" queri the astrologer. 

the hakeem rais a hand deprec the interruption. 

"nay, follow me in my argument," he continu quietly. "if death is a 

birth, then is a birth truli death. for the babe has been live through 

a prior stage of existence. to it the nine month pass in it mother 

womb may have meant a long span of life. for time is but a relat 

term, and, measur against eternity, the whole period of man sojourn 

on[pg 147] earth, be it three score or four score years, is but as the puff of 

a singl breath. so the child in the womb live there a full span of 

existence; it is nurtur and it grows, it sleep and it wakes, it lie 

passiv and it disport itself, it is sensit to cold and to heat, to 

thirst and to hunger, and god alon know what it think and what mental 

impress it form of the exist through which it is passing. and 

the hour of it birth is truli the hour of it death, for in pain and 

travail it is pluck from it warm and comfort surroundings, and 

with the shock of physic chang and unse dread it cri aloud in 

sharp anguish. thus precis do we ourselv die when we pass from this 

world to anoth existence, physic and mental resent the harsh 

change, terrifi becaus of our veri ignor of what is realli 

happening." 

the physician paused, amid a deep hush that bore eloqu testimoni to 

the impress of the thought to which he had given utterance. 

"but the parallel doe not end here," he resumed. 

"when the infant is born, then for the first time doe it see face to 

face the divin who through all the preced stage of it exist 

has protect it, warm it, and nourish it. in the presenc of it 

mother it is in the presenc of the god who has hitherto envelop it, 

wholli and completely, in his own divin being. so when we die will we 

be face to face with the now unseen god who everywher encompass us, 

behold him at first onli with the dazzl vision and dim 

half-consci of the new-[pg 148]born babe, but grow to know him and to 

love him as we have all known and love the devot mother who bore us. 

for mother love is man first foretast of god love, the full glori of 

which we shall comprehend onli when by death we are born into a higher 

and more spacious sphere of existence." 

there was anoth brief interv of silence, again unbroken by ani 

comment from the auditors. then the hakeem continu in lighter tone: 

"now let me point my moral by tell you a stori of a mother suprem 

devot for her son. 

"at one time i practis my profess in the capit citi of a state 

rule over by a maharajah, who, although he had been a brave and 

honour man in his prime, had degener into a mere voluptuary, 

spend his day in the companionship of nautch girl and disreput 

men, indulg constant in immoder potat of strong wine, and 

given at time to the use of bhang, which doe more than anyth els 

to dull the faculti and deaden the conscienc of the unfortun who 

surrend himself to it seduct spells. the inevit result were 

for him the prematur loss of health and strength, and for his peopl 

misrule, extort and widespread unhappiness. 

"it happen that, after sever hindu physician had fail to restor 

their royal master from a faint spell, i, a moslem, was summon in 

hast to the palace. i carri with me a small jar contain a certain 

pungent liquid, which i appli to the nos[pg 149]tril of my patient, with the 

result that he was straightway brought back from seem death to 

conscious of his surroundings. i take no special credit for 

effect this recovery, but the maharajah himself deem me to be a 

verit worker of miracles, and, dismiss all his other doctors, 

kept me thenceforth constant by his side. from the first i knew, by 

his trembl limb and enfeebl condition, that death had mark him 

for it own; but i could, at least, prepar aromat drink to mitig 

his pain and saffron meat to drive out the evil spirit that possess 

him. 

"thus did it come about that i gain the confid of the maharajah, 

and when it happen that one of his favourit wive had fallen into a 

decline, and had beg for the servic of a physician, the honour 

trust of minist to her need was confid to me. my examin of 

the invalid was in accord with the usual restrictions. accompani 

by the feebl old maharajah himself, i was conduct to an apart 

across which a heavi curtain was suspended. after an interv of 

waiting, the rustl of silken garment behind the purdah, follow by 

the gentl sigh of a woman, told me that my patient had arrived. it was 

the husband himself who bade her thrust her tongu through an orific in 

the curtain. my inspect of this member reveal no intern disorder, 

and i request from my master permiss to touch the ladi hand so 

that i might feel the puls of the blood in her veins. not too 

will he order her to push her arm through the opening.[pg 150] 

"it was a dainti white hand, with mani jewel ring upon the taper 

fingers, and the nails, as with all ladi of quality, dy the deep 

orang red of henna. although i knew well that the jealous watch 

eye of her lord were upon me, i made no hesit in encompass the 

wrist with my own fingers. but the littl hand within mine was clench 

tight, and, the better to conduct my examination, i freed my finger 

from her wrist so as to straighten out her as i requir them. when i 

attempt to do this, however, i was conscious of some resist and 

then of the presenc of a small packet conceal in the palm of her 

hand. with a flash of comprehens i knew that the packag must be 

intend to be convey to me surreptitiously, and, with no thought at 

that critic moment of what the ulterior object might be, i aid the 

act by a deft movement of my shoulder, which for a moment intercept 

the maharajah gaze. 

"in anoth second he could see my finger-tip light press on her 

wrist, and her empti hand extended; but the packag was safe in my other 

hand, and not the quiver of a muscl on my face betray that anyth 

unusu had happened. both to mask my feelings, and to give the ladi 

behind the curtain confid that she could repos trust in my 

discretion, i count the puls beat aloud. 

"these inde told me that the heart of my patient was beat at a mad 

gallop, but this i divin was simpli caus by the dare deed she had 

essay and success accomplished. i deem it wise and[pg 151] prudent, 

however, to announc that the ladi was suffer from a fever, and that 

i would send her a powder that would speedili restor her to good 

health. at this the maharajah was suffici overjoy to permit of my 

withdraw without obvious embarrassment. i had a smile upon my lips, 

and the secret packag secur in the fold of my girdle. a chuprassi 

accompani me to my home to bring back the medicine. 

"i knew, of course, that it was onli a dri powder that this high-born 

hindu ladi could take from my dispensary, for to have swallow a liquid 

drug would have been a violat of her caste. i took pain to let the 

chuprassi see that my hand did not touch the powder, which, after due 

weighing, i bestow in a paper care sealed, instruct him to 

deliv it to no one but his high the maharajah. it was onli fine 

ground sugar that the man carri away. but perhap this is a harmless 

littl trick of my profess which even now i should not disclose." 

but a general smile among the compani show the hakeem that his call 

was held in no undu reverence, at least by those without present need 

of his ministrations. 

"when i was alon with my mortar and my drugs," resum the narrator, 

"i lost no time in examin the mysteri packet. i unwound the silk 

thread that tight tie it, both to restrict it bulk and to render it 

secure. soon, to my amazement, i uncov a string of ten pearls, of a 

size and lustrous[pg 152] puriti that bespok a high valu even to my untutor 

eyes. also there was a littl seal of red chalcedony, with the antler 

head of a deer and some scroll of letter engrav upon it; but there 

was not one scrap of write to explain to me the reason of these gifts. 

"had the lady, as often happens, imagin herself to be serious sick, 

and devis this plan of invok my interest and most skil servic 

on her behalf? but why, then, the seal, the valu of which was quit 

insignificant? 

"even as i was ponder these questions, there came a clap of hand 

at the gateway of my home that announc the arriv of a visitor. 

hastili conceal the pearl and the seal in my girdle, i step forth 

into the outer court and took my seat upon the divan. 

"straightway there was usher into my presenc a big man cloth in 

rich garments. his sabl complexion and thick lip declar him to be a 

moorman from across the seas, and his beardless chin further told at a 

glanc that he was an attend at the seraglio of some rich noble. 

"he salaam me with the cool confid of his kind, and, without 

wait for an invitation, seat himself on the carpet at my feet. 

"'mi name, o learn hakeem, is malik kafur, he began in the shrill 

trebl voic i had anticipated, and you know whi i come here. 

"as my knowledg had been taken for granted, i bow in acquiescence. 

"'but her high said that you would first of all show me her signet[pg 153] 

so as to prove that you are act with her authority. 

"with all due graviti i produc the chalcedoni seal from my belt, and, 

without quit hold, extend it for my visitor inspection. there 

was a swift gleam of recognit in his eyes. 

"'that is right, he murmured. 

"'then proceed, i said, quietly. you can speak in the fullest 

confidence. 

"'i have promis the maharane that to-morrow, when the fourth of the 

day is over, i shall conduct her into the bazaars. she bade me explain 

her plan precisely, so that you in turn should know how to act. well, 

her high will be, as usual, in her palankeen slung between two 

mules. when we turn from the coppersmith bazaar into the seclud 

bazaar where the money changer dwell, the two groom in charg of the 

mule will be assail by budmash and beaten with sticks. i, too, will 

be knock down and my cloth torn; but do not worri on my account. 

"i gave a cheer nod to signifi that his anxieti on this score might 

be set at rest. 

"'it will devolv on you to have two men readi to take advantag of the 

confus of the scuffl and lead away the mule with the palankeen, 

conduct the maharane to a place which she herself will indicate. 

this you understand? 

"'i understand. 

"'at night, when i shall come to you again, under[pg 154] cover of the 

darkness, you will pay over to me the agreed-upon price—th ten pearl 

which her high has place in your custody. 

"'they are here, i assented, hold aloft the littl string of pearls, 

the purpos they were intend to serv at last made clear to my 

understanding. 

"the eye of the negro flash with cupidity, and he reach forth a 

big, fat, black hand. 

"'i can be trust to do my share of the task, he said, eagerly. to 

save trouble, let me be paid now. 

"'not so, thou slave, i replied, curt and with authority, as i 

return the pearl to their place of safe-keeping. the price will be 

paid when the servic is performed. to-morrow night you will be 

admitted, malik kafur, if you knock three time at my gate. 

"the fellow rose to his feet, with a servil and submiss smile, and, 

by a wave of my hand, i dismiss him from my presence. 

"here, indeed, was an adventur thrust upon me, a man of peac and of 

studious habits, who had ever shrunk from deed of violence; but the 

hand of fate was clear beckon me along the path of duty, and not 

for a moment did i shrink from the danger into which, perchance, i was 

be hurried. 

"for the maharajah, worthless, besotted, and on the verg of dishonour 

death, i could have no respect. for the ladi of his household, who was 

confid to me her veri life, whose soft hand i had touch with due 

reverence, there was an instinct feel of sympathy. in her hour of 

dire need,[pg 155] most like of extrem danger, she had turn to me, a man 

of staid reput and old enough, no doubt, to be her father. so this was 

no affair of conjug wrong, from which my religi scrupl and my 

abid principl alike, would have repel me. clear was i the 

instrument in god direct hand for some great happening, and it was 

not for me, through thought of self or cowardice, to interpos obstacl 

to the carri out of the divin will. 

"and as i thus rumin there came from a minaret close by the call to 

even prayer. the world is but an hour, i murmur to myself as i 

spread my carpet; spend it in devotion, the rest is unseen. 

"on the morrow i was astir even befor the morn call to prayer. 

prayer is better than sleep'—i listen to the familiar cri of the 

muezzin. but while again i pray i felt that a good deed done may count 

more for a man at the gate of paradis than the record of mani prayers. 

"full an hour befor the appoint time i was at the corner of the 

coppersmith and the money-chang bazaars. here i post two of my 

retainers, in whom i could place complet confidence. they had alreadi 

been instruct how to act when the proper moment arrived. for myself, i 

saunter through the crowd and noisi bazaar of the maker and mender 

of copper vessels, so as not to attract undu attention. in my heart was 

not one flutter of excit or of uncertainty: i felt the quiet 

confid which in the crises[pg 156] of life come to a man whose trust in 

god the most high is implicit. 

"after a period of wait there came into sight the huge black moorman, 

in his hand a white wand of office, and, follow close behind him, a 

brilliant decor palankeen suspend between a pair of mule and 

attend by two grooms, lead the animals. the throng had part 

befor this littl procession, avert their eye from the cover 

palankeen, as was beseeming. 

"but suddenly, at the intersect of the two bazaars, a group of 

loiter sprang forward, and with cri assail the moorman and the 

grooms, turn the mule into the quieter thoroughfare. there i had now 

post myself, and, while the shopkeep ran up the street to see what 

had befallen, the cavalcad under my directions, and with my attend 

at the anim heads, hurri along, and as we thread our way through 

the maze of street the tumult of voic soon die away behind us. 

"after a littl time i ventur to approach the curtain palankin. 

"i spoke just loud enough to be heard by it occupant: 

"'may your day, o queen, be peaceful! your servant, most humbl and 

devoted, await your orders. 

"'peac be to thee, o thou trust and brave hakeem. take me to the 

protect of thi wife and home. 

"it was a soft, melodi woman voic that had[pg 157] spoken, tremblingly, 

imploringly, and yet withal in a tone of authority. 

"'as thou hast commanded, so shall it be done, was my brief reply. 

"after a littl time the cavalcade, without ani undu attent be 

attracted, had pass through the gateway of my home, and the door had 

been bar behind us. 

"to my surpris a gallant youth, some twelv year of age, sprang 

through the momentarili part curtain of the palankeen. 

"'i salut thee, o hakeem, our deliverer, he exclaimed, kiss the hem 

of my robe. my royal mother is in the palankeen, and crave for 

sanctuari in your zenana. 

"'let her pass, i replied, and i urg the docil mule toward the 

second archway that led to the women courtyard. 

"at my bid the inner gate opened, and they close again when the 

palankeen had entered. 

"'within is sanctuari for your royal mother, and here is sanctuari for 

yourself, o prince, i continued, with a profound obeisance, for, 

despit the modest garment he wore, i had recogn the eldest royal 

son of the maharajah, whom i had seen sever time in his father 

presence, and on one occas at an affair of state clad in a robe of 

honour of silk and gold brocade, festoon of jewel around his neck, and 

a tini sword with scabbard of gold girt at his side. 

"have onc more impress secreci on my attendants, and bid them 

give admiss to no one,[pg 158] i led my young guest into an inner recept 

room. there, in a few concis sentences, he told me his story. 

"a plot had been hatch in the royal zenana that, just so soon as the 

maharajah died, this youth, and seven or eight younger brothers, son of 

other wives, should be slain, so that the undisput success might 

descend on one particular son, elder by sever years, but not in the 

regular line of success becaus born of a slave mother. it was this 

slave woman brother who command the maharajah bodyguard, and, in 

collus with his sister, had conceiv the damnabl conspiracy. onli 

by the whisper of a woman who was close to the officer, but whose heart 

was tender, had the mother of the young heir to the throne been warned. 

with my aid, and that of the eunuch who had visit me the day before, 

they had made their escape, the youth have been hidden in the 

palankeen of his mother befor the latter left the seraglio on one of 

her occasion visit to the bazaars. 

"such was the story. now the futur had to be planned, for up to this 

point the maharane had act blind and impulsively—just swiftly—th 

moment she had realiz the suprem danger for her son. in the boy i 

found high courag and a clear brain, and togeth we devis the 

measur to be follow that would best allay suspicion as to the 

whereabout of the fugitives. 

"as a first step i salli forth as usual to pay my profession visit 

on the maharajah a littl before[pg 159] the noontid hour. perhap i felt 

that, if by ani chanc suspicion had alreadi alight upon me, i was 

take my life in my hand by enter the palace; but, trust to the 

protect of allah, i gave no second thought to ani fear of this kind. 

"i had not yet reach the palac gate when i encount a messeng 

run in hot hast to summon me. his high the maharajah had been 

seiz with a fit, and the whole palac was in a turmoil. 

"when i gain the royal apart i saw at a glanc that the suffer 

was beyond human aid. i could but watch the deep labour breathing, 

grow ever fainter and fainter, until the death-rattl in the throat 

proclaim the end. 

"dure that hour of watch my soul had been grave perturbed, not 

becaus of the die debauchee, but in dread of sinist happen in 

the royal zenana when the news of the maharajah demis should come to 

be announced. but how was i to give warn without betray to certain 

death the youth and his mother who had sought sanctuari in my 

defenceless home? for there, at the door of the sick room, stood the 

captain of the king bodyguard, todar rao, the veri man who, i knew, 

held his corrupt soldieri in leash for ani villainy. 

"anoth high offic of the court, the diwan, had share my vigil in 

the death chamber, and just befor the end came had inform me that it 

was news of an attack by budmash on one of the royal palankeen that 

morn in the bazaar that had[pg 160] inflict the fatal stroke upon his 

master. but this treasur was an age man, who would have quail under 

the eye of the stern and relentless soldier keep watch and ward at 

the doorway, and, for all i knew, he, too, might be in the 

conspiracy—indeed, his furtiv glanc and the nervous twitch of his 

hand forewarn me of this danger. 

"surround by uncertainties, and utter helpless in my isolation, i 

could but drift whither the stream of destini carri me. 

"'the king is dead, i announced, when the last flutter of the heart had 

ceased. may god in his compass give him peace. 

"the diwan summon the captain of the bodyguard, and the latter, to 

make certainti doubli sure, brutal shook the dead man by the shoulder. 

i could see the savag gleam of satisfact on his face when he threw 

from him the alreadi stiffen arm. the two men, in close conclave, 

hasten from the chamber, and when the attend set up the accustom 

cri of wail i profit by the clamour and confus to slip 

discreet from the palac and gain my own home. 

"the terribl event of the next few day were, alas! just the same as 

have befallen a hundr time on the pass of a king. the outsid 

world knew few details, but the news from the palac current in the 

bazaar was that all the son of the late maharajah had perish 

except onli the eldest. and this youth, although the whisper pass 

freely[pg 161] that he was mere the son of a slave woman, duli ascend the 

throne. 

"revolt by some of the nobl over such an indign might come later 

on. but meanwhile, at all events, the show of militari power quell all 

opposition, while a judici remiss of tax pleas the general 

populace, and inde caus them joy to acclaim the new maharajah 

as he made a triumphal process through the city, mount on an 

eleph caparison with cloth of gold and bedeck with silver chain 

and bells, preced by priest and the danc girl of the temples, and 

surround by troops, both horsemen and foot soldiers. 

"on i and the member of my household knew that the right heir to 

the throne was aliv and in safe hiding. for the moorman had never come 

to claim his string of pearls, and it was not until some day later that 

i had learn of his have been summarili dispatch by order of the 

dead maharajah, in the latter first paroxysm of anger over the 

abduct of his favourit wife when visit the bazaars. in this 

opportun remov of a greedi hirel and possibl traitor i onc more 

recogn the hand of provid work for the nobl woman whose 

quick wit had aid mother love to save her son. 

"a nobl woman i have call her, and such inde she was. for me the 

maharane had discard the purdah, and in the sanctiti of my harem, 

with my wife as her devot attendant, i was privileg to convers with 

her hour after hour, gaze freely[pg 162] upon the most beauti counten 

i had ever beheld—beauti not onli by reason of soft and round 

featur and the peach bloom of the skin, but also becaus of the 

soul-lit eye that illumin it with joyous radiance. for this queen 

live in her son, forgot everi other sorrow in his safety, and now 

experienc all the glow pride of a leader on the field of battl in 

plan the campaign for the vindic of his right claim to the 

royal inheritance. 

"her first step had been to send secret word to her father—sh was the 

daughter of a mountain chieftain—bid him to dispatch one of her 

brother to me as a trust messenger. the distanc was far, and three 

month elaps befor the hillman arrived, a sturdi young fellow, seren 

of eye, slow of speech, and muscl like a panther. he depart back 

home again, carri our tale by simpl word of mouth for greater 

security, and have conceal on his person some of the gem which the 

maharane had save and which would be readili convert into money. 

then, after a second interv of time, other tribesmen came sift into 

the citi by twos and threes, until we had full fifti of the finest 

materi for a bodyguard a young princ could desire. these men were 

quarter at differ place in the vicin of my home, arm and 

readi for a general muster when the moment should be ripe for action. 

"meanwhil a widespread spirit of dissatisfact with the new raj was 

daili growing, and on everi hand in the bazaar mutter of troubl 

began to[pg 163] be heard. the young ruler had prove to be a mere puppet in 

the hand of his mother and uncle, who had not hesit to advanc 

their base-born relat and associ to place of highest honour and 

emolument, therebi give grievous offenc among the famili of proud 

and ancient lineage, both hindu and moslem, which had hitherto suppli 

the princip offic of state and had been the real buttress of the 

throne. then, to fill full the measur of discontent, came omin 

rumour that the prince, although still a mere youth, had, like his 

father, becom addict to the use of bhang and strong wines, and, 

encourag by a worthless following, was abandon himself to all 

manner of expens debauchery. and when at last the screw of heavili 

increas taxat gave proof to these stori the first timid whisper 

of displeasur among the populac swell to sullen and continu 

murmuring. 

"for the true queen mother and her son the hour of destini was 

approaching! 

"but, although the ember of revolt were readi to burst into flame at 

the first fan of a breeze, todar rao, now sirdar in command of the 

whole army, still domin the situation. at his slightest word the 

mercenari soldieri under his control would have rush into the bazaar 

with sword and torch, like raven wolv among sheep helpless to 

defend themselves. as for the nobles, each surround by his own 

bodyguard, they were torn into rival factions, the one jealous 

watch the other lest open revolt should be made the excus for[pg 164] 

usurp of the throne by the strongest and best prepar among them. 

"in these circumst it would have been fatal to let word go forth 

prematur that the right heir was alive, for disappoint ambit 

among the feudal lord might have becom an ad danger to the furi of 

the sirdar. but ani prolong delay would also be disastrous, for it was 

onli now that the boy princ would be recogn and receiv as the 

undoubt heir to his father throne; a few year later he would, to a 

certainty, be look at askanc as a mere pretender—a pawn in the game 

of some unscrupul king-mak play for his own aggrandizement. 

"it was the maharane who devis the bold stroke which involv 

undoubt danger yet promis the best chanc of success. her idea was 

to take the whole court unawar at one and the same moment, so that the 

nobl might have present to them, not onli a common rallying-point 

for loyalty, but the chanc by unit action to break for all time the 

hate militari power of the slave-born sirdar. 

"it was the appoint day when the recent instal maharajah, 

accord to custom immemorial, was to be public weighed, and the gold 

he counterbalanc distribut in charity. in the great courtyard of the 

palac all the peopl were assembled, nobl and offic of state, 

soldier and traders, rich and poor, among the latter the halt, the 

blind and the maimed, the deform and the leprous, in piti evid 

as fit object for a share of the pro[pg 165]mise bounty. on a rais 

dais, seat upon a throne cover with cloth of gold, and shelter by 

a canopi and awn of crimson brocade, sat the reign maharajah, a 

puni and sickly-look stripling. 

"befor the main ceremoni of the day, herald had announc that the 

sovereign was prepar to listen to ani grievanc or complaint from 

his people. for a few minut no one came forward, but at last a pair of 

sleek mules, handsom caparisoned, with a rich adorn palankeen 

slung between them, the ident equipag of the maharane which had 

been harbour in my home, emerg from the crowd, and advanc at a 

grave pace toward the royal dais. that some high-born ladi was within 

the silken cover of the palankeen everi one surmised, and at this 

extraordinari spectacl a hush of tens expect fell upon the 

assemblage. 

"but the silenc chang to murmur of amaz and admir when a 

queen woman step upon the edg of the dais, and faced, not the 

maharajah on his throne, but the nobl and courtier and offic 

cluster around. 

"with a proud gestur she flung even the sari from her face, which the 

play of the sunbeam among the jewel in her hair and around her neck 

invest with a shimmer halo of radiance. on such a woman face the 

multitud had never look before. but state and unabashed, seren in 

the puriti of her womanhood, the digniti of her motherhood, and the 

majesti of her rank, she rais aloft a hand, and[pg 166] spake aloud in tone 

clear as the note of a silver trumpet. 

"'o nobl and o people, the royal son and heir of my husband, the late 

maharajah, is alive, spare by divin provid from the massacr of 

his brother and playmat in the seraglio of the palace. mani of you 

know him well, and behold now he come to claim his heritage. 

"as these word were spoken, the crowd again parted, and there step 

forth the young prince, my protégé. at the edg of the throng he 

discard a loos mantl of cotton that had conceal the rich garment 

befit his rank. then he advanced, look proud and gaili about 

him, while close behind, and press eager around his person, came 

full fifti stalwart tribesmen, tread with the bold swing gait of 

the mountaineer, their drawn tulwar flash in the sun, their voic 

shout jai, jai,—hail, hail! in deafen chorus. 

"the effect was instantan and tremendous, and from all the assembl 

multitud went up the loud acclaim—'jai, jai, jai! there seem to be 

not a dissenti in the throng. and a moment later the young princ was 

stand on the dai by his mother side, one hand rest proud on 

her shoulder. 

"among the nobl there had hitherto been the silenc of stupefaction. 

but at last, one of their number, an elder man, advanced, and 

prostrat himself on the rich carpet spread in front of the dais, thus 

render public homag to his right king. jai, jai, jai! shout 

the mob, and soon a[pg 167] dozen other among the nobl had given the pledg 

of fealty. 

"meanwhil the kinglet on the throne of gold had been forgotten. he had 

made no move, but had content himself with stare around in confus 

and helpless surprise. but now todar rao, the sirdar, had sprung to his 

side and drag the youth to his feet. 

"'o princ and people, this is your right king, cri the soldier 

in stentorian tones, crown and proclaim and accept by your 

pledg of loyalty. my order to the troop are death to those who now 

betray him. 

"but the word had hard pass his lips, when two score of the 

mountaineers, shout deen, deen,—kill, kill, had swarm over the 

silver rail surround the throne. there was the momentari clash of 

steel on steel, the impot curs of an angri man, a shrill piti cri 

of anguish from the youth who in his terror had crouch behind the 

awn descend from the canopy. and when the tribesmen again face 

the multitude, the soldier figur of todar rao had disappeared, and 

the throne was vacant for the recept of it right occupant. 

"amidst a wild tumult of joy the young princ ascend from the dai and 

took the royal seat, show in his everi movement the natur grace and 

digniti that might almost in themselv have prove his right of 

heritage, and that certain won to his caus the last waver among 

the onlooking[pg 168] multitude. even the bodyguard of the slain sirdar were 

now join in the univers acclaim. 

"the first to bend a knee to the right king enthron was the royal 

queen, his mother. and then the ladi step back, a littl to the rear 

and to the side of the throne, draw her silken sari over the love 

counten that would never again be beholden by the people. 

"'never again! the thought had scarc pass through my mind, as i 

watch the scene from the fring of the crowd, when a more grim and 

terribl realiti was given to the unspoken word than i had ever 

intended. close to the spot where the maharane had halt were some 

hang of brocad arranged, as we understood later, so that the seat 

and veil figur of a woman might observ the brilliant pageantri of 

the day from the privaci of this purdah. 

"and from out these hang there now stretched, stealthili but 

swiftly, a bejewel hand, which plung a long dagger between the 

shoulder of the queen mother. 

"without a cri she fell. i was quick by her side, and the young 

maharajah and myself, as we bent over her, caught her die words. 

"'all is well, my belov son, she murmured. 'i have accomplish that 

which i was sent into the world to perform. in peac i yield my soul to 

god. 

"with the last word she breath her last breath. and such is mother 

love." 

there was a suppress sob in more than one breast at the close of the[pg 169] 

vener hakeem tale. down his own furrow face the tear were 

streaming. 

"and the woman who struck the foul blow?" inquir the afghan in an 

eager whisper. 

"the slave mother of the dead pretender. well, she too had given her all 

for mother love. the tribesmen tore her limb from limb." 

and the hakeem press a hand to his eye to shut out the memori of a 

dread scene. 

[pg 170] 
