the project gutenberg ebook of tale of destiny, by edmund mitchel 

this ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 

almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 

re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 

with this ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

title: tale of destini 

author: edmund mitchel 

releas date: august 10, 2006 [ebook #19017] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: iso-8859-1 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook tale of destini *** 

produc by r. cedron, joseph r. hauser and the onlin 

distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 

tale of 

destini 

by 

edmund mitchel 

london 

constabl and compani ltd 

1913 

copyright, 1912, 

unit state of america, 

by 

edmund mitchel 

content 

introduct 

1 

chap. i. 

the maid of jhalnagor. told by the rajput chief 

5 

ii. 

the hollow column. told by the tax-collector 

19 

iii. 

what the star ordained. told by the astrolog 

35 

iv. 

the spirit wail. told by the merchant 

60 

v. 

the blue diamonds. told by the fakir 

101 

vi. 

the tiger of the pathans. told by the afghan general 

128 

vii. 

her mother love. told by the physician 

146 

viii. 

the sacr pickaxe. told by the magistrate. 

170 

tale of destini 

[pg 1] 

introduct 

just without one of the massiv bastion gate of the citi of 

fathpur-sikri there stood in the year 1580 a caravanserai that afford 

accommod for man and beast. here would alight travel drawn by 

the call of homage, by business, or by curios to the famous town of 

victory, built, as the inscript over the gateway told, by "his 

majesty, king of kings, heaven of the court, shadow of god, jalal-ad-din 

moham akbar padishah." 

at the time of our stori akbar was at the zenith of his glory. he had 

move his court from agra, the capit of his predecessor on the throne 

of the moguls, after have rais for himself, on the spot where the 

birth of a son had been promis him by a hermit saint, this superb new 

citi of fathpur-sikri, seven mile in circumference, wall and guard 

by strong fort at it seven gateways. emperor and nobl had vie with 

each other in erect palac of state design and exquisit finish of 

adornment. a beauti mosqu commemor the good deed of the saint, 

and provid a place of prayer for those of the moslem faith. in the 

palac of the emperor was a magnific audienc hall, with marbl 

column and stone-carv galleries, in the centr of which stood the 

throne of gold sprinkl with rubies, emeralds, and diamonds, surround 

by a silver rail[pg 2]ing, and cover by a canopi of rich crimson brocade. 

in this audienc hall the great and good akbar was wont to receiv not 

onli his subjects, rich and poor, the former assembl to pay their 

court, the latter to lay their grievanc befor the imperi judge; but 

he also extend welcom to stranger from afar. on the question of 

religion his mind was at this period in a state of change, for he had 

broken from the strict faith of the moslem, had public announc that 

there was good in all beliefs, had overthrown ceremoni rules, whether 

of islam or of hinduism, and had proclaim all thing law except 

excess. his thought thus drift toward a new religion, a divin faith 

that would bring into one fold the votari of all religions, he was 

glad at his court to give audienc to learn doctor from distant land 

as well as from everi part of india. all were welcome—brahmin and 

buddhists, moslem schoolmen, hindu fanatics, pantheists, the worshipp 

of fire, the jew whose prophet are abraham and moses, even christian 

padr from far-off europe. it was akbar delight to listen to their 

exposit and discussions, and to the defenc of their vari dogmas. 

thus did the fame of the king for tolerance, benevol and wisdom 

becom nois abroad far and wide, so that visitor flock in 

ever-increas number to the beauti city. at our caravanserai 

without the gate there would often, in the cool of an evening, be 

gather togeth on the shade veranda a group of travel 

repres divers races[pg 3] and classes. some of the town-dwellers, too, 

would be there, rest and refresh themselv after their walk to 

the citi walls, while from the near-bi camp of the rajputs, who form a 

portion of the royal bodyguard, there would oftentim stroll over a few 

men-at-arms. 

on such occas it would general happen that the debat recent 

listen to in the imperi hall of assembl would be subject to 

comment. and from discuss of this kind the convers would quit 

frequent chang to story-telling, dear to the heart of all nativ of 

hindustan, and by no mean to be despised, for in a good stori there may 

be implant the kernel of a sound philosophy. 

on a summer night in the year name eight men were assembl on the 

veranda of the caravanserai. the full moon had just risen abov a tope 

of tamarind trees, and it silvern radianc reveal everi detail of the 

scene. a rajput chief occupi the place of central prominence, cushion 

arrang for his convenience, on one of which rest his scimitar, the 

emblem of his soldier profession. not far from him, in a 

half-reclin posture, was a general of the afghans, also of the 

bodyguard of the emperor. a hakeem, or physician, and an astrologer, 

both in the moslem style of dress, were seat close together, leg 

cross beneath them; while a littl apart were two hindus, as the cast 

mark on their forehead showed, a tax-collector from the countri and a 

kotwal, or citi magistrate. just abov the step lead on to the 

veranda, surround by his[pg 4] bale of merchandise, sat a merchant from 

bombay, a big and stalwart man, attir in spotless white raiment, on 

his head a volumin muslin turban. in strike contrast, squat on 

the ground below the steps, at his feet a wooden beg bowl, was a 

fakir, or religi ascetic, a loin cloth his sole covering, his face 

bedaub with ashes, his lean chin rest on his uprais knee while 

he listen to the dialogu and watch each speaker face with eye of 

keen alertness. 

there had been some desultori conversation, which final result in 

the rajput chief be beg to relat in detail an experi at which 

he had previous hinted. the first stori led to anoth story, and the 

third to yet another, and so on, until each member of the compani had 

contribut to the general entertainment. and these are the tale that 

were told by the travel on the veranda of the caravanserai outsid 

the wall of fathpur-sikri that moonlight night in the day of the 

mighti akbar: 

[pg 5] 
