
"under the firm and just rule of our master akbar there has been peac 

for mani year in our part of the world. except when, as now, i come to 

fathpur-sikri for my year month of servic in providing[pg 8] part of the 

emperor bodyguard, i live quiet among my own people. the soil around 

our villag is tilled, our shopkeep buy and sell, we worship in our 

temples, and we are happy, for no enemi come to disturb the peac of 

our beauti littl valley of jhalnagor embosom among the hills. 

"one day it befel that i had gone on a hunt trip with a parti of my 

friends. in the earli dawn we had descend from the fort on the hill 

top which is my home and the rallying-plac for my clan—a small clan, 

number but a few thousands, but nobli born as ani tribe in rajputana, 

brave and of honour unsullied, men who have never yet given a daughter 

to the harem of a moslem." 

the featur of the rajput flash with pride. his brother-at-arms, the 

afghan, met the defiant look, and said, with a quiet smile: 

"there are mani rajput women wed to moslem lords." 

"yes, but not rajput women of jhalnagor. they would have die 

first—mani of them did so prefer to die when the moslem host first 

swept over our land. in the hour of defeat, against overwhelm 

numbers, within the citadel of jhalnagor the women of my race, refus 

to accept dishonour, bare their bosom to the spear of those they 

loved, husbands, brothers, and fathers, and so they died." 

with hand outstretch and eye uprais in rapt pride and rever 

for the deed of his ancestors, again the rajput fell into momentari 

silence. 

"the stori of the littl maid." it was the voic of[pg 9] the physician 

recal the narrat to his task. 

"yes, the stori of the littl maid," resum the rajput. "as i have 

said, we had gone to the hunt one morning—a parti of twelve, ride on 

three elephants. for we were in pursuit of a tiger, a destroy of men, 

which the villag had mark down in a patch of jungl by the river 

side. of the hunt i need say nothing; we kill the tiger, and, with the 

huge, stripe bodi slung across the neck of my elephant, we were 

return home. it was toward evening, for we had rest in the forest 

dure the heat of the day. 

"we were just enter the narrow gorg that lead to the fort on the 

hill, when, right on the pathway befor me, i saw the prone figur of a 

child. almost my eleph feet were upon it befor the sage brute 

himself stop and trumpet a warn to us in the howdah, for, the 

tiger bodi occupi the place where the mahout was wont to ride, the 

latter was walking, and he, too, had not notic the tini bundl of 

bright yellow cloth lie on the road. 

"glanc down, i beheld a littl girl with her forehead touch the 

dust. at my call she arose, and spread her hand across her breast. 

"'listen, o chief, to my warning, listen, o my lord, she call out in 

a shrill tone of supplication. alreadi had i observ that her face was 

one of great beauty, although that of just a littl child, but six or 

seven year old. 

"the other two eleph had halt behind mine,[pg 10] and some of the parti 

had descended. but at the approach of these men the maid shrank away, 

and, keep her eye fix in my direction, she continu to address 

me: 

"'listen to my words, o chief, and be save from death. 

"in anoth moment i had sprung to the ground. as i advanc the child 

ran toward me, absolut fearless. take her in my arms, i sat me down 

by the roadside. close to my breast she nestled, and, with sob and 

tear now, told me her story. 

"a robber band was in the nullah—less than a mile further along—ful a 

hundr strong, fierc men and murderers. for they had alreadi slain the 

father and the mother of the littl maid, humbl woodcutters. i had 

known them well; they were poor, but of mine own people, and instant 

in my heart i vow that i would be avenged. 

"the littl girl, brenda her name, as she told me in her childish way of 

confidence, had hidden in the brushwood all day, trembl and afraid. 

but at last she divin that the men had come to slay me, for as the 

afternoon advanc they dispos themselv among bush and behind 

trees, also in the hut of her dead parents. and even now were the 

assassin in wait for me, for the girl had seen our parti ride forth 

in the earli morning, and she knew that i had not yet returned. 

"when, with wonder intuit for a child so tender in years, the 

thought came to her mind that i was to be assailed, she stole down the 

gorge, moving[pg 11] cautious through the undergrowth, and await at the 

spot we found her to give me warning. 

"the child had describ to me the leader of the gang, and i had 

immedi recogn gunesh tanti, accurs son of a pig, a robber 

from across the desert of sindh, who had more than onc ravag peac 

villag of rajputana. he would know that i had treasur in the fort, 

and of an instant i could read his wili plan. move through the 

country, he had doubtless heard a day or two befor of this project 

expedit of mine for the kill of the man-eat tiger. so he had 

design to slay me on my homeward way, and, the deed accomplished, 

would reli on gain access to the citadel by load his ruffian into 

the howdah of my elephants. onc over the drawbridg and within the 

portcullis gateway, his murder scheme might have been easy, for my 

score of men-at-arm on duti would have been taken by surpris and so at 

a disadvantage. 

"but know now the danger, i laugh in my beard, for gunesh tanti, 

this human tiger and slayer of innoc men, just as had been the tiger 

now slung across the back of my elephant, was fair deliv into my 

hand. he who had come to trap me was himself entrapped. and thank all 

to this littl maid of the glen! at the thought, i pat her soft cheek 

with my hand, and in respons she smile up into my eye with wondrous 

trust and winsomeness. 

"our party, as i have said, number twelve, this[pg 12] without count the 

three mahouts, lith and activ men, and brave as ani one of us. the 

neck of the gorg was narrow, and for a hundr yard on either side 

there were steep precipic down which rock could be tumbl on flee 

men. by a goat path over the hillsid the fort could be reach by one 

sure of foot and know the way. such a lad was of our party, a cousin 

of my own, who could race with the deer. 

"in a few minut he had gird his loin and was on his mission, 

disappear over the crest of the almost perpendicular crag up which he 

had clambered. he was to warn the garrison, turn out everi man and boy 

fulli armed, and bid them to sweep down on the ambush robbers. the 

mother and the maiden would hold the fort. no other garrison, when 

onc on the alert, was need for such an enemy." 

again the rajput smile proudly, but the silenc of intent listen was 

unbroken, and he continued: 

"the fire of a matchlock was to be our signal that my men held the 

upper end of the pass, and were descend on our enemies. meanwhile, my 

immedi follow prepar the rock abov the narrow neck of the 

defil and got them readi for instant roll down. to this last task 

four of our number were deputed. the other abid with me. our plan was 

to block the narrow passag by rang the eleph abreast of each 

other, and, so that the anim themselv might not be stamped by the 

unexpect din of battle, we chain their forelegs,[pg 13] first each anim 

separately, and then the middl one to his comrad on either side. 

"at last all our prepar were completed, the huge beast in line, 

my companion mount into the howdahs. i alon remain on foot, i and 

the littl woodcutt daughter, stand by my side, hold 

trust to my hand, and no longer weeping. 

"'you must come with me, my almond-sweet, i said, as i rais the child 

in my arms, and pass her up into the howdah of my own elephant, the 

central one. then i myself clamber aloft. the tiger corps had been 

flung to the ground, and our three mahout sat in their proper places, 

iron goad in hand, readi to perform their task of keep the eleph 

under control. 

"at last, after a tens period of waiting, the welcom report of the 

matchlock reverber from among the hills. 

"the fight doe not realli concern my story," said the rajput, grimly. 

"it is suffici to say that gunesh tanti and all his band perish to 

a man—som slain by the sword of my horsemen charg down the pass, 

some crush by the fall rocks, some of the last survivors, who flung 

themselv desper against our live barrier, die on our 

handpik or be trampl under foot by the elephants. not one of more 

than five score men live to carri back the tale of death to the robber 

haunt whenc they had come. 

"on our side some live were lost, seven in all; but this is the penalti 

that brave men have to pay in the[pg 14] do of righteous deeds. their 

memori is honoured. 

"as for the littl maid, i had nest her in the best-protect corner 

of the howdah, and in the thick of the fray, when a shower of arrow had 

fallen upon us, i had cover her tini form with my shield. but dure 

the final hand-to-hand fight, when all was din and turmoil with the 

shout of the men and the angri trumpet of the elephants, i had not 

paid her ani special heed. from her lip came no sound to attract my 

attention—no cri of fear, nor wail murmur. 

"but at the end i look for the littl child, lift the shield that 

had part guard her. she met my gaze with a smile. but straightway i 

notic that an arrow, descend almost perpendicularly, had pierc 

her soft littl arm, and transfix it to her side. yet had she not 

cri out, nor even now, when i was tend her, did she whimper. 

"i drew forth the arrow, break it in twain, so as to let the shaft 

pass through the arm. although blood flow freely, i saw at a glanc 

that the wound in the bodi was a mere puncture, and also that on the 

limb onli a pierc of the flesh. therefor was her hurt not serious, 

although of a certainti painful, and terrifi too for a child so 

young. but even now not one word of complain did she utter. she kept 

her sweet smile on me. brave littl maid! 

"tear a length of cambric from my turban, i had bound both arm and 

tender breast, and readjust the sari of yellow-di cotton that form 

her[pg 15] simpl garment. and now she reposed, happi and contented, in my 

arms. i remain in the howdah, while my companion cut off the head of 

the robbers, and load these trophi of victori on one of the other 

elephants, so that a triumphal pile might be made in the courtyard of 

the citadel. then, with the tiger replac on the neck of my own 

elephant, we move for home, a group of fifti horsemen now form our 

escort. the headless bodi of our enemi were left as fit spoil 

for the jackal and the vultures, the latter of whom, scent the 

carrion, were alreadi begin to drop down, it might seem, from the 

blue vault of heaven. 

"bi the time we gain the fortress the dusk was gathering. across the 

drawbridge, prompt lower at the sound of our joy shouting, i saw 

my wife stand besid the big carronad that command the roadway up 

the hill. the smoke match was in her hand, but at sight of me she 

stoop and smother in the dust the spark that would have dealt out 

death to the robber had they ever gain a near approach. descend 

from my elephant, i greet her and thank her for the courag of 

herself and all the other women, our love ones. 

"then my friend abov hand down gentl into my arm the form of the 

littl maid. at sight of my wife sweet and kind counten the eye 

of the child were light with joyousness. but with a quick motion wife 

drew her veil complet over her features. ere this was done, however, 

i had caught a strang look in her face—a look of mingl sur[pg 16]prise and 

terror. at the same moment her old attend and confidant, rakaya, 

flung herself at my feet, and began to babbl for my forgiveness. 

"'what mean this? i asked, glanc in profound amaz from the 

woman prostrat form up into my wife eyes. there again i read the 

strang troubl expression. puzzled, yet restrain my curios 

befor the other gather around, i place the wound child in my 

wife arms, and, with a gestur to signifi that she and rakaya were to 

follow, i led the way to the women quarters. 

"onc within the zenana, i told my stori briefly: how the littl damsel 

of the glen had save me from certain death, and then, through danger 

and through pain, had been brave as the noblest-born rajput maid could 

be. after this recital, i commend the child to my wife affections, 

bid her love the orphan as she would a daughter. 

"then was the love counten of my wife, the jewel of jhalnagor, 

suffus with great joy. hug the child to her mother bosom, she 

exclaimed: 
