

iii. what the star ordain 

told by the astrolog 

"and now, master star-gazer, your proffer story," said the 

tax-collector, bestir the compani from it medit mood. 

"as i have promised," respond the astrologer, "i shall recount an 

experi that show how the stars, if read aright, can tell us the 

influenc for good or for evil that weigh upon a man and inevit 

determin his destini at the critic moment of his life. what is 

written is written, and it is imposs to strive against fate." 

"nay," object the rajput, "that is a teach of helpless to which 

i cannot subscribe—th piti excus of the coward who fold his hand 

in the hour of danger, or of the self-indulg weakl who yield to 

seduct temptat becaus his heart inclin to seiz the pleasur of 

the moment even when his conscienc counsel otherwise. i hold that man 

is the master of his own fate. most assur have i been the master of 

mine," he ad with a proud smile, his finger close signific on 

the handl of a dagger at his belt. 

"be it so," answer the astrologer. "but as allah know everyth that 

is to happen, so must it happen." 

"which doe not forbid the exercis of my own free will," argu the[pg 36] 

rajput. "the suprem being, the presid power of creation, call him 

allah if you will, understand my heart as he understand all things, 

know beforehand what choic of action i shall make at the moment of an 

emergency. but that still leav me respons for the deed which i 

elect to do. such is my understand of destiny. it give 

fore-knowledg to god, but leav free will to man." 

"from all of which i do not dissent," rejoin the astrologer. "it is 

onli the ignor or the base that make kismet the excus for 

helpless or for wrongdoing. but as the star under which a man is 

born influenc that man acts, then doe the read of the star guid 

us as to what the futur has in store." 

"i know littl about your stars," repli the rajput. "but let us have 

the story," he added, cross his hand on his knee in an attitud of 

expectancy. the astrologer, salut his audienc general with a bow 

of acquiescence, thus began: 

"bi your courtesi let me first explain, as necessari to the 

understand of the tale which is to follow, that i am from persia, 

from the citi of teheran, where for mani generat my ancestor were 

profound student of astrology, some of them famous men becaus of their 

skil divinations, with reput that reach even to stamboul. for 

thither in my earli boyhood to the court of the sultan of the osman 

was my father summoned, and him i never[pg 37] beheld again. it was from my 

age grandfath that i learn my first lesson in astrology—about the 

twelv houses, the rule star of each day, the come and the go of 

the planets, their conjunct and oppositions, and the influenc they 

exercis on men lives. i learn with avidity, and was an apt pupil, 

for at fifteen i had begun the practic of my profession, cast 

horoscop and read the nocturn heaven with constant care, 

understand also the flight of bird and the cri of wild beast of 

the jungle. 

"yet at that time was my mind assail with grievous doubts. i often 

caught myself wonder whether the star did realli rule the fate of 

men. and with this inward question a restless spirit grew upon me. i 

long to see more of the world—to enlarg the sphere of my 

observations. just then i chanc to hear some gossip in the bazaar 

about a great expedit that was get readi at kabul to descend upon 

hindustan. the hunger of adventur seiz me, and was not to be denied. 

despit the tear and implor of my family, i set forth on foot for 

afghanistan, a stripling; in my hand the staff i use in my divinations, 

in the bag slung at my side a singl chang of raiment. money i had 

none, but my abil to read the star i knew well would earn me a 

livelihood wherev i might wander. 

"with my adventur dure the next two year this stori has no concern. 

it is enough to say that, after mani vicissitud of fortune, i found 

myself instal as astrolog in the court of a moslem[pg 38] prince, 

sovereign over an extens region in kashmir. 

"mi lord was a man of nobl heart and of high mental gifts. he rule 

over his peopl not by fear of the sword, but by absolut justice, which 

he himself person administered, everi day hold audienc so that 

grievances, even those of the most poor, might be heard and wrong 

redressed. and his royal duti were share by his wife, who, although 

she might sit behind the screen of the women quarters, none the less 

share in the counsel of state, and contribut word of wisdom in the 

direct of affairs. 

"never in my experi have i encount such mutual love, trust, and 

devot as subsist between this pair. for no other woman in the world 

had mirza shah thought or regard or desire—i call him mirza shah, but 

that was not his real name. for reason that will present appear, i 

refrain from disclos the ident of place and person connect 

with my story. 

"well, it was my privileg from the outset to be on relat of close 

intimaci with my master. he use to come through the palac garden to 

the shrub-embow tower which i occupied, and from the roof of which i 

night contempl the heavens. for long hour he would abid with me, 

learn someth of the star while enjoy the cool of the night air 

after the heat and fatigu of the day. and mani time of an afternoon 

the sultana, veiled, would come with her lord, and togeth they would[pg 39] 

seek to gain from me knowledg of the heaven bodi and of divination. 

some thing i told to them, but other i withheld, which is just and 

right, for skill in astrolog is hereditary, descend from father to 

son, and new mind are unprepar for such teachings, so that too much 

knowledg convey to outsid may becom a sourc of disturb to 

themselv and perchanc of danger and hurt to their fellow men. thus, 

follow the rule laid down for me by my grandfather, always, even 

when close press with questions, did i exercis a discreet reserve. 

"gradual the friendship accord to me by my lord and his ladi wax 

stronger, and i found myself be admit to some of their innermost 

thoughts. thus did i come to learn the passion long of the wife to 

becom a mother: for six year had she waited, but no child had bless 

her love for her husband. as for mirza shah, just so soon as the subject 

was mention i could see the cloud of melancholi rest on his brow. and 

when, as time went on, sad seem to settl upon him continuously, i 

knew full well that this disappoint in his wed life had at last 

taken complet possess of his mind, to the exclus of all other 

matters. 

"and from the sultana manner i could see the trepid that fill 

her heart—th dread that her childless might in the end rob her of 

her husband love. it was not given to me to look upon her face—to get 

more than a glimps of her eye as they shot an occasion glanc at me 

through the part folds[pg 40] of her veil. but in these glanc i had read 

the prayer of entreati that i should use all the spell of my art in 

her favour, so as to obtain for her from god the gift of a son. 

"well, after a time an unexpect thing happened. mirza shah was absent 

from his home—gon on a full week journey, engag in the settl of 

some disput on the confin of his territory. to me there came one 

afternoon the sultana, attend by one of her women—th most trust 

one, i knew, for both were from the same country, near to amritsar, 

where the famous rug are woven. so much i had learned, and this further 

i also knew, that by birth the sultana was a hindu, although on be 

wed to her lord as a littl girl, she had of cours embrac the true 

faith of islam, in so far as it matter for a woman to have ani religion 

at all. 

"it was the femal attend who spoke to me, her mistress listen in 

silence. but the question came so readili that it was clear the lesson 

had been well rehears by the twain. 

"'astrologer, she began, can you swear on the koran that the star 

speak truth? 

"'that i can swear, i replied, with due digniti and respect for myself 

and my profession. 

"'can the star bring about the wish of man or of woman? 

"'nay, that i do not declare. they rule the live of men and women onli 

in so far as their movement forecast the future. if we can read the 

star aright, we may gain foreknowledg of event destin to[pg 41] happen. 

for what is written in the scroll of fate cannot be changed. from kismet 

there is no escape." 

"'then tell me this, o astrologer, from your stars: is my nobl ladi 

here ever go to have a child, a son? 

"'that question i cannot answer. unless i have the horoscop of her 

highness, cast by skill hand at the time of her birth, i cannot tell 

which planet rule her destiny. 

"'alas, we knew not these thing among my peopl down in amritsar, i 

heard my ladi murmur. 

"'bah! exclaim the serv woman contemptuously. she had flung open 

her veil, unasham as are women of her station that i, not her brother 

or her husband, should gaze upon her face. it was a pleasant enough face 

of a woman of five-and-twenti year of age; yet, methought, as i look 

into it now, that there was unseem bold in her eye and even 

someth of wanton abandon in her manner. 

"'bah! if your star cannot get us what we wish, what good are they? 

better pray at a hindu shrine to krishna, god of love revels, than wast 

time in consult a moslem astrologer. that is what i have said all 

along, dear lady'; and with undoubt great affect the woman fold 

to her breast her now sob mistress. 

"i turn away, as was proper, and busi myself with a chart of the 

heaven over which i had been pore when my visitor had arrived. on 

again rais my eyes, i found that i was alone. 

"this incid i had well nigh forgotten, and near a year had elapsed. 

for some month i had not seen[pg 42] the sultana; she remain in the strict 

seclus of the harem. her high was unwell, most peopl said. but i 

knew the truth; mirza shah himself had told it to me, his face beam 

with pride and pleasure. at last his dearest hope were to be realized; 

the sultana was about to becom a mother. 

