
v. the blue diamond 

told by the fakir 

"you have certain improv on the moral of my story," said the 

astrologer, address the merchant, silent now after the tell of his 

tale. "if it is for god alon to pronounc the censur on mankind, then 

assur it is for god also to award the praise. as the stori of sheikh 

ahm and his jewel harp well shows, deed may be done open by the 

hand, but the motiv for their do lie secret in the heart. and the 

heart is the innermost templ where none but the high priest, the 

individu soul, hold communion with his god, the suprem deiti of the 

universe." 

"so that a man life is an unsolv riddl to all but himself," 

concur the hakeem. 

"and not to be solv even by himself," remark the afghan with a 

laugh, half of bitterness, half of bravado. "we may know in our secret 

heart the motiv that prompt to a deed, but we cannot tell the 

consequ of that deed as affect even ourselv who wrought it. 

take this veri stori of the sheikh; when recov his precious harp he 

was but dig his own grave. so with all of us; we imagin we are 

march brave to accomplish some preconceiv plan, when all the time 

we are merely[pg 102] grope with blind eye along the path of destiny, 

avoid the mud holes, it may be, but fail to see the tiger, 

crouch for his spring, a few pace further along." 

"shabash!" cri the fakir, in a shrill tone of approv that drew all 

eye to the lean and nake and ash-besprinkl figur seat at the foot 

of the veranda steps. "shabash! shabash!" he cried, again and yet again. 

"and your story?" ask the rajput, with a nod of inquiri and 

encouragement. 

"is one that show how a man may keep on run all his life yet never 

reach the goal he has in sight," repli the ascetic. and with the 

sturdi independ of his call he beat a peremptori tattoo with 

finger-tip on wooden begging-bowl to command attent to his tale. 

"behold in me a man who possess noth in this world except a 

begging-bowl and a loin cloth. yet was i at one time the owner of land 

and of cattle, of a home bounti store for comfort and for 

sustenance, of wive who wore rich jewels, necklet of pearls, armlet 

of gold, and bangl of silver, with maid-serv to minist to their 

need and children to play around them. all gone! by my own doing, or 

undoing, call it which you will. 

"and know, too, that in those day i also was a soldier"—thi with a 

defiant glanc first at the rajput chief and then at the afghan general. 

"at my side rattl the steel scabbard, and in my belt[pg 103] was the sharp 

poinard, swift messeng of death when it came to hand-to-hand fighting, 

and the hors i rode had it rich trap of gold and silver. it may 

all seem strange, to hear me tell those thing of the long ago and to 

look upon me now"—and the speaker stretch forth his skinny, twist 

finger and attenu arms, and for a moment ruefulli contempl 

them. 

"but i speak the truth," he went on, "for to-night, prompt by the 

stori to which i have listen and the thought they have engendered, 

will i unseal my lip after fifti long year of wander alone, give 

no man my confidence, seek no man confidence, intent onli on the 

attain of the one desir deepli seat in my heart, and which, in my 

eager strive to achieve, seem to be ever more remot from 

accomplishment. to-night will i reveal the stori of my life, so that, 

perchance, the lesson it teach will show still more clear the 

impot of man to constitut himself the aveng of wrongs. for if 

judgment belong to allah, so doe vengeance. and the choic of 

instrument, of time and place, of the veri manner of the deed—al this 

belong to god alone, as this night, listen to the stori that have 

gone before, have i for the first time come fulli to comprehend." 

the fakir paus to gaze around his audience. the look of interest and 

expect on each face show the impress his impuls flow of 

languag had made. no interrupt word was spoken, but everi eye 

remain fasten on the lean, keen face peering[pg 104] over long slender 

shank and hand-clasp knees. the narrat continued: 

"in those day i had twenti retain at my call, and these men i 

command when i rode forth to servic with a certain nawab, from whom i 

held my land for the feudal servic i thus performed. it was my fate to 

take part in mani a fight and in mani a foray, and to send mani a man to 

his doom. but god had ordain it so; the fault was not mine. 

"well, it befel that a certain citi was given over to sack and carnage, 

for the word had gone forth that the onli way to break the power of it 

hindu occup was to demolish their temples, destroy their idols, and 

therebi show the impot of their fals god to protect them." 

the rajput drew himself up proudly, and a flush of resent stole over 

his face. but the moslem fanatic, unconsci now of anyth but his 

reminisc of the past, went on unheed and unabashed: 

"it was toward the hour of sunset when a bodi of our soldieri broke into 

a templ devot to the worship of siva the destroyer. we had batter 

in the heavi wooden door that protect the inner court, and within the 

threshold a score or more of priest fell to our swords, and a dozen 

danc girl as well, attend on the idols—self-slain these women, 

for when they saw that there was no quarter for the men they rush on 

us like femal panther and flung themselv on our drip blades." 

the hindu listen were visibl disturb and af[pg 105]fect by this cold 

recit of bloodi deeds. the hand of the rajput clench and unclench 

themselv nervously, and the merchant gave a deep, guttur groan of 

horror as he flung the end of his robe over his face as if to shut out a 

vision of sacrileg and shame. 

"it was written in the beginning, nay befor creation it was written," 

murmur the moslem astrologer, quoting, in courteous sympathy, the 

familiar formula of his faith. "and as your priest themselv say," he 

added, address himself more particular to the rajput, "'the destini 

of each man is irrevoc inscrib on his forehead by the hand of 

brahma himself.'" 

the rajput bow his head in acquiesc silence, and as the fakir 

proceed with his stori the trader also regain his composur and 

withdrew the cover from his face. 

"when the shadow of night fell, the templ made a bonfir that 

illumin the scene of pillag go on all around. the big idol of 

loath aspect had been thrown down, broken to pieces, and despoil of 

their jewel and the heavi plate of gold that encumb them. our 

soldier had swarm out of the building, past a tank to the hous of 

some priest beyond. not one singl custodian of the templ survived, 

and i stood alon in the outer courtyard, watch in idl fashion the 

tongu of flame lick the beam and rafter and paint-bedaub wall 

of the wreck edifice. 

"then did my eye chanc to light on a small idol[pg 106] in the passage-way 

between the two courtyard of the temple, set in a deep niche, on which 

account it had escap the notic of the despoilers. it was the familiar 

elephant-head idol of the hindus, ganapati, as i knew they call him, 

their god of wisdom and the remov of obstacl accord to their 

creed. 

"even as i looked, methought that the eye of the idol twinkl 

know and entreat at me. after a moment i saw that this fanci 

was but due to the play of the flame on jewels, comprehend which, i 

said to myself that the littl fat man might perchanc be of some 

consider value. so i pluck him from his resting-place, not without 

difficulty, for the base of the idol was fasten by iron clamp to the 

altar, and onli just in time befor a surg of fire and smoke swept 

through the vestibule. then, without more ado, i carri forth this 

ganapati, wrap in a cotton cloth i had gather from one of the slain 

priests, and tie it to the saddle-bow of my horse, which had been 

stand tether under a tree close at hand. 

"thus did it come about that, a full month later, i was seat in my 

home, in a secret inner chamber that serv me as a treasury, and to 

which the onli access was through the women quarters. and befor me on 

a stool rest the cross-leg figur of the four-arm and 

elephant-head god, fat, complacent, smiling, to all appear 

recov from the fatigu of a journey of near a hundr leagu and 

thorough content amidst his new surround[pg 107]ings. the idol was of 

bronze, and the eyes, which at time gave it such life-lik semblance, 

were cluster of rubi set around with white sapphires. 

"and it follow that, day after day, after the siesta hour, i found 

myself in the compani of this accurs idol—for accurs it came to be, 

bring me misfortun and ruin, as my stori will unfold. no doubt it 

was by my own do that the wrath of allah was brought down upon my 

head. for had not i, a follow of the prophet, and therefor a despis 

of graven imag in everi shape or form, come to treat this monstrous 

and misshapen creature, half man, half beast, as a sort of familiar, 

even greet him on my entri with the word with which i might have 

salut a live unbeliever, may your day be peaceful, spoken in 

goodnatur jest, of course, and without one thought at the time of the 

sacrileg of which i was guilty? yea, i would pat the fat littl fellow 

on the head, and, when the humour seiz me, would show him my hoard of 

gold mohurs, even jingl befor him a bag of silver rupees, or ask his 

opinion on the colour and qualiti of some gem, speak word of 

foolish the while, like a child play with a toy. and when i lay 

back on my cushions, sometim i fanci that the littl jewel eye 

in the eleph head of bronz twinkl at me in merri and friend 

understanding. all which thing i have sinc rememb with bitter 

shame. 
