sign op the cross. 

among the numer symbol of solar worship, besid 

those we have alreadi refer to, there are three 

to which we will direct attention. two of these were of 

astronom signification: the one adopt when the 

spring equinox was in the sign of taurus and shape like 

the letter t, was the model after which the ancient templ 

were built; and the other, shape like the letter x, in refer 

to the angl of 23½ degre made by the cross 

of the eclipt and the celesti equator, is known as st. 

andrew cross. the third, and most import of all the 

symbol of solar worship, in it relat to the christian 

religion, which, have no astronom signification, 

origin in egypt, in refer to the annual inund 

of the river nile. to mark the height to which the water 

should rise to secur an abund harvest, post were 

plant upon it bank to which cross beam were attach 

thus ┼. if the water should rise to the design 

height, it was call "the water of life," or "river 

of life;" and, ultimately, this form of the cross was adopt 

as the symbol of the life to come, or etern life; and the 

ancient astrolog had it engrav upon stone, encircl 

with a hieroglyph inscript to that effect, one of 

which was discov in the ruin of the templ erect 

at alexandria, and dedic to "our lord and saviour 

serapis." 

but, if the water fail to rise to the requir height, 

and the horror of starvat becom the inevit result, 

it was the custom of the peopl to nail to these cross 

symbol personif of the demon of famine. to 

indic the steril of the domain over which he reigned, 

he was repres by the figur of a lean and haggard 

man, with a crown of thorn upon his head; a reed cut 

from the river bank was place in his hands, as his unreal 

sceptre; and, consid the inhabit of judea as the 

most slavish and mean-spirit race in their knowledge, 

they placard this figur with the inscription: "this is 

the king of the jews." thus, to the ancient egyptians, 

this sign of the cross was bless or accurs as it was 

repres with, or without, this figur suspend 

upon it. 

when the roman, or modern, form of christian 

was instituted, the hieroglyph inscript signifi 

the life to come or etern life was substitut by a placard 

nail to the cross with the letter i. n. r. i. inscrib 

upon it, which are the initi of the latin word convey 

the same meaning. but if we would learn how the 

figur of a man came to be suspend upon this form of 

the cross, we must refer to mediaev history, which 

teach that in the year 680, under the pontif of agathon, 

and dure the reign of constantin pogonat, at the 

sixth council of the church, and third at constantinople, it 

was order in canon 82 that "instead of a lamb, the figur 

of a man nail to a cross should be the distinguish 

symbol of the christian religion." now, as this figur 

is repres by that of a lean and haggard man, with a 

crown of thorn upon his head, doe it not look as if the 

old egyptian demon of famin was the model after 

which it was constructed? 

futur reward and punishments. 

in the ancient astrolatry, two differ system of 

futur reward and punish were inculcated; the 

orient or east indian, and the occident or egyptian; 

the former, ignor the resurrect of the body, taught 

but one judgment immedi after death, and the latter 

inculc an individu judgment immedi after 

death, the resurrect of the body, and a general judgment 

at the end of the world, or conclus of the 12,000 

year cycle. 

the orient system. 

consid perfect happi to consist in absolut 

rest, the orient astrolog conceiv a state of etern 

and unconsci repose, equival to soul absorption, 

to which they gave the name of nirvana, into which they 

taught that, by the award of the gods, the soul of the 

righteous, or those who had live what they call "the 

contempl life," would be permit to enter immedi 

after death. but, for the soul of sinners, they invent 

a system of expiatori punish which, known 

as the metempsychosis, or transmigr of souls, taught 

that they would be compel to success anim the 

bodi of beasts, birds, fishes, etc., for a thousand year 

befor be permit to enter the nirvana. 

the occident system. 

in concoct the doctrin of the first judgment the 

egyptian astrologers, ignor the nirvana, inculc 

the futur sentient exist of the soul; and, while retain 

the metempsychoti expiat of the orient system, 

taught that it rewards, and princip punishments, 

would be enjoy or suffer in the under or nether 

world, the exist of which they had conceiv in construct 

their system of nature. this imaginari region, 

known to the egyptian as the amenti, to the greek as 

hades, and to the hebrew as sheol, was divid by an 

impass gulf into the two state of happi and 

miseri which were design in the grecian mytholog 

as the elysium, or elysian fields, and the tartarus. in 

the lower part of the latter was locat the phlegethon, 

or lake of fire and brimstone, the smoke from which ascend 

into an upper apartment. 

in this system it was taught that the soul of the 

two extrem of society, constitut of the righteous 

and the great sinners, would be consign immedi 

after the first judgment, the one to the elysium, and the 

other to the phlegethon, where they were to remain until 

the second or general judgment; while the soul of less 

venial sinners, constitut the greater mass of mankind, 

befor be permit to enter the elysium would be 

compel to suffer the expiatori punish of the 

metempsychosis, or in the upper region, or "smoki row" 

of the tartarus. such was the egyptian purgatory, and 

it denizen constitut "the spirit in prison" refer to 

in i. peter iii. 19, from which the astrolog claim to 

have the power to release, provid their surviv friend 

paid liber for their propitiatori offices; and, from this 

assumption, the clergi of the cathol church deriv the 

idea of say mass for the repos of the soul. these 

doctrin were carri by pythagora from egypt to 

greec about 550 year befor the begin of our era; 

and pass from thenc to rome, the greek and latin 

poet vie with each other in portray hade and the 

joy and terror of it two states. 

the second or general judgment. 

the egyptian astrologers, recogn the soul as 

a materi entity, and conceiv the idea that in the 

futur life it would requir a materi organ for it 

perfect action, taught that at the general judgment it 

would be re-unit to it resurrect body. in conform 

to this belief, job is made to say in chapter xix. 25, 26, 

"i know that my redeem liveth, and that he shall stand 

at the latter day upon the earth; and though worm destroy 

this body, yet in my flesh shall i see god." the 

higher class egyptians, however, fear that their exist 

would continu to be of the same shadowi and intang 

charact after the second judgment, as they believ 

it would be in the amenti, if worm were allow to 

destroy their bodies, hope to preserv them until that 

time by the process of embalming. 

the imaginari event to occur in connect with 

the second judgment, which, constitut the final of the 

plan of redemption, and inculc in what are known as 

the doctrin of second adventism, were to be inaugur 

by an archangel sound a trumpet summon 

the quick and the dead to appear befor the bar of the 

god to receiv their final awards. at the second judgment, 

design in the allegori as "the last day," "day 

of judgment," "great and terribl day of the lord," etc., 

it was taught that the tenth and last saviour would make 

his second advent by descend upon the clouds, and 

after the final awards, the elect be caught up "to meet 

the lord in the air" (i. thes. iv. 17), the heaven and the 

earth would be reduc to chao through the agenc of 

fire. in refer to that grand catastroph we find it 

record in ii. peter iii. 10, that "the heaven shall pass 

away with a great nois and the element shall melt with 

fervent heat, the earth also and the work that are therein 

shall be burn up." 

after the organ of a new heaven and a new earth 

it was taught that upon the latter would descend a beauti 

city, with pear gate and golden streets, call the 

citi of god, the kingdom of god, the kingdom of heaven 

or new jerusalem, in which the host of the redeem 

would, with their lord and saviour, enjoy the millennium, 

or thousand year of happi unalloy with evil; 

and such was the kingdom for the speedi come of 

which the votari of astral worship were taught to pray 

in what is known as the lord prayer. 

accord to the teach of the allegories, there were 

to be no sun, moon or star dure the millennium, their 

author have arrang it so that the light of those luminari 

would not be needed, as we find record in rev. 

xxi. 23, and xxii. 5: "the citi had no need of the 

sun, neither of the moon to shine in it; for the glori of 

god did lighten it," and "there shall be no night there; 

and they need no candle, neither the light of the sun; for 

the lord god giveth them light." it must be remembered, 

when read the fanci idea relat to the citi 

of god, that they were compos by men who, live in 

a veri ignor age, gave free rein to fervid imaginations. 
