

the prophecies. 

the clergi have ever claim that the propheci 

are divin revel of event yet to occur, and have 

incess agit societi by preach their speedi fulfillment, 

we propos to expos the fallaci of their teach 

by show that these scriptur are not the record 

of futur events, divin reavealed, but that they origin 

with the founder of astral worship, who predic 

them upon predetermin event of their own concoction, 

relat to the general judgment, and set up of the 

kingdom of heaven, which were to occur as the final of 

the plan of redempt and from which were deriv the 

doctrin of second adventism; and, in determin the 

exact time when then were to occur, we have but to prove 

that it was coincid with the conclus of the last half 

of the grand cycl of 12,000 years, which, as we have 

shown, was dedic to man as the durat of his race 

on earth. 

as evid that the founder of the jewish or ancient 

christian believed, like the votari of other form 

of astral worship, that the propheci were soon to be fulfilled, 

we find that the new testament, of the origin version 

of which they were the authors, is replet with such 

text as "repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand," 

matt. iv. 17; "there be some stand here which shall 

not tast death till they see the son of man come in his 

kingdom," matt. xxi. 28; "the time is fulfilled, and the 

kingdom of god is at hand," mark i. 15. that the origin 

version of the new testament was compos when the 

vernal equinox was in the sign of ari we are assur by 

reason of the fact that it inculc homag to the lord 

under the symbol of the lamb; and that it was dure the 

last, or 30th degre of that sign, can readili be proven by 

appeal to histori and to astronomy, the former of which 

teach that the jew were remov from judea to alexandria 

twenty-f year befor the access to the throne 

of philadelphus, the second ptolemy, to whom we have 

refer in our preced article, and who, after reign 

thirty-nin years, die 246 year befor the begin of 

our era. by refer to the celesti atlas we will find 

that the vernal equinox will pass out of the sign of pisc 

into that of aquarius, or in the year 1900, and we 

have but to deduct that period of time from 2150, the 

number of year requir for the cardin point to pass 

through one whole sign, to determin that the spring 

equinox pass out of the sign of ari into that of pisc 

250 year befor the begin of our era, or about 2,100 

year ago. now, from the project of the astrolog 

science, we are assur that the last half of the grand cycl 

of 12,000 years, which was allot to man as the durat 

of his race on earth, was made to begin at a time correspond 

to the autumn equinox, when that cardin 

point was pass out of the sign of virgo, and that of necess 

it had to come to an end at a time correspond 

to the vernal equinox, when that cardin point was pass 

out of the sign of aries; from which we know why, at 

the last judgment, the offic of trumpet was assign to 

the archangel gabriel, the genius of spring, and whi it 

was a ram horn with which he was to "toot the crack o' 

doom." 

when the time arriv for the fulfil of the propheci 

we can well imagin that, fear the wrath of the 

lamb, there were weeping, wail and gnash of teeth 

among the terror-stricken sinners, while those who believ 

they had made their call and elect sure were 

look with feverish expect for the second advent of 

their lord and saviour; and, doubtless, cloth with their 

ascens robes, they watch and waited, with ear alert, 

to hear the sound of gabriel trumpet, summon the 

quick, and the dead to the general judgment. but not a 

blast from the archangel ram horn was heard reverber 

along the skies, no lord appear descend 

upon the cloud to meet the elect in the air, and, in the last 

act of the fear drama of "judgment day," the curtain refus 

to be rung down upon a burn world. 

with the non-fulfil of the prophecies, the more 

enlighten element of societi began to scoff at the 

priests, who were temporarili demoralized, but true to 

their decept instincts, soon ralli with the plea of a 

mistak have been made in the calcul base upon 

the prophecies, they undoubt concoct scriptur to 

meet that veri emergency, for, to the taunt of the scoffer 

who, in refer to the second advent of the lord, enquir 

"where is the sign of his coming? for, sinc the 

father fell asleep, all thing continu as they were from 

the begin of creation," they answer that "the lord 

is not slack concern his promise," but "as a thief in the 

night" he would soon come and all thing be fulfilled. see 

ii. peter, chapter iii. 

follow up the histori of this interest subject, 

we find that the founder of modern christianity, to which 

we will refer in our next article, in compos their version 

of the new testament from that of the jewish, or ancient 

christians, made no chang in it verbiag relat to the 

prophecies; but when constantin i., emperor of rome, 

becam the patron of the church, her hierarchy, tire of 

figur upon them, secur a long respit from that troublesom 

subject by claim to have made other calculations, 

which put off the time of fulfil to the year 1000; 

and from histori we learn when the time arriv the whole 

of christendom was fear agit upon the subject: 

sinc then everi generat has been vex with the fallaci 

of second adventism; and the fact of the case justifi 

the charg that the clergy, by teach that the propheci 

refer to event yet to occur, are perpetu a 

most stupend fraud upon christendom, and an earnest 

and effici protest should be inaugur against the 

further agit of the monstrous delus of second adventism, 

which is frighten thousand of weak-mind 

peopl into insan and caus a vast amount of social 

distress. 
