god sol. 

in determin the characterist of the suprem 

divin of astral worship, it must be born in mind that 

it founder taught that he was evolv or engend by 

the father, or first person in the sacr triad, from his 

pure substance, which as we have shown was constitut 

of chao or the primev fire into which they suppos all 

thing were reduc through the agenc of that element 

at the conclus of 12,000 year cycles. hence, design 

that mythic be as the onli begotten of the 

father, they personifi him as god the son, or second 

person in the sacr triad; and recogn the sun as the 

rule star, veri appropri made him the presid 

genius of that luminary, under the titl of god sol. accord 

homag to light as his chief attribute, he is refer 

to in the allegori as "the true light, which lighteth 

everi man that cometh into the world," john i., 9; and, 

although design as the onli begotten of the father, 

his co-exist with him, under the titl of the logo or 

word, is shown in the text which reads, "in the begin 

was the word, and the word was with god, and the 

word was god," john i., 1. 

personifi the principl of good and evil in god 

sol, the ancient astrolog consecr the six divis 

of the 12,000 year cycle, correspond to the reproduct 

month of spring and summer, to him as lord of 

good, and symbol him by the constel of the 

zodiac in which the vernal equinox success occurred, 

as explain hereafter, they dedic the six divis 

of that cycle, correspond to the destruct 

month of autumn and winter, to him as lord of evil, 

and as such, symbol him by the serpent, mark the 

begin of his reign by the constel "serpens," 

place in conjunct with the autumn equinox. 

personifi in him the oppos principl of good and 

evil, he was to the ancient both god and devil, or the 

vari god, who, in relat to the seasons, was describ 

as beauti in spring, power in summer, benefic in 

autumn and terribl in winter. thus under various 

names, intend to repres god sol in relat to the 

diversifi seasons, we find record in the scriptures, or 

solar fables, numer portray of imaginari conflicts, 

in which the evil principle, triumph dure autumn 

and winter, is conquer at the vernal equinox by the 

good principle, who, bring back equal day and nights, 

restor the harmoni of nature. 

the etern enmiti between the principl of good 

and evil, as manifest in the divers of the seasons, 

we find portray in the constel hercul and 

draco, place in the northern heavens, in which the heel 

of the former, repres one of the most ancient of the 

imaginari incarn of god sol, to which we will refer 

hereafter, is rest upon the head of the latter, as refer 

to in genesi iii., 15, which make god sol, or the 

lord god, say to the serpent, "i will put enmiti between 

thee and the woman, and between thi seed and her seed; 

it shall bruis thi head, and thou shalt bruis his heel." 

the woman allud to in this text is the virgo of the 

zodiac, as will be made appar hereafter. 

of all the divin of the ancient mytholog god 

sol was the onli one distinguish by the exalt titl of 

lord or lord god, for the reason that he was made the 

organ of chao and governor of heaven and earth. 

hence, have constitut him the lord of light and darkness, 

as well as good and evil, the ancient astrolog in 

compos the solar fabl made him say of himself, "i 

form the light and creat darkness; i make peac and 

creat evil, i the lord do all these things," isaiah xlv., 7. 

"shall there be evil in a city, and the lord hath not 

done it?" amo iii., 6. besid the titl of lord or 

lord god, the solar divin is also design in the 

allegori as the lord of lord and the king of kings, 

the invincible, the mighti god, etc. 

subject the mythic genius of the sun, in his appar 

annual revolut round the earth, to the four 

stage of human life from infanc to old age, the ancient 

magi fix the natal day of the young god sol at the winter 

solstice, the virgo of the zodiac was made his mother, 

and the constel in conjunct with her, which is 

now known as bootes, but ancient call arcturus, his 

foster father. he is repres as hold in leash two 

hunt dog and drive ursa major, or the great bear, 

around the north pole, thus show that the origin 

occup of the celesti foster father of the young god 

sol was that of a bear driver, and that his sons, refer to 

in job xxxviii., 32, are the dog asterion and chara. it 

will be observ that virgo is repres in our illustr 

with a child in her arms, for the reason that she is so 

repres in the ancient zodiacs, and the fact will be 

readili conced that she is the onli virgin who could 

give birth to a child and be a virgin still. 

the ancient cosmogony. 

specul relat to the order in which chao had 

been organized, the ancient astrolog construct a 

cosmogony, which divid the labor of god the son, or 

second person in the trinity, into six period of a thousand 

year each; and which, answer to the six divis 

of the 12,000 year cycl correspond to the reproduct 

month of spring and summer, taught that in the first 

period he made the earth; in the second, the firmament; 

in the third, vegetation; in the fourth, the sun and 

moon and "the star also;" in the fifth, the animals, fishes, 

birds, etc., and in the sixth, man. 

that veget was made befor the sun was not an 

inconsist idea to the origin of the ancient cosmogony. 

they imagin that the heat and light, eman 

from the elementari fire, were suffici to stimul it 

growth, after which god the son gather it togeth and 

made the celesti luminaries. in the solar fabl this 

imaginari element is call the fire-ether, or sacr fire of 

the stars. 
