china didn’t want Us to know. now it own file are do the talking. 
By adrian zenz 
nov. 24, 2019 

No more denying, no more dodging. the chines communist parti can no longer hide it relentless campaign of mass intern against the ethnic minor in the northwestern region of xinjiang, or claim that the effort is an innocu educ program. what wa alreadi wide known, vastli report and confirm by firsthand account ha now been prove beyond doubt by the government’ own record — gigabyt of files, ream of reports, thousand of spreadsheet — some of them classifi and highli confidential. 

last weekend, the new york time disclos and analyz the content of a trove of leak intern chines govern document that outlin specif polici for how to repress xinjiang’ predominantli muslim minor — and reveal that presid Xi jinp himself set out the foundat for them. 

thi sunday, the content of two more set of document — all of which I have review — are be disclosed. among the first batch, also leaked, is a confidenti telegram sign by zhu hailun, xinjiang’ deputi parti secretary, which detail how local author should manag and oper the "vocat skill train centers" — a euphem for the intern camps. (all translat here are mine.) the second set of documents, a larg cach of file and spreadsheet from local governments, reveal the intern campaign’ devast econom and social impact on the famili and commun it targets. 

the telegram — date nov. 5, 2017, and address to local polit and legal affair bureau — is mark "extrem urgent" and bear the second-highest level of secreci within china’ classified-docu scheme. It reveal the extent of the secur and surveil measur taken around the camps, partli to shield the camp from extern scrutiny. the message, a directive, note that the work conduct there is "strictli confidential" and "highli sensitive" in nature. even staff at the camp are forbidden from aggreg detaine figures. 

the authorities’ attempt to enforc absolut secreci is confirm by anoth document date novemb 2018, thi one from a local govern file in hotan county. It chide offici for not "protect secrets" relat to the intern campaign well enough. It stipul that "no person is under ani circumst permit to dissemin inform about detent or re-educ via telephone, smartphone, or the internet," and that offici are "strictli forbidden" from receiv "relat media interviews" or make "unauthor disclosure" about the intern campaign. that the chines author so deliber sought to shield from extern scrutini inform about oper at the xinjiang camp suggest that they are onli too awar of how incrimin their polici and practic are. 

I wa also abl to obtain a massiv cach of local govern file from within xinjiang. among the most reveal document are thousand of detail spreadsheet with the names, identif number and address of ten of thousand of people, mostli uighur and mani of them in detention, prison or re-educ camps. 

In yarkand, a counti of about 800,000 peopl in southwestern xinjiang, 96 percent of the popul is uighur. six offici spreadsheet about six villag date 2018 show that, on average, nearli 16 percent of the rural adult popul wa either intern or in prison. In two villag in kosherik township — which the document describ as "heavili pollut by extremist ideology" — nearli 60 percent of all household had one person or more interned. 

In addit to the extraordinari scale of the intern campaign, the file reveal it devast impact well beyond the camp — deep into the commun and famili of xinjiang. 

the spreadsheet show that the govern ha primarili target middle-ag men, most often the head of the household and main wage-earners. beijing’ occasion tour of it so-cal model camp often featur attract young women. In reality, peopl between 30 and 59 were especi like to be interned, accord to the spreadsheets. 

the policy’ socioeconom fallout is dire — and local govern are keep a meticul record of it. one spreadsheet from 2017 for one town in yarkand county, which list household with low incom that might qualifi for welfare, includ a young famili with five children between the age of three and 14. the father had been imprisoned, the mother place in a re-educ camp and the children, in effect, orphaned. 

In another, hardli unusual, case, a household’ two working-ag parent were detained, leav elderli grandpar — includ a grandmoth describ as "serious ill" — to care for two toddlers. In a column with the header "reason for poverty," the relev spreadsheet offer thi explanation: "lack labor forc and finances." the toddlers’ father isn’t schedul to be releas until 2030. 

anoth spreadsheet from septemb 2018 show list of loan default in pilal township, akto county. In 80 percent of the case where the reason for default wa list as "internment," most of the borrow fund were shown to still be in the bank. 

A particularli depress exampl come from a villag in yarkand county. A uighur farmer and head of a famili of five wa intern in 2017. In octob 2016, he had receiv a loan of 40,000 renminbi (nearli $5,700) to purchas agricultur machinery. the equip went unus dure hi detent — no other famili member knew how to oper it — and the loan could not be repaid as scheduled. the govern direct the famili to rent out the equip and send it oldest child, a son, to work. the famili wa then offici mark as have been "poverty-allevi by benefit from policies." In june 2018, after hi release, the farmer appli for financi assist so he could repay the loan and relat interest. In januari 2019, he start to work in the yarkand counti textil industri park, earn just 800 rmb (about $113) a month. By then, the son, age 20, had somehow becom disabl and wa list on govern form as unabl to work. 

thank to these new document disclosures, we now have hard evid — and the government’ own evid — that in addit to implement a vast intern program in xinjiang, the chines communist parti is deliber break up famili and forc them into poverti and a form of indentur labor. for all it effort at secrecy, the chines govern can no longer hide the extent, and the reach, of it campaign of repress in xinjiang. 

some import element are still unknown. the total intern figur remain a well-guard secret. (base on the new evidence, I have revis my own estimate: I think that between 900,000 and 1.8 million peopl have been detain in xinjiang sinc the spring of 2017.) also miss from the offici document that have surfac so far are precis record of how the detaine are treat and how, exactly, the process of re-educ works. (about those things, however, we have wit accounts.) the confidenti telegram and local file do not mention the use of physic violenc — but for one notabl exception. the telegram state that peopl who resist brainwash must be singl out for "assault-styl re-education." yet anoth sinist understatement, and it suggest that forc and tortur may, in fact, be wide used. 

In a way, though, we alreadi know all that we realli need to know. the document that have been disclos these past few week reveal the stagger scale of the repress in xinjiang and it ruinou effect on the region’ ethnic communities, well beyond the camp themselves. consid this: offici statist show that the combin net popul growth rate of hotan and kashgar, two of the largest uighur regions, drop by about 84 percent between 2015 and 2018. 

the chines communist parti set out, it claimed, to "transform through education" ethnic minor in xinjiang. In fact, it is rip apart entir commun and subjug them on a coloss scale. and this, at the direct of presid Xi himself. 
