devin nune Is daniel steel 
By frank bruni 
nov. 15, 2019 

I came to your hous with a gun. At least imagin I did. I tie you to a chair, took a step back and repeatedli fired. but my arm twitched; everi bullet missed. meanwhile, you slip your knot and fled. 

By the reason of repres jim jordan, I did absolut noth wrong. 

you’r alive! not a drop of blood on you! An unconsumm crime is no crime at all, or so jordan, one of the republican party’ more rococo philosophers, argu on wednesday in defens of presid trump. ukrain got it militari aid; trump did not get hi investig of the bidens. To jordan, that’ proof of innocence. 

To a normal person, that’ proof of incompetence, which doesn’t exoner the presid but should definit reassur us. trump’ an autocrat all right, but the silver line is that he’ an inept one. all strongmen should be thi weak. 

and all of us should have the mental limber and ethic elast that jordan and hi troup possess. they’r the cirqu du soleil of c’est la vie. i’v never seen anyth like the republican effort to defend trump, which chart the frontier of creativity, explor the outer limit of audacity, mutat like the monster in the "alien" movi and restor my faith in american ingenuity. 

My faith in washington, too. I long fear that polit had stop attract the country’ top talent, but some of our finest storytel are work in the unit state capitol. john grisham ha noth on jordan. daniel steel can’t hold a candl to devin nunes. 

nune wa among the first republican to pipe up on day 1 of the impeach inquiry’ public hearings, held by the hous intellig committee, and it wasn’t just hi narr ambit that mesmer me. It wa hi bold descent into hi thesaurus, a sort of semant spelunking. 

the hearings, he said, mark the "piti finale" and "spectacular implosion" of the "russia hoax." they amount to a "scorched-earth war against presid trump" that wa "horrif one-sided" and "preposterous." thi "low-rent ukrainian sequel" had alreadi involv a "closed-door audit process in a cultlik atmospher in the basement of the capitol." cultlike, no less! that’ a more fit descript of republicans’ obeis to the presid and launder of hi wrongdoing, but then one hallmark of trump and hi sycoph is the project of their own flaw onto their adversaries. 

nunes’ best bit on wednesday and then again on friday wa hi portray of trump’ democrat detractor as amateur pornograph intent on find nude pictur of the president. i’m fairli confid that no one is intent on find nude photograph of the president. 

but at thi point it wouldn’t surpris me if trump himself tweet one out. would that be ani crazier than what he did on friday, as mari yovanovitch, the former ambassador to ukraine, testified? 

there she was, a pained, stoic state depart amalgam of erin brockovich and norma rae, and trump use hi twitter account to call her an intern wreck ball, single-handedli respons for the mess that is mogadishu. (one of her post befor ukrain wa somalia.) 

thi accomplish noth in the way of silenc her but rais the prospect of wit intimid be ad to ani articl of impeachment. clearly, the republican respons to thi impeach inquiri isn’t some eleg strategy. it’ an epic snit. 

it leitmotif is hypocrisy. nune open friday’ hear by lament all the import govern busi that wa on hold becaus democrat prefer to tortur trump. I somehow miss hi plea that lawmak keep their eye on the ball and devot themselv to practic problem-solv when the presid stir up one cultur war after anoth just to chang the topic of a given news cycl or hear a ralli audience’ roar. but along come the impeach inquiry, and suddenli hous republican are stymi steward of levelhead government. 

they’r dismiss wednesday’ and friday’ hearings, held in public, as pure theater. but they complain about the closed-door testimoni beforehand. they’r shrug off the account of william taylor, georg kent and other as hearsay. but the white hous ha decre that such firsthand wit as mick mulvaney not cooperate. 

one moment, mulvaney publicli acknowledg the shakedown of ukraine’ president, insist that it’ how foreign polici is done and tell the media to "get over it." the next, he tell the media that they’r reprehens fabulist for report exactli what he said. one moment, republican complet ignor trump’ infam juli 25 phone call and claim that there’ no direct evid of hi bulli and — yes, nanci pelosi is right — hi bribery. the next, they acknowledg the call, sigh over trump’ behavior but say that it’ hardli impeachable. 

In fairness, that’ onli slightli more confus to me than the democrats’ perspect on the call, a definit piec of evid that they may be inadvert downgrading. usually, a process like the one that they’v been engag in over the last seven week is about find a smoke gun. thi process began with the smoke gun, and the farther the democrat travel from it — eight wit thi come week? — the more they risk impli that it wasn’t enough. 

but for curiou behavior, republican have them easili beat, and their conduct dure the impeach inquiri is the culmin and apotheosi of their conduct sinc trump wrap up the republican presidenti nomination: an utter sellout of principl and a pure embrac of fiction to pacifi an emot infant and keep him from spit up on them. 

dure wednesday’ hearing, republican again suggest — while maintain straight face — that trump’ foremost concern wa corrupt in ukraine. steve castor, the republicans’ chief counsel, also gave one of the president’ most conveni (and thu favorite) conspiraci theori a fresh whirl, posit that perhap american intellig offici had it all wrong and ukraine, not russia, hack democrat email in 2016 and otherwis interf in the election. 

how would thi make trump’ demand that ukrainian smear joe biden in return for million of dollar of already-author aid o.k.? It wouldn’t — but what a juici distraction! and what a perfect gateway for castor’ attempt to get taylor to testifi that trump legitim believ that ukrainian were, in castor’ words, "out to get him." 

tri to follow along. not onli doe incompet equal innocence, but also paranoia is exculpatory. same goe for the rel dastardli of a deed, which becom innocu if it’ not maxim obnoxious. that’ my takeaway from when castor, refer to rudi giuliani’ shenanigans, ask taylor: "thi irregular channel of diplomacy, it’ not as outlandish as it could be — is that correct?" clarenc darrow, move over. anoth geniu of jurisprud demand space in the histori books. 

all that wednesday’ hear lack wa lindsey graham. yes, I know, he serv in the senate, and the hear took place in the house. but he’ the standard-bear for trump-coddl contortionism, the reign king of the kind of contradict that were on display. 

presag jordan’ approach at the hearing, graham a week and a half ago shrug off the impeach inquiri by call trump’ polici toward ukrain so "incoherent" that the presid and hi minion "seem to be incap of form a quid pro quo." 

He said at one point that he’d be open to ani evid that back up such a quid pro quo, but then, more recently, he announc that he wouldn’t and couldn’t be bother to follow the testimony, becaus he’d alreadi made up hi mind. As billi binion of reason magazin noted, "graham ha bemoan the democrats’ lack of transparency, onli to shield hi eye onc the curtain wa lifted." 

mayb graham will storm the hear room yet, an effigi of hunter biden in tow. that would match the digniti of what we’v seen from republican so far. 
