georg soros: mark zuckerberg should not Be in control of facebook 
By georg soro 
jan. 31, 2020 

At a dinner last week in davos, switzerland, I wa ask if I thought facebook wa behav more respons today than it did dure the 2016 presidenti election. 

"not at all," I answered. "facebook help trump to get elect and I am afraid that it will do the same in 2020." I explain that there is a longstand law — section 230 of the commun decenc act — that protect social media platform from legal liabil for defam and similar claims. facebook can post deliber mislead or fals statement by candid for public offic and others, and take no respons for them. 

I went on to say that there appear to be "an inform mutual assist oper or agreement develop between trump and facebook" in which facebook will help presid trump to get re-elect and mr. trump will, in turn, defend facebook against attack from regul and the media. 

"thi is just plain wrong," a facebook spokesman told busi insider. 

I disagree. I believ that mr. trump and facebook’ chief executive, mark zuckerberg, realiz that their interest are align — the president’ in win elections, mr. zuckerberg’ in make money. 

let’ look at the evidence: In 2016, facebook provid the trump campaign with embed staff who help to optim it advertis program. (hillari clinton’ campaign wa also approached, but it declin to emb a facebook team in her campaign’ operations.) brad parscale, the digit director of mr. trump’ 2016 campaign and now hi campaign manag for 2020, said that facebook help mr. trump and gave him the edge. thi seem to have mark the begin of a special relationship. 

more recently, direct contact between the two men ha rais seriou questions. mr. zuckerberg met with mr. trump in the oval offic on sept. 19, 2019. We don’t know what wa said. but from an interview on the sidelin at the world econom forum on jan. 22, we do know what mr. trump said about the meeting: mr. zuckerberg "told me that i’m no. 1 in the world in facebook." mr. trump appar had no problem with facebook’ decis not to fact-check polit ads. "i’d rather have him just do whatev he is go to do," mr. trump said of mr. zuckerberg. "he’ done a hell of a job, when you think of it." 

the president’ 2016 campaign mount a robust data-centr commun effort and ha continu to build on that program over the past few years, use facebook as a key part of their strategy. 

facebook’ decis not to requir fact-check for polit candidates’ advertis in 2020 ha flung open the door for false, manipulated, extrem and incendiari statements. such content is reward with prime placement and promot if it meet facebook-design algorithm standard for popular and engagement. 

what’ more, facebook’ design tend to obscur the sourc of inflammatori and fals content, and fail to adequ punish those who spread fals information. nor doe the compani effect warn those who are expos to lies. 

I express my fear that with facebook’ help, mr. trump will win the 2020 election. the recent hire of a right-w figur to help manag it news tab ha reinforc those fears. In my comment in davos, I also point out that facebook ha been use to caus wors damag in other countri than the unit states. In myanmar, for example, militari personnel use facebook to help incit the public against the rohingya, who were target in a militari assault of incred cruelti includ murder, rape and the burn of entir villages: around 700,000 rohingya fled to bangladesh. the intern court of justic in the hagu is current deliber whether these atroc qualifi as genocide. 

but within the last year, facebook ha introduc new featur on it mobil app that actual intensifi the fire of incendiari polit attack — make them easier and quicker to propagate. the system is cost-fre to the poster and revenue-gener for facebook. good for facebook, bad for democracy. 

the respons approach is self-evident. facebook is a publish not just a neutral moder or "platform." It should be held account for the content that appear on it site. 

speak at a cocktail parti in davo on jan. 22, facebook’ chief oper officer, sheryl sandberg, repeat the worn silicon valley cliché that facebook is tri to make the world a better place. but facebook should be judg by what it does, not what it says. 

I repeat and reaffirm my accus against facebook under the leadership of mr. zuckerberg and ms. sandberg. they follow onli one guid principle: maxim profit irrespect of the consequences. one way or another, they should not be left in control of facebook. 
