gone with the windsor 
By maureen dowd 
jan. 11, 2020 

I never had much use for the queen. 

mayb it’ the irish in me. As winston churchil said: "we’v alway found the irish a bit odd. they refus to be english." 

Or mayb it’ the american in me. We did go to an aw lot of troubl to break away from that corgi-and-gin-lov racket 244 year ago. 

At some viscer level, though, america must regret be torn away from the royal family. how els to explain our endur fascin with dynasties? have spent my career cover four dysfunct polit dynasties, I rebel more than ever at the idea that biolog entitl you to authority. 

the ghost of diana gone rogu anim the fractur fairi tale of meghan and harry, and their intemper attempt to upend centuri of starchi rule and break away from the firm. 

princess di’ danger tango with the tabloid left harri with no tast to play that game again, especi with streak of racism against markl ad to the mix. He recent confess that everi click or flash of a camera brought memori of hi mother’ death race back into hi mind. 

I cover diana’ first trip as the princess of wale to america in 1985. she seem happi then, in that year befor charl resum hi relationship with camilla parker bowles. she and the princ share amus eye contact, wink and teas remarks. 

nanci reagan plan an even of candlelit danc at the white hous worthi of a 24-year-old cinderella in a midnight blue velvet gown. mrs. reagan arrang for the marin band to play "night fever" as john travolta spun a euphor diana around the floor. ("she’ a great littl mover," he said afterward.) 

I wonder how princ charl would deal with a young wife with so much star power, absorb so much attention. We were all mesmer when she tuck her chin down in that shi pose and cast that modest yet sauci look up at us. 

the answer was: He did not deal with it well. twelv year later, when the unimagin tragedi hit, the royal ice cube were furiou at the expect that they should emot for the woman who had publicli rip the monarchi as a bloodless, soulless gang and christen herself the prison of wales. 

the firm wa out of it depth then, and it is again now. how can the queen and princ philip and princ charl possibl understand the desir of meghan and harri to rebrand as a goopish lifestyl enterprise? the news that they have appli to trademark hundr of items, from sock to hoodies, under the "sussex royal" logo make walli simpson’ exil in the bahamas, spent match the color on the wall to her face powder, seem posit monastic. 

can you realli call yourself "financi independent" when all you’r do is cash in on the royal name? 

given the state of the world and the implos of the british empir — with scot onc more contempl an off ramp, irish uniti in play, australia on fire and bori johnson trick the queen into suspend parliament in a brexit ploy — it is hard to feel sorri for the duchess of sussex complain that her diamond are heavy. the patho for markle, trap in a design cage, goe onli so far. 

it’ easi for royal to come to north america, where they are lavishli embrac as celebr without all those peski restrict about class and role. (see "the crown" episod about a wild, imbib princess margaret charm l.b.j.) 

still, I think meghan markl should have wield her woke where it is most need — in buckingham palace. she could have channel the obamas, who did a magnific job of rise abov racist taunt and work within the institut to imprint a new imag of racial possibl in america. 

markl had alreadi success brought a refresh dose of semi-rad chic to the royal family. her visit to a mosqu that hous london displac by the grenfel tower fire led to her put out a 2018 cookbook, the proce of which went to the victims. 

At it best, the monarchi ha been abl to lift up people, as it did dure the blitz in world war ii. 

I saw that abil to alchem emot and opinion when I cover the queen on her visit to ireland in 2011, the first by a british monarch in a century. It wa imposs not to be impress watch her speak gaelic and offer regret about how britain had made ireland suffer, bow her head at the scene of bloodi sunday and the garden of remembrance, the sacr ground for slain irish patriots. 

the irish start out skeptical, but by the end of her visit, mani were call her "betty" on twitter. 

the queen of england hold out the idea that she and her famili should have some sort of vestigi moral authority. but with the princ andrew imbroglio in the seraglio of jeffrey epstein, and with harry’ run for the hollywood hills, it is clear that mani in her famili are not interest in moral authority. 

the collaps of the author of the british monarchi mirror the collaps of author generally, scar by year of scandal about clergymen abus children, athlet beat up girlfriend and univers offici accept bribes. 

and yet, even if the royals’ role in the cultur is now akin to the kardashians, it wasn’t cool for meghan and harri to pant the 93-year-old queen, defi her instructions, dump their megxit plan on instagram and intensifi the sad split between the brothers. (if ever there wa a time for some dri gin. …) 

what’ the rush to give up real influenc to be an instagram influencer? besides, who unfollow their own grandmother? 
