how to avoid the coronavirus? wash your hand 
By elisabeth rosenth 
jan. 28, 2020 

american are watch with alarm as a new coronaviru spread in china and case pop up in the unit states. they are barrag with inform about what kind of mask are best to prevent viral spread. student are hand out mask in seattle. mask have run out in brazo county, tex. 

hang on. 

i’v work as an emerg room physician. and as a new york time correspond in china, I cover the sar outbreak in 2002 and 2003 dure which a novel coronaviru first detect in guangdong sicken more than 8,000 peopl and kill more than 800. My two children attend elementari school in beij throughout the outbreak. 

here are my main takeaway from that experi for ordinari peopl on the ground: 

1. wash your hand frequently. 

2. don’t go to the offic when you are sick. don’t send your kid to school or day care when they are ill, either. 

notic I didn’t say anyth about masks. have a mask with you as a precaut make sens if you are in the midst of an outbreak, as I wa when out report in the field dure those months. but wear it constantli is anoth matter. I don a mask when visit hospit where sar patient had been housed. I wore it in the market where wild anim that were the suspect sourc of the outbreak were be butchered, blood droplet flying. I wore it in crowd enclos space that I couldn’t avoid, like airplan and trains, as I travel to citi involv in the outbreak, like guangzhou and hong kong. you never know if the guy cough and sneez two row ahead of you is ill or just ha an allergy. 

but outdoors, infect don’t spread well through the air. those photo of peopl walk down street in china wear mask are dramat but uninformed. and rememb if a mask has, perchance, intercept virus that would have otherwis end up in your body, then the mask is contaminated. so, in theory, to be protect mayb you should use a new one for each outing. 

the simpl mask are better than nothing, but not all that effective, sinc they don’t seal well. for anyon tempt to go out and buy the gold standard, n95 respirators, note that they are uncomfortable. breath is more work. it’ hard to talk to people. On one long flight at the height of the outbreak, on which my few fellow passeng were mostli epidemiologist tri to solv the sar puzzle, mani of us (includ me) wore our mask for the first coupl of hour on the flight. then the food and beverag cart came. 

though virus spread through droplet in the air, a bigger worri to me wa alway transmiss via what doctor call "fomites," infect items. A viru get on a surfac — a shoe or a doorknob or a tissue, for example. you touch the surfac and then next touch your face or rub your nose. it’ a great way to acquir illness. So after walk in the anim markets, I remov my shoe care and did not take them into the hotel room. and of cours I wash my hand immediately. 

remember, by all indic sars, which kill about 10 percent of those infected, wa a deadlier viru than the new coronaviru circul now. So keep thing in perspective. 

face with sars, mani foreign chose to leav beij or at least to send their children back to the unit states. our famili stayed, kid included. We want them with us and didn’t want them to miss school, especi dure what would be their final year in china. but equal import in make the decis wa that the risk of get sar on an airplan or in the airport seem greater than be smart and care while stay put in beijing. 

and we were: I stop take my kid to indoor playground or crowd mall or delici but dens pack neighborhood beij restaurants. out of an abund of caution we cancel a famili vacat to cambodia — though my fear wa less about catch sar on the flight than that one of the kid would have a fever from an ear infect upon our return at a border screening, and would be stuck in a prolong quarantin in china. We instead took a vacat within china, where we carri mask with us but didn’t use them except on a short domest flight. 

In time, dure the sar outbreak, the govern shut down theater and school in beijing, as it is do now in mani chines citi becaus these virus are more easili transmit in such crowd places. 

but there wa also a lot of irrat behavior: enter a villag on the way to a hike near the great wall, our car wa stop by local who had set up a roadblock to check the temperatur of all passengers. they use an oral thermomet that wa onli minim clean after each use. what a great way to spread a virus. 

the intern school of beijing, where my children were students, wa one of the few in the capit — perhap the onli one — that stay open throughout the sar outbreak, though the class were emptier, sinc so mani kid had depart to their home countries. It wa a studi but brave move, sinc a parent at the school had gotten sar at the veri begin of the outbreak on a flight back from hong kong. she recov fine, but it wa close to home and famili were scared. 

the school institut a bunch of simpl precautionari policies: a stern note to parent remind them not to send a child to school who wa sick and warn them that student would be screen for fever with ear thermomet at the school door. there wa no share of food at lunch. the teacher led the kid in frequent hand wash throughout the day at classroom sinks, while sing a prolong "hand wash song" to ensur they did more than a cursori pass under the faucet with water only. 

If a famili left beij and came back, the child would have to stay at home for an extend period befor return to class to make sure they hadn’t caught sar elsewhere. 

with those precaut in place, I observ someth of a public health miracle: not onli did no child get sars, but it seem no student wa sick with anyth at all for month on end. No stomach bugs. No common colds. attend wa more or less perfect. 

the world health organ declar the sar outbreak contain in juli 2003. but, oh, that those habit persisted. the best first-lin defens against sar or the new coronaviru or most ani viru at all are the one that grandma and common sens taught us, after all. 
