instead of a gener cultur war, let’ fight the rich 
By farhad manjoo 
nov. 6, 2019 

gener are pretti bogus. the label we use to casual slice up societi — boomer, millennial, gen X, gen Z — are a nearli useless way of think about politics, cultur or busi in america. the veri idea that ten of million of peopl across differ class and race and geographi might hold similar view on a rang of subject just becaus they happen to be born dure the same 20-year span of american histori — the whole thing sound a bit too much like astrology, doesn’t it? 

In fact, demographers, whose profess came up with these labels, constantli stress the limit and complic of gener analysis. gener can be use for observ broad-scal chang in attitud over long period of time, but they break down into cliché and stereotyp when they are use to make specif observ about the world. 

market and much of the media tend to be quit careless in how we wield gener labels. We invest these categori with too much meaning, often ascrib to gener ideolog what is more like a product of age, wealth and a varieti of other factors. consider, for instance, the absurd parad of stori about how millenni are "killing" variou industries, from golf to wed rings. they collect paint young peopl as be somehow philosoph defici as consum rather than simpli not veri wealthy. 

Of course, I would dismiss generations: i’m a gen xer, and our whole thing is reject labels. 

On the other hand, I might be a boomer, becaus late i’v been nurs a crazi conspiraci theori about gener analysis: I think it’ a plot by the man to keep us from chang the world. focus on gener differ distract the mass from go after more salient differ in societi — especi the power held by the wealthy, whatev their age. 

all of thi explain whi i’m not realli o.k. with "ok boomer," the latest ralli cri in the perman war between the young and the old. As taylor lorenz report in the time last week, "ok boomer" is a meme start by teenag to shred older peopl who express a broad rang of antiqu idea about the world. (the grammar snoot in me — and my copi editor — would prefer the meme render as "o.k., boomer," with period and a comma, but of cours that’ not how teenag write.) 

At first glance, the phrase — which, sinc lorenz’ report, ha been co-opt and repeat into cring ubiqu by just about everi other gener — is the perfect respons to your racist grandpa on facebook and your liber uncl on wall street who is veri worri about medicar for all. it’ knowing, cutting, dismiss and almost imposs to grace recov from: "ok boomer" and you’r done. 

At the risk of sound like a patron old, i’ll conced that "ok boomer" mean well, and I don’t begrudg teenag their anger. they are certainli right that over sever gener and across polit ideologies, the holder of polit and econom power in america total screw thing up for the future. boomer leader (and their forebears) underinvest in long-term infrastructur and safeti net and econom and environment rules. they overindulg in war and tax cut and system deregulation. they long overlook racial and gender bias, sexual harass and just about everi other form of system discrimination. they brought the countri and the world to the sorri place we’r in now. 

yet it’ a mistak to blame all boomer for the sin of the most power among them. As a taunt, "ok boomer" overlook the vast differ within the postwar gener — there are rich boomer and poor boomers, far-left boomer and far-right ones, boomer who are fight for right and those who are hopelessli stuck in yesteryear. "ok boomer" also let other gener off the hook, neglect the fact that millenni keep gain greater econom and polit power and that some of them are start to act and sound like archetyp boomers. 

teenag themselv seem to recogn thi — "boomer is state of mind," lorenz write of how the young think of the term. On the phone, she point to further evid of the flexibl of "boomer" as a taunt. On twitter, she notes, pete buttigieg, the youngest of the 2020 democrat candidates, is frequent dismiss as radiat big boomer energy. even though he’ a millennial, there’ someth about hi rhetor style that feel antiquated. and buttigieg’ boomerish- onli underlin the hollow of the whole idea of gener stereotyping. It suggest a more profit polit path for young people: instead of cancel an entir generation, whi not set your sight on a smaller, more specif group, one that bear more direct complic in america’ widen dystopia? 

not to go full chapo trap hous on you, but yes, i’m talk about the wealthy. instead of "ok boomer," how about "ok billionaire"? 

i’v been preoccupi with billionair for much of the year. In february, I argu that we should "abolish" billionair and wannab billionair becaus they exert outsiz control over america’ resources. insofar as they highlight the unforgiv way that wealthi peopl have rig the polit system, billionair are both a conveni and an appropri polit target of the moment. 

On just about ani import issu of the day, from climat chang to mass incarcer to defeat donald trump, meaning polit chang will come about onli through cross-gener coordin — it will requir concern peopl of all age to band togeth to alter the statu quo. one reason thi is difficult in america is we’v been condit to think that peopl who are much older or younger than we are might be complet alien beings: everi millenni is an avocado- virtu signal who won’t listen to oppos views; all boomer are white, affluent, selfish racist who can’t recogn their privilege; and the two side will never see eye to eye on anything. 

but that is plainli false. last month, repres alexandria ocasio-cortez, who’ 30, endors 78-year-old berni sander for presid — not despit hi age, but becaus sanders’ "decad of work" on progress caus wa a sign of hi fidel to the movement. In the summer, ocasio-cortez met greta thunberg, the teenag climat activist who ha scold older peopl for ignor the issue. among other things, the pair discuss how age wa simpli a mind-set. "you can be much older and still part of a youth movement if you refus to do thing just becaus that’ the way they’v alway been done," ocasio-cortez told thunberg. 

thi is the sort of coalit we need to build a better futur — not gen Z fight boomers, but a coalit of 16-year-old and 30-year-old and 78-year-old join togeth to demolish the rich who run the world today. the stake are too great; we can’t afford to have ani gener sit thi one out. 
