the american health care industri Is kill peopl 
By farhad manjoo 
dec. 4, 2019 

won’t you spare a thought for america’ medic debt collectors? and while you’r at it, will you say a prayer for the nation’ health care bill managers? let’ also consid the kindly, econom product citizen in swing state whose job it is to jail pregnant women and the parent of cancer patient for fail to pay their radiolog bills. put yourself in the entrepreneuri shoe of the friendli hospit administr who ha found a lucr new revenu stream: file thousand of lawsuit to garnish sick people’ wages. 

and who can forget the lawyers? and the lobbyists! oh, aren’t they all have a ball in america’ health care thunderdome. like the two lobbyist who were just caught draft newspap editori for state repres in montana and ohio, decri their party’ push toward a "government-controlled" health care industry. it’ clear whi these lobbyist might prefer the convers statu quo: a govern control by the health care industry. If we move to a single-pay system, how would lobbyist put food on the table, and who would write lawmakers’ op- essays? 

welcom to the bizarr new argument against "medicar for all": it’ go to cost us jobs. lot of jobs. good, middle-class, white-collar job in america’ heartland, where democrat need to win big to defeat donald trump. 

the argument is speciou and moral suspect. last week, health research report that american life expect is declin for the first time in half a century, and some of the lead caus have to do with the ruinou health care system. even if it is the case that reform american health care might elimin some jobs, it would seem to be a good trade for the like benefit: more peopl might gain access to afford health care and get to keep living. 

but I worri that the job argument might sway moder politicians, centrist pundit and much of the establishment, becaus it play on one of the major fault line of health reform: that in fix the system so that more peopl benefit, those who now enjoy a privileg slice of american health care might end up wors off than they are today. 

As a matter of ethic and equality, thi should be o.k.; stick with a system that is the sourc of so much death, debt and financi ruin just becaus you like your doctor or your insur compani or your medical-bil job is not realli a defens position. 

On the other hand, in america, "i’v got mine and I don’t want to lose it" is alway pretti good politics. 

the job argument goe like this: there’ a lot of fat in the american health care industry, and ani effort to transform it into a simpler system in which everyon is cover would necessarili elimin layer of bureaucraci and like reduc overhead costs. everi year american collect pay about $500 billion in administr cost for health care — that is, for thing like bill and insur overhead, not for actual medic care. 

these cost are significantli higher than in most other wealthi countries. one studi on health care data from 1999 show that each american paid about $1,059 per year just in overhead cost for health care; in canada, the per capita cost wa $307. those figur are like much higher today. 

wouldn’t lower overhead cost be an obvious posit outcome? 

ah, but there’ the rub: all thi overspend creat a lot of employ — and move toward a more effici and equit health care system will inevit mean get rid of mani administr jobs. one studi suggest that about 1.8 million job would be render unnecessari if america adopt a public health care financ system. 

So what if some of these job involv debt collection, claim denial, aggress legal action or are otherwis punitive, cruel or simpli moral indefens in a societi that can clearli afford to provid high-qual health care to everyone? job are jobs, folks, as joe biden might say. 

indeed, that’ exactli what biden’ presidenti campaign is say about the medicar for all plan that senat elizabeth warren and berni sander are proposing: they "will not onli cost 160 million american their privat health coverag and forc tax increas on the middl class, but it would also kill almost two million jobs," a biden campaign offici warn recently. 

note the word "kill" in the statement. that word might better describ not what could happen to job under medicar for all but what the health care industri is do to mani american today. 

last week, the medic journal jama publish a comprehens studi examin the caus of a remark grim statist about our nation well-being. from 1959 to 2010, life expect in the unit state and in other wealthi countri around the world climbed. then, in 2014, american life expect began to fall, while it continu to rise elsewhere. 

what caus the american decline? research identifi a number of potenti factors, includ tobacco use, obes and psycholog stress, but two of the lead caus can be pin directli on the peculiar and dysfunct of american health care. 

the first is the opioid epidemic, whose rise can be trace to the release, in 1996, of the prescript pain drug oxycontin. In the public narrative, much of the blame for the epidem ha been cast on the sackler family, whose firm, purdu pharma, creat oxycontin and push for it widespread use. but research ha shown that the sackler exploit aberr incent in american health care. 

purdu court doctors, patient group and insur to convinc the medic establish that oxycontin wa a novel type of opioid that wa less addict and less prone to abuse. the compani had littl scientif evid to make that claim, but much of the health care industri bought into it, and oxycontin prescript soared. the rush to prescrib opioid wa fuel by busi incent creat by the health care industri — for purdue, for mani doctor and for insur companies, treat widespread condit like back pain with pill rather than physic therapi wa simpli better for the bottom line. 

opioid addict isn’t the onli factor contribut to rise american mortal rates. the problem is more pervasive, have to do with an overal lack of qualiti health care. the jama report point out that death rate have climb most for middle-ag adults, who — unlik retire and mani children — are not usual cover by government-run health care servic and thu have less access to afford health care. 

the research write that "countri with higher life expect outperform the unit state in provid univers access to health care" and in "remov cost as a barrier to care." In america, by contrast, cost is a key barrier. A studi publish last year in the american journal of medicin found that of the nearli 10 million american given diagnos of cancer between 2000 and 2012, 42 percent were forc to drain all of their asset in order to pay for care. 

the polit of medicar for all are perilous. understand so: If you’r one of the million of american who love your doctor and your insur company, or who work in the health care field, I can see whi you would be fear of wholesal change. 

but it’ wise to rememb that it’ not just your own health and happi that counts. the health care industri is fail much of the country. mani of your fellow citizen are liter die earli becaus of it failures. "I got mine!" is not a good enough argument to maintain the dismal statu quo. 
