the berni sander fallaci 
By david brook 
jan. 16, 2020 

thi is a golden age for "theyism." thi is the belief that there is some malevolent, elit "they" out there and "they" are destroy life for the rest of us. 

there is donald trump’ culture-war theyism: the coastal cultur elit hate genuin americans, undermin our valu and open our borders. and there is berni sanders’ class-war theyism: the billionair have rig the economi to benefit themselv and impoverish everyon else. 

each of these stori take a genuin tension in societi and blow it up into an all-explain cartoon in which one part of america is tri to destroy the other part. 

the g.o.p. ha been swallow by trump’ cultur war, and mani democrat seem to be rush to join sanders’ class war. 

these democrat are do thi even though it’ polit suicide. class-war progressiv alway lose to culture-war conservat becaus swing voter in the midwest care more about their valu — guns, patriotism, end abortion, masculinity, whatev — than they do about proletarian class consciousness. 

democrat are do thi even though the sander class-war stori is wrong. 

sander start with a truth: worker need more bargain power as they negoti wage with their employers. but then he blow thi up into an all-explain ideology: capit is a system of exploit in which capitalist power complet domin worker power. thi ideolog crash against the facts. 

In the first place, over the past few year wage for worker toward the bottom of the incom stream have been rise faster than wage for those toward the top. If the boss have the worker by the throat, how can thi be happening? 

second, wage are still gener determin by skill and productivity. for example, edward lazear of stanford univers find that between 1989 and 2017, product in mostli high-skil industri rose by roughli 34 percent and wage in those industri rose by 26 percent. product in industri with mostli less-skil worker rose by 20 percent while wage grew by 24 percent. 

As michael strain of the american enterpris institut put it, capit is do what it’ suppos to do. it’ reward product with pay, and some peopl and compani are more productive. If you improv worker bargain power, that may help a bit, but over the long run peopl can’t earn what they don’t produce. 

third, and most important, most of the increas in earn inequ ha happen between companies, not within them. As john van reenen of m.i.t. ha found, all over the world superstar busi are race ahead of their competitors. As those compani grow more productive, they earn more profit per employe and pay their worker more. compani that can’t match that product don’t, and their worker lag behind. 

A recent brook institution/chumir foundat report also note that there is a grow product gap between superstar compani and everybodi else. whether it is in tech, retail, manufacturing, util or services, product growth at the lead compani in each industri ha remain veri strong. those product busi are captur larger and larger market shares. but product is not grow fast among the lag companies. worker in those busi suffer. 

today’ success boss are do what they should be doing: increas productivity, grow their busi and offer great service. A side effect of their effici is they spend a smaller share of their revenu on labor even while rais their workers’ wages. In a global information-ag economy, the reward for be best are huge. 

thus, the core problem is not capitalist exploit their workers; it’ the rise of product inequality. it’ the compani and individu who don’t have the skill to take advantag of new technologies. 

the real solution, therefore, is not class war to hammer success businesses. it’ to boost and expand product for everybodi else. that’ done the old-fashion way — by have better school and better vocat training, by have more open competit markets, by creat incent to expand investment, by make sure superstar busi don’t use lobbyist to lock in their advantages. 

I understand if you want to stick to an us-versus-them polit ideology. it’ emot satisfi to base your polit ideolog on blame peopl you dislike. In fact, I strongli recommend michael lind’ new book, "the new class war," which is the best version of us/them. 

lind make a lot of vagu gener about the "manageri elite," which he blame for our problems. but at least he’ interest and provocative. At least he understand that a polit plausibl "theyism" is econom left and social right — combin the cultur war and class war into a tidi narrative. 

but if you want to deal with our real problems, stop the us/them warfar and start deal with product inequality. 

success execut are do what’ best for their companies, gather as much talent as they can. thi isn’t evil. it’ not exploitation. 

the job of public polici is to make it easier for everybodi to do what success peopl are doing. product is the key to nation prosperity. everi time we increas product for one person, we all thrive a littl more, together. 
