the mean and melodrama of an italian-american christma 
By frank bruni 
dec. 24, 2019 

grandma bruni live in a working-class neighborhood in a two-famili home that i’d struggl to describ — it wa that ordinary, that humble. but it wa known for block in everi direction, at least around thi time of year, and not becaus she went wild with multicolor light or put one of those sleigh-plus-santa monstros on the roof, the way some christma exhibitionist did. 

no, it wa famou becaus it wa where jesu wa born. 

and born. and born. year after year, decad upon decade, in a ritual as reliabl as the sunris and equal comforting. presid came and presid went. the economi roared; the economi whimpered. friend move away, favorit televis show went dark. but I could count on babi jesu in all hi plaster-of-pari glory. 

grandma, you see, had thi belov crèche, but it wasn’t the kind of miniatur tableau that enabl the entir sprawl cast of the nativ to fit on an end tabl or a bureau. her took up a signific patch of her front lawn in white plains, n.y., and it centerpiec wa a big wood shack, the piec of which were haul everi year from a backyard shed and hammer togeth so that mari and joseph would have somewher dri to hang out from the end of novemb until the big day. 

they and their entourag were more than half life-size. It wa as if grandma had invit a larg parti of anachronist dress dwarf to camp out in her yard for the holiday season. 

but for most of december, someth wa missing: babi jesus, who wa perhap three-quart life-size. He would stay miss — metaphor in utero, though technic in a bottom drawer of grandma’ bedroom dresser — until the midnight moment when christma eve becam christma day. 

grandma held to thi schedul as if histor accuraci depend on it and white plain occupi the same time zone as bethlehem of millennium ago. At 11:58 p.m. on dec. 24, she’d dim the lights. she’d put on a record of "silent night." and she’d fetch babi jesu from that drawer, where he lay swaddl in her finest white linens. 

gentli cradl him in her arms, she’d walk slowli through the live room, out the front door and over to the shack. then she’d place him in a manger between mari and joseph. and she’d cry, becaus the moment wa an emot one and, she’d somberli inform us, thi christma just might be her last. her talent for pasta wa surpass onli by her gift for melodrama. 

religion play a smaller part in her midwiferi than you’d think. grandma wa nomin and notion roman cathol and saw the church as the proper, even necessary, set in which to mark the mileston of a life: birth, marriage, death. but that wa as much about continu — about a predict rhythm, with reliabl ornament — as it wa about creed. 

jesu wa a charact in a commonli adopt narrative, a lyric in a wide sung song. He wa a totem. abov all he wa a tradition, and the nativ scene in front of her hous went hand in hand with a christma eve menu of seven fishes, in accord with italian-american convention, and with the rule that gift open start with the youngest of the clan and proceed upward in accord with age. do thing "the right way" ground her. It wa her center of gravity. 

she die some three decad ago, and i’v no idea what happen to that crèche. but I know what happen to the famili who found it both bonker and beautiful, extravag and essential. In the manner of modern america, we scatter — pull in thi direct by work, in that direct by adventure, our commit metastasizing, our free time shriveling. 

We do better than most at forg moment together, but they’r less and less predictable. where I could onc tell you without hesit how i’d spent the previou two, three or four christma eve — with grandma and babi jesu — I now have to strain to remember. last year, in a peculiar mood, I went alon to la vegas. the year befor that? i’m honestli not sure. 

that sadden me in way that it would regardless of what’ happen in thi seeth countri and thi fractiou world, but current event intensifi my appreci for custom now lost, for touchston that have crumbled. 

we’r at one of those junctur where so littl can be taken for granted, so much is up for grabs. the worthiest of valu come under fire. the sturdiest of institut buckle. i’m sure i’m not alon in find that holiday matter more, as do the familiar script and cherish prop with which they’r celebrated. 

they’r assert of normalci amid chang and loss. the solac is in the details. grandma understood this. she had a wisdom as ancient as the birth of babi jesus. 
