the meaningless of the .org domain 
By sam wineburg and nadav ziv 
dec. 5, 2019 

are today’ high school students, the one we call "digit natives," abl to separ fact from fiction? 

not accord to a survey we releas last month in which 3,446 high school student across the countri evalu the trustworthi of differ websites. one such site wa co2science.org, a climate-chang skeptic group that claim to "dissemin factual report and sound commentary." student could go anywher on the web to investig the site. A quick search uncov the group’ past tie to the fossil fuel industry. but 96 percent of student never uncov thi industri connection. 

too often students’ evalu stall at three letters: "thi page is a reliabl sourc to obtain inform from," one wrote, "you see in the url that it end in .org as oppos to .com." 

the kid are wrong. dot-org symbol neither qualiti nor trustworthiness. it’ a market tool that reli on a widespread but fals associ with credibility. 

kid aren’t the onli one misinformed. A 2012 intern studi found that nearli half of americans, and larger percentag in france, brazil and india, believ that an organ must meet "some criteria" befor it could regist under .org. 

the dot-org domain is control by the public interest registry, which wa sold last month to etho capital, a privat equiti firm. the three letter are market as "a power signal that your site serv a greater good — rather than just a bottom line." it’ a claim that lead peopl to make error about whom and what to trust. 

unlik dot-gov or dot-edu, which are close to the gener public, dot-org is an "open" domain. anyon can regist a dot-org without pass a charact test. even commerci site can be dot-orgs. craigslist — among the world’ largest ad site — is craigslist.org. there are over 10 million dot-orgs, each of which pay roughli $10 per year to register. all you have to do to get one is fill out an onlin form and provid payment. 

registr fee gener $92 million in revenu for the public interest registri in 2018 alone. In theori these revenu could grow much larger soon — in june, the internet corpor for assign name and numbers, the supervisori bodi that regul the internet’ domain name system, agre to lift price cap on dot-orgs. still, andi shea, a spokesperson for the public interest registry, say it plan to keep the price for dot-org low, with increas of no more than 10 percent on averag a year. 

In the public interest registry’ latest market blitz, they unveil a logo paint in "deep royal blue," a shade they say evok "feel of trust, secur and reliability." they tell new custom to expect an increas in "donations, and trust for donors" when they becom part of the "domain of trust." 

noteworthi nonprofits, civic organ and religi group have embrac the domain — and so have a host of bad actors. all reap the benefit of dot-org’ associ with credibility. 

educ institut unwittingli shape mispercept around dot-orgs. mani colleg and universities, includ harvard and northwestern, steer student in the wrong direction. they equat dot-org with nonprofit group and issu no warn of the danger lurk beneath the domain’ posit aura. 

dot-org is the favor design of "astroturf" sites, group that masquerad as grass root effort but are back by corpor and polit interests. one of these is the employ polici institute, which claim to sponsor "nonpartisan research." It wa actual found and run by the head of a public relat firm that repres the restaur industry. anoth dot-org, american for prosper foundation, say it address major social problem through "broad-bas grass root outreach." In reality, it wa found by the billionair koch brother and mani of it "grass roots" activist are paid. 

there’ an even bigger risk to equat dot-org site with do-gooders. dozen of neo-nazi, anti-l.g.b.t., anti-muslim, and anti-immigr group bear the dot-org seal. A random sampl of a hundr organ design as hate group by the southern poverti law center found that 49 percent carri the dot-org domain. 

"typic the domain name system is not an appropri tool to address websit content question and speech issues," said shea, the public interest registri spokesperson. "that said, if a site on a .org domain engag in specif threat of violence, we would not hesit to take action on it under our anti-abus policy." 

A 2019 unit nation survey show that citizen the world over have lost trust in the internet. restor it will take herculean efforts. the group that control the internet’ domain system could lead the way by be honest about what these initi do and don’t represent. 

the public interest registri and etho capit could channel some of the million earn from the dot-org mirag to fund initi that educ the public on the domain’ shortcomings. 

they can start by ad a bright red asterisk to their royal blue logo: "dot-org impli noth about an organization’ intent. buyer beware." 
