the pervers servil of bill barr 
By frank bruni 
dec. 10, 2019 

donald trump famous said that he could shoot somebodi in the middl of fifth avenu and not "lose ani voters." I don’t know about that. but i’m confid that he wouldn’t lose bill barr. 

execut privilege, barr would probabl call it. he’d releas a statement or hold a news confer to say that trump had a spastic trigger finger or wa trigger by adam schiff or wa set up by those dastardli ukrainians, who are never up to ani good. such is the magnitud of barr’ servility, the dogged of hi deference. he’ the president’ moral launderer. trump doe evil, and barr wash him clean. 

As attorney general, he’ suppos to be the nation’ lawyer. but he ha bought into the autocrat delus that trump equal america, that nation interest and presidenti prerog are inextric intertwined. So he’ trump’ advocate, come hell or high crimes, as sure as pat cipollon or rudi giuliani is. 

On monday, show fresh contempt for the peopl who work under him in the justic department, barr renounc a determin by the department’ inspector gener that the f.b.i.’ investig into the trump campaign’ tie to russia wa legitim and that anti-trump bia wa not it anim force. He did thi instantly. 

and then, on tuesday, did it again, with even less subtleti and more sanctimony. "it wa a travesty," he said of the investigation, and he wa speak not just of the sloppi and hast of some of the f.b.i.’ actions, with which the inspector gener also took issue. He wa dismiss the whole effort as rotten. 

It wa an eeri echo of hi effort last spring, when he sought to neuter robert mueller’ find about the trump campaign’ open to russian help and the president’ attempt to obstruct justice. give barr point for consistency. He ha bought fulli into the idea that the zeal of trump’ detractor matter more than the presidents’ abus of power. 

but what of the constitution? what of common decency? barr isn’t concern himself with those. To do so would call into question the honor of serv in thi administration, the compliment of hold the job that trump gave him. and he want that compliment. that pedestal. He prefer to see himself as a holi warrior than as an unholi dupe. 

To appreci hi perspective, you must travel back two months, to the univers of notr dame, where he deliv a speech that garner some headlin but not nearli enough of them. 

you should read it. you should savor it grandios — it ha refer to the dawn of homo sapiens, the twilight of the judeo-christian order, edmund burke, jame madison — so that you can understand hi current overreach, born of hi certainti that he know better than the rest of the bodi polit and is call to heal us. 

you should note hi remarks’ obsess with moral and you should tri not to laugh, the same way you stifl chuckl when you’r remind that mike pompeo is a put worship christian and you tri to squar that with how he abet the persecut of mari yovanovitch, leav hi state depart charg twist in the wind and genuflect befor a fals prophet. In trump he trusts. 

you should dwell on the part of barr’ jeremiad where he say that "men are subject to power passion and appetit and, if unrestrained, are capabl of ruthlessli ride roughshod over their neighbor and the community." ruthless? roughshod? that’ trump in an allit nutshell, but barr seem to be pervers oblivi to that. He wa make a case for trump’ presidency. 

the wonder of thi wretch moment ha never been the exist and stench of a bad egg in the oval office. that’ hardli strange, given how abli shameless serv ambition. the wonder is how mani other bad egg the current presid ha assembl or hatched. the wonder is thi fluffy, funki omelet of unscrupulousness. 

all these supposedli godli men — barr, pompeo, mike pence, ben carson, rick perri and more — cluster around such a demonstr godless one. they ration that trump’ indulg of certain religi faction absolv him of hi sins. barr is the princip agent of that absolution. 

he’ also a paragon of hypocrisy, tell pete william of nbc new that the f.b.i. investig of trump’ campaign wa an omin abus of govern power for partisan aims. that descript better suit the conduct for which trump is about to be impeached. I don’t know how barr kept a straight face. 

actually, I do. sinc betroth himself to trump, he ha had ampl practice. In the notr dame speech, without ani palpabl sens of irony, he urg a "moral renaissance" and deliv thi priceless line: "no societi can exist without some mean for restrain individu rapacity." I agree. 

In our society, impeach is one of those means. the law is another. and if barr could dig out hi conscienc from under all those layer of ego, he’d see that the rapaci individu in direst need of restraint is the one he’ let roam free. 
