the white hous motto: watch your back 
By michel cottl 
nov. 14, 2019 

there’ no honor among thiev nor, apparently, among anxiou polit hack who bound themselv to a presid with a penchant for subordin the nation interest to hi own. 

once-eag presidenti enabl have turn on one anoth with feral abandon as the fact of what mr. trump’ flunki were do in ukrain have becom clear and the impeach investig move into it public phase. 

john bolton, the former nation secur adviser, appear to be spoil for a fight. He ha a deal worth around $2 million to write a book about hi time in the administration, which he left on not-so-friendli term in september. In a privat speech last week, mr. bolton offer a harsh assess of the president’ foreign-polici chop and suggest that mr. trump’ polici toward turkey ha been driven by person and busi interests, accord to nbc news. mr. bolton’ lawyer told impeach investig that mr. bolton ha inform about "mani relev meet and conversations" concern ukrain that he might be will to share if the court give him the go-ahead. 

mr. bolton is await the outcom of a lawsuit brought by hi former deputy, charl kupperman, ask the court to decid whether a congression subpoena outweigh the president’ order to ignor it. 

mick mulvaney, the act white hous chief of staff, tri to glom onto mr. kupperman’ lawsuit, but mr. bolton wa have none of it. On monday, a lawyer who repres both him and mr. kupperman ask a judg to deni mr. mulvaney’ request, citing, among other objections, that mr. mulvaney may have waiv ani immun from testifi when he acknowledg in a news confer last month that mr. trump had sought a quid pro quo from ukrain in exchang for militari aid and said that peopl need to "get over it." 

mr. mulvaney, who subsequ insist he hadn’t said what he said, wa a key player in the pressur campaign to have ukrain announc an investig of former vice presid joe biden, while mr. bolton reportedli said he want noth to do with "the drug deal" mr. mulvaney wa "cook up" with gordon sondland, the ambassador to the european union. 

surpris by the blowback, mr. mulvaney drop hi court request and now say he will abid by the president’ edict not to cooperate. 

even so, he ha been clash with pat cipollone, the white hous counsel, over what each see as the other’ mishandl of the president’ impeach defense. mr. mulvaney also face danger from hous republican look for someon to blame other than mr. trump for the ukrain mess. He is among the most promis scapegoats, accord to the washington post, along with the president’ lawyer rudi giuliani and mr. sondland, two of the princip players. but mr. mulvaney ha impli to peopl that he know too much to be fired. 

mr. giuliani, now under crimin investig over hi ukrain dealings, is face newli reveal accus from hi "associate" lev parnas. mr. parna say mr. giuliani direct him to help pressur ukrainian offici to investig mr. trump’ polit rival. 

for hi part, mr. giuliani is contempl start an impeachment-them podcast, which should terrifi everyon concerned. 

the president, meanwhile, is said to want to fire not onli mr. mulvaney but also the inspector gener of the intellig community, michael atkinson, who alert congress to the whistle-blow complaint, kick off the impeach inquiry. 

more publicly, mr. trump ha been berat republican lawmak for suggest that hi behavior toward ukrain wa anyth other than "perfect" — as he ha taken to rant on twitter. 

while secretari of state mike pompeo isn’t under attack from hi peer — yet — there are warn flags. last month, hi former senior advis michael mckinley told investig that mr. pompeo ignor hi plea to protect mari yovanovitch, the former ambassador to ukraine, who becam the target of a giuliani smear campaign that contribut to her ouster from kiev — plea that the secretari claim never to have heard. who know where thi could lead? 

even white hous player not directli tie to impeach are get in on the action. peddl her new memoir, nikki haley, the former ambassador to the unit nations, ha been accus former secretari of state rex tillerson and former white hous chief of staff john kelli of have sought her aid in undermin the president’ polici aim dure their time in the administration. for hi part, mr. kelli say he warn the presid befor be push out that if he were replac by a "ye man," mr. trump would end up be impeached. (look at you, mick.) 

then there’ "anonymous," the senior administr offici who publish a septemb 2018 op- in the times, who is out with a new tell-al book paint an unflatt pictur of the presid and charging, "the white house, quit simply, is broken." 

To be fair, with so mani peopl have been pull — willingli or otherwis — into mr. trump’ ukrain scheme, it can be hard for the lackey to keep their stori straight and avoid incrimin even themselves. for instance, mr. sondland origin told impeach investig that he had no knowledg of a quid pro quo involv ukraine. less than three week later, he amend hi testimoni to say that he did recal tell ukrainian offici that they were unlik to receiv their promis militari aid until they publicli announc the investig sought by mr. trump. thi recov memori brought mr. sondland’ testimoni more into line with that of other witnesses. 

all thi should serv as a warn for the president’ mani apologists. As the impeach inquiri grind on, the circular fire squad is like to grow still larger — and potenti arm with higher-calib ammunition. 
