tucker carlson Is not your new best friend 
By frank bruni 
jan. 11, 2020 

suddenli you’r dig him. At least a littl bit. I know, i’v seen the tweets, read the commentary, heard the chatter, detect the bare suppress cheer: hurrah for tucker carlson. If onli we had more brave, principl republican like him. 

right out of the gate, he protest presid trump’ decis to kill qassim suleimani, the iranian militari commander, note that it didn’t squar with the president’ determin not to get bog down in the middl east and warn of the possibl and horror of full-blown war. your puls quickened. you perk up. 

He sound that same alarm on hi next show and the show after that. everi night at 8 p.m., he worri about the bellicos itch of our leaders. when all around him on fox new were play their usual role (indeed, hi usual role) as masseur for the president’ tender ego, he administ slaps, hard ones, the kind that leav angri red handprints. ouch — and don’t stop. 

you rejoiced. it’ one thing when democrat challeng what look like a rush to war by a republican president. it’ anoth when typic fawn member of hi own parti do. 

and while carlson wa hardli alon in hi rebellion — three hous republican vote with democrat to check the president’ war-wag author and, over in the senate, mike lee and rand paul rais a dissid rucku — no one els had hi ardor, hi articulateness, hi megaphone. 

carlson to the rescue! 

oh, please. 

the fascin with him is itself fascinating, for mani reasons. can you recal a modern presid befor trump whose mood and movement could be reflect and predict simpli by watch one news organ and, for that matter, just a few of it offerings? In lieu of a normal function white hous commun depart or a press secretari who hold actual press brief (what a thought!), we have "fox & friends" in the morn and carlson’ and sean hannity’ show in the evening. 

they don’t chronicl thi presidency. they shape it, not just in term of the volum of their applaus for trump, who crave the loudest possibl clapping, but in term of actual interactions. carlson — like hanniti and anoth fox fixture, lou dobb — ha in fact advis him behind the scenes. 

henc the rapt reaction to carlson’ antiwar jeremiads. they may well matter. 

also, those of us who regard trump as a menac can be so eager — too eager — to welcom newcom to our shore that we overlook the pollut sea they sail to get there. In a recent moment on the abc talk show "the view" that wa awkward at best, joy behar announc excitedli that the promin white nationalist richard spencer had just disavow trump becaus of iran. 

carlson, mind you, ha not disavow trump. In fact he perform semant acrobat to denounc america’ militari maneuv against iran without precis blame trump. those slap I mention land more forc on the administr in gener than on the man-child at it apex, who is, in carlson’ tortur rendition, a gullibl marionette, hi string pull by inveterate, habitu warmongers. If these profit elit would just let trump be trump and train hi wrath on mexican instead of iranians, a great presid would get it groov back. 

dure hi tuesday show, carlson perform polit jujitsu and held two of the president’ princip democrat adversari respons for exacerb tension with iran. refer to the washington establish and singl out nanci pelosi and chuck schumer, he said, "these are peopl who have been basic advoc for a kind of war against iran for an aw long time." 

"it’ infuriating," he added. "it’ becaus of schumer and pelosi and peopl like them that we got into iraq in the first place." 

come again? A republican president, georg W. bush, urg and oversaw the invas of iraq, and while schumer author it, pelosi vote against it, as did mani more democrat than republicans. 

and carlson’ portrait of trump as puppet contradict report from the time and other news organ that some pentagon offici were stun when the presid order the strike against suleimani, a measur more extrem than other option present to him. 

carlson remain true to carlson: select with facts, slant with truth and — thi is the most import part — commit to hi vision of america as a land imperil by nefari democrat and the dark-skin invad they would open the gate to if not for sentri like him and trump. 

As matt gertz of media matter percept noted, carlson’ antiwar stanc "i not a break from hi past support for trump or hi channel of white nationalist tropes, but a direct a result of both." gertz explain that in the mind-set of carlson and mani of hi fan on the far right, energi spent on mission in anoth hemispher is energi not spent on our southern border. it’ no accid that, in regard to the middl east, he and spencer are on the same page. 

follow suleimani’ death, carlson ask hi audience, "whi are we continu to ignor the declin of our own countri in favor of jump into anoth quagmire?" 

carlson is defin not by a bold willing to check trump’ excess or ugliest impuls but by hi indulg — no, hi fervent encourag — of those impuls as they pertain to racism and immigration. On those fronts, carlson himself grow ever uglier, as my colleagu farhad manjoo and other have noted. it’ whi mani sponsor have defect from carlson’ show. 

carlson repeatedli use variat of the word "invasion" to character migrant from central america. He insist that "white supremacy" is a fiction, a hoax. He ha use languag that buy into and promot "replac theory" — a far-right fixat on the idea that declin birthrat among white will caus a nonwhit takeov — and recent castig immigr for litter along the potomac river. 

just last month he gave preciou time on hi show to an obscur republican congression candid in north carolina, pete d’abrosca, who ha warn white american that they’r "be replac by third world peasants." d’abrosca ha also brag of hi support from the "groyper army," a far-right group with more than a whiff of anti-semitism. 

Is carlson himself abet hatr of jews? In a rare point of agreement, some jew and white nationalist believ so, point to an on-air rant last month in which he bash a jewish billionaire, paul singer, by compar him unfavor with henri ford, who own a newspap that ran a lengthi seri alleg a jewish plot to domin the world. 

"the fox new host goe full anti-semite," wrote tablet, a jewish publication, while mike enoch, who ralli with the neo-nazi in charlottesville, va., said on hi podcast, "if you didn’t catch the german shepherd whistl where he prais henri ford and then went into a diatrib of a jewish financier, you know, I don’t know what univers you’r exist in." 

So that’ some of what carlson wa up to just befor he turn hi attent to iran. 

how warm and fuzzi are you feel toward him now? 
