We can’t afford trump as our command in chief 
By frank bruni 
jan. 7, 2020 

We choos our presid in happi time and sad, amid bull and bear markets, when we’r tri to conserv what is and when we’r itch to discov what might be. 

We should alway choos them as if we’r on the brink of war, becaus it’ imposs to predict when we’ll find ourselv there, in petrifi need of a strong, stabl leader we can trust. 

donald trump wa chosen in a fit of long-build and larg warrant cynicism, as a gambl and protest. He hadn’t demonstr ani particular strength, onli that he could perform a peculiar burlesqu of it. He show zilch in the way of honor, but had a geniu for stoke doubt that it still exist in polit at all. hi support thrill to a pledg of disruption, not a promis of safe harbor. 

and here we are, with an inexperienced, impuls and perpetu aggriev command in chief precis when we can’t afford one. 

I hope I have him wrong. I do. I hope that some of hi worst color are an act, that some of hi rashest outburst are a strategy, that instinct can be as use as erudit and that in order the kill of maj. gen. qassim suleimani, he ha persuad iran to rethink rather than redoubl it aggression. 

but there are reason to be worried, even terrified, and they’r root in hi untradit and sometim irrat approach to the presid — and in the wage of that. 

i’m scare becaus all presid are onli as good as the counsel they seek and the counselor who provid it, and trump ha burn through so mani top advis and so much good will that he oper with a hollowed-out staff of half-bak experience. 

hi second (and current) defens secretary, mark esper, lack the season and statur of hi first, jim mattis, who resign 13 month ago when trump reject hi plea and vow to pull american troop out of syria. that, at least, wa the specif prompt for mattis’ departure. but matti also "found the presid to be of limit cognit abil and of gener dubiou character," wrote jeffrey goldberg, the editor in chief of the atlantic, in a profil of matti last fall. 

limit cognition? dubiou character? those may not matter when you’r choos the gilt for a golf resort or skyscraper. they do when you’r decid whether to put american live on the line. 

trump is on hi fourth nation secur adviser, robert o’brien, whose résumé is thin for the job. and throughout the trump administration, there are relev post unfil or occupi by offici never confirm by the senate. 

we’r estrang from some of our most import allies, who are exhaust by trump’ moods, offend by hi mockeri of them and chill by hi ignorance. they have conclud that if he is america, america is no longer trustworthy. 

As greg miller of the washington post recent observed, the presid "ha disparag u.s. intellig agencies, disrupt relationship with european partner and dilut the power of the bulli pulpit with thousand of falsehoods." 

all of that is come home to roost. it’ imposs not to hear hi justif for suleimani’ kill through the filter of hi past exagger and lies. It will be equal difficult to have faith in the inform that he dole out go forward. 

and it’ hard to make sens of this. errat in so mani other ways, trump wa fairli consist in oppos american militari entangl in the middl east, to the point of scorn bash republican who got us into iraq and ignor recommend for repris against iran befor last week. 

but in target suleimani, he embrac a cours that hi predecessor in the oval offic reject as too extreme. accord to the times’ reporting, pentagon offici were stunned. 

Is trump’ spectacular turnabout a function of fresh develop or a spasm of ego? we’r alway yoke to a president’ psych — to georg W. bush’ itch for separ from hi father, to barack obama’ invest in hi own unflappability. trump’ self-sooth pantomim of potenc could strangl us. 

and what of hi recklessli provoc tweets? they’r one thing when he’ bait democrats, quit anoth when he’ thumb hi nose at intern law. On twitter he threaten to bomb import cultur site in iran and later explain to report aboard air forc one that if it and other countri were go to engag in terror and torture, hell, whi should we be ani better? 

here, mr. president, is the reason: becaus we aspir to valu that are actual worth fight for. and the day we take our cue from the like of the taliban and the islam state is the day we should just junk the statu of liberti and retir the nation anthem. 

reshap america’ imag in 280-charact yowl and uppercas yelps, trump told iran to be prepar for militari attack of "a disproportion manner." 

please, god, let richard nixon’ "madman theory" of intern relat — which held that an aura of reckless might cow adversari — have merit. otherwise, there’ no tell where thi mad man might drag us. 

"donald trump ha not made a singl public statement sinc order last thursday’ oper that ha not been either unhelp or counterproductive," noah rothman, the associ editor of commentary, wrote on monday. rothman is conservative, doe not routin bash trump and defend suleimani’ kill itself. but in hi essay, titl "A danger man in peril times," he note that "the best anyon can say about trump’ spasmod conduct is that it won’t matter." 

"seriou moment demand sober and ration mind at the helm, and the president’ behavior so far doe not inspir confidence," rothman added. 

no, it make you tremble. 
