We hate data collection. that doesn’t mean We can stop it. 
By farhad manjoo 
nov. 15, 2019 

we’r be watched. We know we’r be watched, and we don’t think the watcher have our best interest at heart. they tri to mollifi us, argu that we’r be watch for our own good and that in fact we’r the one in charg of the scale and scope of all the watching, but deep down most of us are confus and suspici about thi sudden state of affairs. whi are they watch us so closely? what will they do with all they learn about us? Is there ani hope of stop them? and doe it even matter that we do not want to be watch — or is it of no consequence, becaus they know we’r trapped, and so do we? 

the abov may sound like the rave of a wretch imprison in the panopticon, but accord to a survey of more than 4,000 peopl conduct thi summer by the pew research center, it is the widespread sensibl of the day. 

accord to the survey, american in 2019 feel adrift and powerless about live under the glare of digit surveillance. two-third of american believ that surveil is an inevit consequ of modern exist — it is not possibl to go through daili life, they say, without compani and the govern collect data about them. more than 70 percent believ that most or all of what they do onlin is be tracked, and nearli that mani believ the same is true of what they do offline. and more than 80 percent feel like they have veri littl or no control over the data be collect about them. 

In some way the number are unsurprising; of cours peopl who are be watch all the time feel that they’r be watch all the time. 

yet the survey also suggest a major fail on the part of corpor and the govern to mitig our concern about the trade-off we’r make for digit conveniences. In the past few years, google, facebook and other compani that collect and keep gigant trove of data about us have step up their effort to give us control over that data. their primari argument is that users, not the companies, are in charg of the whole game — we can affect what data is collect about us and how it’ used. 

that messag doesn’t seem to be get through. larg major of american feel as we have littl or no control over our search and purchas and brows histories; that our text and social media wander are easili monitored; and that even our physic locat may be up for grabs. 

It get worse. not onli do we feel we have no control over our data, but we’r also sure there will be few consequ for misuse. 

most american say they don’t trust compani to own up to mistak in the handl of our data, or to suffer ani seriou punish when thing go wrong. most of us say the companies’ own privaci polici are meaningless. 

not that thi is a paranoid view. If you consid recent histori — say, the fact that equifax wa allow to stay in busi after it gargantuan 2017 breach in which it fail at it one job, collect and maintain americans’ financi data — it stand to reason that punish for wrongdo will be light. In july, facebook wa fine $5 billion by the feder trade commiss for it role in the cambridg analytica privaci scandal — a fine that set a record, but wa of so littl consequ to facebook’ busi that it stock price actual rose after the punish wa announced. 

the pew survey show american are eager for more power over our data. three-quart of respond said there should be more regul of what compani can do with our data; the view wa share across the polit spectrum. 

and american are wari of the fundament trade-off we’r make for technology. data-hungri corpor insist that we’r benefit from the surveil state — and that our veri acquiesc to the collect is a signal of our contentment. In fact, the vast major of american say that the potenti risk of data collect by compani and the govern outweigh the benefits. 

but where doe all thi leav us? ordinarili a find of widespread discontent should spark a sens of optim — if peopl hate the statu quo so much and are beg for a new way forward, won’t the market or the govern step in and give us someth better? 

but there is another,mor pessimist way to read thi survey. the tech compani still enjoy enorm financi success, and have seen littl impact from increas scrutini on their businesses. thi suggest none of it matters. We hate the way thing are, but we’v trade away our power to stop it, and our worri won’t chang anything. 

the prison is terrible. We all know it. enjoy your stay. 
