We realli must stop start war 
By farhad manjoo 
jan. 9, 2020 

let us not go again to war. let us not go to war becaus we cannot afford to "win" anoth war. there would be no win thi war. there is onli losing, at a cost that stagger everi dimens on all side — in lives, in money, and in the squander opportun to do anyth better with our collect time and resourc on thi alreadi beset planet. 

i’m speak here of war with iran, our current precipice. but I issu the warn more generally, too. bookmark thi page and pull it up as prophylaxi anytim the drum of war begin rattl anew: war isn’t just tragic. It is increasingli dumb and pointless, too. 

war is becom an outdat mean of human conflict resolution. technolog is turn arm conflict into an endeavor increasingli domin by what war scholar call "asymmetr warfare" — mean that weaker power like iran can now marshal so much strength that they are no longer veri weak, exact a mighti cost of victori even to the world’ pre-emin global superpower. then there is climat change, which ha ratchet up the opportun cost of everi conflict; anytim we are fight each other, we are abscond in the larger and more import fight for the habit of the planet. 

you may debat whether ani particular histor war work out well for it agitators. but there should be no debat that mani of america’ recent war have end in miseri for all. our politician talk of war as a last resort, but that is onli to keep up appearances, becaus the truth is too terribl to admit: that our ever-more-expens war machin (a cost of nearli $740 billion in 2020) can buy us littl peace. rather than a last resort, war now offer no resort. war can no longer be defend as the thing to do after everyth els ha failed. war must instead be seen as failur itself. 

I had thought the futil of war might be grasp by most american politician by now. one of donald trump’ rare bright spot as a candid wa hi departur from the post-9/11 bush-cheney doctrin that doubl down on heedless american militari interventionism. In hi oft-stat avers to "endless war," trump’ sentiment match the public’ — a pew poll thi summer show that most americans, includ most militari veterans, now believ that our war in afghanistan and iraq have not been worth fighting. trump seem to be heed the public’ caution back in the summer when he abruptli call off a strike against iran in retali for it shoot down an american surveil drone. 

but in kill iran’ most import militari leader, maj. gen. qassim suleimani, trump open the door to war. now iran is retaliating, and a cycl of escal look possibl — even if, for now, trump is back away from further conflict. it’ begin to feel a lot like 2003 again, with some of the same pundit and politician who were in favor of a war with iraq now repeat similar talk point about iran. while note that he’d like to avoid war, trump himself ha suggest that war with iran would be a cakewalk: "it wouldn’t last veri long, I can tell you that," the presid told fox busi in june. 

don’t fall for it. it’ plain dishonesty: how could anyon who ha live through the quagmir of iraq and afghanistan think war with iran will be anyth but long and brutal? In those conflicts, america’ overwhelm militari might stumbl on local culture, geography, ethnic and religi rivalries, and most of all the determin of an entrenched, commit foe that could melt in and out of the local population. 

As vox’ alex ward point out, iran ha almost three time as mani peopl as iraq did when we invad in 2003. It also ha treacher geography, and it control a great mani proxi forc across the middl east and even in like sleeper cell in europ and latin america. iran also possess a sophist cyberwar oper — it is believ to be behind recent hack into american bank and other target and to have spread disinform and propaganda on social network around the world. 

the unit state would overwhelm iran in a convent head-on war, but like china and russia, iran ha adopt a deep capac to mount "hybrid war" — conflict that involv both convent and unconvent mean of war. (for example, iran could expand it oper on oil tanker in the strait of hormuz, deal a costli rise in global energi prices.) As ward concludes: "A u.s.-iran war would be a bloodi hell dure and after the fighting." 

thi get to the immens folli at the heart of our militari might. though the unit state spend more on the militari than the next nine countri combined, we have not been abl to purchas much peac through strength. that’ becaus our strength is clearli of a type, and our year in iraq and afghanistan have made plain our vulnerabilities. 

among other shortcomings, our militari is still buy mostli big, old defens technolog (like aircraft carrier and bombers) from the military-industri complex, even if mani of these technolog face obsolesc under a futur of artifici intelligence, unman battlefield robot and other cyberweapons. our country’ effort at adopt artifici intellig technolog in the militari might not be enough to counter our rivals, includ russia and china. 

the upshot is this: the unit state hold militari supremaci over the world’ water and the airspace, but our control is limit and contestable. the last two decad have made clear that even for america, war is never simple. We should fear it. We should avoid it. 

and we ought to look for more fruit thing to do with our money and our lives, like make life on earth more livable, not less. 
