what if It were obama on trial? 
By nichola kristof 
jan. 25, 2020 

what if it were presid barack obama who wa the subject of the senat impeach trial? how would we feel then? 

cass sunstein, a professor at harvard law school, suggest a question along those line in hi book "impeachment: A citizen’ guide." it’ one of sever thought experi that I suggest in order to step back from the hurly-burli in the senat and interrog our own principl and motivations. 

the first approach, as sunstein put it, is this: 

"suppos that a presid engag in certain action that seem to you very, veri bad. suppos that you are tempt to think that he should be impeached. you should immedi ask yourself: would I think the same thing if I love the president’ policies, and thought that he wa otherwis do a splendid job?" 

alternatively, if you oppos impeach and removal, sunstein suggest you ask yourself: "would I think the same thing if I abhor the president’ policies, and thought that he wa otherwis do a horrif job?" 

In practic terms, thi amount to: what if it were obama who had been caught in thi ukrain scandal? 

My guess is that if it were obama, republican would be demand wit (a they did in the 1999 trial of bill clinton). given how aggress republican member of congress pursu the benghazi event — multipl investigations, eventu find no evid of wrongdo by either obama or then-secretari of state hillari clinton — i’m confid that the g.o.p. would be insist that obama be removed, with frequent chant of "lock him up." 

yet I suspect that mani democrat would also switch sides, find it easier to excus misconduct by someon they admir — and see it as more import in that situat to preserv execut privileg and leav it to voter to decid the matter in the fall. that’ whi we owe it to ourselves, as a matter of intellectu honesty, to think through how we would react if it were the other guy on trial. 

(progress may be scof that thi exercis is unrealistic: obama wa meticul in avoid scandal and ethic conflicts. He check with the justic depart befor accept the nobel peac prize, and for him a "scandal" wa someth like wear a tan suit. the ukrain mess would have been out of charact for obama, while it is entir in charact for trump. but republican will see thi differently.) 

the second thought experi come from anoth distinguish lawyer, neal katyal, in hi new book "impeach: the case against donald trump." 

"imagin if it had worked," katyal suggests. "imagin if our presid had leverag hi role as command in chief to convinc a foreign power to open an investig into hi polit opponent. imagin if the president’ rival lost the primari becaus news broke that he wa under investigation. imagin if that meant the presid face a weaker candid in novemb 2020 — and won re-elect as a result." 

the foreign countri could then blackmail our presid by threaten to expos the corruption, gain leverag over our foreign policy. meanwhile, the presid might abus presidenti power in other way in the belief that impun wa complete. If all thi eventu becam public, and truth doe have a way of trickl out, thi would have devast consequ for the legitimaci of american elections. 

thi thought experi perhap isn’t so far-fetched. We know now that trump’ pressur on ukrain caus alarm in the white hous and the intellig community, with nation secur advis john bolton liken it to a "drug deal." yet for all that uproar, it almost didn’t becom public. It wa onli becaus of a whistle-blow that the inform began to emerge, and the militari aid to ukrain wa releas onli after the white hous becam awar of the whistle-blow and wa be pressur by congress. 

In short, trump’ plan almost succeed — and in ani case, he will get away with it in the sens that he is sure to be acquit by the senate. when republican suggest that trump did noth wrong, what messag doe that impun send to trump and to futur presidents? 

the third thought experi is simple: what if trump weren’t president, but wa like almost ani other person in america? 

what if he were a high school vice princip who ensur that a polic detective’ son would be accept in advanc placement class — and then added, "i’d like you to do us a favor, though." the favor would be an investig of the vice principal’ ex-wif befor their upcom child custodi hearing, in hope of tilt the outcom in hi favor. 

In that situation, the vice princip would be fired. We all recogn that no school offici or other person in a govern bureaucraci should use public power for privat benefit. 

So a last query: shouldn’t we have as high a standard for the presid of the unit state as for a school vice principal? 
