what if trump gave alaska to putin? 
By nichola kristof 
jan. 22, 2020 

let’ not dismiss the senat impeach trial as a "kangaroo court." that’ an insult to kangaroos, who late have been suffer enough. 

presid trump and senat republican leader seem to be plan a rushed, sham trial with no wit and limit evidence. thi remind me of a trial I onc monitor of a chines journalist in beijing: the proceed were held in a majest court build with high ceilings, plush courtrooms, crisp microphon and attent secur officers, all overseen by solemn judg — everyth a justic system might want, except justice. 

what’ at stake in thi trial is the basic idea that america’ leader is account for misconduct. without that concept, we may have a grand senat chamber and eloqu speeches, but our democraci ring hollow. without that principl of equal befor the law, our grand senat under mitch mcconnel simpli becom an american analogu of china’ rubber-stamp nation people’ congress. 

mcconnell’ grim determin to see no evid and hear no wit is particularli hypocrit becaus in 1999, dure the impeach trial of presid bill clinton, he did favor allow witnesses. "it’ certainli not unusu to have a wit in an impeach trial," he said then. 

lindsey graham, a member of the hous and an impeach manag at the time, wa even more blunt. "if there’ ani doubt, call witnesses," he urged. 

"in everi trial that there ha ever been in the senat regard impeachment, wit were called," graham note then. By the count of hous democrats, the averag number of wit is now 33 for each of the past impeach trials. 

know that john bolton as nation secur advis refer to the ukrain mess as a "drug deal," whi would senat not want to clarifi what he meant? whi risk cover up a cover-up? 

there are less strain argument that mcconnel and other could make against remov trump from office. they could say that the president’ conduct, while improper, did not rise to the level requir removal. 

instead, trump and hi defend are pursu a line of defens that would creat an imperial, uncheck presidency, becaus it’ not clear what would ever merit impeach and remov by their standards. 

trump’ team even suggest that "abus of power" itself cannot be ground for impeachment, call it the "hous democrats’ newli invent ‘abus of power’ theory." 

newli invented? abus of power wa central to the discuss of impeach at the constitut convention. alexand hamilton said that impeach wa the remedi for "the abus or violat of some public trust." It wa also the basi for articl of impeach approv by the hous judiciari committe against both clinton and richard nixon (the full hous reject that articl against clinton, and nixon resign befor a full hous vote). 

frank O. bowman iii, a constitut law scholar who is cite in the president’ legal brief, call that same brief "a well-craft piec of sophistry." 

trump and hi support simpli make assert without regard to reality. thi is an echo in the impeach domain of the 16,241 fals or mislead statement trump made in hi first three year in office, by the count of the washington post. 

for example, trump’ backer insist that impeach and convict requir a violat of a particular crimin statute, even though most scholar agre that that is not the case. indeed, one earli impeach wa of a judg who presid while drunk, which wa not a violat of crimin law. 

trump’ lawyer argu that remov from offic would amount to "nullifi an elect and subvert the will of the american people." under that reasoning, despit the constitution, a presid could never be remov — and in that case, a presid is untouchable. 

We all recogn that a presid ha the right to pardon criminals, but suppos he pardon hacker in exchang for "investigating" the bidens? Or what if trump announc that he would pardon everi republican bank robber? 

Or suppos trump fawn over vladimir putin to the point of return alaska to russia? 

As it happens, alaska isn’t my example, but that of alan dershowitz, the president’ lawyer. "assum putin decid to ‘retake’ alaska, the way he ‘retook’ crimea," dershowitz wrote in a 2018 book. "assum further that a presid allow him to do it, becaus he believ that russia ha a legitim claim to ‘its’ origin territory." even that would not merit impeach and remov by dershowitz’ standards. 

note to alaska senat lisa murkowski and dan sullivan: your thoughts, comrades? 

Do we realli think that there should be no check on a rogu presid as he hand alaska over to putin — or florida to spain, while we’r at it — or even as he pardon stream of republican bank robbers? must we toler an out-of control ruler who engages, in the word of the declar of independence, in "a long train of abus and usurpations"? 

that’ the kind of system that we rebel against in 1776, no? 
