whi trump persist 
By thoma B. edsal 
jan. 22, 2020 

the failur of the american elector to rise up in opposit to presid trump — whose outrag are well-docu — suggest that voter are less tolerant, less empathet and less insist on integr than mani believe. 

the elect of trump and hi first three year in offic have reveal a nation deepli ambival about immigration, race, equality, fair — even about the ground rule of democraci itself. 

what if the belief system use to justifi anti-immigr polici and to justifi race prejudice, for that matter — hostil to outsiders, insularity, high sensit to extern threat — are as deepli ingrain in the american bodi polit as belief system sympathet to immigr and to racial equal — openness, recept to new experiences, trust? 

karen stenner, a polit psychologist and behavior economist best known for "predict the rise of trump-lik figur under the kind of condit we now confront," respond to my email inquiri by note the conflict pressur at play: 
I don’t think I would agre that trumpian conserv stand on immigration, race and homeless are a more "natural" or "default" position. commun with a good balanc of peopl who seek out diversity, complexity, novelty, new and excit experi etc., and those who are disgust by and avers to such things, avoid them, and tell other to do likewise, tend to thrive and prosper in human evolution. 

find the right balance, stenner said, "i vital to both societ cohes and human flourishing." but, she warned, "we may have tip the balanc too far in favor of unconstrain divers and complexity," push the boundari beyond "mani people’ capac to toler it." 

At thi juncture, she argued, we need to tinker with that balanc and get it right for everyone. So there’ the paradox of our times: it is like that rather less liber democraci will ultim make liber democraci more secure. 

among liberals, stenner argued, the greatest ambival "attach to immigr issues," and that ambival is onli worsen by the unwilling of liber to accept an open debat in which immigr oppon can "express their fear and concerns, without be call racists." 

suzett brook master — who ha written extens about immigr integration, detention, employment-bas immigr and the immigrants’ right field gener — made a parallel point in her recent studi of immigration, "chang is hard": 
academ agre that it is the pace of chang rel to the composit of the receiv commun that matter most. simpli put, if a place is alreadi quit diverse, make it more divers matter less. even signific inflow of divers newcom will be perceiv as less threaten becaus the commun ha alreadi adapt to greater diversity. By contrast, in a rel homogen location, even small absolut number of newcomers, such as refugees, can be disrupt and activ cultur anxiety. 

jonathan haidt, a professor at nyu’ stern school of business, offer a similarli nuanc examin of how the balanc between tribal and open might play out. tribalism, he wrote by email, 
is not a mindless and etern "u versu them" mentality. It is a set of psycholog adapt that make peopl respond to threat and intergroup competit with an urg to band together, enforc loyalti to the team, and guard boundari or territory. 

In the polit arena, haidt continued, 
if one gain prestig for outdo other on one’ devot to sacr valu — such as guard america’ borders, on the right, or be antiracist on the left — then the party’ rhetor will shift to the extremes, with candid make more extrem propos that gain them prestige. 

the pressur to go to extremes, haidt suggested, are "roughli symmetr between left and right." 

john R. hibbing, a polit scientist at the univers of nebraska, take a more uncompromis stance. In an email, he wrote: 
though consider of such matter is alway speculative, suggest the possibl that conserv orientations, particularli on topic such as immigr and race, are evolutionarili more primal is perfectli reasonable. 

In their book "predisposed: liberals, conservatives, and the biolog of polit differences," hibbing, kevin B. smith, of the univers of nebraska, and john R. alford, of rice, argu that liber is "an evolutionari luxury" that can emerg in peopl when "neg stimuli becom less preval and less deadly," or, as hib put it in an email, "when daili threat to life and limb pose by other human be have diminished." 

conversely, they write, if the environ shift back to a "threat-fil atmosphere," then "posit select for conserv orient would reappear." 

let’ take a look at one of the core divis between liber and conservatives: the caus of poverty. the right tend to blame individu fail while the left tend to place the onu on econom and polit forces. the accompani chart, creat from 2019 voter studi group data by zach goldberg, a doctor candid in polit scienc at georgia state, show the difference. 

linda J. skitka, a professor of psycholog at the univers of illinoi at chicago, and four colleagu conduct an intrigu set of test to determin the durabl and strength of liber and conserv belief on poverti in a 2002 paper, "dispositions, scripts, or motiv correction? understand ideolog differ in explan for social problems." 

they found that in troubl times, when competit for limit good intensifies, liber move to the right: 
It is much easier to get a liber to behav like a conserv than it is to get a conserv to behav like a liberal. liber act like conserv when resourc are scarce, cognit load is high, and aid serv secondari rather than primari needs. conserv onli act like liber when they are ask to consid help a person with intern control caus of need who ha convincingli reformed. 

In an email, skitka provid some reason for thi difference: 
My research ha found that hold peopl respons for their plight is a more natur respons than feel sympathet to those in need. under most conditions, liber are more sympathet to the needi in larg part becaus they are more like to attribut the caus of their need to someth about the situation. conservatives, in contrast, tend to attribut the caus of people’ need to someth about the needi person: they don’t work hard enough, etc. 

becaus blame the individu is a default or fallback position, liber have to go through a "more cognit effortful" process to reach their less "natural" conclus — "peopl have to basic overrid a more natur inclin to make disposit attribut instead," accord to skitka. 

As a result, she continued, under certain pressures, 
liber respond to the needi more like conserv when resourc are scarc or when they are under a lot of cognit load (e.g., they are distracted), or their abil to engag in self-control is reduc (e.g., when under the influenc of alcohol). 

the left-right differ over the caus of poverti appli to other controversi subject highli salient in contemporari american politics, skitka and her colleagu write: 
liber tend to focu on situat or institut explan for thing like homeless or whi peopl commit crimes, wherea conserv tend to focu on person explan for the same phenomena. 

skitka and her fellow author receiv strong support for their argument in a 2012 paper, "low-effort thought promot polit conservatism," by scott eidelman, a professor of psycholog at the univers of arkansas, and three co-authors. 

eidelman and hi colleagu conduct a seri of test compar the answer of two group to ideolog reveal questions. the first face time pressur or were forc to answer with distract background noises, in environ "taxing, limit or otherwis disengag effortful, delib thought." the second group wa ask the same question with plenti of time to think and without nois or other distractions. 

In each case, those test under favor circumst provid more liber answer than those test under more hostil conditions. the advers condit forc those particip to perform what the author call "low-effort thinking," and the result show that "low-effort think promot polit conservatism." 

In one of their four experiments, the author went to an unidentifi bar in new england and persuad 85 drinker to take the test and have their alcohol level measured. the results: 
bar patron report more conserv attitud as their level of alcohol intox increased. becaus alcohol limit cognit capac and disrupt control responding, while leav automat think larg intact, these data are consist with our claim that low-effort think promot polit conservatism. 

diana mutz, a professor of polit scienc and commun at the univers of pennsylvania, point out that one effect of increas educ level is to fundament chang individu world views. "the one sens in which there is evid that we do ‘overcome’ our tendenc toward tribal is through education," she wrote by email. 

"everi studi i’v ever seen across the social scienc show that educ promot less in-group favorit and greater toler toward those unlik ourselves," she continued. "in panel studi that track the same peopl over time, as peopl gain advanc level of education, they becom more toler and favor toward liber democrat norms." 

one scholar who ha devot much of hi career to the studi of the transit in develop countri from materialist to post-materialist valu — from a valu orient that emphas econom and physic secur to one that emphas self-express and qualiti of life — is ronald inglehart, a professor of polit scienc at the univers of michigan. He see a gener transit to more liber world view — perhap as a concomit of voter with colleg and graduat school degrees. 

"liber valu are not a veneer, mask a much less pleasant reality," inglehart point out in an email. "A sizabl and grow segment" of the american public, he wrote, "ha toler liber view and these view are deep-root and enduring." 

inglehart’ research ha found 
that those who develop postmaterialist valu (which strongli correl with what you think of as "liberal" values) in their pre-adult years, remain rel postmaterialist 40 year later. 

materialist and postmaterialist take oppos side in respons to these statements: 
A woman ha to/doesn’t have to have children to be fulfilled; I would/wouldn’t want foreigners, homosexu or peopl with aid as neighbors; A child needs/do not need a home with both a father and a mother in order to grow up happily; imagin is/i not one of the most import thing to teach a child; men do/don’t make better polit leader than women; homosexu is/i never justifiable. 

from 1970 to the present, the ratio of materialist to postmaterialist ha gone from 4-1 to 1-1, accord to inglehart. 

ryan enos, a polit scientist at harvard whose research ha demonstr the precari of liber racial commit when test in real world circumstances, repli by email to my inquiries: 
there is no doubt that there is more ambival on these issu among liber and moder than is reflect in the polls. 

In addit to the pressur of "social desir bias" to give the liber answer, eno wrote, 
other will lie to themselves, tell themselv they believ someth that they realli don’t; and other are liber in theory, but less so in practic when it come to thing like homeless in their own citi or neighborhood. 

there are other sourc of intern tension and conflict interest among democrat and liberals. 

I have written frequent on the problem confront the "upstairs-downstairs" democrat coalit — combin well-educated, rel affluent voter who are disproportion white with poor and work class voter who are heavili minority. 

In hi book, "polit Is for power: how to move beyond polit hobbyism, take action, and make real change," and in an atlant article, eitan hersh, a polit scientist at tufts, ha focus on the rel weaker commit of the upscal constitu of the democrat coalit to polici initi aim at provid substant help. 

mani college-educ peopl "think they are deepli engag in politics," hersh wrote in the atlantic: 
they follow the news — read articl like thi one — and debat the latest develop on social media. they might sign an onlin petit or throw a $5 onlin donat at a presidenti candidate. 

In fact, he argues, their consumpt of polit inform is 
a way of satisfi their own emot and intellectu needs. these peopl are polit hobbyists. what they are do is no closer to engag in polit than watch sportscent is to play football. 

hersh is hard on these voters, a group he describ as "college-educ white people, a demograph group that is now predomin democratic." 

these voters, he writes, 
do polit as hobbyist becaus they can. On the polit left, they may say they fear presid donald trump. they may lament polarization. but they are pretti comfort with the statu quo. 

they do not 
feel a sens of obligation, of "link fate," to peopl who have concret need such that they are will to be their allies. they might front as alli on social media, but veri few white liber are activ engag in face-to-fac polit organizations, commit their time to fight for racial equal or ani other issu they say they care about. 

whi doe all thi matter? what differ doe it make if liber and democrat are more ambival than conserv and republicans? 

for one thing, it mean that in elect that are increasingli negative, ambival partisan — democrat in thi case — will be more vulner to attack design to gener conflict, to weaken enthusiasm and to increas the likelihood of nonvoting. presid trump and the propon of the republican parti he domin are certain to do all they can to capit on thi vulnerability. 

most importantly, democrat ambivalence, in a year when high turnout is mandatory, reflect the larger problem face a polit parti that is now focus on it share animos to trump. that animos may or may not be enough to propel it presidenti candid to victory, but the inher tension between differ sector of the center-left coalit over ideological, econom and social issu — not to mention glare level of intraparti incom inequ — call into question exactli what common ground hold the democrat coalit together. how common is it? 
