Why America Needs a Royal Family
By Jennifer Weiner
Jan. 10, 2020

Like everyone else on the internet, I’ve been watching the royal rumble, as Prince Harry and his American bride are attempting to carve out new roles in the royal family, and I’ve reached a conclusion: We, the American people, need some royals of our own.

I know. You’re thinking: Didn’t we fight a revolution so we wouldn’t have kings? Aren’t monarchies expensive and aren’t European nations streamlining their monarchies for this very reason? And isn’t Prince Harry quitting so that he won’t have to participate in an archaic, obsolete system with unpleasant echoes of imperialism and elitism that has made his wife a target for racists?

All true. But hear me out, because, as the House of Windsor burns, and as recriminations ricochet from Instagram to the tabloids, with courtiers and conference calls and competing tales of who knew what when, there’s the kernel of something that might be worth pulling out of the dumpster fire and reinventing as our own.

Based on my understanding of British government (which, full disclosure, is largely informed by memories of my 10th-grade world history class, plus three seasons of “The Crown”), the prime minister and Parliament are democratically elected, and do the actual governing, while the dynastic, unelected royals have ceremonial roles. The kings and queens and their offspring live in the palace, wear fabulous jewels, drive (or are driven) in fancy cars to events like Trooping the Color (excuse me, the Colour) and Swan Upping, which sounds made up, but isn’t, all while draining the nation’s coffers to the tune of some £82.4 million this year (per the royal family) or £345 million (per Republic, a group that advocates abolition of the monarchy).

The subjects pay the bills, and, in return, the royals live their lives in public, enjoying various rich-people pursuits, attending weddings in nice clothes and the aforementioned jewelry, cutting ribbons, standing on balconies and waving. They are England’s celebrities in chief, the stars of one of the world’s longest-running reality shows. They either serve as expensive anachronisms or useful distractions, depending on whom you ask.

“That’s the thing about the monarchy,” says Helena Bonham Carter, playing Princess Margaret on Season 3’s finale of “The Crown.” “We paper over the cracks.”

The problem with a real-time soap opera that draws the entire world’s attention is that very few people are equipped to be its stars. Recent history proves the point: the beautiful princess becoming a desperately unhappy young mother who dies tragically, trying to escape the paparazzi (rest in peace, Princess Diana). Her husband, the dashing prince, caught on tape musing about becoming his mistress’s tampon (really, who’s writing this dialogue?). An uncle, bounced out of the family business after consorting with a notorious pedophile. Is it any wonder that we now have a prince who wants to be written off the show, or, at the very least, become a recurring guest star, not a series regular?

In the United States, meanwhile, we expect our elected officials, with their unelected spouses and children, to serve that public, ceremonial role. Which has meant First Children going through adolescence on the world stage, and spouses who’ve worked as lawyers and teachers pressed into thankless, unsalaried and highly-scrutinized service as hostesses in chief.

Wouldn’t it make sense to separate those spheres, the way they have in Iceland, where there’s an elected president to handle ceremonial tasks, and a prime minister to govern? We, too, could give the power to an elected official and keep a different person around to handle the hosting/ribbon cutting/Rose Garden tour-leading/gossip lightning-rod stuff.

We could keep it simple and give the gig to Miss America, who’s already been chosen and already has a tiara. Or we could have a televised reality contest (a roy-ality contest — see what I did there?) to elect our king and queen. We could recruit the glittering couples we think would be best suited for the job of representing America on the world stage (Beyoncé and Jay-Z! Jennifer Lopez and A-Rod! George and Amal Clooney! Danny DeVito and Rhea Perlman! Ina Garten and Jeffrey!).

We would put the would-be royals through their paces — can she keep her cool while shaking hands in four-inch heels for three hours? Can he entertain foreign dignitaries, even if he doesn’t speak their language? Can they wrangle a gaggle of corgis or visiting college football champs? Do they look good in funny hats?

We let people vote. We move the winners into the White House and relocate the president into some nearby, more modest digs. Then, we let the president govern, while our king and queen cut the ribbons and host state dinners, pardon the Thanksgiving turkeys and light the Christmas tree. We give them a salary and strict instructions about the values they are to uphold (one single brooch like Princess Michael of Kent’s, and you’re out). And we give them crowns and titles because symbols have weight and meaning, and because fairy tales and hallmark movies have trained us to believe that precious metal headgear and titles confer prestige and desirability. There’s a reason we aren’t all bingeing a Netflix series called “The Baseball Cap”; a reason that — no offense, Iceland — Cinderella and Sleeping Beauty dream of a prince and not a president.

Elected royal couples would eliminate the problem of the unpaid first ladies, shifting the burden of being a hostess, a charity patron and a fashion plate onto the shoulders of someone who has skills for it, allowing the president’s spouse to continue on whatever path he or she previously chose — health care administrator, librarian, lawyer, Pilates-class frequenter.

Even better, it would eradicate the possibility of a president who would rather be a king. Any candidates who prefer campaigning to governing, who would rather speak at a rally than sit through a briefing, or who understand the hierarchies of Fox News but do not seem to have read the Constitution can run to be a royal, not a president. Give the power, with no crown, to the hard-working, camera-shy introverts; give a crown, with no power, to the preening spotlight hogs. For all we know, Prince Charles, who’s been kind of a yawn as a royal, could have been a solid politician, and our disastrous president might have been at least a contained disaster as King Donald the First.
