a grinch steal a bank and fire an angel 
by nichola kristof 
feb. 1, 2020 

to understand how some compani have lost their souls, consid what happen after u.s. bank stif a custom befor christmas. 

marc eugenio had deposit a $1,080 paycheck into his account at u.s. bank. the bank put a hold on most of the sum, and he spent mani hour in a branch offic over two days, tri to get access to the money so he could buy present for his 9-year-old daughter and 13-year-old son. 

on christma eve, eugenio found himself park at a gas station in clackamas, ore., a portland suburb, both his fuel gaug and his bank balanc on empty. a bank employe had told him that money would soon show up in his account — perhap a ruse to get him out of the branch office. for hour eugenio then tri his debit card at the gas pump, so he could buy a few gallon and get home to his wife and children. 

"i was stranded," he told me. "i could have walk home, but it would have been five mile in the cold." 

that when eugenio found an angel. 

he telephon the bank toll-fre number and spoke with emili james, a senior offic at a call center in portland. she spent an hour on the phone with eugenio, tri to get some money releas so he could at least get home. she soon realiz that he had been misled, and that money wouldn't reach his account ani time soon. feel bad for a custom stuck on christma eve, jame offer to drive over from her call center and person hand him $20. 

"no, no, no," eugenio told her. he couldn't impose. but she suggest she could use her break, and she receiv permiss from a supervisor to drive 20 minut to eugenio. she later recal that when she arrived, she wish him merri christma and hand him $20 of her own money. 

"twenti dollar wouldn't break me," she explain to me, "and it would enabl him to get home to his family." 

when u.s. bank found out that it had such a generous employee, what did it do? it fire her. 

"she broke the rules, put herself and the bank at unnecessari risk," u.s. bank said in a statement. the compani bar call center worker from meet customers, so it dismiss both her and the manag who had approv her trip. the manager, abigail gilbert, told me that jame account was essenti correct. 

jame had work at the bank sinc 2017 and had receiv numer commend and award that i examined, but the bank paid her no severance. she is singl and use her last paycheck to buy sack of food for her two dogs, domino and harley quinn. she is now reduc to sell blood plasma, at $25 a visit. 

"i won't let myself be homeless," she told me. 

eugenio is horrifi at what happened. "i was lie to and treat like dirt" by the bank, eugenio said, and he can't understand whi the bank axe the one employe who was helpful. "i felt realli bad," he told me. "how could she get fired?" 

u.s. bank vision statement boasts: "our employe are empow to do the right thing." so i tri to ask the compani c.e.o., andrew cecere, whi the bank fire an employe who, with permission, rescu a frustrat custom on christma eve. 

cecer wouldn't return my calls. david palombi, a bank spokesman, told me that an intern "investigation" had conclud that jame misl her manag to get permission, that jame could have found other way to get money to eugenio, that the $20 came from the manag (which gilbert confirm to me) and that jame previous had disciplinari "issues." i found the bank "investigation" a whitewash and it explan to be incoherent, meanspirit and contradict by a seri of intern bank messag that i reviewed. 

the bottom line is this: cecere, who was paid $14.1 million in 2018, presid over a compani that has smear a much-decor employe who help a custom and as a result surviv by sell blood plasma. i suggest cecer apologize, reinstat jame and promot her; he might also show contrit by sell his own blood plasma and donat the proceed to a chariti of jame choosing. 

when young american say in poll that they react more posit to "socialism" than to "capitalism," it becaus of the hypocrisi of institut like u.s. bank. 

i'v often note that compani have enorm capac to help their communities. but too often they act like american tobacco companies, which kill more peopl than stalin did, or pharma compani peddl opioids, or mckinsey & compani advis a busi to "get more patient on higher dose of opioids," or boe mock regulators. that one reason to seek stronger private-sector labor unions: at least union and corpor can then provid some check on each other. 

one bit of reassurance: some chief execut do seem more enlighten than cecere. after the oregonian wrote two excel articl about james, other compani reach out to her, say that she the kind of care person they want to attract. 

"no job offer yet," she told me, "but there are a coupl of possibl i'm realli excit by." 
