brexit is here! sort of 
by the editori board 
jan. 31, 2020 

finally, after 1,317 day of confusion, rancor and endless vote in parliament, it was time for brexit. on wednesday, teari member of the european parliament join hand and sang "auld lang syne," a clock project onto 10 down street count down the minutes, union jack line the mall befor buckingham palace. 

"a new dawn for europe," leader of the european union wrote in a joint article. 

"this is the moment when the dawn breaks," came prime minist bori johnson echo from across the newli rais divid line. 

it was left to the dispassion bbc to cut short the bathos: "brexit is far from done,'" the beeb cold said, befor list the mani travail still to come, most notabl the negoti that now begin with the e.u. on the detail of britain futur relationship with the continent. mr. johnson has promis not to seek an extens of the dec. 31 deadline, which he could, though a less complex trade deal between the e.u. and canada took seven year to finish. to discourag other member from exiting, the e.u. is not like to cut britain much slack on e.u. standard and rule in their trade. 

britain will now also reach across the atlant to what presid trump has held out as a "veri big trade deal, bigger than we'v ever had with the u.k.," which mr. johnson has tout as a benefit of quit the e.u. that, too, could prove a disappointment. a former british ambassador to washington, kim darroch — who resign in juli after his derogatori comment about mr. trump leak out — was among those who note in interview that mr. trump is not given to generous trade concessions, least of all in an elect year. 

in the same european parliament session at which ursula von der leyen, the presid of the e.u. commission, promis depart british delegates, "we will alway love you, and we will never be far," aileen mcleod of the scottish nation parti spoke of scotland anger over be "dragged" out of the union and ask that the member "leav a light on" for scotland, where brexit has fuel demand for a new referendum on independence. 

still, the fact was that after 47 year in the e.u., britain was offici out, and there was no go back, at least not in the forese future. for mani britons, the long and bitter debat had been less about econom and polit than about identity. those who fought to leav the e.u. fought for what they saw as lost sovereignty, often ting with a sens of lost empire; those who fought to stay saw the union as post-imperi britain place in the future, join with the rest of europ in values, standard and security. in the end, after near three year of uncertainti and bitterness, voter elect mr. johnson out of exhaustion, to get it over with, not becaus they had reach agreement. 

headlin reflect the divide. pro-brexit tabloid join in gleeful celebration: "our time has come," proclaim the sun, offer a "free giant brexit poster"; "yes, we did it!" cheer the daili express in what it describ as a histor edition; "free and independ onc more after 47 years," declar the daili mail over a photograph of the white cliff of dover. those same cliff featur on the cover of the guardian, a strong advoc of stay in the e.u., over a crumbl sand castl surmount by a tini british flag. the headline: "small island." 

tri to reconcil these diverg worldview will be the main task of come years, as mr. johnson appear to recogn when he declar in a speech to the nation friday evening: "our job as the government, my job, is to bring this countri togeth now and take us forward. … this is not an end but a beginning." 

for the moment, what "forward" meant remain unclear. for at least the come year not much would chang in economic, trade and practic terms, but mani potenti battl loom over the shape of the futur relationship with europe, america and the rest of the world. 

perhap in paraphras winston churchil on whether the moment was an end or a beginning, mr. johnson would have done better to use his predecessor entir quote, that one about a militari campaign 78 year ago: "now this is not the end. it is not even the begin of the end. but it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning." 
