china, where state pomp come with real feel 
by ian johnson 
oct. 3, 2019 

beij — attend china nation day celebr over the year has been a bit like listen to differ take of a song, with the compos hone the theme and jettison the raw bit until the piec sound just right. 

that how i felt at tuesday celebr on tiananmen square, held to observ the 70th anniversari of the found of the peopl republ of china. i'v attend two other ceremoni like this befor — for the 35th anniversari in 1984 and the 50th in 1999 — and i knew the basic drill: there would be a big militari parad follow by float celebr the govern accomplishments. 

but this show felt bigger and brassier than either of those, as if the compos had decid to use everi instrument in the orchestra and cast subtleti aside. it was slick and sleek, but also overpow and at time bombastic. 

when i receiv my invitation, govern offici told me that i was lucki to attend becaus it was such a great honor. i nod polit but onli realli understood what they meant when i arriv at tiananmen squar on tuesday at 6 a.m. we media type were just a few hundr in a sea of loyal member of the chines communist parti (c.c.p.), and for mani of them it must have felt like one of the biggest event of their lives. 

it would be easi to write these peopl off as extras. and 20 year ago, the last time i was at such an event, the peopl in attend were main high train perform who held aloft placard that spell out differ messages, north korea–style. but tuesday crowd was different. it was made up of univers professors, scientists, administrators, bureaucrat and peopl who had made some sort of contribut to the state. they weren't prop but excit particip who expect to rememb this day. 

i notic that right away when i walk past a rais platform cover with artifici grass that surround a big televis screen. peopl were crouch down next to the platform and neat arrang their letter of invitation, parade-pictur id and program, almost all in the same fashion, like sacrament on a church altar. then they would snap a picture, aim their camera so that china nation symbol, the gate of heaven peace, appear in the background. these were photo design to be boast about on social media: "guess where i was today?" "yes, at tiananmen square." "yes, at the ceremony." and here is proof. 

if these were their sacrament and this ceremoni was their ritual, what then was their belief? 

that would probabl be the messag broadcast on the giant screen that surround us. befor the parad began, those screen show archiv footag of the past 70 year present a stori about how china had been poor and beaten down by outsid power until the communist parti save the country. 

the mao era wasn't portray as foreign journalist and academ often depict it — a seri of violent campaign against imagin enemi of the state and the worst famin in record histori — but as a period of pioneer glory, when china secur it border for the first time in a century, built a heavi industri base and set the stage for it econom takeoff. 

rais on this ideology, the attende seem visibl move when soldier carri the nation flag goose-step from the monument to the peopl hero at the center of the squar down to the enorm flagpole. i was unnerv by the background barrag of artilleri and the amplifi sound of the boot strike the pavement — it felt like an invas of giant — but mani peopl around me stood solemnly. this wasn't stage-managed: some look bored, other gaze around, kid played. but mani more look earnest, just like american do when they stand up, hand on heart, for the nation anthem at a sport event. 

and i don't think it was just for show that peopl jump out of their seat at one of the earli high point of the ceremony: when presid xi jinp appear stand in an open-top limousin drive out of the gate of heaven peace. the moment was pure theater, with mr. xi in a dark tradit suit appearing, frame by the vermilion wall of the imperi forbidden city, as he set off to inspect the troops. 

peopl also ooh and aah at anoth signatur moment that owe much to peke opera. when mr. xi pass the soldiers, their head swivel as if on sockets, their eye bulg as they follow the nation most import person. it was a show of the arm forc unswerv allegi to the c.c.p. leader, and the audienc need no encourag to cheer. 

realiz that some of these emot are genuin is import becaus we can't understand china if we think the parti onli rule through the authoritarian method that report understand focus on. on my social media feed, which includ disgruntl intellectu but also working-class practition of folk religion, it clear that mani buy into the nation stori creat by the c.c.p. 

invent tradit is noth new, nor uniqu to china. but here these construct can sometim feel uneasi becaus mani of them are import — from soldier dress uniform that seem decad out of date (gold braids, enorm epaulets, row of medals) to soundtrack-lik music worthi of john william (fanfares, kettl drums, plenti of brass). 

i might be nostalgic, but the mood 35 year ago felt a bit different. i was a student then, and a group of us was buss down to tiananmen squar for the ceremony. we then mill around for most of the day. there was also an orchestr event, but secur was minim and you could still stand right next to the perform as they march or danc past. some student even jump into the parad and held up a banner greet the paramount leader deng xiaoping. 

china today is more serious about be a superpower. when the spontan enthusiasm flag on tuesday, cheerlead made sure the flag kept waving. and secur was so tight that it border on paranoia: neighborhood park around town implement airport-styl secur to even enter. but that, too, was part of the spectacle, the messag and the vision — of a focus and disciplin state, led by the chines communist party, that can put on a spectacl few countri can match. 
