coronavirus and the panic epidem 
by ian johnson 
jan. 30, 2020 

beij — the absurd of the situat hit me on wednesday when i was come home from a local bar at 8 p.m. i had ridden my bike a few hour earlier to a park for a walk and then to meet a friend — my first human contact in five days, exclud the cashier at the groceri store. 

but the side gate i'd use to leav the enorm communist-era compound was now chain shut. what? a notic in chines said it was lock to prevent the spread of the new coronavirus. 

so i head toward the north entrance. that one is for pedestrian and has two barrier set slight apart, just wide enough to get through on foot. that o.k., i thought, i can squeez by with my bike and be home in a few minutes. 

i rode around the block, but when i got to the gate i had to slam on the brakes. someon had taken a dozen ride-shar bikes, lash them togeth with wire and pile them in between the barriers. then, for good measure, they'd fasten the heap to the post with more wire, make it into some sort of postmodern commentari on our hypermobil society. 

laughing, i rode on to the main entrance. it has a car entranc with a big gate and on either side, walkway for pedestrians. one of those was also pile high with ride-shar bike sacrif for the nation good; the other was protect by two secur guard i'd never seen before. they block my way. 

"what do you want?" one of them asked. 

"to go home. i live here." 

"have you been to wuhan recently?" 

"i just rode back. i'm exhausted!" 

the humor was beyond their pay grade. 

"is anyon in your home from wuhan or has been there recently?" 

i need to stop fool around. 

"no, i haven't been there in four years. i live alone. no fever. i feel fine." 

they silent let me through. 

this felt like the height of foolishness: whi would the gate be open dure the day but lock down at night? do virus oper like vampires? that when i realiz the guard effort was just part of a borg-lik lockdown that the state had put into place with the alacr of offici in full c.y.a. mode. 

the next day i was clean my apartment: no one could enter beij anymore, so my one luxury, an hour-a-week hous cleaner, was stuck in her villag even though the main phase of the lunar new year holiday was over. there was a knock on my door. it was the good peopl from the apart manag office, mrs. luo and her assistant. 

"oh, mr. zhang, nice to see you," mrs. luo, the henna-hair manag of leas renewals, said, address me by my chines name. "is there anyon from wuhan in your apartment?" 

"no. still not." 

"o.k. take a look at this please." 

she hand me a sheet from the local communist parti district committee, list dos and don't to follow dure the outbreak. 

do seek help. do listen to the local government. do keep warm. do stay at home. do avoid contact. do wash your hands. don't spit. don't exert yourself too much. don't associ with peopl who'v recent arriv from the infect area around the megac of wuhan. on the back was a list of all the communist parti street committe and their phone numbers. 

finally, after five year of live in this neighborhood and countless fail effort to regist my complaint about illeg construct at night, i had some phone numbers. i file the sheet for futur use. 

the german languag has, as usual, a hyper-specif word for this phenomenon: "aktionismus," liter actionism, or action for action sake. what i was wit was aktionismus in the face of a problem that requir a sensit respons involv public trust. but sinc the chines govern cannot elicit either of those things, i was see the compensatori flailing-around of a state with no other options. 

instead of have an adult convers with the popul about the virus and put in place reason polici that have been use effect elsewhere, the chines state has gone into full lockdown mode. this demonstr one of those truism from polit science: authoritarian govern are like peopl who don't have ani finger but do possess two thumbs. they can take forc action but can't fine-tun the lever of government. 

actually, i'm not be fair. when the chines communist parti has time, it can come up with and use sophist polici — wit it co-opt of tradit faith to fill a spiritu vacuum in society. 

but when face with a crisis, the parti can't seem to avoid grand gestures: build hospit from scratch in two weeks, lock down ten of million of people, ban million more from travel to big citi and so on. in some ways, a moment like this one is a technocrat dream: when western health care expert say that this sort of lockdown won't work, they basic mean it never been tri on this scale with this kind of ubereffici government. 

now that it be tried, not just in beij but also across the country, the effect are kind of thrill to watch. apart compound like mine are be fumigated. (with what? who cares!) peopl are walk around with loudspeak blare out warn against the virus. villag are close their gate as if bandit were on the prowl. and go to a restaur or a bar is almost an act of treason or, at best, foolish selfishness. 

the most interest question is whi the parti feel the need to carri on like this. i think it know the peopl don't trust it in these case and assum there has been a cover-up. 

henc one of the most popular figur in the crisis: zhong nanshan, the hero of the 2002-3 sar outbreak, now 83, who is back in action, treat patient and warn citizen about the need for hygiene. he has been adopt as the incorrupt offici — a familiar trope in chines history, the confucian offici who stand tall despit pressur to bend. and so we read endless profil of dr. zhong in chines social media, discuss his famili background, upbringing, success and apolit pursuit of science-bas truth. the clear implic is that he is that rare offici capabl of such principl conduct. 

behind all this lie the feel that most other peopl in the parti can't quit be trusted. this has been reinforc over the past few day by report that at least eight peopl who were detain in wuhan in earli januari on charg of spread rumor are in fact medic doctors, not fear-mong ne'er-do-wells. this startl fact is now leak out in onlin report that are sometimes, but not always, be blocked. at some point, the govern will have to admit to a partial cover-up. 

consid the under distrust, it hard for the govern to say what mani epidemiologist are saying: this outbreak is serious but not catastrophic. becaus if the state level with the people, it would also have to admit that there is no need for this degre of social control. some 259 peopl were report to have die as of saturday evening, in a countri of near 1.4 billion, and there is no indic that we are at the start of a hollywood disaster-styl movie. 

the govern inabl to formul a measur respons will turn this outbreak into a direct successor of the sar epidemic. that hard was a huge public health disast — fewer than 800 death — yet it has taken on a legendari reput as a catastroph of unimagin proportions, one that should never be allow to recur. 

but of cours a new outbreak has occurred. 

doe this mean that the state will suffer? i don't think so. for despit their mistrust of the system, peopl over all are go along with the lockdown. in privat convers and on chat rooms, they say it imposs not to take drastic action in a countri as big as china. 

in this sense, the popul has absorb the govern narrat of chines exceptionalism: run china requir a strong hand, and these measures, as absurd as they seem, are proof that the govern is do a good job — and portend that the parti will come out of this, as always, triumphant. 
