coronavirus spreads, and the world pay for china dictatorship 
by nichola kristof 
jan. 29, 2020 

china leader sometim seem 10 feet tall, presid over a polit and econom juggernaut that has found univers at a rate of one a week and that recent use more cement in three year than the unit state did in the entir 20th century. 

presid trump has hail china president, xi jinping, as a "brilliant leader," and michael bloomberg say xi is "not a dictator." but we'r now see the danger of xi authoritarian model, for china and the world. 

the first known coronavirus infect in the citi of wuhan present symptom begin on dec. 1, and by late decemb there was alarm in wuhan medic circles. that would have been the moment for the author to act decisively. 

and act decis they did — not against the virus, but against whistle-blow who were tri to call attent to the public health threat. a doctor who told a wechat group about the virus was disciplin by the communist parti and forc to admit wrongdoing. the polic report give "education" and "criticism" to eight front-lin doctor for "rumormongering" about the epidemic; instead of punish these doctors, xi should have listen to them. 

china inform the world health organ of the virus on dec. 31 but kept it own citizen in the dark; as other countri report infect even as china pretend that it had confin the outbreak to wuhan, chines joke grim about a "patriotic" virus that onli struck foreigners. 

wuhan mayor said he wasn't author to discuss the virus until late this month. in that time, peopl travel to and from wuhan and didn't take precautions. 

the govern final order a lockdown on jan. 23 that effect quarantin peopl in wuhan. but by then, accord to the mayor, five million peopl had alreadi fled the city. 

part becaus the govern cover up the epidem in the earli stages, hospit were not abl to gather supplies, and there are now major shortag of test kits, mask and protect gear. some doctor were reduc to make goggl out of plastic folders. 

one reason for the earli cover-up is that xi china has systemat gut institut like journalism, social media, nongovernment organizations, the legal profess and other that might provid accountability. these institut were never veri robust in china, but on and off they were toler until xi came along. 

i conduct a seri of experi on chines blog over the year begin in 2003 and was sometim surpris by what i could get away with — but no longer. xi has drag china backward in term of civil society, crush almost everi wisp of freedom and oversight. 

for the same reason that xi increas authoritarian china bungl the coronavirus outbreak, it also mishandl a swine fever virus that sinc 2018 has devast china hog industri and kill almost one-quart of the world pigs. 

dictat often make poor decis becaus they don't get accur information: when you squelch independ voic you end up get just flatteri and optim from those around you. senior chines offici have told me that they are routin lie to on trip to meet local offici and must dispatch their driver and secretari to assess the truth and gaug the real mood. 

for this or other reasons, xi has made a seri of mistakes. he mishandl and inflam the polit crisi in hong kong, he inadvert assur the re-elect of his nemesi as presid of taiwan, and he has presid over worsen relat with the unit state and mani other countries. 

the coronavirus has alreadi reach the xinjiang region in the far west of china, and one risk is that it will spread in the intern camp where china is confin about one million muslim with poor sanit and limit health care. 

virus are challeng for ani country, and it onli fair to note that china doe a better job protect it peopl from measl than the u.s. does. it a credit to china system that a babi born in beij today has a longer life expect than a babi born in washington, d.c. more broadly, the unit states, which has sever impoverish counti with lower life expect than cambodia or bangladesh, is in no posit to lectur anyon about health. 

but, with a dose of humility, let get over ani misplac admir some american have for xi authoritarian model. 

the chines social contract has been that citizen will not get ballot but will live steadili better lives, yet china economi is now as weak as it has been in three decad — and the coronavirus will sap growth further. xi is not live up to his end of the bargain, and this is seen in the anger emerg on chines social media despit the best effort of censors. 

i don't know if xi is in polit troubl for his misrule, but he should be. he a preen dictator, and with this outbreak some citizen are pay a price. 
