democrat baffl 2020 mess 
by frank bruni 
dec. 7, 2019 

kamala harri fold her tent, and on that patch of ground, mani flimsi theori bloomed. 

disappoint democrat grous that you obvious had to be rich to compet in the 2020 race — becaus she was gone, while two billionair remain — and point to the potenti all-white, un-divers lineup at the parti next debat as proof that the qualifi criteria put too much of a premium on fund-raising. 

but harri had made the cut for that debate. and she enter the presidenti sweepstak with a higher net worth ($6 million, accord to forbes) than berni sander ($2.5 million), ami klobuchar ($2 million) or pete buttigieg ($100,000), who are still in the hunt and are among the six contend slate to be spar onstag on dec. 19. what more, sander and anoth of the six, elizabeth warren, have rais bucket of money without court plutocrats. 

mani democrat blame the media for harri demise. they have a point, inasmuch as some news organ never had the kind of romanc with her that they did with buttigieg and beto o'rourke, two white men. i note as much in a column last may, point to o'rourk placement on the cover of vaniti fair and buttigieg on the cover of time. 

but the media fell quick out of love with o'rourk and is pick buttigieg apart for his lack of support among african-american and his past employ as a mckinsey consultant. and harri was hard ignored: her initi campaign ralli in oakland, calif., in januari was cover live, in it entirety, on msnbc and cnn. that same month, rachel maddow of msnbc told her, in a face-to-fac interview, "i think there is a good chanc that you are go to win the nomination." and after the democrat debat in june, when harri stir confront joe biden about his past opposit to feder mandat buse to integr schools, she receiv a bonanza of media attent and raptur reviews. 

i get that this democrat primari isn't play out as anyon predict or in remot accord with the parti imag of itself and with it priorities. none of the top four candid — biden, warren, buttigieg and sander — is a person of color, three of them are 70 or older, and the billionaires, tom steyer and mike bloomberg, are dip into their person fortun in their effort to gain ground. for a parti that celebr diversity, pitch itself to underdog and pride itself on be future-mind and youth-oriented, that a freaky, baffl turn of events. 

but some of the conclus be drawn and complaint be rais don't fulli hold water. 

take the fear about the nomin be purchased. without question, run for offic is too expensive. that dynam can definit favor candid with lucrat connections. and candid are forc — unless they'r steyer or bloomberg — to devot ludicr and possibl corrupt sum of time to polit panhandling. 

but at least at present, neither steyer nor bloomberg is exact barrel toward victory. and while cori booker drew a connect between harri departur and a process warp by wealth, the link is tenuous. booker, whose campaign press on despit his failur to qualifi for the decemb debate, said of harri withdrawal, "voter did not determin her destiny." 

actually, they kind of did. they'r the one who are or aren't excit enough about a candidaci to donat money and keep it alive. they'r the one respond to pollster and, by flag their preferences, determin which candid take on the air of plausibl that often generat the next round of donations. i keep seeing, on twitter and facebook, lament about harri fate from democrat who chose to support candid other than her. well, she couldn't succeed on generalized, ambient good will. 

i also keep see and hear statement along the line that the parti should be asham of the way thing are turn out, that the parti failed. while an offici parti entity, the democrat nation committee, inde set criteria for the debat — which had to have some criteria — there otherwis no committe of elder or secret cabal that decre which candid prosper and which don't. 

besid which, as eric levitz observ in new york magazine, harri "boast the enthusiast support of hillari donor network and supporters, warm relat with obamaworld, and the sympathi of a broad rang of democrat lawmak in the nation largest state and beyond." levitz ad that when harri end her campaign on tuesday, she trail onli biden in the websit fivethirtyeight talli of import endorsements; that booker has more such endors than sanders, who is far ahead of him; and that klobuchar has more than buttigieg, whom she distant trails. so if the parti is fellow democrat politician of note, it hard drive the direct of this contest. 

we in the media aren't drive it, either, though there constant carp along those lines. we'v alway been fundament responsive, bestow coverag base on establish interest, and we'r more respons than ever in this digit age of sophisticated, real-tim measur of precis what our audienc doe and doesn't turn to. we give you a tide of warren in part becaus you thrill to the earlier trickle. we serv you oodl of buttigieg becaus we'v notic your appetit for it. 

anoth question assess of this primari is that "electability" is crowd out candid who don't fit some safe profile. yes, mani democrat voter tell pollster that choos the candid most like to beat trump is their top concern. yes, there evid that such an impuls is lead some voter away from candid of color. 

but if "electability" emphat rule the day, wouldn't at least one of the three current or former governor alreadi gone from the race — john hickenloop of colorado, steve bullock of montana and jay insle of washington — have fare better? governor are frequent tout as the best candidates, and they account for four of the past seven presidents. 

if "electability" rule the day, would biden stiffest competit be come from a 78-year-old democrat socialist who recent had a heart attack (and just place first in a california poll), a 70-year-old former ivi leagu law professor whom trump delight in call "pocahontas" and the 37-year-old gay mayor of a small indiana city? 

there a lot to this primari that more complic than meet the eye, a lot that explod assumptions. accord to the poll so far, voter aren't drawn to candid whose demograph profil overlap with theirs. biden support from black democrat in a nation quinnipiac poll late last month was more than eight time what harri or booker was. he and sander do exponenti better among latino than julián castro does. sanders, not buttigieg, has the advantag among democrat under the age of 35. and mani gay democrat have reject buttigieg as inadequ progress and even insuffici gay. 

so if ident group, electability, media bias and person wealth aren't the secret to success, what are? i think we'r learn yet again that there no tidy, trusti formula. but broad name recognit among engag voter — which biden, sander and, to a lesser extent, warren all had at the outset — is an enorm asset. so are a sale pitch and brand, like buttigieg's, that are distinct from ani other contender's. 

finally, there polit acumen. there raw talent. the last democrat president, barack obama, had plenti of it. the next democrat presid will, too. 
