devin nune is daniell steel 
by frank bruni 
nov. 15, 2019 

i came to your hous with a gun. at least imagin i did. i tie you to a chair, took a step back and repeat fired. but my arm twitched; everi bullet missed. meanwhile, you slip your knot and fled. 

by the reason of repres jim jordan, i did absolut noth wrong. 

you'r alive! not a drop of blood on you! an unconsumm crime is no crime at all, or so jordan, one of the republican parti more rococo philosophers, argu on wednesday in defens of presid trump. ukrain got it militari aid; trump did not get his investig of the bidens. to jordan, that proof of innocence. 

to a normal person, that proof of incompetence, which doesn't exoner the presid but should definit reassur us. trump an autocrat all right, but the silver line is that he an inept one. all strongmen should be this weak. 

and all of us should have the mental limber and ethic elast that jordan and his troup possess. they'r the cirqu du soleil of c'est la vie. i'v never seen anyth like the republican effort to defend trump, which chart the frontier of creativity, explor the outer limit of audacity, mutat like the monster in the "alien" movi and restor my faith in american ingenuity. 

my faith in washington, too. i long fear that polit had stop attract the countri top talent, but some of our finest storytel are work in the unit state capitol. john grisham has noth on jordan. daniell steel can't hold a candl to devin nunes. 

nune was among the first republican to pipe up on day 1 of the impeach inquiri public hearings, held by the hous intellig committee, and it wasn't just his narrat ambit that mesmer me. it was his bold descent into his thesaurus, a sort of semant spelunking. 

the hearings, he said, mark the "piti finale" and "spectacular implosion" of the "russia hoax." they amount to a "scorched-earth war against presid trump" that was "horrif one-sided" and "preposterous." this "low-rent ukrainian sequel" had alreadi involv a "closed-door audit process in a cultlik atmospher in the basement of the capitol." cultlike, no less! that a more fit descript of republican obeis to the presid and launder of his wrongdoing, but then one hallmark of trump and his sycoph is the project of their own flaw onto their adversaries. 

nune best bit on wednesday and then again on friday was his portray of trump democrat detractor as amateur pornograph intent on find nude pictur of the president. i'm fair confid that no one is intent on find nude photograph of the president. 

but at this point it wouldn't surpris me if trump himself tweet one out. would that be ani crazier than what he did on friday, as mari yovanovitch, the former ambassador to ukraine, testified? 

there she was, a pained, stoic state depart amalgam of erin brockovich and norma rae, and trump use his twitter account to call her an intern wreck ball, single-hand respons for the mess that is mogadishu. (one of her post befor ukrain was somalia.) 

this accomplish noth in the way of silenc her but rais the prospect of wit intimid be ad to ani articl of impeachment. clearly, the republican respons to this impeach inquiri isn't some eleg strategy. it an epic snit. 

it leitmotif is hypocrisy. nune open friday hear by lament all the import govern busi that was on hold becaus democrat prefer to tortur trump. i somehow miss his plea that lawmak keep their eye on the ball and devot themselv to practic problem-solv when the presid stir up one cultur war after anoth just to chang the topic of a given news cycl or hear a ralli audienc roar. but along come the impeach inquiry, and sudden hous republican are stymi steward of levelhead government. 

they'r dismiss wednesday and friday hearings, held in public, as pure theater. but they complain about the closed-door testimoni beforehand. they'r shrug off the account of william taylor, georg kent and other as hearsay. but the white hous has decre that such firsthand wit as mick mulvaney not cooperate. 

one moment, mulvaney public acknowledg the shakedown of ukrain president, insist that it how foreign polici is done and tell the media to "get over it." the next, he tell the media that they'r reprehens fabulist for report exact what he said. one moment, republican complet ignor trump infam juli 25 phone call and claim that there no direct evid of his bulli and — yes, nanci pelosi is right — his bribery. the next, they acknowledg the call, sigh over trump behavior but say that it hard impeachable. 

in fairness, that onli slight more confus to me than the democrat perspect on the call, a definit piec of evid that they may be inadvert downgrading. usually, a process like the one that they'v been engag in over the last seven week is about find a smoke gun. this process began with the smoke gun, and the farther the democrat travel from it — eight wit this come week? — the more they risk impli that it wasn't enough. 

but for curious behavior, republican have them easili beat, and their conduct dure the impeach inquiri is the culmin and apotheosi of their conduct sinc trump wrap up the republican presidenti nomination: an utter sellout of principl and a pure embrac of fiction to pacifi an emot infant and keep him from spit up on them. 

dure wednesday hearing, republican again suggest — while maintain straight face — that trump foremost concern was corrupt in ukraine. steve castor, the republican chief counsel, also gave one of the presid most conveni (and thus favorite) conspiraci theori a fresh whirl, posit that perhap american intellig offici had it all wrong and ukraine, not russia, hack democrat email in 2016 and otherwis interf in the election. 

how would this make trump demand that ukrainian smear joe biden in return for million of dollar of already-author aid o.k.? it wouldn't — but what a juici distraction! and what a perfect gateway for castor attempt to get taylor to testifi that trump legitim believ that ukrainian were, in castor words, "out to get him." 

tri to follow along. not onli doe incompet equal innocence, but also paranoia is exculpatory. same goe for the relat dastardli of a deed, which becom innocu if it not maxim obnoxious. that my takeaway from when castor, refer to rudi giuliani shenanigans, ask taylor: "this irregular channel of diplomacy, it not as outlandish as it could be — is that correct?" clarenc darrow, move over. anoth genius of jurisprud demand space in the histori books. 

all that wednesday hear lack was lindsey graham. yes, i know, he serv in the senate, and the hear took place in the house. but he the standard-bear for trump-coddl contortionism, the reign king of the kind of contradict that were on display. 

presag jordan approach at the hearing, graham a week and a half ago shrug off the impeach inquiri by call trump polici toward ukrain so "incoherent" that the presid and his minion "seem to be incap of form a quid pro quo." 

he said at one point that he'd be open to ani evid that back up such a quid pro quo, but then, more recently, he announc that he wouldn't and couldn't be bother to follow the testimony, becaus he'd alreadi made up his mind. as billi binion of reason magazin noted, "graham has bemoan the democrat lack of transparency, onli to shield his eye onc the curtain was lifted." 

mayb graham will storm the hear room yet, an effigi of hunter biden in tow. that would match the digniti of what we'v seen from republican so far. 
