did i just get yanged? 
by bari weiss 
jan. 30, 2020 

it was new year eve, and i had decid to spend it with andrew yang. a self-describ "asian man who good at math," mr. yang had rais an impress $16.5 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 for his presidenti campaign. despit be newli flush, the campaign didn't hold it shindig in a napa valley wine cave or at gramerci tavern, but in a florescent-lit room abov a bar in nashua, n.h. 

the parti look like noth so much as a high school danc if you had ban the bullies. there was a modest buffet of meatballs, spanakopita, ritz cracker and cheddar cheese. the d.j., a boomer with trouser that bad need hemming, could have been your chemistri teacher bounc to cardi b. 

now, a few day away from the iowa caucus, mr. yang has outlast more than a dozen candidates, includ three senat and two governors. he came in first among democrat in the iowa youth straw poll on tuesday. next week, he'll be back on the debat stage. 

he remain a veri long shot: nation poll have him consist in the second tier, right next to ami klobuchar. still, convent wisdom would say that andrew yang should be nowher this close to the american presidency. 

i went to new hampshir becaus i want to understand how a polit rooki with what seem like littl go for him beyond a signatur propos of free money and relentless cheer onlin fan had gotten this far. what doe the url candid campaign look like irl? 

that night, the yang gang, as the candid fan proud call themselves, was a happi crowd of gamers, asians, former goth girls, burn man enthusiasts, sci-fi geeks, students, coder and stoners. when mr. yang drop a "lord of the rings" joke — "it like the eye of sauron is close in!" he said of his momentum in the race — they erupt in laughter. hardcor yang voter are not cool. and that is exact their, and his, appeal. 

among the partygo on new year eve were jacki and dave farrell, former berni sander support who own a deli in caldwell, n.j. mr. farrel wore a handmad knit beani stitch with the word "yang," "math," "vote" and "2020"; ms. farrel had a pink yang gang basebal hat over her blue hair and a copi of the candid best seller, "the war on normal people," in her purse. 

they fell in love insid an onlin role play game call hobowars. it hard to imagin anyon at a joe biden event with that kind of meet-cute. "he actual sold me a guild," ms. farrel told me. "it sort of like a gang. like a yang gang." 

talk to anyon in the yang gang for a few minut and they'll inevit tell you how they got yanged. the stori almost alway begin with a younger person tell an older person to googl andrew yang. which is exact what happen with the farrells. 

in august, a 23-year-old employe in the deli approach ms. farrel to ask whom she was supporting. "i was like: bernie, i guess. i support him in 2016,'" she recalled. "and he goes, whi haven't you googl andrew yang yet?" 

so she did. "i liter stay up till 4 a.m. that night watch videos." 

have you ever been the target of a twitter mob? it about as pleasant as a brazilian wax in slow motion. the one thing that bring a small measur of comfort when you are in the digit cross hair is the follow assertion: the internet is not real life. 

it is true, at least for the time being, that a hord of pixel cannot transform itself into a hord of people. but the lie that there is a bright line between the onlin world and the "real" one has been well and truli debunked. just ask ani middle-school girl shame for an instagram post, or ani adult fire becaus of a bad tweet, or ani democrat hope to oust donald trump and becom the 46th presid of the unit states. 

berni sander may be fuel by his zealous fan on social media, but of all the democrat run for president, the web mean the most to andrew yang. without it, his candidaci simpli wouldn't exist. 

it a classic underdog story: a polit unknown, ignor by the mainstream media, sidestep the pundit who had consid him a punchline. "in the earli day there weren't mani peopl in cabl news clamor to have me on their shows," he told me over bubbl tea on a recent afternoon in his manhattan campaign headquarters. "and so you seek out peopl who can reach lot of americans." 

those peopl were the one with podcasts. 

"what launch us was sam harris," said mr. yang of his june 2018 appear on mr. harri show "make sense." it put him on the map: "i was invit to speak at the wing ding in iowa" — a major democrat fund-rais event — "becaus one of the peopl there was a sam harri fan." 

mr. harri introduc him to joe rogan, a mix martial art color comment who host one of the most popular podcast in the country. (disclosure: i'v also appear on his show.) "joe rogan was the game changer," mr. yang said. "we rais ten of thousand of dollar a day for awhil there and a million buck in a week." 

but it isn't simpli that mr. yang clever use new platform to his advantage. sure, the podcast gave him a big boost, but lot of politician have use new media to expand their reach: franklin roosevelt command the radio; team obama master the email blast; presid trump tear up twitter. 

mr. yang outsiz success show that the peopl who insist that rachel maddow has more influenc over the american elector than mr. rogan are lie to themselv about where cultur power in america is actual located. 

what mr. yang understand is that the old rule no longer appli — and that flout those rule is an energ strategy. but while donald trump burn the whole hous down, andrew yang is dunk on the system with a big smile. 

that how he get onstag at a democrat debate, point out the ridicul of the artific — "we'r up here with makeup on our face and our rehears attack lines, play role in this realiti tv show" — and walk away with one of the most talked-about moment of the night despit have had the least talk time. 

his appeal is a power remind that the anim polit conflict of our era may not be left versus right, but establish versus insurgency. 

the yang campaign pride itself on the heterodoxi of it supporters. "i poll 18 percent among colleg republicans," mr. yang told me. "i'v got a higher appeal among independents, libertarian and even some disaffect trump voter than joe biden by the numbers, than berni sander by the numbers." one of his campaign slogan is "not left. not right. forward." 

the writer wesley yang has suggest that the in-between natur of asian-american — the way they are often regard neither as white nor as peopl of color — allow them "to say and do thing that white liber are now afraid to say and do, which is to stand up for certain fundament values." 

when you consid mr. yang posit on some of the touchiest aspect of the cultur war and imagin his view come out of the mouth of a michael bennet or a pete buttigieg, you can easili see the truth of this insight. 

for instance: he glad that america has becom "less of a monoculture." (when he was a kid, he says, his own "effort to be american includ thing like join the wrestl team"; he was terribl at the sport.) but, he added, "i think there a middl ground where you can't just say america is noth and everybodi run off and do your own thing." it important, he said, to have a "common cultur context and even — and this will be veri controversi — a common languag of expression." 

i spoke to some of his mani asian-american supporters, and this reson with them. michael chen, a 19-year-old drexel student at one of the new hampshir town hall events, said he appreci that mr. yang, whose immigr father grew up in a hous with a dirt floor on a peanut farm, is not run on his identity: "you can be asian-american, you can be black american, you can be latino-american, but the common denomin is american. that who he is." 

mr. chen was there with his dad, jack. the elder mr. chen call himself a "yang junkie" but insist be asian has "littl to do with it." what anim him is the practic of mr. yang solutions. 

mr. yang believ in talk to peopl he disagre with. in april, he appear on "the ben shapiro show," a no-go zone for those who buy into the new polit of contamin — that to sit next to a conserv like mr. shapiro is to tacit endors his ideas. "think that i'm go to catch idea from someon seem ludicr to me," he said. 

soon after the comedian shane gilli was hire by "saturday night live," it was reveal that he had use racial slur on podcasts, includ describ mr. yang with an anti-semit and racist epithet. mr. yang tweet that he didn't think mr. gilli should be fired, writing, "we would benefit from be more forgiv rather than punitive." the show didn't follow mr. yang advice. 

i ask mr. yang, who ran one of the top test prep program in the countri befor it was bought by kaplan, about his view on affirm action. is harvard do to asian in the 21st centuri what it did to jew in the 20th? 

"harvard gonna harvard," he said. 

he told me that he himself was reject from the school — he wound up at brown — though he was ampli qualified. but "if you have ani kind of perspective," he said, you realiz that "mi life and my human depend on more than whether some institut decid to stamp my hand." 

"argu for higher represent of an alreadi overrepres group — at least accord to popul standard — would not be my first bone to pick," he said. instead, he ask whi harvard, a univers with a $40 billion endowment, is "open locat in shanghai but not ohio or michigan." the real question, he said, is, "are you tri to advanc our societi or are you tri to advanc global money interests?" 

on new year eve it occur to me that, despit live in new york, which pride itself on be the most cosmopolitan citi in the world, i had not been in a room with such a polit divers group of peopl sinc donald trump was elect president. 

if there is a typic yang voter it is a former berni sander support who feel that mr. yang understand the challeng of the 21st centuri better than a 78-year-old socialist without a singl app on his phone. 

mr. yang support mr. sander in 2016, befor vote for hillari clinton in the general elect ("i'm pro-civilization," he said). he understand whi young voter are drawn to mr. sanders. "if you'r a young person you look up and say, what have i experienc from this capitalist system? corpor abuse, crashes, bailouts, greed, record level of colleg debt." but he insist the best actor to improv peopl live is "not our government, it us." 

"berni saying, let stick it to the billionair and all will be well,'" he said. "i'm saying, we need to rewrit the code, we need to rewrit the software.'" 

at a campaign stop in manchester, n.h., i spoke with sunni payne, a 23-year-old yang support who'd come in from bangor, me., and use the pronoun they. "while i think berni sander is an amaz person," they said, "he has had the exact same polici stanc for liter decades." 

amber mccabe and martin raucher, both 29, are also former sander supporters. they drove 25 hour from st. petersburg, fla. they made sure not to cut anyon off on the highway, ms. mccabe said, becaus there a yang bumper sticker on their car and "we have to represent." 

mr. raucher is a disabl veteran and ms. mccabe is an artist; they met through their passion: spin fire. it wasn't possibl to twirl lit torch insid the parti room, so ms. mccabe had fashion the next best thing: a handmad light-up yang sign. 

"with yang i'm all about the ideas, the policies," she said, abov all, his propos for a univers basic incom of $1,000 a month. 

"i need an oil change," said mr. raucher, when i ask how they'd spend it. "and my roof is leaking." 

just across the danc floor were elasa and russel peterson, two former trump voter who chang their registr — and move state — to support mr. yang candidacy. 

"everyon i know is the broke-folk vote," said mr. peterson. they are among them. until recent they work at a north carolina oliv garden. ("i got to where i hate breadsticks," said ms. peterson.) 

"donald trump stand up there and says, hey, we got to build the wall becaus the immigr are come over here and they'r steal our jobs. and you know what? becaus we'r all broke we'r all like: it immigrants! yeah! let build the wall!'" mr. peterson said. "but then you hear andrew yang talk and he like, you know what? it not immigrants. it automation. you go into walmart, you don't see immigrants. you see self-serv checkouts. it like a light bulb goe off. like, wow, this make sense.'" 

it made so much sens that they move in with ms. peterson sister in vermont, 10 minut from the new hampshir border, so they could volunt full-tim for the campaign and promot him on their youtub channel. 

"everybodi in our famili has been yanged. and they were all trumpers," mr. peterson said. 

at a town hall event attend by some 300 peopl on new year day, the first question — so on-brand i almost assum it was a plant — was about the metric system: "so, mr. make american think harder, can we count on presid yang to support the bless of the metric system?" 

the crowd laughed. amazingly, mr. yang came back with a thought answer about how the metric system is safer, not least becaus it is more accur for micro-dos babi medicine. 

to hear andrew yang talk is to understand whi it is possibl for peopl like the peterson to support him: unlik the president, he never demon other americans. "the differ between us are pretti trivial compar to the thing we share in common. and that a fundament messag of the campaign: able-bodi special needs, white black, old young, rural urban, we'r all go to get run over by this autom freight train," he said. "we need to human up and stop focus on relat trivial distinctions." 

the villain is not donald trump, but a market rig for big tech and against normal americans. 

in mr. yang frame of the 2016 election, mrs. clinton lost not becaus of the elector colleg or russian bots, but becaus she fundament misunderstood the crisi face america. "donald trump said he was go to make america great again. and what did hillari clinton say in response? america is alreadi great," mr. yang said. "that messag did not work becaus the pain in our countri is real." 

in other words: donald trump is the wrong answer to the right question. mr. yang believ he is the right one. 

at each one of the four campaign stop i went to, he ask the crowd whi presid trump won. the audienc call out answers: the media. russia. racism. hillary. facebook. twitter. jame comey. 

no, said mr. yang. it becaus "we blast away four million manufactur jobs" through autom in state like ohio, michigan, pennsylvania, missouri and iowa. 

what happen to manufactur is come to retail, restaur and even account and the law, mr. yang insists. while mr. sander suggest a feder govern job guarantee, and joe biden suggest turn coal miner into coders, mr. yang say that work as we have known it is over. 

if we don't chang anything, i ask him, where will be 50 year from now? 

best-cas scenario? "we will see inequ at a stagger scale that right now most american would find unthinkable." 

and in the worst case? "the collaps of the govern in it current form, polit break up, and societ dysfunct that result in mass riot and violence." 

it impress that, for the most part, his good humor soften the bleak messag he is conveying. it a vision of the futur — one disput as hyster by mani observ — that make presid trump "american carnage" address look almost rosi by comparison. 

i caught up with sunni payn this week. hear mr. yang in person "lit the fire under me," they said as they drove around anderson, s.c., after a day spent door-knock for him. they'd just spent a week in iowa befor realiz that "i want to spread the messag to black voter and communiti of color and i realiz the best place for me to do that was in south carolina." 

they said they kept hear the same stori from voters: "i can't care about climat chang becaus i need to put food on the table. i have three jobs. i bare sleep." 

to these people, sunni payn said, $1,000 a month would be life-changing. 

that the reason that the comedian dave chappell has endors mr. yang. "the wealth dispar between me and my neighbor is immense; it heartbreaking," said mr. chappelle, who live in ohio, but appear alongsid mr. yang on the campaign trail this week. "if you know a third of the peopl up the street can't buy groceries, then you start to feel an imper concern," he said. "this is without ironi or a punch line, i'm just tell you — this guy got some great ideas, you should check it out." 

so have i been yanged? 

i don't know if a univers basic incom is the best solut to the problem of inequality. i'm not particular passion about lower the vote age to 16 or requir polic offic to get purpl belt in jujitsu. i worri about whether someon with zero foreign polici experi can be the command in chief. 

but as berni sander sell class rage, joe biden promis normalci and elizabeth warren push a social progressiv so perfect doctrinair it seem tailor for five kid at oberlin, andrew yang iconoclasm and optim are refreshing. 

if get yang mean that i believ that this curious campaign is a caus for that rarest thing in current american polit — hope — and that mr. yang is model how to har the populist energi that otherwis threaten to tear us apart, then count me #yanggang. 
