america public restroom are kind of great now 
by farhad manjoo 
dec. 11, 2019 

in the past few years, someth amaz has been quiet happen across the land. public restroom in america — long a flash point of exclus by race, gender, class and abil — have gotten much, much better. thank to an increas effect campaign by a rang of activists, america public bathroom are now cleaner, more plentiful, more private, and more access and inclus than ever. in mani places, they'r even great. 

this is a stori about ident politics, advocacy, design and architecture. it is also a stori still in motion, with progress yet to unfold and mani peopl still shut out. there is still much controversi surround our bathrooms, who get to use them and how. but it import to recogn progress as it happening. and if you travel across america, now, it undeni that how we go keep get better. 

how do i know? 

at the risk of t.m.i., i happen to be an expert on bathrooms. twenti year ago, when i was a senior in college, i was diagnos with a condit call achalasia, a rare, sometim genet swallow disord that i was actual quit familiar with, becaus when i was a kid, my mother had it, too. 

it began as a blinding, burn bolt of pain in the middl of my chest after eating. imagin heartburn after you'v eaten someth spicy, but amp up to 11, as if the thing you'd eaten was a chain saw dous in ghost peppers. the pain would abat after a few minutes, but it would come back again and again, usual after i'd eaten a big meal. then it began to hurt dure big meals, then dure everi meal, and soon anytim i'd tri to swallow anything. for mani peopl the condit is curabl through surgery, but for me that long-ago flash of pain turn out to be onli the begin of an all-consuming, chronic and often embarrass disability. 

over the last two decades, though i'v undergon dozen of invas procedur and tests, taken a panopli of pill and had various part of my digest system remov or surgic rebuilt, my symptom have onli gotten more intens and more — how to put this delicately? — expansive. swallow food is now an arduous enough task that i have to get much of my nutrit through liquid: as kany onc rapped, "i drink a boost for breakfast, an ensur for dessert." but it no longer just eat that a pain; it what happen after, too. from the nave to the chops, my swallow problem has spawn a gross-out comedi worth of g.i. complications. 

the ugli upshot is this: at least onc everi day and sometim mani times, i have to run to the restroom on a moment notice, and what happen to me there is best experienc alone, in blissful, unembarrass solitude. 

i tell you all this, in order to establish my bona fides: i know public bathrooms. in my travels, over the years, i have assembl in my head a verit michelin guid of private, peac place to go. so trust me when i tell you that in the last few years, better public bathroom have start to pop up everywhere. again and again, in big citi and small, in red state and blue, in airports, hotels, shop malls, theaters, stadiums, offic and a rang of other public venues, i'v been save by a bounti of better loos. 

more restroom are now explicit inclus and accessible, design for peopl who are physic disabled; are gender nonconforming; are travel with children; or are otherwis in need of special accommodation. (for instance, paruresi and parcopresis, phobia that inhibit peopl from urin or defec in public restrooms, are real, debilit condit that affect ten of million of people.) 

one innov that has been of particular use to me is the lockable, single-occupancy, all-gend restroom. a decad ago, in most public places, it was nigh imposs to find a privat place to do your business. today, these one-person stall are a rise trend across the country, especi at airport and other larg public facilities. in some place they'r label "all gender" restrooms; in others, they'r call "family" bathrooms; in yet others, sign welcom everyon with broad language, like, "all person may use this restroom." whatev you call them, they'r a haven in a world mark by chao and disorder. over the last few years, when natur call sudden and panic set in, i'v had the fortun of find a clean, privat place at, among other locations, the guggenheim in new york; the getti center in los angeles; the mall of america; a dozen airports, at least; and so, so mani starbucks. 

of course, thing still aren't perfect. i am a member of a racial minority, but i'm a cisgend person of mean and social privilege. it like that a lot of peopl still find it hard to find clean, privat restroom in much of the land. still, the restroom situat in america is much better than it use to be and, i'v noticed, so much better than in mani other part of the world. 

on a trip to britain and franc with my kid last year, i was surpris at how difficult it was to find a clean, privat bathroom; when there was one, you often had to pay to use it. i'v seen some veri nice bathroom in dubai, but onli in place that cater to the wealthy. in south africa and india? forget about it. america has less and less to be proud of these days; our life expect are falling, our infrastructur is crumbling, and our polit are in the toilet. but look at our toilets! while there no offici metric on this sort of thing, in my estim american toilet are now like among the top in the world. japan loo are said to be veri nice; if we can't be no. 1, it possibl we'r at least, you know, no. 2. 

if it true that our toilet are get better, it worth ask why. in a word: activists. in the last few years, a rang of advoc fight on behalf of transgend people, the disabled, homeless peopl and other have mount a varieti of legal and public advocaci campaign aim at make bathroom more accessible. these have sometim spark backlash and controversy, like the 2016 law in north carolina that roll back gender-inclus restrooms. at the suprem court this fall, justic consid a case about gay and transgend right couldn't stop themselv from consid everyth through the len of the loo. 

despit the polit controversy, on the ground, in facil all over the country, the moral arc of the bathroom is bend toward inclusion. at starbucks, after a viral incid last year in which two black men who had ask to use the restroom were arrest at a philadelphia location, the restroom are now open to everyone, even peopl who haven't purchas anything. citi are now spend money to creat more public restrooms. and earlier this year, stalled!, an organ of design and activist who push for restroom-rel social justice, mount a success campaign to get the intern plumb code — which set standard for bathroom — to adopt new languag support all-gend restrooms. 

"inclus design" has been a hot new term among architect and product designers; the idea, broadly, is that when you creat product and space that are accommod of a broad rang of human capacity, they end up be much more use to everyon in unexpect ways. advoc of inclus design point to some canon examples: sidewalk ramp were put in place for peopl with wheelchairs, but they turn out to be handi for parent with strollers, too. some of the technolog in the smartphon touchscreen was invent as a way to help peopl with disabl like carpal tunnel syndrome. typewrit and keyboard were first creat to help the blind. 

restroom are follow a similar path. it not just obvious disabl and gender-nonconform peopl who need a private, more access restroom. everyone, now and again, can do with a nicer place to go to the bathroom. in america, at long last, we'r get that. thank you, social justic warriors. 
