elizabeth warren throw down the gauntlet 
by elisabeth rosenth 
nov. 4, 2019 

lay the tabl for the next democrat debate, elizabeth warren has issu a plan that explain how she would fund what she call medicar for all. she had studious avoid say whether it would rais tax for the middl class, and in her proposal, she say (repeatedly) it will not. 

it will instead be financ by a mix of wealth taxes, employ transfer of money they current spend on health care and reduct of the mani ineffici in our current byzantin system — among other initiatives. 

but now all the candid need to tell us more of those detail about their health care strategies. it time for the candid to stop talk slogan and start talk sens — or dollar and cent — so that voter can know what they mean and choos among them. 

medicar for all, medicar for all who want it, a public option, improv the afford care act — those are 30,000-foot concept that, depend on the details, could work (or not) and be popular (or not). 

the candid (includ ms. warren) also need to say more about what they'll do right now: in one poll, 40 percent of american said they had skip a recommend test or treatment, and 32 percent said they had skip a medicine, becaus of cost. 

support of medicar for all want to tie their futur to the popular of the medicar program. but ms. warren (and berni sanders) are offer up american a supercharg version of the current govern insur for those over 65. 

it promis to elimin co-pay for prescript drugs. (under current medicare, mani patient contribut thousand of dollar annually.) it includ dental and long-term care — a huge expens that is conspicu miss from current medicare. 

that ambit would make a health care plan vast more expensive. the nation health system of britain and canada, both singl payer system like the medicar for all proposal, do not offer comprehens long-term care coverage. canada doesn't includ coverag for prescript drug out of the hospital. 

is the financ ms. warren propos go to be adequ to support the expand goals? economist disagree. 

but in releas her proposal, she has thrown down the gauntlet befor the other candid — who support medicar for all who want it or some other type of public option — to be a whole lot clearer about what they mean. 

joe biden, kamala harris, pete buttigieg, et al.: doe your public option — a govern insur polici that anyon may buy — resembl mr. sander enhanc medicare, or current medicar or medicaid, which is far more bare bones? 

voter need to know. 

there anoth obvious reason the candid have been so close lip on specifics: to calcul how to pay for ani of the plans, the candid have to say how they intend to bring down price — for hospit stays, drugs, procedures, devices, doctor visits, surgeries. american often pay two to 10 time what patient pay for these item in other develop countries. 

those price will have to come down to make ani plan viabl without break the bank. to realli assess ani plan, we'll need that kind of information. 

ms. warren has courag step into that fraught territory, with number that have veri like sent shock wave through the health care industry. 

for example, to make her financ propos work, she suggest pay most hospit on averag 110 percent of current medicar rates. she suggest american should pay no more for drug than 110 percent of the averag intern market price. that may be emin reasonable, but is it achievable? 

when montana negoti rate direct with hospit for it state employees, it settl on a deal in which the state agre to pay an averag of 234 percent of medicar rates. and it still save money. 

set lower price is go to bring out strong opposition. remember, patient (or taxpayer) save mean loss of incom for one of america most profit industries, whose lobbyist spent more than half a billion dollar last year and which is flush with dark money to distribut in congress. 

to get the a.c.a. passed, presid barack obama gave up on a number of price-low idea to get buy-in from the health care industri and it friend in congress. these includ jettison the idea of a public option and allow medicar to negoti drug prices. 

the republican — whose "plans" have been larg proclam of better, cheaper health care without ani strategi — will be quick to label ani of the democrat plan as a govern takeov of health care, or socialism. 

remember, patient (or taxpayer) save mean loss of incom for the unit state most robust sector in the post-recess economy. in mani post-manufactur citi like pittsburgh and cleveland, a singl hospit system is the biggest employer. in boston, hospit and hospit corpor make up the top six employers. minnesota and massachusett have done well with drug and devic manufacturing. and let not start on insurers, whose lucrat health busi would larg disappear. 

ani plan to rein in the unit state bloat $3.5 trillion health care system will be slow going, requir not just a footnot blueprint but also the tame of mani oppos forces. it took year for canada to move from a market-bas system to govern run health. it endur lengthi debat and doctor strikes. 

ms. warren call her propos a "long-term plan." but voter want to know how we get from here to anywher else. in polls, their top health care issu is afford — emphasi on now. 

they need concret propos as well as long-term vision. in the next debate, how about talk about h.r. 3, a bill in congress to curb prescript drug prices? that plan would allow the health and human servic secretari to negoti a maximum price that could be charg to medicar for insulin and some of the most expens medicin in the unit states, base on the price paid for those drug in other countries. 

day befor the last democrat debate, the congression budget offic said it would save $345 billion over a six-year period (2023-29). 

if the bill were to move to the senate, how would the front-runn vote? what do they have to say about that? 
