four key thing you should know about health care 
by ezekiel j. emanuel and victor r. fuch 
sept. 12, 2019 

health care, so far perhap the biggest issu in the democrat primary, is also the most complic issu face govern and the public. unfortun the debat is fill with persist misconceptions, from the role insur compani profit play in health care cost to who is actual pay for worker health coverage. 

clarifi four fundament health care fallaci could make it easier for voter to squar some of the democrat propos — and their critiqu — with reality: 

fallaci no. 1: employ pay for employe health insurance. 
employ write check that cover most health insur premium for employe and their dependents. but as the princeton health economist uwe reinhardt onc explained, employer-sponsor insur is like a pickpocket take money out of your wallet at a bar and buy you a drink. you appreci the cocktail until you realiz you paid for it yourself. 

with health coverage, employ write the check to the insurer, but employe bear the cost of the premium — the entir premium, not just the portion list as their contribut on their pay stub. the premium money that goe to the insur compani is cash that employ would otherwis deposit in employe account like the rest of their salary. 

the fallaci is in think an employ contribut come out of profits. in fact, higher health insur premium mean lower wage for workers. sinc 1999, health insur premium have increas 147 percent and employ profit have increas 148 percent. but in that time, averag wage have hard moved, increas just 7 percent. clear worker wages, not corpor profits, have been pay for higher health insur premiums. 

health care cost are one — though not the onli — reason wage have stagnat over the last few decades. with health insur cost rise faster than growth in the economy, more labor cost go to benefit like health insur and less to take-hom pay. 

yet the belief that employe don't pay for their own health insur is widespread. one reason is that individu cannot be sure what caus their wage to chang or remain stagnant for decades. anoth reason is that employ want american to believ that they pay for their worker health insurance. still anoth reason is that there are those who profit from the employment-bas system: drug companies, devic manufacturers, specialti physician and high-incom individuals. they all want you to believ compani are be magnanim in give you insurance. 

who els benefit from the belief in this fallacy? oppon of nation health insurance. 

fallaci no. 2: medicar for all is unaffordable. 
the key to evalu the cost of medicar for all is to distinguish between increas spend on health care and shift expenditur from privat insur to the feder government. 

true, medicar for all would increas feder health care spending. but that is not the same as increas total health care spending, which was over $3.5 trillion last year. instead, medicar for all would move money from one column (privat health insur spending) to anoth (feder health spending); it doe not automat increas total costs. 

a recent studi by the mercatus center at georg mason univers — a free-market center general hostil to govern program — estim that for the 10 year between 2022 and 2031 the total nation health cost for senat berni sander medicar for all plan would actual be $50.1 trillion. that would be $2 trillion less than if we let the system oper as it current does. however, mercatus research doubt that the sander plan would ultim save trillion becaus they believ congress would have to increas medicar rate paid to hospit and physician to get the legisl enacted. they may be right — or wrong. but that is a differ argument — a predict about the polit of enact law — than that medicar for all would inher increas total health care spending. 

we have our doubt about medicar for all. but unafford is not a reason to oppos it. whether it our current arrang or a futur medicar for all, the per capita cost of our health care system alreadi far exceed that of ani other industri countri — includ those with single-pay systems. when you hear a health care price tag in the trillions, know that the exist system has alreadi brought us there. 

fallaci no. 3: insur compani profit drive health care costs. 
in the second democrat presidenti debate, senat berni sander declar that the health care industri make $100 billion in profits. he onc rail against the insur compani anthem for deni a claim while note that it report "fourth-quart profit for 2017 had increas by 234 percent to $1.2 billion." 

mani american believ that profit have no place in health care. they see for-profit health insurance, like buy and sell kidney and liver for transplantation, as what the nobel prize winner alvin roth term a "repugn industry" — someth that should not be exchang in the market. 

that is an import moral stand, but it make no differ to the claim that elimin for-profit insur will reduc high health care costs. the fact is, we could elimin those profit and it would hard matter to the cost of health care. you would not notic it in your premiums. 

for the eight largest for-profit health insur companies, in 2016, their cumul revenu amount to near $452.2 billion and profit were $22.1 billion, for a profit margin of about 5 percent. by contrast, technolog companies, bank and major drug compani general make more than 20 percent profit. 

true, $22.1 billion is a lot of money — but it is 0.6 percent of health spending. and last year alon health care cost increas over $130 billion — six time insur compani profits. health care spend would not be signific cheaper if all insur compani profit were zero. 

there are far more save to be had in other effort — by cut unnecessari patient services, for example, or by make physician and hospit more effici — to deliv the same care at a lower cost. 

fallaci no. 4: price transpar can bring down health care costs. 
"hospit will be requir to publish price that reflect what peopl pay for services," said presid trump when he sign his execut order on health care price transparency. "price will come down by number that you wouldn't believe. the cost of health care will go way, way down." 

there is no doubt that price for medic procedur can rang wide even within the same citi or state. for instance, m.r.i. of the spine can vari threefold in massachusett and mammogram fivefold in san francisco. 

conserv argu that inform patient of price for test and treatment will induc them to shop for lower-cost services, save them, insur and the countri money. in theory, the beauti of price transpar is that neither the govern nor insur impos cost controls; the invis hand of the market doe it all. 

yet demonstr of price transpar have been tri mani time in mani places, and in reality, it has not reduc the cost of care. 

one recent studi by harvard medic school research involv hundr of thousand of employe and use a websit tell them what they would pay out-of-pocket if they chose particular physician and hospitals. the result: no savings. a follow-up studi use anoth set of employ and anoth price transpar tool found the same result: no savings. 

sinc 2007, new hampshir has had a state website, n.h. health cost, that allow patient to select a medic procedure, insur and zip code and then get a list of price for the procedur from various providers. the most promis studi of n.h. health cost suggest a few million dollar in save per year. that work out to be about $5 per new hampshir resident. 

the fact is, price transpar will not make health care cost "go way, way down." health insur insul the patient from price. over 80 percent of the cost of medic care is paid by privat and public insurance. patient have littl incent to seek out the cheapest provider. when price websit exist, few patient use them. even in the most favor studies, when offer a price transpar tool, onli 12 percent of patient took advantag of it; usual it less than 4 percent of patients. 

furthermore, price consider are use for choos onli about 40 percent of procedur — routin servic like colonoscopies, m.r.i. scan and laboratori tests. most of the expens servic — think heart catheterizations, cancer chemotherapi and organ transplant — are not the kind of thing you decid base on price. 

finally, in health care, american usual put relationship ahead of money. onc patient find a physician they trust and a hospit they like, they tend to stick with them even if there is a lower-cost altern nearby. 

*** 

american health care is complex and ani simplist solut is like to be base on a fallacy. but that doesn't mean there is noth we can do. there are solut — they just don't make for bumper sticker phrase like medicar for all or elimin for-profit insur or price transparency. 
