give joe biden his due 
by frank bruni 
dec. 20, 2019 

pete buttigieg and elizabeth warren are the shini objects. 

joe biden just may be the keepsak that endures. 

the other two went at it on thursday night, quarrel over the mean and moral of a wine cave, in an exchang that distil the democrat primari broader tension between pragmat and purity, compromis and idealism. biden was care not to be drawn too far into it and, dure other stretch of the debate, stood back. 

whi wouldn't he? for all the worri becaus he sometim stutters, for all the concern becaus he occasion sputters, for all his corni locut ("malarkey") and reflex convers filler ("here the deal"), the former vice presid has almost consist maintain a lead over his democrat rival in nation poll sinc he announc his candidaci last april. he has recent gain ground in iowa, the state that vote first, mean that he may avoid what had been look like a candidacy-imperil embarrass there. 

he has surviv salvo from critic and mess of his own that were suppos to halt or at least hobbl him: the attent to his crossing-the-lin physic with women; the flip-flop about public fund of abortions; the back-and-forth with kamala harri about busing; the moment at the fifth democrat primari debat when he seem to forget either that she was in the senat or that she was black. 

all of that suppos made him look weak. but none of that appreci weaken him. 

and at the latest debate, he perform better than befor — which may not be say a lot but is say something. he still can't speak in a straight line, instead zig and zagging: if he were a car, his tire would constant scrape the curb and his hubcap would probabl pop off. 

but they stay on this time around. biden, 77, seem more relax and confident, and he radiat his trademark warmth. it difficult not to like him. and it time to give him his due. 

so mani of us haven't, and i'm as guilti as anyone. in past column i urg him not to run — cite his unsuccess previous presidenti bids, his age, his eccentr and his outright flaw — and doubt his abil to go the distance. i join other pundit and polit analyst in treat biden front-runn status as fictiv or inevit fleet and as the bequest of simpl name recognition. 

we decre that other contend — harri for an instant, warren and buttigieg for longer, even berni sander of late — had momentum. biden had vestigi good will, which we regard as a less flashi and flimsier commodity. 

when we examin biden, we saw warn signs. look at that light schedule! check out those anem fund-rais numbers! sure, mani democrat voter deem him the most elect altern at a junctur when snatch back the white hous matter infinit more to them than ani romanc with a figur fresher and more inspir than he is. but would they stick? and could he last? 

so far, so good — or, rather, so biden, which in thursday night debat meant a quizzic refer to winston churchill, some endear loos banter with sander and an overarch aura of sheer good-naturedness. 

when one of the moderators, tim alberta of politico, brought up the subject of age, biden said: "look, i'm run becaus i'v been around. all my experience. with experience, hopefully, come judgment and a littl bit of wisdom." 

alberta note that if biden won the presidency, he'd be 82 at the end of his first term. "are you will to commit tonight to run for a second term?" 

"no, i'm not will to commit one way or another," biden said without pause, to support laughter from the audience. "here the deal. i'm not even elect one term yet, and let see where we are. but it a nice thought." it was a nice answer. 

moder gave him ampl opportun to stumble, challeng him, for example, on the obama administr failur to close guantánamo bay and it exagger of progress in the war in afghanistan. he had answer at the readi and exhibit zero discomfort. 

while he was evas about a few topics, he was emphat about his disagr with sander and warren on "medicar for all." and he leapt into the fray to explain that he find that plan exorbit and far-fetched. "i'm the onli guy that not interrupted," he said. "all right, i'm go to interrupt now." this from a man who, at a previous debate, cut himself off even befor moder did. 

i maintain serious reserv about him. thirty-six year in the senat and eight in the vice presid add up not just to enorm experi but also to a sprawl record that a gold mine for detractors. he undeni lack the vigor he onc possessed. 

and presid trump cynic air of question about his past deal with ukrain — and about the lucrat posit that his son hunter had on the board of the natur gas compani burisma — remain a potenti liabil for biden, who still hasn't found and deliv the perfect rebuttal. 

but journalist may not have the right antenna for how this is play out. when biden admonish a man in iowa who credul parrot trump line of attack, mani polit analyst pronounc him imprud thin-skin and unattract defensive. but mani voter sure saw him as authentic, relat — a love father and decent person disgust with the nasti come his way. there an upsid to trade a safe, convent polit script for someth rawer. trump demonstr that in 2016. 

and on thursday night, biden reassert the fundament generos of spirit that separ him from trump and is like a tall, cold glass of water to american thirsti for decency. "i refus to accept the notion, as some on this stage do, that we can never, never get to a place where we have cooper again," he said, make a pitch for bipartisanship. "if that the case, we are dead as a country. we need to be abl to reach a consensus. and if anyon has reason to be angri with the republican and not want to cooperate, it me — the way they'v attack me, my son and my family." 

he got fresh reason dure the debate, when sarah huckabe sanders, the former white hous press secretary, sent out a tweet that ridicul his stutter. she delet it — and apolog — after he ask her where her empathi had gone, a question i assum was rhetorical. it die on the altar of trump, where too mani other republican sacrif their principles, too. 

biden glow in comparison. he almost look shiny. 
