good for meghan and harri 
by the editori board 
jan. 9, 2020 

"and they live happili ever after," affirm the stori we tell our children about a beauti common marri princ charming. just make sure your kid don't see thursday headlin in the london dailies. 

"civil war as harri & meg quit the royals," scream the sun. "queen furi as harri and meghan say: we quit," blare the daili mail in a "royal bombshel special issue." "they didn't even tell the queen," lament the daili mirror. ani other news, from the drum of war in iran to passage, at last, of a brexit bill in parliament was swept away for megxit, as the tabloid prompt call the decis by princ harri and his wife, meghan, to "step back" from the ribbon-cutting, kindergarten-visit and foreign-travel duti they'v been assign as their royal high the duke and duchess of sussex. they will try, they said in a statement post on instagram wednesday, "to becom financi independent" and to balanc their live between britain and north america. 

how that will work is hard to predict. no one has ever resign from the "firm," as the british call the royal clan, though some have been exil or fire — most notabl edward viii, who had to renounc the throne and leav britain to marri an american divorcée, and most recent princ andrew, queen elizabeth ii second son, over his connect to the sex offend jeffrey epstein. 

true to the intens attent the duke and duchess of sussex have attract sinc their marriag in may 2018, the press was quick fill with stori about their financ and prospects, and about how the queen, the princ grandmother, would handl the defection. a few articl actual show sympathi for a coupl trap in a gild cage that expos them to constant scrutini — and, in the duchess case, virul racism. 

sarcasm and exagger come easili when write about royals, and the stori of princ harry, the rambuncti second son of princ charl and diana, princess of wales, reach across the atlant to marri an american actress was custom-mad for the tabloid — and, yes, for serious paper like this one. their wed at windsor castl and the birth of an ador son, archie, a year later was grand copy, a moral tale of a chang world, a fairi tale updat with divers millennials. but as the children stori fail to warn unsuspect youngsters, be royal isn't all about live happily, and certain not ever after. 

almost from the outset, a parallel line of nasti stori spread in the tabloid about meghan difficulti with her american famili and purport rift among the royal family. instead of adopt the british tradit of a stiff upper lip in the face of adversity, as queen elizabeth has so admir done throughout her long and crisis-riddl reign, princ harri and meghan proclaim that they did not intend to play by the old rules. the prince, who lost his mother to a horrif car chase through paris, spoke open about his emot struggles; the duchess made no secret of the difficulti of her new role. "not mani peopl have ask if i'm o.k.," she told one interviewer. 

in october, the coupl struck back, file a lawsuit against the mail on sunday over the public of a privat letter from meghan to her father. in a statement explain the suit, princ harri assail the tabloid and the suffer they caus his wife. "for these select media this is a game, and one that we have been unwil to play from the start," he wrote. "i have been a silent wit to her privat suffer for too long. to stand back and do noth would be contrari to everyth we believ in." 

given this background, the coupl decis to withdraw from the firm should not come as a surprise, though it appear to be just that to the queen and the heir apparent, princ charles. rear in the tradit of monarchi as the symbol and mainstay of the nation, they have stoical carri on in their duti even as their world, and their family, has been batter by the wind of change, discont and scandal, as dramat in the netflix seri "the crown." evid they expect the duke and duchess of sussex to do just that, and to rear children who would as well. 

but the real valu of the royal famili has never been in cut ribbon and prove endless fodder for the tabloids; it has been in the continu saga of fairi tale king and queen come to term with the world. in this story, princ harri and meghan should not be lament as defector from the old order, but celebr as the hero of the next installment, as modern royal renounc some level of privileg to seek their fortun in the real world. may they live happili ever after. 
