how much of harvard $40 billion endow is invest in fossil fuels? 
by devi lockwood 
jan. 29, 2020 

in my senior year at harvard, i was invit to a dinner in honor of the writer margaret atwood, the recipi of the 2014 harvard art medal. on my way out the door i lingered, shrug on my coat, took a deep breath and walk up to the univers presid at the time, drew gilpin faust. we had met twice: onc dure her offic hour and at an ice cream social. 

"pleas divest from fossil fuels," i said, hope to catch her off guard. 

the president, at first seem happi to see me, rearrang her face. her shoulder crept up toward her ears. 

"you student don't understand investments," she said. then she walk out of the room. 

i have benefit immeasur from harvard invest in me. but recogn where some of harvard $40 billion endow is invest was a caus of grow uneas for me and some of my classmates. student at other campus were similar concern about the endow of their schools. 

figur out exact how much of harvard endow is invest in oil, gas and coal compani is a near-imposs task. harvard is requir to disclos onli direct invest in which the univers own share of a specif company. 

harvard say it direct invest amount to $394 million as of may 2019, or rough 1 percent of the endow total. divest harvard, a student group, determin that of that approxim amount, $5.6 million was invest in compani that produc or own reserv of oil, natur gas and coal, and larg electr util power by natur gas and coal. 

harvard doesn't comment on it individu investments. but in 2015, the south pole group, a carbon financ consult in zurich, analyz $989 million of harvard then $36.4 billion endow at the request of divest harvard and 350.org. base on those investments, the group estim that the overal endow was respons for annual emiss of 11 million ton of carbon dioxide, rough equival to the annual emiss from delaware. 

it easi to get bog down in the numbers, but the exact amount of harvard fossil fuel invest or the emiss it is respons for isn't all that important. as the world face a climat crisis, ani amount of invest in compani that extract or burn fossil fuel is too much, especi by one of the world lead universities. 

lawrenc bacow, the univers current president, explain in the harvard gazett last fall that rather than divest, the univers believ that "engag with industri to confront the challeng of climat chang is ultim a sounder and more effect approach for our university." 

but mani student have not been content with that approach. 

as part of a divest campaign, in may 2014 an undergraduate, brett roche, was arrest by harvard univers polic for block an entranc to massachusett hall, where presid faust and member of the administr had their offices. in april 2015, dure harvard heat week, students, faculty, alumni and communiti member blockad presid faust offic onc more. last november, at the harvard-yal footbal game, climat chang protest storm the field at half time, delay the game for rough an hour. to date, 532 faculti member have sign a petit in favor of divest from fossil fuels. 

the result? noth has happened. 

other campus have had more luck. after pressur from student groups, stanford announc in 2014 that it would not make direct invest in public trade compani whose princip busi is coal mining. the univers of main follow suit in 2015, divest all direct hold from coal companies. in 2017, columbia univers announc divest from produc of coal burn to generat electricity. 

other school have taken addit steps, divest not onli from coal producers, but also from oil and gas companies. these includ sterl colleg in 2013; the univers of hawaii, univers of dayton, syracus univers and the rhode island school of design in 2015; and the univers of oregon in 2016. the univers of california system announc last septemb that it would divest $13 billion of it $83 billion endow and $70 billion of pension from fossil fuel producers. 

recogn that student activ hasn't work on it own, two harvard colleg alumni from the class of 2018, daniell strasburg and nathán goldberg start think about the harvard board of overs election. last year, they found harvard forward, an alumni-run organ that aim to elect five recent graduat candid to the board. the board of overs most advis the univers on strateg decisions, though it doe have the power to consent to the elect of member to the harvard corporation. 

the averag age of the five candid is 28 — the same number of year that, on average, have pass sinc the current overs were harvard students. their platform includes: "complet and swift divest of all univers asset from fossil fuels." 

the board is compos of 30 harvard alumni who sit for six-year terms. each year in april, five new member are vote in by alumni. a nomin committe of the harvard alumni associ general choos eight candid who will be ad to the slate. 

there anoth way in, though — though a petit process. to qualify, each candid need 2,936 sign nomin forms, equival to 1 percent of elig voter (live harvard alumni, with the except of current professors, administr and staff). 

the first test will come on feb. 1, the deadlin to qualifi for the ballot. when we spoke last week, ms. strasburg estim that between 2,300 and 2,400 nomin form had alreadi been sign in favor of each candidate. they are near there. 

this is not just about harvard. and it also not just about whether you think divest is a strategi that is worth pursuing, or whether it has an impact. 

rather, harvard forward is a model for build power by young peopl — of break the logjam within larg institut and make chang happen. 

this approach is not new. from 1985 to 1991, harvard and radcliff alumni/a against apartheid campaign for harvard to divest it stock in compani oper in south africa. the organ use the same nominate-by-petit system to elect four member to the board, includ archbishop desmond tutu, who state that he would return his honorari degre unless harvard divest entir from south africa. by the 1980s, harvard did. 

younger alumni realiz then that they need a seat at the decis make tabl to creat change. that is exact what harvard forward is seeking. 

on jan. 15, harvard global network night, over 100 volunt for harvard forward — mani of them alumni from the 1960s, 70s and 80s — attend 50 alumni event in 20 state and 20 countri with petit in hand. that night alone, they gather over 1,000 signatures. 

alumni can submit petit to nomin the younger slate of candid until the deadlin on saturday at 5 p.m. harvard forward has volunt in 35 citi to collect form at signatur parti this week. 

"a lot of peopl want to know how they can make an impact when it come to climate," ms. strasburg told me. "if you have a chanc to influenc a $40 billion endowment, that a pretti big deal." 
