are there limit to the right revolution? 
by thoma b. edsal 
dec. 18, 2019 

if you'r a democrat strategist, what do you do to reconcil the moral power of your parti argument about the inher digniti and civil right of everi american with the realiti of an elector that has not caught up with where the parti has gone and is slight — or more than slight — avers to it? how do you decid whether what is right is also what is wise? 

as recent as 2004, propos state constitut amend ban same-sex marriage, particular one in ohio, may have cost the democrat the presidency, so how do you handl presid trump calcul assault on transgend rights? you can't tell peopl "oh just wait for your rights, they'll be come soon" — that has never work for anyon — so i decid to ask philosophers, ethicists, transgend activist and other how the parti should respond to trump provocations. 

the issu of polit strategi rais by the transgend right movement have split liber into two camps, one urg caution against move too far in front of public opinion, the other call for all out support of transgend men and women. 

on one side are democrat for whom the first prioriti is a strategi to defeat donald trump in novemb and who see some polici sought by transgend right activist as potenti alien the moder voter they believ are necessari to a democrat victory. 

on the other side are those who are equal hungri to see the presid defeat but who hold a deep allegi to the ethic and moral principl of freedom and equality, includ for the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgend community. without these principles, they believe, the democrat parti will not onli lose votes, but also it core reason for being. 

presid trump, ever the opportunist, has been aggress move sinc his inaugur to attack the right of transgend men and women — see a hot button or third rail issu he think he can deploy to his advantag as he attempt to carv up the democrat opposition. 

i ask scholar who special in the studi of moral dilemma about the ethic and strateg choic trump current offens against transgend right forc on the liber coalition. there is evid that the democrat respons to trump onslaught is split. 

peter singer, a professor of bioethic at the centr for human valu at princeton, has been describ as "arguabl the most famous and influenti modern philosopher." he is unequivoc commit to a liber worldview. 

"the failur of peopl in the rich nation to make ani signific sacrific in order to assist peopl who are die from poverty-rel caus is ethic indefensible," he wrote in "achiev the best outcome," a 2002 essay: 
it is not simpli the absenc of charity, let alon of moral saintliness: it is wrong, and one cannot claim to be a moral decent person unless one is do far more than the typic comfortably-off person does. 

singer is specif sympathet to the difficulti face transgend men and women, write in 2012 "peopl who cross gender boundari suffer clear discrimination." 

weigh the tactic option face democrats, singer was, nonetheless, forc in his respons to my email inquiry: 
as a consequentialist, i don't believ that the parti is oblig to support discrimin against group regardless of the consequences. after all, the re-elect of trump, and republican control of congress, would be a greater disast than the reject of the legitim claim of transgend peopl to express themselv as they wish. 

most importantly, singer continued, the re-elect of trump 
would mean anoth four year in which the u.s. doe littl or noth to reduc it greenhous gas emissions, which make it difficult for other leader to take the strong stand that is needed, and that could bring about chang that are catastroph for hundr of million or even billion of people. 

the harm that a second trump term would produce, singer argued, "put the transgend issu you mention in perspective. we may believ that peopl should be abl to use whichev bathroom they choose, but stand up for that isn't suffici reason to risk the futur of our planet," not to mention "the mani other ways" that a "trump/republican victori would be bad." 

take a differ position, ami l. thomasson, professor of intellectu and moral philosophi at dartmouth, wrote by email: 
i think that howev much democrat may want to win, we must not lose sight of our moral compass — especi in time like this. the commit to protect the rights, equality, and well-b of everyon — not just those with power, wealth, or privileg — is absolut central. 

this commit is not subject to compromise: the democrat party, thomasson argued, 
would lose it soul to lose those commitments. what we need most in this countri is an honest moral convers — and that mean not replac moral consider with strateg calculations, or buri them to meet short-term goals. 

moral commitments, thomasson continued, 
are not thing that should be sacrif in hope of avoid right-w attacks, or hope to maxim a calcul of expect votes. it does, of course, leav democrat with a job to do, of make clear that it is moral rights, human right that are at stake here; of make clear whi recogn transgend right is not a threat; and of work through the detail of polici propos regard the impact on health care, etc. 

in fact, mara keisling, the execut director of the nation center for transgend equality, doe not expect democrat presidenti candid to support everi prioriti set by her organization. 

in a phone interview, keisl said that her organ first prioriti is that the candid "show they are compassion peopl who care about margin people." 

she said that if a democrat win the presidency, "we will have a polici agenda of mayb 200 items," but her group would not expect full support on everi one of them. 

the center has been interview democrat candid and so far all of them have shown that "they think about tran peopl in a compassion way. that a lot," she said, and a sharp contrast to trump. 

i ask grace lavery, a professor of english at berkeley — who describ her work in trans-feminist studi as "focus on the belief that transit works; that it is truli possibl to chang sex" — a seri of questions, including: "how do you think democrat should deal with some of the more complex issu rais by the transgend right movement?" 

she replied: 
the same way that anyon els should: by discuss them openly, and ensur that tran peopl account of our own experi are be heard. 

tran people, laveri continued, 
need access to health care, we need equit treatment by a crimin justic system, and we need equal protect under exist civil rights/titl ix legislation. given which, we don't tend to care what cis peopl think about what trans means. 

the basic issue, laveri argued, 
is about safeguard the civil right of a minor of people, at a moment in histori when we are be singl out for prejudici treatment. there are no real polici issu to address other than prejudic and squeamishness. 

robin dembroff, a professor of philosophi at yale who use the pronoun they/them, wrote me that democrat candid should treat "the trump campaign focus on transgend issues" as a "divis tool for stoke fear, distract from economic, health care, and climat issues, and dismantl alreadi tenuous women rights." 

dembroff argu that "recent threat to reproduct rights, lgbtq workplac protections, and transgend health care and facil access within the u.s. are part of this global movement to maintain the gender status quo." 

trump has clear calcul that opposit to transgend right will win him more vote than it will lose him, and he has translat that decis into action throughout the execut branch, rescind a wide rang of pro-transgend regulations, while issu harsh new ones. while some of his decis have been temporarili block by the courts, his intent are clear. 

trump has bar transgend individu from serv in the military. he has withdrawn an obama administr regul grant transgend student the right to use bathroom correspond to their gender identity. he has expand a "conscienc rule" that protect doctor and other health care worker who, on religi grounds, declin to provid care and who refus to refer patient to personnel who will provid it. the administr has also propos the elimin of obama-era rule ban discrimin against transgend medic patient by elimin provis that defin discrimin "on the basi of sex" to includ gender identity. 

for over five decades, start with the passag of the civil right act of 1964, the democrat parti has assum the broad role of polit home to the right revolut for african-americans, latinos, women, gay and, now, transgend men and women. 

the general elect will test whether the democrat nomine is will — in the face of trump inflammatori foray against transgend right — to bear the potenti cost of fight for privat health care coverag of gender transit surgery, includ for those in the arm services, in prison, or on medicaid; particip in women athlet competit for transgend women; and nondiscriminatori access to public facilities, includ bathroom in schools, librari and public spaces. 

for david leege, a professor emeritus of polit scienc at notr dame, the issu of transgend right now pose a possibl insolubl dilemma for democrat — someth trump fulli intend to exploit. 

leeg wrote me: 
i think it is an area whose discours is so new that a polit feasibl solut has not yet present itself. if we can't yet deal with toilets, where the answer are simpl — unisex toilet compart with lock on door — how can we deal with larg public financi outlay for sex-chang surgery? 

leeg said he can forese "politician appeal to relat deprivation. we'r go to spend taxpay dollar for their sex-chang surgeri when there is not enough to pay for my cancer drugs'." 

as an exampl of the complex of transgend rights, leeg cite the question rais by the issu of whether transgend women should be abl to enter women sport competitions: 
should she be forc to compet with men in run event or basketbal rather than against women? what is fair to other women? to the transgend woman? are right in conflict? is kind violated? we don't walk around with label specifi level of male and femal hormones. and we have thought of gender in binari term for so long that it is hard to think that hormon could resembl bell-shap curves. 

there are clear philosoph differ over democrat oblig to the transgend community. these differ translate, in turn, to sharpli dissimilar strategi for how democrat should address transgend issues. 

bruce cain, a polit scientist at stanford, worri that democrat risk not onli mobil trump supporters, but also lose vote from their own constituents. "transgend rights," cain writes, "could inde becom a power wedg issu for presid trump, especi if the democrat across the board take the strongest pro-transgend right stances." 

cain note that stand in favor of "use public money to pay for sexual transit or allow transgend access to public facil will certain fire up the conservative, republican base," but, he continued, "i would worri especi about the reaction in the black and latino communiti and among older moder whites." 

the key to the 2020 election, in cain view, "is win back state behind the blue wall and the swing states, keep the focus on trump and away from bolder issu that might lose vote in the swing areas." 

in contrast to cain, seana shiffrin, a professor of philosophy, law and social justic at u.c.l.a., argu that 
the democrat should take a matter of fact approach about these issues, with the tone that they are pretti straightforward. they shouldn't hand-wr or talk about it as "a difficult matter," 

in shiffrin view, "show strength and convict here is also a strateg approach." 

she provid more specif exampl of how democrat could frame transgend issues: 
democrat are in favor of health care for all and so they are in favor of what transgend peopl requir to function and flourish, just as they are in favor of the health care that ani other member of societi need to function and flourish. we all have differ health needs. some of the health need of transgend peopl have been neglect and the cost they have suffer as a result are rather shocking. 

in the case of bathrooms, shiffrin argu that the issu should be place in the larger context of protect peopl from violence: 
the peopl in true danger of violenc in restroom are transgend peopl who do not conform to gender expectations. forc transgend women to use men room will subject them to potenti violence. ergo, we should allow peopl to choos the restroom that best fit their ident and comfort levels. 

nanci bauer, a professor of philosophi and a dean of academ affair for art and scienc at tufts, argu in favor of orient strategi toward younger voters: 
my view is that the onli way that democrat can win is if they embrac progressivism, not just becaus it on the side of justice, equality, fairness, compassion, and decency, but also becaus it the onli polit strategi that will bring younger voter to the poll in signific numbers. i think that trump is monstrous and deepli fear his re-election. but the best way to get rid of him is to build coalit of decent peopl and get out the vote. 

judith butler, a professor of compar literatur at berkeley whose book includ "gender trouble: femin and the subvers of identity," made a straightforward case for full support of transgend polici priorities: 
we are seek to win the elect in order to restor faith in democracy, which includ a commit to equal and freedom. we do not seek to win for the sake of winning, but in order to preserv principl such as equal embodi in civil right protections. the right to health care and to social recognit and protect from discrimin should be regard as the fundament right of tran peopl in society. if we deni those rights, includ the right to have access to medic care, we deni those right and treat tran peopl differ from other minor under the law. 

william galston, a senior fellow at brook and former deputi assist to presid bill clinton for domest policy, make a differ argument, in favor of more increment change: 
the task of decent politician in a democraci is to move their countri as far toward justic and fair as the current state of public opinion will permit while do what they can to improv the chanc that public opinion will continu to shift in the right direction. this task requir judgment base on a solid understand of public opinion and of the fact on the ground. 

this is not an easi task, especi for a polit parti that support challeng to the tradit hierarchy. 

galston went on: 
as an elect offici or aspir for elect office, there is noth dishonor about defin one polici aspir at ani given point in respons to what the public is prepar to endors or at least permit at that time. the higher the stake in the election, the more defens this practic becomes. if, as mani peopl believe, the 2020 elect implic not onli polici disput but also the futur of liber constitut democraci in the unit states, then it would be justifi to subordin ani polici issu to the overrid goal of protect our constitut order. 

transgend right pose a classic push-pul problem for the contemporari democrat party: in support the expans of right to previous discriminated-against constituencies, how far ahead of public opinion should the parti go? 

the difficulti is onli made more challeng by the fact that the pressur in primari is to move to the left while the pressur in the general elect is to move to the center. 

by a number of measures, the countri has becom mark more liber over the past half century, especi on social and cultur issu — even as the process has been slow, often painstak slow, the pace more evolutionari than abrupt — as the public becom acclim to change. 

would democrat be wise to recogn this pace of chang as they head into a defin election? or should they attempt to enlarg their base by embrac an element argument about what the parti stand for? this is an elect in which turnout will be crucial. can democrat spur the legion who are focus on the environment, climat change, immigr and women right as well as transgend rights? can they expand the arena of concern? the stake could not be higher. 
