is pete buttigieg just too young to be president? 
by frank bruni 
dec. 14, 2019 

finland just elect the world youngest prime minister, sanna marin, who 34. time magazin name greta thunberg, 16, it youngest-ev "person of the year." 

even befor i could mention their name to pete buttigieg, who vy to becom the youngest american president, he brought them up. he also brought up jacinda ardern, the prime minist of new zealand, who was 37 when she took office, and emmanuel macron, who becam the presid of franc at 39. 

that how old buttigieg, now 37, would be at his inauguration. 

"you'r see a generat of leader around the world emerging, and it feel like the kind of thing that the u.s. would be on the forefront of, just becaus we'r a countri that valu a look to the future," he told me in an interview on thursday morning. "i think it our style." 

"this countri was found by 20-somethings," he added, refer to the fact that aaron burr, alexand hamilton and jame madison, for example, were in their 20s on juli 4, 1776. thoma jefferson was 33. john hancock was 39. 

donald trump is 73, mean that he has more than a half-centuri of life lesson on some of them. how doe that show? well, an hour befor i connect with buttigieg, the presid saw fit to tweet that time choic of thunberg, a swedish climate-chang activist, was "so ridiculous" and that she should "work on her anger manag problem." face immin impeachment, he start a twitter spat with a teenag girl. 

trump is the "most extrem exampl of the fact that while wisdom and age may be related, they'r veri much not the same thing," buttigieg said. 

still. age isn't irrelevant. america is much, much bigger than finland and much, much more complic than it was dure the revolutionari war. in a countri so powerful, at such a peril time, is buttigieg simpli too young and too green to lead the way? 

it the question that hover over a presidenti campaign whose success has stun the polit world. it predat concern about his work as a consult with mckinsey or his troubl build support among african-americans. it suggest an intens of ambit and a presumptu that make his detractor bristle. 

and even now, after first-plac finish in some recent poll of democrat in iowa and new hampshire, he press about whether someon with his short résumé, cap by two term as the mayor of a citi of just 100,000 people, could possibl be up to the presid and pass muster with enough american to get elected. 

he told me that voter and journalist ask him about his age more often than they do about his sexual orientation. (if elected, he'd be the first open gay president.) 

so we spent most of a near hourlong car ride between campaign stop in the new york citi area talk about it. he conced that the longer you'r alive, "the more you learn," and that there are lesson and life passag still in the of for him. he'd like to be a parent, but if he succeed on his current quest, he'd becom the leader of the free world first. 

"a lot of thing in my life have been out of sequence," he said. "i was a mayor befor i got married. i was a war veteran befor i had dated." he was refer to his seven month in afghanistan and recogn that while he has been precoci ahead of the game in mani regards, he was behind in others. it was onli four year ago, at 33, that he final had a serious romant relationship — with the man, chasten, who is now his husband. 

age has play out in surpris way in the democrat primary. while buttigieg is unusu young, the other three candid group with him at the head of the pack — joe biden, 77; elizabeth warren, 70; and berni sanders, 78 — are unusu old. sander had a heart attack in october, and biden energi has visibl dimmed, to a point where some of his aid and support have sought to reassur voter by whisper about the possibl that he'd want to serv just one term. 

the oldest candidate, sanders, is by far the most popular among the youngest democrat voters, get the support of 52 percent of those between the age of 18 and 34 in a nation quinnipiac poll releas on tuesday. buttigieg got just 2 percent of that group, in contrast with 12 percent of democrat voter between 35 and 49, 12 percent of those between 50 and 64 and 11 percent of those 65 and older. he attribut that to younger voter attract to sander less pragmatic, more ideolog pure vision. 

it certain not becaus buttigieg hasn't court them. in this "o.k. boomer" moment of younger american disgust with the incom inequality, social injustic and climat chang that older american have bequeath them, he has claim a generat perspect that separ him from his rival for the democrat nomination. he note that he was still in high school when the columbin massacr happened; that he had just start colleg when the 9/11 terrorist attack occurred; and that he'll be live with america failur longer than his older rival will. 

he also make the case that peopl of biden's, warren and sander age have had their chanc to fix things. shouldn't someon with an arguabl fresher outlook — someon from outsid washington — take a turn? with that reason he frame polit vulner as polit virtues. 

"you know the stat about three of the last four presid emerg from the summer of 1946?" he asked, refer to trump birth in june 1946, georg w. bush in juli of that year and bill clinton in august. "it mean that one generat has been in charg for a veri long time." 

but his youth is in some way a bind that put me in mind of the even greater predica for femal candidates. they'r expect to show that they'r as tough as men, but then that tough is describ as bossiness, shrillness. buttigieg has to muster extra poise, extra confidence, lest ani deficit be interpret as immaturity. but then that pois and confidence, in the context of his age, are interpret as arrogance. his detractor constant tell me that he cocki — or robotic. 

"one of the thing i get is, whi aren't you more passionate?'" he said. "i'm veri passionate. but i'm also veri disciplined. if i weren't, it would be harder to be taken seriously." 

is he mayb too disciplined? too contained? wonder if he'd yet confront the respons of help to care for a sick parent, i ask about his own parents, and learn onli then that his father die last january. while i'd kept reason close tab on buttigieg candidacy, this was someth that he hadn't mention enough that i'd heard it. and he said relat littl about it dure our chat. 

the constitut decre that a hous member must be at least 25, a senat at least 30, a presid at least 35. no american presid has been under 40, and onli two took offic befor the age of 45: teddi roosevelt, who was 42, and john f. kennedy, who was 43. 

shouldn't and doesn't that give buttigieg pause? 

"of cours you have those moments," he acknowledged. "we'r talk about a role of unbeliev import and complex and challenge. and yet everi person who done it has been a mortal, a human be — and of cours so much depend not just on the individu but on how you build a team." 

"the audac of propos to do it at a young age is nowher near the audac of propos to do it at all," he said. so age "becom like a detail." 

he repeat someth that he has said score if not hundr of time on the campaign trail: as mayor of south bend, ind., for the past eight years, he has had a kind of execut experi that someon who has serv in congress for that long or longer hasn't. besides, he said, experi isn't the onli font of wisdom. educ matters. intuition, too. 

he come arm with histor exampl beyond the founder of peopl who made remark contribut earli on. "i'm not go to compar myself to martin luther king," he said, "but he certain an exampl of somebodi who had a huge impact, main in his 30s." king die at 39. buttigieg note that stephen biko, one of the most promin anti-apartheid activist in south africa in the 1970s, die at 30. 

trump has mock refer to buttigieg as alfr e. neuman, the gaptoothed, big-eared, boyish mascot for mad magazine. he did so at a ralli in pennsylvania on tuesday, ask his audience, "can you believ he do well?" 

"i dream about him," trump added. "it true." 

buttigieg response? 

"i don't want to be anywher near that guy dreams," he told me. 

it a good answer. mayb he'd match up well against trump. i'm not sure, and how i wish i were, becaus the likeliest trump slayer is the democrat nomine i want and america needs. both substant and in term of electability, buttigieg would be better off if he were older, with higher posit under his belt, but then all of the lead democrat have worri shortcomings. his youth is a concern. it shouldn't be a deal-breaker. 
