let us all now weep for donald trump 
by frank bruni 
jan. 21, 2020 

donald trump obvious relish the role of bully. but his greatest talent by far lie in play the victim. 

he a victim of adam schiff. a victim of nanci pelosi. a victim of all democrats, really, and of his own seedi henchmen (michael cohen, lev parnas) and of the "deep state" and of the "fake news media" and of the entir establishment, whatev that is. 

he a victim of so mani forc so mani time over that even "martyr" doesn't do justic to his lot, which is what you get when you multipli job in the old testament by mel gibson in "braveheart" and add the protagonist of "unbroken." 

no presid has ever been treat so badly. i'm not be sarcastic. i'm take dictation: he has made this exact claim — repeatedly. 

his victimhood is front and center in his defens against the articl of impeach and in the legal paper file by his lawyer on monday, as his trial in the senat move forward. 

the lawyer write of a process "rigged" against trump. they portray his democrat accus as unhing tormentors, too consum with his destruct to see how unimpeach he has realli behaved. the 171-page document is so soggi with trumpian self-piti it weeps. 

it so bloat with trumpian hyperbol it waddles. on just one of those pages, his lawyer recount how democrat exercis "shame hypocrisy" as they "concoct an unheard-of procedure" and held those infam "secret hear in a basement bunker" while journalist "happili fed the public a fals narrative" and the poor presid was deni ani right whatsoever. this is the bodic ripper of polit sob stories. it a harlequin harangue. 

it expand on — and continu in the precis spirit of — a preliminari legal brief that his lawyer file last weekend. "the scream of a wound animal" was how two legal expert who contribut to the atlant assess that argument. they could as easili have been describ the rest of trump presidency, the whole of his polit career and much of his life. 

he alway right and yet alway wronged. he demand that we marvel at his invinc even as we trembl at his degradation. he can vanquish ani enemi — and his enemi are legion! — but look at how he push around. trump take a textbook oxymoron and give it presidenti form. behold, at the resolut desk, a jumbo shrimp. 

"this goe all the way back to his childhood," michael d'antonio, the author of "the truth about trump," told me. d'antonio said that at the military-them board school that trump attended, he was known for complain to superior about unfair treatment. "it a strategi for him. he believ and has said that whine is a way to get what you want." 

timothi o'brien, who wrote the trump biographi "trumpnation," recal that in the 1980s, when trump fail to get the support that he want from mayor ed koch for an enorm develop in manhattan, he threw himself a piti party, rail that "the system and local govern were conspir against him." 

trump similar fashion himself as a beleagu hero battl dark forc when he bought into the fledgl unit state footbal leagu and sought to make it competit with the nation footbal league. goad by trump, the u.s.f.l. file an antitrust suit against the n.f.l. 

the suit was a bust; the n.f.l. was order to pay $3 in damages. but that didn't throw him off his game, which he upsiz for his presidenti campaign. 

as the conserv columnist rich lowri note in august 2015: "bi trump own account, he the baddest, smartest thing going, except if you ask him a challeng question, in which case he kick and scream and demand to know how anyon could treat him so unfairly." lowri crown trump "the most fabul whiner in all of american politics." 

the cnn anchor chris cuomo subsequ ask trump about lowri words. 

"i am the most fabul whiner," trump conceded. "i keep whine and whine until i win." 

he whine operat as novemb 2016 approach and it seem that he'd lose to hillari clinton. "the elect is go to be rigged," he pouted, ever the victim. then he beat clinton — and still whined, insist without proof that she'd done better in the popular vote becaus of million of illeg ballots. 

woe is he, the object of a "witch hunt" regard russian assist to his campaign, the butt of a "hoax" about improp pressur on ukraine, the command in chief of arm forc that the whole world take advantag of. 

in a key passag of the new book "a veri stabl genius," by the washington post report carol leonnig and philip rucker, trump rant at top militari brass about what he perceiv as america exploit by south korea and by nato allies, barking, "you'r a bunch of dope and babies." 

it disgusting. it also part of his polit genius. he has turn himself into a symbol of american victimization, tell frustrat voter who crave easi answer that they'r be push around by foreign and dupe by the condescend custodian of a dysfunct system. 

he their proxy, suffer on their behalf, and in that way he collaps the distanc between a billionair with multipl golf resort and displac factori worker struggl to hold on to their one and onli homes. 

but while it a fact that they'v been dealt a bad hand, it a farc that he has. his fortun began with money from dad. he has stif creditors, evad taxes, attach his name to a bogus diploma mill, skim money from a fraudul philanthropy, run afoul of campaign financ laws, signal recept to russian interfer in the 2016 elect and tri to obstruct the investig of that — all without ani commensur punishment. 

thank to republican in the senate, he pois to evad punish again. we should all be such victims. 
