mayor pete gay reckon 
by frank bruni 
feb. 1, 2020 

ankeny, iowa — you can listen to long stretch of pete buttigieg remark and hear littl or no refer to the trailblaz natur of his campaign. you can almost forget. 

but as he wrap up a ralli here on thursday night, with the clock tick down fast to the iowa caucuses, he made soaring, stir mention of it. you remembered. 

"iowa has a remark knack for make history," he told hundr of supporters, note that he'd initi visit the state to support barack obama dure the democrat primari in 2008, when obama iowa victori set him on his way. "you chang america — and the world — expect for what was possible." 

then he allud to iowa legal of gay marriag in 2009, six year befor that happen nationally, and how it gave him hope that he might someday "be a happili marri man." the crowd roared. i had one foot out the door — it had been a long, long day — and i stop in my tracks. as a gay man and an american, i felt a surg of pride. 

it do-or-di time for buttigieg, whose poll number recent have been move in the wrong direction. he probabl need to finish first or a veri strong second on monday to preserv ani shot to be his parti 2020 nominee. 

he need neither to claim an enorm accomplishment. win or lose, buttigieg is the first open gay american to becom a serious presidenti candidate, one who land on the cover of promin magazines, was fawn over on the most-watch televis talk shows, rais exponenti more money than ani of the governor in the race, outpac beto o'rourke, outpol kamala harris, caught presid trump attention, qualifi for all of the democrat debat and more than held his own in each of them. 

win or lose, he an example, an educ and a hell of a story. that narrat is about youth — he just turn 38 — and the power of hyper-articul in an era of presidenti crudeness. but it also about sexual orientation, which has and hasn't factor into his pitch in surpris ways. 

he has grappled, on the nation polit stage, with question that all l.g.b.t.q. peopl ask, so that his candidaci is a metaphor for our lives: to what extent am i defin by my sexual orient or gender identity? what doe and doesn't it tell you about me? 

buttigieg answer have disappoint some l.g.b.t.q. peopl — and were bound to, given the expect place on ani politician who is bless and curs to becom a symbol. femal candid have had experi similar to his; candid of color, too. these pioneer are exhort to open door close to the group they repres but to repres those group first and foremost, and that tough. check with obama. or hillari clinton. 

or, now, buttigieg. he has weather complaints, even derision, from l.g.b.t.q. progressives, mani of whom say he not gay enough, his manner and manner too strait-laced, his polici preoccup too moderate, his success infuri reflect of how readili and well he assimil into heterosexu america. "gay seem to be mayor pete worst critics" was the headlin of a column in the washington blade, an l.g.b.t.q. publication. 

that sadden me. as i'v written before, part of what so mani gay peopl have fought so hard for is the recognit that we don't fit into tidi boxes, otherwis known as stereotyp — not sartorially, not ideologically. absolut disagre with buttigieg opposit to "medicar for all" if you have a differ view, but don't suggest that he should support it becaus he gay. yawn at all those perfect press white dress shirt that he wears, but don't cast them as a betrayal. 

and don't say that by discuss his own christianity, he consort with the enemy. yes, religion has been use cruelli against l.g.b.t.q. people. but one of the most profound dimens of buttigieg candidaci is how he has turn that around, for instanc assert that his marriag to his husband, chasten, has brought him "closer to god." 

"that the thing that i wish the mike penc of the world would understand," he said in a speech last year, refer to the vice presid anti-gay record. "that if you have a problem with who i am, your problem is not with me. your quarrel, sir, is with my creator." 

buttigieg has campaign frequent with his husband, embrac him onstage, and has mention his marriag in debates. and he doesn't shi away from question about his sexual orientation, which he didn't public acknowledg until the age of 33, short befor his elect to a second term as mayor of south bend, ind. 

but he doesn't volunt lengthi rumin about it impact on how he see the world or showcas it in ani other way. it there if you look and listen for it. but sometim you have to look and listen hard. 

none of the voter at his ralli in iowa brought it up when i ask them what drew them to buttigieg. they most rave about his intelligence. 

were there ani particular obstacl he might face in a general election? 

"his youth," said louann cooling, 62, of le grand, iowa. it was the same answer — his youth, or his inexperi — that other gave. no one mention his be open gay. 

be gay and an emblem of progress hasn't given buttigieg ani special traction with younger democrats, who respond much less favor to him than older democrat do. it hasn't establish ani solidar with other minorities, though he reach for such a connect when state a commit to racial justic dure the democrat novemb debate. 

"while i do not have the experi of ever have been discrimin against becaus of the color of my skin, i do have the experi of sometim feel like a stranger in my own country, turn on the news and see my own right come up for debate," he said. "wear this wed ring in a way that couldn't have happen two elect ago let me know just how deep my oblig is to help those whose right are on the line everi day, even if they are noth like me in their experience." 

those remark didn't have the effect he intended. some african-american accus him of equat veri differ kind of discrimination, and poll show that his support from black democrat remain abysmal. when they apprais buttigieg, they notic a whole lot beyond his sexual orientation, includ worrisom friction between him and some black resid of south bend and a path of extraordinari privileg (harvard, a rhode scholarship, a job with mckinsey) that brought him to this point. 

what doe buttigieg be gay tell you? that he has trepid and caution in him — he stay in the closet all those year — but that he has courage, too, enough to pursu the presid despit the inevit spotlight on him as a novelty. 

what doesn't his be gay tell you? his music tastes, for one. the last time i had a long talk with him was in mid-december, and he had just met the perform lizzo, who was a fellow guest on "cbs this morning." she an icon for outsiders, brim with delici attitude, and i assum he'd be thrilled. 

but i'm not sure he realli doe "thrilled," and he confess to be more a dave matthew band fan. in ani case, he said, "i usual have a kind of celebr blindness." 

a gay man who doesn't twinkl at the star around him? yep, our creator make us in all shape and stripes. thank you, mayor pete, for take that messag out on the trail. 
