no, team trump, the coronavirus isn't good for america 
by paul krugman 
jan. 30, 2020 

how frighten should you be about the coronavirus? i'm no epidemiologist, but what i'v seen look pretti scary. it doesn't help that the trump administration, as part of it general war against scienc and expertise, has serious reduc america capac to respond if we do face a danger pandemic. 

it also look quit possibl that the virus will inflict a lot of econom damag — even if it doesn't kill you, it might kill your job. and one special sourc of concern is that top offici in the trump administr are talk nonsens about the econom threat. 

so, about that econom threat: mani peopl are draw parallel between the coronavirus and the 2002-3 outbreak of sever acut respiratori syndrome, or sars, which also origin in china. like the current outbreak, sar led to the imposit of econom disrupt quarantines, which appear to have had a signific if temporari advers effect on china economy, and a modest negat impact on the world economi as a whole. 

we still don't know whether the coronavirus is more or less danger than sars. what we do know is that the global econom implic of a pandem in china are like to be much more sever now than they were then, for the simpl reason that china is a vast bigger player than it use to be. 

in 2002 china was still in the earli stage of it great econom surge; it account for onli around 8 percent of global manufactur valu added, far less than the share of the u.s., japan and europe. today, however, china is the workshop of the world, account for more than a quarter of global manufacturing. 

now, you might think that this impli an upsid to china troubles, that disrupt china vast manufactur sector would offer opportun to produc in other countries, includ the unit states. that is, you might think this if you knew noth about 21st-centuri economics. 

sure enough, wilbur ross, the commerc secretary, appear on fox busi on thursday morn to declar that he "didn't want to talk about a victori lap," but that the coronavirus "will help to acceler the return of job to north america." by say this, he demonstr a coupl of things: (1) whi gail collin reader vote him trump worst cabinet member, and (2) whi trump trade war has been such a failure. 

what ross and his colleagu appar still don't understand — although some of them may be get an inkl — is that modern manufactur isn't like manufactur a coupl of generat ago, when differ countri industri sector were engag in fair straightforward head-to-head competition. these day we live in a world of global valu chains, in which much of what ani given nation import consist not of consum good but of "intermediate" good that it use as part of it own product process. 

in such a world, anyth that disrupt import — whether it tariff or a virus — rais product costs, and as a result if anyth hurt manufacturing. indeed, a recent studi by the feder reserv found that trump tariffs, which were concentr on intermedi goods, have reduced, not increased, manufactur output and employment. sure enough, while overal econom growth in 2019 was decent (not great), manufactur is in a recession. (and the uncertainti creat by the trade war may explain whi busi invest is down despit a huge cut in corpor taxes.) 

as i said, some of trump peopl seem to have gotten an inkl here. last week the white hous basic admit that tariff on steel and aluminum have done more harm than good, hurt industri that use these materials. but the administr answer isn't a reconsider of it polici — it is to impos more tariffs, on a wider rang of products. 

which bring me back to the coronavirus. let leav asid the public health issu — although the trump administr has clear left us much less prepar than we had been to deal with these issu if they becom serious — and focus on the economics. 

what we can say is that if the virus serious disrupt chines production, it impact on the u.s. economi will be like an extrem version of trump trade war, except without ani compens in the form of tariff revenue. and the two thing we know about the trade war are that it has been an econom bust and that trump offici still appear clueless about whi it has been a bust. 

bear in mind that so far trump has been remark lucky. asid from hurrican maria — which he mishandled, and in which thousand of american die — he has face essenti no crises, domest or foreign, that weren't of his own making. and he has surround himself with the gang that couldn't think straight, which rais sever doubt about how well he would handl a crisi that he didn't creat himself. 

if wilbur ross bonehead remark on thursday are ani indic — and i fear they are — the trump administr is even less prepar to deal with the econom fallout from a possibl pandem than it is to deal with the public health crisis. be afraid. 
