notori d.j.t. on trial 
by maureen dowd 
jan. 25, 2020 

republican know veri well who they are. 

that whi it was such a juici moment when hakeem jeffries, the congressman from brooklyn and democrat impeach manager, quot a lyric by fellow b-town nativ son biggi small to rebut jay sekulow when the presid lawyer disingenu wondered, “whi are we here?" 

refer to the democrat crystal-clear case that donald trump abus his power and corrupt the highest offic in the land, jeffri proclaimed, “and if you don't know, now you know." 

i went to the press galleri one afternoon to check out the tableau vivant. the visitor galleri was onli half full, and there was none of the passion and titil that infus the clinton impeachment, which also, odd enough, revolv around a power dispar between two people. 

one democrat senat staffer mourn the apathy. “our phone aren't ringing," he told me. “nobodi cares. it the saddest thing ever." 

one side of the room seem to be smirking. 

mitch mcconnel is resort to his merrick garland playbook. he'll let the democrat make all their nobl points, but it kabuki. republican have perfect the dark art of “there noth to see here, just keep moving." mcconnel long ago choreograph the end, with democrat lose the argument and the acquit scoundrel triumphant sweep into the capitol to make his state of the union address. 

at night, tipsi republican staffer treat senat offic build as a pub crawl, roam the hall with celebratori bottl of wine. 

some republican were pay attent at the trial — or want to be seen pay attention. susan collin was glu to the proceedings, as was the senat to her left in a magma-color shawl, lisa murkowski. republican like collin who are vulner in 2020 have to be alert and figur out how to find their way out of the hear without do more polit harm. a trump confid told cbs news that republican senat were warned, “vote against the presid and your head will be on a pike." 

seat at the back of the class, mitt romney look dutiful, and the thought must have cross his mind that he in a posit to inflict payback on trump for call him “a pompous ass" and trick him into an interview for secretari of state onli to humili him. (reveng is a dish best serv with milk.) 

but more senat on the republican side were telegraph boredom. 

lindsey graham yawn and rearrang his yellow pencil and went on walkabouts, later tell reporters, “about the fourth time you tell me the same thing is twice too much." he cleav to his lap-dog role, say preposter of trump: “what he want to do is get to the truth." 

tom cotton play with the fidget spinner richard burr had hand out to all the republicans. marsha blackburn and other left to trash the proceed on fox news. 

the senat in the democrat presidenti race could not have been happi to be stuck there, either. berni sanders, accustom to make like leonard bernstein at big ralli and upset he not in iowa to relish his surge, had a hard time keep his hand still, move them restlessly, silent clapping, and final hold them togeth on his chest over his blue sweater. 

but head on both side did snap to attent whenev that unholy, jangly, self-impeach peal, so inescap in the last three years, rang out in the hallow chamber. trump voic was imposs to ignor when the hous impeach manag play incrimin video clip of the human fidget spinner himself, sometim howl over the blade of his chopper on the south lawn. 

so mani peopl in this veri room had tri and failed, or are now trying, to vanquish the guy. romney, cruz, rubio, graham, klobuchar, sanders, bennet, booker, gillibrand, warren, harris. trump had savag all his fellow republican and yet here they were listen to an unend recit of his crime and come out to be his praetorian guard. 

adam schiff tri to warn the former nemes turn defend of trump that if the presid is not removed, he could turn on them the way he had turn on mari yovanovitch and joe biden, use the power of the presid to cheat, lie and smear. (now rudi buddi lev parna say he has fork over to congression democrat a 2018 record of trump person order yovanovitch to be fired.) 

“the next time, it just may be you," schiff told the republican senators. “do you think he wouldn't ask you to be investigated? do you think for a moment that he wouldn't?" 

schiff also remind republican that trump had invert their dogma, embrac the evil empir and authoritarian and trust crazi rudi conspiraci theori over his own intellig services. 

“you don't realiz how import charact is in the highest offic in the land until you don't have it," schiff said. 

but the more impress the democrat case is, the more depress the realiti becomes. they want to convinc themselv that charact matters. but mani american knew they were vote for a thug. they want a thug who would bust up washington, and they got one. 

the democrat are reli on facts, but the republican are reli on fox. 

and if you don't know, now you know. 
