of all trump defenses, this is the lamest 
by frank bruni 
jan. 25, 2020 

onc the senat conclud it trial of presid trump, it should go into recess. until next january. the house, too. lawmak shouldn't pass legislation, consid nomin or make ani import decis whatsoever: this is an elect year, and the voter will soon weigh in on the direct of america. the nation busi should await that judgment, lest member of congress contradict it. 

a ludicr proposal? indeed. but it in line with — and an extrapol of — a favorit argument against trump convict and remov from office. his republican support say that lawmak shouldn't speak for voter on such a crucial issue. to pre-empt the verdict at the ballot box, they say, is to subvert the peopl will. 

nice try. lawmak are elect specif to speak for voter on crucial issues. that the system. that their job. american govern doesn't oper by daily, hour or issue-by-issu poll (at least not overtly). congress doesn't have exponenti more power one week after elect day than it doe one year later (though it may inde have more polit currency). 

and lawmak shouldn't defer to their constitu at everi turn. those constitu expect them, over the cours of their legisl terms, to use their judgment as better-inform proxi for the peopl they represent. so doe the constitution, which creat america as a repres democracy, not a direct one. our lawmak are suppos to lead as well as follow, to be respons to public sentiment but not mesmer or paralyz by it. that even truer when the stake are huge than when they'r small. 

republican have decid to sing a differ tune. if it sound familiar, that becaus they turn to the same music when the suprem court justic antonin scalia died, presid barack obama nomin merrick garland to replac him and the senat major leader, mitch mcconnell, declar that a presidenti elect about eight month in the of prevent the senat from take ani action. it was a song not of principl but of polit convenience. the same hold true now. 

"give the peopl back their power," the hous minor leader, kevin mccarthy, implor a few month ago, argu against impeach itself. refer to the presid transgress and the novemb 2020 election, mcconnel said, "the american people, if they think this is a veri signific episode, can take it into account." senat lindsey graham chime in: "i realli do believ that the best person — group of peopl — to pick a presid are the voters, not a bunch of partisan politicians." pat cipollone, one of the presid lawyers, added: "no one ever thought that it would be a good idea for our countri — for our children, for our grandchildren — to tri to remov a presid from a ballot, to deni the american peopl the right to vote." 

no one? really? how about the framer of the constitution, who establish the impeach process to do essenti that and declin to add ani asterisk about the next elect imminence? "if the framer thought impeach in an elect year was a bad idea, they could have set thing up differently," note jill lepore, a harvard histori professor and the author of the 2018 book "these truths: a histori of the unit states." 

"they could have institut a mechan for an interim election, for instance," lepor told me. "they did not. they could have said, except not in an elect year. they did not. you want there to be no impeach allow in an elect year, ever? you have to get a constitut amend ratified." and that would never happen, becaus it would be licens for a presid to do anyth he or she wanted, fearlessly, if it sync with the calendar just so. 

the framers, in fact, want a govern that wasn't too sensit to voter — that mediat voter whim and prejudic through repres presum take a longer, cooler view. senat six-year term reflect that. as alison lacroix, a univers of chicago professor who teach constitut law and american history, told me, "the senat is suppos to have a littl more delib power and mayb be a littl less beholden to the people." when senat say they should kick an issu back to the people, they'r arguabl violat the spirit of the chamber. 

lacroix made anoth excel point: what happen to trump isn't muscl voter out of the process but, rather, take into account what voter recent did. "you onli get an impeach vote when peopl have chang their minds," she said, refer to their opinion about a sit president. "the vote come from the house, and we know, from thing like the midterm elections, that some amount of peopl have chang their minds. anoth parti has gain control of the house. that has to be tell us something." 

granted, that switch in the hous major wasn't a referendum on trump interact with ukraine, which were the ground for his impeach and hadn't yet come to light. but they were absolut a referendum, in part, on his behavior and character. lawmak who are now assess and act on the worst of that behavior and charact are hard turn a deaf ear to voters. 

if republican leader were realli so invest in a govern that didn't diverg from voter desires, more of them would be question the elector college. becaus of it, the countri has a president, trump, who receiv about three million fewer vote than his opponent. becaus of it, georg w. bush won the 2000 presidenti elect despit be the choic of fewer american than al gore. but both trump and bush are republicans. so it fine if the system and voter sentiment aren't perfect aligned. 

similarly, republican — democrats, too — are fond of tar oppon by say that they'r too beholden to polls. the implic is that elect offici should have the courag of their own convict and not outsourc their judgment to constituents. say that onli voter should decid trump fate is precis such outsourcing. and elect day is essenti the biggest poll of all. 

there an additional, profound import wrinkl in the case of trump impeach and trial. they stem specif from action he took to corrupt the next presidenti elect by get a foreign govern to smear a potenti rival. to give those action a pass is to green-light more of the same or worse, mean that voter verdict on trump behavior might be fatal tainted: not a clean express of popular will but a product of, well, cheating. the elect can't be the remedi when the elect is what at issue. 

but mccarthy, mcconnel and other republican are determin to spare their parti the humili of trump remov and to protect themselv from his wrath (and his base fury) if he isn't saved. so they reach for whatev argument they can. some are more plausibl than others. the assert that an elect next novemb forbid honor this januari is a joke, and the framer would have laugh at it. 
