berni angri bros 
by bret stephen 
jan. 31, 2020 

barbara boxer minc no word when it come to describ the peopl usual known as the berni bros — a subset of berni sander support who hope to take over the democrat parti and remak it in their image. 

"there is so much negat energy; it so angry," say the former four-term democrat senat from california. "you can be angri about the unfair in the world. but this becom a personal, deep-seat anger at anyon who doesn't say exact what you want to hear." 

i ran into boxer earlier this week and got to talk about a superb report in the time by my colleagu matt flegenheimer, rebecca r. ruiz and nelli bowles: "berni sander and his internet army." the piec briefli mention a 2016 incid in which boxer went to nevada to tri to unifi the parti after hillari clinton defeat berni sander in the state caucus. 

boxer was an earli clinton supporter. but she also a liber lioness and felt sure she could mollifi the crowd. "i thought i could get the boo down," she recalled. "i said: whi are you booing? i'm berni friend. when you boo me, you'r boo bernie.'" 

thing onli got worse. the heckl got louder. someon pick up a chair as if to throw it. "secur whisper in my ear, you'v got to get off the stage," boxer said. "when i left, my heart was pounding. i'd never had that before." 

boxer stori is one of the milder one the time tell about the internet troll whose goal seem to have less to do with build sander up than with hound and humili anyon who stand in their man way. 

"when mr. sander support swarm someon online, they often find multipl access point to that person life, compil what can amount to investig dossiers," the time reported. "more commonly, there is a barrag of jab and threat sometim frame as jokes. if the target is a woman, and it often is, these insult can veer toward her physic appearance." 

doe this mean sander himself support this kind of behavior? no, and occasion he tri to disavow it. but not veri hard: last year, he hire as a top aid and speechwrit david sirota, accur describ by the atlant as "his twitter attack dog." 

nor doe it mean that anyth like a major of sander support support the nasti carri out in his name. yet no other democrat candid has so mani venom follow — no biden brother or warren sister to return fire with fire. the onli real analog in u.s. polit today to the berni nasti are the trump nasties. they resembl each other in way neither side care to admit. 

the most obvious resembl is the adul they bestow on their respect champions, whom they treat less as normal politician than as savior who deserv uncrit and uncompromis support. 

"surrend to a leader is not a mean to an end but a fulfillment," the philosoph eric hoffer observ in "the true believer," a book that remain as relev in our populist era as it was in the totalitarian one. "whither they are led is of secondari importance." 

sinc it the usual destini of savior to be persecut befor they'r exalted, the respons of their follow often is to persecut back. but persecut whom? in the demonolog of most mass movement there is usual a near enemi and a far one, and the near enemi must be dealt with first and hardest. to this day, hard-cor trump support reserv their deepest spite for republican nevertrump holdout ("human scum," accord to the president). 

just so with the berni bros, who see more moder democrat not as kindr spirit or potenti convert but as sellouts, even traitor — the proverbi enemi within. part this is about the normal competit for power, in which the show of ideolog puriti is treat as evid of moral superiority. 

but it also goe to the heart of what the berni bros are realli about. as they see it, ordinari civil isn't a virtue. it a ruse by which those with power manipul and margin those without. democrat like joe biden who play by the rule of civil and bipartisanship aren't just fall prey to the insidi manipulation. they are perpetr and legitim it. no wonder near half of sander support won't commit to or are unsur about vote for the democrat nomine in the event it isn't bernie, accord to a recent poll. whi bother vote for oligarchi lite? 

if there is a silver line here, it that the world has long experi with this brand of zealotry. berni sander may not be one of his own aw bros, and may condemn their worst excesses. but there no reason to think they'll lose their influenc should he win the white hous — just as trump presid has embolden and empow mani of his own worst followers. 

is this the democrat parti the democrat want? they will cast their first vote for presid on monday even at the parti caucus in iowa. now is the moment for second thoughts. 
