onli you can prevent dystopia 
by farhad manjoo 
jan. 1, 2020 

the new year is here, and online, the forecast call for sever season of hell. tech giant and the media have scarc figur out all that went wrong dure the last presidenti elect — viral misinformation, state-sponsor propaganda, bot aplenty, all of us cleav into our own tribal realiti bubbl — yet here we go again, headlong into anoth experi in digit mediat democracy. 

i'll be honest with you: i'm terrified. i spend a lot of my time look for edifi way of interact with technology. in the last year, i'v told you to meditate, to keep a digit journal, to chat with peopl on the phone and to never tweet. still, i enter the new decad with a feel of overwhelm dread. there a good chanc the internet will help break the world this year, and i'm not confid we have the tool to stop it. 

unless, that is, we are all realli careful. as smokey bear might say of our smolder onlin discourse: onli you can prevent dystopia! 

and so: here are a few tip for improv the digit world in 2020. 

viral is a red flag. suspect it. 
if i were king of the internet, i would impos an ironclad rule: no one is allow to share ani piec of content without wait a day to think it over. 

viral was onc the delight miracl of a network age; you'd see a funni video go around, get caught up in the collect wonder and hilarity, and forward it on to your 100 closest pals. at it meme-ifi best, particip in this sort of viral feast felt like a boon to collect social bonding. remember, kids, that one glorious day we were all talk about the crazi dress? what times, what times! 

but, the dress notwithstanding, in the 2010s viral got too easy, and then it grew sour, venal and dishonest. nobodi counting, but by my unscientif estim almost everyth that becam instant popular onlin in the last decad turn out to be problemat in one way or another. that photo of the shark wash onto a freeway by a hurricane? fake. the culture-war-defin outrag your aunt just post to facebook? debunked, of course. the sudden popular influencer? a "milkshak duck" run from his past. 

social network and even govern are look into way to curb viral misinformation, but this fight will defin our age. the root of the problem is that human are weak, gullibl dolts; everi day mani of us, even peopl who should know better — folk with fanci job and blue check mark next to our handl — keep fall for onlin hoaxes. viral hijack our better instincts, and becaus so mani of the internet busi model benefit from instant popularity, there a great deal of money and power ride on our failings. 

there is onli one long-term fix: that a critic number of us alter how we approach viral content. let all conscious embark on a mind-set shift. in 2020, question anyth that everyon talk about, especi if it fit all your priors, or there some kind of ad money involved. (hint: there alway ad money involved.) if you can't stop sharing, at least slow your roll. the stake are enormous; there no room for error. strive to be better, please. 

resist the easi dunk. 
in the 2010s, twitter becam the center of the polit universe. in some way this was for the better — twitter is a haven for righteous activ against the global power that be — but most times, it was for the worse. twitter is a daili toxic nightmar of reflex egot and groupthink that will prompt you to question your priorities, not to mention your sanity. 

which is why, if you'r on twitter and can't muster the will to never tweet, you should at least consid it your duti in 2020 to resist the network worst impulses, for your sake and all of ours, too. 

what twitter most damag sin? i say it the too-easi mock joke — what known, in the jargon, as the "quote-tweet dunk." 

here are two canon examples: 

this scurril maneuv work like so: you spot an easili ridicul tweet by a member of some rival social or polit tribe. like a 1990s fourth grader with phaser set to "moded!" you add a pithi rejoind that sure to pleas your side. it best if you elid context, depth or ani intent of dialogue; just straight-up make fun of the person. then mash on the retweet button to broadcast your suppos clever jape. 

the mechan is part of the problem — when you quote-tweet someon on twitter, the servic show off your remark to your own follow while leav the origin poster follow in the dark. (anoth twitter feature, the reply, let follow of both user see a response.) if twitter is a cocktail party, the quote-tweet dunk is the equival of overhear a guy across the room say someth ridiculous, then invit the whole room to point and giggl at the idiot over there. the imbal discourag ani possibl of meaning convers and reduc all of polit discours to empty, shallow quippery. 

the thing about the quote-tweet dunk is that it can feel incred intoxicating; in the heat of some white-hot polit moment, it alway tempt to shoot the fish in the barrel and watch the like roll in. i swore off dunk year ago, but i still find myself ape michael jordan now and again. 

twitter could instant improv itself by remov quote-tweet as a feature. fail that, take the oath with me: if the joke too obvious to resist, let it go. 

find a well-moder corner of the internet. 
it can sometim seem as if all the internet is deep fake and cultur wars, trump tweet and influenc scams. it not, of course. the internet still abound in lovely, wholesom nich — the fantasi sport circles, the youtub and instagram communiti devot to ani kind of craft, the mani subreddit where stranger come togeth to help one anoth out of real problem in life. 

what distinguish the product onlin communiti from the disturb ones? often it someth simple: content moderation. the best place onlin are bound by clear, well-enforc communiti guidelin for participation. twitter and facebook are toxic becaus there are few rule and few penalti for flout them. a reddit communiti like r/relationships, meanwhile, is a haven of incredible, empathet discuss becaus it host spend a lot of effort polic the discuss toward product dialogue. 

this get at the plain truth of the internet: a better digit world take work. it work all of us should do. 
