pompeo call me a liar. that not what bother me. 
by mari louis kelli 
jan. 28, 2020 

ask journalist whi they do the job they do, and you'll hear a rang of answers. here mine: not everi day, but on the best ones, we get to put question to power peopl and hold them to account. this is both a privileg and a responsibility. 

januari has been an interest month on this front. i'v had the opportun to put questions, one on one, to the top diplomat of both the unit state and iran, in their respect capitals. 

iran foreign minister, javad zarif, spoke to me on jan. 7 in tehran. secretari of state mike pompeo spoke to me last friday, in washington. each man repres a nation in conflict with the other; speak with them, i wonder what path either could see out of the situation. in both cases, i was allot 10 minut for questions. 

it turn out you can cover a lot of ground in 10 minutes. when mr. zarif sat down with me, on the sidelin of a big think tank confer focus on secur in the persian gulf, it was just four day after an american drone strike had kill maj. gen. qassim suleimani. we start there. 

how might iran retali for general suleimani death? "the unit state has commit a grave error," mr. zarif told me. "and it will pay for that grave error." i do not know whether, at that moment, he was awar that just hour later, iran would unleash missil on iraqi militari base where american troop are housed. 

we move on to whether he would travel to new york later that week, to attend secur council meet at the unit nations. 

"no," he told me, "becaus mike pompeo decid i was too danger for the unit states." the unit state had deni mr. zarif a visa, in what some have brand a violat of the 1947 unit nation headquart agreement, which general requir the unit state to grant access to the unit nation for foreign diplomats. 

next i ask whether we were wit the death of the 2015 nuclear deal. mr. zarif insist no — even as he acknowledg that iran was suspend complianc with centrifug limits. 

the foreign minist and i end with a tens exchang on what is an uncomfort question for him: the status of unit state citizen imprison in iran, and whether futur prison exchang were off the table. "we had propos a univers exchang of all prison and we were do that in good faith," mr. zarif said. but are those channel still open? no, he conceded, saying, "those talk are certain suspend now." 

my interview with secretari pompeo came two week and three day later, in the east hall of the treati room, on the seventh floor of the state department. by then an uneasi paus had taken hold; the unit state and iran appeared, for the moment, to have step back from the brink of war. 

i kick off with a question on diplomacy. is there ani serious initi underway to reopen diplomaci with iran? "we'v been engag in deep diplomat effort sinc the first day of the trump administration," mr. pompeo replied, underlin american effort to build a coalit to counter and contain iran. 

but in term of american engag with iran, i went on, are there ani plan for talks? "the diplomat effort on this front has been vigorous, robust and enorm successful," mr. pompeo said, chang the subject back to engag american alli to put pressur on iran. 

anoth question i was curious to hear secretari pompeo answer was how the trump administr plan to prevent iran from build nuclear weapons, should it decid to do so, given that iran is closer to a nuclear weapon capabl than when presid trump took office. 

here the relev portion of the interview: 

kelly: how do you stop iran from get a nuclear weapon? 

pompeo: we'll stop them. 

kelly: how? sanctions? 

pompeo: we'll stop them. 

he did not offer specifics. nor did he elaborate, when press on how to squar his resolv with what mr. zarif had just told me — that all limit on iran centrifug program have been suspended. 

"yeah," mr. pompeo said. "he blustering." 

do you have evid that he blustering? he did not direct answer. (in fairness, i could hard expect him to telegraph what intellig the unit state may possess on the iranian regim nuclear ambitions.) 

i write about all this now to refocus attent on the substanc of the interviews, which has been overshadow by mr. pompeo subsequ swear at me, call me a liar and challeng me to find ukrain on an unmark map. 

for the record, i did. that not the point. the point is that recent the risk of miscalcul — of two old adversari misread each other and accident escal into arm confront — has felt veri real. it occur to me that swap insult through interview with journalist such as me might, terrifyingly, be as close as the top diplomat of the unit state and iran came to communic this month. 

there is a reason that freedom of the press is enshrin in the constitution. there is a reason it matter that peopl in posit of power — peopl charg with steer the foreign polici of entir nation — be held to account. the stake are too high for their impuls and decis not to be examin in as thought and rigor an interview as is possible. 

journalist don't sit down with senior govern offici in the servic of score polit points. we do it in the servic of ask tough questions, on behalf of our fellow citizens. and then share the answer — or lack thereof — with the world. 
