requiem for a dream 
by roger cohen 
jan. 31, 2020 

i have cover mani stori that mark me over the past 40 years, in war zone and outsid them, but none that has affect me as person as britain exit from the european union. brexit day, now upon us, feel like the end of hope, a moral collapse, a self-amput that will make the countri where i grew up poorer in everi sense. 

poorer materially, of course, but abov all poorer in it shrivel soul, divorc from it neighborhood, intern fractured, smaller, meaner, more insular, more alone, no longer a protagonist in the great miracl of the postwar year — europ journey toward borderless peac and union. britain, in a fit of delud jingoism, has opt for littleness. 

the fiasco was captur this week when that pompous and piti british nationalist, nigel farage, wave a miniatur union jack in the european parliament as he bid farewel and was cut off by the vice-presid of the parliament, mairead mcguinness. "put your flag away, you'r leaving, and take them with you," she said. 

farag look like a sheepish schoolboy caught break rules. he blushed. an irish woman from a countri uplift by european union membership reprimand the new breed of little-england male as he exit histori in pursuit of an illusion: the symbol was perfect. "hip, hip hooray!" farag flag-wav brexit parti cohort chanted. save me, please, for i shall weep. 

speak of symbolism, the fact that presid trump has been a fulsom support of this folli is apt. an ahistorical, amor american leader cheer on a british abdic sum up the end of an era. the world was rebuilt after 1945 on someth of more substanc than british-american lie and bloviation; it took resolve. the torch has passed. to whom exact is unclear, perhap to a countri slow to contain a plague. that is a problem. 

brexit belong to this era in one quintessenti way. it is an act of the imagination, inspir by an imaginari past, carri along by misdirect grievances, born aloft by an imaginari future. the age of impun is also the age of illus turbocharg by social media. 

inequality, poor infrastructure, low investment, inadequ school are real british problem but the take-back-your-countri transfer of blame for them onto "brussel bureaucrats" prove that the imagin now overwhelm reality. truth withers. the mob roars. this, too, is a problem. 

yes, britain was undef in world war ii and help liber europe. but it could do so onli with it allies; and it was precis to secur what it is now turn it back on: a free europ offer it peopl the "simpl joy and hope which make life worth living." those are churchil word in 1946 in a speech that also contain this phrase: "we must build a kind of unit state of europe." unbow britain was onc consequenti britain; no longer. 

i use the word "abdication" advisedly. europ need the great tradit of british liber at a moment when hungari and poland have veer toward nation and, across the continent, xenophob hatr is resurgent. it is pervers for britain to tri to look away. europ is part of britain. visit the great norman monasteri in england and tell me this is not so. the british dead who lie in the contin soil have given their live for it liberti tell the same stori of interlac fate from a differ perspective. 

to be so orphan is painful. the 47 year of british membership cover the entir arc of my adult life. europa was our dream. i cover anwar sadat, the egyptian president, speak to the european parliament about hope and peac in 1981, eight month befor his assassination. so much for dreams. 

yet they persist, for otherwis life is unlivable. i wander from brussel to rome to pari to berlin to london and everywher i live i experienc some iter of europ beauty, as a physic thing, as a cultur bond and as a transform idea. 

the sensat was most acut in germany, where the idea of the union was the most effect escap from postwar shame and the rubbl of 1945, a form of atonement. but it was ubiquitous, the guarantor of our deliver and the symbol of our capac to reinvent the world and even make it better. 

everi european country, through the goal of ever closer union, chang itself. they grew richer, no small thing. but they also refram their self-image. 

itali and spain left mussolini and franco behind to becom stable, prosper democracies. franc found it tortuous way to truth after the humili and predat of vichi and discov a european avenu to express onc more it univers messag of human right found on human dignity. 

central european countri stabil their escap from the deaden soviet imperium to which yalta had confin them. britain ceas equat europ with scourg like intellectuals, rabi and garlic, as it had in my childhood. hyde park becam a babbl of european tongues. the british economi surged. britain had given up it coloni and found a new ident in associ with europe, or so it seemed, flickeringly. 

then i live in sarajevo cover the bosnian war and i saw, in inert bodi torn by shrapnel, and in histori reviv as galvan myth of might and conquest, the horror from which the european union had save my generation. it had laid bad histori to rest. that was enough to be forev a european patriot. 

but not enough for the british a quarter-centuri later. in the word of my friend ed vulliamy, who also cover that war, britain has becom a countri "that board cheap flight for stag outing to piss all over krakow." 

hip, hip hooray! 

when i live in berlin, i would cross the nearbi polish border and never fail to marvel that where million had perish decad earlier a nonexist frontier trace it invis line across field of wheat. i would pass from the german world to the land of the slav and nobodi ask me who i was, what paper i bore or what was my intent. 

if german-polish reconcili has been possible, anyth is possible, my onli solac at this moment. a bunch of flag-wav fantasists, at the wrong end of actuari tables, have rob british youth of the europ they embrace. they will be look on as 450 million european across the way forg their fate. their automat right to live and work anywher from lisbon to stockholm will be lost. 

i'v lost a limb; more than a limb, my heart. europ help britain grow bigger and more open and more prosperous. now it will shrink. anoth suffer friend, patrick wintour, the diplomat editor of the guardian, sent me these line of auden: 

in the nightmar of the dark 

all the dog of europ bark, 

and the live nation wait, 

each sequest in it hate; 

intellectu disgrac 

stare from everi human face, 

and the sea of piti lie 

lock and frozen in each eye. 

a better epitaph for the abort stori of britain in europ and the tragedi of a disori nation will inflict of endur self-harm is imposs to imagine. 
