senat republican are bath in shame 
by frank bruni 
jan. 18, 2020 

the impeach trial of donald john trump began on thursday when john roberts, the chief justic of the suprem court, direct all of the senat to stand and rais their right hands. ever sinc i can't get two question out of my head. 

the first: how in god name — and it was in god name — can the republican who have alreadi decid to acquit presid trump take a solemn oath to administ "imparti justice"? they'r partial to the core, unabash so, as their unit march toward a foregon conclus shows. a mind-meld this ironclad isn't a reflect of facts. it a triumph of factionalism. 

the major of the parti senat have said outright or clear signal that they have no intent of find the presid guilti and remov him from office. yap lap dog like lindsey graham and obedi manserv like mitch mcconnel have gone further, mock the whole impeach process. 

so the oath they took: how doe that work? did they cross the finger on their left hands? do they reason that american polit has reach a nadir of such fundament hypocrisi and overween partisanship that no one regard that pledg as anyth but window dressing? 

certain they'r tell themselv that their own polit survival, hing on obsequi to a presid with a talent for retribution, matter more than honor. over the three year of the trump presidency, they'v becom expert at that calculation. 

my second question is realli a subset, corollari or anagram of the first: how can marco rubio, ted cruz and martha mcsalli stand to look at themselv in the mirror? i'm singl out these three somewhat randomly, but also becaus they'v travel particular self-mortifi journey away from self-respect. 

at a news confer on thursday afternoon, chuck schumer, the leader of the senat democrat minority, said that when the chief justic walk into the chamber earlier that day, "i saw member on both side of the aisl visibl gulp." schumer attribut that to the palpabl "weight of history." but for mani of them, it probabl had more to do with their awar that they were about to sell out again, this time in circumst that would be rememb long into the future. 

democrats, too, have made up their minds, and that would be equal upset but for the mountain of actual evid on which their judgment rests. you can eras all the testimoni in the hous by gordon sondland, david holmes, alexand vindman, fiona hill and others. you can delet mick mulvaney admission, at a white hous news conference, of a quid pro quo. you can discount lev parna ongo aria of atonement. still you have the transcript (of sorts) of trump "perfect" phone call with the presid of ukraine, in which it clear to ani sane reader with a semblanc of common sens that he tri to trade american aid for the smear of joe biden. 

if there were noth to this, whi would trump stonewal congress to the extent that he has? that not how the innoc act. 

when wit after wit tell a version of the same story, provid piec of a puzzl that fit snug together, you can reach a conclus about the whole of it. that call logic. 

and if the actual case against trump were weak, whi would republican keep redirect attent to democrat motiv — to how much they despis the president? that call distraction. 

mcsalli practic it on thursday when, in a moment of breathtak hostility, she answer a reason question from manu raju of cnn about whether ani new evid should be present dure the senat trial by snarling, "liber hack!" 

she terrified. her state, arizona, is increas purple. she lost her 2018 race for the senat and end up in the chamber onli by appoint follow john mccain death. she has to run again this year, against mark kelly, the former astronaut, who a popular figure. she vulnerable, and stand with trump is almost as much of a gambl as stand up to him would be. 

but she onc did stand up to him. she use to have guts. befor go into politics, she blaze trail as an air forc pilot and even su the secretari of defens when she detect discrimin against women. dure her success campaign for the hous in 2016, she point didn't endors trump and just as point spoke out against the behavior that he cop to — no, brag about — in that infam "access hollywood" tape. mcsalli had a moral compass then. 

now she just has a hunger to hold onto her suit of offic in the capitol. she has wager that emul trump is her best bet. at the conclus of this pathet excus for a trial, she'll vote to acquit him — impartially, of course. 

she'll be join by cruz and rubio, who are special target of my disappoint becaus they were onc special target of trump ugliness. they know it firsthand and well. 

they campaign against him for the republican presidenti nomin in 2016, when he didn't just critic them but vicious belittl and even savag them. he conspiracy-theor a role for cruz father in john f. kennedi assassination. 

"a patholog liar," cruz call trump. 

but now that trump is presid and his base has becom the most impass constitu in the party, cruz is his biggest cheerlead and a readi mouthpiec for all of those lies. he has swap thought of 2016 for thought of 2024, when there anoth opportun to reach for the white hous and trump loyalist will come in handy. he'll have to muscl asid javanka and don jr., but that a pickl for anoth day. first step: acquittal! 

rubio has long fashion himself a foreign-polici maven and took a hard line when it came to russia. so you might think that the trump presid would be especi gall to him. you might also think that trump bulli of ukrain — which left the countri more vulner to russian aggress — would be some sort of break point. 

but he a republican member of congress in 2020, which mean he a sycophant shell of his former self. and have bitten his tongu about trump global misadventures, he'll now abet more of the same by help trump stay in office. 

there are so mani other republican senat to marvel at. mitt romney, what was the point of dive back into public life if you'r go to prop up a presid whose fraudul you onc gave a whole long speech about? lamar alexander, you vener howard baker, a fellow tennessean who onc held your senat seat and put principl abov partisanship by stand up to presid nixon. whi not do the same and stand up to presid trump? 

susan collins, i can't imagin the exhaust of your role as polit wild card, scrutin to a fare-thee-well. but come on. if you'r go to pride yourself on autonomy, you need to exercis it when it matter most. 

it not fun to be ani of you right now, with mcconnel abov you and #maga hellion below you pois to make your life a miseri if you stray. but no one forc you into public service. when you enter the senate, you took an oath, and you took anoth one on thursday. i have a third question, mayb just a reword of the first and second: doesn't that nag at you even a little? 
