starr chamber: the sequel 
by maureen dowd 
jan. 18, 2020 

can a woman be presid of the unit states? 

hell, yes. 

i'v cover the men who run the world my whole life. and there have been a lot of screw-ups, from vietnam to waterg to afghanistan to iraq to push the economi off a cliff. there has also been plenti of creepi behavior, culmin in the news that donald trump, ken starr and alan dershowitz have join togeth in a pervy, hypocrit cabal to argu that trump did not smirch the constitution. 

so please, elizabeth warren and ami klobuchar, stop whing about sexism and just show how you could wield power like a boss. ibid: nanci pelosi. 

when steve bannon call pelosi a "total assassin," accord to the hot new book "a veri stabl genius," by washington post writer phil rucker and carol leonnig, he meant it as the highest compliment. you won't find pelosi keen about gender; she too busi take care of business. 

hillari clinton did not lose becaus she was a woman. she face sexism, of course, just as barack obama face racism. she lost becaus she ran an entitled, joyless, nose-in-th air campaign and becaus she didn't emul her husband etho of campaign til the last dog die and the last bowl alley closes, and alway make it about the voters. she lost becaus she and her campaign manager, robbi mook, didn't listen to bill clinton, the world lead expert on the white, male, rural vote, when he warn them that there was troubl and offer to help out. 

donald trump oper from the id, which is fit becaus he repres a last-gasp primal scream from working-class american threaten by the chang transform the country. women are now a major of the work forc and white are head toward a minor status. hollywood cannot cling to it benight — and self-def — desir to stay a white male club forever, despit the fact that women have alway made up half the audience. 

trump ascent doe not make it harder for women to ascend — just the opposite. look at the throng of women who were outrag enough about trump to march and run and get elect in 2018. 

onc a woman electrifi democrat the way j.f.k., bill clinton and obama did — and the way trump doe his base — she will win. 

trump is onc more do his part to energ women voters. on friday, we learn that the presid will get help from starr and dershowitz for the impeach trial in the senate. 

the starr chamber was a shame period of american history, with the prissi puritan independ counsel hound and virtual jail monica lewinski and produc hundr of page of panting, bodice-rip prose that read more like bad erotica than a feder report, rife with lurid passag about breasts, stain and genitalia. like the rev. arthur dimmesdal and other pharisa holi roller befor him, the prosecutor who read the bibl and sang hymn when he jog becam fixat on sex in an unhealthy, warp way. 

even trump was appalled. "starr a freak," the bloviat builder told me back in 1999. "i bet he got someth in his closet." in other interviews, he call starr "a lunatic," "a disaster" and "off his rocker," and express sympathi for hillari have to stand by her man when he was "be lambast by this crazi ken starr, who is a total wacko." 

starr, who onc clutch his pearl over bill clinton sexual high jinks, is now go to bat for presid "access hollywood." after play an aveng javert about foreplay in the oval, starr will now do his utmost to prove that a real abus of power undermin congress and american foreign polici is piffle. 

in 2007, he defend jeffrey epstein. by 2016, starr was be oust as presid of baptist baylor univers for fail to protect women and look the other way when footbal player were accus and sometim convict of sexual assaults. in other words, he a complet partisan hack who doesn't give a damn about sexual assault. 

and then there dershowitz, whose past client have includ such sterl fellow as epstein, claus von bülow, o.j. simpson and harvey weinstein. how did he miss ted bundy? still, dershowitz has put himself on the side of an impress pantheon of villaini in the realm of violenc against girl and women. 

virginia giuffre, princ andrew accuser, has also claim that she was offer as a teenag to dershowitz for sex — a content that dershowitz has deni in a countersuit. 

on fox news, dershowitz has made the case that it is pelosi who put herself abov the law by delay the deliveri of the articl of impeachment. good luck with that one. 

the govern account office, a nonpartisan govern watchdog, a few day ago deem that trump slimi ukrain gambit violat a law. yet dershowitz will somehow argu that it doesn't repres high crime and misdemeanors. 

he tweet that he nonpartisan becaus he oppos bill impeach and vote for hillary, even as he join up with bill persecutor. dershowitz said that he is particip "to defend the integr of the constitution." 

that assert may fli in foxworld. but in the real world, it ridiculous. you can bet that trump and his buddi will continu to turn out the women vote. 
