steve job was right: smartphon and tablet kill the p.c. 
by farhad manjoo 
nov. 13, 2019 

i got an ipad pro recently, and i'v fallen mad in love with it. 

this was unexpected. i'v had ipad before, but like a lot of people, i hadn't found them to be veri useful. tablet were good for surf the web and watch netflix, but they'v alway been dog by the charg that you couldn't get a lot of work done on them. 

appl latest ipad are different. not onli can you get work done on them; in mani way they'r product dream machines. today ipad are power by custom-design processor that are faster than the chip on some of the mac appl makes, and the ipad separ sold keyboard is better and more durabl than the accursed, falling-apart mess of a keyboard that appl is ship on it much-malign current line of laptops. 

appl unveil a new 16-inch macbook with a revamp keyboard on wednesday, good news for the mani appl lover who'v been grumbl about the compani lacklust slate of recent macs. but i think the ipad is alreadi begin to eclips the tradit person computer. in the four month i'v had this latest model, the ipad pro has eaten into the time i spend on my phone and my old-school laptop and desktop. among other things, i now research and write just about everi column use an ipad (i still compos mani first draft by speak into my headphones, but i'm an odd duck). 

i thought i had gotten out of the gadget-review busi for good last year. sinc the smartphon had gobbl up everyth from camera to music player to portabl game systems, i declar the whole field of gadgetri dead. but just when i thought i was out, they pull me back in. 

the histori of the ipad is a stori about consolidation, focus and the power of scale in the tech business. it a stori about how thorough one company, apple, has domin the entir hardwar busi this decade. and it is also, really, a stori about the onli thing that matter in tech in the 2010s — the smartphon — and the way that one devic becam the gravit center of the entir tech business, shape everi market in the industry, and much of the non-tech world beyond it. 

the ipad has alway been freight with great expectations. although the ipad was unveil in 2010, three year after the iphone, develop of the ipad predat develop of the phone, and steve jobs, appl co-founder, alway seem to have his heart in the tablet. 

in one of his last interview befor his death in 2011, job declar the ipad to be the futur of computing. "pcs are go to be like trucks," he told the journalist kara swisher and walt mossberg — mean the tradit mac and window machin would still be around, but like big rigs, they'd be use by a small set of power user for a dwindl set of specific, high-pow tasks. the "cars" of the tech industry, as job saw it, would be phone and tablets. 

for a while, he was onli partial right. the ipad sold well at launch, but after a few year it hit some hurdles. after job death, appl left the ipad to languish, and did someth similar with the mac. 

meanwhile, someth amaz happen with the iphon and the mani android-bas copycat phone it inspired. in the 2010s, smartphon becam more popular, more power and more profit than anyon in the tech industri thought possible. within a few years, their sale and usag eclips that of pcs, and for much of the decad they were the fountain of most new consum innov across the technolog industry. smartphon made uber and instagram and snapchat and tiktok possible. smartphon camera began to surpass stand-alon cameras, turn much of cultur and societi into a meme-soak playground where visual media matter more than text. 

the smartphon also alter the busi dynam of the tech industry. when the iphon came out, appl was just one of mani success hardwar compani in the world. but the smartphon decim a host of phone brand (rememb nokia? motorola?), and as smartphon gain more power, they began make life imposs for a slate of hardwar start-ups, from gopro to jawbone. 

on the strength of the iphone, appl began captur a greater and greater slice of the tech hardwar business; although it didn't sell a major of units, it commit to the high end of the market allow it to make the bulk of profits. in the last quarter of 2017, accord to one estimate, appl made 86 percent of profit in the smartphon industry. 

appl domin came despit the fact that the compani made some big mistak and was late to mani big innovations. samsung, not apple, invent huge-screen phones. appl mac line was plagu by delay and dead ends, includ a 2013 redesign of the mac pro that look like a trash can and prove just as useful. and on the ipad, for mani years, appl just seem to fall asleep. the ipad stylus and keyboard-forward design? microsoft did it first on the surface. 

yet none of this mattered. becaus of it hold on the smartphon busi and a veri sticki softwar ecosystem that user found hard to leave, appl has been abl to incorpor mani innov pioneer elsewher and sell it custom on a seri of peripher billion-dollar businesses, includ the appl watch and airpods. 

and ultimately, it the ecosystem that explain whi i can't stop rave about the ipad. when it came out, the big knock on the ipad was that it was just a big phone; today, that what i love about it — like the watch or airpods, the ipad feel intuit and natur to me becaus it work just like the devic i use most often, my phone. 

like a phone, in most scenario i find the ipad to be faster, more portabl and easier to use and maintain than ani tradit p.c. i'v ever owned. the ipad limit screen space and emphasi on full-screen app also make for fewer distract than on a tradit person computer. the ipad, like my phone, let me log in to my bank use my face; the mac, in 2019, doesn't even have a touch screen. 

the ipad still can't do everyth a laptop can, and i still have to log in to a "real" comput sometimes. i had a long chat recent with dan seifert, the deputi editor of the verge, who use an ipad everi day on the subway but often find the devic infuriating. 

"for someon like me, who been use a desktop oper system for a long time, there a lot of built-in convent that i'm use to that can be frustrating," seifert said. in particular, the ipad doesn't work with antiqu work flow that are built for pcs. say you need to log into your compani bespok publish system or expens program? it possibl those won't work on your ipad — at least not yet — becaus they were built for much older devices. 

but seifert agre with me that mani of these use are a special case. he still use p.c.s becaus often, in job parlance, he need a truck. most people, however, don't need trucks, and few of us will need them in the future. seifert isn't teach his kid how to use desktop oper system like the mac or windows, and neither am i. 

it took longer than he expected, but steve job was right. over the past decade, for most people, in most use cases, phone kill the p.c. to get work done, now you just use a big phone — which appl happen to call an ipad. 
