the futur of american polit 
by david brook 
jan. 30, 2020 

men and women are primarili motiv by self-interest. no other partial truth has done as much damag as this one. 

if you base your polit and social system on the idea that the autonom self-interest individu is the basic unit of society, then you will wind up with an individualist cultur that widen the maneuv room between peopl but shred the relationship and communiti between people. 

you will wind up with a capit in which superstar perform get concentr in superstar citi and everybodi els get left behind. in a system base pure on competit individu self-interest, those who are advantag get to race out further ahead year by year. the sens of common communiti and equal digniti is annihilated. 

this is the flaw of unrestrain liberalism, what the radic call "neoliberalism" or "late capitalism." and they are not entir wrong. 

populist on the right and the left look at this current realiti and they come to a swift conclusion: the game is rigged! liber is a con! then they come to a differ conclusion. the essenti logic of societi is not actual individu seek their self-interest. it group struggl for power. societi is an arena where certain group crush other groups. 

on the trumpian right it the coastal cultur elit tri to crush and delegitim the white christian patriot of the heartland. on the cultur left it the whole michel foucault legacy. languag is a tool the oppressor class use to perman margin the oppressed. on the econom left it the berni sander class war. the greedi capitalist class rig the system and immiser the work class. 

the populist narrat differ but all have the same under structure. we'r lock in a life-or-death struggl of oppressor vs. oppress groups. it us versus them — the good peopl here and the bad peopl there. the problem in societi didn't just happen; they were conscious engin by the evil other, who must be broken. our veri exist is at stake! 

if the anthropolog of unrestrain liber is the autonom individu make his own way, the anthropolog of popul is warrior ant in a ruthless tribal war. these are veri differ view of human nature, but they have someth in common: both narrat make us miserable! 

in one, life is isolation, inequ and the feel of be invisible. in the other, it malice, fear and constant war. and that becaus both of these polit tendenc are wrong about human nature. they creat societi that pulver who we are and are made to be. 

human be didn't evolv into the world domin speci becaus we are more autonomous. we didn't do it becaus we'r more vicious in tooth and claw. we thrive as a speci becaus we are better at cooperation. 

we evolv complex social network in our brain to make us better at bonding, teach and collaborating. we don't cooper onli to get thing we want individually. often, we collabor to build share environ we can enjoy together. often, we pick a challeng just so we can have the joy of collaborating. relationship are end to themselves. 

thus, the best futur for american polit is not base on individu competit or group war. it base on this narrative: we are an incred divers societi that got good at collabor becaus we had to. the best futur polit put collabor pluralism, weaving, at the center. 

that means, first, elect leader who are master at cooperation. no offense, but if you'r support donald trump or berni sander this year, collabor skill are not high on your list of priorities. 

second, it mean infus cooper weaver valu into all of our organizations. there a fantast communiti organ in baltimor call thread that has a few core compet that shape it culture. we'd be in much better shape if everi organ in america live out these values: 

show all the way up. be fulli present, honest and vulner in all interactions. recogn your own value. push through discomfort to connect deepli with others. 

learn from all voices. most of our challeng are complex. it take everi perspect to see an issu whole. assum peopl have the best of intentions, and activ focus on the valu they bring. be intent about be with those differ from you. 

treat relationship as wealth. human bond are the chief resourc of your organization. recogn the inher valu of each person and meet each person where she or he is. 

fail forward. life is iterative. your vision is not alway the answer, but rather a step in a creativ learn process. set up feedback mechan that support chang and person growth. dogma won't get you to the solution. open and adjust will. 

the third task of weaver polit is reform institut so they encourag collaboration. some of our institutions, like congress, have been complet subsum by tribal warfare. other institutions, as yuval levin write in his book "a time to build," are no longer format place where we learn and serve; they have becom platform individu use to broadcast their suprem selves. 

still other institut have becom dehumanized. our schools, hospitals, prison and welfar system don't emb peopl in thick relationships. they treat them as unit to be process and shove out the door. still other institut ceas to exist. whi do we still not have a nation servic program? 

america has an enorm task of institut reform ahead of it, just as it did in the progress era. 

the fourth and final task of this kind of polit is transform polici that direct address our most serious divides. for example, repar are a way to acknowledg the wrong inflict on african-american and to begin to heal that breach. congressman ro khanna has a propos that would show rural america that everyon has a place in the new economy. he would fund research and technolog hub throughout the countri — a land grant colleg system for the 21st century. 

the polit of weav grow out of the acknowledg that there is no domin major in america. there is no moder center. your group will never pulver and elimin your oppos group. there no choic but to set up better collabor system across difference. this is not a problem, it an adventure. 

yes, human be are part selfish and self-interested. but we are also suprem social and collaborative. this is the part we have to work on now. 
