the polit of exhaust 
by david brook 
dec. 12, 2019 

there are two power bloc drive polit today. first, there the proletariat. these are the working-class voter who go to trump ralli in the u.s. and power brexit and bori johnson campaign in the u.k. they see their best world reced and they want a tough guy to bring it back. 

second, there is the precariat. these are the young and educ voter caught in the gig economy, who see no career secur ahead. they want leader like berni sander and jeremi corbyn who will promis envelop polici — free college, free internet, free child care — to give them some sens of safety. 

these two group are differ in some ways. when the proletarian attack their enemies, they do so from a posit of perceiv social inferiority, so their attack are resent and brutal. when the precariat attacks, it doe so from a posit of perceiv moral superiority, so it attack are fill with ridicule, mockeri and scorn. 

but the movement do have parallels. both are driven by a fear of the future, and of each other. both have a tendenc to embrac catastrophic, apocalypt vision of the ruin around us. dystopia has becom the opiat of the activist class. 

haunt by econom insecurity, they will toler ani sin in their leader — racism, anti-semitism, dishonesti — so long as that person is will to fight and be on their side. they both support massive, unrealist polici proposals, becaus they reject the idea that polit is simpli the muddl way we settl differ with peopl we disagre with. 

these two power bloc are drive the debat and set the agenda. but there anoth group of people, who have becom the most interest part of the electorate, both here and in britain. it the exhaust 75 percent, peopl who are defin not by ani common ideolog but by an affect state — they are simpli worn out by the endless war between these two armies. exhaust has becom an independ forc in modern politics. mani peopl are vote for whatev candid will exhaust them less. 

thursday british elect was defin by the fact that most voter were simpli ground down by johnson and corbyn. the economist call the elect "britain nightmar befor christmas." 

write in the guardian, rafael behr observed, "we live with the undertow of sad and dread. we are brace for that feeling, like see callous hand rummag in a privat drawer where a delicate, tangl ident is store and pull at the threads. it feel like exile." 

peopl in the exhaust camp are tire of have polit thrust in their face everi hour. as ryan streeter of the american enterpris institut has found, young peopl who are "lone at least onc in a while" are more than seven time more like to be activ in polit than those who are social active. those who are exhaust have other thing to do. they want to restor polit to it right place, and find meaning, attachment, entertain and moral in someth els besid twitter war and elect campaigns. 

year and year of exhaust have also made these peopl weary, cynic and disgusted. exhaustion, as always, induc a sort of pessimism, a feel that we are live in terribl times, a sort of weari of the soul. as peter stockland of the think tank cardus put it, "the combin effect of fear and exhaustion" is "produc a cynic so deep and murki and toxic that it verg on the sin of bear fals wit against reality." 

but the chief featur of the voter in the exhaust group is timidity. they do not get energi from conflict, the way, say, trump does. their instinct is to keep their head down and just get through this craziness. 

on campus 10 percent of student are abl to intimid the other 90 percent, who don't want to say the wrong thing and get canceled. in congress, the trumpian are abl to intimid the member who realiz what a problem he is. the peopl in the two big power bloc are not good at win the war against each other, but they are realli good at intimid the moder on their own side. 

in this way, those in the exhaust camp perpetu their own misery. they complain about the terribl choic each elect cycle, but never organ enough or becom imagin enough to offer someth they themselv might want. 

in britain they'v most taken money out of politics, but they still had an elect even wors and more polar than our own. in the end, if johnson, as expected, win easily, it will be in part becaus exhaust voter will have swung to trump/johnson nationalist demagogi sinc the onli altern is a corbyn/sand class war. 

in the states, voter still have a chanc to turn the emot page, to elect a person who display that you can be a progress or you can be a conserv without turn polit into perpetu war. pete buttigieg is rise and joe biden support is resili precis becaus they are not exhausting. 

the interest question is whether, in the heat of battle, the exhaust voter can get over their fatigue, cynic and timid and take their own side in a fight. 
