a ridicul optimist histori of the next decad 
by david brook 
jan. 2, 2020 

look back at the 2020s from our vantag point in 2030, the first great event was the complet destruct of donald trump republican party. as the former republican consult mike murphi had noticed, there were rough 300 state and feder elect dure the trump year and republican did horribl in most of them. the 2020 vote was a continu of that trend. trump landslid defeat left him humiliated, and the republican lost their senat majority. 

trump cri fraud and tri to whip up his followers, but they turn their backs. he went from idol to scapegoat in an instant. it seem they could forgiv him everyth but losing. mani temporarili retreat from polit life, the way evangel christian did after the ignomini of the scope trial. 

presid joe biden face an interest dynam in his party. the polit power was with moderates. the intellectu power was with the left. peopl of color, whose view were larg more moderate, becam the crucial swing faction. 

as president, biden resist the interest group that want him to address health care first. instead, he did child and earned-incom tax credits, infrastructure, expand earli childhood education, expand prison reform, and so on — what some writer call "repar by ani other name." he gave regulatori czar elizabeth warren a special portfolio to take on big tech. 

the major event of the decad were cultural, not political. the trump era had wit a crisi of connect at the bottom of societi and a crisi of author at the top. social repair was the top order of the day onc a new presid took office. 

the first whiff of the cultur restor was the "account clubs" that spread across the nation campuses. colleg student realiz that america stink at accountability. either there is no account (wall street after the financi crisis) or peopl have their live destroy for a "problematic" tweet. 

the account club bore the motto "truth and mercy." student want to restor a cultur in which fact mattered. they were also search for a way to judg other in a graduat and human manner, allow for repentance, forgiv and restoration. marshal mcluhan onc remark that "moral indign is a techniqu use to endow an idiot with dignity." sudden indignation, the keyston emot of the trump years, was lame. empathi made a comeback. 

the second cultur trend of the decad was the rise of the urban church. suburban megachurch attend fell, becaus the pastor had disgrac themselv under trump. but sudden there was a surg in church plant in place like brooklyn, washington, d.c., chicago and san francisco, as high educ peopl found home for their spiritu longings. 

the church were liturg high charismat (bethel music) and high universalist and intellectu (richard rohr). their polit were an odd mix — pro-l.g.b.t.q., pro-life, activ on climat change, pro-anim right (one of the signatur moral caus of the decade). the religi left gain on the religi right. 

at the same time, the racial justic convers went intimate. america is involv in a multigener process of truth and reconciliation. in the teens, the truth-tel had general revolv around histor event — slavery, lynching, redlining. in the 2020s, a seri of writers, artist and director gave us vivid descript of the subtleti of contemporari black life. 

the profus of video stream network allow a new generat of artist to take audienc insid the psycholog live of peopl of color. these artist realiz that structur chang would happen when peopl learn to see one anoth whole. 

the most import cultur chang came to be known as the civic renaissance. dure the first two decad of the century, hundr of thousand of new civic organ came into be — heal polit divides, fight homelessness, promot social mobil and weav communities. but these organ were small. they did not grow into the big nation chapter-bas structur that had repair america social fabric a centuri earlier — the y.m.c.a., the rotary, the boy scouts. 

by the 2020s, philanthropist and communiti builder realiz the onli way to chang cultur and weav the social fabric was by creat an a.f.l.-c.i.o. of civil society, with big nation voic and large, decentr nation organ so that peopl across america had easi and practic pathway to get involv in communiti revival. 

in the 2010s, it seem like the liber order was crack up. in the 2020s, that feel vanished. the declin of the chines economi delegitim the authoritarian model. it turn out you can't run a central control economi without a lot of waste, corrupt and riot police. 

meanwhile, the american polit system began to work better. the g.o.p. re-emerg under josh hawley and marco rubio as a better version of a working-class parti — social right, econom left. democrat remain domin through the decade. their parti biggest accomplish was in foreign affair — the repair of america allianc and the restor of global american leadership. 

american were more collabor in the 2020s. and the new york met won the world seri everi singl year. 
