the shaki futur of .org domain 
by josephin wolff 
jan. 27, 2020 

onlin commerc and for-profit activ have larg shape the internet over the past 25 years, but a few import corner of the internet have remain staunch nonprofit, retain some of the internet earli charm and resist to commerci interests. one of those corner is the .org top-level domain, the go-to domain for nonprofit and nongovernment organ look to establish an afford and reput onlin presence. 

domain name for websites, like nytimes.com or un.org or tufts.edu, are the key real estat of the internet. without a domain, it is next to imposs to have an onlin presence; there are now more than 350 million domain name regist worldwide. those domain name are sold to custom by registrar (like godaddy) which partner with registri (like verisign, which manag the .com top-level domain or all the domain name end in .com). domain name are big busi — there a lot of money at stake when divvi them up among all the registrar and registries. 

at the top of the domain name hierarchi sit the internet corpor for assign name and numbers, a nonprofit that design which registri control which top-level domain and help resolv disput around domain ownership. icann has a uniqu govern structure: it is run by a board of director that incorpor feedback from differ advisori committe compos of govern officials, industri repres and civil societi members. it is a model that icann refer to as "multistakeholder" govern base on the premis "that all user of the internet deserv a say in how it is run." 

sinc 2002, domain end in .org have been purchas through an agenc call the public interest registry, which is own by the internet society, a well-regard nonprofit work to expand access to the internet across the world. but, in november, the internet societi announc it was plan to sell the public interest registri — along with control of all the .org domain — for $1.1 billion to a recent form privat equiti compani call etho capit with close tie to former leader of the internet govern community. 

the propos sale has spark outrag from mani peopl at promin internet nonprofits, includ the wikimedia foundat and the electron frontier foundation, and right so. one worri is that ethos, in an attempt to make the .org top-level domain as profit as possible, will rapid rais price for it customers. for years, a 2013 contract cap the cost of an .org domain at $8.25 with an allow increas of no more than 10 percent a year — a restrict that kept .org domain affordable. today, a .org domain cost $9.93 a year. 

but in june 2019, icann approv a new contract with the public interest registri elimin the price cap, even though thousand of peopl voic opposit to that decis dure a period of public comment. etho has said it will continu to rais price for .org domain by no more than 10 percent per year, but it not clear how those promis will be enforced, or by whom, and the time of the sale — follow immedi on the elimin of the price cap — has contribut to some of the skeptic surround the deal. 

anoth fear is that etho will cave to pressur from foreign govern about which organ should and should not be allow to own .org domains. currently, .org is an open domain so anyon is allow to regist a .org domain, and there are more than 10 million of them regist worldwide. but the public internet registri has the author to suspend domain name for illeg activity, and one of the concern rais in a public letter oppos the sale is the potenti for govern to target ngos by accus them of illeg activ and pressur the public internet registri to take down their domains. just last month, for instance, the chines govern sanction five unit states-headquart ngos for their involv in the protest in hong kong; all five of those ngos have .org domains. 

there are other reason to be worri about the sale. the circumst of the deal between etho and the internet societi seem at odd with the multistakehold model of cooperative, transpar govern that the internet communiti has work so hard to develop. beyond just threaten the integr of the .org top-level domain, the sale of the public interest registri without ani further communiti involv or oversight from icann threaten the integr of that govern model and the public trust that the organ respons for run the internet have their best interest at heart. 

icann has the abil to block the deal, as well as to question the involv parti about how they would manag the .org domain and protect customers, but in a statement to the financi times, icann said it "doe not have author over the propos acquisition," a claim that is patent false. icann itself, in a blog post last month, acknowledg that "pir must obtain icann prior approv befor ani transact that would result in a chang of control of the registri operator" and pledg to take "it respons in evalu this propos transact veri seriously." but while icann say it has ask pir for more inform about the sale, it has told the public veri littl about those inquiri or the ensu responses, and it has not solicit ani public comment on the transaction. 

icann reason seem to be that sinc the sale doe not threaten the security, reliabl or stabil of the .org domain, it is not it place to intervene. but icann regular make decis about domain ownership that are unrel to issu of secur and stabil — just last year, for instance, it grant amazon ownership of the .amazon top-level domain over the object of sever south american countries. that decis resolv a seven-year-long dispute, date to 2011 when icann decid to open up more top-level domain beyond the standard one like .com, .org and .gov. icann receiv near 2,000 applic in 2012 for new top-level domain like .google, .love, .microsoft and .wine, and for each applic the applic had to pay icann $185,000, in addit to ongo fee for maintain the domains. 

this brought a massiv influx of cash for icann that help fund it subsequ intern expans and the process of sever it final tie with the unit state govern in 2016. the point of sever those tie was to engend greater intern trust in icann and, by extension, the system of global internet govern that it oversees. but instead, icann seem at risk of be captur by commerci interest — a risk that first becam appar with the lucrat 2012 expans of the top-level domain that benefit no one besid icann. odd are that seven year later you'v still never interact with a websit end in one of those domain and, if you have, it was probabl onli a mean of deliv spam or malwar to your computer. 

today, icann is in a veri delic posit becaus it deriv it author not from a contract with the unit state but instead from it abil to balanc the interest of all it various stakehold from govern offici to civil societi group and for-profit compani and maintain credibl with the worldwid community. it easi to see whi it is not eager to jump into the fray and interfer with, or even question, the etho deal for fear of draw criticism. but the real risk to icann is in fail to protect the remain corner of the internet preserv for public good and let it for-profit stakehold becom the domin voic in it decision-mak processes. just as icann former relationship with the unit state govern prove problemat for it in tri to sustain a credibl role in global govern activities, so will a too-clos relationship with the for-profit sector at the expens of individu internet users. 

icann should public investig this sale so that all of it stakehold can see exact which safeguard will be put in place to protect .org customers. and if those safeguard are not suffici or enforceable, if they meet with widespread disapprov and dissatisfact from .org custom and registrars, then icann should make good on it promis to provid consensus-bas multistakehold govern and, if necessary, block the deal from go through. icann cannot and should not be hide from controversi domain disputes. it is the onli entiti with author over these decisions, and it willing to exercis that power will ultim be good not just for the internet and internet user but also for icann itself. 
