the sidney award 
by david brook 
dec. 19, 2019 

i'v been give out the sidney award (initi call the hookies) for long-form essay sinc 2004, in honor of the late great philosoph sidney hook. this year there were more phenomen articl than ever before, mani more than i can list. the topic they tackl were also more downbeat than ever before. it been that kind of year. 

sever of the peopl who sent me their own list of favorit suggest candac vogler essay "a spiritu autobiography," in comment. it unlik ani essay you'v ever read. vogler suffer a childhood of unimagin sexual abus and neglect. "i was afraid to be alone. i was afraid of the other children in school. i was afraid of the other children in the neighborhood. i fear that an evil thing had attach itself to me, and could injur anyon who got close to me." 

her life took a seri of improb turns: berkeley feminism, quakerism, a rang of gay friend in societi high and low, famili disruption, bar fights, an afro-brazilian spiritu practic call umbanda. from jesus she learn that not all men are toxic. she is now an esteem philosoph at the univers of chicago. you can't summar this essay becaus it so hard to encapsul this life twist and turns. "i enjoy a kind of peac now that i could not have imagin before. i am the luckiest person i know," vogler writes, reflect on the arriv of mani grace into her life. 

i'v co-taught with her a coupl of time (she an amaz teacher) and had no idea of the back stori that she carri around — a remind that mani peopl we meet carri back stori that are simpli mind-boggling. 

in "when the cultur war come for the kids," in the atlantic, georg packer describ what happen when the feroci competit meritocrat cultur of the new york educ class collid with the feroci social justic warrior of the new york educ class. packer trace his own famili peril adventur through a few brooklyn school and write a piec that captur the zeitgeist of our age. 

his son public school coerc parent into opt out of standard test and made the bathroom gender neutral, lead femal student to hold their bladder all day rather than go to the bathroom with boys. it taught the oppress of everi out-group but never the histori of the american founding. it not the school decis themselv that are so remark but the atmospher of p.c. religi zealotri that surround them, and the anguish of progress parent who have to send their precious children into the maw of ideolog re-educ camp that in theori they agre with. 

in "the unthink has happened," in vulture, jayson green describ what happen when a brick fell from an eighth-floor windowsil and hit his daughter in the head. it a father wrench and beauti minute-by-minut account of the next few days. at one point he and his wife are in the hospit absorb the doctor prognosis: "we know greta is go to die, all of us, although we haven't allow the thought into our conscious mind yet. none of us is readi for it to maraud through our subconscious, kill and burn everyth it sees. but we hear bang at the gates. we glanc around us, realiz this is the last we'll ever see of the world as we'v known it. whatev come next will raze everyth to the ground." you will read it and cri and hug your children tighter. 

i'v alway given sidney to individu essays, but this year it seem right to give one to an entir issu of a magazine, the decemb issu of the atlantic, titl "how to stop a civil war." that issu felt like a civic act. i'd particular recommend yoni appelbaum essay, "how america ends," which captur the polit moment we are in. america is undergo a demograph revolution, with the domin white major becom a minority. we'r also at a moment when hyperpartisan fear that lose an elect will be more catastroph than lose our democracy. such peopl are will to destroy democrat norm to stay in power (look around you). appelbaum also argu that the key to the countri futur is build a healthi center-right. as someon who work on this problem for 25 years, i say good luck with that. 

i'd also recommend caitlin flanagan "the dishonesti of the abort debate" from that issue. flanagan doe someth that should be more common: she take the most vivid argument from each side of a controversi and she jam them into one essay. the most vivid argument of the pro-choic side is the back-alley and other danger abort that result when you make the procedur illeg and the women who die as a result. flanagan take you there. 

the most vivid argument of the pro-lif side is the sonogram, and the grow evid that cognit life begin sooner than we thought. these images, flanagan writes, "are proof that what grow within a pregnant woman bodi is a human being, live and unfold accord to a timet that has exist as long as we have. obviously, it would take a profound act of violenc to remov him from his quiet world and destroy him." there a reason this debat is so hard. 

on a lighter note, sport illustr had an essay by emma baccellieri, call "mud maker: the man behind mlb essenti secret sauce." in 1920, the cleveland indian shortstop ray chapman was kill when a pitch hit him in the head. basebal need a way to help pitcher have greater control of their pitches. the solut was to coat the ball with a thin layer of mud, thus improv their grip. 

jim bintliff is the man who collect that mud, with shovel and buckets, from a secret spot along the delawar river. his mud now coat rough 240,000 ball per season. the stori is about bintliff, who cultiv the mud as if it were fine wine. "i know the mud. i'm the onli one on the planet who does," he says. 

in "the day the dinosaur died," in the new yorker, dougla preston describ what happen when an asteroid struck the earth 66 million year ago, the most signific event in the histori of our planet. twenty-f trillion metric ton of debri were thrown up into the atmosphere. the energi releas was more power than a billion hiroshima bombs. a mountain rose up higher than mount everest. fire consum 70 percent of the world forest and kill 99.9999 percent of all live organisms. preston tale get more astound from there. 

in "magic eras juice," in hazlitt, elizabeth rosen describ what it like to be an e.m.t. in the age of the opioid epidemic. the piec is grip throughout but especi when she describ how peopl who have overdos are brought back to life when she administ narcan. some are overcom with grief that they have fallen so low. other are nonchalant: "oh, i'v od'd a bunch of times." 

i hope everybodi has read richard power phenomen novel "the overstory," about how tree communic (and a lot more). robert macfarlan essay "the understory," in emerg magazine, is even more astounding, explain how tree communic underground. one of the way they do it is through hyphae, which are superfin thread that fungi send out through the soil to creat an interconnect social network. a singl teaspoon of soil can hold up to seven mile of hyphae. 

i found the american scholar essay "how i learn to talk," by emili fox gordon, a pure delight. when she was a young woman, gordon found a psychoanalyst, lesli farber, who didn't tri to forc epiphani and breakthrough "aha!" moments. he didn't treat therapi as work. he saw it as an occas for friendship and beauti talk. this kind of talk, gordon writes, "is play and gratuitous. though it often contain element of argument and analysis, it first aim is not to solv problems. in the case of farber practice, ani therapeut benefit lay in the talk itself, the self-forget human connect that can lift a person out of desper isol and remind him that in the futur such repriev will continu to be possible." gordon narrat voic is love and wise. farber is someon we would all like to have known — and can through this essay. 

the final sidney winner is a bit of a cheat. "cop diary" by edward conlon was first publish in the new yorker in 1997 and was repost this year by the sun. it certain the most realist descript of polic work that i have read. "i take prisoners," conlon writes, "and to exercis that author is to invok a profound social trust. each time a surgeon undertak the respons of cut open a human being, it should be awesom and new, no matter how necessari the operation, no matter how routine. a polic offic who take away someon freedom bear a burden of at least equal gravity. let me tell you, it a pleasur sometimes." 

when i read these essay at the end of the year, i feel like i'v been given gift and a deeper appreci of the realiti around us. when i spend the rest of the year follow impeach on twitter, not so much. 

a lot of peopl help me find great essay each year, but i'm especi grate to robert cottrell, who run one of my favorit spot on the web, the browser; conor friedersdorf, whose the best in journal newslett is a week dose of intellectu nutrition; and robert atwan, who run the best american essay seri at houghton mifflin. all three are generous with their time and erudition. full disclosure: my wife is editor in chief of comment, where the vogler essay appeared. 
