the three crucial flaw in trump peac vision 
by micah goodman 
jan. 29, 2020 

presid trump “ultim deal" for israeli-palestinian peac isn't ultimate, and it isn't quit a deal. releas on tuesday, the plan — or “peac vision," as it call in it offici document — has three flaws. none are fatal. 

first, the disson between it pretens and it timing: it purport to chang history, but come just one month befor israel elections, it serv petti politics. second, there is a mismatch between the plan state aim and the actor who are meant to put it into place: it seek to bring peac between israel and the palestinians, but the palestinian are not full partner in it implementation. third, and the biggest problem: the plan doesn't meet the palestinian minimum conditions. can anyon imagin that the palestinians, who have previous reject plan that offer them near 100 percent of the west bank, might be happi with just 70 percent? the peac plan, in other words, will not bring peace. 

but these three flaw should not distract us from the big opportun the plan presents: it clever redivides, even temporarily, the territori in dispute. this divis can rearrang the conflict. if put in place, the plan would creat a palestinian state with almost full sovereignti on some 70 percent of the west bank, while fulli address israel secur needs. the conflict would not end, but it would be function different. the israeli-palestinian conflict is a conflict between occupi and the occupied. but after the plan it would becom a conflict between two separ polit entiti — and that an entir new paradigm. this should be the plan big ambition: instead of seek to end the battle, it should fundament redraw the battl lines. 

the problem with the “ultim deal" is the mismatch between the plan and it state aim. as a peac plan, it laughable. but sometimes, all that need to fix a problem is to rethink the purpos of the solution. and here, we can stop pretend that the unit state plan will end the conflict, and admit that it might be better at transform it character. and with more modest goals, it might enjoy better success. 

to turn the trump administr propos from a bad plan to end the conflict into a good plan to transform the conflict, all refer to end the conflict should be removed. the palestinian cannot be expect to recogn israel as a jewish state, formal renounc the right of return or sign a document announc an “end to claims." 

what would israel gain from a plan to reconfigur the conflict? plenty. most isra are trap between two nation aspirations. on the one hand, they don't want to rule over the palestinian people, but on the other, they don't want to live under the threat of rocket from a palestinian state. the tension between these two impuls has paralyz israel abil to address the conflict. a plan to reconfigur the conflict would dramat reduc israel control over the palestinian and do so without put israel in danger. in other words, for israelis, the trump plan would smash the zero-sum game between secur and end the occupation. isra would be abl to great reduc their rule over the palestinian without be ani more threaten by them. 

and what do the palestinian stand to gain from a plan to reconfigur the conflict? also plenty. the palestinians, too, are trapped. on the one hand, they want an independ state of their own, but on the other, most of them want the palestinian refuge to “return" — that is, to be reloc to israel. moreover, a larg section of palestinian societi is unwil to recogn non-muslim sovereignti over ani part of the holi land. reconcil with israel would be a religi concession, and relinquish the “right of return" would be a nation concession. for mani palestinians, those two concess would mean renounc their most sacr beliefs, which form a part of palestinian identity. for mani years, the various peac plan propos to the palestinian expect them to forgo these two axioms. but the palestinian have alway refus a deal in which they would have to relinquish core element of their nation ident as the price for independence. a plan to rearrang the conflict would give the palestinian a state without expect them to pay for it by renounc their demand for a right of return and therebi conced a plank of their nation identity. 

under the plan, the new palestinian state will not be complet sovereign, but it will be most sovereign, and the element of the occup that immiser palestinian in their day-to-day live — name restrict on movement, construct and econom growth — will be swept away. 

in other words, ani plan would need to drop the pretens of realiz either side perfect deal. this plan begin to do that. under it, the palestinian could dramat enhanc their sovereignti without conced their aspirations, and israel should control far fewer palestinian without conced it security. neither side will give up on what is truli import to it, and both will reduc what is truli painful. it won't be peace. it won't be a new middl east. but it will be progress. 

conflict between neighbor are not onli healthier than conflict between occupi and the occupi — they are also more like to support negotiations. talk in the futur would be between two sovereign states. in other words, reconfigur the conflict will creat new opportun to continu shrink it. 

it time to stop devot our energi and polit capit to end the conflict in a single, “ultim deal," and start focus on a much more modest mission — transform it nature. instead of reject the plan — we should think again about what it can and should realist achieve. that the way to break through the deadlock, minim suffer and forg a new reality. 
