the wisdom your bodi know 
by david brook 
nov. 28, 2019 

this has been a golden age for brain research. we now have amaz brain scan that show which network in the brain ramp up dure differ activities. but this emphasi on the brain has subt fed the illus that think happen onli from the neck up. it fed the illus that the advanc part of our think are the "rational" part up top that tri to control the more "primitive" part down below. 

so it interest how mani scientist are now focus on the think that happen not in your brain but in your gut. you have neuron spread through your innards, and there increas attent on the vagus nerve, which emerg from the brain stem and wander across the heart, lungs, kidney and gut. 

the vagus nerv is one of the pathway through which the bodi and brain talk to each other in an unconsci conversation. much of this convers is about how we are relat to others. human think is not primarili about individu calculation, but about social engag and cooperation. 

one of the leader in this field is stephen w. porg of indiana university. when you enter a new situation, porg argues, your bodi reacts. your heart rate may go up. your blood pressur may change. signal go up to the brain, which record the "autonom state" you are in. 

mayb you walk into a social situat that feel welcoming. green light. your brain and bodi get prepar for a friend conversation. but mayb the person in front of you feel threatening. yellow light. you go into fight-or-flight mode. your bodi instant changes. your ear, for example, adjust to hear high and low frequenc — a scream or a growl — rather than midrang frequencies, human speech. or mayb the threat feel like a matter of life and death. red light. your brain and bodi begin to shut down. 

accord to porg "polyvag theory," the concept of safeti is fundament to our mental state. peopl who have experienc trauma have bodi that are high reactiv to perceiv threat. they don't like public place with loud noises. they live in fight-or-flight mode, stress and anxious. or, if they feel trap and constrained, they go numb. their voic and tone go flat. physic reaction shape our way of see and being. 

lisa feldman barrett, of northeastern university, also argu that a main purpos of the brain is to read the body, and to regul what she call the bodi budget. you may see a bulli on the playground. your brain then predict your next action and speed your heart rate and breath to deal with it. you experi these chang as emot — oh, this is fear or oh, this is anger — becaus your brain has creat an emot concept to make those physic chang meaningful. 

"you might think that in everyday life, the thing you see and hear influenc what you feel, but it most the other way around: what you feel alter your sight and hearing," barrett write in "how emot are made." 

when we'r realli young we know few emot concepts. young children say, "mommy, i hate you!" when they mean "i don't like this" becaus they haven't learn their cultur concept for hatr vs. badness. but as we get older we learn more emot granularity. the emot wise person can creat distinct experi of disappointment, anger, spite, resentment, grouchi and aggravation, wherea for a less emot wise person those are all synonym for "i feel bad." 

a wise person may know the foreign word that express emot we can't name in english: tocka (russian, roughly, for spiritu anguish) or litost (czech, roughly, for miseri combin with the hunger for revenge). peopl with high emot granular respond flexibl to life, have better mental health outcom and drink less. 

if bodili reaction can drive peopl apart they can also heal. martha g. welch of columbia univers point to the import of love physic touch, especi in the first 1,000 minut of life, to lay down marker of emot stability. 

under the old brain-on paradigm, welch argues, we told peopl to self-regul their emot through conscious self-talk. but real emot help come through co-regulation. when a mother and a child physic hold each other, their bodili autonom state harmonize, connect on a metabol level. togeth they move from separ distress to mutual calm. 

welch has creat someth call the welch emot connect screen, which measur the emot connect between mother and pre-term babies. by encourag this kind of deep viscer connect through 18 months, her therapi can mitig the effect of autism. 

when you step back and see the brain and bodi think together, the old distinct between reason and emot doesn't seem to make sense. your veri percept of the world is shape by the predict your brain is make about your physic autonom states. 

you also see how import it is to teach emot granularity, someth our cultur pay almost no attent to. 

you also see that we'r not separ brains, coolli observ each other. we'r physic viscera, deepli interact with each other. the import communic is happen at a much deeper level. 
