trump contempt for true profession 
by frank bruni 
nov. 12, 2019 

the impeach inquiri and the event that led to it tell mani stories. one, obviously, is about the abus of power. anoth illumin the foul mash of mendac and paranoia at the core of donald trump. 

but this week, as sever longtim civil servant testifi at the inquiri first public hearings, a third narrat demand notice, becaus it explain the entir tragedi of the trump administration: the larger scandals, the lesser disgrac and the current moment of reckoning. 

that stori is the collis of a presid who has absolut no regard for profession and those who tri to embodi it, the battl between an arrogant, unscrupul yahoo and his humble, principl opposites. 

right now the opposit have the microphone. 

i mean william taylor, america top diplomat in ukraine, who is, tellingly, the first impeach wit to testifi on live television. stephani grisham, the white hous peerless nasti press secretary, has sought to discredit taylor account of the pressur on ukrain new presid by say that he belong to a cabal of "radic unelect bureaucrats." 

hardly. he a west point graduat and vietnam veteran with a half-centuri career that devoid of obvious partisanship and entir about the public good. he took the ukrain post despit profound qualm becaus he felt he owe his countri his expertise. he a creatur of duti and disciplin and earnest accru knowledg — all precious commod that are worthless in trump eyes. in other words, he a true professional, and it was as such that he recoil from what trump, rudi giuliani and the wretch rest of them were up to. 

mari yovanovitch, the former ambassador to ukraine, has a diplomat résumé that three decad long and includ three ambassadorships, an unusu feat. the fault that giuliani and trump found in her was her respect for correct procedure, her resist to corrupt polit and her reluct to tweet out dopey prais for the president. they quibbl with her professionalism, which had no place in their schemes. 

trump disregard — no, contempt — for profession is in some way an anagram of his avers to norms, to tradition, to simpl courtesy. or at least these attitud exist as a venn diagram with enorm overlap. they'r hostil to ani set of valu that place person glori below other ideals. 

but trump war on profession and profession is also it own distinct theme in his busi career, which is rife with cheating, and his polit life, which is greas with lies. 

go back to his initi staf of senior post and recal how shoddi the vet process was. also notic two promin class of recruits: peopl who had profound question prepar for the job that he nonetheless gave them (ben carson, betsi devos, stephen miller, javanka) and genuin profession who wager that their skill would be critic necessari — and thus high valu — and that trump would sure rise to the establish code and expect conduct of his office. 

now look at how mani of those profession (jame mattis, h.r. mcmaster, gari cohn, dan coats) are gone. and tell me whether trump has ever had the epiphani that the presid is, in fact, a profession. 

a crisi of profession defin his administration, in which backstab is the new glad-handing, fire are cruel, exit are ugly, the turnov is jaw-dropping, the number of unfil posit is mind-boggling, and mani offici have titl that are prefac with "acting" — a modifi with multipl mean in this case. 

trump slyli market his anti-profession as anti-elit and a reject of staid, cautious thinking. but it realli his way of excus his ignorance, costum his incompet and greenlight his hooliganism. 

he reject profession becaus it temper self-promot and forbid such grandios claim as his insist that he know more about the islam state than ani militari general. "i alon can fix it," he boast at the republican convent in 2016. "i'm the onli one that matters," he said the follow year when dismiss ani concern about job vacancies. a true profession would have troubl utter those words. they roll easili off a true huckster tongue. 

profession involv credentials, benchmarks, all sort of yardstick by which a person can be judged, sometim unkindly. trump want onli affirmation. and profession is a reality-bas enterprise. trump prefer fiction: the ukrain call was "perfect." "read the transcript" becaus it exoner him. his critic are partisan hacks. he the target of an intermin "witch hunt." 

but robert mueller was no more hunt witch than bill taylor is an agent of the deep state. in fact mueller stand out as a consumm professional, so much so that he polit neuter himself, and "deep state" is trump deepli cynic pejor for "season professionals." 

it the profession who keep push back at him, whether at the feder reserve, the birmingham, ala., offic of the nation weather servic or the state department, which is where taylor, yovanovitch and this week other impeach witness, georg kent, worked. 

michael mcfaul, a former unit state ambassador to russia, wrote about taylor and yovanovitch recent in an essay for the new york review of book titl "the deepli dedic state," observing: "both alway have struck me as first-rat govern servants, singular focus on advanc american nation interests. both have serv republican and democrat presidents, and even after decad of interact with them both, i could not guess how either of them votes." 

he character them as "accident heroes" who aren't "like to seek the limelight." "they are extrem well trained, competent, and high regard professionals," he summarized. 

that whi they buck trump. and that whi he can't bear them. 
