trump digit advantag is freak out democrat strategist 
by thoma b. edsal 
jan. 29, 2020 

in a blog post publish in november, a year befor the 2020 election, brian burch, the presid of catholicvote.org, a social conserv advocaci group, announc that in wisconsin alon his organ had identifi 199,241 cathol "who'v been to church at least 3 time in the last 90 days." 

near half of these religi observ parishioners, burch wrote, "91,373 mass-attend cathol — are not even regist to vote!" catholicvote.org is look for potenti trump voter within this large, untap reservoir — republican-lean white cathol who could bolster trump number in a battleground state. 

burch, whose organ oppos abort and gay marriage, made his plan clear: 

we are alreadi build the largest cathol voter mobil program ever. and no, that not an exaggeration. our plan span at least 7 state (and growing), and includ million of cathol voters. 

how did cathol vote come up with these particular church attend number for 199,241 catholics? with geofencing, a technolog that creat a virtual geograph boundary, enabl softwar to trigger a respons when a cellphon enter or leav a particular area — a church, for example, or a stadium, a school or an entir town. 

geofenc is just one of the new tool of digit campaigning, a larg unregul field of polit combat in which voter have littl or no idea of how they are be manipulated, in which tradit disclosur requir are inop and key actor are anonymous. it is a weapon of choice. onc an area is geofenced, commerci data compani can acquir the mobil phone id number of those within the boundary. 

this is how the nation cathol report describ the process in an articl earlier this month: 

polit mind geofenc captur data from the cellphon of churchgoers, and then purchas ad target those devices. that data can be match against other easili obtain databases, includ voter profiles, which give market identifi inform such as names, address and voter registr status. such inform can be a gold mine. 

burch describ what catholicvote.org initi in the 2018 election. "we creat ad campaign target to mobil devic that have been insid of cathol churches," burch explained. what more, 

we told cathol in missouri the truth about then-sen clair mccaskil — that she was pro-abortion, was unwil to protect the littl sister of the poor, and oppos cathol judici nomine becaus of their religi beliefs. and she lost. 

if you attend an evangel or a cathol church, a women right march or a polit ralli of ani kind, especi in a serious contest state, the odd are that your cellphon id number, home address, partisan affili and the identifi inform of the peopl around you will be provid by geofenc market to campaigns, lobbyist and other interest groups. 

with increas speed, digit technolog is transform politics, constant provid novel way to target specif individuals, to get the unregist registered, to turn out margin voters, to persuad the undecid and to suppress support for the opposition. 

democrat and republican agre that the trump campaign is far ahead of the democrat parti in the use of this technology, capit on it substanti invest dure the 2016 elect and benefit from an uninterrupt high-tech drive sinc then. 

republican "have a big advantag this time," ben nuckels, a democrat media consult said in a phone interview. "they not onli have all the data from 2016 but they have been build this oper into a nonstop juggernaut." 

the new technology, nuckel continued, allow campaign to "deliv a broader narrat over the top" on televis and other media, while "underneath in digit you are deliv ad that are tailor to those voter that you need to influenc and persuad the most." 

the explos of digit technolog has creat the opportun for polit oper to run what amount to dark campaigns, conduct below the radar of both voter awar and govern oversight. 

in some cases, the technolog is veri simple: the anonym transmiss of negat imag of candid by individu to facebook groups. this activ is neither report to the feder elect commiss nor link to offici campaigns. 

steven livingston, a professor of media and public affair and director of the institut for data, democraci and polit at georg washington university, has been track this sub rosa election in the current elect cycle. he found that support of two candidates, trump and berni sanders, are the primari practitioners. 

the washington post and the new york time have both report on the activ of sander supporters, but, livingston note in an email, "our evid suggest that trump support use autom promot or cross post four time as much as sander supporters." 

livingston describ "these digit shadow campaigns" as "analog to and perhap an actual digit manifest of dark money influenc campaigns." in addition, he continued, 

overwhelmingly, these page and group do not have ownership declar or facebook verifications. we simpli do not know what other digit properti might be oper by common sourc with the groups. there is money be spent but we don't know the sources. it is unaccount spending. 

livingston provid some of the kind of negat messag and imag promot by anonym pro-trump activists. here is one: 

and here is one made by a sander enthusiast: 

expert in the explos grow field of polit digit technolog have develop an innov terminolog to describ what they do — a lexicon that is virtual incomprehens to ordinari voters. this languag provid an inkl of the extraordinarili arcan univers polit has entered: 

geofencing, mass personalization, dark patterns, ident resolut technologies, dynam prospecting, geotarget strategies, locat analytics, geo-behaviour segment, polit data cloud, automat content recognition, dynam creativ optimization. 

geofenc and other emerg digit technolog deriv from microtarget market initi that use consum and other demograph data to identifi the interest of specif voter or veri small group of like-mind individu to influenc their thought or actions. microtarget first had a signific impact on american polit in state level campaign work by alec gage, a republican, and his firm targetpoint in 2002. 

now, polit oper are exploit commerci techniqu to correl microtarget data with the identif number of cellphones. this allow campaign to mobilize, persuad and turn out — or to suppress turnout among — key voters. 

in 2016, trump spent far more than hillari clinton on digit campaigning, and sinc then his campaign, under the direct of brad parscale, has continu far outpac it democrat rivals. 

in a paper publish this month, "the digit commerci of us polit — 2020 and beyond," kathryn montgomery, a professor of communic at american university, and jeff chester, execut director of the center for digit democracy, describ the differ between the 2016 trump and clinton campaigns: 

wherea 31 percent of donald trump total campaign expenditur were for digit media, onli 6 percent of hillari clinton expenditur were for digital. moreover, wherea almost 50 percent of mr. trump media expenditur were for digital, onli 8 percent of secretari clinton media expenditur were for digital. so although secretari clinton outspent mr. trump by $75 million on media, it is quit possibl that mr. trump heavi relianc on digit media allow for a more effici and target ad campaign that escap the eye. 

parscale, who is now manag trump 2020 campaign, claim in a 2018 tweet that the trump campaign tech oper was "100 time to 200 times" more effect than the clinton campaign's, ad "@realdonaldtrump was a perfect candid for facebook." 

on monday, parscal boast on the conserv websit townhal that trump ralli are provid a gold mine of data for the 2020 election: 

out of more than 20,000 identifi voter who came to a recent trump ralli in milwaukee, wisconsin, 57.9 percent did not have a histori of vote for republicans. remarkably, 4,413 attende didn't even vote in the last elect — a clear indic that presid trump is energ american who were previous not engag in politics. 

similar find are come out of other rallies, accord to parscale: 

near 22 percent of identifi support at presid trump ralli in toledo, ohio, were democrats, and anoth 21 percent were independents. an astound 15 percent of identifi voter who saw the presid speak in battl creek, michigan, has not vote in ani of the last four elections. in hershey, pennsylvania, just over 20 percent of identifi voter at the ralli were democrats, and 18 percent were nonwhite. 

in the current elect cycle, montgomeri and chester write, 

further growth and expans of the big data digit marketplac is reshap elector polit in the us, introduc both candid and issu campaign to a system of sophist softwar applic and data-target tool that are root in the goals, values, and strategi for influenc consum behaviors. 

technolog use for "ident resolution," they write, 

enabl market — and polit group — to target and reach real peopl with greater precis than ever before. market are help perfect a system that leverag and integrates, increas in real-time, consum profil data with onlin behavior to captur more granular profil of individuals, includ where they go, and what they do. 

the author go on to warn that "all of these develop are take place, moreover, within a regulatori structur that is weak and larg ineffectual." 

tara mcgowan, execut director of the recent creat pro-democrat group acronym, which plan to spend $75 million on digit and other media, repli to my question by email: 

there no digit dark magic be deploy by brad parscal and the trump campaign. they just have near unlimit resourc and are spend them wise to reach their voter where they are — online, and especi on platform like facebook. 

the greatest advantage, mcgowan continued, that 

the trump campaign has over democrat head into 2020 is time. democrat may not settl on a general elect nomine until late spring or summer. that give the trump campaign much more time to talk to voter and defin the democrat in place where it counts. 

in addit to acronym, pro-democrat group like prioriti usa, american bridge, america vote and a host of other are work together, prepar to spend more than $300 million to counter the trump efforts. 

in addition, the campaign of mike bloomberg, berni sander and tom steyer are all spend huge amount of money on digit strategi focus on facebook, googl and other social media. 

still, there are concern that much of the democrat spend will have limit valu in the general election, insofar as it is go toward state that will not be 2020 battlegrounds, including, for example, alabama, arkansas, california, massachusetts, oklahoma, tennessee, utah and vermont on tuesday march 3, better known as super tuesday. in addition, whoever becom the democrat nomine will not be abl to share his or her data with the independ pro-democrat groups, accord to feder regulation. 

apple, googl and most other major internet player have adopt privaci polici that would appear to signific constrain the abil of data manag firm to obtain detail household information, consum spend and partisan lean of smartphon users. but it turn out that there are way to get around the rules. 

serg egelman, a research director at berkeley intern comput scienc institut and a co-author of the paper "50 way to leak your data: an explor of app circumvent of the android permiss system," repli to my email: 

most user are like of the impress that app will onli collect the person data that they'r ask about in the permiss dialogu that they encount (i.e., pop-up notif ask if it o.k. for an app to access certain data, such as location, address book contacts, photos, etc.). 

these unsuspect user were mistaken. 

we discov that there are "back channels" through which the same data is avail without have to present the user with a permiss dialogue. 

what doe this mean for politics? 

we know that mani of these entiti are data broker and analyt compani that are in the busi of use this type of data to profil mobil devic users, and then sell these profil to various entities, includ polit campaigns. 

the data 

general provid inform about individu user day-to-day activ and preferences: where they shop; what they do for fun; what other app they use, for how long, and what they do in those apps; where they live; where they work; with whom they associate. 

this data, he added, enabl campaign to list "individu attende at polit rallies;" to identifi "polit lean base on onlin and offlin prefer (where you live, work, shop, play, etc.); and to segment "ad base on infer psychograph trait (i.e., exact what cambridg analytica did, but instead of person polit ad on facebook, user get person ad in potenti all of their mobil apps)." 

egelman note that "from the user perspective, there liter no way of prevent it from happen or even know when it happening." the expect "that app user should be abl to figur this all out and manag it is absolut ludicrous." 

a pro-democrat strategist who is help coordin the independ effort to defeat trump — and who insist on anonym to protect his job — describ what he believ is the current state of play in the role of digit technolog in larger, overal strategy: 

there no question that as a technic matter, the republican and the koch are spend much more and have better data than democrats/progressives. but they also have a much more difficult product to sell: trump. 

if marco rubio were presid in this thrive economy, he continued, "2020 would not be a competit election, and the democrat might not have claim the hous in 2018." 

"crucially," the strategist said, 

trump has two relev advantag deriv from the asymmetri between the flow of republican and democrat information. first, when trump say something, fox repeat it. when a democrat say something, the new york time and the rest of the msm knock it down if it fals or debatable. 

in other words, a huge swath of trump-support media doe not perform fact-bas journalism. 

in addition, the democrat strategist said, 

trump benefit enorm becaus of the right align network of media properti (i.e., sinclair), facebook properties, youtub influenc and bots/sock puppets. this kind of amplif network bare exist for democrats/progressives. 

while studi show that "digit ad have at most a slight persuas effect," he noted, 

the real goal of paid advertis is for the content to becom organ social media. for example, a trump ad say that he brought back manufactur job would persuad almost no one. but, when local news or your neighbor start repeat that, it becom more credibl and persuasive. that what they'r after. to sum up, their content is advantag becaus it reach their target audiences, without friction, from the media that audienc trusts, and is quick and reliabl repeat by other voic they trust in their world. 

what the bottom line? 

finally, there the question of the size of the valu of trump data/digit advantage. big enough to enabl him to win the popular vote? almost certain not. big enough to win wisconsin? frighten so. 
