two death and my life 
by roger cohen 
jan. 10, 2020 

samuel beckett, when ask one beauti spring morn whether such a day did not make him glad to be alive, responded, "i wouldn't go as far as that." life is a predicament, death the eleph at the horizon that loom larger as the year pass. 

still, life is what we have. to give less than everyth to it is dereliction. in the end it wonder is unimagin without the presenc of death. as the dew dispels, the mist dissolves, and the sap rise on a morn such as the one that did not quit win over beckett, the forc of life is unmistakable. that is what put us here in the first place. 

great soul resembl the element in their immensity. they absorb everyth — pain, injustice, insult, folli — and give back decenc and kindness. they are not born of a piece. they come into be through unflinch confront with life spears. they reach quiet. disciplin is the backbon of graciousness. stoicism is the other face of wounds. in the most beauti smile, pain knowledg hovers. 

midwint is not what prompt these reflections, although when a freez wind whip off the east river all thought turn to refuge. no, the death in quick success of two friend was the catalyst. they were older than me. but they were not old enough and not so distant in age that their memento mori feel less than urgent. 

sonni mehta, who die last month at the age of 77, would caress the book he loved. for them he lived. he guid alfr a. knopf through more than three decad of rapid change. he was a complet publisher, eclect in his tastes, feroci in his will, guid by a mission to bring the finest book to knopf and publish them onli onc edit had hone them to irreproach form. yet he want to be rememb abov all as a reader. 

i knew sonni for three decades. he publish my last two books. his civil never wavered. the twinkl in his eye never faded. his friendship was constant. whiski and a cigarett and the meander convers that went with them were more his thing than the treadmill. he was a beauti man. 

how so? in his gentl that contain wisdom, in his diffid that contain enthusiasm, in his discret that contain curiosity. you had to listen carefully, for he spoke softly, to the clue he offered. his long marriag to his wife, gita, brought to my mind, in it respect and vitality, rilk phrase about love as protect the solitud of the other. 

a child of india, brown-skin in what was when he start the white preserv of british publishing, onc ask if he was perhap seek a job in the stockroom, mehta never stoop to unkindness. his writer knew they had come home. he command the unswerv loyalti of the like of michael ondaatje, kazuo ishiguro, germain greer and julian barnes. "i feel that my heart has been rip out," jon segal, his longtim colleagu at knopf, told me. 

when mehta father, a diplomat, die in vienna, mehta found in his desk a folder with everi articl ever publish about him. the pride of his father, who had never compliment his son, was evident. remot fathers: vast subject. hear this story, i understood more of my friend eleg stoicism. 

earlier in december, ward just, a journalist who turn to fiction, a great washington post correspond in vietnam who becam a great novelist, die at the age of 84. like mehta, he was a lover of scotch. i had not seen much of just sinc we becam friend in berlin 20 year ago, but his death hit me hard. i recal him say to me back then: "i was useless for journal after vietnam. i knew i was not go to do ani better work." 

truth, he decided, must be pursu elsewhere. "mani of the thing that make you a good journalist have to be discard to make you a good writer," he said. "in a novel, everi fact is a rock thrown in the hull, and the boat sink a bit." 

just probe the delus of peopl and nations, and the damag they suffer. his prose was understated. in "a danger friend," one charact observes, "i have alway believ that a mountain ego result from an absenc of conscience." and that was befor his needi seiz the oval office. 

as with mehta, just prod was subtle, his smile contain sorrows, his wisdom was hard-earned, his constant humor wry. wound by a grenad blast in 1966, winch to safeti by a chopper, he later wrote, as quot in his washington post obituary: "when you got there, you said instinctively, i made it. and over and over again, jesus christ." 

i can hear my friend say that, stress on the christ. life hang by a thread. pay attent to it ephemer gifts. of truman schockley, dead at 19 in vietnam, just wrote in 1967: 

"smoke a lucki strike and stare off into the mountains, schockley die with a sniper bullet through the heart and stop breath befor the cigarett stop burning." 

now there a perfect sentenc that might even have persuad beckett. spring passes. truth distil doe not. 
