warren and klobuchar teach the boy a lesson 
by frank bruni 
jan. 15, 2020 

would a femal democrat nomine have a harder time beat donald trump than a male one? 

i can't tell you, becaus i don't have a crystal ball and becaus it a stupid question, it answer depend on which femal candid you'r talk about, on how she run her campaign, on the twist and turn of the nation convers between now and november. 

but i can tell you this: either of the two women among the six candid on the stage in des moin on tuesday night would give trump a serious run for his money. both have earn the right to take him on. both would be formid presidents. 

and both made clear, with command performances, how absurd it is that this countri hasn't yet shatter the highest glass ceil of all. 

i'm focus on elizabeth warren and ami klobuchar becaus dure the most electr stretch of this seventh debat of the democrat primary, the focus was inde on them — or, rather, on the idea that their parti couldn't risk nomin one of them at a junctur when get rid of a republican incumb has seldom, if ever, been so important. 

you know the back story. accord to media report over recent days, warren and berni sander met 13 month ago to discuss their nascent presidenti campaign and he told her he didn't believ a woman could win the 2020 election. sander deni say that. 

he deni it again on tuesday night, and warren declin to get into a back-and-forth about that conversation. what she did instead was more effect — and certain more stirring: she drew a contrast between the two women and the four men who had made the cut for this debate, which was the final one befor the iowa caucus and had the fewest candid so far. 

that contrast was perfect, and got better still when klobuchar chime in, becaus what the two women said brilliant cast them not as trailblaz who had someth extra to prove, not as outsid who had finagl a way in, not as underdog urg voter to take some extraordinari leap of faith, not as high-mind gambles. they turn the stubborn, sexist notion that their presenc and presidenti ambit were exot on it head, cite yardstick by which they were demonstr superior to their male rivals. 

"i think the best way to talk about who can win is by look at peopl win record," warren, a second-term senat from massachusetts, said. "look at the men on this stage. collectively, they have lost 10 elections." she didn't name the men or the elections, but joe biden is the veteran of two previous, miser unsuccess campaign for the presidency. pete buttigieg lost bid to becom the treasur of indiana and the chairman of the democrat nation committee. 

in contrast, warren noted, "the onli peopl on this stage who have won everi singl elect that they'v been in are the women — ami and me. and the onli person who has beaten an incumb republican ani time in the past 30 year is me." 

klobuchar, a third-term senat from minnesota, said you don't need to be male to win just as you don't need other qualiti pronounc necessari or optim by some unnamed, amorph committe of pronouncers. "you don't have to be the skinniest person in the room," she said. "you don't have to be the loudest person. you have to be competent." 

"and when you look at what i have done," she added, "i have won everi race, everi place, everi time. i have won in the reddest of districts. i have won in the suburban areas, in the rural areas." that, she added, was whi she had "the most endors of current iowa legisl and former iowa legisl in this race." 

i don't mean to romantic warren and klobuchar. warren boast about vanquish a republican incumbent? that incumb was scott brown, whose victori in a special elect in deep blue massachusett was consid someth of a freak occurr to begin with. 

and when klobuchar began to tick off the name of women recent elect to high posts, she sudden froze, unabl to rememb who the governor of kansa was, though she'd just said, "i'm veri proud to know her." (her name is laura kelly.) 

i'm also not say that warren or klobuchar would be the parti best bet. i don't know who would be. i'm just say that on a night when the viabil of women aim for the white hous went from subtext to text, these two women found word — not just in address that issu but also in talk about prescription-drug prices, climat change, nuclear weapon and more — that expos the bigotri and shame of doubt about femal candidates. 

otherwis the seventh debat was sleepili like mani of the first six: biden seem to be campaign for a third barack obama term, and his sentenc were less straight line than knots. they didn't build toward a conclus so much as sag until they final gave out. warren said "corruption" everi chanc she got. sander call for revolut and correct emphas that mani trade and foreign-polici posit that other democrat came around to he embrac from the start. 

buttigieg pivot from the question at hand to a practic soliloquy that almost alway had someth to do with turn the page and a new generation. tom steyer insist that no one care about the environ as much as he did. and klobuchar talk about so mani differ piec of legisl with her name on them that you had this imag of her race around the capitol with an outstretch pen, stop all aid who pass by and scrawl her signatur on ani paper they were carrying. 

one new wrinkl was warren clear and proud posit of herself to sander right on trade and on health care. she was make the case for herself as a progress who would favor increment fix if those were the onli avail improv and who could be a unifier; she suggest that sander lack that potential. buttigieg, meanwhile, was more determin than ever to mention and reach out to voter of color, from whom he enjoy littl support. 

but what most distinguish the debat was the way in which gender came to the fore. 

there was a memor moment when sander sought to correct warren on her 30-year claim, note that he'd defeat a republican in 1990, and she did some quick, out-loud arithmet to determin that 1990 was, well, 30 year ago! mansplain met mathematics. 

warren also said this: "sinc donald trump was elected, women candid have outperform men candid in competit races. and in 2018, we took back the house; we took back statehouses, becaus of women candid and women voters." 

"back in the 1960s," she added, "peopl asked, could a cathol win? back in 2008, peopl ask if an african-american could win. in both time the democrat parti step up and said yes, got behind their candid and we chang america. that who we are." 

it was a self-serv edit of history, sure, and it put the most posit gloss possibl on the nation character. but that didn't make it ani less important. or ani less inspiring. 
