what doe it mean to have a serious drink problem? 
by nanci wartik 
jan. 31, 2020 

one day in the fall of 2018, i woke up feel wrecked. the night befor i'd had beer with colleagu and wound up bray loud to one of them about someth she'd confid and what i thought she should do. 

"i wish i'd never told you this," she final blurted, and i knew i'd betray a trust. 

a few night before, i'd been more inept. a group of us had held a memori for a friend. at a gather later, i'd had a martini with prosecco chasers, then pick a senseless quarrel with our hostess, a close friend as bereav as i was. 

now i sat there, head pounding, stomach roiling. it was anoth in a string of morn when i'd woken want to smother myself with a pillow. 

booze: it didn't take much for me to feel the effects. alcohol could make night glitteri and fun, make me love all humankind. it could also, and unpredictably, rous demon that turn me into a wife shrew, spark bruis arguments, unleash embarrass faux pas. this morning, a new thought struck, penetr to the bone. 

"i can't do it anymore. i quit." 

although i'd grappl for decad with my relationship to alcohol, i didn't consid myself an alcoholic. in onlin quizz ask how mani drink i typic had per day, i could fair accur answer "two" (veri generous drinks). 

on the world health organ audit quiz, which test for drink problems, i score eight of 40 points, make me a "medium" drinker with a "risky" pattern. but medium didn't sound too bad and the websit said i could alter my drink "without too much difficulty." 

plus, i had the vaunt femal triumvirate: husband, kid, respect job. friends, when they weren't mad at me. o.k., sometim i overdid it. but it was easi to imagin myself as your averag fun-lov parisian oenophile. 

and yet. 

i was in my late teen when i discov what alcohol could do: quash my inhibitions; kindl fals intimacies; provok brilliant revel that i soon forgot. alcohol made me the outgo person my unconfid self want to be, let me talk to peopl i normal wouldn't have. yes, occasion i awok to see a head on the adjoin pillow and felt a bolt of regret. 

"damn! whi did this guy seem cute last night?" 

but i'd call a friend: "guess what i did this time?" i'd ask, turn discomfort into a hilari anecdote. 

or a friend would inform me of my revelry: "nancy, the bartend threw you out. you couldn't stay on your stool." 

alcohol was also medication. i drank to quiet angst or becaus i was lonesome. i drank, it took year to realize, becaus i had clinic depression. eventu i treat the depress but kept drinking. alcohol was my stress reducer, my realiti fighter, the conferr of artifici joys. 

life chang in my 40s. i married, and with my husband, adopt our belov daughter, now 17. work from home, i made dinner, drink wine with a neighbor mom. my morning-aft headach were worsening, though. nights, rather than read or chat with my husband, i'd crash. i fear my drink was destroy brain cells. i'd written about how alcohol is harder on women than men and that worri me, too. 

some year ago, to prove i had control, i cut down to five night a week. it was tough. how could i not drink after a rough day? i couldn't manag two consecut sober nights. achiev my two sober night was alway an exercis in military-level strategizing. but everi sunday, i felt virtuous. an actual alcohol couldn't skip ani nights, i thought. but i could. 

what doe it mean to have a serious drink problem? the answer is surpris vague. 

"alcoholism" isn't an actual diagnosis. in 1980, the american psychiatr associ authorit diagnost and statist manual of mental disord establish two differ classifications: alcohol abus and alcohol dependence. in 2013, the d.s.m. combin the categori to creat "alcohol use disorder," a spectrum rang from mild to severe, base not on how much someon drink but on how mani of 11 behavior or psycholog symptom a person has. 

meanwhile, the center for diseas control and prevent has it own standards, focus more on quantiti of alcohol consumption. seven drink per week or fewer is consid safe for women, 14 or fewer for men. but guidelin fluctuat internationally, accord to a stanford univers studi from 2016. in canada or france, you can drink more week and be consid "low risk." 

moreover, a recent studi in the lancet conclud alcohol is so tough on health that there no safe level. 

in short, if you wonder whether you drink too much, sometim it best to trust your gut. 

i don't know exact what happen that fall morn as i sat in bed, achi and humiliated. as viscer as i'v known anything, i knew i was in trouble. so what if i didn't swig a bottl of scotch daily? i'd hit "medium drinker" rock bottom and it was enough. 

despit the websit say i could chang my drink "without too much difficulty," quit booz is one of the hardest thing i'v ever done. i pine for it: at restaurants, i'd gaze at rubi goblet as if at a divin elixir. after workout i'd crave a beer. and what was the point of social sober? 

eventually, i had to try. guzzl nonalcohol beer — befor i wise switch to seltzer — while chat with peopl savor complex pinot noir was initi daunting. but astonishingly, my non-intox brain still found what they said funny, touch or interesting. 

i didn't join a.a., though i don't rule it out. i sought support from my husband, daughter and friend — those i'd offended, those surpris i even had a problem. i devour other stories, watch movi about alcoholics, read memoirs, lurk in sub-reddit for peopl struggl to quit. but what realli kept me on the path was the remark differ between the drink and not drink me. i hadn't grasp the degre to which a sens of shame had insidi undergird my life. now it was gone, replac by an unaccustom pride. 

the longer i abstained, the better i felt, in way that spill into marriage, work, parenting, friendships. recently, someon unawar i'd quit told me i look year younger. i'm more patient. my headach are infrequent, my energi up. 

those result fit with a studi publish in the canadian medic associ journal, among the first focus on moder drinker mental health. research studi cohort of peopl in hong kong and the unit state found even "safe" drinkers, women in particular, show improv well-b if they stopped. 

today, i can label myself. i had moder alcohol use disorder, a "chronic relaps brain disease" mark by loss of control over alcohol. the nation institut on alcohol and alcohol abus say 6.2 percent of american adults, more than 15 million people, are on the alcohol use disord spectrum. (other research put the number higher.) i'd guess many, like me, drink modest enough that they don't believ they have a problem. i feel lucki i quit befor anyth wors happened. 

sobrieti can still be a challenge. if all goe accord to plan, i'll never again experi the soft scrim that drop between me and reality, as wine drain from my glass. it seem sad, until i rememb that three time sinc quitting, i'v tri a celebratori drink. most recently, in peru, i had one of the countri famous pisco sours. it gave me a mild buzz and a hangover. i haven't had a drop since. 

these days, i awaken clearheaded. i'm closer than ever to be the mother, wife, relat and friend i want to be. it feel good. realli good. i get up the next morning. i do it again. 
