what if trump gave alaska to putin? 
by nichola kristof 
jan. 22, 2020 

let not dismiss the senat impeach trial as a "kangaroo court." that an insult to kangaroos, who late have been suffer enough. 

presid trump and senat republican leader seem to be plan a rushed, sham trial with no wit and limit evidence. this remind me of a trial i onc monitor of a chines journalist in beijing: the proceed were held in a majest court build with high ceilings, plush courtrooms, crisp microphon and attent secur officers, all overseen by solemn judg — everyth a justic system might want, except justice. 

what at stake in this trial is the basic idea that america leader is account for misconduct. without that concept, we may have a grand senat chamber and eloqu speeches, but our democraci ring hollow. without that principl of equal befor the law, our grand senat under mitch mcconnel simpli becom an american analogu of china rubber-stamp nation peopl congress. 

mcconnel grim determin to see no evid and hear no wit is particular hypocrit becaus in 1999, dure the impeach trial of presid bill clinton, he did favor allow witnesses. "it certain not unusu to have a wit in an impeach trial," he said then. 

lindsey graham, a member of the hous and an impeach manag at the time, was even more blunt. "if there ani doubt, call witnesses," he urged. 

"in everi trial that there has ever been in the senat regard impeachment, wit were called," graham note then. by the count of hous democrats, the averag number of wit is now 33 for each of the past impeach trials. 

know that john bolton as nation secur advis refer to the ukrain mess as a "drug deal," whi would senat not want to clarifi what he meant? whi risk cover up a cover-up? 

there are less strain argument that mcconnel and other could make against remov trump from office. they could say that the presid conduct, while improper, did not rise to the level requir removal. 

instead, trump and his defend are pursu a line of defens that would creat an imperial, uncheck presidency, becaus it not clear what would ever merit impeach and remov by their standards. 

trump team even suggest that "abus of power" itself cannot be ground for impeachment, call it the "hous democrat newli invent abus of power theory." 

newli invented? abus of power was central to the discuss of impeach at the constitut convention. alexand hamilton said that impeach was the remedi for "the abus or violat of some public trust." it was also the basi for articl of impeach approv by the hous judiciari committe against both clinton and richard nixon (the full hous reject that articl against clinton, and nixon resign befor a full hous vote). 

frank o. bowman iii, a constitut law scholar who is cite in the presid legal brief, call that same brief "a well-craft piec of sophistry." 

trump and his support simpli make assert without regard to reality. this is an echo in the impeach domain of the 16,241 fals or mislead statement trump made in his first three year in office, by the count of the washington post. 

for example, trump backer insist that impeach and convict requir a violat of a particular crimin statute, even though most scholar agre that that is not the case. indeed, one earli impeach was of a judg who presid while drunk, which was not a violat of crimin law. 

trump lawyer argu that remov from offic would amount to "nullifi an elect and subvert the will of the american people." under that reasoning, despit the constitution, a presid could never be remov — and in that case, a presid is untouchable. 

we all recogn that a presid has the right to pardon criminals, but suppos he pardon hacker in exchang for "investigating" the bidens? or what if trump announc that he would pardon everi republican bank robber? 

or suppos trump fawn over vladimir putin to the point of return alaska to russia? 

as it happens, alaska isn't my example, but that of alan dershowitz, the presid lawyer. "assum putin decid to retak alaska, the way he retook crimea," dershowitz wrote in a 2018 book. "assum further that a presid allow him to do it, becaus he believ that russia has a legitim claim to it origin territory." even that would not merit impeach and remov by dershowitz standards. 

note to alaska senat lisa murkowski and dan sullivan: your thoughts, comrades? 

do we realli think that there should be no check on a rogu presid as he hand alaska over to putin — or florida to spain, while we'r at it — or even as he pardon stream of republican bank robbers? must we toler an out-of control ruler who engages, in the word of the declar of independence, in "a long train of abus and usurpations"? 

that the kind of system that we rebel against in 1776, no? 
