what will you do when the cultur war come for you? 
by charli warzel 
jan. 29, 2020 

the cultur war will come for us all. 

on sunday, it came for a washington post reporter, felicia sonmez. 

nine peopl were kill in a helicopt crash in calabasas, calif., that morning, includ the basketbal legend kobe bryant and his 13-year-old daughter, gianna. the news rocket around social media, where mourner share their heartbreak at the news. as is common with major break news, some report were inaccur or false, layer anxieti on top of grief. 

into the mix, ms. sonmez tweet the link to a 2016 articl from the daili beast about a young woman accus that mr. bryant had rape her in colorado. crimin charg against him were drop in 2004 and a civil suit was settl out of court. 

the tweet highlight the fact that mr. bryant legaci is fraught and complicated, and attract the attent of fan as well as troll who bombard her inbox with abus and post her home address online. ms. sonmez then post a select of the threat she received, without obscur the name of the peopl who had sent her hate mail. she slept in a hotel on sunday night, fear for her safeti at home, she said. 

we don't know all the details, but it seem that the post manag and execut editor were not pleased. they chastis her over email and place her on administr leav while the organ review whether she had violat the compani social media guidelines. their reason on monday: "the tweet display poor judgment that undermin the work of her colleagues." the post revers her suspens on tuesday, rough 36 hour after the initi tweets, state that senior manag had conclud that ms. sonmez tweet didn't violat compani policy. 

this, of course, was obvious to almost everyon but the post higher-ups. it was imposs to imagin how post a link to a stori by a differ public on twitter could undermin the work of colleagues. just as it was imposs to imagin which colleagu would have felt undermin (more than 300 of ms. sonmez colleagu express solidar with her in a letter from the post union to management). 

there remain glare questions. did the execut editor, marti baron, inquir about ms. sonmez safeti when he email her to critic her tweets? what, beyond a reflex for onlin civility, led the post to determin the report was "hurt this institution" by discuss a part of mr. bryant legaci that appear in the post own news pages? why, after year of watch journalists, women and vulner individu be troll and abus by viral outrag online, are newsroom still fall for the same gamergate-styl tactics? the post offici statement (it doesn't quit rise to the level of an apology), which includ the caveat "we consist urg restraint" for report online, doesn't begin to answer these questions. 

the incid also rais headier questions, including: in the world of onlin journalism, what specif do writer owe to their public via their social media presence? surely, there a bare minimum if they'r collect a paycheck. journalist obvious shouldn't undermin their colleagu with cheap shot or reckless specul as to other work. they should stay professional. after that, thing get murky. 

twitter is a gordian knot of news and opinion that can't be untangled. insid publications, news and opinion bleed together; opinion writer report while report opin via news analysis. partisan commentary, onc a third rail for object reporters, is omnipres on twitter. in the past, news organ — and the peopl who work for them — would never have call the presid a racist. some now do so explicitly. newsroom and even the platform have struggl with find a new standard in the trump era of disinformation; meanwhile, journalist are expect to sort it out in real time, while on the job. and to get it right or face consequences. 

journalist who build follow online, in part by be incisive, combative, funni and omnipres on twitter, are often hire becaus of that exposur — becaus they'r a known quantity. 

at a larger organization, though, those same attribut may quick be seen as a liability. public hire divers outspoken writer and then get anxious when these writer start tweet about politics. some outlet ask staffer who don't cover incendiari beat like polit to refrain from comment on polit goings-on. but what happen when polit touch everything? for those who'v made a name be outspoken, sudden say noth is a statement in itself. for newsroom leader the question get tough, fast. few if ani outlet seem to want to draw exact lines. and so they becom blurred. 

there also a doubl standard. while few public would say it, it all but requir for young journalist to jump into the cultur war online. it a way to find stories. and in a volatil industri it get you noticed. be "part of the discourse" each day mean be marketable. it help writers, but it also bolster publications, help promot big stori and creat all kind of dystopian form of content like "microscoops," or break news too small to merit it own articl but enough to tout to competitor on twitter. 

this exposur is a drug for journalists. the real-tim spar and feedback is seductive, and the endorphin boost of constant mention is addictive. but it also exposur in the truest sense: great visibl and great vulner blend seamless together. 

though an argument could be made that all the time-wasting, in-jok and gaff from idl report and editor on twitter subt undermin the rigor part of the work, newsroom benefit great from the constant exposur of their journalists. report use twitter to poke and prod sources. writer sometim enhanc their stori with long tweet thread that explain the report process. and report build trust with audienc by includ or signal to their audienc perspect in their onlin analysi (ms. sonmez, who has come forward with detail of her own sexual assault, told her colleagu erik wempl that her tweet were, in part, to make survivor like herself who follow her feel seen). when import news breaks, newsroom claim credit when their report break it first on twitter. 

which is whi the post statement, especi it urg of restraint, is so fraught. the same editor who want restraint from report onlin dure a celebr death would most like also be furious if their capitol hill report were slow in live-tweet a hear or impeach proceed and fell behind the competition. restraint is a virtu in journalism, no doubt, but so are tenac and transparency. the messag is contradictory: broadcast everything, but exercis restraint. twitter isn't real life, but tweet can and will get you fire or suspended. 

but these qualiti have been in conflict and competit for long befor twitter and newsroom understood a journalist exposur dure break news and had their back accordingly. evid suggest that not alway the case in the face of a cascad of onlin outrage. that less a chang in the industri than it is a failur of newsroom leader to understand the inform war it send it journalist out to fight in each day. 

while the internet cultur war dynam are fraught, they'r not all that hard to understand. they come in the form of intimid and threat toward journalist and angri campaign toward advertis and executives. some of the respons are postur and some are real, but all are engin for maximum viral and outrage. yes, sometim journalist make mistakes. sometim work will harm the institut or undermin co-workers, but newsroom leader ought to be train to distinguish troll from good-faith criticism. 

it a weird moment that newsroom aren't talk about enough. just as social media platform allow celebrities, politician and influenc to circumv tradit press gatekeeping, the same thing has happen to journal own practitioners. despit all the social media guidelines, there an unansw question: who do those follow realli belong to? 

perhap it most accur to say they'r an asset and a liabil for both parties. everyon exposed. but there an asymmetri to that exposure. the cultur war will come for us all, institut and individu alike. one group can weather the storm, the other need protection. newsroom need to get smart, prepar and protect their foot soldiers. it the least they can do. 
