bojack horseman end with a necessari reckon 
by charl dunst 
feb. 1, 2020 

this essay contain spoiler for the final season of "bojack horseman." 

"i haven't done anything. sinc i got out of rehab, i have been on my best behavior," proclaim bojack horseman (voic by will arnett), the eponym protagonist of the anim netflix show. in the second half of the sixth and final season, bojack, a washed-up 1990s sitcom star and anthropomorph horse, has found out report are plan to publish a damn exposé of his pre-rehab behavior. 

"they can't get me on old [expletive]," he pleads. "i'm a differ person now." 

but they do "get him." after bojack give a princ andrew-lik interview, he ostrac and fall off the wagon, almost drunken drown to death in the pool of his former home. he convict and sentenc to 14 month in prison for break and entering, although, he admits, "it was kind of for everything" — includ seduc and almost sleep with an ex-girlfriend 17-year-old daughter and provid a former co-star with the heroin on which she fatal overdoses. 

male antihero tv charact like bojack — the don draper and walter white who domin the late 2000s and earli 2010s — are usual design to be empathetic. we'r suppos to root for them despit their wrongdoings, and cheer when they ride off into the proverbi sunset as some karmic justic restor the broken they'v left behind. 

sinc it began, "bojack horseman" has offer an alternative, forc viewer to repeat see the damag it destruct protagonist inflicts, while complic ani empathi they might feel for him. this uniqu approach arriv at it logic conclus with the final instal of episod releas friday, punish bojack while also lay out a path for his redemption. 

if this remain a rare outcom on tv, it is even rarer in real life — and it like to reson with viewer wrestl with what a transgressor path to aton might look like. 

in crucial ways, bojack bear resembl to jon hamm don draper on "mad men" — both charact treat women horribly, use their profession power to get what they want without ani serious self-reflection. yet unlik don, bojack eventu tri to better himself, address his drug addict and repair the relationship he has broken. 

at first, there seem to be hope for a neat end for bojack. but that would have betray the show under messag that action have consequ — and that the acknowledg of this fact is central to one person penanc and evolution. 

when a bowl or teapot fall and shatters, most peopl might throw it away, consid the object broken, ruin and without value. the japanes art of "kintsugi" take a radic differ approach, use precious metal to bring the broken piec back together. "bojack horseman" doe someth similar. 

take, for example, bojack confid and former biographer, dian nguyen (alison brie). though thrive in her person life, she struggl to write her promis collect of essays. as she tri to focus, she interrupt by a surreal black-and-whit mélang of key contributor to her emot wreckage, includ her father and bojack. a figment of her ex-husband, mr. peanutbutt (paul f. tomkins), appear in her mental chaos, offer tidbit of insight. "crack in an object are part of it history," he says. 

bojack is also tri to piec himself back together. after year of blame his misde on childhood trauma, he at last accept respons for his behavior. he emerg sober, think himself to be a new man, and most escap profession punishment. the movi he film right befor enter prison has posit buzz. the industri has forgotten bojack indiscretions, allow him to walk entertain dollar-pav road to rebirth. 

"peopl have short memories," say princess carolyn (ami sedaris), his agent and friend. "it the best and worst thing about people." 

but a stint in rehab cannot eras the hurt he caus the peopl in his life, just as similar period out of the spotlight have not repair the damag inflict by real-lif men who resurfac in attempt comebacks. 

princess carolyn declin to continu repres bojack. hollyhock (aparna nancherla), his half sister, send him a letter, the content of which are never reveal to the viewer but which clear mark her perman exit from his life. and diane, whom bojack has unfair imagin to be his savior, wish him well but impli their friendship has reach it end. 

this bittersweet end show how within the last decade, writer and audienc have come to think differ about so-cal "difficult men." 

mani peopl admir don draper — whom jon hamm himself call "a pretti dismal, despic guy" — despit seven season of narcissism, callous woman and a layered, platon relationship with his one-tim secretari peggi olson that often border on the emot manipul and abusive. by the show end, don appear to remain on good term with some of those he wronged, and is set to look after his children in the eventu absenc of his die ex-wife, betty. 

the seri end with him, ostens at peace, dream up the 1971 landmark coca-cola ad, "i'd like to buy the world a coke." 

viewer also root for walter white on "break bad," despit his deceit and exploit action toward others, most notabl jess pinkman, his partner in crime, and skyler white, his wife. skyler (anna gunn) was the onli charact who truli challeng walter behavior: ms. gunn herself receiv hate mail as a result. the backlash was so strong that the actress pen a new york time op- in 2013, observ that "male charact don't seem to inspir this kind of public vent and vitriol," which is instead reserv for tv wive like skyler and betti draper on "mad men." 

we'r prime to extend empathi to the reckless antihero, rather than the charact repres the moral consider that probabl should hold them in check. in it final episode, "break bad" valor walter, a man who onc cold watch a woman die of an overdos without do anyth to save her, among mani other horrif deeds. he get to go out on his own term after magnific mow down a conglomer of neo-nazis, perhap the onli charact who outrank him in insidiousness. 

"bojack horseman" is uniqu out of step here. it creator, raphael bob-waksberg, doesn't want to give his protagonist such a satisfi ending. mr. bob-waksberg has said he base season 5 of the show on the actor mel gibson, whose record racist rant fail to end his career. and while the showrunn said he found himself "unwil to forgive" the actor, he admit to believ "in the power of forgiveness, generally." this ambival speak direct to the tone of the final season of "bojack." 

as a viewer, it would have felt preposter for bojack to be readili accept back into the fold by the peopl who care about him the most. it fit that the show forc him to reckon with his past in a way charact like don draper and walter white never did. the seri arc match the public grow concern about how to measur and take part in account across all walk of life — the #metoo abus and manipulators, yes, but also those who may have, for instance, said or done racist or homophob thing in their past. 

by the end, bojack come to understand that, rather than disappear or drag him down, his past wrong linger like precious "kintsugi" crack in his reform self, serv as indel remind of where broken onc was — and to illumin who he is now as a whole. 

"life a [expletive] and then you die," bojack tell dian in the final scene. they are sit on a maroon-shingl roof, have what they both recogn is like to be their last interact with one another. but she disagrees. instead, she urg him to see the crack of his past as fortif for the future, offer a correct he seem to accept. "life a [expletive]," she says, "and you keep living." 
