where the fraud are all legal 
by elisabeth rosenth 
dec. 7, 2019 

much of what we accept as legal in medic bill would be regard as fraud in ani other sector. 

i have been circl around this conclus for this past five years, as i'v listen to patient stori while cover health care as a journalist and author. now, after a summer of firsthand experi — my husband was in a bike crash in juli — it time to call out this fact head-on. mani of the democrat candid are talk about practic fix for our high-pric health care system, and some legisl or regul solut to the madden world of medic bill would be welcome. 

my husband, andrej, flew over his bicycl handlebar when he hit a pothol at high speed on a sunday ride in washington. he was unconsci and lie on the pavement when i caught up with him minut later. the result: six broken ribs, a collaps lung, a broken finger, a broken collarbon and a broken shoulder blade. 

the treatment he got via paramed and in the emerg room and intens care unit were great. the troubl began, as i knew they would, when the bill start arriving. 

i will not even complain here about some of the crazi high charges: $182 for a basic blood test, $9,289 for two day in a room in intens care, $20 for a pill that cost penni at a pharmacy. we have great insurance, which negoti these rate down. and at least andrej got and benefit from those services. 

what i'm talk about here were the bill for thing that simpli didn't happen, or onli kind-of, sort-of happened, or were mislabel as thing they were not, or were so nebul defin that i couldn't figur out what we might be pay for. 

to be clear, mani of the charg that i would call fraudul — mayb all of them — are technic legal (thank sometim to lobbi by providers), but that doesn't make them right. and no one would accept them if they appear on bill deliv by a contractor, or a lawyer or an auto mechanic. there were so mani of these charg that i came up with categori to keep track of them: 

1. medic swag 
in the trauma bay, someon slap a hard brace around andrej neck until scan confirm that he had not suffer a grievous spinal injury. it was remov within an hour. 

the medic equip compani that provid that piec of plastic bill $319. our insur paid $215 (90 percent of it discount rate of $239). we were bill $24, our "patient responsibility." 

compani are permit by insur to bill for "durabl medic equipment," stuff you receiv for home use when you'r in the hospit or doctor office. that yield some familiar marked-up charges, like the sling you can buy at walgreen for $15 but for which you or your insur get a bill for $120 after it is given to you at urgent care. the polici has also led to widespread abuse, with patient sent home with equip they don't need: my mom apartment, for example, hold an unus wheelchair, a walker and a commod paid for by medicare, by which i mean our tax dollars. it as if you were given a swag bag at a confer and then sent a bill for hundr or thousand of dollars. 

at least with swag, you get to keep it. my husband hard worn neck brace didn't even come home with us as a souvenir. 

2. the cover charg 
the biggest singl item on andrej e.r. bill was a $7,143.99 trauma activ fee. what was that for, sinc everi compon of his care had been bill and bill handsomely? 

among the line items: $3,400 for a high-level e.r. visit. $1,030 for the trauma surgeon. between $1,400 and $3,300 for five purport ct scans. and i say "purported" becaus one trip into a scanner examin the head, upper spine and maxillofaci bones, but was bill as three separ things. there was also an administr fee of more than $350 each for four injections. 

trauma activ fee have been allow sinc 2002, after 9/11, when the trauma center associ of america, an industri group, convinc regul that they need to be compens for maintain a state of "readiness." 

wait. isn't the purpos of an e.r. to be "ready"? isn't that whi the doctor servic and scan are bill at higher rate when they are perform in an emerg department? 

despit scrutini from research about whether trauma fee are deserved, trauma activ fee have onli grown in size, 15 percent annual in recent years, and can reach into the ten of thousand of dollars. (on average, medicar pay a fee of about $1,000.) some have liken trauma activ fee to a cover charg for be wheel into an e.r. with major trauma. but doe a cover charg typic cost more than the meal? 

3. impostor bill 
we receiv bill from doctor my husband never met. some of these bill were understandable, like for the radiologist who read the scans. but other were for bedsid treatment from peopl who never came anywher near the bed to deliv the care. 

andrej had a small finger fractur with a cut that need some stitches, which a resident, a surgeon-in-training, sutured. but the $1,512 bill came in the name of a senior surgeon, as if he had done the work. 

physician and mani other health profession are allow to bill for the work of "extenders" — stand-in with less train who see patient and work under the supervis doctor. these might be residents, physician assist or nurs anesthetists, for example. for bill purposes, this allow the senior provid to be in two, three, sometim more than half a dozen place at once, often even when they are physic mile away. 

the resid did a fine job on my husband. but if an assist did the work, shouldn't it be bill for less? at law firms, the hour rate for paraleg and junior attorney are lower than those for partners. 

on a websit call clinic advisor, a reimburs expert himself seem to wonder at the profess luck that such bill is tolerated: "i hear peopl ask, how can i do that? the doctor never saw the patient, never had ani interact with the patient and yet i can still bill this servic under the physician?'" 

4. the drive-bi 
the day befor andrej left the hospital, a physic therapist visit and ask a few questions. from that brief encounter, the therapist note "ambul deficits, balanc deficits, endur deficits, pain-limit function, transfer deficits." that translat into a bill of $646.15 for what was record as a p.t. evalu "1st session onli (billable)." he said he was there for 30 minutes, but he was not. he said he walk andrej up 10 step with a stabil belt for assistance. he did not. there was no signific health servic given. just an appear and some box check on a form. it a phenomenon call drive-bi doctoring. 

more shockingly, the drive-bi continu at our home, presag by a call on andrej cellphon a day after he was discharged. a physic therapist from a privat compani want to visit him for at-hom therapy. in his discharg instructions, no one had mention this service, and his injuri was clear too fresh to benefit. she came. she didn't know which bodi part had been injur and conclud he was in too much pain to participate. 

the same compani call twice more the follow week to schedul visits. by the third time, i told andrej not to open the front door. nonetheless, our insur was bill — and paid — for three visits. 

it as if alexa notic that my dishwash make too much nois (it does) and took it upon herself to send over a repair guy. but if i turn him away at the front door, say i'm o.k. with the racket (i am), would i still be bill for the visit? 

5. the enforc upgrad 
one monday when andrej was in pain and out of pills, the trauma doctor suggest we meet in the emerg room, becaus the trauma clinic was open onli from 8 to 10:45 a.m. on wednesday and thursdays. 

so we met the trauma doctor in the e.r., and they talk to andrej, who remain in his street clothes. they gave him a prescription. becaus the interact — which could have happen in the lobbi — happen in the e.r., it result in an e.r. visit charg of $1,330. but when the trauma clinic is open less than six hour a week, bill for an e.r. visit that doesn't tap into ani of the emerg room resourc feel like a scam. is an e.r. visit determin by the content of the servic rendered, or mere by the location? 

andrej had a similar experi when his broken finger was treat with a plastic splint that fold over his fingertip. he complain becaus the upper layer press on the fracture. at a follow-up visit, someon took a pair of scissor and cut off the upper half of the splint and tape the lower half back in place. that translat into a $481 charg for "surgery," in addit to the $375 charg for the offic visit and a $103 facil fee. doesn't surgery, by definition, involv cut into flesh or an anim object — not a piec of plastic? 

sure, it sound fanci to upgrad a meet to an e.r. visit, or to call the tweak of a splint "surgery," but if an airlin overbook my flight and put me on anoth flight where the onli seat avail is in first class, it doe not charg me for the more expens ticket. 

my insur paid for most of these question charges, though at discount rates. but even a discount payment for someth that never realli happen or didn't need to happen or that we didn't agre to have happen is still, accord to common sense, a fraud. 

whi do insur pay? part becaus insur have no way to know whether you got a particular item or service. but also becaus it not worth their time to investig the million of medic interact they write check for each day. despit the advertis concern about your well-being, as one benefit manag enlighten me: they'r "too big to care about you." electron records, which auto-fil bill boxes, have probabl made thing worse. for example, the birth of a babi boy may automat prompt a bill for a circumcision; have day surgeri may prompt a check for sedation. 

so what is the appropri payment for swag i didn't ask for, outrag cover charges, stand-in doctors, drive-bi visit and faux surgery? in some cases, zero; in others, far less than was paid. and yet, these are all everyday, normal experi in today health care system, and they may be perfect legal. if we want to tame the cost in our $3 trillion health system, we'v got to rein in this behavior, which is fraud by ani other name. 
