whi donald trump hate your dog 
by frank bruni 
nov. 5, 2019 

reach for verb to describ abu bakr al-baghdadi final moments, presid trump grab hold of "crying," "screaming" and "whimpering." 

reach for nouns, he said that al-baghdadi die "like a dog." 

i wasn't awar that canin expir in a signatur fashion, but trump know best, even if he doesn't know so veri mani words. about a week later, when he took characterist nasti note of beto o'rourk decis to abandon the presidenti race, he said that o'rourk quit "like a dog." 

some simil demand repetition. 

this wasn't one of them. 

but a lack of verbal ingenu never stop trump. and an animus toward a certain anim has long, well, hound him. 

in his boundless unoriginality, he has liken women he dislik to dogs. in his infinit incoherence, he has repeat tweet of peopl be fire like dogs. i person haven't met all that mani gain employ pooches, unless dig hole in the backyard is a profession, and when those excav receiv order to desist, none of them got a pink slip and a referr to career counseling. 

trump did recent make the acquaint — from a distanc — of a dog with a bona fide job. that dog is a belgian malinoi name conan. and conan job, brilliant executed, was to find, chase and corner al-baghdadi. trump call conan "a beauti dog, a talent dog." the new york post put conan pictur on it front page, along with the headlin "zero bark thirty." trump also tweet a photoshop imag in which he drape a medal around conan neck. 

so this malinoi warrant decor while "a dog" get derision? or is it just that everi dog has it day? i use to believ that adag until trump came along. he has had more than 1,000 day in the presidency, even as the white hous goe to the dogs. 

journalist with mani news organ (the washington post, new york magazine, slate and more) have had a field day with trump dog use of "dog" as an all-purpos put-down. when it come to "like a dog," he like a dog with a bone. 

you'r no one until he divin the flea-bitten mongrel within you — and you'v join a dog pound that includ the like of mitt romney, gen. stanley mcchrystal, bill maher, steve bannon, georg will, omarosa manigault newman, my fellow time columnist gail collin and mani more. 

fun doggi factoid cling to him like so much samoy fur. he the first presid in more than a centuri who doesn't have a dog. accord to the chines zodiac, he was born in the year of the dog. accord to ivana trump, he provok growl from her dog, chappy, a poodl who could suss out a peacock. the media nicknam for his first defens secretary, jame mattis, was "mad dog." and from the forehead up, he a dead ringer for a distress pomeranian. 

but no one has definit solv the riddl of what seem like a rabid case of canin contempt. i have my own theories, but first i have the more erudit insight of justin frank, a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst and the author of the book "trump on the couch." 

frank note that trump is "phobic about germs" and no doubt see dog as four-leg germ factories. he probabl also think "dog are stupid becaus they obey," frank said. disobedi is trump prefer posture, at least for himself, although he broke with that to become, in frank words, "putin lap dog." disobedience, that is, and distemper. 

frank rais anoth issu that the presid might well have with dogs: when they'r around, they often steal attention, becom the object of peopl ooh and cooing. trump like the ooh all to himself. 

my own sense? for trump, all relationship are transact and god creatur possess valu onli in accord with their abil to elev and enrich him. his affect for kellyann conway hing on her superhuman power not to break into laughter or spontan combust when she put the most ludicr adulatori spin on his most transpar execr deeds. if border colli perform that trick, he would keep a kennel of them at mar-a-loco. 

his regard for rudi giuliani depend on the hunch henchman open to unscrupul errands. if doberman pinscher could pressur ukrainian offici to investig joe and hunter biden, trump would repurpos camp david as a dog run and turn ivanka pump into chew toys. 

but they can't, just as siberian huski can't hack democrat email — for that, a huski siberian is handier — and golden retriev can't retriev gold. dog are useless to trump, at least by the criteria he care about. 

there no money in most of them, no vote in ani of them, and they can't play golf with him and tell him along the way what a man drive and grace putt he has. that lucki for lindsey graham, who would otherwis be swap out for a labradoodl lickety-split. 

conan pass muster onli by be a proxi for trump own imagin machismo. mayb chappi was mere yappy. like a donald. 
