brexit has arrived. but bori johnson reign is just beginning. 
by richard seymour 
jan. 31, 2020 

london — the moment has arrived. britain is out of the european union. prime minist bori johnson and his "peopl government" — it scarc call itself conserv at this point — has fulfil the promis on which it was elect in decemb and "got brexit done." 

there are difficulti ahead. mr. johnson has promis imposs and contradictori thing on brexit: maximum regulatori freedom where it suit his government, maximum frictionless trade where it suit the british economy. the european union is unlik to give him what he want in the month of negoti to come. 

but by fulfil his pledge, mr. johnson has won enorm good will from nationalist voter across england and wales. outsid the european union, he will also have more scope to chang the british govern role in the economy. this give him a uniqu opportun do what his predecessor could not: build a last popular base for the conserv party. mr. johnson can now take advantag of his big major to overhaul british capitalism, incentiv long-term conserv voter while perman annex chunk of the labour parti histor base. 

already, the dimens of mr. johnson plan are becom clear. he has no intent of run the countri as ani conserv leader sinc margaret thatcher would have: he is not out to roll back the state. instead, he is out to secur the support of working-class voter who hand over to the tori dozen of seat former held by labour. his premiership, set free by brexit, could reshap britain elector map for decades. 

dure the election, mr. johnson campaign as an almost single-issu nationalist, the phrase "get brexit done" fall robot from his lip between everi other stammer. beyond that, much of what he said was convent tory: he promis harsher restrict on immigration, mean an end to free movement from the european union and the expans of the "hostil environment" for migrants. domest repression, the manifesto promised, would also tighten, with a bigger penal system and a greater emphasi on "counter-extremism," which, as home secretari priti patel has indicated, will target part of the left. mr. johnson has also hint at constitut reforms, which would strengthen the execut and weaken judici challenges. he promis an attack on liber norm and legal in the name of nation invigoration. 

tellingly, he distanc himself from the last government. he would end austerity, rais spend on the nation health service, guarante pensions, rais the minimum wage and borrow £100 billion to invest in infrastructure. mani of these promis were grossli exaggerated, but they serv to underlin the point that a johnson administr would be different. and sinc the election, the govern has act to carri out it commitments, pass legisl to guarante n.h.s. spend increas and propos moder improv to worker and renter rights. it has also promis that most of the infrastructur spend will be invest in england depriv northern region — and this week back up the promis by nation the north major rail service. 

if this sound like an incurs into labour territory, it is. mani of the polici are direct taken from labour plans. the push for a larger state reson with a polit ambigu popular memori of the postwar era — a certain nostalgia for the era of big, dynam industri own by the british govern inflect both a version of the left-w polit of the labour parti leader, jeremi corbyn, and a version of brexit sentiment. mr. johnson know that mani of the vote contribut to a conserv major were "lent" by voter who want brexit done. a more interventionist state is a way to shore up a lasting, broad coalition. 

this pragmat raid on enemi turf was first conceiv under mr. johnson predecessor, theresa may. more thought tori knew they had to change. the british state and economi had becom dysfunctional: gape region inequalities, a hous market inaccess to younger workers, weak labor productivity, sluggish invest and veri littl to export. mrs. may advis understood that the conserv had to break with the formula of auster and financi somehow. 

but while she use the rhetor of working-class uplift, she was unabl to back it up with policy. her chancellor, philip hammond, a tradit alli of the banks, was determin to keep auster going. if noth else, he could see no other way to creat a fiscal surplus big enough to soften the impact of brexit. mr. johnson, by contrast, is just enough of an opportunist to see that deliv brexit, in howev self-injur and punit a form, give him both the polit power and the regulatori latitud to do thing differently. 

there is a risk, though, of succumb to mr. johnson own mythmaking. as much as he need working-class conservatives, they have alway existed. and the core tori voter remain the affluent middl class. what more, when it come to public spending, he limit in what he can do by his commit to freez most taxes. in an economi that is alreadi weak and like to be weaker after brexit, he has littl room for serious investment. 

and mr. johnson will face conflict demand from within his own party. the chancellor, sajid javid, has demand 5 percent cut from most govern departments, make plain that the spend spigot are not about to freeli flow. and the prime minist is surround by alli who, far from want a more interventionist state, want to cut tax and slash regul in the interest of a more global competit economy. 

dure the election, mr. johnson was abl to glide over the glare contradict in what he said with a bustl con man charm, but in offic he has to navig them. with a big majority, he can no longer play the outsider. however, the lesson of nationalist leader global is that, in this jitteri era, they don't have to deliv boom success to keep power. from viktor orban in hungari to narendra modi in india, these leader have expand their base by deliv a personalized, charismat form of rule in which they are milit defend of the nation against all comer — be they foreigners, "traitors," liberals, or leftists. 

mr. johnson is not a nationalist by conviction. he is the epitom of the "reckless opportunists" that, as the sociologist aeron davi says, run britain. his vote record in parliament show him to be slight more liber than his party. but his perform over the last few month — dure which he agit against parliament, accus oppon of "collaboration" with europe, and saber-rattl against the court and media — show him to be adept at use the far right template. whenev the contradict in his govern threaten to unravel, he is like to return to these tactics. 

indeed, brexit fit in with that method perfectly. after today, mr. johnson will be abl to continu remind voter that he was abl to overcom the hostil of the liber elit and accomplish his goal. and as negoti proceed, he can gin up hostil against his suppos enemi whenev he doesn't get his way. 

whenev ani politician claim to speak for "the people," someon alway pay the price. migrant are first on the list for mr. johnson. but they will not be the last. 
