
zodiac symbol OF solar worship. 

have shown that the founder of the ancient astrolatri 

accord homag to god sol as lord of evil, under 

the symbol of the serpent, and mark the begin of 

hi reign, as such, by the constel "serpens" place in 

conjunct with the autumn equinox; we will now 

direct attent to the symbol under which he wa worship 

as lord of good, which, correspond to the 

form of the constel in which occur the vernal 

equinox, and which wa chang to correspond to the 

form of the succeed constel as that cardin 

point pass into it, by that process, known in astronomy, 

as the precess of the equinoxes, it explan becom 

essenti to a correct understand of our subject. 

after long observation, aid by the telescope, of 

which they were undoubtedli the origin inventors, the 

ancient astrolog discov that the sun, in make 

hi appar annual revolution, did not return to the same 

point in the heavens, but fell behind that of the preced 

year, at the rate of 50¼ second of a degre annually. At 

thi rate of precession, which modern, calcul ha confirmed, 

it requir 71 2-3 year for the cardin point to 

pass through one degre on the ecliptic, and 2150 year 

through thirti degrees, or one sign of the zodiac. the 

knowledg of thi process afford an exact chronology, 

we are enabled, not onli to determin the origin of these 

symbols, but to approximate, veri nearly, to the respect 

date of their adoption. 

the sphinx. 

from the teach of astronomi we learn that the 

summer solstic is now occupi the point between the 

sign of tauru and gemini, from which we know that 

that cardin point ha pass through three whole sign 

sinc it wa between the sign of leo and virgo, and we 

have but to multipli 2,150 by 3 to determin that it ha 

been about 6,450 year ago. hence, the tourist to the 

nile valley, when viewing, near the base of old cheops, 

the great egyptian pyramid, a coloss head and bust of 

a woman, carv in stone, and learn that it is attach 

to a body, in the form of a lion in a crouch attitud 146 

feet long, hidden beneath the shift sand of the libyan 

desert; if possess of the knowledg of the precess 

of the equinoxes, he will be enabl to solv the 

riddl of the sphinx by recogn in that grotesqu 

monument the mid-summ symbol of solar worship, 

when the summer solstic wa between the sign of leo 

and virgo. 

the dragon. 

when the summer solstic wa between the sign 

of leo and virgo, the winter solstic wa between those 

of aquariu and pisces, and the figur compos of the 

bodi of a man with the tail of a fish becam the mid-wint 

symbol of solar worship. such wa the form of thi 

symbol to which the ancient phoenician paid homag 

to the lord under the name of dagon. 

the bull. 

At the same time the summer solstic enter the 

sign of leo, the vernal equinox enter that of taurus, 

and the bull becom the spring symbol of solar worship—th 

lord wa design in the ancient allegori as the 

bull of god which taketh away the sin of the world; which, 

shorn of it allegor sense, signifi the sun in taurus, 

or sun of spring, which taketh away the evil of winter. 

such is the purport of hieroglyph inscript upon 

papyru roll found in egypt, and engrav upon obelisk 

erect in the nile valley, one of which ha been recent 

brought to the citi of new york and set up in central 

park. In the east indi thi symbol wa repres by 

the figur of a bull with the solar disk between hi horns; 

and the egyptians, who were of hindoo origin, perpetu 

it in their "apis," it wa reproduc in the golden calf 

of the ancient israelites. the assyrian repres thi 

symbol by the figur of a wing bull with the face and 

beard of a man; the phoenicians, in their "baal," by the 

figur of a man with a bull' head and horns; and the 

small silver bull' head with golden horns, recent discov 

by dr. schliemann in the ruin of mycenae, were 

jewel worn by the women of that ancient city, when the 

vernal equinox wa in the sign of taurus. 

the ram. 

By deduct 2,150 year from 6,450, we determin 

that about 4,300 years; ago the vernal equinox enter the 

sign of aries, and the spring symbol of solar worship, 

chang from the bull to the ram, wa repres by 

ram-head figures, two of which, found in egypt, are on 

exhibit in the british museum. then the text which 

read the bull of god, wa chang to the ram of god 

which taketh away the sin of the world. 

the lamb. 

ultim attach a meek and lowli disposit 

to the imaginari incarn of the mythic geniu of 

the sun, the symbol of the ram wa chang to that of the 

lamb, and the text in the allegories, which read the ram of 

god, wa chang to read "the lamb of god which 

taketh away the sin of the world," john i, 29. the explan 

we have given rel to the zodiac symbol 

of solar worship make the assur doubli sure that the 

origin of the new testament were compos when the 

vernal equinox wa in the sign of aries, as will be 

shown hereafter. have adopt the symbol of the 

lamb, it wa repres by sever form of what is 

known as agnu dei, or lamb of god, one of which wa 

in the form of a bleed lamb with a vase attach into 

which blood is flowing, which origin in refer to 

the shed of blood as a vicari aton for sin. 

but the most comprehens form of thi symbol in it 

astronom signification, wa repres by the 

figur of a lamb in a stand attitude, support the 

circl of the zodiac, divid into quarter to denot the 

seasons. At each of the cardin point there wa a small 

cross, and the lamb held in it uplift fore-foot a larger 

cross, the long arm of which wa made to cut the celesti 

equat at the angl of 23½ degrees, the true angl of 

obliqu of the ecliptic. thi symbol is still retain in 

the cathol church. 

the fish. 

By deduct 2,150 year from 4,300 we determin 

that about 2,150 year ago the vernal equinox enter 

the sign of pisces; and although the origin version of the 

new testament wa found upon the symbol of the lamb, 

it is a histor fact that for centuri after the begin 

of our era, the christian paid homag to the lord under 

the symbol of the fish; but ultim go into desuetude, 

the lamb wa retain as the distinguish symbol 

of the christian religion until the year 680, at which date 

anoth wa substituted, as will be shown under our next 

heading. 
