the sacr number 7 and 12. 

In refer to the planets, and the sign of the 

zodiac, the number seven and twelv were recogn 

as sacr by the ancient astrologers, and dedic 

were made to them in all kind and sort of forms. In 

the allegories, the genii of the planet were design 

as spirit or messeng to the suprem deity, imaginarili 

enthron abov the firmament, which we find describ 

in revel iv. 5, as "seven lamp of fire burn 

befor the throne, which are the seven spirit of god;" 

and which were repres by light burn in seven 

branch candlestick set befor the altar in the temples; 

the central light for the sun; the moon, mercuri and 

venu on one side; and mars, jupit and saturn on the 

other. the seven branch candlestick seen in all 

cathol churches, and in some protest ones, are intend 

to repres the same planetari system. 

among the numer dedic to the genii of the 

planet we mention the seven day of the week, the seven 

stori of the tower of babylon, the seven gate of thebes, 

the seven pipe flute of pan, the seven string lyre of 

apollo, the seven book of fate, the book of seven seals, 

the seven cast into which the egyptian and east indian 

were divided, and the jubile of seven time seven 

years. among the dedic to the twelv sign we 

mention the twelv month of the year, the grand cycl 

of 12,000 years, the twelv altar of james, the twelv 

labor of hercules, the twelv divis of the egyptian 

labyrinth, the twelv shield of mars, the twelv preciou 

stones, rang in three to denot the seasons, in the 

breastplat of high priest, the twelv foundat of the 

sacr city, refer to in the book of revelation, the 

twelv son of jacob, the twelv tribe of israel, and the 

twelv disciples. In the book of revel alon the 

number 7 is repeat twenty-four times, and the number 

12 fourteen times. 

the twelv thousand year cycle. 

In determin the durat of the period within 

which were to occur the event taught in the doctrin of 

the exoter creed, the ancient astrolog dedic 

a thousand year to each of the sign of the zodiac, and 

thu inaugur the cycl of twelv thousand years, 

taught that, at it conclusion, the heaven and the earth, 

which they believ to be compos of the indestruct 

element of fire, air, earth and water, would, through the 

agenc of the first of these, be reduc to chaos, as a 

preliminari to the reorgan of a new heaven and a 

new earth at the begin of the succeed cycle. such 

wa the origin of the grand cycl of the ancient astrolatry, 

and it must be born in mind that it author made it 

conclus to correspond in time and circumst to the 

doctrin relat to the final of the plan of redemption. 

the ancient triad. 

after conceiv the idea of a primev chaos, constitut 

of four indestruct element of which fire wa 

the lead one, the orient astrolog began to indulg 

in specul rel to the agenc which were engag 

in it organization. have no knowledg of the 

forc inher in nature, they imput thi work to three 

intelligences, which, embodi the all in all, they personifi 

by the figur of a man with three heads, and to 

thi triniti gave the name of brahma, vishnu and siva. 

such a figure, carv in stone, may be seen in the island 

cave of elephanta, near bombay, india, and is popularli 

believ to repres the creator, preserv and destroyer; 

but, in determin their true signification, we 

must be govern by the ancient teach that "all 

thing were made by one god-head with three names, and 

thi god is all things." henc the conclus is irresist 

that the first person repres neither the creator 

nor organ of chaos, but chao itself; the second person, 

it organ and governor; and the third person, the 

agent in natur which impress all her part with life and 

motion; the latter be the imaginari great soul or 

spirit inculc in the esoter philosophy. In support 

of thi opinion it will be found that the egyptian triad of 

father, son and spirit is virtual the same we have assign 

to it orient prototype. thu we see that to 

the ancient astrolatri christendom is indebt for the 

triniti of 

"god the father, god the son, 

god the spirit—thre in one." 

but, have ascrib suprem intellig or reason 

to it second person, under the name of the logos, or 

word, and design it third person as the holi ghost, 

the ancient triad wa usual formul as the father, 

the word and the holi ghost, as may be seen by refer 

to the text in the allegori which we find record 

in I john v. 7, which read that "there are three that 

bear record in heaven, the father, the word and the 

holi ghost, and these three are one." 

consid in some form of astrolatri as too 

sacr to attach a name to the triun deity, he wa call 

"the one," and we find him thu design in the 4th 

chapter of revelation, where, like zeu and jupiter, of the 

grecian and roman mythologies, he is repres as 

seat abov the firmament, upon a throne from which 

"proceed lightn and thunderings," and to whom 

all, the subordin divin were made to pay homage. 

As the hurler of thunderbolt he wa call "the thunderer," 

and as the open of the window of heaven, 

when it rained, he wa design "jupit pluvius." 

such wa the ancient triad made to say of himself, in an 

inscript found in the ruin of the templ at sai in 

egypt, "I am all that ha been, all that is, and all that 

shall be, and no mortal ha lift yet the veil that cover 

me;" and such wa the triuniti refer to as the god 

univers by pliny, the roman philosoph and naturalist, 

who, flourish in the first centuri of the christian era, 

wrote that he is "an infinit god which ha never been 

created, and which shall never come to an end. To look 

for someth els beyond it is useless labor for man and 

out of hi reach. behold that truli sacr being, etern 

and immense, which includ within itself everything; it 

is all in all, or rather itself is all. It is the work of 

nature, and itself is nature." 

thu we see that, although inculc homag to a 

multitud of subordin divinities, the ancient astrolatri 

wa onli an appar polytheism; it enlighten votaries, 

recogn the dogma of the uniti of god, were in 

realiti monotheists, pay suprem ador to the 

mythic geniu of the sun, to whom we will now direct 

attention. 
