
andrew lang. 

guy manner 

OR 

the astrolog 

chapter I 

He could not deni that, look round upon the dreari region, 

and see noth but bleak field and nake trees, hill 

obscur by fogs, and flat cover with inundations, he did 

for some time suffer melancholi to prevail upon him, and 

wish himself again safe at home. 

--’travel of will. marvel,’ idler, no. 49. 

It wa in the begin of the month of novemb 17--when a young english 

gentleman, who had just left the univers of oxford, made use of the 

liberti afford him to visit some part of the north of england; and 

curios extend hi tour into the adjac frontier of the sister 

country. He had visited, on the day that open our history, some monast 

ruin in the counti of dumfries, and spent much of the day in make 

draw of them from differ points, so that, on mount hi hors to 

resum hi journey, the brief and gloomi twilight of the season had 

alreadi commenced. hi way lay through a wide tract of black moss, 

extend for mile on each side and befor him. littl emin aros 

like island on it surface, bear here and there patch of corn, which 

even at thi season wa green, and sometim a hut or farm-house, shade 

by a willow or two and surround by larg elder-bushes. these insul 

dwell commun with each other by wind passag through the 

moss, impass by ani but the nativ themselves. the public road, 

however, wa toler well made and safe, so that the prospect of be 

benight brought with it no real danger. still it is uncomfort to 

travel alon and in the dark through an unknown country; and there are few 

ordinari occas upon which fanci fret herself so much as in a 

situat like that of mannering. 

As the light grew faint and more faint, and the morass appear blacker 

and blacker, our travel question more close each chanc passeng 

on hi distanc from the villag of kippletringan, where he propos to 

quarter for the night. hi queri were usual answer by a 

counter-challeng respect the place from whenc he came. while 

suffici daylight remain to show the dress and appear of a 

gentleman, these cross interrogatori were usual put in the form of a 

case supposed, as, ‘ye’ll hae been at the auld abbey o’ halycross, sir? 

there’ moni english gentlemen gang to see that.’--or, ‘your honour will 

becom frae the hous o’ pouderloupat?’ but when the voic of the querist 

alon wa distinguishable, the respons usual was, ‘where are ye come 

frae at sic a time o’ night as the like o’ this?’--or, ‘ye’ll no be o’ 

thi country, freend?’ the answers, when obtained, were neither veri 

reconcil to each other nor accur in the inform which they 

afforded. kippletringan wa distant at first ‘a gey bit’; then the ‘gey 

bit’ wa more accur describ as ‘ablin three mile’; then the ‘three 

mile’ diminish into ‘like a mile and a bittock’; then extend 

themselv into ‘four mile or thereawa’; and, lastly, a femal voice, 

have hush a wail infant which the spokeswoman carri in her arms, 

assur guy mannering, ‘it wa a weari lang gate yet to kippletringan, and 

unco heavi road for foot passengers.’ the poor hack upon which manner 

wa mount wa probabl of opinion that it suit him as ill as the 

femal respondent; for he began to flag veri much, answer each 

applic of the spur with a groan, and stumbl at everi stone (and 

they were not few) which lay in hi road. 

manner now grew impatient. He wa occasion betray into a 

deceit hope that the end of hi journey wa near by the apparit of a 

twinkl light or two; but, as he came up, he wa disappoint to find 

that the gleam proceed from some of those farm-hous which 

occasion ornament the surfac of the extens bog. At length, to 

complet hi perplexity, he arriv at a place where the road divid into 

two. If there had been light to consult the relic of a finger-post which 

stood there, it would have been of littl avail, as, accord to the good 

custom of north britain, the inscript had been defac shortli after 

it erection. our adventur wa therefor compelled, like a knight-err 

of old, to trust to the sagac of hi horse, which, without ani demur, 

chose the left-hand path, and seem to proceed at a somewhat liveli 

pace than before, afford therebi a hope that he knew he wa draw 

near to hi quarter for the evening. thi hope, however, wa not speedili 

accomplished, and mannering, whose impati made everi furlong seem 

three, began to think that kippletringan wa actual retreat befor 

him in proport to hi advance. 

It wa now veri cloudy, although the star from time to time shed a 

twinkl and uncertain light. hitherto noth had broken the silenc 

around him but the deep cri of the bog-blitter, or bull-of-the-bog, a 

larg speci of bittern, and the sigh of the wind as it pass along the 

dreari morass. To these wa now join the distant roar of the ocean, 

toward which the travel seem to be fast approaching. thi wa no 

circumst to make hi mind easy. mani of the road in that countri lay 

along the sea-beach, and were liabl to be flood by the tides, which 

rise with great height, and advanc with extrem rapidity. other were 

intersect with creek and small inlets, which it wa onli safe to pass 

at particular time of the tide. neither circumst would have suit a 

dark night, a fatigu horse, and a travel ignor of hi road. 

manner resolved, therefore, definit to halt for the night at the 

first inhabit place, howev poor, he might chanc to reach, unless he 

could procur a guid to thi unlucki villag of kippletringan. 

A miser hut gave him an opportun to execut hi purpose. He found 

out the door with no small difficulty, and for some time knock without 

produc ani other answer than a duet between a femal and a cur-dog, the 

latter yelp as if he would have bark hi heart out, the other 

scream in chorus. By degre the human tone predominated; but the 

angri bark of the cur be at the instant chang into a howl, it is 

probabl someth more than fair strength of lung had contribut to the 

ascendency. 

‘sorrow be in your thrappl then!’ these were the first articul words, 

‘will ye no let me hear what the man wants, wi’ your yaffing?’ 

‘am I far from kippletringan, good dame?’ 

‘frae kippletringan!!!’ in an exalt tone of wonder, which we can but 

faintli express by three point of admiration. ‘ow, man! ye should hae 

hadden eassel to kippletringan; ye maun gae back as far as the whaap, and 

baud the whaap till ye come to ballenloan, and then--’ 

‘thi will never do, good dame! my hors is almost quit knock up; can 

you not give me a night’ lodgings?’ 

‘troth can I no; I am a lone woman, for jame he’ awa to drumshourloch 

fair with the year-aulds, and I daurna for my life open the door to oni o’ 

your gang-there-out sort o’ bodies.’ 

‘but what must I do then, good dame? for I can’t sleep here upon the road 

all night.’ 

‘troth, I kenna, unless ye like to gae down and speer for quarter at the 

place. i’s warrant they’ll tak ye in, whether ye be gentl or semple.’ 

‘simpl enough, to be wander here at such a time of night,’ thought 

mannering, who wa ignor of the mean of the phrase; ‘but how shall I 

get to the place, as you call it?’ 

‘ye maun baud wessel by the end o’ the loan, and take tent o’ the 

jaw-hole.’ 

‘o, if ye get to eassel and wessel again, I am undone! Is there nobodi 

that could guid me to thi place? I will pay him handsomely.’ 

the word pay oper like magic. ‘jock, ye villain,’ exclaim the voic 

from the interior, ‘are ye lie rout there, and a young gentleman 

seek the way to the place? get up, ye faus loon, and show him the way 

down the muckl loaning. he’ll show you the way, sir, and i’s warrant 

ye’ll be weel put up; for they never turn awa naebodi frae the door; and 

ye ‘ll be come in the canni moment, i’m thinking, for the laird’ 

servant--that’ no to say hi body-servant, but the helper like--rad 

express by thi e’en to fetch the houdie, and he just staid the drink 

o’ twa pint o’ tippenni to tell us how my leddi wa ta’en wi’ her pains.’ 

‘perhaps,’ said mannering, ‘at such a time a stranger’ arriv might be 

inconvenient?’ 

‘hout, na, ye needna be blate about that; their hous is muckl eneugh, 

and deck time’ aye canti time.’ 

By thi time jock had found hi way into all the intricaci of a tatter 

doublet and more tatter pair of breeches, and salli forth, a great 

white-headed, bare-legged, lubberli boy of twelv year old, so exhibit 

by the glimps of a rush-light which hi half-nak mother held in such a 

manner as to get a peep at the stranger without greatli expos herself 

to view in return. jock move on westward by the end of the house, lead 

mannering’ hors by the bridle, and pilot with some dexter along 

the littl path which border the formid jaw-hole, whose vicin the 

stranger wa made sensibl of by mean of more organ than one. hi guid 

then drag the weari hack along a broken and stoni cart-track, next over 

a plough field, then broke down a slap, as he call it, in a dryston 

fence, and lug the unresist anim through the breach, about a rood 

of the simpl masonri give way in the splutter with which he passed. 

finally, he led the way through a wicket into someth which had still 

the air of an avenue, though mani of the tree were felled. the roar of 

the ocean wa now near and full, and the moon, which began to make her 

appearance, gleam on a turret and appar a ruin mansion of 

consider extent. manner fix hi eye upon it with a disconsol 

sensation. 
