

chapter II 

come me crank in, 

and cut me from the best of all my land 

A huge half-moon, a monstrou cantle, out 

henri iv, part 1. 

the compani in the parlour at ellangowan consist of the laird and a sort 

of person who might be the villag schoolmaster, or perhap the minister’ 

assistant; hi appear wa too shabbi to indic the minister, 

consid he wa on a visit to the laird. 

the laird himself wa one of those second-r sort of person that are to 

be found frequent in rural situations. field ha describ one class 

as fera consumer nati; but the love of field-sport indic a certain 

activ of mind, which had forsaken mr. bertram, if ever he possess it. 

A good-humour listless of counten form the onli remark 

express of hi features, although they were rather handsom than 

otherwise. In fact, hi physiognomi indic the inan of charact 

which pervad hi life. I will give the reader some insight into hi 

state and convers befor he ha finish a long lectur to manner 

upon the proprieti and comfort of wrap hi stirrup-iron round with a 

wisp of straw when he had occas to ride in a chill evening. 

godfrey bertram of ellangowan succeed to a long pedigre and a short 

rent-roll, like mani laird of that period. hi list of forefath 

ascend so high that they were lost in the barbar age of galwegian 

independence, so that hi genealog tree, besid the christian and 

crusad name of godfreys, and gilberts, and dennises, and roland 

without end, bore heathen fruit of yet darker ages--arths, and knarths, 

and donagilds, and hanlons. In truth, they had been formerli the stormi 

chief of a desert but extens domain, and the head of a numer tribe 

call mac-dingawaie, though they afterward adopt the norman surnam of 

bertram. they had made war, rais rebellions, been defeated, beheaded, 

and hanged, as becam a famili of importance, for mani centuries. but they 

had gradual lost ground in the world, and, from be themselv the 

head of treason and traitor conspiracies, the bertrams, or 

mac-dingawaies, of ellangowan had sunk into subordin accomplices. their 

most fatal exhibit in thi capac took place in the seventeenth 

century, when the foul fiend possess them with a spirit of 

contradiction, which uniformli involv them in controversi with the 

rule powers. they revers the conduct of the celebr vicar of bray, 

and adher as tenaci to the weaker side as that worthi divin to the 

stronger. and truly, like him, they had their reward. 

enlarg 

allan bertram of ellangowan, who flourish tempor caroli primi, was, 

say my authority, sir robert douglas, in hi scottish baronag (see the 

titl ‘ellangowan’), ‘a steadi loyalist, and full of zeal for the caus of 

hi sacr majesty, in which he unit with the great marqui of montros 

and other truli zealou and honour patriots, and sustain great 

loss in that behalf. He had the honour of knighthood confer upon him 

by hi most sacr majesty, and wa sequestr as a malign by the 

parliament, 1642, and afterward as a resolution in the year 1648.’ 

these two cross-grain epithet of malign and resolution cost poor 

sir allan one half of the famili estate. hi son denni bertram marri a 

daughter of an emin fanat who had a seat in the council of state, and 

save by that union the remaind of the famili property. but, as ill 

chanc would have it, he becam enamour of the lady’ principl as well 

as of her charms, and my author give him thi character: ‘he wa a man of 

emin part and resolution, for which reason he wa chosen by the 

western counti one of the committe of noblemen and gentlemen to report 

their grief to the privi council of charl ii. anent the come in of 

the highland host in 1678.’ for undertak thi patriot task he 

underw a fine, to pay which he wa oblig to mortgag half of the 

remain moieti of hi patern property. thi loss he might have 

recov by dint of sever economy, but on the break out of argyle’ 

rebellion denni bertram wa again suspect by government, apprehended, 

sent to dunnotar castl on the coast of the mearns, and there broke hi 

neck in an attempt to escap from a subterranean habit call the 

whigs’ vault, in which he wa confin with some eighti of the same 

persuasion. the appriz therefor (a the holder of a mortgag wa then 

called) enter upon possession, and, in the languag of hotspur, ‘came me 

crank in,’ and cut the famili out of anoth monstrou cantl of their 

remain property. 

donoho bertram, with somewhat of an irish name and somewhat of an irish 

temper, succeed to the diminish properti of ellangowan. He turn out 

of door the reverend aaron macbriar, hi mother’ chaplain (it is said 

they quarrel about the good grace of a milkmaid); drank himself daili 

drunk with brim health to the king, council, and bishops; held orgi 

with the laird of lagg, theophilu oglethorpe, and sir jame turner; and 

lastly, took hi grey geld and join claver at killiecrankie. At the 

skirmish of dunkeld, 1689, he wa shot dead by a cameronian with a silver 

button (be suppos to have proof from the evil one against lead and 

steel), and hi grave is still call the wick laird’ lair. 

hi son lewi had more prudenc than seem usual to have belong to the 

family. He nurs what properti wa yet left to him; for donohoe’ 

excesses, as well as fine and forfeitures, had made anoth inroad upon 

the estate. and although even he did not escap the fatal which induc 

the laird of ellangowan to interfer with politics, he had yet the 

prudence, ere he went out with lord kenmor in 1715, to convey hi estat 

to trustees, in order to parri pain and penalti in case the earl of mar 

could not put down the protest succession. but scylla and charybdis--a 

word to the wise--h onli save hi estat at expens of a lawsuit, which 

again subdivid the famili property. He was, however, a man of 

resolution. He sold part of the lands, evacu the old cattle, where the 

famili live in their decad as a mous (said an old farmer) live 

under a firlot. pull down part of these vener ruins, he built with 

the stone a narrow hous of three stori high, with a front like a 

grenadier’ cap, have in the veri centr a round window like the singl 

eye of a cyclops, two window on each side, and a door in the middle, 

lead to a parlour and withdrawing-room full of all manner of cross 

lights. 

thi wa the new place of ellangowan, in which we left our hero, better 

amus perhap than our readers, and to thi lewi bertram retreated, full 

of project for re-establish the prosper of hi family. He took some 

land into hi own hand, rent some from neighbour proprietors, bought 

and sold highland cattl and cheviot sheep, rode to fair and trysts, 

fought hard bargains, and held necess at the staff’ end as well as he 

might. but what he gain in purs he lost in honour, for such 

agricultur and commerci negoti were veri ill look upon by hi 

brother lairds, who mind noth but cock-fighting, hunting, coursing, 

and horse-racing, with now and then the altern of a desper duel. 

the occup which he follow encroached, in their opinion, upon the 

articl of ellangowan’ gentry, and he found it necessari gradual to 

estrang himself from their society, and sink into what wa then a veri 

ambigu character, a gentleman farmer. In the midst of hi scheme death 

claim hi tribute, and the scanti remain of a larg properti descend 

upon godfrey bertram, the present possessor, hi onli son. 

the danger of the father’ specul wa soon seen. depriv of laird 

lewis’ person and activ superintendence, all hi undertak 

miscarried, and becam either abort or perilous. without a singl spark 

of energi to meet or repel these misfortunes, godfrey put hi faith in the 

activ of another. He kept neither hunter nor hounds, nor ani other 

southern preliminari to ruin; but, as ha been observ of hi 

countrymen, he kept a man of business, who answer the purpos equal 

well. under thi gentleman’ supervis small debt grew into large, 

interest were accumul upon capitals, movabl bond becam heritable, 

and law charg were heap upon all; though ellangowan possess so 

littl the spirit of a litig that he wa on two occas charg to 

make payment of the expens of a long lawsuit, although he had never 

befor heard that he had such case in court. meanwhil hi neighbour 

predict hi final ruin. those of the higher rank, with some malignity, 

account him alreadi a degrad brother. the lower classes, see 

noth enviabl in hi situation, mark hi embarrass with more 

compassion. He wa even a kind of favourit with them, and upon the 

divis of a common, or the hold of a black-fish or poach court, 

or ani similar occas when they conceiv themselv oppress by the 

gentry, they were in the habit of say to each other, ‘ah, if 

ellangowan, honest man, had hi ain that hi forbear had afor him, he 

wadna see the puir folk trodden down thi gait.’ meanwhile, thi gener 

good opinion never prevent their take advantag of him on all possibl 

occasions, turn their cattl into hi parks, steal hi wood, 

shoot hi game, and so forth, ‘for the laird, honest man, he’ll never 

find it; he never mind what a puir bodi does.’ pedlars, gipsies, tinkers, 

vagrant of all descriptions, roost about hi outhouses, or harbour in 

hi kitchen; and the laird, who wa ‘nae nice body,’ but a thorough 

gossip, like most weak men, found recompens for hi hospit in the 

pleasur of question them on the news of the countri side. 

A circumst arrest ellangowan’ progress on the highroad to ruin. 

thi wa hi marriag with a ladi who had a portion of about four thousand 

pounds. nobodi in the neighbourhood could conceiv whi she marri him and 

endow him with her wealth, unless becaus he had a tall, handsom 

figure, a good set of features, a genteel address, and the most perfect 

good-humour. It might be some addit consideration, that she wa 

herself at the reflect age of twenty-eight, and had no near relat 

to control her action or choice. 

It wa in thi lady’ behalf (confin for the first time after her 

marriage) that the speedi and activ express, mention by the old dame of 

the cottage, had been despatch to kippletringan on the night of 

mannering’ arrival. 

though we have said so much of the laird himself, it still remain that we 

make the reader in some degre acquaint with hi companion. thi wa 

abel sampson, commonli called, from hi occup as a pedagogue, domini 

sampson. He wa of low birth, but have evinced, even from hi cradle, an 

uncommon serious of disposition, the poor parent were encourag to 

hope that their bairn, as they express it, ‘might wag hi pow in a 

pulpit yet.’ with an ambiti view to such a consummation, they pinch 

and pared, rose earli and lay down late, ate dri bread and drank cold 

water, to secur to abel the mean of learning. meantime, hi tall, 

ungainli figure, hi taciturn and grave manners, and some grotesqu habit 

of swing hi limb and screw hi visag while recit hi task, 

made poor sampson the ridicul of all hi school-companions. the same 

qualiti secur him at glasgow colleg a plenti share of the same 

sort of notice. half the youth mob of ‘the yards’ use to assembl 

regularli to see domini sampson (for he had alreadi attain that 

honour title) descend the stair from the greek class, with hi 

lexicon under hi arm, hi long misshapen leg sprawl abroad, and 

keep awkward time to the play of hi immens shoulder-blades, as they 

rais and depress the loos and threadbar black coat which wa hi 

constant and onli wear. when he spoke, the effort of the professor 

(professor of divin though he was) were total inadequ to restrain 

the inextinguish laughter of the students, and sometim even to 

repress hi own. the long, sallow visage, the goggl eyes, the huge 

under-jaw, which appear not to open and shut by an act of volition, but 

to be drop and hoist up again by some complic machineri within 

the inner man, the harsh and disson voice, and the screech-owl note to 

which it wa exalt when he wa exhort to pronounc more 

distinctly,--al ad fresh subject for mirth to the torn cloak and 

shatter shoe, which have afford legitim subject of railleri 

against the poor scholar from juvenal’ time downward. It wa never known 

that sampson either exhibit irrit at thi ill usage, or made the 

least attempt to retort upon hi tormentors. He slunk from colleg by the 

most secret path he could discover, and plung himself into hi 

miser lodging, where, for eighteenp a week, he wa allow the 

benefit of a straw mattress, and, if hi landladi wa in good humour, 

permiss to studi hi task by her fire. under all these disadvantages, 

he obtain a compet knowledg of greek and latin, and some 

acquaint with the sciences. 




