

chapter iii 

Do not the hist’ri of all age 

relat miracul presag 

Of strang turn in the world’ affairs, 

foreseen by astrologers, soothsayers, 

chaldeans, learn genethliacs, 

and some that have writ almanacks? 

hudibras. 

the circumst of the landladi were plead to mannering, first, as an 

apolog for her not appear to welcom her guest, and for those 

defici in hi entertain which her attent might have supplied, 

and then as an excus for press an extra bottl of good wine. ‘I cannot 

weel sleep,’ said the laird, with the anxiou feel of a father in such 

a predicament, ‘till I hear she’ gotten ower with it; and if you, sir, 

are not veri sleepery, and would do me and the domini the honour to sit 

up wi’ us, I am sure we shall not detain you veri late. lucki howatson is 

veri expeditious. there wa anc a lass that wa in that way; she did not 

live far from hereabouts--y needna shake your head and groan, dominie; I 

am sure the kirk due were a’ weel paid, and what can man do mair?--it wa 

laid till her ere she had a sark ower her head; and the man that she sinc 

wad doe not think her a pin the waur for the misfortune. they live, 

mr. mannering, by the shoresid at annan, and a mair decent, orderli 

couple, with six as fine bairn as ye would wish to see plash in a 

saltwat dub; and littl curli godfrey--that’ the eldest, the come o’ 

will, as I may say--he’ on board an excis yacht. I hae a cousin at the 

board of excise; that’ commission bertram; he got hi commissionership 

in the great contest for the county, that ye must have heard of, for it 

wa appeal to the hous of commons. now I should have vote there for 

the laird of balruddery; but ye see my father wa a jacobite, and out with 

kenmore, so he never took the oaths; and I ken not weel how it was, but 

all that I could do and say, they keepit me off the roll, though my agent, 

that had a vote upon my estate, rank as a good vote for auld sir thoma 

kittlecourt. but, to return to what I wa saying, lucki howatson is veri 

expeditious, for thi lass--’ 

here the desultori and long-wind narr of the laird wa interrupt 

by the voic of some one ascend the stair from the kitchen story, and 

sing at full pitch of voice. the high note were too shrill for a man, 

the low seem too deep for a woman. the words, as far as manner could 

distinguish them, seem to run thus:-- 

canni moment, lucki fit! 

Is the ladi lighter yet? 

Be it lad, or be it lass, 

sign wi’ cross and sain wi’ mass. 

‘it’ meg merrilies, the gipsy, as sure as I am a sinner,’ said mr. 

bertram. the domini groan deeply, uncross hi legs, drew in the huge 

splay foot which hi former postur had extended, place it 

perpendicularly, and stretch the other limb over it instead, puf out 

between while huge volum of tobacco smoke. ‘what need ye groan, 

dominie? I am sure meg’ sang do nae ill.’ 

‘nor good neither,’ answer domini sampson, in a voic whose untun 

harsh correspond with the awkward of hi figure. they were the 

first word which manner had heard him speak; and as he had been 

watch with some curios when thi eating, drinking, moving, and 

smoke automaton would perform the part of speaking, he wa a good deal 

divert with the harsh timber tone which issu from him. but at thi 

moment the door opened, and meg merrili entered. 

her appear made manner start. she wa full six feet high, wore a 

man’ great-coat over the rest of her dress, had in her hand a goodli 

sloethorn cudgel, and in all point of equipment, except her petticoats, 

seem rather masculin than feminine. her dark elf-lock shot out like 

the snake of the gorgon between an old-fashion bonnet call a 

bongrace, heighten the singular effect of her strong and weather-beaten 

features, which they partli shadowed, while her eye had a wild roll that 

indic someth like real or affect insanity. 

‘aweel, ellangowan,’ she said, ‘wad it no hae been a bonni thing, an the 

leddi had been brought to bed, and me at the fair o’ drumshourloch, no 

kenning, nor dream a word about it? wha wa to hae keepit awa the 

worriecows, I trow? ay, and the elv and gyre-carl frae the bonni 

bairn, grace be wi’ it? ay, or said saint colme’ charm for it sake, the 

dear?’ and without wait an answer she began to sing-- 

trefoil, vervain, john’s-wort, dill, 

hinder witch of their 

will, weel is them, that weel may 

fast upon saint andrew’ day. 

saint bride and her brat, 

saint colm and hi cat, 

saint michael and hi spear, 

keep the hous frae reif and wear. 

thi charm she sung to a wild tune, in a high and shrill voice, and, 

cut three caper with such strength and agil as almost to touch the 

roof of the room, concluded, ‘and now, laird, will ye no order me a tass 

o’ brandy?’ 

‘that you shall have, meg. sit down yont there at the door and tell us 

what news ye have heard at the fair o’ drumshourloch.’ 

‘troth, laird, and there wa muckl want o’ you, and the like o’ you; for 

there wa a whin bonni lass there, forby mysell, and deil ane to gie 

them hansels.’ 

‘weel, meg, and how moni gipsi were sent to the tolbooth?’ 

‘troth, but three, laird, for there were nae mair in the fair, bye mysell, 

as I said before, and I e’en gae them leg-bail, for there’ nae eas in 

deal wi’ quarrelsom fowk. and there’ dunbog ha warn the red rotten 

and john young aff hi grunds--black be hi cast! he’ nae gentleman, nor 

drap’ bluid o’ gentleman, wad grudg twa gangrel puir bodi the shelter 

o’ a wast house, and the thristl by the roadsid for a bit cuddy, and 

the bit o’ rotten birk to boil their drap parritch wi’. weel, there’ ane 

abun a’; but we’ll see if the red cock craw not in hi bonni barn-yard 

ae morn befor day-dawing.’ 

‘hush! meg, hush! hush! that’ not safe talk.’ 

‘what doe she mean?’ said manner to sampson, in an undertone. 

‘fire-raising,’ answer the lacon dominie. 

‘who, or what is she, in the name of wonder?’ 

‘harlot, thief, witch, and gipsy,’ answer sampson again. 

‘O troth, laird,’ continu meg, dure thi by-talk, ‘it’ but to the 

like o’ you ane can open their heart; ye see, they say dunbog is nae mair 

a gentleman than the blunker that’ biggit the bonni hous down in the 

howm. but the like o’ you, laird, that’ a real gentleman for sae moni 

hundr years, and never hund puir fowk aff your grund as if they were 

mad tykes, nane o’ our fowk wad stir your gear if ye had as moni capon as 

there’ leav on the trysting-tree. and now some o’ ye maun lay down your 

watch, and tell me the veri minut o’ the hour the wean’ born, an i’ll 

spae it fortune.’ 

‘ay, but, meg, we shall not want your assistance, for here’ a student 

from oxford that ken much better than you how to spae it fortune; he 

doe it by the stars.’ 

‘certainly, sir,’ said mannering, enter into the simpl humour of hi 

landlord, ‘I will calcul hi nativ accord to the rule of the 

“triplicities,” as recommend by pythagoras, hippocrates, diocles, and 

avicenna. Or I will begin ab hora questionis, as haly, messahala, 

ganwehis, and guido bonatu have recommended.’ 

one of sampson’ great recommend to the favour of mr. bertram was, 

that he never detect the most gross attempt at imposition, so that the 

laird, whose humbl effort at jocular were chiefli confin to what 

were then call bite and bams, sinc denomin hoax and quizzes, had 

the fairest possibl subject of wit in the unsuspect dominie. It is 

true, he never laughed, or join in the laugh which hi own simplic 

afforded--nay, it is said, he never laugh but onc in hi life, and on 

that memor occas hi landladi miscarried, partli through surpris 

at the event itself, and partli from terror at the hideou grimac which 

attend thi unusu cachinnation. the onli effect which the discoveri of 

such imposit produc upon thi saturnin personag was, to extort an 

ejacul of ‘prodigious!’ or ‘veri facetious!’ pronounc syllabically, 

but without move a muscl of hi own countenance. 

On the present occasion, he turn a gaunt and ghastli stare upon the 

youth astrologer, and seem to doubt if he had rightli understood hi 

answer to hi patron. 

‘I am afraid, sir,’ said mannering, turn toward him, ‘you may be one 

of those unhappi person who, their dim eye be unabl to penetr the 

starri spheres, and to discern therein the decre of heaven at a 

distance, have their heart bar against convict by prejudic and 

misprision.’ 

‘truly,’ said sampson, ‘I opin with sir isaac newton, knight, and umwhil 

master of hi majesty’ mint, that the (pretended) scienc of astrolog is 

altogeth vain, frivolous, and unsatisfactory.’ and here he repos hi 

oracular jaws. 

‘really,’ resum the traveller, ‘I am sorri to see a gentleman of your 

learn and graviti labour under such strang blind and delusion. 

will you place the brief, the modern, and, as I may say, the vernacular 

name of isaac newton in opposit to the grave and sonor author 

of dariot, bonatus, ptolemy, haly, eztler, dieterick, naibob, harfurt, 

zael, taustettor, agrippa, duretus, maginus, origen, and argol? Do not 

christian and heathens, and jew and gentiles, and poet and 

philosophers, unit in allow the starri influences?’ 

‘communi error--it is a gener mistake,’ answer the inflex domini 

sampson. 

‘not so,’ repli the young englishman; ‘it is a gener and well-ground 

belief.’ 

‘it is the resourc of cheaters, knaves, and cozeners,’ said sampson. 

‘abusu non tollit usum.--th abus of anyth doth not abrog the 

law use thereof.’ 

