

chapter IV 

come and see’ trust thine own eye 

A fear sign stand in the hous of life, 

An enemi a fiend lurk close behind 

the radianc of thi planet O be warned! 

coleridge, from schiller 

the belief in astrolog wa almost univers in the middl of the 

seventeenth century; it began to waver and becom doubt toward the 

close of that period, and in the begin of the eighteenth the art fell 

into gener disrepute, and even under gener ridicule. yet it still 

retain mani partizan even in the seat of learning. grave and studiou 

men were loath to relinquish the calcul which had earli becom the 

princip object of their studies, and felt reluct to descend from the 

predomin height to which a suppos insight into futurity, by the 

power of consult abstract influenc and conjunctions, had exalt them 

over the rest of mankind. 

among those who cherish thi imaginari privileg with undoubt faith 

wa an old clergyman with whom manner wa place dure hi youth. He 

wast hi eye in observ the stars, and hi brain in calcul 

upon their variou combinations. hi pupil, in earli youth, natur 

caught some portion of hi enthusiasm, and labour for a time to make 

himself master of the technic process of astrolog research; so that, 

befor he becam convinc of it absurdity, william lilli himself would 

have allow him ‘a curiou fanci and pierc judgment in resolv a 

question of nativity.’ 

On the present occas he aros as earli in the morn as the short 

of the day permitted, and proceed to calcul the nativ of the young 

heir of ellangowan. He undertook the task secundum artem, as well to keep 

up appear as from a sort of curios to know whether he yet 

remembered, and could practise, the imaginari science. He accordingli 

erect hi scheme, or figur of heaven, divid into it twelv houses, 

place the planet therein accord to the ephemeris, and rectifi their 

posit to the hour and moment of the nativity. without troubl our 

reader with the gener prognost which judici astrolog would 

have infer from these circumstances, in thi diagram there wa one 

signif which press remark upon our astrologer’ attention. 

mars, have digniti in the cusp of the twelfth house, threaten 

captiv or sudden and violent death to the native; and mannering, have 

recours to those further rule by which divin pretend to ascertain the 

vehem of thi evil direction, observ from the result that three 

period would be particularli hazardous--hi fifth, hi tenth, hi 

twenty-first year. 

It wa somewhat remark that manner had onc befor tri a similar 

piec of fooleri at the instanc of sophia wellwood, the young ladi to 

whom he wa attached, and that a similar conjunct of planetari 

influenc threaten her with death or imprison in her thirty-ninth 

year. she wa at thi time eighteen; so that, accord to the result of 

the scheme in both cases, the same year threaten her with the same 

misfortun that wa presag to the nativ or infant whom that night had 

introduc into the world. struck with thi coincidence, manner 

repeat hi calculations; and the result approxim the event 

predicted, until at length the same month, and day of the month, seem 

assign as the period of peril to both. 

It will be readili believ that, in mention thi circumstance, we lay 

no weight whatev upon the pretend inform thu conveyed. but it 

often happens, such is our natur love for the marvellous, that we 

willingli contribut our own effort to beguil our better judgments. 

whether the coincid which I have mention wa realli one of those 

singular chanc which sometim happen against all ordinari calculations; 

or whether mannering, bewild amid the arithmet labyrinth and 

technic jargon of astrology, had insens twice follow the same clue 

to guid him out of the maze; or whether hi imagination, seduc by some 

point of appar resemblance, lent it aid to make the similitud between 

the two oper more exactli accur than it might otherwis have 

been, it is imposs to guess; but the impress upon hi mind that the 

result exactli correspond wa vividli and indel strong. 

He could not help feel surpris at a coincid so singular and 

unexpected. ‘doe the devil mingl in the dance, to aveng himself for our 

trifl with an art said to be of magic origin? Or is it possible, as 

bacon and sir thoma brown admit, that there is some truth in a sober and 

regul astrology, and that the influenc of the star is not to be 

denied, though the due applic of it by the knave who pretend to 

practis the art is greatli to be suspected?’ A moment’ consider of 

the subject induc him to dismiss thi opinion as fantastical, and onli 

sanction by those learn men either becaus they durst not at onc 

shock the univers prejudic of their age, or becaus they themselv 

were not altogeth freed from the contagi influenc of a prevail 

superstition. yet the result of hi calcul in these two instanc 

left so unpleas an impress on hi mind that, like prospero, he 

mental relinquish hi art, and resolved, neither in jest nor earnest, 

ever again to practis judici astrology. 

He hesit a good deal what he should say to the laird of ellangowan 

concern the horoscop of hi first-born; and at length resolv plainli 

to tell him the judgment which he had formed, at the same time acquaint 

him with the futil of the rule of art on which he had proceeded. with 

thi resolut he walk out upon the terrace. 

If the view of the scene around ellangowan had been pleas by moonlight, 

it lost none of it beauti by the light of the morn sun. the land, even 

in the month of november, smile under it influence. A steep but regular 

ascent led from the terrac to the neighbour eminence, and conduct 

manner to the front of the old castle. It consist of two massiv 

round tower project deepli and darkli at the extrem angl of a 

curtain, or flat wall, which unit them, and thu protect the main 

entrance, that open through a lofti arch in the centr of the curtain 

into the inner court of the castle. the arm of the family, carv in 

freestone, frown over the gateway, and the portal show the space 

arrang by the architect for lower the portculli and rais the 

drawbridge. A rude farm-gate, made of young fir-tre nail together, now 

form the onli safeguard of thi onc formid entrance. the esplanad 

in front of the castl command a nobl prospect. 

the dreari scene of desol through which mannering’ road had lain on 

the preced even wa exclud from the view by some rise ground, 

and the landscap show a pleas altern of hill and dale, 

intersect by a river, which wa in some place visible, and hidden in 

others, where it roll betwixt deep and wood banks. the spire of a 

church and the appear of some hous indic the situat of a 

villag at the place where the stream had it junction with the ocean. the 

vale seem well cultivated, the littl inclosur into which they were 

divid skirt the bottom of the hills, and sometim carri their 

line of straggl hedgerow a littl way up the ascent. abov these were 

green pastures, tenant chiefli by herd of black cattle, then the stapl 

commod of the country, whose distant low gave no unpleas anim 

to the landscape. the remot hill were of a sterner character, and, at 

still greater distance, swell into mountain of dark heath, border 

the horizon with a screen which gave a defin and limit boundari to the 

cultiv country, and ad at the same time the pleas idea that it 

wa sequest and solitary. the sea-coast, which manner now saw in 

it extent, correspond in varieti and beauti with the inland view. In 

some place it rose into tall rocks, frequent crown with the ruin of 

old buildings, towers, or beacons, which, accord to tradition, were 

place within sight of each other, that, in time of invas or civil 

war, they might commun by signal for mutual defenc and protection. 

ellangowan castl wa by far the most extens and import of these 

ruins, and assert from size and situat the superior which it 

founder were said onc to have possess among the chief and nobl of 

the district. In other place the shore wa of a more gentl description, 

indent with small bays, where the land slope smoothli down, or sent 

into the sea promontori cover with wood. 

enlarg 

A scene so differ from what last night’ journey had presag produc 

a proport effect upon mannering. beneath hi eye lay the modern 

house--an awkward mansion, indeed, in point of architecture, but well 

situated, and with a warm, pleasant exposure. ‘how happily,’ thought our 

hero, ‘would life glide on in such a retirement! On the one hand, the 

strike remnant of ancient grandeur, with the secret conscious of 

famili pride which they inspire; on the other, enough of modern eleg 

and comfort to satisfi everi moder wish. here then, and with thee, 

sophia!’ 

We shall not pursu a lover’ day-dream ani farther. manner stood a 

minut with hi arm folded, and then turn to the ruin castle. 

On enter the gateway, he found that the rude magnific of the inner 

court ampli correspond with the grandeur of the exterior. On the one 

side ran a rang of window lofti and large, divid by carv mullion of 

stone, which had onc light the great hall of the castle; on the other 

were variou build of differ height and dates, yet so unit as to 

present to the eye a certain gener effect of uniform of front. the 

door and window were ornament with project exhibit rude 

specimen of sculptur and tracery, partli entir and partli broken down, 

partli cover by ivi and trail plants, which grew luxuriantli among 

the ruins. that end of the court which face the entranc had also been 

formerli close by a rang of buildings; but owing, it wa said, to it 

have been batter by the ship of the parliament under deane, dure 

the long civil war, thi part of the castl wa much more ruinou than the 

rest, and exhibit a great chasm, through which manner could observ 

the sea, and the littl vessel (an arm lugger), which retain her 

station in the centr of the bay. [footnote: the outlin of the abov 

description, as far as the suppos ruin are concerned, will be found 

somewhat to resembl the nobl remain of carlaverock castle, six or seven 

mile from dumfries, and near to lochar moss.] while manner wa gaze 

round the ruins, he heard from the interior of an apart on the left 

hand the voic of the gipsi he had seen on the preced evening. He soon 

found an apertur through which he could observ her without be himself 

visible; and could not help feel that her figure, her employment, and 

her situat convey the exact impress of an ancient sibyl. 

she sate upon a broken corner-ston in the angl of a pave apartment, 

part of which she had swept clean to afford a smooth space for the 

evolut of her spindle. A strong sunbeam through a lofti and narrow 

window fell upon her wild dress and features, and afford her light for 

her occupation; the rest of the apart wa veri gloomy. equipt in a 

habit which mingl the nation dress of the scottish common peopl with 

someth of an eastern costume, she spun a thread drawn from wool of 

three differ colours, black, white, and grey, by assist of those 

ancient implement of housewiferi now almost banish from the land, the 

distaff and spindle. As she spun, she sung what seem to be a charm. 

mannering, after in vain attempt to make himself master of the exact 

word of her song, afterward attempt the follow paraphras of what, 

from a few intellig phrases, he conclud to be it purport:-- 

twist ye, twine ye! even so 

mingl shade of joy and woe, 

hope, and fear, and peace, and strife, 

In the thread of human life. 

while the mystic twist is spinning, 

and the infant’ life beginning, 

dimli seen through twilight bending, 

lo, what vari shape attending! 

passion wild, and folli vain, 

pleasur soon exchang for pain, 

doubt, and jealousy, and fear 

In the magic danc appear. 

now they wax, and now they dwindle, 

whirl with the whirl spindle. 

twist ye, twine ye! even so 

mingl human bliss and woe. 

ere our translator, or rather our free imitator, had arrang these 

stanza in hi head, and while he wa yet hammer out a rhyme for 

dwindle, the task of the sibyl wa accomplished, or her wool wa expended. 

she took the spindle, now charg with her labours, and, undo the 

thread gradually, measur it by cast it over her elbow and bring 

each loop round between her forefing and thumb. when she had measur it 

out, she mutter to herself--’a hank, but not a haill ane--th full year 

o’ three score and ten, but thrice broken, and thrice to oop (i.e. to 

unite); he’ll be a lucki lad an he win through wi’t.’ 

our hero wa about to speak to the prophetess, when a voice, hoars as the 

wave with which it mingled, halloo twice, and with increas 

impatience--’meg, meg merrilies! gipsy--hag--tausend deyvils!’ 

‘I am coming, I am coming, captain,’ answer meg; and in a moment or two 

the impati command whom she address made hi appear from the 

broken part of the ruins. 




