

chapter vii 

come, princ of the rag regiment, 

you of the blood! prigs, my most upright lord, 

and these, what name or titl e’er they bear, 

jarkman, or patrico, crank or clapper-dudgeon, 

prater or abram-man--i speak of all. 

beggar’ bush. 

although the charact of those gipsi tribe which formerli inund most 

of the nation of europe, and which in some degre still subsist among 

them as a distinct people, is gener understood, the reader will pardon 

my say a few word respect their situat in scotland. 

It is well known that the gipsi were at an earli period acknowledg as 

a separ and independ race by one of the scottish monarchs, and that 

they were less favour distinguish by a subsequ law, which 

render the charact of gipsi equal in the judici balanc to that of 

common and habitu thief, and prescrib hi punish accordingly. 

notwithstand the sever of thi and other statutes, the fratern 

prosper amid the distress of the country, and receiv larg 

access from among those whom famine, oppression, or the sword of war 

had depriv of the ordinari mean of subsistence. they lost in a great 

measur by thi intermixtur the nation charact of egyptians, and 

becam a mingl race, have all the idl and predatori habit of 

their eastern ancestors, with a feroc which they probabl borrow from 

the men of the north who join their society. they travel in differ 

bands, and had rule among themselves, by which each tribe wa confin to 

it own district. the slightest invas of the precinct which had been 

assign to anoth tribe produc desper skirmishes, in which there 

wa often much blood shed. 

the patriot fletcher of saltoun drew a pictur of these banditti about a 

centuri ago, which my reader will perus with astonishment:-- 

‘there are at thi day in scotland (besid a great mani poor famili 

veri meanli provid for by the church boxes, with other who, by live 

on bad food, fall into variou diseases) two hundr thousand peopl 

beg from door to door. these are not onli no way advantageous, but a 

veri grievou burden to so poor a country. and though the number of them 

be perhap doubl to what it wa formerly, by reason of thi present great 

distress, yet in all time there have been about one hundr thousand of 

those vagabonds, who have live without ani regard or subject either to 

the law of the land or even those of god and natur . . . No magistr 

could ever discover, or be informed, which way one in a hundr of these 

wretch died, or that ever they were baptized. mani murder have been 

discov among them; and they are not onli a most unspeak oppress 

to poor tenant (who, if they give not bread or some kind of provis to 

perhap forti such villain in one day, are sure to be insult by them), 

but they rob mani poor peopl who live in hous distant from ani 

neighbourhood. In year of plenty, mani thousand of them meet togeth in 

the mountains, where they feast and riot for mani days; and at countri 

weddings, markets, burials, and other the like public occasions, they are 

to be seen, both man and woman, perpetu drunk, cursing, blaspheming, 

and fight together.’ 

notwithstand the deplor pictur present in thi extract, and 

which fletcher himself, though the energet and eloqu friend of 

freedom, saw no better mode of correct than by introduc a system of 

domest slavery, the progress of time, and increas both of the mean of 

life and of the power of the laws, gradual reduc thi dread evil 

within more narrow bounds. the tribe of gipsies, jockies, or cairds--for 

by all these denomin such banditti were known--becam few in number, 

and mani were entir root out. still, however, a suffici number 

remain to give, occasion alarm and constant vexation. some rude 

handicraft were entir resign to these itinerants, particularli the 

art of trencher-making, of manufactur horn-spoons, and the whole 

mysteri of the tinker. To these they ad a petti trade in the coars 

sort of earthenware. such were their ostens mean of livelihood. each 

tribe had usual some fix place of rendezvous, which they occasion 

occupi and consid as their stand camp, and in the vicin of 

which they gener abstain from depredation. they had even talent and 

accomplishments, which made them occasion use and entertaining. 

mani cultiv music with success; and the favourit fiddler or piper of 

a district wa often to be found in a gipsi town. they understood all 

out-of-door sports, especi otter-hunting, fishing, or find game. 

they bred the best and boldest terriers, and sometim had good pointer 

for sale. In winter the women told fortunes, the men show trick of 

legerdemain; and these accomplish often help to while away a weari 

or stormi even in the circl of the ‘farmer’ ha’.’ the wild of 

their character, and the indomit pride with which they despis all 

regular labour, command a certain awe, which wa not diminish by the 

consider that these stroller were a vindict race, and were 

restrain by no check, either of fear or conscience, from take 

desper vengeanc upon those who had offend them. these tribe were, 

in short, the pariah of scotland, live like wild indian among european 

settlers, and, like them, judg of rather by their own customs, habits, 

and opinions, than as if they had been member of the civilis part of 

the community. some hord of them yet remain, chiefli in such situat 

as afford a readi escap either into a wast countri or into anoth 

jurisdiction. nor are the featur of their charact much softened. their 

numbers, however, are so greatli diminish that, instead of one hundr 

thousand, as calcul by fletcher, it would now perhap be imposs to 

collect abov five hundr throughout all scotland. 

A tribe of these itinerants, to whom meg merrili appertained, had long 

been as stationari as their habit permit in a glen upon the estat of 

ellangowan. they had there erect a few huts, which they denomin 

their ‘citi of refuge,’ and where, when not absent on excursions, they 

harbour unmolested, as the crow that roost in the old ash-tre 

around them. they had been such long occup that they were consid 

in some degre as proprietor of the wretch sheal which they 

inhabited. thi protect they were said ancient to have repaid by 

servic to the laird in war, or more frequently, by infest or 

plunder the land of those neighbour baron with whom he chanc to 

be at feud. latterli their servic were of a more pacif nature. the 

women spun mitten for the lady, and knit boot-hos for the laird, 

which were annual present at christma with great form. the age 

sibyl bless the bridal bed of the laird when he married, and the cradl 

of the heir when born. the men repair her ladyship’ crack china, and 

assist the laird in hi sport parties, worm hi dogs, and cut the 

ear of hi terrier puppies. the children gather nut in the woods, and 

cranberri in the moss, and mushroom on the pastures, for tribut to the 

place. these act of voluntari service, and acknowledg of dependence, 

were reward by protect on some occasions, conniv on others, and 

broken victuals, ale, and brandi when circumst call for a display 

of generosity; and thi mutual intercours of good offices, which had been 

carri on for at least two centuries, render the inhabit of 

derncleugh a kind of privileg retain upon the estat of ellangowan. 

‘the knaves’ were the laird’ ‘exceed good friends’; and he would have 

deem himself veri ill use if hi counten could not now and then 

have born them out against the law of the countri and the local 

magistrate. but thi friendli union wa soon to be dissolved. 

the commun of derncleugh, who care for no rogu but their own, were 

wholli without alarm at the sever of the justice’ proceed toward 

other itinerants. they had no doubt that he determin to suffer no 

mendic or stroller in the countri but what resid on hi own 

property, and practis their trade by hi immedi permission, impli 

or expressed. nor wa mr. bertram in a hurri to exert hi newly-acquir 

author at the expens of these old settlers. but he wa driven on by 

circumstances. 

At the quarter-sess our new justic wa publicli upbraid by a 

gentleman of the opposit parti in counti politics, that, while he 

affect a great zeal for the public police, and seem ambiti of the 

fame of an activ magistrate, he foster a tribe of the greatest rogu 

in the country, and permit them to harbour within a mile of the hous 

of ellangowan. To thi there wa no reply, for the fact wa too evid 

and well known. the laird digest the taunt as he best could, and in hi 

way home amus himself with specul on the easiest method of rid 

himself of these vagrants, who brought a stain upon hi fair fame as a 

magistrate. just as he had resolv to take the first opportun of 

quarrel with the pariah of derncleugh, a caus of provoc 

present itself. 

sinc our friend’ advanc to be a conserv of the peace, he had 

caus the gate at the head of hi avenue, which formerly, have onli one 

hinge, remain at all time hospit open--h had caus thi gate, I 

say, to be newli hung and handsom painted. He had also shut up with 

paling, curious twist with furze, certain hole in the fenc 

adjoining, through which the gipsi boy use to scrambl into the 

plantat to gather birds’ nests, the senior of the villag to make a 

short cut from one point to another, and the lad and lass for even 

rendezvous--al without offenc taken or leav asked. but these halcyon 

day were now to have an end, and a minatori inscript on one side of 

the gate intim ‘prosecut accord to law’ (the painter had spelt 

it ‘persecution’--l’un vaut bien l’autre) to all who should be found 

trespass on these inclosures. On the other side, for uniformity’ sake, 

wa a precautionari annunci of spring-gun and man-trap of such 

formid power that, said the rubrick, with an emphat nota bene--’if 

a man goe in they will break a horse’ leg.’ 

In defianc of these threats, six well-grown gipsi boy and girl were 

ride cock-hors upon the new gate, and plait may-flowers, which it 

wa but too evid had been gather within the forbidden precincts. with 

as much anger as he wa capabl of feeling, or perhap of assuming, the 

laird command them to descend;--they paid no attent to hi mandate: 

he then began to pull them down one after another;--they resisted, 

passiv at least, each sturdi bronz varlet make himself as heavi as 

he could, or climb up as fast as he wa dismounted. 

the laird then call in the assist of hi servant, a surli fellow, 

who had immedi recours to hi horsewhip. A few lash sent the parti 

a-scampering; and thu commenc the first breach of the peac between the 

hous of ellangowan and the gipsi of derncleugh. 

the latter could not for some time imagin that the war wa real; until 

they found that their children were horsewhip by the griev when found 

trespassing; that their ass were poind by the ground-offic when left 

in the plantations, or even when turn to graze by the roadside, against 

the provis of the turnpik acts; that the constabl began to make 

curiou inquiri into their mode of gain a livelihood, and express 

hi surpris that the men should sleep in the hovel all day, and be 

abroad the greater part of the night. 

when matter came to thi point, the gipsies, without scruple, enter 

upon measur of retaliation. ellangowan’ hen-roost were plundered, hi 

linen stolen from the line or bleaching-ground, hi fish poached, hi 

dog kidnapped, hi grow tree cut or barked. much petti mischief wa 

done, and some evid for the mischief’ sake. On the other hand, 

warrant went forth, without mercy, to pursue, search for, take, and 

apprehend; and, notwithstand their dexterity, one or two of the 

depred were unabl to avoid conviction. one, a stout young fellow, 

who sometim had gone to sea a-fishing, wa hand over to the captain of 

the impress servic at d--; two children were soundli flogged, and one 

egyptian matron sent to the hous of correction. 

still, however, the gipsi made no motion to leav the spot which they 

had so long inhabited, and mr. bertram felt an unwilling to depriv 

them of their ancient ‘citi of refuge’; so that the petti warfar we have 

notic continu for sever months, without increas or abat of 

hostil on either side. 
