

chapter XI 

enter time, AS choru 

I, that pleas some, tri all, both joy and terror 

Of good and bad; that make and unfold error, 

now take upon me, in the name of time, 

To use my wing imput it not a crime 

To me, or my swift passage, that I slide 

o’er sixteen years, and leav the growth untri 

Of that wide gap. 

winter’ tale. 

our narrat is now about to make a larg stride, and omit a space of 

nearli seventeen years; dure which noth occur of ani particular 

consequ with respect to the stori we have undertaken to tell. the gap 

is a wide one; yet if the reader’ experi in life enabl him to look 

back on so mani years, the space will scarc appear longer in hi 

recollect than the time consum in turn these pages. 

It was, then, in the month of november, about seventeen year after the 

catastroph relat in the last chapter, that, dure a cold and stormi 

night, a social group had close around the kitchen-fir of the gordon 

arm at kippletringan, a small but comfort inn kept by mrs. 

mac-candlish in that village. the convers which pass among them 

will save me the troubl of tell the few event occur dure thi 

chasm in our history, with which it is necessari that the reader should be 

acquainted. 

mrs. mac-candlish, throne in a comfort easychair line with black 

leather, wa regal herself and a neighbour gossip or two with a cup 

of genuin tea, and at the same time keep a sharp eye upon her 

domestics, as they went and came in prosecut of their variou duti 

and commissions. the clerk and precentor of the parish enjoy at a littl 

distanc hi saturday night’ pipe, and aid it bland fumig by an 

occasion sip of brandi and water. deacon bearcliff, a man of great 

import in the village, combin the indulg of both parties: he had 

hi pipe and hi tea-cup, the latter be lace with a littl spirits. 

one or two clown sat at some distance, drink their twopenni ale. 

‘are ye sure the parlour’ readi for them, and the fire burn clear, and 

the chimney no smoking?’ said the hostess to a chambermaid. 

she wa answer in the affirmative. ‘ane wadna be uncivil to them, 

especi in their distress,’ said she, turn to the deacon. 

‘assuredli not, mrs. mac-candlish; assuredli not. I am sure oni sma’ thing 

they might want frae my shop, under seven, or eight, or ten pounds, I 

would book them as readili for it as the first in the country. Do they 

come in the auld chaise?’ 

‘I daresay no,’ said the precentor; ‘for miss bertram come on the white 

powni ilka day to the kirk--and a constant kirk-keep she is--and it’ a 

pleasur to hear her sing the psalms, winsom young thing.’ 

‘ay, and the young laird of hazlewood ride hame half the road wi’ her 

after sermon,’ said one of the gossip in company. ‘I wonder how auld 

hazlewood like that.’ 

‘I kenna how he may like it now,’ answer anoth of the tea-drinkers; 

‘but the day ha been when ellangowan wad hae like as littl to see hi 

daughter take up with their son.’ 

‘ay, ha been,’ answer the first, with somewhat of emphasis. 

‘I am sure, neighbour ovens,’ said the hostess, ‘the hazlewood of 

hazlewood, though they are a veri gude auld famili in the county, never 

thought, till within these twa score o’ years, of even themselv till 

the ellangowans. wow, woman, the bertram of ellangowan are the auld 

dingawai lang syne. there is a sang about ane o’ them marri a 

daughter of the king of man; it begins-- 

blyth bertram’ ta’en him ower the faem, 

To wed a wife, and bring her hame-- 

I daur say mr. skreigh can sing us the ballant.’ 

‘gudewife,’ said skreigh, gather up hi mouth, and sip hi tiff of 

brandi punch with great solemnity, ‘our talent were gien us to other use 

than to sing daft auld sang sae near the sabbath day.’ 

‘hout fie, mr. skreigh; i’s warrant I hae heard you sing a blyth sang on 

saturday at e’en befor now. but as for the chaise, deacon, it hasna been 

out of the coach-hous sinc mrs. bertram died, that’ sixteen or 

seventeen year sin syne. jock jabo is away wi’ a chais of mine for 

them; I wonder he’ no come back. it’ pit mirk; but there’ no an ill 

turn on the road but twa, and the brigg ower warroch burn is safe eneugh, 

if he haud to the right side. but then there’ heaviesid brae, that’ 

just a murder for post-cattle; but jock ken the road brawly.’ 

A loud rap wa heard at the door. 

‘that’ no them. I dinna hear the wheels. grizzel, ye limmer, gang to the 

door.’ 

‘it’ a singl gentleman,’ whine out grizzel; ‘maun I take him into the 

parlour?’ 

‘foul be in your feet, then; it’ll be some english rider. come without a 

servant at thi time o’ night! ha the hostler ta’en the horse? Ye may 

light a spunk o’ fire in the red room.’ 

‘I wish, ma’am,’ said the traveller, enter the kitchen, ‘you would give 

me leav to warm myself here, for the night is veri cold.’ 

hi appearance, voice, and manner produc an instantan effect in hi 

favour. He wa a handsome, tall, thin figure, dress in black, as 

appear when he laid asid hi riding-coat; hi age might be between 

forti and fifty; hi cast of featur grave and interesting, and hi air 

somewhat military. everi point of hi appear and address bespok the 

gentleman. long habit had given mrs. mac-candlish an acut tact in 

ascertain the qualiti of her visitors, and proport her recept 

accordingly:-- 

To everi guest the appropri speech wa made, 

and everi duti with distinct paid; 

respectful, easy, pleasant, or polite-- 

‘your honour’ servant!’ ‘mister smith, good-night.‘ 

On the present occas she wa low in her courtesi and profus in her 

apologies. the stranger beg hi hors might be attend to: she went 

out herself to school the hostler. 

‘there wa never a prettier bit o’ horse-flesh in the stabl o’ the gordon 

arms,’ said the man, which inform increas the landlady’ respect 

for the rider. finding, on her return, that the stranger declin to go 

into anoth apart (which, indeed, she allowed, would be but cold and 

smoki till the fire bleez up), she instal her guest hospit by the 

fireside, and offer what refresh her hous afforded. 

‘A cup of your tea, ma’am, if you will favour me.’ 

mrs. mac-candlish bustl about, reinforc her teapot with hyson, and 

proceed in her duti with her best grace. ‘we have a veri nice parlour, 

sir, and everyth veri agreeabl for gentlefolks; but it’ bespok the 

night for a gentleman and hi daughter that are go to leav thi part 

of the country; ane of my chais is gane for them, and will be back 

forthwith. they’r no sae weel in the warld as they have been; but we’r 

a’ subject to up and down in thi life, as your honour must need 

ken,--but is not the tobacco-reek disagre to your honour?’ 

‘bi no means, ma’am; I am an old campaigner, and perfectli use to it. 

will you permit me to make some inquiri about a famili in thi 

neighbourhood?’ 

the sound of wheel wa now heard, and the landladi hurri to the door to 

receiv her expect guests; but return in an instant, follow by the 

postilion. ‘no, they canna come at no rate, the laird’ sae ill.’ 

‘but god help them,’ said the landlady, ‘the morn’ the term, the veri 

last day they can bide in the house; a’ thing’ to be roupit.’ 

‘weel, but they can come at no rate, I tell ye; mr. bertram canna be 

moved.’ 

‘what mr. bertram?’ said the stranger; ‘not mr. bertram of ellangowan, I 

hope?’ 

‘just e’en that same, sir; and if ye be a friend o’ his, ye have come at a 

time when he’ sair bested.’ 

‘I have been abroad for mani years,--i hi health so much deranged?’ 

‘ay, and hi affair an’ a’,’ said the deacon; ‘the creditor have enter 

into possess o’ the estate, and it’ for sale; and some that made the 

maist by him--i name nae names, but mrs. mac-candlish ken wha I mean (the 

landladi shook her head significantly)--they’r sairest on him e’en now. I 

have a sma’ matter due myself, but I would rather have lost it than gane 

to turn the auld man out of hi house, and him just dying.’ 

‘ay, but,’ said the parish clerk, ‘factor glossin want to get rid of the 

auld laird, and drive on the sale, for fear the heir-mal should cast up 

upon them; for I have heard say, if there wa an heir-mal they couldna 

sell the estat for auld ellangowan’ debt.’ 

‘he had a son born a good mani year ago,’ said the stranger; ‘he is dead, 

I suppose?’ 

‘nae man can say for that,’ answer the clerk mysteriously. 

‘dead!’ said the deacon, ‘i’s warrant him dead lang syne; he hasna been 

heard o’ these twenti year or thereby.’ 

‘I wot weel it’ no twenti years,’ said the landlady; ‘it’ no abun 

seventeen at the outsid in thi veri month. It made an unco nois ower a’ 

thi country; the bairn disappear the veri day that supervisor kennedi 

cam by hi end. If ye kenn’d thi countri lang syne, your honour wad mayb 

ken frank kennedi the supervisor. He wa a heartsom pleasant man, and 

compani for the best gentlemen in the county, and muckl mirth he’ made 

in thi house. I wa young then, sir, and newli marri to baili 

mac-candlish, that’ dead and gone (a sigh); and muckl fun i’v had wi’ 

the supervisor. He wa a daft dog. O, an he could hae hauden aff the 

smuggler a bit! but he wa aye venturesome. and so ye see, sir, there wa 

a king’ sloop down in wigton bay, and frank kennedy, he behov to have 

her up to chase dirk hatteraick’ lugger--ye’l mind dirk hatteraick, 

deacon? I daresay ye may have dealt wi’ him--(th deacon gave a sort of 

acquiesc nod and humph). He wa a dare chield, and he fought hi ship 

till she blew up like peel of ingans; and frank kennedy, he had been 

the first man to board, and he wa flung like a quarter of a mile off, and 

fell into the water below the rock at warroch point, that they ca’ the 

gauger’ loup to thi day.’ 

‘and mr. bertram’ child,’ said the stranger, ‘what is all thi to him?’ 

‘ou, sir, the bairn aye held an unco wark wi’ the supervisor; and it wa 

gener thought he went on board the vessel alang wi’ him, as bairn are 

aye forward to be in mischief.’ 

