

chapter XV 

My gold is gone, my money is spent, 

My land now take it unto thee. 

give me thi gold, good john o’ the scales, 

and thine for aye my land shall be. 

then john he did him to record draw. 

and john he cast him a gods-pennie; 

but for everi pound that john agreed, 

the land, I wis, wa well worth three. 

heir OF linne. 

the galwegian john o’ the scale wa a more clever fellow than hi 

prototype. He contriv to make himself heir of linn without the 

disagre ceremoni of ‘tell down the good red gold.’ miss bertram no 

sooner heard thi painful, and of late unexpected, intellig than she 

proceed in the prepar she had alreadi made for leav the 

mansion-hous immediately. mr. mac-morlan assist her in these 

arrangements, and press upon her so kindli the hospit and 

protect of hi roof, until she should receiv an answer from her 

cousin, or be enabl to adopt some settl plan of life, that she felt 

there would be unkind in refus an invit urg with such 

earnestness. mrs. mac-morlan wa a ladylik person, and well qualifi by 

birth and manner to receiv the visit, and to make her hous agreeabl to 

miss bertram. A home, therefore, and an hospit recept were secur 

to her, and she went on with better heart to pay the wage and receiv the 

adieu of the few domest of her father’ family. 

where there are estim qualiti on either side, thi task is alway 

affecting; the present circumst render it doubli so. all receiv 

their due, and even a trifl more, and with thank and good wishes, to 

which some ad tears, took farewel of their young mistress. there 

remain in the parlour onli mr. mac-morlan, who came to attend hi guest 

to hi house, domini sampson, and miss bertram. ‘and now,’ said the poor 

girl, ‘I must bid farewel to one of my oldest and kindest friends. god 

bless you, mr. sampson, and requit to you all the kind of your 

instruct to your poor pupil, and your friendship to him that is gone. 

I hope I shall often hear from you.’ she slid into hi hand a paper 

contain some piec of gold, and rose, as if to leav the room. 

domini sampson also rose; but it wa to stand aghast with utter 

astonishment. the idea of part from miss lucy, go where she might, had 

never onc occur to the simplic of hi understanding. He laid the 

money on the table. ‘it is certainli inadequate,’ said mac-morlan, 

mistak hi meaning, ‘but the circumstances--’ 

mr. sampson wave hi hand impatiently.--’it is not the lucre, it is not 

the lucre; but that I, that have ate of her father’ loaf, and drank of 

hi cup, for twenti year and more--to think that I am go to leav her, 

and to leav her in distress and dolour! no, miss lucy, you need never 

think it! you would not consent to put forth your father’ poor dog, and 

would you use me waur than a messan? no, miss luci bertram, while I live I 

will not separ from you. i’ll be no burden; I have thought how to 

prevent that. but, as ruth said unto naomi, “entreat me not to leav thee, 

nor to depart from thee; for whither thou goest I will go, and where thou 

dwellest I will dwell; thi peopl shall be my people, and thi god shall be 

my god. where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried. the lord 

do so to me, and more also, if aught but death do part thee and me.”’ 

dure thi speech, the longest ever domini sampson wa known to utter, 

the affection creature’ eye stream with tears, and neither luci nor 

mac-morlan could refrain from sympathis with thi unexpect burst of 

feel and attachment. ‘mr. sampson,’ said mac-morlan, after have had 

recours to hi snuff-box and handkerchief alternately, ‘mi hous is larg 

enough, and if you will accept of a bed there while miss bertram honour 

us with her residence, I shall think myself veri happy, and my roof much 

favoured, by receiv a man of your worth and fidelity.’ and then, with a 

delicaci which wa meant to remov ani object on miss bertram’ part to 

bring with her thi unexpect satellite, he added, ‘mi busi 

requir my frequent have occas for a better account than ani of 

my present clerks, and I should be glad to have recours to your 

assist in that way now and then.’ 

‘of a surety, of a surety,’ said sampson eagerly; ‘I understand 

book-keep by doubl entri and the italian method.’ 

our postilion had thrust himself into the room to announc hi chais and 

horses; he tarried, unobserved, dure thi extraordinari scene, and 

assur mrs. mac-candlish it wa the most move thing he ever saw; ‘the 

death of the grey mare, puir hizzie, wa naeth till’t.’ thi trifl 

circumst afterward had consequ of greater moment to the dominie. 

the visitor were hospit welcom by mrs. mac-morlan, to whom, as well 

as to others, her husband intim that he had engag domini sampson’ 

assist to disentangl some perplex accounts, dure which occup 

he would, for conveni sake, resid with the family. mr. mac-morlan’ 

knowledg of the world induc him to put thi colour upon the matter, 

awar that, howev honour the fidel of the dominie’ attach 

might be both to hi own heart and to the famili of ellangowan, hi 

exterior ill qualifi him to be a’squir of dames,’ and render him, 

upon the whole, rather a ridicul appendag to a beauti young woman 

of seventeen. 

domini sampson achiev with great zeal such task as mr. mac-morlan 

chose to entrust him with; but it wa speedili observ that at a certain 

hour after breakfast he regularli disappeared, and return again about 

dinner-time. the even he occupi in the labour of the office. On 

saturday he appear befor mac-morlan with a look of great triumph, and 

laid on the tabl two piec of gold. ‘what is thi for, dominie?’ said 

mac-morlan. 

‘first to indemnifi you of your charg in my behalf, worthi sir; and the 

balanc for the use of miss luci bertram.’ 

‘but, mr. sampson, your labour in the offic much more than recompens 

me; I am your debtor, my good friend.’ 

‘then be it all,’ said the dominie, wave hi hand, ‘for miss luci 

bertram’ behoof.’ 

‘well, but, dominie, thi money-’ 

‘it is honestli come by, mr. mac-morlan; it is the bounti reward of a 

young gentleman to whom I am teach the tongues; read with him three 

hour daily.’ 

A few more question extract from the domini that thi liber pupil 

wa young hazlewood, and that he met hi preceptor daili at the hous of 

mrs. mac-candlish, whose proclam of sampson’ disinterest 

attach to the young ladi had procur him thi indefatig and 

bounteou scholar. 

mac-morlan wa much struck with what he heard. domini sampson wa 

doubtless a veri good scholar, and an excel man, and the classic were 

unquestion veri well worth reading; yet that a young man of twenti 

should ride seven mile and back again each day in the week, to hold thi 

sort of tete-a-tet of three hours, wa a zeal for literatur to which he 

wa not prepar to give entir credit. littl art wa necessari to sift 

the dominie, for the honest man’ head never admit ani but the most 

direct and simpl ideas. ‘doe miss bertram know how your time is engaged, 

my good friend?’ 

‘sure not as yet. mr. charl recommend it should be conceal from 

her, lest she should scrupl to accept of the small assist aris 

from it; but,’ he added, ‘it would not be possibl to conceal it long, 

sinc mr. charl propos take hi lesson occasion in thi house.’ 

‘o, he does!’ said mac-morlan.’ yes, yes, I can understand that better. 

and pray, mr. sampson, are these three hour entir spent inconstru 

and translating?’ 

‘doubtless, no; we have also colloqui intercours to sweeten study: 

nequ semper arcum tendit apollo.’ 

the querist proceed to elicit from thi galloway phoebu what their 

discours chiefli turn upon. 

‘upon our past meet at ellangowan; and, truly, I think veri often we 

discours concern miss lucy, for mr. charl hazlewood in that 

particular resembleth me, mr. mac-morlan. when I begin to speak of her I 

never know when to stop; and, as I say (jocularly), she cheat us out of 

half our lessons.’ 

‘O ho!’ thought mac-morlan, ‘sit the wind in that quarter? i’v heard 

someth like thi before.’ 

He then began to consid what conduct wa safest for hi protegee, and 

even for himself; for the senior mr. hazlewood wa powerful, wealthy, 

ambitious, and vindictive, and look for both fortun and titl in ani 

connexion which hi son might form. At length, have the highest opinion 

of hi guest’ good sens and penetration, he determin to take an 

opportunity, when they should happen to be alone, to commun the 

matter to her as a simpl piec of intelligence. He did so in as natur a 

manner as he could. ‘I wish you joy of your friend mr. sampson’ good 

fortune, miss bertram; he ha got a pupil who pay him two guinea for 

twelv lesson of greek and latin.’ 

‘indeed! I am equal happi and surprised. who can be so liberal? is 

colonel manner returned?’ 

‘no, no, not colonel mannering; but what do you think of your 

acquaintance, mr. charl hazlewood? He talk of take hi lesson here; 

I wish we may have accommod for him.’ 

luci blush deeply. ‘for heaven’ sake, no, mr. mac-morlan, do not let 

that be; charl hazlewood ha had enough of mischief about that already.’ 

‘about the classics, my dear young lady?’ wil seem to 

misunderstand her; ‘most young gentlemen have so at one period or another, 

sure enough; but hi present studi are voluntary.’ 

miss bertram let the convers drop, and her host made no effort to 

renew it, as she seem to paus upon the intellig in order to form 

some intern resolution. 

the next day miss bertram took an opportun of convers with mr. 

sampson. express in the kindest manner her grate thank for hi 

disinterest attachment, and her joy that he had got such a provision, 

she hint to him that hi present mode of superintend charl 

hazlewood’ studi must be so inconveni to hi pupil that, while that 

engag lasted, he had better consent to a temporari separation, and 

resid either with hi scholar or as near him as might be. sampson 

refused, as inde she had expected, to listen a moment to thi 

proposition; he would not quit her to be made preceptor to the princ of 

wales. ‘but I see,’ he added, ‘you are too proud to share my pittance; and 

peradventur I grow wearisom unto you.’ 

‘no indeed; you were my father’ ancient, almost hi only, friend. I am 

not proud; god knows, I have no reason to be so. you shall do what you 

judg best in other matters; but oblig me by tell mr. charl 

hazlewood that you had some convers with me concern hi studies, 

and that I wa of opinion that hi carri them on in thi hous wa 

altogeth impracticable, and not to be thought of.’ 

domini sampson left her presenc altogeth crest-fallen, and, as he shut 

the door, could not help mutter the ‘varium et mutabile’ of virgil. 

next day he appear with a veri rueful visage, and tender miss bertram 

a letter. ‘mr. hazlewood,’ he said, ‘wa to discontinu hi lessons, 

though he had gener made up the pecuniari loss. but how will he make 

up the loss to himself of the knowledg he might have acquir under my 

instruction? even in that one articl of writing,--h wa an hour befor 

he could write that brief note, and destroy mani scrolls, four quills, 

and some good white paper. I would have taught him in three week a firm, 

current, clear, and legibl hand; he should have been a calligrapher,--but 

god’ will be done.’ 

the letter contain but a few lines, deepli regret and murmur 

against miss bertram’ cruelty, who not onli refus to see him, but to 

permit him in the most indirect manner to hear of her health and 

contribut to her service. but it conclud with assur that her 

sever wa vain, and that noth could shake the attach of charl 

hazlewood. 

under the activ patronag of mrs. mac-candlish, sampson pick up some 

other scholars--veri differ inde from charl hazlewood in rank, and 

whose lesson were proport unproductive. still, however, he gain 

something, and it wa the glori of hi heart to carri it to mr. mac-morlan 

weekly, a slight peculium onli subtract to suppli hi snuff-box and 

tobacco-pouch. 

and here we must leav kippletringan to look after our hero, lest our 

reader should fear they are to lose sight of him for anoth quarter of a 

century. 
