china’ new civil religion 
By ian johnson 
dec. 21, 2019 

beij — In the northern suburb of thi citi is a small templ to a chines folk deity, lord guan, a famou warrior deifi more than a millennium ago. renov five year ago at the government’ expense, the templ is use by a group of retire who run pilgrimag to a holi mountain, schoolchildren who come to learn tradit cultur and a taoist priest who preach to wealthi urbanit about the tradit valu of ancient china. 

perch atop a hillock overlook the sprawl capital, the templ is a microcosm of a new civil religion take shape in china — an effort by the chines communist parti to satisfi chines people’ search for moral guidelin by supplement the larg irrelev ideolog of commun with a curat version of the past. 

thi new state-guid religios is the flip side of the government’ harsh polici toward islam and christianity. offici believ these two global faith are hard to control becaus of their foreign ties, and they have use negoti or forc — diplomaci with the vatican, arrest of promin protestants, intern camp for muslim — to tri to bring these religion to heel. 

yet beijing’ recent turn to tradit may be even more significant. even though islam and christian are world religions, in china they remain minor, with the number of their combin adher amount to less than 10 percent of the population. most chines believ in an amalgam of buddhism, taoism, confucian and other tradit valu and idea that still reson deeply. 

for thi silent major of hundr of million of people, the government’ newfound support for thing like the templ to lord guan is welcom — a feel that the chines communist parti hope will bolster it legitimacy, especi given the irrelev today of it found ideas. the benefit of it move to embrac the past may seem obvious, but the shift mark a radic departure, not just for a parti offici commit to atheism but also from how reform over the past centuri have imagin a modern, prosper china. 

from the 19th centuri onward, china’ elit argu that the country’ tradit and faith were a major reason for it decline. reform in 1898 call for templ to be convert into schools. while the nationalist parti under chiang kai-shek approv of four religion — buddhism, taoism (sometim call "daoism"), christian and islam — it larg consid tradit chines belief to be superstit and advoc the destruct of temples. 

scholar estim that by the middl of the 20th century, half of the templ that exist in china at the end of the 19th centuri had been destroyed. An 1851 survey of the old citi of beij list 866 temples; today, I count just 18. At the end of the 19th century, most villag had at least one templ and mani had half a dozen; vast section of the chines countrysid now have no templ at all. 

when the communist took power in 1949, they, like the nationalists, offici recogn four religion — but then promptli began persecut them. tradit faith came under especi harsh treatment, with the govern ban bedrock tradit practices, from worship ancestor and local deiti to follow the advic of geomanc master and spirit mediums. 

the three decad of reform that start in the late 1970 loosen control over society, allow the reviv of all religion and mani tradit that had been proscribed. despit period crackdowns, church and mosques, but also temples, were rebuilt, and clergi trained. although all faith were suppos to remain under parti control, religi feel boomed, with the number of believ in china top 500 million by 2010. 

Xi jinping’ rise to power in late 2012 mark a new era, the third, in the histori of the chines communist party’ religi policies. instead of the destruct of the mao year and the rel laissez-fair approach of the reform period, the state ha embark on a form of highli curat revivalism. 

one part of it approach rest on a deep suspicion of christian and islam. the party’ polici toward islam ha been the most draconian. some believers, especi uighur in the northwestern provinc of xinjiang, have been subject to a polici of forc secularization. thi ha includ send hundr of thousand of muslim to re-educ camps, compel restaur to serv pork and alcohol, and forbid fast dure ramadan. 

the polici toward christian is more nuanced. last year, beij struck a deal with the vatican to jointli appoint cathol bishops. the vatican seem to hope to revers the declin in the number of cathol in china. but for beijing, the measur wa a way to tighten control over the cathol clergi — and, by extension, the church itself. 

protestant pose an especi vex problem for the party. It is arguabl china’ fastest-grow religion, with an estim 60 million or more adher today (compar with one million in 1949), includ some 20 to 30 million who are thought to worship in unregist (or underground) protest churches. but the faith lack a unifi structur that would allow for negotiations. and so the govern ha fire a few shot across the bow, close sever of the country’ best-known underground churches. 

In mani ways, however, the Xi administration’ embrac of tradit faith is more radical. sinc take office, the presid ha met with buddhist leaders, and hi govern ha allow taoism to flourish. the state recent issu a landmark plan to improv social mores, the first such program sinc 2001. 

the plan stem from a widespread feel that china’ relentless drive to get ahead econom ha creat a spiritu vacuum, and sometim justifi break rule and trampl civility. mani peopl do not trust one another. the government’ blueprint for handl thi moral crisi call for endors certain tradit beliefs. 

the epic paper — it run to 10,000 chines characters, and would be significantli longer translat into english — doesn’t mention communist china’ found father, mao zedong, or hi successor and their ideologies, focus instead on mr. Xi and hi effort to fix social problem like "money worship and hedonism." It doe invok communist slogan such as "core socialist values," but in contrast to the previou such document from 2001 — which made onli pass refer to chines tradit — it call the past a "rich sourc of morality." the plan order parti offici to promot "ancient and worthi sages," as well as to "deepli expound" tradit concept such as "ren’ai" (benevolence), "zhengyi" (righteousness) and "jianyi zhengwei" (stand up brave for the truth). 

thi effort is not an attempt to replac commun with confucianism. yet it is fair to say that for the first time sinc china’ imperi order collaps in 1911, a central govern is embrac the idea that made up the political-religi order that ran china for much of the past 2,500 years. why? not onli to address china’ moral vacuum, but also as a populist measure. the countri is enter a more uncertain era, of slower growth and rise inequality, and beij is drape itself in the mantl of tradit to broaden it appeal. 

In do so, the govern seem to be assum that tradit chines valu and belief are easier to control than foreign religions, and that support them will outweigh the cost of suppress islam and christianity. but I have my doubts. 

dure a visit thi fall to the lord guan temple, I saw a dozen or so people, mostli in their 30 and 40s, read work by wang yangming, a philosoph born in the late 15th century. On the face of it, thi wa in line with govern policy: the parti ha embrac wang for exemplifi an incorrupt spirit and match word with deeds. 

but after read a passag of wang’ work, the men and women sat around a big wooden table, wield brush to write out, over and over again, hi most famou phrase: "zhi xing he yi" (knowledg and action are one). thi knowledge, accord to wang, come from an inner light, a conscienc — one that no government, no matter how powerful, can control. 
