

chapter xviii 

talk with a man out of a window!--a proper saying. 

much ado about nothing. 

We must proceed with our extract from miss mannering’ letters, which 

throw light upon natur good sense, principle, and feelings, blemish by 

an imperfect educ and the folli of a misjudg mother, who call 

her husband in her heart a tyrant until she fear him as such, and read 

romanc until she becam so enamour of the complic intrigu which 

they contain as to assum the manag of a littl famili novel of her 

own, and constitut her daughter, a girl of sixteen, the princip 

heroine. she delight in petti mysteri and intrigu and secrets, and yet 

trembl at the indign which these paltri manoeuvr excit in her 

husband’ mind. thu she frequent enter upon a scheme mere for 

pleasure, or perhap for the love of contradiction, plung deeper into it 

than she wa aware, endeavour to extric herself by new arts, or to 

cover her error by dissimulation, becam involv in mesh of her own 

weaving, and wa forc to carri on, for fear of discovery, machin 

which she had at first resort to in mere wantonness. 

fortun the young man whom she so imprud introduc into her 

intim society, and encourag to look up to her daughter, had a fund of 

principl and honest pride which render him a safer intim than mrs. 

manner ought to have dare to hope or expect. the obscur of hi 

birth could alon be object to him; in everi other respect, 

with prospect bright upon the world he came, pure love of virtue, strong 

desir of fame, men watch the way hi lofti mind would take, and all 

foretold the progress he would make. 

but it could not be expect that he should resist the snare which mrs. 

mannering’ imprud threw in hi way, or avoid becom attach to a 

young ladi whose beauti and manner might have justifi hi passion, even 

in scene where these are more gener met with than in a remot 

fortress in our indian settlements. the scene which follow have been 

partli detail in mannering’ letter to mr. mervyn; and to expand what is 

there state into farther explan would be to abus the patienc of 

our readers. 

We shall therefor proceed with our promis extract from miss 

mannering’ letter to her friend. 

sixth extract 

‘I have seen him again, matilda--seen him twice. I have use everi 

argument to convinc him that thi secret intercours is danger to us 

both; I even press him to pursu hi view of fortun without farther 

regard to me, and to consid my peac of mind as suffici secur by 

the knowledg that he had not fallen under my father’ sword. He 

answers--but how can I detail all he ha to answer? He claim those hope 

as hi due which my mother permit him to entertain, and would persuad 

me to the mad of a union without my father’ sanction. but to this, 

matilda, I will not be persuaded. I have resisted, I have subdued, the 

rebelli feel which aros to aid hi plea; yet how to extric 

myself from thi unhappi labyrinth in which fate and folli have entangl 

us both! 

‘I have thought upon it, matilda, till my head is almost giddy; nor can I 

conceiv a better plan than to make a full confess to my father. He 

deserv it, for hi kind is unceasing; and I think I have observ in 

hi character, sinc I have studi it more nearly, that hi harsher 

feel are chiefli excit where he suspect deceit or imposition; and 

in that respect, perhaps, hi charact wa formerli misunderstood by one 

who wa dear to him. He has, too, a ting of romanc in hi disposition; 

and I have seen the narr of a gener action, a trait of heroism, or 

virtuou self-denial, extract tear from him which refus to flow at a 

tale of mere distress. but then brown urg that he is person hostil 

to him. and the obscur of hi birth, that would be inde a 

stumbling-block. O, matilda, I hope none of your ancestor ever fought at 

poictier or agincourt! If it were not for the vener which my father 

attach to the memori of old sir mile mannering, I should make out my 

explan with half the tremor which must now attend it.’ 

seventh extract 

‘I have thi instant receiv your letter--your most welcom letter! 

thanks, my dearest friend, for your sympathi and your counsels; I can onli 

repay them with unbound confidence. 

‘you ask me what brown is by origin, that hi descent should be so 

unpleas to my father. hi stori is shortli told. He is of scottish 

extraction, but, be left an orphan, hi educ wa undertaken by a 

famili of relat settl in holland. He wa bred to commerce, and sent 

veri earli to one of our settlement in the east, where hi guardian had a 

correspondent. but thi correspond wa dead when he arriv in india, 

and he had no other resourc than to offer himself as a clerk to a 

counting-house. the break out of the war, and the strait to which we 

were at first reduced, threw the armi open to all young men who were 

dispos to embrac that mode of life; and brown, whose geniu had a 

strong militari tendency, wa the first to leav what might have been the 

road to wealth, and to choos that of fame. the rest of hi histori is 

well known to you; but conceiv the irrit of my father, who despis 

commerc (though, by the way, the best part of hi properti wa made in 

that honour profess by my great-uncle), and ha a particular 

antipathi to the dutch--think with what ear he would be like to receiv 

propos for hi onli child from vanbeest brown, educ for chariti by 

the hous of vanbeest and vanbruggen! O, matilda, it will never do; nay, 

so childish am I, I hardli can help sympathis with hi aristocrat 

feelings. mrs. vanbeest brown! the name ha littl to recommend it, to be 

sure. what children we are!’ 

eighth extract 

‘it is all over now, matilda! I shall never have courag to tell my 

father; nay, most deepli do I fear he ha alreadi learn my secret from 

anoth quarter, which will entir remov the grace of my communication, 

and ruin whatev gleam of hope I had ventur to connect with it. 

yesternight brown came as usual, and hi flageolet on the lake announc 

hi approach. We had agre that he should continu to use thi signal. 

these romant lake attract numer visitors, who indulg their 

enthusiasm in visit the sceneri at all hours, and we hope that, if 

brown were notic from the house, he might pass for one of those admir 

of nature, who wa give vent to hi feel through the medium of 

music. the sound might also be my apology, should I be observ on the 

balcony. but last night, while I wa eagerli enforc my plan of a full 

confess to my father, which he as earnestli deprecated, we heard the 

window of mr. mervyn’ library, which is under my room, open softly. I 

sign to brown to make hi retreat, and immedi reentered, with some 

faint hope that our interview had not been observed. 

‘but, alas! matilda, these hope vanish the instant I beheld mr. 

mervyn’ counten at breakfast the next morning. He look so 

provokingli intellig and confidential, that, had I dared, I could have 

been more angri than ever I wa in my life; but I must be on good 

behaviour, and my walk are now limit within hi farm precincts, where 

the good gentleman can ambl along by my side without inconvenience. I 

have detect him onc or twice attempt to sound my thoughts, and watch 

the express of my countenance. He ha talk of the flageolet more than 

once, and has, at differ times, made eulogium upon the watch 

and feroc of hi dogs, and the regular with which the keeper make 

hi round with a load fowling-piece. He mention even man-trap and 

springguns. I should be loth to affront my father’ old friend in hi own 

house; but I do long to show him that I am my father’ daughter, a fact of 

which mr. mervyn will certainli be convinc if ever I trust my voic and 

temper with a repli to these indirect hints. Of one thing I am certain--i 

am grate to him on that account--h ha not told mrs. mervyn. lord help 

me, I should have had such lectur about the danger of love and the 

night air on the lake, the risk aris from cold and fortune-hunters, 

the comfort and conveni of sack-whey and close windows! I cannot help 

trifling, matilda, though my heart is sad enough. what brown will do I 

cannot guess. I presume, however, the fear of detect prevent hi 

resum hi nocturn visits. He lodg at an inn on the opposit shore 

of the lake, under the name, he tell me, of dawson; he ha a bad choic 

in names, that must be allowed. He ha not left the army, I believe, but 

he say noth of hi present views, 

‘to complet my anxiety, my father is return suddenly, and in high 

displeasure. our good hostess, as I learn from a bustl convers 

between her housekeep and her, had no expect of see him for a 

week; but I rather suspect hi arriv wa no surpris to hi friend mr. 

mervyn. hi manner to me wa singularli cold and constrained, suffici 

so to have damp all the courag with which I onc resolv to throw 

myself on hi generosity. He lay the blame of hi be discompos and 

out of humour to the loss of a purchas in the south-west of scotland on 

which he had set hi heart; but I do not suspect hi equanim of be 

so easili thrown off it balance. hi first excurs wa with mr. 

mervyn’ barg across the lake to the inn I have mentioned. you may 

imagin the agoni with which I wait hi return! had he recogn brown, 

who can guess the consequence! He returned, however, appar without 

have made ani discovery. I understand that, in consequ of hi late 

disappointment, he mean now to hire a hous in the neighbourhood of thi 

same ellangowan, of which I am doom to hear so much; he seem to think 

it probabl that the estat for which he wish may soon be again in the 

market. I will not send away thi letter until I hear more distinctli what 

are hi intentions.’ 

‘I have now had an interview with my father, as confidenti as, I 

presume, he mean to allow me. He request me to-day, after breakfast, to 

walk with him into the library; my knees, matilda, shook under me, and it 

is no exagger to say I could scarc follow him into the room. I 

fear I knew not what. from my childhood I had seen all around him 

trembl at hi frown. He motion me to seat myself, and I never obey a 

command so readily, for, in truth, I could hardli stand. He himself 

continu to walk up and down the room. you have seen my father, and 

noticed, I recollect, the remark express cast of hi features. hi 

eye are natur rather light in colour, but agit or anger give 

them a darker and more fieri glance; he ha a custom also of draw in 

hi lip when much moved, which impli a combat between nativ ardour of 

temper and the habitu power of self-command. thi wa the first time we 

had been alon sinc hi return from scotland, and, as he betray these 

token of agitation, I had littl doubt that he wa about to enter upon 

the subject I most dreaded. 


