

teacup fortunetel 

(in the follow pages, you may learn someth of the mean attach 

to the tea leav which remain among the dreg in the bottom of your teacup.) 

how TO test your fortun 

leav a slight amount of tea in the cup, not so much as a spoonful. place 

the saucer on the cup, swill the cup round, male do thi so that the liquid 

move round in a clockwis direction, femal in an anti-clockwis direction. 

the tea is then run out of the cup, the saucer lift off and the shape or format 

are readi to be examined. 

no. 17.—bird seen in tea leav gener denot an end of your troubles. 

what the format mean 

anchor.—denot a voyag full of hope. It is consid a splendid 

omen for a sailor' bride. 

arch.—you are to undertak a journey in the near future. It is some[84]tim 

a happi omen for a woman, signifi that she will marri a tall, handsom 

man and be bless with healthi children. 

axe.—denot that your difficulti have now been overcom by your 

own splendid endeavors. you have sever the old bad habit and made a 

clean cut at your past blunders. 

balloon.—although it denot a certain rise in the consultant' fortunes, 

it carri the warn to bewar of a sudden fall. 

banana.—signifi to the sick, quick restor to health. 

basket.—impli that a person, by chang hi or her mind within the 

last twenty-four hours, ha reason for congratulation. 

bells.—if they are connect to a rope, you can look forward to splendid 

news. 

birds.—generally, they denot an end of your troubles. 

boat.—if you cannot discov an occup of the boat, the symbol mean 

a voyage. 

book.—you should ask advic from some friend for whom you care. 

good advic is precious. 

bugle.—y will be the recipi of good news shortly. 

butterfly.—a warn to a young ladi that her lover, whom she 

trust implicitly, is rather fond of flit from one "peach" to another. 

cap.—if you see a man' cap, you may have minor worries: if a widow' 

cap, marri joy will be yours. 

cards.—if you gamble, you will certainli lose. 

chain.—thi bid you put forth everi ounc of energi in one big endeavor: 

then, success will be yours. 

cigar.—som of your scheme may "end in smoke." 

clock.—thi signifi that you are to have an import appoint 

with someon veri soon. 

comet.—a symbol to warn you against play with fire. beware. 

cross.—you may have anxiety: but it will soon pass away. 

crown.—denot great honor come to you. 

dart.—you will shortli have a propos of marriage. cupid is about. 

dice.—y will lose money if you gamble. 

doves.—your trial will end when you see thi welcom "messeng of 

peace." 

envelope.—good tide are heralded. 

eye.—look to some other power than your own. 

fingerprint.—a remind to you to ask and you will find out a secret. 

[85] 

fish.—thi signifi good news from abroad. If the fish is surround by 

dot you will emigrate. 

flag.—a splendid omen—th best of news is come from abroad, and 

you are about to experi good fortun at home. 

no. 18.—cross. you may have anxiety, but it will soon pass away. 

foot.—thi leaf-pictur denot good news which, however, is still far off. 

fork.—your life would be all the happier were you not so easili flattered. 

gallows.—contrari to expectation, to see thi pictur denot noth 

of evil significance, but is mere a warn to you to be cautious—in fact, a 

kindli symbol. 

garden.—prosperous, joy days. 

gate.—a remind that patienc is a virtue, and that the gate to fortun 

will open for you in due course. 

giant.—thi denot you are attempt someth which is far too big 

for you. better be a success dwarf than a gigant failure. 

gypsy.—an invit to you to wish for someth you dearli desire, and 

your wish will be granted. 

globe.—denot you are to take a roundabout journey lead final to 

your home. 

glove.—a sign of good luck. 

[86] 

goose.—y will be the recipi of foolish remark from stupid persons, 

but these need caus you no concern. 

grapes.—from time immemori the symbol of perfect love between 

couples. 

hair.—a lock of hair signifi great devot on the part of your lover. 

halter.—a warn that you are too easili led, and that you must 

cultiv the art of self-reliance. 

ham.—thi is a sign you will undergo a brief illness, but will make a 

quick recovery. 

hammer.—triumph over adversity. after endur mani knock you 

will hit the nail of success. 

hammock.—point to the knowledg that your sailor-lov is true and 

dream of you everi night. 

hamper.—suggest use and serviceable, but inexpensive, present are 

coming. 

handcuffs.—thi is a cogent warn to you to get rid of an evil 

habit befor it is too late. littl sin lead to great crimes, and no one desir 

to receiv the attent of the law. 

harp.—count yourself veri fortunate. 

hat.—thi picture, if it is a lady' hat, signifi luck, but if a man's, it 

mean that you may experi a slight misfortune. 

hatchet.—thi leaf-pictur is a warn to take great care or you may 

experi danger. 

initial.—in thi import leaf-pictur the initi should be care 

studied. If the initi is form near the rim, the signific is one of good 

fortune. initi most commonli found are those without curves. such 

straight initi are—a, I, L, N, T, V, W. 

interrog mark.—signifi doubt. Be careful. 

key.—an import pictur suggest that you look deeper and more 

care in the cup for an initial, which, when you have found it, will unlock 

someth that ha been up till now a mystery. A close book will be open 

for you and past enigma unravelled. 

label.—thi ticket-lik picture, which must not be mistaken for an 

envelope, is the sign that you possess a dear friend who will one day be "tied" 

to you for life. 

lace.—denot you will err on a veri minor and fragil matter and make 

a fals move on veri flimsi grounds. 

ladder.—if on the side of the cup a rise in your fortun is indicated. 

lady.—point to the fact that you will shortli make a friend of one who 

will prove of great service. 

[87] 

no. 19.—a mark of interrog signifi doubt: be careful. 

lines.—thes indic journeys. 

lock.—thi denot that you can safe confid in your nearest friend. 

He or she will lock your secret in hi or her bosom. 

locket.—a pictur denot steadfast loyalti on the part of a friend 

whom you have not seen for long months. 

look glass.—you are warn by thi pictur that the world see 

you for what you realli are. your charact is mirror for your friend to 

gaze upon. 

man.—denot a visitor who will bring a gift if hi arm is outstretched. 

If the symbol is clear he is a dark man; if vagu he is veri fair. 

map.—a symbol bid you travel, for you will be sure of success wherev 

you go. 

maze.—a regular "maze of difficulty" confront you, but with care you 

will find a way out of the labyrinth. 

milestones.—y are about to win success after travel a long and 

difficult road. 

moon.—if shown as a crescent prosper and fortun are indicated. 

motorcar.—denot that you will achiev a rapid success. 

mountains.—thi majest pictur signifi an arduous, lengthy, and 

uphil fight against bad fortune. set your heart to it, and toil on to the goal. 

[88] 

mouse.—a remind that the littl irrit you are nurs is realli a 

veri trivial affair. 

navvy.—a token that you are veri bookish, and fond of dig into 

abstrus treatises. you are remind that "all work and no play make 

jack a dull boy." 

necklace.—grac and beauti of bodi and mind are here indicated. 

needle.—a singl needl signifi you are abl to withstand all the 

sharp prick of circumstances. sever needl togeth mean quarrels. 

pendulum.—great indecis and lack of charact are here indicated. 

pennon.—to deciph thi small-point flag is a sign that someon 

on board a ship is think much of you. 

pennies.—they denot great care in small details, which lead 

to ultim prosperity. 

ring.—a veri import symbol. gener speaking, it alway denot 

marriage, especi if seen at the bottom of the cup, in which case search 

for an initi which will reveal to a man or woman hi or her futur life-partner. 

rivers.—thes denot much peac of mind. 

roads.—if the road appear in the clear they predict a speedi chang 

of circumstances, usual for the better. 

robin.—thi bird alway denot hope. If you see it you can cheer up, 

as the troubl you now experi is about to pass away. 

rock.—a massiv rock denot great burdens. If there are a number of 

small rock easi fortun and much happi are indicated. 

rocket.—anoth warn against high ambition. 

rod.—if it is long and slender you will be veri fortunate. 

roof.—if what appear to be the roof onli of a hous is seen the signif 

is domest bliss. 

rook.—great happi is indicated. 

sailor.—foretel that veri shortli you will receiv a letter from over 

the sea. 

scales.—thi pictur is the token that the friend you have weigh in 

the balanc and found want is realli true and just. 

sceptre.—a sign of honor from royalty. 

serpent.—if on the side of the cup and appear to be rise to near 

the brim you may take comfort in the fact that you will shortli receiv some 

inform which will be of use. 

sheaves.—a good omen of a bounteou harvest of prosperity. 

shield.—a remind that you have just escap from a great calamity. 

[89] 

ship.—a larg ship with funnel and mast is a token of a long journey, 

usual on business. 

thimble.—thi home pictur denot that industri and devot to 

duti bring their own reward. 

thin person.—th figur of a veri slender person is usual the sign 

of veri prosper day ahead. 

thistle.—thi strike leaf-pictur is a sign that you will onli achiev 

success by plain live and high thinking. 

thorn.—thi is alway an excel omen. good luck and mani 

friend are indicated. 

tongs.—suggest you are of a fieri nature, and will quarrel with your 

best friend. 

tongue.—someon you are fond of who is far away is speak about 

you. 

tool.—ani instrument of manual oper denot that hard knock 

may be coming. 

triangle.—thi is a token of all-round prosper in love. 

trident.—thi is a token of success and honor in the navy. 

wagon.—a remind that you are soon to undertak a long journey. 

waiter.—thi pictur denot that rich and marri happi will 

come to you. 

walk stick.—a warn not to lean too much on your own 

efforts. 

waterfall.—ind the remov of mani obstruct in your path 

to happiness. 

weathercock.—thi pictur point to a friend who is unreliable. 

web.—signifi you will one day be caught in the toil as the result of 

ignor friendli warnings. 

well.—thi denot you are not dip deep enough into knowledge. 

[90] 

when will you marry? 

It ha long been held that an unmarri person can tell 

how mani year it will be befor he or she is married, in the 

follow manner. 

balanc a small spoon on the edg of a teacup. the spoon 

should be perfectli dry. then, with the assist of a second 

spoon, tilt drop of tea into the balanc spoon and count 

them, one by one. the number of drop it take to upset 

the spoon reveal the number of year that will elaps befor 

the wed take place. 

[91] 
