cuomo’ bad medicin on medicaid 
By the editori board 
jan. 31, 2020 

for years, new york state ha oper one of the most gener medicaid program in the country, a point of pride in a state with a long tradit of invest in the social safeti net. 

the program provid health care and other servic to more than six million people, larg low-incom new yorkers, and the cost are share between the state and feder government. 

but proflig spend ha sent cost spiral in recent years. the medicaid program ha becom a drive forc behind a $6.1 billion hole in new york’ budget next year, and a brew polit battl over what to do about it. 

though medicaid cost are rise across the unit states, in new york — among the country’ largest programs, and long one of it most expens — spend ha surged. from 2015 to 2019, annual spend grew by an averag of 6 percent, accord to a report last year by the empir center for public policy, a conserv nonprofit research organization. that’ roughli doubl the rate of growth in the previou sever years, even as enrol remain flat. 

health care and budget expert have said a varieti of factor are behind the trend, includ an increas in demand for person care program that provid nonmed servic to disabl new yorkers, a minimum-wag increas and financi assist that the state ha provid to struggl hospitals. 

new york’ share of it $75 billion annual medicaid bill is now about $30 billion and growing, impos an increasingli unten burden on state and local budgets. the feder govern pay the rest. 

the good news is that gov. andrew cuomo, who is in charg of administ the feder program, ha move to rein in costs. 

the bad news is that he ha said local will have to pay for increas in local medicaid spend abov 3 percent. that’ unfair and unrealistic. local govern in new york alreadi pay more mandat medicaid cost than local govern in ani other state, a dynam that’ been in place sinc the program began in the 1960s. that’ not unusu in new york, where albani reli on new york city’ tax base to fund the bulk of state servic from educ to commut rails. 

In 2018, local govern in new york sent $7.6 billion to albani for the program, accord to a 2018 report from the citizen budget commission. In fulton counti in upstat new york, for instance, the local medicaid bill for 2016 amount to more than 15 percent of the counti budget. In new york city, the annual medicaid tab is roughli $5 billion, or nearli 5 percent of the city’ budget. 

If the spend increas continue, and the state forc local govern to pay for them, the de blasio administr estim the citi would owe an addit $1.1 billion next year. the state say the figur would be much lower. 

mr. cuomo ha call on local govern to reduc costs. that’ fine: new york citi and counti across the state, which overse enrollment, should work to root out ani fraud or abus and ensur that those who sign up for the program are elig and truli in need. "they are the on-the-ground administrator. We respond to them," mr. cuomo said in a phone call wednesday. 

realli though, local govern have limit say over how the program is run. most of that respons rest with the state. 

when it come to reduc medicaid costs, that’ where the focu should remain. the most promis effort so far is mr. cuomo’ medicaid redesign team, a work group assign to find $2.5 billion in save thi year, preserv benefit while slash waste. 

the governor use a similar task forc to success carri out cost-sav medicaid reform nearli a decad ago, aid by the afford care act. 

the new group will be led by the same two men: michael dowling, the presid and c.e.o. of northwel health, and by denni rivera, the former head of 1199 s.e.i.u., the powerhous health care union. they are set to make their recommend ahead of the april 1 budget deadline. 

It will be up to mr. cuomo to ensur the public good is top of mind. the redesign group should issu a thorough report, present it find to the public and the legislature. right now, it’ not clear they plan to do so, and that’ a problem. 

while not perfect, the approach is far better than simpli fork over more and more taxpay dollar and stick local govern with an ever-grow tab, as the state ha been doing. 

To get new york’ medicaid program back on track, the group will need to take a hard look at spend on nonmed servic like cook and bath for homebound new yorkers. accord to the empir center, new york’ medicaid spend on such person servic wa the highest in the country. that may be becaus of a program that ha expand in recent year in which medicaid pay nonmed provid like famili member to care for clients. In 2016, person spend in new york account for 40 percent of nation medicaid spend for the categori overall, up from 23 percent in 2011, the empir center said. 

complic matter is a polit dynam friendli to the health care industry. In 2018, for example, the greater new york hospit associ gave more than $1 million in polit contribut to the state’ democrat party. not long afterward, the state increas medicaid reimburs rate for the first time sinc 2008, cost the state an estim $140 million per year. mr. cuomo ha deni that donat influenc hi polici decisions, and cuomo administr offici said at the time that the increas wa necessary, and simpli long overdue. health care expert disagree, and say hospit revenu had alreadi been on the rise. 

new york’ medicaid bill is out of control. the first order of busi is to understand more about why, and to be honest with the public about what need to be done about it. 
