I. W. kelli 

recent shift IN astrolog idea 
classic (traditional) astrolog wa associ with prognost and 
rel specific, testabl hypothes about planetari configur and 
human activities. until the twentieth century, astrolog have held that the 
stellar connect mainli reflect actual outward human behavior, but to- 
day there is a tendenc to claim that the stellar connect reflect onli in- 
ner life. To appreci the shlft in claim, consid first the view of charl 
carter, who wa the leadmg british astrolog in the mid-twentieth century: 
practic experi wiu soon convinc the most sceptic that the bodi of the solar system 
indicate, if they do not actual produce, chang in (1) our minds, (2) our feel and emo- 
[ions, (3) our physic bodies, (4) our extern affair and relationship with the world at larg 
(1925, p. 14). 

although everi birth chart wa differ and mani astrolog factor had 
to be assess (often with mutual conflict indications), it wa conced 
that there wa an observable, rel specif someth in common that 
should be exhibit by peopl with a particular planetari configur in 
their birth chart (horoscope). As the dutch psychologist jan van rooij 
point out, 
If one take 100 peopl w~rhthe sun in aries, they should have someth in common, irre- 
spectiv of other astrolog~cdfactors. and thi common should be d&erent from the com- 
mon factor in 100 peopl uith the sun in taurus, irrespect of addit factor (1994, p. 
55). 

On thi basi we should not expect to see the influenc of a particular factor 
on a particular person. but examin larg group of peopl should allow 
common to be detectable, if they exist. contrast thi with the view of 
psychotherapist and astrolog dr. glenn perry, perhap the leadmg propo- 
nent of modern inner psycholog astrolog (also known as astropsycholog 
and archetyp astrology) in the unit state today: 
astrolog doe not deal with quantiti that can be object measured.. . the [birth] chart 
depict the structur and dynam of consciousness.. . [it] shift the emphasi from predict 
outcom to interpret the meonirzg of outcom as they relat to the inner life of the person 
(1993, pp. 7, 8, 9). 

further, "astrolog onli play a role in the mental plane and doe not ex- 
press itself consist or systemat in event or behavior" (terpstra, 
1994, p. 42). here carter' direct connect with outward behavior and ex- 
ternal event is denied. instead the connect is with the unobserv in- 
ner life. when leadmg astrolog cannot even agre on what astrolog deal 
with, other confict and problem can onli further reduc the plausibhti of 
astrology. 
sinc the 1950 mani studi were conduct by both astrolog and 
sympathet researchers. the pictur that emerg out of thi research, as 
modern astrology: A critiqu 1039 

point out, wa mostli bad for astrology. but neg studes, even when 
they are cumulative, have been 'explain away' and dismiss in mani dif- 
ferent way by astrologers, allow them to maintain their belief in astrolo- 
gy whatev the evid or criticisms. 
~ e a l i with 
n ~ critic the astrolog way 
some typic way astrolog have react to neg findmg and cri- 
tiqu are briefli considered. 
ignor bad news.-first of all, such find can be ignor or play 
down. As the astrolog robert hand said, "posit result in the scientif 
studi of astrolog have to be taken serious undeniably, but neg result 
not so seriously" (cite in perry, 1995a, p. 37). overall, thi ha been the 
domin respons by the astrolog community. thi tack is taken by 
john anthoni west in hi "the case for astrology" (1991) where he say 
"sinc the aim of thi book is to present the posit evidence, intim de- 
t d s of the bulk of the neg evid do not realli concern us" (p. 234). 
but nearli all the evid is negative, so west' dehber suppress of it 
is irrespons (dean, 1993). A visit to ani astrolog bookstor win quickli 
confirm that research into astrolog is rare cite and when it is, it usual 
onli involv a distort present of the gauquelin find (kelli & 
saklofske, 1994)' and an outdat relianc and misinterpret of studi 


'the research of the late michael gauquelin and hi d e francois have been consist mis- 
understood and distort by astrolog and those sympathet to astrolo y the gauquehn 
found evid of a weak relationship between planetari posit in the 5; 
emin profession in some occupations. for exam le, mar tend to occur more often 
and the birth of 
than ex ect by chanc in some sector of the sky ar t f e birth of o u t s t a n d q athlet in mani 
sports. h e gauquelin attempt to explain these eind by suggestin that the underli 
process involv an inherit tempera (charact traits) imprint Ey planetari geomag- 
netic effects. An implic here wa chat, if thc suggest mediatin factor were correct, one 
would expect such lanetari relationshi s to be lnked ro hereditari factors. An initi studi by 
G a u q u e h inde pound a (weak) tenbenc for chlldren to be born with the same particular 
planet in the same secror of the sky as their parents. un€ortunatel , follow-up studi by gau- 
quelin with twice 4s lar e a sampl as the initi studi did nor conirm the realiti of the plane- 
tari link with herecllri &auquelin, 1988). A further re-analysi of gauquelin' hered hypoth- 
esis, by errel (1989. 1992) usin an improv methodology, also ave neg results. In addi- 
tion, in a s e r m of studi by g ~ r t e l(1990, 19931, gau u e h ' s aaracter-rrait hypothes and 
planetari geornagnerjc hypothes were nor supported, 
- - 
?cave wide open the mean of the 
findings. - 
It 1s of interest to note that the over-al find of gauquelin were hardli support of 
astrology. first of all, the planetari relationship were onli found with ot~tstandingpeo le in 
some occupations. No planetari relationship were uncov for the rest of the popu&rion, 
namely, the vast ma'ori of peopl who visit astrologers. second, even within the restrict 
group of emin indivixals, the effect wa extrem weak; there wa onli abour a 2% ddfer- 
enc benveen those with the hypothes planet in the relev sector and chanc expecta- 
tions. third, the data support planetari relationshi s &d not support other central asrrologi- 
cal h pothes such as zodiac signs, transits, and pfanetari aspects. fourth, gauquelin onli 
found(sorn of the planet (the moon, venus, mars, Ju iter, and saturn) to be relat to the 
birth-tim of the emin individu considered. No etfect were found for the other astrolog- 
ical signific planets, namely, mercury, uranus, Ne tune, pluto, or the sun. and the rela- 
tionship that were found were also inconsist w i l astrolog in rhat astrolog theori 
1040 I. W. kelli 

examin alleg lunar effect on human behavior (see kelly, rotton, & 
culver, 1996 for a recent review of stude on lunar effects).' 
knock science.-a second popular respons is the ever-applic argu- 
ment that the limit is with the present day scienc and not astrology. 
hand again said: "I don't think that scienc is yet capabl of deal with 
the full complex of the symbol languag as employ by astrologers" 
(cite by perry, 1995a, p. 37). unfortunately, thi promissori note may never 
be cash in. how would an appropri scienc differ from our present 
one? As gross said, "like all utopian these [astrologers] are short on spe- 
cific and we are never told what such a scienc as scienc would look hke, 
even in o u t h e , much less in detail, nor how [such a futur science] is like 
to dlffer as scienc from present day science" (1994, pp. 434-435; actual 
gross wa tallung about extrem view on feminist science, but the analog 
is perfect). 
move goalposts.-critic and seriou long last anomah can also 

would predct weak rather than strength for the planetari result obtain by gauquelin. 
F i n d y , gauquelin test the abil of astrolo er use the whole chart to discern import 
life characterist of peoples' lives. the astrofog inevitabl fail hi tests. H e conclud 
that horosco es did not provid inform of ani use varu in understand human be- 
havior and ciaract (gauquelin, 1983). 
seymour (1990, 1996) recent ar ed for the valid of a limit astrolo y base on the 
gau uelin findings. alon these lmes, ha attempt to strengthen the case for the gauque. 
lin &netary-occup findlngh by propos a s eculac mechan base on the aucgcj 
respons of our neural network< ro fluctuat in $e earth' geomagnet field which, m [urn, 
interact with the gravit field of the planets. udortunately, while seymour' t h e o r ~ z ~ n ~ 
doe not contradict modern physic theories, to make a plausibl case, one need much more 
than an ad hoc fit to the gauquelin results. and, it is precisel at thi point that seymour' 
propos lack substance. inrerestin iy, he cite as support for %i explanatori theori the he- 
and eomagnet effect h i t i d y uncov by gauquelin but neglect to inform reader 
:$loth eauqudinv own research and later studi b E n d did not reppcat such findings. 
furthermore, seymour never satisfactorili address X e problem of the mismatch between 
planetari and biolog frequenc or how the nervou system is influenc (other than by 
vagu refer to 'induc current in the neural networks,' whch tell us nothing). for all of 
seymour' appeal to the scientif statu of hi ex lanat he never s ecifi test by which 
hi theori could be examined. the entir edific o?~eymour' theori aeo reli on the trust- 
worthi of the G a u x e l i n d a ~ base 
a which ha been challeng by the dutch mathematician 
nienhuy (in press). e rehabhti of the G a u q u e h databas ha been the scene of a bitter 
controversy. interest reader might consult the debat between ertel and irv (1997) and 
furtz, nienhuys, and sandhu (1997) for the most recent exchang on thi topic. 
the qualiti of much astrolog think is summar by astrolog joanna ashmun' de- 
scription of internet exchang between astrologers: "skeptic is not in evid and is in 
fact discouraged.. . . the way astrolog treat research and ske tic is just the way they 
treat other astrolog who disagre with them-continu on as f they and their disagree- 
ment never existed. . . . the thing that I find least comfort about astrolo discuss 
(and not just on the internet) is their irnmateriahty, their lack of grounding. ~stro!&er are less 
liter than average; they write badli and they read badly; there is almost no critic re onse; 
error are ignored, correct are not acknowl ed they answer off the top of their eeads, 
quot from memory, claim that anythin publishef anywher at an time is gener knowl e 
and then get sidetrack into argu atout who' a liar instead orsort out the fact of i%c 
origin question. there is noth resembl peer review, except in regard ro polit correct- 
ness. the fact is they don't look stuff up, not even when they d ~ s a ~ r cwith e you! most 
astrolog would rather have an dfi quotat from dane rudhyar or C G. jung to supporr 
their opinion than some good research" (ashmun, 1996, pp. 41-43). 
modern astrology: A critiqu 1041 

be dealt with by hand-wav in anoth drection and the elev of spec- 
ulat to a futurist higher plane. for example, a seriou problem for as- 
trolog is the great &vide between the eastern sider zo&ac and the west- 
ern tropic zodiac. these zodiac current differ by almost one sign. one 
may be an ari in north america but a pisc in lndia (cornelius, hyde, 
& webster, 1995, p. 31). Is thi conact between zodiac a problem for as- 
trology? Of cours not! cornehu state thi could occur becaus there are 
"two differ order of influence, one from the constel and the other 
from the earth-sun cycle" or, alternatively, we can view "both zodiac as two 
reflect of the same symbol forms. . . [that] both show in their own dif- 
ferent ways" (p. 32). the obfusc 'order of influence' and 'reflecuon 
. . . show in their own ways' are nowher clarified, henc we are no h r - 
ther in our understand after be told thi than we were before. 
\xlhat about peopl who are born at the same time and have M e r e n t 
destinies? l h s ha been a standard argument against astrology. the same as- 
trolog tell us: "the singular horoscop [can be1 read as a signatur for 
these particular twin with M e r e n t group of planet describ the two 
individu . . . where frequent one twin answer to the sun and the other 
to the moon in the same horoscope" (cornelius, et al., 1995, p. 131). here 
the term 'frequently' refer to inch not compeumg, to avoid dsconfir- 
mation. We are also entitl to ask how one would tell which one is sun and 
which one is moon, but no answer is p r ~ v i d e d If 
. ~ that doesn't work, cor- 
nelius, et al. remind us that we can alway interpret astrolog symbol 
in a metaphor way, for example, "sigmund freud wa born on a differ- 
ent contin but within minut of robert perry. freud discov the un- 
consciou and perri discov the north pole" (p. 131; see also p. 96). 
hence, these time-twin were both &scoverers!' If interpret encom- 
pass both liter and symbol (includ metaphorical) are equal adrnis- 
sibl with astrolog claims, then we cannot fail to find a fit between the 
horoscop and the person. the posit side to thi is never have to admit 
you are wrong, the neg side say veri littl of import. 
invok negatives.-a fourth popular respons is to say that the phe- 
nomena astrolog deal with are veri subtl and elus and what we need 
are more creativ way of investig them. for example, even though a 
large, consist bodi of research converg on the view that sun sign are 


'A varieti of ad hoc rule could be used, for example, oldest=sun, o r (for op osite-sex wins) 
male=sun, or it could be whichev one on inspect fit best. At the end o r t h e day all chat 
. 
matter to astrolo er is have a ~ r a c t i c a strategi 
l no matter how arbitrary. 
'ac,tud freud j i d n ' ~discov t e vnconscious. there is a l a q e pre-freudian literatur on the 
toplc. &at freud did wa use the term as a work tool chat could be investi ate psycho- 
logic (fine, 1973, pp. 36-37). further, the noccb pole wasn't 'discovered' at a%. everybodi 
knew where and what it was. 
1042 I. W . kelli 

not valid, the astrolog harvey could still say "it is absolut correct to say 
that there is no evid for sign and hous as yet. . . (1982, p. 47, itahc 
harvey's) and twelv year later, after again acknowledg the lack of evi- 
dence, tell us "I am person still convinc that, given more sensit and 
imagin tests, confirm of the realiti of sun-sign typologies, and the 
sign generally, will be obtained" (1994, p. v). sinc it is difficult to prove a 
neg in such cases, thi posit can be maintain indefinitely. A col- 
lorari is that astrolog with incompat posit on fundament tent 
can adopt the same intransig attitud in regard to their own beliefs. such 
a postur in the face of neg evid can guarante a static system and 
a lack of progress. It also contradict the suppos eas with which astrolog- 
ical connect were first recognized. As perri (1993) tell us of the an- 
cients, "the partial if not complet validlti of astrolog wa self-evid to 
anyon w h g to attempt a seriou studi of the subject" (p. 3 ) . thi dis- 
crepanc is in need of explanation. furthermore, appeal to the self-evid 
have not been veri fruit guid to truth in the histori of ideas. 
blame faulti methods.-finally, one can say that, if you are obtain 
neg results, you must be do it wrong. you are use the wrong meth- 
odology, the wrong paradigm or both. thi approach ha been adopt by 
increas number of astrolog sinc the 1950s, when research (and nega- 
tive results) got undenvay. west (1991), for example, contend that scien- 
tific critic of astrolog are irrelev becaus astrolog is "a system of 
magic" (p. 223), where magic is "the attempt to master the fundament 
law of reson that have produc the cosmos" (p. 220). west wa insuf- 
ficient explicit about thi 'system of magic' and we are left with a conjunc- 
tion of unformul statement about 'the creativ power of nature' or the 
'law of harmony' and appeal to author ('ancient wisdom'). As evan 
(1994) point out, west' 
magic system is a close system. W e are invit to bcheve that it is true, not becaus it con- 
nect up with other thing which experi ha shown to be true, but by some inher truth 
of it own which will have it that the planet saturn symbol contract wherea jupit 
symbol expansiveness. . . (p. 413). 

while, in general, astrolog pretend that claim about zochac signs, 
houses, planetari aspects, and so on are empir statements, that is, claim 
capabl of be reject or modifi by research or theory, to most astrolo- 
ger such claim actual function as necessarili true claims. the "truth" of 
central astrolog tenet themselv is never in doubt.' 


'A more gener underli issu here is whi astrolog themselv behev in astrology. As 
dean, mather, and kell (1996) point out, the step in b&ef are roughly: (1) read astrolog 
books, becom awar o r h e system. (2) learn more, calcul charts, see that they appear to 
work. (3) becom dazzl by the history, majesty, and sheer appeal of it all. (4) adopt the sys- 

the origin of astrolog idea 
A legitim queri here concern how these astrolog connect 
were establish in the first place. To make it easier, let us initi consid 
a rel straightforward 
- astrolog claim and examin the theori ad- 
vanc by astrolog to explain the origin of these connections. If astrolo- 
ger have no plausibl explanation, then we have good reason to reject 
more complic claim base on these connections. 
accord to traltion astrology, the planet are suppos to be asso- 
ciat with certain charact traits; for example, mar is associ with com- 
bativ and courage, and uranu is associ with origin and inde- 
pendence. how did astrolog find thi out or determin this? 
G a u q u e h (1980) and startup (1981) have describ five such theori 
that are taken serious by member of the astrolog community. Ln what 
1046 I. W. kelli 

follows, I w d describ each of these theories, reli heavili on mani of the 
insight of startup to examin them critically: 
(1) the planetari connect were reveal to the ancient by a higher 
intelligence, for example, by gods, angels, demons, or extraterrestrials. apart 
from beg the question about the exist of these be in the first 
place, explain mysteri in term of other mysteri doe not take us ani 
further than we were before. "we have not explain how these alien got 
their knowledge" and so it mere push the problem elsewher (startup, p. 
26). It is also not clear how thi propos could be independ tested. 
(2) the earli astrolog acquir thi inform about planet and 
person&ti by paranorm means. thi similar beg the question in that it 
assum esp ha been demonstr and is capabl of establish relation- 
ship far and beyond the claim of the major of even the most fervent 
advoc of the paranormal. also, 
which parricular psi abil is to be invoked? sure telepathi is not good here since, prior to 
the esrablish of the typology, there wa no one' mind to read. clairvoy is equal du- 
biou sinc it is difficult to imagin what state of affair could have been paranorm per- 
ceiv which wa not avail to ordinari perceptions. that leav precognition. . . but thi 
would presum requir that the ancient astrolog somehow saw the result of modern in- 
vestigauon which were themselves, in turn, inspired, albeit indirectly, by the 'insights' of the 
ancient (startup, 1981, p. 26). 

there are other problems. what is the 'it' we are detect by paranorm 
means? some 'force' eman from the celesti object? how do the item 
detect paranorm relat to item detect by normal perception? (for 
example, if we detect all sort of paranorm 'rays' around us, how can we 
tell that they are come from what we visual perceiv as mars?) how do 
we know that there is a correl between the normal and the paranorm 
items? By paranorm means?-that' doubli question begging! By normal 
means? If so, then whi could not we have notic the paranorm item 
through normal channels? 


