project gutenberg' astronom lore in chaucer, by florenc M. grimm 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 

almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 

re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 

with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

title: astronom lore in chaucer 

author: florenc M. grimm 

releas date: octob 11, 2011 [ebook #37711] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: iso-8859-1 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook astronom lore IN chaucer *** 

produc by the onlin distribut proofread team at 

http://www.pgdp.net (thi file wa produc from imag 

gener made avail by the internet archive.) 

univers OF nebraska 

studi inlanguage, literatur and critic 

number 2 



astronom lore IN chaucer 



BY 

florenc M. grimm, A. m.assist in the univers ofnebraska librari 



editori committe 

louis pound, ph. d., depart of englishh. B. alexander, ph. d., depart of philosophyf. W. sanford, A. b., depart of latin. 



lincoln1919 



[pg 2] 

content 

I. 

astronomi in the middl age 

3 

ii. 

chaucer’ scientif knowledg 

9 

iii. 

chaucer’ cosmolog 

12 

iv. 

chaucer’ astronomi 

27 

V. 

astrolog lore in chaucer 

51 



appendix 

79 



[pg 3] 

astronom lore IN chaucer 



I 

astronomi in the middl age 

the conspicu of astronom lore in the poetri of chaucer is due 

to it import in the life of hi century. In the mediaev period, 

astronomi (or ‘astrology,’ for the two name were use indiffer to 

cover the same subject) wa one of the vital interest of men. the 

ordinari man of the middl age knew much more than do most men to-day 

about the phenomena of the heavens; conveni such as clocks, almanacs, 

and chart repres celesti phenomena were rare, and direct 

observ of the appar movement and the rel posit of the 

heavenli bodi were necessari for the regul of man’ daili 

occupations. furthermore, the belief in a geocentr system of the 

universe, which in chaucer’ centuri wa almost univers accepted, wa 

of vast signific in man’ way of thinking. accept thi view, all 

the heavenli bodi seem to have been creat for the sole benefit of 

man, inhabit the central posit in the universe; their movements, 

alway with refer to the earth as a center, brought to man light, 

heat, chang of season—al the condit that made human life possibl 

on the earth. 

not onli did the man of the middl age see in the regular movement of 

the celesti sphere the instrument by which god grant him physic 

existence, but in the variou aspect of heavenli phenomena he saw the 

govern principl of hi moral life. the arrang of the heavenli 

bodi with regard to one anoth at variou time wa suppos to exert 

undoubt power over the cours of terrestri events. each planet wa 

thought to have special attribut and a special influenc over men’s[pg 4] 

lives. venu wa the planet of love, mars, of war and hostility, the sun, 

of power and honor, and so forth. each wa mysteri connect with a 

certain color, with a metal, too, the alchemist said, and each had 

special power over some organ of the human body. the planet’ influenc 

wa believ to vari greatli accord to it posit in the heavens, so 

that to determin a man’ destini accur it wa necessari to consid 

the aspect of the whole heavens, especi at the moment of hi birth, 

but also at other times. thi wa call “cast the horoscope” and wa 

regard as of great import in enabl a man to guard against 

threaten peril or bad tendencies, and to make the best use of 

favor opportunities. 

It is not astonishing, then, that the great monument of literatur in the 

mediaev period and even much later are fill with astronom and 

astrolog allusions; for these are but reflect of vital human 

interest of the times. the greatest poetic work of the middl ages, 

dante’ divina commedia, is rich in astronom lore, and it dramat 

action is project against a cosmograph background reflect the 

view of dante’ contemporari as to the structur of the world. milton, 

write in the seventeenth century, base the cosmolog of hi paradis 

lost in the main on the ptolema system, but make adam and the 

archangel raphael discuss the rel merit of thi system and the 

heliocentr view of the universe. the latter had been brought forth by 

copernicu a centuri earlier, but even in milton’ day had not yet 

succeed in supplant the old geocentr cosmology. 

the view of the univers which we find reflect in chaucer’ poetri is 

chiefli base on the ptolema system of astronomy, though it show trace 

of veri much more primit cosmolog ideas. the ptolema system owe 

it name to the famou alexandrian astronom of the second centuri A. d., 

claudiu ptolemy, but is base larg on the work and discoveri of the 

earlier greek philosoph and astronomers, especi eudoxus, 

hipparchus, and aristarchus, whose investig ptolemi compiled[pg 5] and, 

along some lines, extended. ptolema astronomi wa a pure geometr 

or mathemat system which repres the observ movement and 

rel posit of the heavenli bodi so accur that calcul 

as to their posit at ani given time could be base upon it. ptolemi 

agre with hi contemporari in the opinion that to assign caus for 

the celesti movement wa outsid the sphere of the astronomer. thi wa 

a proper field of philosophy; and the decis of philosophers, 

especi those of aristotle, were regard as final, and their teach 

as the basi upon which observ phenomena should be described. 

accord to the ptolema system the earth is a motionless sphere fix 

at the center of the universe. It can have no motion, for there must be 

some fix point in the univers to which all the motion of the heavenli 

bodi may be referred; if the earth had motion, it wa argued, thi would 

be proportion to the great mass of the earth and would caus object 

and anim to fli off into the air and be left behind. ptolemi believ 

thi reason suffici to make unten the idea of a rotatori motion of 

the earth, although he wa fulli awar that to suppos such a motion of 

the earth would simplifi exceedingli the represent of the celesti 

movements. It did not occur to him that to suppos the earth’ atmospher 

to particip in it motion would obviat thi difficulty. the earth wa 

but a point in comparison with the immens sphere to which the star were 

attach and which revolv about the earth onc in everi twenty-four 

hours, impart it motion to sun, moon, and planets, thu caus day 

and night and the rise and set of the heavenli bodies. the irregular 

motion of the planet were account for by suppos them to move on 

circl of small sphere call ‘epicycles’, the centr of which move 

around the ‘deferents’, or circl of larg sphere which carri the 

planet in cours concentr to the star sphere. By give each of the 

planet an epicycl and defer of the proper rel size and veloc 

the vari oscil of the planets, as far as they could be follow 

by mean of the simpl instrument then in use, were almost perfectli 

account for. 

[pg 6]though it wa a pure mathemat system which onli attempt to give a 

basi for comput celesti motions, ptolema astronomi is of great 

import histor as it remain the foundat of theoret 

astronomi for more than 1400 years. throughout the long dark centuri of 

the middl age it surviv in the studi of the retir student of the 

monasteri and of the few except enlighten men who still had 

some regard for pagan learn in the day when mani of the church father 

denounc it as heretical. 

ptolemi wa the last of the great origin greek astronomers. the 

alexandrian school produced, after him, onli copyist and commentators, 

and the theoret astronomi of the greeks, so highli perfect in 

ptolemy’ almagest, wa for mani centuri almost entir neglected. 

the roman state gave no encourag to the studi of theoret 

astronomi and produc no new school of astronomy. although it wa the 

fashion for a roman to have a smatter of greek astronomy, and famou 

latin author like cicero, seneca, strabo and plini wrote on astronomy, 

yet the roman care littl for origin investig and contribut 

noth new to the science. the romans, however, appreci the valu of 

astronomi in measur time, and appli to the alexandrian school to 

satisfi their practic need for a calendar. what juliu caesar obtain 

from the alexandrian sosigenes, he greatli improv and gave to the 

empire, as the calendar which, with the except of the slight chang 

made by gregori xiii, we still use. 

the pseudo-astronom scienc of astrology, or the so-cal ‘judici 

astronomy’ wa pursu dure the roman empir and throughout the middl 

age with much greater zeal than theoret astronomy. the interest in 

astrology, to be sure, encourag the studi of observ astronomi to 

a certain extent; for the cast of horoscop to foretel destini 

requir that the heavenli bodi be observ and method of calcul 

their posit at ani time or place be known. but there wa no desir to 

inquir into the underli law of the celesti motion or to 

investig the real natur of the heavenli phenomena. 

[pg 7]if the roman state did not encourag astronomy, the roman church 

posit discourag it. the bibl becam and long remain the sole 

author recogn by the church father as to the constitut of the 

universe. By mani of the patrist ptolema astronomi wa despised; not 

becaus it did not describ accur the observ phenomena of the 

heavens, for it did thi in a way that could scarc have been improv 

upon with the facil for observ then available; and not becaus 

it wa found upon the fals assumpt that the earth is the motionless 

center of the univers about which all heavenli bodi revolve; but 

becaus there wa no author in scriptur for such a system, and it 

could not possibl be made consist with the cosmolog of genesis. 

allegor descript of the univers base on the scriptur held 

almost complet sway over the mediaev mind. the whole univers wa 

repres allegor by the tabernacl and it furniture. the earth 

wa flat and rectangular like the tabl of shew bread, and surround on 

all four side by the ocean. the wall of heaven beyond thi support the 

firmament shape like a half-cylinder. angel move the sun, moon, and 

star across the firmament and let down rain through it window from the 

expans of water above. 


