
iii 

chaucer’ cosmolog 

chaucer wrote no poetic work have a cosmograph background as 

complet set forth as is that in dante’ divin comedi or that in 

milton’ paradis lost. although hi cosmolog refer are often 

incident they are not introduc in a pedant manner. whenev they are 

not part of interpol from other writer hi use of them is due to 

their intim relat to the life hi poetri portray or to hi 

appreci of their poetic value. when chaucer says, for example, that 

the sun ha grown old and shine in capricorn with a paler light than is 

hi wont, he is not use a mere convent devic for show that 

winter ha come, but is express thi fact in truli poetic manner and in 

word quit comprehens to the men of hi day, who were accustom to 

think of time relat in term of heavenli phenomena. 

popular and scientif view of the univers in chaucer’ centuri were by 

no mean the same. the untaught man doubtless still thought of the earth 

as be flat, as it appear to be, as bound by the water of the ocean, 

and as cover by a dome-lik materi firmament through which the water 

abov sometim came as rain;[pg 13] while, as we have seen, by the fourteenth 

centuri among scholar the geocentr system of astronomi wa firmli 

establish and the sphere and epicycl of ptolemi were becom more 

wide known. It is the view held by the educ men of hi centuri that 

chaucer’ poetri chiefli reflects. 



1. the celesti sphere and their movement 

when we read chaucer we are transport into a world in which the heavenli 

bodi and their movement seem to bear a more intim relat to human 

life than they do in the world in which we live. the thought of the 

revolv sphere carri sun, moon, and planets, regul light and 

heat on the earth, and exercis a mysteri influenc over terrestri 

event and human destini wa a sublim concept and one that natur 

appeal to the imagin of a poet. chaucer wa impress alik by the 

vast of the revolv sphere in comparison to the earth’ smallness, 

by their orderli arrangement, and by the unceas regular of their 

appear which seem to show that they should etern abide. In the 

parlement of foul he interpol a passag from cicero’ somnium 

scipioni in which africanu appear to the sleep scipio, point out 

to him the insignific of our littl earth when compar with the 

vast of the heaven and then admonish him to regard the thing of 

thi world as of littl import when compar with the joy of the 

heavenli life to come.[9] 

“than shew he him the litel erthe, that heer is, 

At regard of the heven quantite; 

and after shew he him the nyne speres.” 

the regular arrang of the planetari sphere cling often to the 

poet’ fanci and he make mani allus to their order in the heavens. He 

speak of mar as “the thridd heven lord above”[10] and of venu as 

presid over[pg 14] the “fift cercle.”[11] In troilu and criseyd the poet 

invok venu as the adorn light of the third heaven.[12] 

“O blis light, of which the beme clere 

adorneth al the thridd heven faire!”[13] 

mediaev astronom as we have seen, imagin nine spheres, each of the 

seven innermost carri with it one of the planet in the order mention 

below; the eighth sphere wa that of the fix stars, and to account for 

the precess of the equinoxes, men suppos it to have a slow motion 

from west to east, round the axi of the zodiac; the ninth or outermost 

sphere they call the primum mobile, or the sphere of first motion, and 

suppos it to revolv daili from east to west, carri all the other 

sphere with it. the thought of the two outer spheres, the primum 

mobile, whirl along with it all the inner spheres, and the firmament, 

bear host of bright stars, seem to have appeal strongli to the 

poet’ imagination. In the tale of the man of law the primum mobil 

is describ as crowd and hurl in diurnal revolut from east to 

west all the sphere that would natur follow the slow cours of the 

zodiac from west to east.[14] elsewher the primum mobil is call the 

“whele that bereth the sterres” and is said to turn the heaven with a 

“ravissh sweigh:” 

“O thou maker of the whele that bereth the sterres, which that art 

y-fastn to thi perdur chayer, and[pg 15] tornest the heven with a 

ravissh sweigh, and constreinest the sterr to suffren thi lawe;”[15] 

the firmament, which in chaucer is not restrict to the eighth sphere but 

gener refer to the whole expans of the heavens, is mani time 

mention by chaucer; and it appear on clear or cloudi nights, it 

chang aspect befor an impend storm or with the come of dawn, 

beauti described.[16] 



2. the harmoni of the sphere 

some of the cosmolog idea reflect in chaucer’ write can be 

trace back to system older than the ptolemaic. the beauti fanci that 

the univers is govern by harmoni had it origin in the philosophi of 

the pythagorean in the fourth centuri B. c., and continu to appeal to 

men’ imagin until the end of the middl ages. It wa thought that 

the distanc of the planetari sphere from one anoth correspond to the 

interv of a music scale and that each sphere as it revolv sound 

one note of the scale. when ask whi men could not hear the celesti 

harmony, the pythagorean said: A blacksmith is deaf to the continuous, 

regular beat of the hammer in hi shop; so we are deaf to the music which 

the sphere have been send forth from eternity. 

In ancient and mediaev cosmolog it wa onli the seven sphere of the 

planet that were gener suppos to particip in thi celesti 

music; but the poet have[pg 16] taken liberti with thi idea and have given 

it to us in form suit their own fancies. milton bid all the celesti 

sphere join in the heavenli melody: 

“ring out, ye crystal spheres, 

onc bless our human ears,if ye have power to touch our sens so; 

and let your silver chime 

move in melodi time,and let the base of heaven’ deep organ blow; 

and with your ninefold harmony, 

make up full consort to the angel symphony.”[17] 

shakespear let everi orb of the heaven send forth it note as it moves: 

“there’ not the smallest orb which thou behold’st 

but in hi motion like an angel sings, 

still quir to the young-ey cherubins;”[18] 

chaucer, too, make all nine sphere participate: 

“and after that the melody herd he 

that cometh of thilk spere thrye three, 

that well is of musyk and melody 

In thi world heer, and caus of armonye.”[19] 

onli in unusu circumst can the music of the sphere be heard by 

mortal ears. In the line just quot the celesti melodi is heard dure 

a dream or vision. In troilu and criseyde, after troilus’ death hi 

spirit is born aloft to heaven whenc he behold the celesti orb and 

hear the melodi sent forth as they revolve: 

[pg 17] 

“and ther he saugh, with ful avysement, 

the erratik sterres, herkening armony 

with sown full of hevenish melodye.”[20] 



3. the cardin point and the region of the world 

more primit in origin than the harmoni of the sphere are refer to 

the four elements, to the divis of the world, and to the cardin 

point or quarter of the earth. Of these, probabl the most primit is 

the last. the idea of four cardin points, the “before,” the “behind,” 

the “right,” and the “left,” later given the name north, south, east, and 

west, appear among peopl in their veri earliest stage of civilization, 

and becaus of it great use ha remain and probabl will remain 

throughout the histori of the human race. onli one of chaucer’ mani 

refer to the cardin point need be mentioned. In the man of law 

tale (b.491ff.) the cardin point are first suggest by an allus to 

the four ‘spirit of tempest,’ which were suppos to have their 

respect abod in the four quarter of earth, and then specif 

name in the line following: 

“who bad the four spirit of tempest, 

that power han tanoyen land and see, 

‘both north and south, and also west and est, 

anoyeth neither see, ne land, ne tree?’” 

Of almost equal antiqu are idea of the univers as a threefold world 

have heaven above, earth below, and a region of dark and gloom 

beneath the earth. chaucer usual speak of the threefold world, the 

“tryne compas,” as compris heaven, earth and sea. thu in the knight 

tale:[21] 

“‘o chast goddess of the wode grene, 

To whom both heven and erth and see is sene, 

quen of the regn of pluto derk and lowe,’” 

[pg 18]fame’ palac is said to stand midway between heaven, earth and sea: 

“hir paley stant, as I shal seye, 

right even in midd of the wey 

betwixen hevene, erthe, and see;”[22] 

again in the second nonn tale, the name ‘tryne compas’ is use of the 

threefold world and the three region are mentioned: 

“that of the tryne compa lord and gyde is, 

whom erth and see and heven, out of relees, 

Ay herien;”[23] 



4. heaven, hell and purgatori 

In mediaev cosmolog idea of heaven, hell, and purgatory, as more or 

less definit locat region where the spirit of the dead were either 

reward or punish eternally, or were purg of their earthli sin in 

hope of futur blessedness, play an import part. accord to dante’ 

poetic concept hell wa a conic shape pit whose apex reach to the 

center of the earth, purgatori wa a mountain on the earth’ surfac on 

the summit of which wa locat the garden of eden or the earthli 

paradise, and heaven wa a motionless region beyond space and time, the 

motionless sphere outsid of the primum mobile, call the empyrean. 

chaucer’ allus to heaven, hell and purgatori are frequent but chiefli 

incident and give no such definit idea of their locat as we find in 

the divin comedy. the nearest chaucer come to indic the place of 

heaven is in the parlement of foules, 55-6, where africanu speak of 

heaven and then point to the galaxy: 

“and right folk shal go, after they dye, 

To heven; and shew him the galaxye.” 

[pg 19]chaucer describ heaven as “swift and round and burning”, thu to some 

extent depart from the concept of it usual held in hi time: 

“and right so as thise philosophr wryte 

that heven is swift and round and eek brenninge, 

right so wa fayr cecili the whyte.”[24] 

In use the term “swift and round” chaucer must have been think of 

the primum mobil which, as we have seen, wa thought to have a swift 

diurnal motion from east to west. hi use of the epithet “burning” is in 

conform with the mediaev concept of the empyrean, or heaven of 

pure light as it is describ by dante. 

chaucer doe not describ the form and locat of hell as definit as 

doe dante, but the idea which he present of it by incident allusions, 

whether or not thi wa the view of it he himself held, is practic the 

one commonli held in hi day. that hell is locat somewher within the 

depth of the earth is suggest in the knight tale;[25]— 

“hi felaw went and soght him down in helle;” 

and in the man of law tale;[26] 

“O serpent under femininitee, 

lyk to the serpent depe in hell y-bounde,” 

In the person tale hell is describ as a horribl pit to which no 

natur light penetrates, fill with smoke flame and presid over by 

devil who await an opportun to draw sin soul to their 

punishment.[27] elsewher in the same tale the parson describ hell as a 

region of disorder, the onli place in the world not subject to the 

univers law of nature, and attribut thi idea of it to job: 

[pg 20]“and eek iob seith: that ‘in hell is noon ordr of rule.’ and 

al-be-it so that god hath creat all thing in right ordre, and 

no-th with-outen ordre, but all thing been ordeyn and nombred; 

yet nathele they that been dampn been no-th in ordre, ne holden 

noon ordre.”[28] 

the word purgatori seldom occur in a liter sens in chaucer’ poetry, 

but the figur use of it is frequent. when the wife of bath is 

relat her experi in marri life she tell us that she wa her 

fourth husband’ purgatory.[29] the old man, ianuarie[30], contempl 

marriage, fear that he may lose hope of heaven hereafter, becaus he will 

have hi heaven here on earth in the joy of wed life. hi friend 

iustinu sarcast tell him that perhap hi wife will be hi 

purgatory, god’ instrument of punishment, so that when he die hi soul 

will skip to heaven quicker than an arrow from the bow. To arcite, 

releas from prison on condit that he never again enter theseus’ 

lands, banish will be a wors fate than the purgatori of life 

imprisonment, for then even the sight of emely will be deni him: 

“he seyde, ‘alla that day that I wa born! 

now is my prison wors than biforn; 

now is me shape etern to dwell 

noght in purgatorie, but in helle.’”[31] 

the idea of purgatory, not as a place definit locat like dante’ 

mount of purgatory, but rather as a period of punish and probation, is 

express in these line from the parlement of foul (78-84): 

[pg 21] 

“‘but breker of the lawe, soth to seyne, 

and lecher folk, after that they be dede, 

shul alwey whirl about therth in peyne, 

til mani a world be passed, out of drede, 

and than, for-yeven all hir wik dede, 

than shul they come unto that blis place, 

To which to comen god thee send hi grace!’” 

chaucer use the idea of paradis for poetic purpos quit as often as 

that of purgatory. He express the highest degre of earthli beauti or 

joy by compar it with paradise. criseyde’ face is said to be like the 

imag of paradise.[32] again, in extol the marri life, the poet say 

that it virtu are such 

“‘that in thi world it is a paradys.’”[33] 

and later in the same tale, woman is spoken of as 

“mann help and hi confort, 

hi paradi terrestr and hi disport.”[34] 

when aenea reach carthag he 

“i come to paradi 

out of the swolow of helle, and thu in ioy 

remembreth him of hi estat in troye.”[35] 

chaucer mention paradis sever time in it liter sens as the abod 

of adam and eve befor their fall. In the monk tale we are told that 

adam held sway over all paradis except one tree.[36] again, the 

pardon speak of the expuls of adam and eve from paradise: 

“adam our fader, and hi wyf also, 

fro paradi to labour and to wo 

were driven for that vyce, it is no drede; 

for whyl that adam fasted, as I rede,[pg 22]he wa in paradys; and whan that he 

eet of the fruyt defend on the tree, 

anon he wa out-cast to we and peyne.”[37] 



5. the four elements. 

the idea of four elements[38] ha it origin in the attempt of the earli 

greek cosmologist to discov the ultim principl of realiti in the 

universe. 

thale reach the conclus that thi principl wa water, anaximines, 

that it wa air, and heracleitus, fire, while parmenid suppos two 

elements, fire or light, subtl and rarefied, and earth or night, dens 

and heavy. empedocl of agrigentum (about 450 B. c.) assum as primari 

element all four—fire, air, water, and earth—of which each of hi 

predecessor had assum onli one or two. To explain the manifold 

phenomena of natur he suppos them to be produc by combin of the 

element in differ proport through the attract and repuls 

forc of ‘love’ and ‘discord.’ thi arbitrari assumpt of four 

elements, first made by empedocles, persist in the popular imagin 

throughout the middl age and is, like other cosmolog idea of 

antiquity, sometim reflect in the poetri of the time. 

the element in mediaev cosmolog were assign to a definit region of 

the universe. be mortal and imperfect they occupi four sphere below 

the moon, the element region or region of imperfection, as distinguish 

from the ether region abov the moon. immedi within the sphere of 

the moon came that of fire, below thi the air, then water, and lowest of 

all the solid sphere of earth.[pg 23] fire be the most ether of the 

element constantli tend to rise upward, while earth sink toward the 

center of the universe. thi contrast is a favorit idea with dante, who 

say in the paradiso i. 112-117: 

“‘wherefor they move to divers port o’er thegreat sea of being, and each one withinstinct given it to bear it on. 

thi beareth the fire toward the moon; thisi the mover in the heart of thing that die;thi doth draw the earth togeth and unit it.’” 

elsewher dant describ the lightn as flee it proper place when 

it strike the earth: 

“‘but lightning, flee it proper site, ne’er 

dart as dost thou who art return thither.’”[39] 

and again: 

“‘so from thi cours sometim departeth thecreatur that hath power, thu thrust, to swerveto-ward some other part, 

(even as fire may be seen to dart down fromth cloud) if it first rush be wrench asideto earth by fals seem pleasure.’”[40] 

the same thought of the tendenc of fire to rise and of earth to sink is 

found in chaucer’ translat of boethius:[41] 

“thou bindest the element by noumbr proporcionables, ... that the 

fyr, that is purest, ne flee nat over hye, ne that the heviness ne 

draw nat adoun over-low the erth that ben ploung in the wateres.” 

chaucer doe not make specif mention of the sphere of the elements, but 

he tell us plainli that each element ha been assign it proper region 

from which it may not escape: 



