
V 

astrolog lore in chaucer 

astrology, though resembl a scienc in that it make use of observ 

and seek to establish law govern it data, is in realiti a faith or 

creed. It had it beginning, so tradit tell us, in the faith of the 

ancient babylonian in certain astral deiti who exert an influenc 

upon terrestri event and human life. the basi of thi faith wa not 

altogeth illog but contain a germ of truth. 

Of all the heavenli bodies, the sun exert the most obviou effect upon 

the earth; the sun brought day and night, summer and winter; hi ray 

lure grow thing from mother earth and so gave susten to mankind. 

but to the ancient peopl of the orient the sun wa also often a bane 

power; he could destroy as well as give life. therefore, the ancient came 

to look upon the sun as a great and power god to be worship and 

propiti by men. and if the sun wa such a power, it wa natur to 

believ that all the other bright orb of the sky were lesser [pg 52]divin 

who exercis more limit power on the earth. from thi beginning, 

based, as we have seen, on a germ of fact, by the power of hi imagin 

and credulity, man extend more and more the power of these sider 

divinities, attribut to their volit and influenc all the most 

insignific as well as the most import terrestri events. and if the 

heavenli bodies, by revolv about the earth in ceaseless harmony, 

effect the recurr of day and night and of the seasons, and if their 

configur were respons for the minutest event in nature, wa it 

not natur to suppos that, besid affect man thu indirectly, they 

also influenc him directli and were respons for hi conduct and for 

the veri qualiti of hi mind and soul? perhap the astonish varieti 

of the influenc that the celesti bodies, from ancient until modern 

times, were suppos to exercis over the world and the life of mankind 

can be account for by imagin some such process of thought to have 

been involv in the begin of astrology. 

It wa but a step from faith in stellar influenc on our earth to the 

belief that, as the heavenli movement were govern by immut laws, so 

their influenc upon the world would follow certain law and it effect 

in the futur could be determin as certainli as could the come 

revolut and conjunct of the stars. out of thi two-fold belief wa 

evolv a complex system of divination, the origin of which wa forgotten 

as men, believ in it, invent reason for believing, pretend that 

their faith wa found on a long seri of observations. the chaldean 

believ that in discov the unceas regular of the celesti 

motions, they had found the veri law of life and they built upon thi 

convict a mass of absolut rigid dogmas. but when experi beli 

these dogmas, unabl to realiz the falsiti of their presupposit and 

to give up their faith in the divin stars, the astrolog invent new 

dogma to explain the old ones, thu pile up a bodi of complic and 

often[pg 53] contradictori doctrin that will ever be to the student a sourc 

of perplex and astonishment. 

On it philosoph side astrolog wa a system of astral theolog 

developed, not by popular thought, but through the care observ 

and specul of learn priest and scholars. It wa a pure eastern 

scienc which came into be on the chaldean plain and in the nile 

valley. As far as we know, it wa entir unknown to ani of the primit 

aryan races, from hindostan to scandinavia. astrolog as a system of 

divin never gain a foothold in greec dure the brightest period 

of her intellectu life. but the dogma of astral divin wa zealous 

maintain by the greatest of greek philosophers. plato, the great 

idealist, whose influenc upon the theolog of the ancient and even of the 

modern world wa more profound than that of ani other thinker, call the 

star “visibl gods” rank them just below the suprem etern being; 

and to plato these celesti god were infinit superior to the 

anthropomorph god of the popular religion, who resembl men in their 

passion and were superior to them onli in beauti of form and in power. 

aristotl defend with no less zeal the doctrin of the divin of the 

stars, see in them etern substances, principl of movement, and 

therefor divin beings. In the hellenist period, zeno, the stoic, and 

hi follow proclaim the supremaci of the sider divin even 

more strongli than the school of plato and aristotl had done. the stoic 

conceiv the world as a great organ whose “sympathetic” forc 

constantli interact upon one another, govern by reason which wa of 

the essenc of ether fire, the primordi substanc of the universe. To 

the stars, the purest manifest of the power of thi ether 

substance, were attribut the greatest influenc and the loftiest divin 

qualities. the stoic develop the doctrin of fatalism, which is the 

inevit outcom of faith in stellar influenc on human life, to it 

consequences; yet they prove by fact that fatal is not incompat 

with [pg 54]activ and virtuou living. By the end of the roman imperi period 

astrolog had transform paganism, replac the old societi of immort 

who were scarc superior to mortals, except in be exempt from old 

age and death, by faith in the etern be who ran their cours in 

perfect harmoni throughout the ages, whose power, regul by the 

unvari celesti motions, extend over all the earth and determin 

the destini of the whole human race. 

astrology, as a scienc and a system of divination, exert a profound 

influenc over the mediaev mind. No court wa without it practic 

astrolog and the univers all had their professor of astrology. the 

practic of astrolog wa an essenti part of the physician’ profession, 

and befor prescrib for a patient it wa thought quit as import to 

determin the posit of the planet as the natur of the disease.[139] 

interest evid of thi fact is found in the prologu to the 

canterburi tale where chaucer speak of the doctour’ knowledg and use 

of astrolog as if it were hi chief excel as a physician: 

“in al thi world ne wa ther noon him lyk 

To speke of phisik and of surgerye; 

for he wa ground in astronomye. 

He kept hi pacient a ful greet del 

In houres, by hi magik naturel. 

wel coud he fortunen the ascend 

Of hi imag for hi pacient.”[140] 

yet in spite of the esteem in which astrolog divin wa held by 

most peopl in the middl ages, dante, the greatest expon of the 

thought and learn of that period, show practic no knowledg of the 

technic and practic side of astrology. when he refer to the specif 

effect of the planet it is onli to those most familiarli known, and he 

nowher use such technic term as “houses” or “aspects” of planets. but 

dante, like the great philosoph of the earlier periods, wa undoubtedli 

[pg 55]influenc by the philosoph doctrin of astrology, and a gener 

belief in the influenc of the celesti sphere upon human life wa 

deepli root in hi mind. To him the ceaseless and harmoni movement 

of the celesti bodi were the manifest and instrument of god’ 

providence, and were ordain by the first mover to govern the destini 

of the earth and human life. 

We can see thi convict of dante’ with perfect certainti when we read 

the divina commedia. for dante’ poetri is highli subjective; on everi 

page hi own person thought and feel are reveal quit openly. 

chaucer’ poetry, on the other hand, is objective; he tell us almost 

noth directli about himself and what we learn of him in hi write is 

almost entir by inference. chaucer’ frequent use of astrolog in hi 

poetri would make it hard to believ that he wa not consider 

influenc by it philosoph aspects, at least in the gener way that 

dant was. part and parcel of the dramat action in most of hi poem is 

the idea of stellar influences. yet we cannot assert, with the same 

assur that we can say it of dante, that chaucer believed, even in a 

gener way, in the influenc of the star on human life. In dante’ 

poetry, as we have said, the poet himself is alway befor us. chaucer, 

with socrat irony, alway make it plain to the reader that hi attitud 

is pure objective, that he is onli the narrat of what he ha seen or 

dreamed, onli the copyist of another’ story. even when chaucer make 

himself one of the protagonists, as in the hou of fame and the 

canterburi tales, it is onli that hi narr may be the more 

convincing. He tell a stori and make it protagonist actual live 

befor us, as individu men and women. It is possibl to imagin all of 

hi use of astrolog in hi poetri not as the reflect of hi own faith 

in it cosmic philosophy, but the express of hi geniu for 

understand peopl and truth describ life and character. 

consider discuss as to chaucer’ attitud toward astrolog ha 

been call forth by passag in which[pg 56] he speak in word of scorn with 

regard to some of the practic and magic art that were often use in 

connect with astrology. In the astrolab after describ somewhat at 

length the favor and unfavor posit of planet he says: 

“natheles, thise ben observauncez of iudici matier and ryte of 

payens, in which my spirit ne hath no feith, ne no know of hir 

horoscopum.”[141] 

again in the franklin’ tale he speak in a similar disdain tone of 

astrolog magic: 

“he him remembr that, upon a day, 

At orlien in studi a book he say 

Of magik naturel, which hi felawe, 

that wa that tyme a bachel of lawe, 

Al were he ther to lern anoth craft, 

had prive upon hi desk y-laft; 

which book spak muchel of the operaciouns, 

touching the eight and twenti mansioun 

that longen to the mone, and swich folye, 

As in our day is not worth a flye: 

for holi chirch feith in our bilev 

Ne suffreth noon illus us to greve.”[142] 

and elsewher in the same tale he writes: 

“so att last he hath hi tyme y-found 

To maken hi iap and hi wreccedness 

Of switch a superstici cursednesse.”[143] 

here follow a long descript of the clerk’ instrument and 

astrolog observances, end in the line 

“for swich illusioun and swich meschaunc 

As hethen folk use in thilk dayes; 

for which no lenger make he delayes, 

but thurgh hi magik, for a wyke or tweye, 

It seem that all the rokk were aweye.”[144] 

[pg 57]on the strength of these passag professor T. R. lounsbury[145] hold 

that chaucer wa far ahead of most of hi contemporari in hi attitud 

toward the superstiti practic connect with the astrolog of hi 

day; that hi attitud toward judici astrolog wa one of total 

disbelief and scorn; and he even goe so far as to say that chaucer wa 

guilti of a breach of artist workmanship in express hi disbelief so 

scorn in a tale in which the veri climax of the dramat action 

depend upon a feat of astrolog magic. 


