

superstit regard anim 

serpents.—thes creatur have been regard from veri differ angles, 

accord to the time and the country. the stori of the serpent in the garden 

of eden ha caus mani peopl to detest them: but numer are the 

refer in histori which go to show that serpent and snake have been 

reverenced. In ancient rome, the serpent wa a household god: at other 

times, it wa regard as a symbol of life and vitality, and it wa frequent 

use as a medium for heal the sick. In india, thi creatur is look upon 

as a mascot for time and wisdom. thus, it is worn by fanat as a part of 

their headgear, and peopl make metal replica and wear them as rings, 

bracelets, etc. clearly, then, serpent have found more favor than disapproval, 

and they may be count as mascots, stand for wisdom, long life and good 

health. 

cats.—cats, the most domest of animals, are regard with mix feelings. 

gener speaking, they are suppos to be unlucky, though oddli 

enough a black cat is credit with good qualiti when it take up it abod 

in a house. thi is due to the fact that, dure the middl ages, black cat 

were suppos to be associ with witch and in leagu with the evil one. 

As a result, peopl treat them kindli and shower favor on them, not 

becaus they like them, but becaus they thought that thi treatment would 

avert bad luck. 

the person who drown or kill a cat may look for ill-fortun for nine 

years. bad luck attend the vessel or ship on which a cat is found, but on no 

account may the creatur be thrown overboard after the vessel ha sailed. 

thi would onli make matter worse. 

If a cat leav a house, it is suppos to take the luck with it, and leav 

noth but bad fortun behind. If a white cat enter a home, it announc 

troubl and sickness. A cat lick itself all over signifi fair weather, but 

if it mere wash it face, it mean the approach of rain or storms. 

dogs.—a dog howl under a window indic death. 

dog begin in jest and end in earnest. 

A dog, a woman, a walnut tree, 

the more you beat 'em, the better they be. 

If a dog bark, go in: if a bitch, go out. 

A dog will bark ere he bite. 

hares.—if a hare cross your path, you may look out for a disappointment. 

If it run past houses, there will soon be a fire in one of them. 

In the isl of man, hare are believ to be the spirit of old women, and 

on that account are shun as articl of food. In other parts, those who 

wish to look beauti for a week make a point of eat hare. 

[105] 

birds.—robin are various regard in differ part of the country. 

some peopl think them unlucky, possibl becaus of their associ with 

the tragedi of the babe in the wood. but gener they are welcom to 

a garden or house, which is suppos to be all the luckier for their coming. 

robin that show sign of be friendli are consid to foretel a hard 

winter. 

woodpeck and kingfish are also lucky, and ani suggest of ill-luck 

is onli possibl when bird are deliber kill after have built their nest 

and claim the hospit of a home. 

the screech of a peacock is best unheard when luck is particularli wanted. 

the feather of thi bird, known to everyon by reason of their beauti 

coloring, should never be taken indoors, as they are reckon special unlucky. 

there is an old superstit regard the cuckoo. should a maiden, hear 

it note for the first time that season, kiss her hand to it and say:— 

cuckoo, cuckoo, 

tell me true, 

when shall I be married? 

she may tell the number of year which will elaps until her wed by 

count the number of time the bird cri "cuckoo." she must reckon 

each cri as a year. 

anoth superstit relat to the cuckoo is that what you are do 

when you hear it cri for the first time in ani season is what you will spend 

most time at dure the remaind of the year. folk in the channel island 

claim that they are sure to be fortun if they jingl their purs and run a 

short distanc when hear the cuckoo for the first time in the year. 

owls, crow and magpi do not presag ani good: in fact, mani peopl 

would rather not meet them when anxieti is at hand. An old jingl say of 

magpies:— 

one for anger, 

two for mirth; 

three for a wed 

four for a birth. 

raven are suppos to bring luck to the hous where they build their nests, 

so it is unlucki to kill one. 

It is unlucki to touch a yellowhamm in may, sinc there is the devil' 

blood in it then. 

for a white pigeon to singl out a hous and hover round it is a sure sign 

of an earli marriag or engag in that house. 

A cock crow dure the night-tim mean a bad ill for someon close 

at hand: if it crow dure the afternoon, a visitor will arrive. 

sailor are not over-fond of seagulls, believ them to be the spirit of their 

dead mates, yet they are most indign if anyon tri to shoot or kill one 

of them. 

[106] 

other animals.—a cricket sing within a hous ensur good luck 

for all the household. 

kill a spider and it will sure rain. 

see a moth on your cloth and you will get new ones. 

A death' head moth indic bereavement. 

pig are unlucki creatur when seen singly. 

To see a white hors and then, shortli after, a red-hair person, tell of 

approach good fortune. 

mole are unlucki to find alive. 

Of bees, the follow rhyme is prophetic:— 

A swarm of bee in may 

Is worth a load of hay. 

A swarm of bee in june 

Is worth a silver spoon. 

A swarm of bee in juli 

Is not worth a fly. 

countri peopl are still given to treat bee as if they belong to the 

family. for instance, not a few folk tell the bee of the betrothal, marriag 

and other outstand event happen in the home. 

propheci regard anim 

(a) when black snail cross your pathblack cloud much moistur hath. 

(b) when the peacock loudli bawls,soon we'll have both rain and squalls. 

(c) when rook fli sport high in air,it show that windi storm are near. 

(d) bee will not swarm befor a near storm. 

(e) when the cuckoo come to the bare thorn,sel your cow and buy your corn.but when she come to the full bit,sel your corn and buy some sheep. 

(f) littl bantam are great at crowing. 

(g) good luck for a grey horse. 

(h) let a hors drink what he will, not when he will. 

(i) trust not a horse' heel, nor a dog' tooth. 

(j) plenti of ladybirds, plenti of hops. 

(k) never offer your hen for sale on a raini day. 

(l) when the glow-worm light her lamp,th air is alway damp. 

(m) unlucki to hear the cuckoo sing sitting.or to sit and see the first swallow flitting. 

[107] 
