

viii. the sacr pickax 

told BY the magistr 

the first wolf-grey of the dawn wa creep over the scene, and turn 

to a sickli yellow the flare of the littl oil lamp arrang around the 

veranda. the morn air bit shrewdly, and more than one of the seat 

or reclin figur had gather hi robe more close around him. all 

eye were now turn on the kotwal. He alon of the compani had not 

contribut from hi store of experiences. 

"methink it is too late for ani more story-telling," he protest 

diffidently, with gestur and glanc toward the east in token that he 

spoke truly. 

"nay, nay," cri the rajput, "thi night will not be complet without 

the full measur of our entertainment. come, come, friend; the sun is 

yet an hour below the horizon." 

murmur of approv show that the gener wish had been interpreted. 

"be it so, then," assent the magistrate. "I have heard so mani stori 

thi night that it would inde be churlish on my part to refus to give 

you one of mine. well, listen. 

"know, my friends, that I am a district judg in[pg 171] delhi, presid over 

that quarter known as the bara bazaar, where the merchant most do 

congregate. one day some few year ago it befel that I wa seat alon 

in the hall where I hold my court. It wa the afternoon hour, all the 

suit of the day had been dispos of, punish had been mete out to 

those who deserv it, justic had been done to rich and poor alike, in 

accord with the order of our most righteou master akbar, to whom 

be all honour and glory. 

"I had taken from my garment my silver betel-nut box, and wa leisur 

spread on a leaf the smear of lime preparatori to enjoy my pan 

supari, muse the while on the strang littl ironi of life that came 

to my knowledg each day in the discharg of my magisteri functions. 

all at onc a shadow from the open doorway fell across the room. rais 

my eyes, I beheld the tall figur of a man. On meet my look he bow 

hi body, and with both hand outstretched, courteous salaam me. 

"'protector of the poor, listen to my story,' he said. 

"in silence, while I adjust the fragment of betel-nut on the lime 

leaf and roll up the morsel, I motion him to a place on the edg of 

the carpet whereon I myself sat. for my first glanc had shown me that 

the stranger wa a man of consequence, hi garment be rich and hi 

look that of one accustom to the exercis of authority. 

"he took hi seat, and arrang hi flow and fine embroid robe 

around him. I proffered[pg 172] him the pan supari I had prepared, but with a 

wave of the hand he declin thi courtesy. So I place the morsel in my 

own mouth, fell to it medit mastication, and await the begin 

of hi tale. 

"'i am a well-to-do traveller, as you would think. O kadi—a pilgrim on 

my way to the sacr shrine of juggernaut, as I profess myself to all 

who make inquiri and to whom an answer is due. but I am not what I 

appear to be. In realiti you behold in me—a thug.' 

"the man lower hi voic mysteri when he pronounc the last 

word, bend forward so that I might hear it. 

"'and what may be a thug?' I asked, for the name to me wa quit a new 

one. 

"'listen,' he said eagerly, and still in a low whisper. 'the thug are 

worshipp of bowani.' 

"'there are countless thousand who worship kali, the dread goddess,' I 

replied. 

"'yes, but we, the thugs, not onli worship her as the wife of siva, god 

of destruction, but we are her devot priest who put men to death in 

her name and for her glory.' 

"now inde did I prick up my ear and listen intently. but I did not 

suffer my awaken interest to betray itself in look or tone of voice. 

"'some fanat may seek to justifi human sacrifice,' I said. I wa 

tread cautiously; later I would tell the man that such foul deed 

were against the decre of akbar, and involv the penalti of death[pg 173] 

under the feet of elephants. but meanwhil I want hi confession. 

"'ah, you know noth about the thugs,' continu the stranger. 'but 

hearken to me, for I have come to tell you all, and for a reason you 

will present understand. We are thousand strong, and we live in all 

part of hindustan and the deccan. We are cast brothers, and are bound 

togeth by our worship of bowani. the tradit of our creed have been 

hand down for gener from father to son. you have never heard of 

the thugs, O kadi, although you sit in the place of justice. Do you know 

why? becaus I am the veri first of the sect who ha broken hi vow of 

silence, and spoken the word thug to one outsid our secret 

association.' 

"'yet you say you are thousand strong.' 

"'yes, we are strong in numbers, but stronger still in our fidel to 

our vows. when onc we have sworn on the sacr pickaxe, it is 

imposs to speak word of treachery.' 

"'if it be for the good and happi of all men,' I interpolated, 

encourag him to keep on speak freely, 'there can be no treachery, 

no break of vow in reveal the truth.' 

"'it is to reveal the truth that I have come to you. It is by the order 

of bowani herself; for I have wrong her, and she is angri and ha 

loudli proclaim to me that thugge is ended—that her protect is 

for ever withdrawn from me and my fellows, because, O misery, we have 

grievous offend her. hark! Do you not hear the voic of bowani even 

now?' 

"the man rais hi face toward the rafter of the room, and, with right[pg 174] 

hand uplifted, hi attitud wa one of intent listening. 

"'unworthy, unworthy, unworthy,' he murmured, in a strang absent 

monotone, as if repeat word he wa actual hearing. 'you have 

broken my laws. Go now to your doom, you and all your brothers. such 

priest kali will not have. thugge is no more. I will seek some other 

worshippers.' 

"after a paus of tens silence, as if the listen wa await for 

more, he drop hand and eyes. and now my mind took a new turn of 

thought. there wa the confused, unmistak glare of insan in the 

man' eyes. half unconsciously, I lean back on my cushion and place 

a hand upon the dagger in my kummerbund. 

"the stranger notic the movement, and, lunat though he undoubtedli 

appear to be, interpret my thoughts. 

"'be not afraid of me, master,' he said. 'thi is the onli weapon I 

carry.' 

"and with these word he slip off a silken scarf that he had been 

wear loos around hi throat, and toss it on the carpet between 

us. 

"now wa I all the more confirm in my estim of hi madness. To call 

such a thing a weapon!—a strip of soft fabric that might kill a 

butterfli but would be poor defenc inde to reli on against sword or 

dagger. I suppos I smile contemptuously, for again the man read my 

thoughts. 

"then instantli did he do a thing that made my[pg 175] blood run cold. with a 

toss of the scarf into the air, he form it into a noose, and thi he 

threw over one upbend knee. next with a swift twist of fierc hand he 

drew the knot tight, and so terribl realist wa hi action that for 

the moment I saw abov hi knee the contort mouth and protrud eye 

of hi suddenli strangl victim. 

"there wa horror in my gaze now, but onli calm profession pride in 

his, as he flung back the still loop and knot kerchief on to the 

carpet. 

"'yes, I am a strangler,' he said calmly, 'a are all the thugs, born to 

becom stranglers, and taught how to use the roomal in earli youth by 

their own fathers' hands.' 

"of strangl as a mean of murder I of cours knew, and, indeed, 

dure the year of my magistracy, I had heard vagu rumour of robber 

habitu resort to thi method of dispatch their victim rather 

than to club or swords. but such appal dexter as thi man 

display in the handl of an innocent-look silken scarf I had 

never imagined. 

