
the project gutenberg ebook of the strang case Of dr. jekyl and mr. 
hyde, by robert loui stevenson 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever.y may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the strang case Of dr. jekyl and mr. hyde 

author: robert loui stevenson 

releas date: june 25, 2008 [ebook #43] 
last updated: decemb 6, 2018 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook 
the strang case OF dr. jekyl and mr. hyde *** 


produc by david widger 




the strang case Of dr. jekyl and mr. hyde 

by robert loui stevenson 


content 


stori OF the door 

search for mr. hyde 

dr. jekyl wa quit AT eas 

the carew murder case 

incid OF the letter 

incid OF dr. lanyon 

incid AT the window 

the last night 

dr. lanyon’ narr 

henri jekyll’ full statement OF the case 

prefac 
stori OF the door 

mr. utterson the lawyer wa a man of a rug counten that wa 
never light by a smile; cold, scanti and embarrass in discourse; 
backward in sentiment; lean, long, dusty, dreari and yet somehow 
lovable. At friendli meetings, and when the wine wa to hi taste, 
someth emin human beacon from hi eye; someth inde which 
never found it way into hi talk, but which spoke not onli in these 
silent symbol of the after-dinn face, but more often and loudli in 
the act of hi life. He wa auster with himself; drank gin when he 
wa alone, to mortifi a tast for vintages; and though he enjoy the 
theatre, had not cross the door of one for twenti years. but he had 
an approv toler for others; sometim wondering, almost with 
envy, at the high pressur of spirit involv in their misdeeds; and 
in ani extrem inclin to help rather than to reprove. “I inclin to 
cain’ heresy,” he use to say quaintly: “I let my brother go to the 
devil in hi own way.” In thi character, it wa frequent hi fortun 
to be the last reput acquaint and the last good influenc in 
the live of downgo men. and to such as these, so long as they came 
about hi chambers, he never mark a shade of chang in hi demeanour. 

No doubt the feat wa easi to mr. utterson; for he wa undemonstr 
at the best, and even hi friendship seem to be found in a similar 
cathol of good-nature. It is the mark of a modest man to accept 
hi friendli circl ready-mad from the hand of opportunity; and that 
wa the lawyer’ way. hi friend were those of hi own blood or those 
whom he had known the longest; hi affections, like ivy, were the 
growth of time, they impli no apt in the object. hence, no doubt 
the bond that unit him to mr. richard enfield, hi distant kinsman, 
the well-known man about town. It wa a nut to crack for many, what 
these two could see in each other, or what subject they could find in 
common. It wa report by those who encount them in their sunday 
walks, that they said nothing, look singularli dull and would hail 
with obviou relief the appear of a friend. for all that, the two 
men put the greatest store by these excursions, count them the chief 
jewel of each week, and not onli set asid occas of pleasure, but 
even resist the call of business, that they might enjoy them 
uninterrupted. 

It chanc on one of these rambl that their way led them down a 
by-street in a busi quarter of london. the street wa small and what is 
call quiet, but it drove a thrive trade on the weekdays. the 
inhabit were all do well, it seem and all emul hope to 
do better still, and lay out the surplu of their grain in 
coquetry; so that the shop front stood along that thoroughfar with an 
air of invitation, like row of smile saleswomen. even on sunday, 
when it veil it more florid charm and lay compar empti of 
passage, the street shone out in contrast to it dingi neighbourhood, 
like a fire in a forest; and with it freshli paint shutters, 
well-polish brasses, and gener cleanli and gaieti of note, 
instantli caught and pleas the eye of the passenger. 

two door from one corner, on the left hand go east the line wa 
broken by the entri of a court; and just at that point a certain 
sinist block of build thrust forward it gabl on the street. It 
wa two storey high; show no window, noth but a door on the lower 
storey and a blind forehead of discolour wall on the upper; and bore 
in everi feature, the mark of prolong and sordid negligence. the 
door, which wa equip with neither bell nor knocker, wa blister 
and distained. tramp slouch into the recess and struck match on 
the panels; children kept shop upon the steps; the schoolboy had tri 
hi knife on the mouldings; and for close on a generation, no one had 
appear to drive away these random visitor or to repair their 
ravages. 

mr. enfield and the lawyer were on the other side of the by-street; but 
when they came abreast of the entry, the former lift up hi cane and 
pointed. 

“did you ever remark that door?” he asked; and when hi companion had 
repli in the affirmative, “it is connect in my mind,” ad he, 
“with a veri odd story.” 

“indeed?” said mr. utterson, with a slight chang of voice, “and what 
wa that?” 

“well, it wa thi way,” return mr. enfield: “I wa come home from 
some place at the end of the world, about three o’clock of a black 
winter morning, and my way lay through a part of town where there wa 
liter noth to be seen but lamps. street after street and all the 
folk asleep—street after street, all light up as if for a process 
and all as empti as a church—til at last I got into that state of mind 
when a man listen and listen and begin to long for the sight of a 
policeman. all at once, I saw two figures: one a littl man who wa 
stump along eastward at a good walk, and the other a girl of mayb 
eight or ten who wa run as hard as she wa abl down a cross 
street. well, sir, the two ran into one anoth natur enough at the 
corner; and then came the horribl part of the thing; for the man 
trampl calmli over the child’ bodi and left her scream on the 
ground. It sound noth to hear, but it wa hellish to see. It wasn’t 
like a man; it wa like some damn juggernaut. I gave a few halloa, 
took to my heels, collar my gentleman, and brought him back to where 
there wa alreadi quit a group about the scream child. He wa 
perfectli cool and made no resistance, but gave me one look, so ugli 
that it brought out the sweat on me like running. the peopl who had 
turn out were the girl’ own family; and pretti soon, the doctor, for 
whom she had been sent put in hi appearance. well, the child wa not 
much the worse, more frightened, accord to the sawbones; and there 
you might have suppos would be an end to it. but there wa one 
curiou circumstance. I had taken a loath to my gentleman at first 
sight. So had the child’ family, which wa onli natural. but the 
doctor’ case wa what struck me. He wa the usual cut and dri 
apothecary, of no particular age and colour, with a strong edinburgh 
accent and about as emot as a bagpipe. well, sir, he wa like the 
rest of us; everi time he look at my prisoner, I saw that sawbon 
turn sick and white with the desir to kill him. I knew what wa in hi 
mind, just as he knew what wa in mine; and kill be out of the 
question, we did the next best. We told the man we could and would make 
such a scandal out of thi as should make hi name stink from one end 
of london to the other. If he had ani friend or ani credit, we 
undertook that he should lose them. and all the time, as we were 
pitch it in red hot, we were keep the women off him as best we 
could for they were as wild as harpies. I never saw a circl of such 
hate faces; and there wa the man in the middle, with a kind of 
black sneer coolness—frighten too, I could see that—but carri 
it off, sir, realli like satan. ‘if you choos to make capit out of 
thi accident,’ said he, ‘I am natur helpless. No gentleman but 
wish to avoid a scene,’ say he. ‘name your figure.’ well, we screw 
him up to a hundr pound for the child’ family; he would have 
clearli like to stick out; but there wa someth about the lot of us 
that meant mischief, and at last he struck. the next thing wa to get 
the money; and where do you think he carri us but to that place with 
the door?—whip out a key, went in, and present came back with the 
matter of ten pound in gold and a chequ for the balanc on coutts’s, 
drawn payabl to bearer and sign with a name that I can’t mention, 
though it’ one of the point of my story, but it wa a name at least 
veri well known and often printed. the figur wa stiff; but the 
signatur wa good for more than that if it wa onli genuine. I took 
the liberti of point out to my gentleman that the whole busi 
look apocryphal, and that a man doe not, in real life, walk into a 
cellar door at four in the morn and come out with anoth man’ 
chequ for close upon a hundr pounds. but he wa quit easi and 
sneering. ‘set your mind at rest,’ say he, ‘I will stay with you till 
the bank open and cash the chequ myself.’ So we all set off, the 
doctor, and the child’ father, and our friend and myself, and pass 
the rest of the night in my chambers; and next day, when we had 
breakfasted, went in a bodi to the bank. I gave in the chequ myself, 
and said I had everi reason to believ it wa a forgery. not a bit of 
it. the chequ wa genuine.” 

“tut-tut!” said mr. utterson. 

“I see you feel as I do,” said mr. enfield. “yes, it’ a bad story. for 
my man wa a fellow that nobodi could have to do with, a realli 
damnabl man; and the person that drew the chequ is the veri pink of 
the proprieties, celebr too, and (what make it worse) one of your 
fellow who do what they call good. blackmail, I suppose; an honest man 
pay through the nose for some of the caper of hi youth. black mail 
hous is what I call the place with the door, in consequence. though 
even that, you know, is far from explain all,” he added, and with 
the word fell into a vein of musing. 

from thi he wa recal by mr. utterson ask rather suddenly: “and 
you don’t know if the drawer of the chequ live there?” 

“A like place, isn’t it?” return mr. enfield. “but I happen to have 
notic hi address; he live in some squar or other.” 

“and you never ask about the—plac with the door?” said mr. utterson. 

“no, sir; I had a delicacy,” wa the reply. “I feel veri strongli about 
put questions; it partak too much of the style of the day of 
judgment. you start a question, and it’ like start a stone. you sit 
quietli on the top of a hill; and away the stone goes, start others; 
and present some bland old bird (the last you would have thought of) 
is knock on the head in hi own back garden and the famili have to 
chang their name. No sir, I make it a rule of mine: the more it look 
like queer street, the less I ask.” 

“A veri good rule, too,” said the lawyer. 

“but I have studi the place for myself,” continu mr. enfield. “it 
seem scarc a house. there is no other door, and nobodi goe in or 
out of that one but, onc in a great while, the gentleman of my 
adventure. there are three window look on the court on the first 
floor; none below; the window are alway shut but they’r clean. and 
then there is a chimney which is gener smoking; so somebodi must 
live there. and yet it’ not so sure; for the build are so pack 
togeth about the court, that it’ hard to say where one end and 
anoth begins.” 

the pair walk on again for a while in silence; and then “enfield,” 
said mr. utterson, “that’ a good rule of yours.” 

“yes, I think it is,” return enfield. 

“but for all that,” continu the lawyer, “there’ one point I want to 
ask. I want to ask the name of that man who walk over the child.” 

“well,” said mr. enfield, “I can’t see what harm it would do. It wa a 
man of the name of hyde.” 

“hm,” said mr. utterson. “what sort of a man is he to see?” 

“he is not easi to describe. there is someth wrong with hi 
appearance; someth displeasing, someth down-right detestable. I 
never saw a man I so disliked, and yet I scarc know why. He must be 
deform somewhere; he give a strong feel of deformity, although I 
couldn’t specifi the point. he’ an extraordinari look man, and yet 
I realli can name noth out of the way. no, sir; I can make no hand 
of it; I can’t describ him. and it’ not want of memory; for I declar 
I can see him thi moment.” 

mr. utterson again walk some way in silenc and obvious under a 
weight of consideration. “you are sure he use a key?” he inquir at 
last. 

“mi dear sir...” began enfield, surpris out of himself. 

“yes, I know,” said utterson; “I know it must seem strange. the fact 
is, if I do not ask you the name of the other party, it is becaus I 
know it already. you see, richard, your tale ha gone home. If you have 
been inexact in ani point you had better correct it.” 

“I think you might have warn me,” return the other with a touch of 
sullenness. “but I have been pedant exact, as you call it. the 
fellow had a key; and what’ more, he ha it still. I saw him use it 
not a week ago.” 

mr. utterson sigh deepli but said never a word; and the young man 
present resumed. “here is anoth lesson to say nothing,” said he. “I 
am asham of my long tongue. let us make a bargain never to refer to 
thi again.” 

“with all my heart,” said the lawyer. “I shake hand on that, richard.” 



search for mr. hyde 

that even mr. utterson came home to hi bachelor hous in sombr 
spirit and sat down to dinner without relish. It wa hi custom of a 
sunday, when thi meal wa over, to sit close by the fire, a volum of 
some dri divin on hi read desk, until the clock of the 
neighbour church rang out the hour of twelve, when he would go 
soberli and grate to bed. On thi night however, as soon as the 
cloth wa taken away, he took up a candl and went into hi busi 
room. there he open hi safe, took from the most privat part of it a 
document endors on the envelop as dr. jekyll’ will and sat down 
with a cloud brow to studi it contents. the will wa holograph, for 
mr. utterson though he took charg of it now that it wa made, had 
refus to lend the least assist in the make of it; it provid 
not onli that, in case of the deceas of henri jekyll, m.d., d.c.l., 
l.l.d., f.r.s., etc., all hi possess were to pass into the hand 
of hi “friend and benefactor edward hyde,” but that in case of dr. 
jekyll’ “disappear or unexplain absenc for ani period exceed 
three calendar months,” the said edward hyde should step into the said 
henri jekyll’ shoe without further delay and free from ani burthen or 
oblig beyond the payment of a few small sum to the member of the 
doctor’ household. thi document had long been the lawyer’ eyesore. 
It offend him both as a lawyer and as a lover of the sane and 
customari side of life, to whom the fanci wa the immodest. and 
hitherto it wa hi ignor of mr. hyde that had swell hi 
indignation; now, by a sudden turn, it wa hi knowledge. It wa 
alreadi bad enough when the name wa but a name of which he could learn 
no more. It wa wors when it began to be cloth upon with detest 
attributes; and out of the shifting, insubstanti mist that had so 
long baffl hi eye, there leap up the sudden, definit present 
of a fiend. 

“I thought it wa madness,” he said, as he replac the obnoxi paper 
in the safe, “and now I begin to fear it is disgrace.” 

with that he blew out hi candle, put on a greatcoat, and set forth in 
the direct of cavendish square, that citadel of medicine, where hi 
friend, the great dr. lanyon, had hi hous and receiv hi crowd 
patients. “if anyon knows, it will be lanyon,” he had thought. 

the solemn butler knew and welcom him; he wa subject to no stage 
of delay, but usher direct from the door to the dining-room where dr. 
lanyon sat alon over hi wine. thi wa a hearty, healthy, dapper, 
red-fac gentleman, with a shock of hair prematur white, and a 
boister and decid manner. At sight of mr. utterson, he sprang up 
from hi chair and welcom him with both hands. the geniality, as wa 
the way of the man, wa somewhat theatric to the eye; but it repos 
on genuin feeling. for these two were old friends, old mate both at 
school and college, both thorough respector of themselv and of each 
other, and what doe not alway follow, men who thoroughli enjoy each 
other’ company. 

after a littl rambl talk, the lawyer led up to the subject which so 
disagre preoccupi hi mind. 

“I suppose, lanyon,” said he, “you and I must be the two oldest friend 
that henri jekyl has?” 

“I wish the friend were younger,” chuckl dr. lanyon. “but I suppos 
we are. and what of that? I see littl of him now.” 

“indeed?” said utterson. “I thought you had a bond of common interest.” 

“we had,” wa the reply. “but it is more than ten year sinc henri 
jekyl becam too fanci for me. He began to go wrong, wrong in mind; 
and though of cours I continu to take an interest in him for old 
sake’ sake, as they say, I see and I have seen devilish littl of the 
man. such unscientif balderdash,” ad the doctor, flush suddenli 
purple, “would have estrang damon and pythias.” 

thi littl spirit of temper wa somewhat of a relief to mr. utterson. 
“they have onli differ on some point of science,” he thought; and 
be a man of no scientif passion (except in the matter of 
conveyancing), he even added: “it is noth wors than that!” He gave 
hi friend a few second to recov hi composure, and then approach 
the question he had come to put. “did you ever come across a _protégé_ 
of his—on hyde?” he asked. 

“hyde?” repeat lanyon. “no. never heard of him. sinc my time.” 

that wa the amount of inform that the lawyer carri back with 
him to the great, dark bed on which he toss to and fro, until the 
small hour of the morn began to grow large. It wa a night of 
littl eas to hi toil mind, toil in mere dark and besieg 
by questions. 

six o’clock struck on the bell of the church that wa so conveni 
near to mr. utterson’ dwelling, and still he wa dig at the 
problem. hitherto it had touch him on the intellectu side alone; 
but now hi imagin also wa engaged, or rather enslaved; and as he 
lay and toss in the gross dark of the night and the curtain 
room, mr. enfield’ tale went by befor hi mind in a scroll of light 
pictures. He would be awar of the great field of lamp of a nocturn 
city; then of the figur of a man walk swiftly; then of a child 
run from the doctor’s; and then these met, and that human 
juggernaut trod the child down and pass on regardless of her screams. 
Or els he would see a room in a rich house, where hi friend lay 
asleep, dream and smile at hi dreams; and then the door of that 
room would be opened, the curtain of the bed pluck apart, the 
sleeper recalled, and lo! there would stand by hi side a figur to 
whom power wa given, and even at that dead hour, he must rise and do 
it bidding. the figur in these two phase haunt the lawyer all 
night; and if at ani time he doze over, it wa but to see it glide 
more stealthili through sleep houses, or move the more swiftli and 
still the more swiftly, even to dizziness, through wider labyrinth of 
lamplight city, and at everi street corner crush a child and leav 
her screaming. and still the figur had no face by which he might know 
it; even in hi dreams, it had no face, or one that baffl him and 
melt befor hi eyes; and thu it wa that there sprang up and grew 
apac in the lawyer’ mind a singularli strong, almost an inordinate, 
curios to behold the featur of the real mr. hyde. If he could but 
onc set eye on him, he thought the mysteri would lighten and perhap 
roll altogeth away, as wa the habit of mysteri thing when well 
examined. He might see a reason for hi friend’ strang prefer or 
bondag (call it which you please) and even for the startl claus of 
the will. At least it would be a face worth seeing: the face of a man 
who wa without bowel of mercy: a face which had but to show itself to 
rais up, in the mind of the unimpression enfield, a spirit of 
endur hatred. 

from that time forward, mr. utterson began to haunt the door in the 
by-street of shops. In the morn befor offic hours, at noon when 
busi wa plenti and time scarce, at night under the face of the 
fog citi moon, by all light and at all hour of solitud or 
concourse, the lawyer wa to be found on hi chosen post. 

“if he be mr. hyde,” he had thought, “I shall be mr. seek.” 

and at last hi patienc wa rewarded. It wa a fine dri night; frost 
in the air; the street as clean as a ballroom floor; the lamps, 
unshaken by ani wind, draw a regular pattern of light and shadow. By 
ten o’clock, when the shop were closed, the by-street wa veri 
solitari and, in spite of the low growl of london from all round, veri 
silent. small sound carri far; domest sound out of the hous 
were clearli audibl on either side of the roadway; and the rumour of 
the approach of ani passeng preced him by a long time. mr. utterson 
had been some minut at hi post, when he wa awar of an odd light 
footstep draw near. In the cours of hi nightli patrols, he had 
long grown accustom to the quaint effect with which the footfal of 
a singl person, while he is still a great way off, suddenli spring out 
distinct from the vast hum and clatter of the city. yet hi attent 
had never befor been so sharpli and decis arrested; and it wa 
with a strong, superstiti previs of success that he withdrew into 
the entri of the court. 

the step drew swiftli nearer, and swell out suddenli louder as they 
turn the end of the street. the lawyer, look forth from the entry, 
could soon see what manner of man he had to deal with. He wa small and 
veri plainli dress and the look of him, even at that distance, went 
somehow strongli against the watcher’ inclination. but he made 
straight for the door, cross the roadway to save time; and as he 
came, he drew a key from hi pocket like one approach home. 

mr. utterson step out and touch him on the shoulder as he passed. 
“mr. hyde, I think?” 

mr. hyde shrank back with a hiss intak of the breath. but hi fear 
wa onli momentary; and though he did not look the lawyer in the face, 
he answer coolli enough: “that is my name. what do you want?” 

“I see you are go in,” return the lawyer. “I am an old friend of 
dr. jekyll’s—mr. utterson of gaunt street—you must have heard of my 
name; and meet you so conveniently, I thought you might admit me.” 

“you will not find dr. jekyll; he is from home,” repli mr. hyde, 
blow in the key. and then suddenly, but still without look up, 
“how did you know me?” he asked. 

“on your side,” said mr. utterson “will you do me a favour?” 

“with pleasure,” repli the other. “what shall it be?” 

“will you let me see your face?” ask the lawyer. 

mr. hyde appear to hesitate, and then, as if upon some sudden 
reflection, front about with an air of defiance; and the pair stare 
at each other pretti fixedli for a few seconds. “now I shall know you 
again,” said mr. utterson. “it may be useful.” 

“yes,” return mr. hyde, “it is as well we have met; and _à propos_, 
you should have my address.” and he gave a number of a street in soho. 

“good god!” thought mr. utterson, “can he, too, have been think of 
the will?” but he kept hi feel to himself and onli grunt in 
acknowledg of the address. 

“and now,” said the other, “how did you know me?” 

“bi description,” wa the reply. 

“whose description?” 

“we have common friends,” said mr. utterson. 

“common friends,” echo mr. hyde, a littl hoarsely. “who are they?” 

“jekyll, for instance,” said the lawyer. 

“he never told you,” cri mr. hyde, with a flush of anger. “I did not 
think you would have lied.” 

“come,” said mr. utterson, “that is not fit language.” 

the other snarl aloud into a savag laugh; and the next moment, with 
extraordinari quickness, he had unlock the door and disappear into 
the house. 

the lawyer stood awhil when mr. hyde had left him, the pictur of 
disquietude. then he began slowli to mount the street, paus everi 
step or two and put hi hand to hi brow like a man in mental 
perplexity. the problem he wa thu debat as he walked, wa one of a 
class that is rare solved. mr. hyde wa pale and dwarfish, he gave an 
impress of deform without ani nameabl malformation, he had a 
displeas smile, he had born himself to the lawyer with a sort of 
murder mixtur of timid and boldness, and he spoke with a husky, 
whisper and somewhat broken voice; all these were point against 
him, but not all of these togeth could explain the hitherto unknown 
disgust, loath and fear with which mr. utterson regard him. “there 
must be someth else,” said the perplex gentleman. “there _is_ 
someth more, if I could find a name for it. god bless me, the man 
seem hardli human! someth troglodytic, shall we say? or can it be 
the old stori of dr. fell? or is it the mere radianc of a foul soul 
that thu transpir through, and transfigures, it clay continent? the 
last, I think; for, O my poor old harri jekyll, if ever I read satan’ 
signatur upon a face, it is on that of your new friend.” 

round the corner from the by-street, there wa a squar of ancient, 
handsom houses, now for the most part decay from their high estat 
and let in flat and chamber to all sort and condit of men; 
map-engravers, architects, shadi lawyer and the agent of obscur 
enterprises. one house, however, second from the corner, wa still 
occupi entire; and at the door of this, which wore a great air of 
wealth and comfort, though it wa now plung in dark except for 
the fanlight, mr. utterson stop and knocked. A well-dressed, elderli 
servant open the door. 

“i dr. jekyl at home, poole?” ask the lawyer. 

“I will see, mr. utterson,” said poole, admit the visitor, as he 
spoke, into a large, low-roofed, comfort hall pave with flags, 
warm (after the fashion of a countri house) by a bright, open fire, 
and furnish with costli cabinet of oak. “will you wait here by the 
fire, sir? or shall I give you a light in the dining-room?” 

“here, thank you,” said the lawyer, and he drew near and lean on the 
tall fender. thi hall, in which he wa now left alone, wa a pet fanci 
of hi friend the doctor’s; and utterson himself wa wont to speak of 
it as the pleasantest room in london. but tonight there wa a shudder 
in hi blood; the face of hyde sat heavi on hi memory; he felt (what 
wa rare with him) a nausea and distast of life; and in the gloom of 
hi spirits, he seem to read a menac in the flicker of the 
firelight on the polish cabinet and the uneasi start of the 
shadow on the roof. He wa asham of hi relief, when pool present 
return to announc that dr. jekyl wa gone out. 

“I saw mr. hyde go in by the old dissect room, poole,” he said. “i 
that right, when dr. jekyl is from home?” 

“quit right, mr. utterson, sir,” repli the servant. “mr. hyde ha a 
key.” 

“your master seem to repos a great deal of trust in that young man, 
poole,” resum the other musingly. 

“yes, sir, he doe indeed,” said poole. “we have all order to obey 
him.” 

“I do not think I ever met mr. hyde?” ask utterson. 

“o, dear no, sir. He never _dines_ here,” repli the butler. “inde 
we see veri littl of him on thi side of the house; he mostli come 
and goe by the laboratory.” 

“well, good-night, poole.” 

“good-night, mr. utterson.” 

and the lawyer set out homeward with a veri heavi heart. “poor harri 
jekyll,” he thought, “mi mind misgiv me he is in deep waters! He wa 
wild when he wa young; a long while ago to be sure; but in the law of 
god, there is no statut of limitations. ay, it must be that; the ghost 
of some old sin, the cancer of some conceal disgrace: punish 
coming, _pede claudo_, year after memori ha forgotten and self-lov 
condon the fault.” and the lawyer, scare by the thought, brood 
awhil on hi own past, grope in all the corner of memory, least by 
chanc some jack-in-the-box of an old iniqu should leap to light 
there. hi past wa fairli blameless; few men could read the roll of 
their life with less apprehension; yet he wa humbl to the dust by 
the mani ill thing he had done, and rais up again into a sober and 
fear gratitud by the mani he had come so near to do yet avoided. 
and then by a return on hi former subject, he conceiv a spark of 
hope. “thi master hyde, if he were studied,” thought he, “must have 
secret of hi own; black secrets, by the look of him; secret compar 
to which poor jekyll’ worst would be like sunshine. thing cannot 
continu as they are. It turn me cold to think of thi creatur 
steal like a thief to harry’ bedside; poor harry, what a wakening! 
and the danger of it; for if thi hyde suspect the exist of the 
will, he may grow impati to inherit. ay, I must put my shoulder to 
the wheel—if jekyl will but let me,” he added, “if jekyl will onli 
let me.” for onc more he saw befor hi mind’ eye, as clear as 
transparency, the strang claus of the will. 



dr. jekyl wa quit AT eas 

A fortnight later, by excel good fortune, the doctor gave one of 
hi pleasant dinner to some five or six old cronies, all intelligent, 
reput men and all judg of good wine; and mr. utterson so 
contriv that he remain behind after the other had departed. thi 
wa no new arrangement, but a thing that had befallen mani score of 
times. where utterson wa liked, he wa like well. host love to 
detain the dri lawyer, when the light-heart and loose-tongu had 
alreadi their foot on the threshold; they like to sit a while in hi 
unobtrus company, practis for solitude, sober their mind in 
the man’ rich silenc after the expens and strain of gaiety. To thi 
rule, dr. jekyl wa no exception; and as he now sat on the opposit 
side of the fire—a large, well-made, smooth-fac man of fifty, with 
someth of a stylish cast perhaps, but everi mark of capac and 
kindness—y could see by hi look that he cherish for mr. utterson 
a sincer and warm affection. 

“I have been want to speak to you, jekyll,” began the latter. “you 
know that will of yours?” 

A close observ might have gather that the topic wa distasteful; 
but the doctor carri it off gaily. “mi poor utterson,” said he, “you 
are unfortun in such a client. I never saw a man so distress as 
you were by my will; unless it were that hide-bound pedant, lanyon, at 
what he call my scientif heresies. O, I know he’ a good fellow—y 
needn’t frown—an excel fellow, and I alway mean to see more of 
him; but a hide-bound pedant for all that; an ignorant, blatant pedant. 
I wa never more disappoint in ani man than lanyon.” 

“you know I never approv of it,” pursu utterson, ruthlessli 
disregard the fresh topic. 

“mi will? yes, certainly, I know that,” said the doctor, a trifl 
sharply. “you have told me so.” 

“well, I tell you so again,” continu the lawyer. “I have been 
learn someth of young hyde.” 

the larg handsom face of dr. jekyl grew pale to the veri lips, and 
there came a black about hi eyes. “I do not care to hear more,” 
said he. “thi is a matter I thought we had agre to drop.” 

“what I heard wa abominable,” said utterson. 

“it can make no change. you do not understand my position,” return 
the doctor, with a certain incoher of manner. “I am pain 
situated, utterson; my posit is a veri strange—a veri strang one. 
It is one of those affair that cannot be mend by talking.” 

“jekyll,” said utterson, “you know me: I am a man to be trusted. make a 
clean breast of thi in confidence; and I make no doubt I can get you 
out of it.” 

“mi good utterson,” said the doctor, “thi is veri good of you, thi is 
downright good of you, and I cannot find word to thank you in. I 
believ you fully; I would trust you befor ani man alive, ay, befor 
myself, if I could make the choice; but inde it isn’t what you fancy; 
it is not as bad as that; and just to put your good heart at rest, I 
will tell you one thing: the moment I choose, I can be rid of mr. hyde. 
I give you my hand upon that; and I thank you again and again; and I 
will just add one littl word, utterson, that i’m sure you’ll take in 
good part: thi is a privat matter, and I beg of you to let it sleep.” 

utterson reflect a little, look in the fire. 

“I have no doubt you are perfectli right,” he said at last, get to 
hi feet. 

“well, but sinc we have touch upon thi business, and for the last 
time I hope,” continu the doctor, “there is one point I should like 
you to understand. I have realli a veri great interest in poor hyde. I 
know you have seen him; he told me so; and I fear he wa rude. but I do 
sincer take a great, a veri great interest in that young man; and if 
I am taken away, utterson, I wish you to promis me that you will bear 
with him and get hi right for him. I think you would, if you knew 
all; and it would be a weight off my mind if you would promise.” 

“I can’t pretend that I shall ever like him,” said the lawyer. 

“I don’t ask that,” plead jekyll, lay hi hand upon the other’ 
arm; “I onli ask for justice; I onli ask you to help him for my sake, 
when I am no longer here.” 

utterson heav an irrepress sigh. “well,” said he, “I promise.” 



the carew murder case 

nearli a year later, in the month of october, 18—, london wa startl 
by a crime of singular feroc and render all the more notabl by 
the high posit of the victim. the detail were few and startling. A 
maid servant live alon in a hous not far from the river, had gone 
upstair to bed about eleven. although a fog roll over the citi in 
the small hours, the earli part of the night wa cloudless, and the 
lane, which the maid’ window overlooked, wa brilliantli lit by the 
full moon. It seem she wa romant given, for she sat down upon 
her box, which stood immedi under the window, and fell into a 
dream of musing. never (she use to say, with stream tears, when she 
narrat that experience), never had she felt more at peac with all 
men or thought more kindli of the world. and as she so sat she becam 
awar of an age beauti gentleman with white hair, draw near 
along the lane; and advanc to meet him, anoth and veri small 
gentleman, to whom at first she paid less attention. when they had come 
within speech (which wa just under the maid’ eyes) the older man 
bow and accost the other with a veri pretti manner of politeness. 
It did not seem as if the subject of hi address were of great 
importance; indeed, from hi pointing, it sometim appear as if he 
were onli inquir hi way; but the moon shone on hi face as he 
spoke, and the girl wa pleas to watch it, it seem to breath such 
an innoc and old-world kind of disposition, yet with someth 
high too, as of a well-found self-content. present her eye wander 
to the other, and she wa surpris to recognis in him a certain mr. 
hyde, who had onc visit her master and for whom she had conceiv a 
dislike. He had in hi hand a heavi cane, with which he wa trifling; 
but he answer never a word, and seem to listen with an 
ill-contain impatience. and then all of a sudden he broke out in a 
great flame of anger, stamp with hi foot, brandish the cane, and 
carri on (a the maid describ it) like a madman. the old gentleman 
took a step back, with the air of one veri much surpris and a trifl 
hurt; and at that mr. hyde broke out of all bound and club him to 
the earth. and next moment, with ape-lik fury, he wa trampl hi 
victim under foot and hail down a storm of blows, under which the 
bone were audibl shatter and the bodi jump upon the roadway. At 
the horror of these sight and sounds, the maid fainted. 

It wa two o’clock when she came to herself and call for the police. 
the murder wa gone long ago; but there lay hi victim in the middl 
of the lane, incred mangled. the stick with which the deed had been 
done, although it wa of some rare and veri tough and heavi wood, had 
broken in the middl under the stress of thi insens cruelty; and 
one splinter half had roll in the neighbour gutter—th other, 
without doubt, had been carri away by the murderer. A purs and gold 
watch were found upon the victim: but no card or papers, except a 
seal and stamp envelope, which he had been probabl carri to the 
post, and which bore the name and address of mr. utterson. 

thi wa brought to the lawyer the next morning, befor he wa out of 
bed; and he had no sooner seen it and been told the circumstances, than 
he shot out a solemn lip. “I shall say noth till I have seen the 
body,” said he; “thi may be veri serious. have the kind to wait 
while I dress.” and with the same grave counten he hurri through 
hi breakfast and drove to the polic station, whither the bodi had 
been carried. As soon as he came into the cell, he nodded. 

“yes,” said he, “I recognis him. I am sorri to say that thi is sir 
danver carew.” 

“good god, sir,” exclaim the officer, “i it possible?” and the next 
moment hi eye light up with profession ambition. “thi will make a 
deal of noise,” he said. “and perhap you can help us to the man.” and 
he briefli narrat what the maid had seen, and show the broken 
stick. 

mr. utterson had alreadi quail at the name of hyde; but when the 
stick wa laid befor him, he could doubt no longer; broken and 
batter as it was, he recognis it for one that he had himself 
present mani year befor to henri jekyll. 

“i thi mr. hyde a person of small stature?” he inquired. 

“particularli small and particularli wicked-looking, is what the maid 
call him,” said the officer. 

mr. utterson reflected; and then, rais hi head, “if you will come 
with me in my cab,” he said, “I think I can take you to hi house.” 

It wa by thi time about nine in the morning, and the first fog of the 
season. A great chocolate-colour pall lower over heaven, but the 
wind wa continu charg and rout these embattl vapours; so 
that as the cab crawl from street to street, mr. utterson beheld a 
marvel number of degre and hue of twilight; for here it would be 
dark like the back-end of evening; and there would be a glow of a rich, 
lurid brown, like the light of some strang conflagration; and here, 
for a moment, the fog would be quit broken up, and a haggard shaft of 
daylight would glanc in between the swirl wreaths. the dismal 
quarter of soho seen under these chang glimpses, with it muddi 
ways, and slatternli passengers, and it lamps, which had never been 
extinguish or had been kindl afresh to combat thi mourn 
reinvas of darkness, seemed, in the lawyer’ eyes, like a district 
of some citi in a nightmare. the thought of hi mind, besides, were of 
the gloomiest dye; and when he glanc at the companion of hi drive, 
he wa consciou of some touch of that terror of the law and the law’ 
officers, which may at time assail the most honest. 

As the cab drew up befor the address indicated, the fog lift a 
littl and show him a dingi street, a gin palace, a low french eat 
house, a shop for the retail of penni number and twopenni salads, mani 
rag children huddl in the doorways, and mani women of mani 
differ nation pass out, key in hand, to have a morn 
glass; and the next moment the fog settl down again upon that part, 
as brown as umber, and cut him off from hi blackguardli surroundings. 
thi wa the home of henri jekyll’ favourite; of a man who wa heir to 
a quarter of a million sterling. 

An ivory-fac and silvery-hair old woman open the door. she had an 
evil face, smooth by hypocrisy: but her manner were excellent. yes, 
she said, thi wa mr. hyde’s, but he wa not at home; he had been in 
that night veri late, but he had gone away again in less than an hour; 
there wa noth strang in that; hi habit were veri irregular, and 
he wa often absent; for instance, it wa nearli two month sinc she 
had seen him till yesterday. 

“veri well, then, we wish to see hi rooms,” said the lawyer; and when 
the woman began to declar it wa impossible, “I had better tell you 
who thi person is,” he added. “thi is inspector newcomen of scotland 
yard.” 

A flash of odiou joy appear upon the woman’ face. “ah!” said she, 
“he is in trouble! what ha he done?” 

mr. utterson and the inspector exchang glances. “he don’t seem a veri 
popular character,” observ the latter. “and now, my good woman, just 
let me and thi gentleman have a look about us.” 

In the whole extent of the house, which but for the old woman remain 
otherwis empty, mr. hyde had onli use a coupl of rooms; but these 
were furnish with luxuri and good taste. A closet wa fill with 
wine; the plate wa of silver, the naperi elegant; a good pictur hung 
upon the walls, a gift (a utterson supposed) from henri jekyll, who 
wa much of a connoisseur; and the carpet were of mani pli and 
agreeabl in colour. At thi moment, however, the room bore everi mark 
of have been recent and hurriedli ransacked; cloth lay about the 
floor, with their pocket insid out; lock-fast drawer stood open; and 
on the hearth there lay a pile of grey ashes, as though mani paper had 
been burned. from these ember the inspector disint the butt end 
of a green chequ book, which had resist the action of the fire; the 
other half of the stick wa found behind the door; and as thi clinch 
hi suspicions, the offic declar himself delighted. A visit to the 
bank, where sever thousand pound were found to be lie to the 
murderer’ credit, complet hi gratification. 

“you may depend upon it, sir,” he told mr. utterson: “I have him in my 
hand. He must have lost hi head, or he never would have left the stick 
or, abov all, burn the chequ book. why, money’ life to the man. We 
have noth to do but wait for him at the bank, and get out the 
handbills.” 

thi last, however, wa not so easi of accomplishment; for mr. hyde had 
number few familiars—even the master of the servant maid had onli 
seen him twice; hi famili could nowher be traced; he had never been 
photographed; and the few who could describ him differ widely, as 
common observ will. onli on one point were they agreed; and that wa 
the haunt sens of unexpress deform with which the fugit 
impress hi beholders. 



incid OF the letter 

It wa late in the afternoon, when mr. utterson found hi way to dr. 
jekyll’ door, where he wa at onc admit by poole, and carri down 
by the kitchen offic and across a yard which had onc been a garden, 
to the build which wa indiffer known as the laboratori or 
dissect rooms. the doctor had bought the hous from the heir of a 
celebr surgeon; and hi own tast be rather chemic than 
anatomical, had chang the destin of the block at the bottom of 
the garden. It wa the first time that the lawyer had been receiv in 
that part of hi friend’ quarters; and he eye the dingy, windowless 
structur with curiosity, and gaze round with a distast sens of 
strang as he cross the theatre, onc crowd with eager student 
and now lie gaunt and silent, the tabl laden with chemic 
apparatus, the floor strewn with crate and litter with pack 
straw, and the light fall dimli through the foggi cupola. At the 
further end, a flight of stair mount to a door cover with red 
baize; and through this, mr. utterson wa at last receiv into the 
doctor’ cabinet. It wa a larg room fit round with glass presses, 
furnished, among other things, with a cheval-glass and a busi 
table, and look out upon the court by three dusti window bar 
with iron. the fire burn in the grate; a lamp wa set light on the 
chimney shelf, for even in the hous the fog began to lie thickly; and 
there, close up to the warmth, sat dr. jekyll, look deathli sick. He 
did not rise to meet hi visitor, but held out a cold hand and bade him 
welcom in a chang voice. 

“and now,” said mr. utterson, as soon as pool had left them, “you have 
heard the news?” 

the doctor shuddered. “they were cri it in the square,” he said. “I 
heard them in my dining-room.” 

“one word,” said the lawyer. “carew wa my client, but so are you, and 
I want to know what I am doing. you have not been mad enough to hide 
thi fellow?” 

“utterson, I swear to god,” cri the doctor, “I swear to god I will 
never set eye on him again. I bind my honour to you that I am done 
with him in thi world. It is all at an end. and inde he doe not 
want my help; you do not know him as I do; he is safe, he is quit 
safe; mark my words, he will never more be heard of.” 

the lawyer listen gloomily; he did not like hi friend’ feverish 
manner. “you seem pretti sure of him,” said he; “and for your sake, I 
hope you may be right. If it came to a trial, your name might appear.” 

“I am quit sure of him,” repli jekyll; “I have ground for certainti 
that I cannot share with ani one. but there is one thing on which you 
may advis me. I have—i have receiv a letter; and I am at a loss 
whether I should show it to the police. I should like to leav it in 
your hands, utterson; you would judg wisely, I am sure; I have so 
great a trust in you.” 

“you fear, I suppose, that it might lead to hi detection?” ask the 
lawyer. 

“no,” said the other. “I cannot say that I care what becom of hyde; I 
am quit done with him. I wa think of my own character, which thi 
hate busi ha rather exposed.” 

utterson rumin awhile; he wa surpris at hi friend’ 
selfishness, and yet reliev by it. “well,” said he, at last, “let me 
see the letter.” 

the letter wa written in an odd, upright hand and sign “edward 
hyde”: and it signified, briefli enough, that the writer’ benefactor, 
dr. jekyll, whom he had long so unworthili repaid for a thousand 
generosities, need labour under no alarm for hi safety, as he had 
mean of escap on which he place a sure dependence. the lawyer like 
thi letter well enough; it put a better colour on the intimaci than he 
had look for; and he blame himself for some of hi past suspicions. 

“have you the envelope?” he asked. 

“I burn it,” repli jekyll, “befor I thought what I wa about. but 
it bore no postmark. the note wa hand in.” 

“shall I keep thi and sleep upon it?” ask utterson. 

“I wish you to judg for me entirely,” wa the reply. “I have lost 
confid in myself.” 

“well, I shall consider,” return the lawyer. “and now one word more: 
it wa hyde who dictat the term in your will about that 
disappearance?” 

the doctor seem seiz with a qualm of faintness; he shut hi mouth 
tight and nodded. 

“I knew it,” said utterson. “he meant to murder you. you had a fine 
escape.” 

“I have had what is far more to the purpose,” return the doctor 
solemnly: “I have had a lesson—o god, utterson, what a lesson I have 
had!” and he cover hi face for a moment with hi hands. 

On hi way out, the lawyer stop and had a word or two with poole. 
“bi the bye,” said he, “there wa a letter hand in to-day: what wa 
the messeng like?” but pool wa posit noth had come except by 
post; “and onli circular by that,” he added. 

thi news sent off the visitor with hi fear renewed. plainli the 
letter had come by the laboratori door; possibly, indeed, it had been 
written in the cabinet; and if that were so, it must be differ 
judged, and handl with the more caution. the newsboys, as he went, 
were cri themselv hoars along the footways: “special edition. 
shock murder of an m.p.” that wa the funer orat of one friend 
and client; and he could not help a certain apprehens lest the good 
name of anoth should be suck down in the eddi of the scandal. It 
was, at least, a ticklish decis that he had to make; and 
self-reli as he wa by habit, he began to cherish a long for 
advice. It wa not to be had directly; but perhaps, he thought, it 
might be fish for. 

present after, he sat on one side of hi own hearth, with mr. guest, 
hi head clerk, upon the other, and midway between, at a nice 
calcul distanc from the fire, a bottl of a particular old wine 
that had long dwelt unsun in the foundat of hi house. the fog 
still slept on the wing abov the drown city, where the lamp 
glimmer like carbuncles; and through the muffl and smother of these 
fallen clouds, the process of the town’ life wa still roll in 
through the great arteri with a sound as of a mighti wind. but the 
room wa gay with firelight. In the bottl the acid were long ago 
resolved; the imperi dye had soften with time, as the colour grow 
richer in stain windows; and the glow of hot autumn afternoon on 
hillsid vineyards, wa readi to be set free and to dispers the fog 
of london. insens the lawyer melted. there wa no man from whom he 
kept fewer secret than mr. guest; and he wa not alway sure that he 
kept as mani as he meant. guest had often been on busi to the 
doctor’s; he knew poole; he could scarc have fail to hear of mr. 
hyde’ familiar about the house; he might draw conclusions: wa it 
not as well, then, that he should see a letter which put that mysteri 
to right? and abov all sinc guest, be a great student and critic 
of handwriting, would consid the step natur and obliging? the 
clerk, besides, wa a man of counsel; he could scarc read so strang a 
document without drop a remark; and by that remark mr. utterson 
might shape hi futur course. 

“thi is a sad busi about sir danvers,” he said. 

“yes, sir, indeed. It ha elicit a great deal of public feeling,” 
return guest. “the man, of course, wa mad.” 

“I should like to hear your view on that,” repli utterson. “I have a 
document here in hi handwriting; it is between ourselves, for I scarc 
know what to do about it; it is an ugli busi at the best. but there 
it is; quit in your way: a murderer’ autograph.” 

guest’ eye brightened, and he sat down at onc and studi it with 
passion. “no sir,” he said: “not mad; but it is an odd hand.” 

“and by all account a veri odd writer,” ad the lawyer. 

just then the servant enter with a note. 

“i that from dr. jekyll, sir?” inquir the clerk. “I thought I knew 
the writing. anyth private, mr. utterson?” 

“onli an invit to dinner. why? Do you want to see it?” 

“one moment. I thank you, sir;” and the clerk laid the two sheet of 
paper alongsid and sedul compar their contents. “thank you, 
sir,” he said at last, return both; “it’ a veri interest 
autograph.” 

there wa a pause, dure which mr. utterson struggl with himself. 
“whi did you compar them, guest?” he inquir suddenly. 

“well, sir,” return the clerk, “there’ a rather singular 
resemblance; the two hand are in mani point identical: onli 
differ sloped.” 

“rather quaint,” said utterson. 

“it is, as you say, rather quaint,” return guest. 

“I wouldn’t speak of thi note, you know,” said the master. 

“no, sir,” said the clerk. “I understand.” 

but no sooner wa mr. utterson alon that night, than he lock the 
note into hi safe, where it repos from that time forward. “what!” he 
thought. “henri jekyl forg for a murderer!” and hi blood ran cold in 
hi veins. 



incid OF dr. lanyon 

time ran on; thousand of pound were offer in reward, for the death 
of sir danver wa resent as a public injury; but mr. hyde had 
disappear out of the ken of the polic as though he had never 
existed. much of hi past wa unearthed, indeed, and all disreputable: 
tale came out of the man’ cruelty, at onc so callou and violent; of 
hi vile life, of hi strang associates, of the hatr that seem to 
have surround hi career; but of hi present whereabouts, not a 
whisper. from the time he had left the hous in soho on the morn of 
the murder, he wa simpli blot out; and gradually, as time drew on, 
mr. utterson began to recov from the hot of hi alarm, and to 
grow more at quiet with himself. the death of sir danver was, to hi 
way of thinking, more than paid for by the disappear of mr. hyde. 
now that that evil influenc had been withdrawn, a new life began for 
dr. jekyll. He came out of hi seclusion, renew relat with hi 
friends, becam onc more their familiar guest and entertainer; and 
whilst he had alway been known for charities, he wa now no less 
distinguish for religion. He wa busy, he wa much in the open air, 
he did good; hi face seem to open and brighten, as if with an inward 
conscious of service; and for more than two months, the doctor wa 
at peace. 

On the 8th of januari utterson had dine at the doctor’ with a small 
party; lanyon had been there; and the face of the host had look from 
one to the other as in the old day when the trio were insepar 
friends. On the 12th, and again on the 14th, the door wa shut against 
the lawyer. “the doctor wa confin to the house,” pool said, “and 
saw no one.” On the 15th, he tri again, and wa again refused; and 
have now been use for the last two month to see hi friend almost 
daily, he found thi return of solitud to weigh upon hi spirits. the 
fifth night he had in guest to dine with him; and the sixth he betook 
himself to dr. lanyon’s. 

there at least he wa not deni admittance; but when he came in, he 
wa shock at the chang which had taken place in the doctor’ 
appearance. He had hi death-warr written legibl upon hi face. the 
rosi man had grown pale; hi flesh had fallen away; he wa visibl 
balder and older; and yet it wa not so much these token of a swift 
physic decay that arrest the lawyer’ notice, as a look in the eye 
and qualiti of manner that seem to testifi to some deep-seat terror 
of the mind. It wa unlik that the doctor should fear death; and yet 
that wa what utterson wa tempt to suspect. “yes,” he thought; “he 
is a doctor, he must know hi own state and that hi day are counted; 
and the knowledg is more than he can bear.” and yet when utterson 
remark on hi ill looks, it wa with an air of great firm that 
lanyon declar himself a doom man. 

“I have had a shock,” he said, “and I shall never recover. It is a 
question of weeks. well, life ha been pleasant; I like it; yes, sir, 
I use to like it. I sometim think if we knew all, we should be more 
glad to get away.” 

“jekyl is ill, too,” observ utterson. “have you seen him?” 

but lanyon’ face changed, and he held up a trembl hand. “I wish to 
see or hear no more of dr. jekyll,” he said in a loud, unsteadi voice. 
“I am quit done with that person; and I beg that you will spare me ani 
allus to one whom I regard as dead.” 

“tut, tut!” said mr. utterson; and then after a consider pause, 
“can’t I do anything?” he inquired. “we are three veri old friends, 
lanyon; we shall not live to make others.” 

“noth can be done,” return lanyon; “ask himself.” 

“he will not see me,” said the lawyer. 

“I am not surpris at that,” wa the reply. “some day, utterson, after 
I am dead, you may perhap come to learn the right and wrong of this. I 
cannot tell you. and in the meantime, if you can sit and talk with me 
of other things, for god’ sake, stay and do so; but if you cannot keep 
clear of thi accurs topic, then in god’ name, go, for I cannot bear 
it.” 

As soon as he got home, utterson sat down and wrote to jekyll, 
complain of hi exclus from the house, and ask the caus of 
thi unhappi break with lanyon; and the next day brought him a long 
answer, often veri pathet worded, and sometim darkli mysteri 
in drift. the quarrel with lanyon wa incurable. “I do not blame our 
old friend,” jekyl wrote, “but I share hi view that we must never 
meet. I mean from henceforth to lead a life of extrem seclusion; you 
must not be surprised, nor must you doubt my friendship, if my door is 
often shut even to you. you must suffer me to go my own dark way. I 
have brought on myself a punish and a danger that I cannot name. If 
I am the chief of sinners, I am the chief of suffer also. I could 
not think that thi earth contain a place for suffer and terror 
so unmanning; and you can do but one thing, utterson, to lighten thi 
destiny, and that is to respect my silence.” utterson wa amazed; the 
dark influenc of hyde had been withdrawn, the doctor had return to 
hi old task and amities; a week ago, the prospect had smile with 
everi promis of a cheer and an honour age; and now in a moment, 
friendship, and peac of mind, and the whole tenor of hi life were 
wrecked. So great and unprepar a chang point to madness; but in 
view of lanyon’ manner and words, there must lie for it some deeper 
ground. 

A week afterward dr. lanyon took to hi bed, and in someth less 
than a fortnight he wa dead. the night after the funeral, at which he 
had been sadli affected, utterson lock the door of hi busi room, 
and sit there by the light of a melancholi candle, drew out and set 
befor him an envelop address by the hand and seal with the seal 
of hi dead friend. “private: for the hand of G. J. utterson alone, 
and in case of hi predeceas _to be destroy unread_,” so it wa 
emphat superscribed; and the lawyer dread to behold the 
contents. “I have buri one friend to-day,” he thought: “what if thi 
should cost me another?” and then he condemn the fear as a 
disloyalty, and broke the seal. within there wa anoth enclosure, 
likewis sealed, and mark upon the cover as “not to be open till 
the death or disappear of dr. henri jekyll.” utterson could not 
trust hi eyes. yes, it wa disappearance; here again, as in the mad 
will which he had long ago restor to it author, here again were the 
idea of a disappear and the name of henri jekyl bracketted. but in 
the will, that idea had sprung from the sinist suggest of the man 
hyde; it wa set there with a purpos all too plain and horrible. 
written by the hand of lanyon, what should it mean? A great curios 
came on the trustee, to disregard the prohibit and dive at onc to 
the bottom of these mysteries; but profession honour and faith to hi 
dead friend were stringent obligations; and the packet slept in the 
inmost corner of hi privat safe. 

It is one thing to mortifi curiosity, anoth to conquer it; and it may 
be doubt if, from that day forth, utterson desir the societi of hi 
surviv friend with the same eagerness. He thought of him kindly; but 
hi thought were disquiet and fearful. He went to call indeed; but 
he wa perhap reliev to be deni admittance; perhaps, in hi heart, 
he prefer to speak with pool upon the doorstep and surround by 
the air and sound of the open city, rather than to be admit into 
that hous of voluntari bondage, and to sit and speak with it 
inscrut recluse. pool had, indeed, no veri pleasant news to 
communicate. the doctor, it appeared, now more than ever confin 
himself to the cabinet over the laboratory, where he would sometim 
even sleep; he wa out of spirits, he had grown veri silent, he did not 
read; it seem as if he had someth on hi mind. utterson becam so 
use to the unvari charact of these reports, that he fell off 
littl by littl in the frequenc of hi visits. 



incid AT the window 

It chanc on sunday, when mr. utterson wa on hi usual walk with mr. 
enfield, that their way lay onc again through the by-street; and that 
when they came in front of the door, both stop to gaze on it. 

“well,” said enfield, “that story’ at an end at least. We shall never 
see more of mr. hyde.” 

“I hope not,” said utterson. “did I ever tell you that I onc saw him, 
and share your feel of repulsion?” 

“it wa imposs to do the one without the other,” return enfield. 
“and by the way, what an ass you must have thought me, not to know that 
thi wa a back way to dr. jekyll’s! It wa partli your own fault that 
I found it out, even when I did.” 

“so you found it out, did you?” said utterson. “but if that be so, we 
may step into the court and take a look at the windows. To tell you the 
truth, I am uneasi about poor jekyll; and even outside, I feel as if 
the presenc of a friend might do him good.” 

the court wa veri cool and a littl damp, and full of prematur 
twilight, although the sky, high up overhead, wa still bright with 
sunset. the middl one of the three window wa half-way open; and 
sit close besid it, take the air with an infinit sad of 
mien, like some disconsol prisoner, utterson saw dr. jekyll. 

“what! jekyll!” he cried. “I trust you are better.” 

“I am veri low, utterson,” repli the doctor drearily, “veri low. It 
will not last long, thank god.” 

“you stay too much indoors,” said the lawyer. “you should be out, 
whip up the circul like mr. enfield and me. (thi is my 
cousin—mr. enfield—dr. jekyll.) come now; get your hat and take a quick 
turn with us.” 

“you are veri good,” sigh the other. “I should like to veri much; but 
no, no, no, it is quit impossible; I dare not. but indeed, utterson, I 
am veri glad to see you; thi is realli a great pleasure; I would ask 
you and mr. enfield up, but the place is realli not fit.” 

“why, then,” said the lawyer, good-naturedly, “the best thing we can do 
is to stay down here and speak with you from where we are.” 

“that is just what I wa about to ventur to propose,” return the 
doctor with a smile. but the word were hardli uttered, befor the 
smile wa struck out of hi face and succeed by an express of such 
abject terror and despair, as froze the veri blood of the two gentlemen 
below. they saw it but for a glimps for the window wa instantli 
thrust down; but that glimps had been sufficient, and they turn and 
left the court without a word. In silence, too, they travers the 
by-street; and it wa not until they had come into a neighbour 
thoroughfare, where even upon a sunday there were still some stir 
of life, that mr. utterson at last turn and look at hi companion. 
they were both pale; and there wa an answer horror in their eyes. 

“god forgiv us, god forgiv us,” said mr. utterson. 

but mr. enfield onli nod hi head veri seriously, and walk on onc 
more in silence. 



the last night 

mr. utterson wa sit by hi firesid one even after dinner, when 
he wa surpris to receiv a visit from poole. 

“bless me, poole, what bring you here?” he cried; and then take a 
second look at him, “what ail you?” he added; “i the doctor ill?” 

“mr. utterson,” said the man, “there is someth wrong.” 

“take a seat, and here is a glass of wine for you,” said the lawyer. 
“now, take your time, and tell me plainli what you want.” 

“you know the doctor’ ways, sir,” repli poole, “and how he shut 
himself up. well, he’ shut up again in the cabinet; and I don’t like 
it, sir—i wish I may die if I like it. mr. utterson, sir, i’m afraid.” 

“now, my good man,” said the lawyer, “be explicit. what are you afraid 
of?” 

“i’v been afraid for about a week,” return poole, doggedli 
disregard the question, “and I can bear it no more.” 

the man’ appear ampli bore out hi words; hi manner wa alter 
for the worse; and except for the moment when he had first announc 
hi terror, he had not onc look the lawyer in the face. even now, he 
sat with the glass of wine untast on hi knee, and hi eye direct 
to a corner of the floor. “I can bear it no more,” he repeated. 

“come,” said the lawyer, “I see you have some good reason, poole; I see 
there is someth serious amiss. tri to tell me what it is.” 

“I think there’ been foul play,” said poole, hoarsely. 

“foul play!” cri the lawyer, a good deal frighten and rather 
inclin to be irrit in consequence. “what foul play! what doe the 
man mean?” 

“I daren’t say, sir,” wa the answer; “but will you come along with me 
and see for yourself?” 

mr. utterson’ onli answer wa to rise and get hi hat and greatcoat; 
but he observ with wonder the great of the relief that appear 
upon the butler’ face, and perhap with no less, that the wine wa 
still untast when he set it down to follow. 

It wa a wild, cold, season night of march, with a pale moon, lie 
on her back as though the wind had tilt her, and fli wrack of the 
most diaphan and lawni texture. the wind made talk difficult, and 
fleck the blood into the face. It seem to have swept the street 
unusu bare of passengers, besides; for mr. utterson thought he had 
never seen that part of london so deserted. He could have wish it 
otherwise; never in hi life had he been consciou of so sharp a wish 
to see and touch hi fellow-creatures; for struggl as he might, there 
wa born in upon hi mind a crush anticip of calamity. the 
square, when they got there, wa full of wind and dust, and the thin 
tree in the garden were lash themselv along the railing. poole, 
who had kept all the way a pace or two ahead, now pull up in the 
middl of the pavement, and in spite of the bite weather, took off 
hi hat and mop hi brow with a red pocket-handkerchief. but for all 
the hurri of hi coming, these were not the dew of exert that he 
wipe away, but the moistur of some strangl anguish; for hi face 
wa white and hi voice, when he spoke, harsh and broken. 

“well, sir,” he said, “here we are, and god grant there be noth 
wrong.” 

“amen, poole,” said the lawyer. 

thereupon the servant knock in a veri guard manner; the door wa 
open on the chain; and a voic ask from within, “i that you, 
poole?” 

“it’ all right,” said poole. “open the door.” 

the hall, when they enter it, wa brightli light up; the fire wa 
built high; and about the hearth the whole of the servants, men and 
women, stood huddl togeth like a flock of sheep. At the sight of 
mr. utterson, the housemaid broke into hyster whimpering; and the 
cook, cri out “bless god! it’ mr. utterson,” ran forward as if to 
take him in her arms. 

“what, what? are you all here?” said the lawyer peevishly. “veri 
irregular, veri unseemly; your master would be far from pleased.” 

“they’r all afraid,” said poole. 

blank silenc followed, no one protesting; onli the maid lift her 
voic and now wept loudly. 

“hold your tongue!” pool said to her, with a feroc of accent that 
testifi to hi own jangl nerves; and indeed, when the girl had so 
suddenli rais the note of her lamentation, they had all start and 
turn toward the inner door with face of dread expectation. “and 
now,” continu the butler, address the knife-boy, “reach me a 
candle, and we’ll get thi through hand at once.” and then he beg 
mr. utterson to follow him, and led the way to the back garden. 

“now, sir,” said he, “you come as gentli as you can. I want you to 
hear, and I don’t want you to be heard. and see here, sir, if by ani 
chanc he wa to ask you in, don’t go.” 

mr. utterson’ nerves, at thi unlooked-for termination, gave a jerk 
that nearli threw him from hi balance; but he recollect hi courag 
and follow the butler into the laboratori build through the 
surgic theatre, with it lumber of crate and bottles, to the foot of 
the stair. here pool motion him to stand on one side and listen; 
while he himself, set down the candl and make a great and 
obviou call on hi resolution, mount the step and knock with a 
somewhat uncertain hand on the red baiz of the cabinet door. 

“mr. utterson, sir, ask to see you,” he called; and even as he did 
so, onc more violent sign to the lawyer to give ear. 

A voic answer from within: “tell him I cannot see anyone,” it said 
complainingly. 

“thank you, sir,” said poole, with a note of someth like triumph in 
hi voice; and take up hi candle, he led mr. utterson back across 
the yard and into the great kitchen, where the fire wa out and the 
beetl were leap on the floor. 

“sir,” he said, look mr. utterson in the eyes, “wa that my master’ 
voice?” 

“it seem much changed,” repli the lawyer, veri pale, but give look 
for look. 

“changed? well, yes, I think so,” said the butler. “have I been twenti 
year in thi man’ house, to be deceiv about hi voice? no, sir; 
master’ made away with; he wa made away with eight day ago, when we 
heard him cri out upon the name of god; and _who’s_ in there instead of 
him, and _why_ it stay there, is a thing that cri to heaven, mr. 
utterson!” 

“thi is a veri strang tale, poole; thi is rather a wild tale my 
man,” said mr. utterson, bite hi finger. “suppos it were as you 
suppose, suppos dr. jekyl to have been—well, murder what could 
induc the murder to stay? that won’t hold water; it doesn’t commend 
itself to reason.” 

“well, mr. utterson, you are a hard man to satisfy, but i’ll do it 
yet,” said poole. “all thi last week (you must know) him, or it, 
whatev it is that live in that cabinet, ha been cri night and 
day for some sort of medicin and cannot get it to hi mind. It wa 
sometim hi way—th master’s, that is—to write hi order on a sheet 
of paper and throw it on the stair. we’v had noth els thi week 
back; noth but papers, and a close door, and the veri meal left 
there to be smuggl in when nobodi wa looking. well, sir, everi day, 
ay, and twice and thrice in the same day, there have been order and 
complaints, and I have been sent fli to all the wholesal chemist 
in town. everi time I brought the stuff back, there would be anoth 
paper tell me to return it, becaus it wa not pure, and anoth 
order to a differ firm. thi drug is want bitter bad, sir, 
whatev for.” 

“have you ani of these papers?” ask mr. utterson. 

pool felt in hi pocket and hand out a crumpl note, which the 
lawyer, bend nearer to the candle, care examined. it content 
ran thus: “dr. jekyl present hi compliment to messrs. maw. He 
assur them that their last sampl is impur and quit useless for hi 
present purpose. In the year 18—, dr. J. purchas a somewhat larg 
quantiti from messrs. M. He now beg them to search with most sedul 
care, and should ani of the same qualiti be left, forward it to him at 
once. expens is no consideration. the import of thi to dr. J. can 
hardli be exaggerated.” So far the letter had run composedli enough, 
but here with a sudden splutter of the pen, the writer’ emot had 
broken loose. “for god’ sake,” he added, “find me some of the old.” 

“thi is a strang note,” said mr. utterson; and then sharply, “how do 
you come to have it open?” 

“the man at maw’ wa main angry, sir, and he threw it back to me like 
so much dirt,” return poole. 

“thi is unquestion the doctor’ hand, do you know?” resum the 
lawyer. 

“I thought it look like it,” said the servant rather sulkily; and 
then, with anoth voice, “but what matter hand of write?” he said. 
“i’v seen him!” 

“seen him?” repeat mr. utterson. “well?” 

“that’ it!” said poole. “it wa thi way. I came suddenli into the 
theatr from the garden. It seem he had slip out to look for thi 
drug or whatev it is; for the cabinet door wa open, and there he wa 
at the far end of the room dig among the crates. He look up when 
I came in, gave a kind of cry, and whip upstair into the cabinet. 
It wa but for one minut that I saw him, but the hair stood upon my 
head like quills. sir, if that wa my master, whi had he a mask upon 
hi face? If it wa my master, whi did he cri out like a rat, and run 
from me? I have serv him long enough. and then...” the man paus and 
pass hi hand over hi face. 

“these are all veri strang circumstances,” said mr. utterson, “but I 
think I begin to see daylight. your master, poole, is plainli seiz 
with one of those maladi that both tortur and deform the sufferer; 
hence, for aught I know, the alter of hi voice; henc the mask 
and the avoid of hi friends; henc hi eager to find thi 
drug, by mean of which the poor soul retain some hope of ultim 
recovery—god grant that he be not deceived! there is my explanation; it 
is sad enough, poole, ay, and appal to consider; but it is plain 
and natural, hang well together, and deliv us from all exorbit 
alarms.” 

“sir,” said the butler, turn to a sort of mottl pallor, “that 
thing wa not my master, and there’ the truth. My master”—her he 
look round him and began to whisper—“i a tall, fine build of a man, 
and thi wa more of a dwarf.” utterson attempt to protest. “o, sir,” 
cri poole, “do you think I do not know my master after twenti years? 
Do you think I do not know where hi head come to in the cabinet door, 
where I saw him everi morn of my life? no, sir, that thing in the 
mask wa never dr. jekyll—god know what it was, but it wa never dr. 
jekyll; and it is the belief of my heart that there wa murder done.” 

“poole,” repli the lawyer, “if you say that, it will becom my duti 
to make certain. much as I desir to spare your master’ feelings, much 
as I am puzzl by thi note which seem to prove him to be still 
alive, I shall consid it my duti to break in that door.” 

“ah, mr. utterson, that’ talking!” cri the butler. 

“and now come the second question,” resum utterson: “who is go to 
do it?” 

“why, you and me, sir,” wa the undaunt reply. 

“that’ veri well said,” return the lawyer; “and whatev come of 
it, I shall make it my busi to see you are no loser.” 

“there is an axe in the theatre,” continu poole; “and you might take 
the kitchen poker for yourself.” 

the lawyer took that rude but weighti instrument into hi hand, and 
balanc it. “do you know, poole,” he said, look up, “that you and I 
are about to place ourselv in a posit of some peril?” 

“you may say so, sir, indeed,” return the butler. 

“it is well, then that we should be frank,” said the other. “we both 
think more than we have said; let us make a clean breast. thi mask 
figur that you saw, did you recognis it?” 

“well, sir, it went so quick, and the creatur wa so doubl up, that 
I could hardli swear to that,” wa the answer. “but if you mean, wa it 
mr. hyde?—why, yes, I think it was! you see, it wa much of the same 
bigness; and it had the same quick, light way with it; and then who 
els could have got in by the laboratori door? you have not forgot, 
sir, that at the time of the murder he had still the key with him? but 
that’ not all. I don’t know, mr. utterson, if you ever met thi mr. 
hyde?” 

“yes,” said the lawyer, “I onc spoke with him.” 

“then you must know as well as the rest of us that there wa someth 
queer about that gentleman—someth that gave a man a turn—i don’t 
know rightli how to say it, sir, beyond this: that you felt in your 
marrow kind of cold and thin.” 

“I own I felt someth of what you describe,” said mr. utterson. 

“quit so, sir,” return poole. “well, when that mask thing like a 
monkey jump from among the chemic and whip into the cabinet, it 
went down my spine like ice. O, I know it’ not evidence, mr. utterson; 
i’m book-learn enough for that; but a man ha hi feelings, and I 
give you my bible-word it wa mr. hyde!” 

“ay, ay,” said the lawyer. “mi fear inclin to the same point. evil, I 
fear, founded—evil wa sure to come—of that connection. Ay truly, I 
believ you; I believ poor harri is killed; and I believ hi murder 
(for what purpose, god alon can tell) is still lurk in hi victim’ 
room. well, let our name be vengeance. call bradshaw.” 

the footman came at the summons, veri white and nervous. 

“pull yourself together, bradshaw,” said the lawyer. “thi suspense, I 
know, is tell upon all of you; but it is now our intent to make 
an end of it. poole, here, and I are go to forc our way into the 
cabinet. If all is well, my shoulder are broad enough to bear the 
blame. meanwhile, lest anyth should realli be amiss, or ani 
malefactor seek to escap by the back, you and the boy must go round 
the corner with a pair of good stick and take your post at the 
laboratori door. We give you ten minut to get to your stations.” 

As bradshaw left, the lawyer look at hi watch. “and now, poole, let 
us get to ours,” he said; and take the poker under hi arm, led the 
way into the yard. the scud had bank over the moon, and it wa now 
quit dark. the wind, which onli broke in puff and draught into that 
deep well of building, toss the light of the candl to and fro about 
their steps, until they came into the shelter of the theatre, where 
they sat down silent to wait. london hum solemnli all around; but 
nearer at hand, the still wa onli broken by the sound of a 
footfal move to and fro along the cabinet floor. 

“so it will walk all day, sir,” whisper poole; “ay, and the better 
part of the night. onli when a new sampl come from the chemist, 
there’ a bit of a break. ah, it’ an ill conscienc that’ such an 
enemi to rest! ah, sir, there’ blood foulli shed in everi step of it! 
but hark again, a littl closer—put your heart in your ears, mr. 
utterson, and tell me, is that the doctor’ foot?” 

the step fell lightli and oddly, with a certain swing, for all they 
went so slowly; it wa differ inde from the heavi creak tread 
of henri jekyll. utterson sighed. “i there never anyth else?” he 
asked. 

pool nodded. “once,” he said. “onc I heard it weeping!” 

“weeping? how that?” said the lawyer, consciou of a sudden chill of 
horror. 

“weep like a woman or a lost soul,” said the butler. “I came away 
with that upon my heart, that I could have wept too.” 

but now the ten minut drew to an end. pool disint the axe from 
under a stack of pack straw; the candl wa set upon the nearest 
tabl to light them to the attack; and they drew near with bate breath 
to where that patient foot wa still go up and down, up and down, in 
the quiet of the night. 

“jekyll,” cri utterson, with a loud voice, “I demand to see you.” He 
paus a moment, but there came no reply. “I give you fair warning, our 
suspicion are aroused, and I must and shall see you,” he resumed; “if 
not by fair means, then by foul—if not of your consent, then by brute 
force!” 

“utterson,” said the voice, “for god’ sake, have mercy!” 

“ah, that’ not jekyll’ voice—it’ hyde’s!” cri utterson. “down with 
the door, poole!” 

pool swung the axe over hi shoulder; the blow shook the building, and 
the red baiz door leap against the lock and hinges. A dismal 
screech, as of mere anim terror, rang from the cabinet. Up went the 
axe again, and again the panel crash and the frame bounded; four 
time the blow fell; but the wood wa tough and the fit were of 
excel workmanship; and it wa not until the fifth, that the lock 
burst and the wreck of the door fell inward on the carpet. 

the besiegers, appal by their own riot and the still that had 
succeeded, stood back a littl and peer in. there lay the cabinet 
befor their eye in the quiet lamplight, a good fire glow and 
chatter on the hearth, the kettl sing it thin strain, a drawer 
or two open, paper neatli set forth on the busi table, and nearer 
the fire, the thing laid out for tea; the quietest room, you would 
have said, and, but for the glaze press full of chemicals, the most 
commonplac that night in london. 

right in the middl there lay the bodi of a man sore contort and 
still twitching. they drew near on tiptoe, turn it on it back and 
beheld the face of edward hyde. He wa dress in cloth far too larg 
for him, cloth of the doctor’ bigness; the cord of hi face still 
move with a semblanc of life, but life wa quit gone; and by the 
crush phial in the hand and the strong smell of kernel that hung 
upon the air, utterson knew that he wa look on the bodi of a 
self-destroyer. 

“we have come too late,” he said sternly, “whether to save or punish. 
hyde is gone to hi account; and it onli remain for us to find the 
bodi of your master.” 

the far greater proport of the build wa occupi by the theatre, 
which fill almost the whole ground storey and wa light from above, 
and by the cabinet, which form an upper storey at one end and look 
upon the court. A corridor join the theatr to the door on the 
by-street; and with thi the cabinet commun separ by a 
second flight of stairs. there were besid a few dark closet and a 
spaciou cellar. all these they now thoroughli examined. each closet 
need but a glance, for all were empty, and all, by the dust that fell 
from their doors, had stood long unopened. the cellar, indeed, wa 
fill with crazi lumber, mostli date from the time of the surgeon 
who wa jekyll’ predecessor; but even as they open the door they 
were advertis of the useless of further search, by the fall of a 
perfect mat of cobweb which had for year seal up the entrance. 
nowher wa there ani trace of henri jekyll, dead or alive. 

pool stamp on the flag of the corridor. “he must be buri here,” 
he said, hearken to the sound. 

“or he may have fled,” said utterson, and he turn to examin the door 
in the by-street. It wa locked; and lie near by on the flags, they 
found the key, alreadi stain with rust. 

“thi doe not look like use,” observ the lawyer. 

“use!” echo poole. “do you not see, sir, it is broken? much as if a 
man had stamp on it.” 

“ay,” continu utterson, “and the fractures, too, are rusty.” the two 
men look at each other with a scare. “thi is beyond me, poole,” said 
the lawyer. “let us go back to the cabinet.” 

they mount the stair in silence, and still with an occasion 
awestruck glanc at the dead body, proceed more thoroughli to examin 
the content of the cabinet. At one table, there were trace of 
chemic work, variou measur heap of some white salt be laid on 
glass saucers, as though for an experi in which the unhappi man had 
been prevented. 

“that is the same drug that I wa alway bring him,” said poole; and 
even as he spoke, the kettl with a startl nois boil over. 

thi brought them to the fireside, where the easy-chair wa drawn 
cosili up, and the tea thing stood readi to the sitter’ elbow, the 
veri sugar in the cup. there were sever book on a shelf; one lay 
besid the tea thing open, and utterson wa amaz to find it a copi 
of a piou work, for which jekyl had sever time express a great 
esteem, annotated, in hi own hand with startl blasphemies. 

next, in the cours of their review of the chamber, the searcher came 
to the cheval-glass, into whose depth they look with an involuntari 
horror. but it wa so turn as to show them noth but the rosi glow 
play on the roof, the fire sparkl in a hundr repetit along 
the glaze front of the presses, and their own pale and fear 
counten stoop to look in. 

“thi glass ha seen some strang things, sir,” whisper poole. 

“and sure none stranger than itself,” echo the lawyer in the same 
tones. “for what did jekyll”—h caught himself up at the word with a 
start, and then conquer the weakness—“what could jekyl want with 
it?” he said. 

“you may say that!” said poole. 

next they turn to the busi table. On the desk, among the neat 
array of papers, a larg envelop wa uppermost, and bore, in the 
doctor’ hand, the name of mr. utterson. the lawyer unseal it, and 
sever enclosur fell to the floor. the first wa a will, drawn in 
the same eccentr term as the one which he had return six month 
before, to serv as a testament in case of death and as a deed of gift 
in case of disappearance; but in place of the name of edward hyde, the 
lawyer, with indescrib amaz read the name of gabriel john 
utterson. He look at poole, and then back at the paper, and last of 
all at the dead malefactor stretch upon the carpet. 

“mi head goe round,” he said. “he ha been all these day in 
possession; he had no caus to like me; he must have rage to see 
himself displaced; and he ha not destroy thi document.” 

He caught up the next paper; it wa a brief note in the doctor’ hand 
and date at the top. “O poole!” the lawyer cried, “he wa aliv and 
here thi day. He cannot have been dispos of in so short a space; he 
must be still alive, he must have fled! and then, whi fled? and how? 
and in that case, can we ventur to declar thi suicide? O, we must be 
careful. I forese that we may yet involv your master in some dire 
catastrophe.” 

“whi don’t you read it, sir?” ask poole. 

“becaus I fear,” repli the lawyer solemnly. “god grant I have no 
caus for it!” and with that he brought the paper to hi eye and read 
as follows: 


“mi dear utterson,—when thi shall fall into your hands, I shall have 
disappeared, under what circumst I have not the penetr to 
foresee, but my instinct and all the circumst of my nameless 
situat tell me that the end is sure and must be early. Go then, and 
first read the narr which lanyon warn me he wa to place in your 
hands; and if you care to hear more, turn to the confess of 

“your unworthi and unhappi friend, 

“henri jekyll.” 


“there wa a third enclosure?” ask utterson. 

“here, sir,” said poole, and gave into hi hand a consider packet 
seal in sever places. 

the lawyer put it in hi pocket. “I would say noth of thi paper. If 
your master ha fled or is dead, we may at least save hi credit. It is 
now ten; I must go home and read these document in quiet; but I shall 
be back befor midnight, when we shall send for the police.” 

they went out, lock the door of the theatr behind them; and 
utterson, onc more leav the servant gather about the fire in the 
hall, trudg back to hi offic to read the two narr in which 
thi mysteri wa now to be explained. 



dr. lanyon’ narr 

On the ninth of january, now four day ago, I receiv by the even 
deliveri a regist envelope, address in the hand of my colleagu 
and old school companion, henri jekyll. I wa a good deal surpris by 
this; for we were by no mean in the habit of correspondence; I had 
seen the man, dine with him, indeed, the night before; and I could 
imagin noth in our intercours that should justifi formal of 
registration. the content increas my wonder; for thi is how the 
letter ran: 

“10_th december_, 18—. 


“dear lanyon,—y are one of my oldest friends; and although we may 
have differ at time on scientif questions, I cannot remember, at 
least on my side, ani break in our affection. there wa never a day 
when, if you had said to me, ‘jekyll, my life, my honour, my reason, 
depend upon you,’ I would not have sacrif my left hand to help you. 
lanyon my life, my honour, my reason, are all at your mercy; if you 
fail me to-night, I am lost. you might suppose, after thi preface, 
that I am go to ask you for someth dishonour to grant. judg 
for yourself. 

“I want you to postpon all other engag for to-night—ay, even if 
you were summon to the bedsid of an emperor; to take a cab, unless 
your carriag should be actual at the door; and with thi letter in 
your hand for consultation, to drive straight to my house. poole, my 
butler, ha hi orders; you will find him wait your arriv with a 
locksmith. the door of my cabinet is then to be forced; and you are to 
go in alone; to open the glaze press (letter E) on the left hand, 
break the lock if it be shut; and to draw out, _with all it 
content as they stand_, the fourth drawer from the top or (which is 
the same thing) the third from the bottom. In my extrem distress of 
mind, I have a morbid fear of misdirect you; but even if I am in 
error, you may know the right drawer by it contents: some powders, a 
phial and a paper book. thi drawer I beg of you to carri back with you 
to cavendish squar exactli as it stands. 

“that is the first part of the service: now for the second. you should 
be back, if you set out at onc on the receipt of this, long befor 
midnight; but I will leav you that amount of margin, not onli in the 
fear of one of those obstacl that can neither be prevent nor 
foreseen, but becaus an hour when your servant are in bed is to be 
prefer for what will then remain to do. At midnight, then, I have to 
ask you to be alon in your consult room, to admit with your own 
hand into the hous a man who will present himself in my name, and to 
place in hi hand the drawer that you will have brought with you from 
my cabinet. then you will have play your part and earn my gratitud 
completely. five minut afterwards, if you insist upon an explanation, 
you will have understood that these arrang are of capit 
importance; and that by the neglect of one of them, fantast as they 
must appear, you might have charg your conscienc with my death or 
the shipwreck of my reason. 

“confid as I am that you will not trifl with thi appeal, my heart 
sink and my hand trembl at the bare thought of such a possibility. 
think of me at thi hour, in a strang place, labour under a 
black of distress that no fanci can exaggerate, and yet well awar 
that, if you will but punctual serv me, my troubl will roll away 
like a stori that is told. serv me, my dear lanyon and save 

“your friend, 


“h.j. 


“p.s.—i had alreadi seal thi up when a fresh terror struck upon my 
soul. It is possibl that the post-offic may fail me, and thi letter 
not come into your hand until to-morrow morning. In that case, dear 
lanyon, do my errand when it shall be most conveni for you in the 
cours of the day; and onc more expect my messeng at midnight. It 
may then alreadi be too late; and if that night pass without event, 
you will know that you have seen the last of henri jekyll.” 


upon the read of thi letter, I made sure my colleagu wa insane; 
but till that wa prove beyond the possibl of doubt, I felt bound 
to do as he requested. the less I understood of thi farrago, the less 
I wa in a posit to judg of it importance; and an appeal so word 
could not be set asid without a grave responsibility. I rose 
accordingli from table, got into a hansom, and drove straight to 
jekyll’ house. the butler wa await my arrival; he had receiv by 
the same post as mine a regist letter of instruction, and had sent 
at onc for a locksmith and a carpenter. the tradesmen came while we 
were yet speaking; and we move in a bodi to old dr. denman’ surgic 
theatre, from which (a you are doubtless aware) jekyll’ privat 
cabinet is most conveni entered. the door wa veri strong, the 
lock excellent; the carpent avow he would have great troubl and 
have to do much damage, if forc were to be used; and the locksmith wa 
near despair. but thi last wa a handi fellow, and after two hour’ 
work, the door stood open. the press mark E wa unlocked; and I took 
out the drawer, had it fill up with straw and tie in a sheet, and 
return with it to cavendish square. 

here I proceed to examin it contents. the powder were neatli 
enough made up, but not with the niceti of the dispens chemist; so 
that it wa plain they were of jekyll’ privat manufacture; and when I 
open one of the wrapper I found what seem to me a simpl 
crystallin salt of a white colour. the phial, to which I next turn 
my attention, might have been about half full of a blood-r liquor, 
which wa highli pungent to the sens of smell and seem to me to 
contain phosphoru and some volatil ether. At the other ingredi I 
could make no guess. the book wa an ordinari version book and 
contain littl but a seri of dates. these cover a period of mani 
years, but I observ that the entri ceas nearli a year ago and 
quit abruptly. here and there a brief remark wa append to a date, 
usual no more than a singl word: “double” occur perhap six 
time in a total of sever hundr entries; and onc veri earli in the 
list and follow by sever mark of exclamation, “total failure!!!” 
all this, though it whet my curiosity, told me littl that wa 
definite. here were a phial of some salt, and the record of a seri of 
experi that had led (like too mani of jekyll’ investigations) to 
no end of practic usefulness. how could the presenc of these 
articl in my hous affect either the honour, the sanity, or the life 
of my flighti colleague? If hi messeng could go to one place, whi 
could he not go to another? and even grant some impediment, whi wa 
thi gentleman to be receiv by me in secret? the more I reflect the 
more convinc I grew that I wa deal with a case of cerebr 
disease; and though I dismiss my servant to bed, I load an old 
revolver, that I might be found in some postur of self-defence. 

twelv o’clock had scarc rung out over london, ere the knocker sound 
veri gentli on the door. I went myself at the summons, and found a 
small man crouch against the pillar of the portico. 

“are you come from dr. jekyll?” I asked. 

He told me “yes” by a constrain gesture; and when I had bidden him 
enter, he did not obey me without a search backward glanc into the 
dark of the square. there wa a policeman not far off, advanc 
with hi bull’ eye open; and at the sight, I thought my visitor 
start and made greater haste. 

these particular struck me, I confess, disagreeably; and as I follow 
him into the bright light of the consult room, I kept my hand readi 
on my weapon. here, at last, I had a chanc of clearli see him. I 
had never set eye on him before, so much wa certain. He wa small, as 
I have said; I wa struck besid with the shock express of hi 
face, with hi remark combin of great muscular activ and 
great appar debil of constitution, and—last but not least—with 
the odd, subject disturb caus by hi neighbourhood. thi bore 
some resembl to incipi rigour, and wa accompani by a mark 
sink of the pulse. At the time, I set it down to some idiosyncratic, 
person distaste, and mere wonder at the acut of the 
symptoms; but I have sinc had reason to believ the caus to lie much 
deeper in the natur of man, and to turn on some nobler hing than the 
principl of hatred. 

thi person (who had thus, from the first moment of hi entrance, 
struck in me what I can onli describ as a disgust curiosity) wa 
dress in a fashion that would have made an ordinari person laughable; 
hi clothes, that is to say, although they were of rich and sober 
fabric, were enorm too larg for him in everi measurement—th 
trouser hang on hi leg and roll up to keep them from the 
ground, the waist of the coat below hi haunches, and the collar 
sprawl wide upon hi shoulders. strang to relate, thi ludicr 
accoutr wa far from move me to laughter. rather, as there wa 
someth abnorm and misbegotten in the veri essenc of the creatur 
that now face me—someth seizing, surpris and revolting—thi 
fresh dispar seem but to fit in with and to reinforc it; so that 
to my interest in the man’ natur and character, there wa ad a 
curios as to hi origin, hi life, hi fortun and statu in the 
world. 

these observations, though they have taken so great a space to be set 
down in, were yet the work of a few seconds. My visitor was, indeed, on 
fire with sombr excitement. 

“have you got it?” he cried. “have you got it?” and so live wa hi 
impati that he even laid hi hand upon my arm and sought to shake 
me. 

I put him back, consciou at hi touch of a certain ici pang along my 
blood. “come, sir,” said I. “you forget that I have not yet the 
pleasur of your acquaintance. Be seated, if you please.” and I show 
him an example, and sat down myself in my customari seat and with as 
fair an imit of my ordinari manner to a patient, as the late 
of the hour, the natur of my preoccupations, and the horror I had of 
my visitor, would suffer me to muster. 

“I beg your pardon, dr. lanyon,” he repli civilli enough. “what you 
say is veri well founded; and my impati ha shown it heel to my 
politeness. I come here at the instanc of your colleague, dr. henri 
jekyll, on a piec of busi of some moment; and I understood...” He 
paus and put hi hand to hi throat, and I could see, in spite of hi 
collect manner, that he wa wrestl against the approach of the 
hysteria—“i understood, a drawer...” 

but here I took piti on my visitor’ suspense, and some perhap on my 
own grow curiosity. 

“there it is, sir,” said I, point to the drawer, where it lay on the 
floor behind a tabl and still cover with the sheet. 

He sprang to it, and then paused, and laid hi hand upon hi heart; I 
could hear hi teeth grate with the convuls action of hi jaws; and 
hi face wa so ghastli to see that I grew alarm both for hi life 
and reason. 

“compos yourself,” said I. 

He turn a dread smile to me, and as if with the decis of 
despair, pluck away the sheet. At sight of the contents, he utter 
one loud sob of such immens relief that I sat petrified. and the next 
moment, in a voic that wa alreadi fairli well under control, “have 
you a graduat glass?” he asked. 

I rose from my place with someth of an effort and gave him what he 
asked. 

He thank me with a smile nod, measur out a few minim of the red 
tinctur and ad one of the powders. the mixture, which wa at first 
of a reddish hue, began, in proport as the crystal melted, to 
brighten in colour, to effervesc audibly, and to throw off small fume 
of vapour. suddenli and at the same moment, the ebullit ceas and 
the compound chang to a dark purple, which fade again more slowli to 
a wateri green. My visitor, who had watch these metamorphos with a 
keen eye, smiled, set down the glass upon the table, and then turn 
and look upon me with an air of scrutiny. 

“and now,” said he, “to settl what remains. will you be wise? will you 
be guided? will you suffer me to take thi glass in my hand and to go 
forth from your hous without further parley? or ha the greed of 
curios too much command of you? think befor you answer, for it 
shall be done as you decide. As you decide, you shall be left as you 
were before, and neither richer nor wiser, unless the sens of servic 
render to a man in mortal distress may be count as a kind of rich 
of the soul. or, if you shall so prefer to choose, a new provinc of 
knowledg and new avenu to fame and power shall be laid open to you, 
here, in thi room, upon the instant; and your sight shall be blast 
by a prodigi to stagger the unbelief of satan.” 

“sir,” said I, affect a cool that I wa far from truli 
possessing, “you speak enigmas, and you will perhap not wonder that I 
hear you with no veri strong impress of belief. but I have gone too 
far in the way of inexplic servic to paus befor I see the end.” 

“it is well,” repli my visitor. “lanyon, you rememb your vows: what 
follow is under the seal of our profession. and now, you who have so 
long been bound to the most narrow and materi views, you who have 
deni the virtu of transcendent medicine, you who have derid your 
superiors—behold!” 

He put the glass to hi lip and drank at one gulp. A cri followed; he 
reeled, staggered, clutch at the tabl and held on, stare with 
inject eyes, gasp with open mouth; and as I look there came, I 
thought, a change—h seem to swell—hi face becam suddenli black and 
the featur seem to melt and alter—and the next moment, I had sprung 
to my feet and leap back against the wall, my arm rais to shield 
me from that prodigy, my mind submerg in terror. 

“O god!” I screamed, and “O god!” again and again; for there befor my 
eyes—pal and shaken, and half fainting, and grope befor him with 
hi hands, like a man restor from death—ther stood henri jekyll! 

what he told me in the next hour, I cannot bring my mind to set on 
paper. I saw what I saw, I heard what I heard, and my soul sicken at 
it; and yet now when that sight ha fade from my eyes, I ask myself if 
I believ it, and I cannot answer. My life is shaken to it roots; 
sleep ha left me; the deadliest terror sit by me at all hour of the 
day and night; and I feel that my day are numbered, and that I must 
die; and yet I shall die incredulous. As for the moral turpitud that 
man unveil to me, even with tear of penitence, I cannot, even in 
memory, dwell on it without a start of horror. I will say but one 
thing, utterson, and that (if you can bring your mind to credit it) 
will be more than enough. the creatur who crept into my hous that 
night was, on jekyll’ own confession, known by the name of hyde and 
hunt for in everi corner of the land as the murder of carew. 

hasti lanyon. 




henri jekyll’ full statement OF the case 

I wa born in the year 18— to a larg fortune, endow besid with 
excel parts, inclin by natur to industry, fond of the respect of 
the wise and good among my fellowmen, and thus, as might have been 
supposed, with everi guarante of an honour and distinguish 
future. and inde the worst of my fault wa a certain impati 
gaieti of disposition, such as ha made the happi of many, but such 
as I found it hard to reconcil with my imperi desir to carri my 
head high, and wear a more than commonli grave counten befor the 
public. henc it came about that I conceal my pleasures; and that 
when I reach year of reflection, and began to look round me and take 
stock of my progress and posit in the world, I stood alreadi 
commit to a profound duplic of life. mani a man would have even 
blazon such irregular as I wa guilti of; but from the high 
view that I had set befor me, I regard and hid them with an almost 
morbid sens of shame. It wa thu rather the exact natur of my 
aspir than ani particular degrad in my faults, that made me 
what I was, and, with even a deeper trench than in the major of men, 
sever in me those provinc of good and ill which divid and compound 
man’ dual nature. In thi case, I wa driven to reflect deepli and 
inveter on that hard law of life, which lie at the root of 
religion and is one of the most plenti spring of distress. though 
so profound a double-dealer, I wa in no sens a hypocrite; both side 
of me were in dead earnest; I wa no more myself when I laid asid 
restraint and plung in shame, than when I laboured, in the eye of 
day, at the further of knowledg or the relief of sorrow and 
suffering. and it chanc that the direct of my scientif studies, 
which led wholli toward the mystic and the transcendental, react and 
shed a strong light on thi conscious of the perenni war among my 
members. with everi day, and from both side of my intelligence, the 
moral and the intellectual, I thu drew steadili nearer to that truth, 
by whose partial discoveri I have been doom to such a dread 
shipwreck: that man is not truli one, but truli two. I say two, becaus 
the state of my own knowledg doe not pass beyond that point. other 
will follow, other will outstrip me on the same lines; and I hazard 
the guess that man will be ultim known for a mere politi of 
multifarious, incongru and independ denizens. I, for my part, 
from the natur of my life, advanc infal in one direct and in 
one direct only. It wa on the moral side, and in my own person, 
that I learn to recognis the thorough and primit dualiti of man; 
I saw that, of the two natur that contend in the field of my 
consciousness, even if I could rightli be said to be either, it wa 
onli becaus I wa radic both; and from an earli date, even befor 
the cours of my scientif discoveri had begun to suggest the most 
nake possibl of such a miracle, I had learn to dwell with 
pleasure, as a belov daydream, on the thought of the separ of 
these elements. If each, I told myself, could be hous in separ 
identities, life would be reliev of all that wa unbearable; the 
unjust might go hi way, deliv from the aspir and remors of 
hi more upright twin; and the just could walk steadfastli and secur 
on hi upward path, do the good thing in which he found hi 
pleasure, and no longer expos to disgrac and penit by the hand 
of thi extran evil. It wa the curs of mankind that these 
incongru faggot were thu bound together—that in the agonis womb 
of consciousness, these polar twin should be continu struggling. 
how, then were they dissociated? 

I wa so far in my reflect when, as I have said, a side light began 
to shine upon the subject from the laboratori table. I began to 
perceiv more deepli than it ha ever yet been stated, the trembl 
immateriality, the mistlik transience, of thi seemingli so solid bodi 
in which we walk attired. certain agent I found to have the power to 
shake and pluck back that fleshli vestment, even as a wind might toss 
the curtain of a pavilion. for two good reasons, I will not enter 
deepli into thi scientif branch of my confession. first, becaus I 
have been made to learn that the doom and burthen of our life is bound 
for ever on man’ shoulders, and when the attempt is made to cast it 
off, it but return upon us with more unfamiliar and more aw 
pressure. second, because, as my narr will make, alas! too 
evident, my discoveri were incomplete. enough then, that I not onli 
recognis my natur bodi from the mere aura and effulg of certain 
of the power that made up my spirit, but manag to compound a drug by 
which these power should be dethron from their supremacy, and a 
second form and counten substituted, none the less natur to me 
becaus they were the expression, and bore the stamp of lower element 
in my soul. 

I hesit long befor I put thi theori to the test of practice. I 
knew well that I risk death; for ani drug that so potent control 
and shook the veri fortress of identity, might, by the least scrupl of 
an overdos or at the least inopportun in the moment of exhibition, 
utterli blot out that immateri tabernacl which I look to it to 
change. but the temptat of a discoveri so singular and profound at 
last overcam the suggest of alarm. I had long sinc prepar my 
tincture; I purchas at once, from a firm of wholesal chemists, a 
larg quantiti of a particular salt which I knew, from my experiments, 
to be the last ingredi required; and late one accurs night, I 
compound the elements, watch them boil and smoke togeth in the 
glass, and when the ebullit had subsided, with a strong glow of 
courage, drank off the potion. 

the most rack pang succeeded: a grind in the bones, deadli 
nausea, and a horror of the spirit that cannot be exceed at the hour 
of birth or death. then these agoni began swiftli to subside, and I 
came to myself as if out of a great sickness. there wa someth 
strang in my sensations, someth indescrib new and, from it 
veri novelty, incred sweet. I felt younger, lighter, happier in 
body; within I wa consciou of a headi recklessness, a current of 
disord sensual imag run like a millrac in my fancy, a 
solut of the bond of obligation, an unknown but not an innoc 
freedom of the soul. I knew myself, at the first breath of thi new 
life, to be more wicked, tenfold more wicked, sold a slave to my 
origin evil; and the thought, in that moment, brace and delight me 
like wine. I stretch out my hands, exult in the fresh of these 
sensations; and in the act, I wa suddenli awar that I had lost in 
stature. 

there wa no mirror, at that date, in my room; that which stand besid 
me as I write, wa brought there later on and for the veri purpos of 
these transformations. the night however, wa far gone into the 
morning—th morning, black as it was, wa nearli ripe for the 
concept of the day—th inmat of my hous were lock in the most 
rigor hour of slumber; and I determined, flush as I wa with hope 
and triumph, to ventur in my new shape as far as to my bedroom. I 
cross the yard, wherein the constel look down upon me, I 
could have thought, with wonder, the first creatur of that sort that 
their unsleep vigil had yet disclos to them; I stole through 
the corridors, a stranger in my own house; and come to my room, I saw 
for the first time the appear of edward hyde. 

I must here speak by theori alone, say not that which I know, but 
that which I suppos to be most probable. the evil side of my nature, 
to which I had now transfer the stamp efficacy, wa less robust 
and less develop than the good which I had just deposed. again, in 
the cours of my life, which had been, after all, nine tenth a life of 
effort, virtu and control, it had been much less exercis and much 
less exhausted. and hence, as I think, it came about that edward hyde 
wa so much smaller, slighter and younger than henri jekyll. even as 
good shone upon the counten of the one, evil wa written broadli 
and plainli on the face of the other. evil besid (which I must still 
believ to be the lethal side of man) had left on that bodi an imprint 
of deform and decay. and yet when I look upon that ugli idol in 
the glass, I wa consciou of no repugnance, rather of a leap of 
welcome. this, too, wa myself. It seem natur and human. In my eye 
it bore a liveli imag of the spirit, it seem more express and 
single, than the imperfect and divid counten I had been hitherto 
accustom to call mine. and in so far I wa doubtless right. I have 
observ that when I wore the semblanc of edward hyde, none could come 
near to me at first without a visibl misgiv of the flesh. this, as 
I take it, wa becaus all human beings, as we meet them, are 
commingl out of good and evil: and edward hyde, alon in the rank of 
mankind, wa pure evil. 

I linger but a moment at the mirror: the second and conclus 
experi had yet to be attempted; it yet remain to be seen if I had 
lost my ident beyond redempt and must flee befor daylight from a 
hous that wa no longer mine; and hurri back to my cabinet, I onc 
more prepar and drank the cup, onc more suffer the pang of 
dissolution, and came to myself onc more with the character, the 
statur and the face of henri jekyll. 

that night I had come to the fatal cross-roads. had I approach my 
discoveri in a more nobl spirit, had I risk the experi while 
under the empir of gener or piou aspirations, all must have been 
otherwise, and from these agoni of death and birth, I had come forth 
an angel instead of a fiend. the drug had no discrimin action; it 
wa neither diabol nor divine; it but shook the door of the 
prisonhous of my disposition; and like the captiv of philippi, that 
which stood within ran forth. At that time my virtu slumbered; my 
evil, kept awak by ambition, wa alert and swift to seiz the 
occasion; and the thing that wa project wa edward hyde. hence, 
although I had now two charact as well as two appearances, one wa 
wholli evil, and the other wa still the old henri jekyll, that 
incongru compound of whose reform and improv I had alreadi 
learn to despair. the movement wa thu wholli toward the worse. 

even at that time, I had not conquer my avers to the dryness of a 
life of study. I would still be merrili dispos at times; and as my 
pleasur were (to say the least) undignified, and I wa not onli well 
known and highli considered, but grow toward the elderli man, thi 
incoher of my life wa daili grow more unwelcome. It wa on thi 
side that my new power tempt me until I fell in slavery. I had but to 
drink the cup, to doff at onc the bodi of the note professor, and to 
assume, like a thick cloak, that of edward hyde. I smile at the 
notion; it seem to me at the time to be humourous; and I made my 
prepar with the most studiou care. I took and furnish that 
hous in soho, to which hyde wa track by the police; and engag as 
a housekeep a creatur whom I knew well to be silent and 
unscrupulous. On the other side, I announc to my servant that a mr. 
hyde (whom I described) wa to have full liberti and power about my 
hous in the square; and to parri mishaps, I even call and made 
myself a familiar object, in my second character. I next drew up that 
will to which you so much objected; so that if anyth befel me in 
the person of dr. jekyll, I could enter on that of edward hyde without 
pecuniari loss. and thu fortified, as I supposed, on everi side, I 
began to profit by the strang immun of my position. 

men have befor hire bravo to transact their crimes, while their own 
person and reput sat under shelter. I wa the first that ever did 
so for hi pleasures. I wa the first that could plod in the public eye 
with a load of genial respectability, and in a moment, like a 
schoolboy, strip off these lend and spring headlong into the sea of 
liberty. but for me, in my impenetr mantle, the safeti wa 
complete. think of it—i did not even exist! let me but escap into my 
laboratori door, give me but a second or two to mix and swallow the 
draught that I had alway stand ready; and whatev he had done, 
edward hyde would pass away like the stain of breath upon a mirror; and 
there in hi stead, quietli at home, trim the midnight lamp in hi 
study, a man who could afford to laugh at suspicion, would be henri 
jekyll. 

the pleasur which I made hast to seek in my disguis were, as I have 
said, undignified; I would scarc use a harder term. but in the hand 
of edward hyde, they soon began to turn toward the monstrous. when I 
would come back from these excursions, I wa often plung into a kind 
of wonder at my vicari depravity. thi familiar that I call out of 
my own soul, and sent forth alon to do hi good pleasure, wa a be 
inher malign and villainous; hi everi act and thought center on 
self; drink pleasur with bestial avid from ani degre of tortur 
to another; relentless like a man of stone. henri jekyl stood at time 
aghast befor the act of edward hyde; but the situat wa apart from 
ordinari laws, and insidi relax the grasp of conscience. It wa 
hyde, after all, and hyde alone, that wa guilty. jekyl wa no worse; 
he woke again to hi good qualiti seemingli unimpaired; he would even 
make haste, where it wa possible, to undo the evil done by hyde. and 
thu hi conscienc slumbered. 

into the detail of the infami at which I thu conniv (for even now I 
can scarc grant that I commit it) I have no design of entering; I 
mean but to point out the warn and the success step with which 
my chastis approached. I met with one accid which, as it 
brought on no consequence, I shall no more than mention. An act of 
cruelti to a child arous against me the anger of a passer-by, whom I 
recognis the other day in the person of your kinsman; the doctor and 
the child’ famili join him; there were moment when I fear for my 
life; and at last, in order to pacifi their too just resentment, edward 
hyde had to bring them to the door, and pay them in a chequ drawn in 
the name of henri jekyll. but thi danger wa easili elimin from 
the future, by open an account at anoth bank in the name of edward 
hyde himself; and when, by slope my own hand backward, I had suppli 
my doubl with a signature, I thought I sat beyond the reach of fate. 

some two month befor the murder of sir danvers, I had been out for 
one of my adventures, had return at a late hour, and woke the next 
day in bed with somewhat odd sensations. It wa in vain I look about 
me; in vain I saw the decent furnitur and tall proport of my room 
in the square; in vain that I recognis the pattern of the bed 
curtain and the design of the mahogani frame; someth still kept 
insist that I wa not where I was, that I had not waken where I 
seem to be, but in the littl room in soho where I wa accustom to 
sleep in the bodi of edward hyde. I smile to myself, and in my 
psycholog way, began lazili to inquir into the element of thi 
illusion, occasionally, even as I did so, drop back into a 
comfort morn doze. I wa still so engag when, in one of my 
more wake moments, my eye fell upon my hand. now the hand of henri 
jekyl (a you have often remarked) wa profession in shape and size; 
it wa large, firm, white and comely. but the hand which I now saw, 
clearli enough, in the yellow light of a mid-london morning, lie half 
shut on the bedclothes, wa lean, corded, knuckly, of a duski pallor 
and thickli shade with a swart growth of hair. It wa the hand of 
edward hyde. 

I must have stare upon it for near half a minute, sunk as I wa in the 
mere stupid of wonder, befor terror woke up in my breast as sudden 
and startl as the crash of cymbals; and bound from my bed I 
rush to the mirror. At the sight that met my eyes, my blood wa 
chang into someth exquisit thin and icy. yes, I had gone to bed 
henri jekyll, I had awaken edward hyde. how wa thi to be explained? 
I ask myself; and then, with anoth bound of terror—how wa it to be 
remedied? It wa well on in the morning; the servant were up; all my 
drug were in the cabinet—a long journey down two pair of stairs, 
through the back passage, across the open court and through the 
anatom theatre, from where I wa then stand horror-struck. It 
might inde be possibl to cover my face; but of what use wa that, 
when I wa unabl to conceal the alter in my stature? and then 
with an overpow sweet of relief, it came back upon my mind 
that the servant were alreadi use to the come and go of my 
second self. I had soon dressed, as well as I wa able, in cloth of 
my own size: had soon pass through the house, where bradshaw stare 
and drew back at see mr. hyde at such an hour and in such a strang 
array; and ten minut later, dr. jekyl had return to hi own shape 
and wa sit down, with a darken brow, to make a feint of 
breakfasting. 

small inde wa my appetite. thi inexplic incident, thi revers 
of my previou experience, seemed, like the babylonian finger on the 
wall, to be spell out the letter of my judgment; and I began to 
reflect more serious than ever befor on the issu and possibl 
of my doubl existence. that part of me which I had the power of 
projecting, had late been much exercis and nourished; it had seem 
to me of late as though the bodi of edward hyde had grown in stature, 
as though (when I wore that form) I were consciou of a more gener 
tide of blood; and I began to spi a danger that, if thi were much 
prolonged, the balanc of my natur might be perman overthrown, 
the power of voluntari chang be forfeited, and the charact of edward 
hyde becom irrevoc mine. the power of the drug had not been alway 
equal displayed. once, veri earli in my career, it had total fail 
me; sinc then I had been oblig on more than one occas to double, 
and once, with infinit risk of death, to trebl the amount; and these 
rare uncertainti had cast hitherto the sole shadow on my contentment. 
now, however, and in the light of that morning’ accident, I wa led to 
remark that whereas, in the beginning, the difficulti had been to throw 
off the bodi of jekyll, it had of late gradual but decidedli 
transfer itself to the other side. all thing therefor seem to 
point to this; that I wa slowli lose hold of my origin and better 
self, and becom slowli incorpor with my second and worse. 

between these two, I now felt I had to choose. My two natur had 
memori in common, but all other faculti were most unequ share 
between them. jekyl (who wa composite) now with the most sensit 
apprehensions, now with a greedi gusto, project and share in the 
pleasur and adventur of hyde; but hyde wa indiffer to jekyll, 
or but rememb him as the mountain bandit rememb the cavern in 
which he conceal himself from pursuit. jekyl had more than a father’ 
interest; hyde had more than a son’ indifference. To cast in my lot 
with jekyll, wa to die to those appetit which I had long secretli 
indulg and had of late begun to pamper. To cast it in with hyde, wa 
to die to a thousand interest and aspirations, and to become, at a 
blow and forever, despis and friendless. the bargain might appear 
unequal; but there wa still anoth consider in the scales; for 
while jekyl would suffer smartingli in the fire of abstinence, hyde 
would be not even consciou of all that he had lost. strang as my 
circumst were, the term of thi debat are as old and commonplac 
as man; much the same induc and alarm cast the die for ani 
tempt and trembl sinner; and it fell out with me, as it fall with 
so vast a major of my fellows, that I chose the better part and wa 
found want in the strength to keep to it. 

yes, I prefer the elderli and discont doctor, surround by 
friend and cherish honest hopes; and bade a resolut farewel to 
the liberty, the compar youth, the light step, leap impuls 
and secret pleasures, that I had enjoy in the disguis of hyde. I 
made thi choic perhap with some unconsci reservation, for I 
neither gave up the hous in soho, nor destroy the cloth of edward 
hyde, which still lay readi in my cabinet. for two months, however, I 
wa true to my determination; for two months, I led a life of such 
sever as I had never befor attain to, and enjoy the 
compens of an approv conscience. but time began at last to 
obliter the fresh of my alarm; the prais of conscienc began 
to grow into a thing of course; I began to be tortur with throe and 
longings, as of hyde struggl after freedom; and at last, in an hour 
of moral weakness, I onc again compound and swallow the 
transform draught. 

I do not suppos that, when a drunkard reason with himself upon hi 
vice, he is onc out of five hundr time affect by the danger that 
he run through hi brutish, physic insensibility; neither had I, 
long as I had consid my position, made enough allow for the 
complet moral insens and insens readi to evil, which 
were the lead charact of edward hyde. yet it wa by these that I 
wa punished. My devil had been long caged, he came out roaring. I wa 
conscious, even when I took the draught, of a more unbridled, a more 
furiou propens to ill. It must have been this, I suppose, that 
stir in my soul that tempest of impati with which I listen to 
the civil of my unhappi victim; I declare, at least, befor god, 
no man moral sane could have been guilti of that crime upon so 
piti a provocation; and that I struck in no more reason spirit 
than that in which a sick child may break a plaything. but I had 
voluntarili strip myself of all those balanc instinct by which 
even the worst of us continu to walk with some degre of steadi 
among temptations; and in my case, to be tempted, howev slightly, wa 
to fall. 

instantli the spirit of hell awok in me and raged. with a transport of 
glee, I maul the unresist body, tast delight from everi blow; 
and it wa not till weari had begun to succeed, that I wa 
suddenly, in the top fit of my delirium, struck through the heart by a 
cold thrill of terror. A mist dispersed; I saw my life to be forfeit; 
and fled from the scene of these excesses, at onc glori and 
trembling, my lust of evil gratifi and stimulated, my love of life 
screw to the topmost peg. I ran to the hous in soho, and (to make 
assur doubli sure) destroy my papers; thenc I set out through 
the lamplit streets, in the same divid ecstasi of mind, gloat on 
my crime, light-headedli devis other in the future, and yet still 
hasten and still hearken in my wake for the step of the avenger. 
hyde had a song upon hi lip as he compound the draught, and as he 
drank it, pledg the dead man. the pang of transform had not 
done tear him, befor henri jekyll, with stream tear of 
gratitud and remorse, had fallen upon hi knee and lift hi clasp 
hand to god. the veil of self-indulg wa rent from head to foot. I 
saw my life as a whole: I follow it up from the day of childhood, 
when I had walk with my father’ hand, and through the self-deni 
toil of my profession life, to arriv again and again, with the same 
sens of unreality, at the damn horror of the evening. I could have 
scream aloud; I sought with tear and prayer to smother down the 
crowd of hideou imag and sound with which my memori swarm against 
me; and still, between the petitions, the ugli face of my iniqu 
stare into my soul. As the acut of thi remors began to die 
away, it wa succeed by a sens of joy. the problem of my conduct wa 
solved. hyde wa thenceforth impossible; whether I would or not, I wa 
now confin to the better part of my existence; and O, how I rejoic 
to think of it! with what will humil I embrac anew the 
restrict of natur life! with what sincer renunci I lock 
the door by which I had so often gone and come, and ground the key 
under my heel! 

the next day, came the news that the murder had not been overlooked, 
that the guilt of hyde wa patent to the world, and that the victim wa 
a man high in public estimation. It wa not onli a crime, it had been a 
tragic folly. I think I wa glad to know it; I think I wa glad to have 
my better impuls thu buttress and guard by the terror of the 
scaffold. jekyl wa now my citi of refuge; let but hyde peep out an 
instant, and the hand of all men would be rais to take and slay him. 

I resolv in my futur conduct to redeem the past; and I can say with 
honesti that my resolv wa fruit of some good. you know yourself 
how earnestly, in the last month of the last year, I labour to 
reliev suffering; you know that much wa done for others, and that the 
day pass quietly, almost happili for myself. nor can I truli say 
that I weari of thi benefic and innoc life; I think instead 
that I daili enjoy it more completely; but I wa still curs with my 
dualiti of purpose; and as the first edg of my penit wore off, the 
lower side of me, so long indulged, so recent chain down, began to 
growl for licence. not that I dream of resuscit hyde; the bare 
idea of that would startl me to frenzy: no, it wa in my own person 
that I wa onc more tempt to trifl with my conscience; and it wa 
as an ordinari secret sinner that I at last fell befor the assault of 
temptation. 

there come an end to all things; the most capaci measur is fill 
at last; and thi brief condescens to my evil final destroy the 
balanc of my soul. and yet I wa not alarmed; the fall seem natural, 
like a return to the old day befor I had made my discovery. It wa a 
fine, clear, januari day, wet under foot where the frost had melted, 
but cloudless overhead; and the regent’ park wa full of winter 
chirrup and sweet with spring odours. I sat in the sun on a bench; 
the anim within me lick the chop of memory; the spiritu side a 
littl drowsed, promis subsequ penitence, but not yet move to 
begin. after all, I reflected, I wa like my neighbours; and then I 
smiled, compar myself with other men, compar my activ good-wil 
with the lazi cruelti of their neglect. and at the veri moment of that 
vainglori thought, a qualm came over me, a horrid nausea and the 
most deadli shuddering. these pass away, and left me faint; and then 
as in it turn faint subsided, I began to be awar of a chang in 
the temper of my thoughts, a greater boldness, a contempt of danger, a 
solut of the bond of obligation. I look down; my cloth hung 
formlessli on my shrunken limbs; the hand that lay on my knee wa 
cord and hairy. I wa onc more edward hyde. A moment befor I had 
been safe of all men’ respect, wealthy, beloved—th cloth lay for 
me in the dining-room at home; and now I wa the common quarri of 
mankind, hunted, houseless, a known murderer, thrall to the gallows. 

My reason wavered, but it did not fail me utterly. I have more than 
onc observ that in my second character, my faculti seem 
sharpen to a point and my spirit more tens elastic; thu it came 
about that, where jekyl perhap might have succumbed, hyde rose to the 
import of the moment. My drug were in one of the press of my 
cabinet; how wa I to reach them? that wa the problem that (crush 
my templ in my hands) I set myself to solve. the laboratori door I 
had closed. If I sought to enter by the house, my own servant would 
consign me to the gallows. I saw I must employ anoth hand, and 
thought of lanyon. how wa he to be reached? how persuaded? suppos 
that I escap captur in the streets, how wa I to make my way into 
hi presence? and how should I, an unknown and displeas visitor, 
prevail on the famou physician to rifl the studi of hi colleague, 
dr. jekyll? then I rememb that of my origin character, one part 
remain to me: I could write my own hand; and onc I had conceiv 
that kindl spark, the way that I must follow becam light up from 
end to end. 

thereupon, I arrang my cloth as best I could, and summon a 
pass hansom, drove to an hotel in portland street, the name of which 
I chanc to remember. At my appear (which wa inde comic 
enough, howev tragic a fate these garment covered) the driver could 
not conceal hi mirth. I gnash my teeth upon him with a gust of 
devilish fury; and the smile wither from hi face—happili for him—yet 
more happili for myself, for in anoth instant I had certainli drag 
him from hi perch. At the inn, as I entered, I look about me with so 
black a counten as made the attend tremble; not a look did they 
exchang in my presence; but obsequi took my orders, led me to a 
privat room, and brought me wherewith to write. hyde in danger of 
hi life wa a creatur new to me; shaken with inordin anger, strung 
to the pitch of murder, lust to inflict pain. yet the creatur wa 
astute; master hi furi with a great effort of the will; compos hi 
two import letters, one to lanyon and one to poole; and that he 
might receiv actual evid of their be posted, sent them out with 
direct that they should be registered. thenceforward, he sat all 
day over the fire in the privat room, gnaw hi nails; there he 
dined, sit alon with hi fears, the waiter visibl quail befor 
hi eye; and thence, when the night wa fulli come, he set forth in the 
corner of a close cab, and wa driven to and fro about the street of 
the city. he, I say—i cannot say, I. that child of hell had noth 
human; noth live in him but fear and hatred. and when at last, 
think the driver had begun to grow suspicious, he discharg the cab 
and ventur on foot, attir in hi misfit clothes, an object 
mark out for observation, into the midst of the nocturn passengers, 
these two base passion rage within him like a tempest. He walk 
fast, hunt by hi fears, chatter to himself, skulk through the 
less frequent thoroughfares, count the minut that still divid 
him from midnight. onc a woman spoke to him, offering, I think, a box 
of lights. He smote her in the face, and she fled. 

when I came to myself at lanyon’s, the horror of my old friend perhap 
affect me somewhat: I do not know; it wa at least but a drop in the 
sea to the abhorr with which I look back upon these hours. A 
chang had come over me. It wa no longer the fear of the gallows, it 
wa the horror of be hyde that rack me. I receiv lanyon’ 
condemn partli in a dream; it wa partli in a dream that I came 
home to my own hous and got into bed. I slept after the prostrat of 
the day, with a stringent and profound slumber which not even the 
nightmar that wrung me could avail to break. I awok in the morn 
shaken, weakened, but refreshed. I still hate and fear the thought 
of the brute that slept within me, and I had not of cours forgotten 
the appal danger of the day before; but I wa onc more at home, 
in my own hous and close to my drugs; and gratitud for my escap 
shone so strong in my soul that it almost rival the bright of 
hope. 

I wa step leisur across the court after breakfast, drink the 
chill of the air with pleasure, when I wa seiz again with those 
indescrib sensat that herald the change; and I had but the 
time to gain the shelter of my cabinet, befor I wa onc again rage 
and freez with the passion of hyde. It took on thi occas a 
doubl dose to recal me to myself; and alas! six hour after, as I sat 
look sadli in the fire, the pang returned, and the drug had to be 
re-administered. In short, from that day forth it seem onli by a 
great effort as of gymnastics, and onli under the immedi stimul 
of the drug, that I wa abl to wear the counten of jekyll. At all 
hour of the day and night, I would be taken with the premonitori 
shudder; abov all, if I slept, or even doze for a moment in my chair, 
it wa alway as hyde that I awakened. under the strain of thi 
continu impend doom and by the sleepless to which I now 
condemn myself, ay, even beyond what I had thought possibl to man, I 
became, in my own person, a creatur eaten up and empti by fever, 
languidli weak both in bodi and mind, and sole occupi by one 
thought: the horror of my other self. but when I slept, or when the 
virtu of the medicin wore off, I would leap almost without transit 
(for the pang of transform grew daili less marked) into the 
possess of a fanci brim with imag of terror, a soul boil 
with causeless hatreds, and a bodi that seem not strong enough to 
contain the rage energi of life. the power of hyde seem to have 
grown with the sickli of jekyll. and certainli the hate that now 
divid them wa equal on each side. with jekyll, it wa a thing of 
vital instinct. He had now seen the full deform of that creatur 
that share with him some of the phenomena of consciousness, and wa 
co-heir with him to death: and beyond these link of community, which 
in themselv made the most poignant part of hi distress, he thought 
of hyde, for all hi energi of life, as of someth not onli hellish 
but inorganic. thi wa the shock thing; that the slime of the pit 
seem to utter cri and voices; that the amorph dust gesticul 
and sinned; that what wa dead, and had no shape, should usurp the 
offic of life. and thi again, that that insurg horror wa knit to 
him closer than a wife, closer than an eye; lay cage in hi flesh, 
where he heard it mutter and felt it struggl to be born; and at everi 
hour of weakness, and in the confid of slumber, prevail against 
him, and depos him out of life. the hatr of hyde for jekyl wa of 
a differ order. hi terror of the gallow drove him continu to 
commit temporari suicide, and return to hi subordin station of a 
part instead of a person; but he loath the necessity, he loath the 
despond into which jekyl wa now fallen, and he resent the 
dislik with which he wa himself regarded. henc the ape-lik trick 
that he would play me, scrawl in my own hand blasphemi on the 
page of my books, burn the letter and destroy the portrait of 
my father; and indeed, had it not been for hi fear of death, he would 
long ago have ruin himself in order to involv me in the ruin. but 
hi love of life is wonderful; I go further: I, who sicken and freez at 
the mere thought of him, when I recal the abject and passion of 
thi attachment, and when I know how he fear my power to cut him off 
by suicide, I find it in my heart to piti him. 

It is useless, and the time aw fail me, to prolong thi 
description; no one ha ever suffer such torments, let that suffice; 
and yet even to these, habit brought—no, not alleviation—but a certain 
callous of soul, a certain acquiesc of despair; and my 
punish might have gone on for years, but for the last calam 
which ha now fallen, and which ha final sever me from my own face 
and nature. My provis of the salt, which had never been renew 
sinc the date of the first experiment, began to run low. I sent out 
for a fresh suppli and mix the draught; the ebullit followed, and 
the first chang of colour, not the second; I drank it and it wa 
without efficiency. you will learn from pool how I have had london 
ransacked; it wa in vain; and I am now persuad that my first suppli 
wa impure, and that it wa that unknown impur which lent efficaci 
to the draught. 

about a week ha passed, and I am now finish thi statement under 
the influenc of the last of the old powders. this, then, is the last 
time, short of a miracle, that henri jekyl can think hi own thought 
or see hi own face (now how sadli altered!) in the glass. nor must I 
delay too long to bring my write to an end; for if my narr ha 
hitherto escap destruction, it ha been by a combin of great 
prudenc and great good luck. should the throe of chang take me in 
the act of write it, hyde will tear it in pieces; but if some time 
shall have elaps after I have laid it by, hi wonder selfish 
and circumscript to the moment will probabl save it onc again from 
the action of hi ape-lik spite. and inde the doom that is close 
on us both ha alreadi chang and crush him. half an hour from now, 
when I shall again and forev reindu that hate personality, I know 
how I shall sit shudder and weep in my chair, or continue, with 
the most strain and fearstruck ecstasi of listening, to pace up and 
down thi room (mi last earthli refuge) and give ear to everi sound of 
menace. will hyde die upon the scaffold? or will he find courag to 
releas himself at the last moment? god knows; I am careless; thi is 
my true hour of death, and what is to follow concern anoth than 
myself. here then, as I lay down the pen and proceed to seal up my 
confession, I bring the life of that unhappi henri jekyl to an end. 




*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook 
the strang case OF dr. jekyl and mr. hyde *** 


***** thi file should be name 43-0.txt or 43-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/4/43/ 

produc by david widger 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase “project 
gutenberg”), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat (“the foundation” 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project 
gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase “project gutenberg” associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
“plain vanilla ascii” or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin “plain vanilla ascii” or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, “inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation.” 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
“defects,” such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the “right 
of replac or refund” describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you ‘as-is’ with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm’ 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation’ ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state’ laws. 

the foundation’ princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation’ web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

